THE MEANING OF THE FRONTISPIECE.
LEARNING the ATLAS of the world, does bear
Earths burden up; sustaines this lower Sphere.
Which else had fallen, and her declining light
Had slept in shades of IGNORANCE and NIGHT.
RIOT and SLOTH, and dull OBLIVIONS head
Our ATLAS spurns, whose conquering feet does tread
Upon those slavish necks, which else would rise
(Like selfe-lewd Rebels) up and tirannize:
Grave HISTORY, and renowned GEOGRAPHY
Keep Centry here; their quickening flames do fly
And make a SUN whole more refulgent rays
Lightens the WORLD, and glorifies our DAYS:
By that fair EUROPE viewes the ASIAN shore,
And wild AMERICK courts the Sunburnt MOORE:
By this, th'extreme ANTIPODES do meet
And Earths vast bulk is lodged within one SHEET.
M. S.

HISTORIA LVX ^VL

GEOGRAPHIA MVNDI.

HISTORIA MVNDI OR MERCATORS ATLAS.

Containing his Cosmographicall Descriptions of the Fabric and Figure of the
World. Lately rectified in diverse places, as also beutified and enlarged with
new Mapps and Tables by the Studious industry of IODOCVS HONDY ^NGLISHED by
W.S. Generosus and Regin: Oxoniae.

LONDON Printed for MICHAELL SPARK. and are to be sowld in green Arbowre 1637

SECOND EDYTION



HISTORIA MVNDI: OR MERCATOR'S ATLAS.

Containing his COSMOGRAPHICALL Description of the Fabric and Figure of the
WORLD.

Lately rectified in diverse places, as also beautified and enlarged with new
Mappes and Tables;

By the studious industry OF IVDOCVS HONDY.

ENGLISHED BY W. S. Generosus, and Coll. Regin. Oxoniae.

Pingitur his tabulis Orbis, simul Orbis and urbes;
Gemmae sunt urbes, annulus Orbis erit.
LONDON Printed by T. Cotes, for Michael Spark and Samuel Cartwright. 1635.

TO THE TRVELY NOBLE, and no less worthily honored Sir H. Marten Knight,
Judge of his Majesty's high Court of the Admiralty of England, and Judge of the
Prerogative Court of Canterbury.
SIR
MERCATORS Geographicall History, fitly Emblematiz'd by the Sun, has with
refulgent rays illuminated the Transmarine World. But now rising up in our
Critical Horizon, it fears the Eclipse of Envy, and therefore desires your
worthy and learned Patronage, that being freed from such interposing
shadows, it may shine forth as the Meridian Sun. Your great, and good Fame,
inviting and encouraging strangers to boldness, is my Apology for this
Dedication. For since the world is so much obliged to your Virtue, Learning,
and upright Integrity, it will appear a just gratitude to devote this
Cosmographicall World to so favorable a Moecenas. The Translator in the
performance, and Dedication, is enforced to aim at an inferior Object; and to
descend beneath his own descent and Birth, which improved in the University
of Oxford, flattered him with hope of a kinder Fortune. But modest ingenuitie
permits not a larger Character of himself, and the Brevitie of few words is
most intelligible to the judicious. The work in the Original was written by a
famous learned Cosmographer, and a great light of his time Mercator, whose
labors are here humbly presented, and his ashes sleeping in their Vrne (if
they could be sensible of joy) would rejoice in so worthy a Patron. Let the
Authors, and your own worthiness mitigate my presumption, that J whose life
has been all Tristia, have presumed to offer up the whole World at so high an
Altar. Pardon this double Ambition, and be pleased to accept this Sacrifice,
from the hand of the most humble Sacrificer,

The Servant of your Worthy Virtues, WYE SALTONSTALL.

Ad Mercatoris dignissimum and doctissimum Moecenatem.
LEarned Moecenas; I confess that I
Was borne to love and honor Poesy.
And though I do not write a gingling Line
To please the silken Tribe with a smooth Rhyme;
Nor strive against Minerva's sacred will
To extract Nonsense from a forced Quill.
I shunning these two mad Extremes of Wit,
To sing your Praise more humbly think it fit;
Since justice (the maine Pillar of a State)
Virtue, and Learning, which did transmigrate
Out of the ancient Sages, now do rest
In the fair Mansion of your worthy Breast.
Unto Pythagoras we may credit give,
Their Souls informed but once, their virtues live
In you by Transmigration, who have stood
The great Protector of the Common good.
And may you live to protect Mercators story,
Until you are exalted unto Glory.
W. S.

TO THE GENTRY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
IT is an Argument of worthiness, to love worth in others, and virtue you know
consists in action; so that Gentlemen should be always doing some worthy
deed, or patronizing that which is done. If you therefore consider the
worthiness of the Author or Work, you will join your helping hands to
support Atlas groaning under the burden of the world. Mercator drew these
Descriptions of the Integrall parts of the World in Latin, but now they are
drawn forth in English colors, which are but changeable accidents, for the
real substance of Mercators World remains the same in that manner as he
fashioned it. But of late with great care, cost, and fidelity, these
Descriptions have been converted into English with new additions and much
enlarged, that the benefit thereof might have a larger extent, for bonum quo
communius eo melius, Good becomes better when it is communicable to all. And
besides, seeing personal travells in these tempestuous times, cannot be
attempted with any safety, here you may in the quiet shade of your Studdies
travel at home. If therefore a work that is Bonum, utile and jucundum, good,
profitable, and pleasant, may deserve your favor, Hic labor, hoc opus est,
this is it. So that as Alexander grieved that there was but one World for him
to conquer, so you will be sorry that there was but one World for Mercator to
describe. Enjoy therefore that which is both good in it self, and was
undertaken for your good, and benefit. Valete.

W. S.

The Preface to the courteous Reader.
THat many sollid and urgent reasons did enduce them, who among the liberal
Disciplines which without controversy are very profitable to man's life, do
give the first place to the noble Art of Geographie, they shall best know and
discern, who shall consider both the excellency, and pleasure, as also the
incredible profit of this Art. For, as concerning the dignity and excellency
thereof, it does not entreat of mean matters of small moment, as brute
beasts, the fruits of the Earth, precious stones, mettalls, and other works of
nature, the handling whereof no reasonable man will contemn; but it presents
to our sight the whole Globe of the Earth as it were in a Mirror or
Looking-glass, and does show the beauty and ornaments of the whole Fabric
of the world, and contains all things in her ample and spacious bosom, and
like the vaste Sea, it does not only open and lay forth the hidden and remote
Jslands, but also all other Countries. To omit the near affinity which this
noble Science has with Astronomy, which mounting above the earth does
contemplate the Heavens.

Moreover, if men as often as they hear some relation of this or that Country,
of any strange unknown people, or of any rare and unusual Creature, or of the
continual burning of the Mountain Aetna, also of diverse Jslands lying here
and there in the great Ocean, and also of Salvage Nations, some whereof go
naked without clothes, others feed on man's flesh, and the like matters; or
do read the wonderful histories of the East and West Jndies, (in which there
are many things which do rather seem fabulous than true) do apprehend them
with such great admiration, and give such earnest attention thereunto, out of
the desire which they have to hear such novelties; how much more may the
curious Readers delight in this work, which, as we said before, does contain
and represent the whole Globe of the Earth, with all the Countries, Kingdoms,
Dominions, Woods, Mountains, Valleys, Rivers, Lakes, People, Cities and
innumerable Towns thereof, with the Seas flowing about it: all which any one
may here view on dry land, without endangering his body or goods; and in this
travel his friends shall not be sollicitous or take care for him in his
absence, or earnestly desire his return. Besides, in this peregrination or
travel he shall want no delight that may drive away the tediousness of the
journey; for while he fixes his eyes on several Countries and places, he
shall straight way behold the special gifts and peculiar excellency of every
Country, and observe a wonderful variety therein, which are very delightful
to the mind, for as the Proverb says, A good merry companion is as a Coach
upon the way.

But they shall chiefly discern the great and manifold benefits of this Art
of Geography, who in their eye-travell, and viewing of several Countries,
shall consider the situation and disposition of Countries, the Customs,
observations, laws, and manners of the Inhabitants, and shall afterward
traffic, and send commodities to several places, or resolve to study the
liberal Arts; seeing no Poet, nor Historian can be well read with profit, nor
be conveniently expounded or declared by any Interpreter or Commentator,
without the help and knowledge of this most Noble Science. J omit here to
mention how absurd and unfit it is, that he who has no skill nor knowledge in
these matters, should give his opinion and judgment in the public assembly
or council of the Commonwealth, when consultation is held about the discovery
of some unknown Country, or in time of war concerning the bounds and
confines of any Province.

But Princes and Noble men ought chiefly to bestow great pains in studdying
this most excellent Art, in regard it may be very useful unto them in
undertaking journies and voyages when occasion requires, as also at home for
fortifying the Frontiers of their own Territories, or the directing and
conducting of any warlike expedition. For that irrecoverable dangers have
ensued when an army has been led through places unknown both to to the
soldiers and Captain, both Livy and many other Historiographers have
abundantly testified by clear and manifest examples.

And moreover, as it is very necessary, profitable and pleasant to know all
Countries, Kingdoms, Dominions, and Provinces, with their situation,
disposition, and qualities; so in like manner the several Seas, Rivers, Lakes,
and memorable waters thereof, ought to be considered exactly in these times,
when voyages are so frequently made, unto known and unknown Countries, so
that not any one will continually reside at home, and abstain from making
discoveries both by Sea and Land. So that Polidore Virgils complaint is now
vain, who in the fifteenth chapter of the third Book concerning the Invention
of Matters, does condemn mankind of too much rashness, and madness, in
regard he cannot bridle his affections and desires with reason: and though God
has given him the Earth, being a firm and immovable element, abundantly
producing all things necessary and convenient for man's life, yet he being not
content therewith, has made a Scrutiny and search into the stars, the
heavens, and the vaste Seas. To the same purpose Horace sung formerly, in his
first Book, and third Ode:

He had a heart of Oak or Brass,
Who did lanch forth a brittle ship, to pass
At first through the rough Seas,
And did not fear, when he set forth
The Afric wind striving with the North
wind, etc.
And a little after in the same place:

No sort of death he sure did fear
That saw the Monsters swimming there,
And could behold them with dry eyes
With the swelling Sea and rocks which in it lies.
And afterward he adds;

In vain did God divide the land
from the unsociable Seas,
If impious ships can sail unto
forbidden Ports when they do please.
But mankind bold still to adventure
does on forbidden mischief enter etc.
And hereunto Propertius in his third Book does allude, in that Elegy wherein
he bewayleth Petus his Shipwreck, where he sings thus:

Go crooked ships, of death the fatal cause,
Which on himself man with his own hand draws.
Unto the earth, we added have the Seas,
That the miseries of misfortunes may increase.
And a little after:

Nature to ensnare the covetous man,
Does let him sail upon the Ocean.
But these reasons are not able to discourage any one, but rather to quicken
their industry, greedily to take any occasion to know, view and discover diverse
Countries both neerehand and remote; partly by undertaking long voyages: and
those that cannot conveniently travel, may gather the knowledge of all
Countries out of Books and exact descriptions. And truly that studdy is
irreproveable, so that it ought rather to be accounted laudible, profitable,
pleasant and necessary. For Strabo in the first Book of his Geography says
rightly, that man ought to live on the Sea as well as on the land, and that God
made him equally an Inhabitant and Lord thereof. Therefore they deserve great
praise, who have labored in this Art, as Abraham Or^elius, Daniel Cellarius,
Anthony Maginus, Paul Merula, Peter Bertius and others: but especially that
most learned Mathematician Gerard Mercator, although he were prevented by
death, so that he could not finish his Geographicall work, entitled Atlas.
But Iodocus Hondy did supply this defect; adding not only those Tables which
were wanting to make the work perfect, but also accurate descriptions thereof,
by the labor and studdy of Peter Montane. This work we do publish again in
this new Edition, being accurately reuised, and purged from many gross
errors; and the studious Reader shall find that the enlargement of this Book
is not to be contemned, being set forth with diverse additions, and some new
Tables added, as he may see in the descriptions of England, Ireland, Spain,
Friesland, Groonland, Vltrajectum, and other Countries, that shall compare this
Edition with the former. Therefore Courteous Reader, enjoy these our new
labors, favor them, and Farewell.

(...) TO The virtuous and learned Gentlemen of Innes of Court, Mercator
dedicateth his Atlas or Cosmographicall Meditations.
TO you that are the Ornament of the Temples,
And by your actions give such fair Examples
Unto the Vulgar, that their Judgments can
Discern that Virtue makes a Gentleman:
To you Mercator offers by my hand
The Worlds Portraicture, wherein Sea and Land
Which make one Globe, are drawn forth in each Part
In Plano, with such Judgment, Truth, and Art,
That Pictures of all mortal beauties are
Weak shadows of frail dust, nor can compare
With these sweet Pieces; for who would not be
A Lover? when he sees Geographie
Drawn forth in such fresh colors, that invite
The eye to gaze with wonder and delight?
And while it gazes does such pleasure find
That it convayes loves flame into the mind.
I know your Judgments, let none henceforth be
Your Mistresses but fair Geographie.
W. S.

Reverendae, and Eruditae Matris Academiae Oxoniae in Albo Mercatoris Famae
Inscriptio.
QVis ille Mundum cogit in leges suas,
Potentis artis machina!
Non illubenti quis jugum victor dedit
Vt serviat felicius!
Angustijsque clausit insuetum novis,
Vt major inde prodeat!
Et quae lacerent membra magni corporis,
Dedit videre singula.
Per quicquid usquam est sparsa, nec lacera tamen
Integriora reddidit.
Non hunc vetustis edidere saeculis
seu Roma, sive Graecia
Aevo priores, and labor praevios,
At post-futuris impares
Dicemus istos; orbis incunabulis
Quos admoveri fas erat.
Quos and minores expedire fascias
Debebat, ut mundo rudi.
Adultus at jam crevit, and cingi petit
(Quod repperit) solutius,
Quin and Britanno, (quod Britanni gaudeant)
Cinctu decorus visitur.
N. S. Oxonia

Aeque Eruditae and, Alma Matris Cantabrigiae, (...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
R. B. Cantabrigiae

In Praise of Mercators Works:
INdustrious Camden; Englands brightest star,
By's Art gave light to us and after Times;
Mercators Sun shines more resplendent far
By's History, describing all the Climes
And uncouth Contnents, strange for us to view
The Rocks, the Isles, the Rivers and their falls,
Gods greatest Works, and Natures rarest show,
Which here lies open, with Mountains, Hills and dales;
And in these Mappes thou may at home descry
What some have sought with Travail far and near;
At easy rate they all here open lie
To feast thy Judgment with delicious cheer:
Then crown his Temples with deserving Bays
That such a Trophee, to thy use could raise.
W. D. Exoniae.

To the worthy Translator.
IF, what that famous Lyrick-Poet writ
In praise of Poetry, so full did fit;
That, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. Hor. de Art poetica.
He, of All, deserves the prize and praise,
Which mixeth Profit, with his Pleasant-Layes:
Then (sure) the same of History is true;
And of all Histories, to This, most due.
To this, I say; This Atlas of Earths frame,
This Geographick-Structure of much fame;
This Worlds bright Light, Delight, and Sun most fair,
Discovering all Earths specious Countries rare,
In such a Cosmographicall display,
In such a faithful and exact Survey.
That (Now) at least, Eleven fair Languages
Themselves with Its Translation sweetly please.
What thanks (Me thinks) then unto Thee remains,
Praiseworthy Saltonstall, for thy great pains!
In thus Translating on our English-Soyle
So choice a Piece, Wherein, without much toil;
Yet with much Pleasure and Utility,
The Mind all-bent on Foreign Noveltie
May here at home, even in his Chamber view
Each Country in his state and station true;
In figures fair lively delineated,
And in exact descriptions demonstrated.
For which, let Belgia give her Hondy praise,
And we, our Saltonstall deserved Bays.
I. V.

In due commendation of the Author, with an Allusion of Atlas his supportation
of the World. 1. An Acrosticke on Mercators Atlas.
M ercators Atlas Mirror of all story,
E xpresse in Tropes of deep Cosmographie,
R eader admire in reading; for, It Is Glory
C laimes a precedence past equality
A ll that Laborious Artists can compose
T riangles, Circles, Lines and Parallels;
O nly (dear Hondius) these thy Maps disclose,
R aising to life a Work that all excels.
A tlas by fiction does the World uphold;
T hou, more, by Art, do all the Orb contain:
L et Poets pencill forth thy praise in Gold,
A nd all that reap the Harvest of thy pain;
S o shall thy fame to every Age remain.
Here may thou read what ere thou would desire,
The manners of thine own and foraigne Nations,
And in thy Study only but retire
To view their customs, strengths and Scituations.
Then praise his Name, such gifts to Man that gave
Whereby thou may much cost and labor save.
M. R.

De Mercatoris Atlante in Anglorum sermon edito.
ATlas Latin, fortis in lauds tuas
Graeco politus carmine Heinsius fuit:
At Nostrum Atlantem, qui novus prodit modo,
Laudare non audere, laus, post Heinsium.
R. B. S. S. M.

Ad Anglum Lectorem.
SCire cupis mores hominum, lustrareque terras?
hic depicta tibi cuncta viaere ^ice^.
Ne Linguae ignotae exaniment, hunc consule nostrum
Atlantem: notus sic tibi mundus erit.
Orbem fulcit Atlas, opus hoc intellige: Atlantem
Lector, and Atlantis non leve fulcis onus.
R. B. S. Hosp.

On this Translation, an HEXASTICHON.
MErcator, sure thy Merchandise is good,
Having so current for so long time stood
In foreign Countries; but in British soil
Vnkenn'd, unkiss'd, till Saltonstall with toil
And study, rich, in thee, his natives made,
Teaching thee with our English (now) to-trade.
THOM. a VICARS, olim Reginensis. Oxon,

NIli diluvium steriles faecundat agellos.
Floscula sparsa iuvant: stercora lucra ferunt;
Inde decus Solis, late quia lumina spargit.
Rivi fama patet, flumina longa trahens.
Sic linguis varijs, doctum lucrantur opellae
Laudem, diffusae: nos tamen omne bonum.
Hebraei, Graeci exonerant: gens undique docta
Alueum in Brittanicum, qui scatet art nova.
Olim non notus, noto divisus ab orb
Huc tendi petijt navita nullus iter.
Olim tendebat clarus mercator ad Indos,
Iam oras Angligenum, curva carina petit.
Ast hic Mercator non est omnino viator
Musaeo merces; littus and aequor eme.
Pet. Vowel.

To his learned (though unknown) friend the Author of this Translation.
SOmewhat amongst the rest of those that press,
To honor this thy Work, would I address
Unto thy praise, and therein strive to be
As breife and sweet as this Epitomee.
The World is here contracted, and in this
Thou show us what the lesser world (Man) is,
And therein work'st a wonder, that the less
Should comprehend the greaters spaciousness.
As thou have thus reduced both to a span,
So shall my lines thy worth, and in this one
Express thy world of that Celestial fire,
Whose beams we love not more than we admire.
I. G.

Verses in Commendation of this description of the terrestrial Globe, by G. W.
With cost and peril, some adventure far,
Yet, never the richer, nor the wiser are:
But giddily through many Climates rome,
And come less honored, and worse manner'd home,
Some others, Men and Cities, having seen,
Epitomize each place where they have been;
From every quarter, bringing like the Be,
The quintessence of all the flowers they see:
And best are pleased when they shall contrive
The honor, and the profit, of their Hive.
This is one end of Travail; and, the next
To that, which makes the world an ample Text,
Whereon to meditate, and Preach abroad
The many praisefull Attributes of GOD:
For, though two other Books are now unsealed,
He, by the World, was first of all revealed.
The Second volumne of that large Record,
(Which is Earth's Globe) this Treatise does afford,
Abstracted so (by this our Authors pain)
That, now, a Closet may the same contain:
And, they that have not heart, nor means, nor time,
To make their progres, through each foreign Clime,
Or view the World's remotest parts, at large,
May see them, now in breife, with little charge;
Without those pains or perils which are found,
In compassing, or traversing, this ROVND.
And (which does much endeare it) this will show
more profitable Truths, than many know
By hazzards, Pilgrimages, or expense:
Yea, and with more exact intelligence,
Than could be gotten (if these Charts were lost)
By ten men's pains, and fifty times the cost.
Then slight not Readers, that which here is tend'red
Nor let ill payments, for good-workes, be rendered:
But know (before miscensure this despises)
What profit from our Authors pains arises:
For by this Work, you have (though small it shows)
A World of Kingdoms at your own dispose.
Hereby, at leisure and with pleasure too
(When any sudden use requires so)
Within your own command you may survey
Earth's wide extended Empire every day;
Rise (in an instant) from your seat, and see
The farthest Kingdoms which discovered be;
Informed become, how small or large they are;
What profits, and what Rarities be there;
What Cities they afford, what Hills of Fame,
What Air, what Soil, what Rivers of great Name;
How governed, how confined, how defended,
What Foes they have, and how they stand befrended
With many other things, which much may steed
To serve your pleasures, or in time of need.
And when your Inquisitions there are done
You may (with swifter motion than the Sun)
Remove to any Province when you please,
From thence again to her Antipodes;
Yet neither be compelled to adventure
About the sphere, nor seek it through the Center:
For only by the turning of the hand,
The place desired, in your view shall stand,
And at one Prospect, show it with all those
Adjacent Countries, which the same enclose.
More might be said. But, I may think you prize not
An honest man's report, if this suffice not:
And therefore will no more thereon insist;
But leave you to accept it as you list.
Concerning the use of these Tables.
PTolomie and we in this book, do make the Longitude to be a segment of the
Equator, or Aequinoctiall Circle, comprehended with the Meridian of that
place, and the Meridian of the Fortunate Islands: for from these Islands the
beginning of Longitude is taken.

Some do not begin the Longitude from the Fortunate Islands (which are now
called the Canaries) but from the Flandrian Islands, which are now called the
Azores, because the needle of the compass does point there directly toward the
North. But the superficies of the Globe contains in Longitude 360 degrees.

The Latitude is the Arch or Segment of any place between the Aequinoctiall
and Parralell which is drawn through the vertical point of the same place,
and it is always to the elevation of the Pole.

Latitude is twofold, either Northern, or Southern, and there are reckoned
from the Aequinoctiall to either Pole 90 degrees of Latitude.

We have noted the degrees of Longitude and Latitude on the sides of all the
Tables, and for the most part, the degrees of Latitude on the top and
bottom, and of Longitude on the right and left hand, except when some Country
is to be described that is more extended between the South and North.

The several degrees both of Longitude and Latitude, according to the
capacity of the place, are sometimes divided into 60, sometimes into 10. 6. or
5. parts, which are called minutes, and we have noted the degrees with greater
Arithmeticall figures, and the minutes with lesser for difference sake.

If one would find out the Longitude and Latitude of any place, where the
Meridian Parralells are, by taking with a pair of compasses the distance
thereof from the side of the Table, and afterward by applying the compasses to
the other side. If thou take the distance from the East side, the compasses
being turned from that side to the North side, will show the degree and minute
of Longitude. If thou have the distance from the North-side, turn thy
compasses from thence to the East side, and it will show the Latitude. But if
the Meridians be not Parralells, the Latitude of a place is found in the same
manner, but in the Universal Tables where the Parralells are circular, the
distance of a place being taken from the next side, will show the same on the
East side. But the Longitude is to be taken with a thread or Ruler, laid upon
the place and turned until it do point out on the Northern and Southern
side, the same minute of the same degree, and wheresoever it be, that is the
Longitude of the place.

How to find out the distance of degrees or Miles between two Cities, or any
other Places.
WE have added scales of Miles to all the Tables, by which thou may easily
find out the distance of all places in this mannner.

Take a pair of Compasses, and open them until the 2 feet do touch the
extreme points of the places given, then appy them without any alteration to
the scale of miles, and the numerall figures noted thereon will give the
distance.

But if the Distance of places does exceed the length of the Scale, then with
thy compasses thou shall take the length of the Scale, and thou shall turn the
Compasses from one place to another, as far as the distance of places will
permit, and then reckon the miles together. But because the length of miles in
all Countries is unknown, thou shall more certainly take the distance of
places with thy Compasses, and apply the Compasses without variation to the
degrees of Latitude, which will give the true distance, by multiplying them by
the Miles of the known Country.

But the Miles do differ much in diverse Countries, and therefore I will here
insert their difference in the chief Countries.

Of common German Miles; which we Hollanders do also use 15 do answer to one
Degree. Of the middle sort of German Miles 12 do answer to one Degree. Of
great German Miles 10 do answer to one Degree. Of common French Miles 25 do
make one degree. Of great French Miles 20 do make one degree. Of Italian Miles
60 are contained in one Degree. Of English Miles as many, or as some will have
it 50 contained in every Degree. Of English Leagues 20 do make one degree. Of
Spanish Leagues 17 do make one degree. Houre-Leagues, and Itinerarie hours 20
do make one degree. Of Swedish and Danish Miles 10 do make one degree.
A Table of the Cosmographicall Descriptions, Mappes, and Tables contained in
Marcators Atlas. The first figures directing to the Descriptions, The second to
the Mappes.
1 THe World. Fol. 3. and 5. 2 Europe, Fol. 8. and 9. 3 Afric, Fol. 12. and
13. 4 Asia. 18, 19. 5 America. 21. 23. 6 The North Pole. 28, 29. 7 Iseland, 33.
35. 8 The Isles of Britain. 38, 39. 9 Ireland, 43, 45. 10 Ireland 2 Tab. 48,
49. 11 Ireland 3 Tab. 53. 55. 12 Ireland 4 Tab. 58, 59. 13 Ireland 5 Tab. 63.
65. 14 Scotland. 68. 69. 15 Scotland 2 Tab. 73. 75, 16 Scotland 3 Tab. 78. 79.
17 England 83, 85. 18 England 2 Tab. 88. 89. 19 England 3 Tab. 92. 93. 20 A
Particular Description of Wales. 97. 21 England 4 Tab. 99. 101. 22 England 5
Tab. 105. 107. 23 England 6 Tab. 110. 111. 24 England 7 Tab. 116. 117. 25
Norwey and Swethland 121. 123 26 The State Politic of the Kingdom of
Denmark, 126. 27 The Kingdom of Denmark. 132. 133. 28 Denmark 137. 139. 29
Denmark 3 Tab. 142. 143. 30 Denmark 4 Tab. 147, 149. 31 Borussia or
Spruceland. 152. 153 32 Liefland. 157, 159. 33 Russia or Moscovie. 162. 163. 34
A more Particular Description of some Provinces of Moscovia. 165. 35 Lithuania
D. 168. 169. 36 Transyluania or Siebenburgen. 173, 175. 37 Taurian Chersonesus
178, 179. 38 Spain 183, 185. 39 Portugal and Algarbia. 197. 199. 40 Gallicia,
Leon; and Asturia de Oviedo, 202, 203. 41 Biscay and Guipuscoa 207. 209. 42
Castile Old and New. 212. 213. 43 Andalusia 217, 219. 44 Valentia and Murcia.
222. 223. 45 Aragon and Catalonia 227, 229 46 Catalonia more particularly
described. 233. 235. 47 France 245. 247. 48 Brittanie, Normandy, and Belsia
259. 261. 49 Lemovicium, 264, 265. 50 Xaintogne 269, 274. 51 Aquitaine 274.
275. 52 Provence, 269. 271. 53 Picardie and Campania. 284. 285. 54 France. 289,
291. 55 Picardie. 294. 295. 56 Campania 298, 299. 57 Bellovacum 303. 305. 58
Boulogne 307. 309. 59 Aniou. 311. 313. 60 Bituricum 316, 317. 61 Burbun D. 321,
323. 62 Burdigala 326, 327. 63 Perch, C. 332. 333. 64 Turone D. 335, 337. 65
Pictavia 338, 339. 66 Cadurcium 343, 345. 67 Bressia 348, 349. 68 Lions 351,
353. 69 Languedoc. 356. 357. 70 Delphinate of France 359. 361 71 Lotharingia D.
362. 363. 72 Lotharingia D. South part. 367. 3^9. 73 Burgundy D. 372, 373. 74
Burgundy C. 377, 379. 75 Savoy D. 382, 383. 76 Helvetia, 387, 389. 77
Lurichg^w 39^, 393. 78 Wistispurgergow. 397. 399. 79 Lake Leman 409, 411. 80
Argow 414, 415. 81 Rhetians 419, 421. 82 Low Countries 422, 423. 83 Flanders
439, 441. 84 Eastern part of Flanders 444, 445. 85 Brabant D. 449 451. 86
Holland, C. 454, 455. 87 Zeland C. 459, 461. 88 Gelderland, 464, 465. 89
Zutphania 469, 471. 90 Vltrajectum 472. 473. 91 Machlin 478, 479. 92 Groeninga
481, 483. 93 Trans-Issalana 484, 485. 94 Artois. 487, 489. 95 Hannalt 492, 493.
96 Namurcium 497, 499. 97 Lutzenburg D. 500, 01. 98 Limburg D. 505, 507. 99
Germany 509, 511. 100 Germany 518. 101 West Friesland 5^2 533. 102 Embdanum
and Oldenburg 536, 539. 103 Westphalia 1 Tab. 541, 543. 104 Bremes 545. 105
Westphalia 2 Tab. 547, 549. 106 Munster B. 552, 553. 107 Westphalia 3 Tab. 555,
557. 108 Colen 560, 561. 109 Westphalia 4 Tab. 563, 565. 110 Leiden 566, 567.
111 Muers 571, 573. 112 Waldeck 576, 577. 113 Palatinate of Rhene, 580, 581.
114 Wirtemberg 585, 587. 115 Alsatia the Lower 589, 591. 116 Alsatia the
Higher, 594, 595. 117 Saxony the Lower 599, 521. Here the figures go false,
but I follow them as the pages are misfigured.
118 Brunswicke D. 524, 525. 119 Hessen 529, 531. 120 Nassaw 534, 535. 121
Duringen 537, 539. 122 Frankenland D. 542, 543. 123 Bavaria D. 547, 549. 124
Bavaria Palut. ^52, 553. 125 Saxony the higher D. 557, 559. 126 Brandenburg D.
562. 563. 127 Pomerania D. 649, 651. 128 Rugia 652, 653, 129 Bohemia 656, 657.
130 Moravia 660, 661. 131 Austria 664, 665. 132 Saltzburg 669, 671. 133 Poland
K. 674, 675. 134 Poland 679. 681. 135 Hungary 683, 685. 136 Italy 688, 689.
137 Lumbardie 704, 705. 138 Valesia 707. 139 Lumbardie 2 Tab. 709. 711. 140
Lumbardie 3 Tab. 714, 715. 141 Genoa D. 720, 721. 142 Lumbardie 4 Tab. 723,
725. 143 Bressia and Millan, D. 728, 729. 144 Millan D. 734. 735. 145 Verona
737, 739. 146 Friuli 742, 743. 147 Istria 744. 148 Carniola 746. 149 Tuscany
747, 748. 150 Spoleto D. 752, 753. 151 Campagna di Roma 757, 759. 152 Abruzzo
762, 763. 153 Puglia Piana 767, 769. 154 Corsica and Sardinia 772, 773. 155
Sardinia 775. 156 Sicilie 777, 779. 157 Stirmarck 782, 783. 158 Slavonia 786,
787. 159 Walachia, 790, 791. 160 Greece 794, 795. 161 Macedon 799, 801. 162
Morea 804, 805. 163 Candie 809, 811. 164 Barbary 814, 815. 165 Egypt 816,
818. 166 Morocco 819, 821. 167 Abissines D. 824, 825. 168 Guinea 829, 831. 169
Turkish Empire 834, 835. 170 Holy Land 839, 841. 171 Asia the Lasser 844, 845.
172 Cyprus 849, 851. 173 Persia 855, 857. 174 Tartarie 860, 861. 175 China 865,
867. 176 East Indies 870, 871. 177 Islands of the East Indies 875, 877. 178
Iapan Isle. 880. 881. 179 Zeilan I. 885, 887. 180 Islands of the West Indies,
890, 891. 181 Cuba, Hispaniola, etc. 893, 895. 182 Virginia 898, 899. 183 New
Virginia 905. 184 Description of New Spain M. 905. 185 New Spain 906, 907.
186 Firine Land 911, 913. 187 Peru 914, 915. 188 Summer Islands or Berm. 917,
919. 189 Southorne America 920, 921. 190 Straites of Magellan. 925, 927. 191
New England after the book before the Table.
THE BOOK OF THE CREATION AND FABRIC OF THE WORLD.
The first Chapter. The scope of all Cosmographie.
IT is a common Axiom among those, who are in any wise elevated in the
contemplation of the work of this frame of the world, that God who is the
Author thereof, is of an immense power, wisdom, and goodness, and it is
impossible that a man should doubt of his power, who believes that created of
nothing, and that the matter thereof is not eternal. If there be any man, to
whom this power and goodness of God does not sufficiently appear, as not
having yet considered well the commendable, exquisite, and most wise ornament,
and disposition of this Fabric, let him then diligently enquire with us, so
far as the contemplation of the workmanship it self may persuade him, and
as far as is lawful to know by the Word of God, and the experience of
things. For this is the maine scope we aim at, that in handling Cosmographie,
the infinite wisdom of God, and his inexhaust goodness, may be known, as
well by the admirable concordancy of all things to one and the same end of God,
as also by his inscrutable providence in the composition, whereby we may be
continually rapt up to reverence and honor his Majesty, and to embrace his
rich goodness. God grant then, that he will be pleased, to enlighten our dark
understandings with his light, and direct our minds, to the finding out of
this true wisdom. It is so then, that this immense goodness of God, not able
to contain his own glory in himself, by reason of superabundant fecunditie
to beget, was willing to create man, to whom he communicated the same, and
having conceived in his wisdom, to invest him a body, such as we see, as his
first Creation shows him to be, Created and brought forth the world by his
Almighty power, and digested it into that order, nature, and proportion,
according to that Idea, which he from all Eternity had conceived, furnished
with all parts necessary for the use of man, so created. Therefore the chief
end of the works of God, and his primary intention, was to communicate his
glory. The second was the creation of man. The third, the disposition of all
things in the world, and the last drift of his intention, was the beginning of
the work. It behooves him then, that will undertake the description of the
world, to begin at its first exordium, who would profitably extend it to
Phylosophie.

Curious men were wont to ask, first what God did before he Created the world,
how and where he was then, when as yet there was neither place, nor time?
secondly, why he did not Create the world many Ages before? and wherefore he
did not make man so perfect, that he could not fall? to which frivolous and
rash questions, he will easily answer who has knowledge as far as the
Scriptures and the work of God teaches us of the sacred Trinity, and who
shall diligently observe the true definitions of time, and place: but this
impiety, and wickedness of men are not worthy the answering; for it is
religion, not to pry further into the hidden secrets and judgments of God,
then he has revealed unto us in his holy Word, and to dispute of things that
are out of our element, and before the world was, and of things that are above
our reach and capacity, is mere madness and folly: seeing they beget only
opinions, not sciences, and therefore can bring no true wisdom along with
them: but rather produce strange doctrines, which obscure and darken the truth.
Let it suffice us then, to know the truth o^ things, so far forth, as history
and sense reveals them to us, and not according to opinions, whereof there is
no science, and in so doing, we shall not err, if we only proceed in a right
order.

Du Bartas.
Thou scoffing Atheist, that inquire, what
The Almighty did before he framed that,
What weighty work his mind was busied on,
Eternally before the world begun.
(Since so deep wisdom, and omnipotence,
Naught worse beseemes, then sloth and negligence.)
Know (bold blasphemer) that before, he built
A Hell to punish the presumptuous guilt.
Of those ungodly, whose proud sense dare cite
And censure so, his wisdom infinite.
God was not void of sacred exercise
He did admire his glories, mysteries.
His power, his justice, and his providence,
His bounteous grace, and great beneficence;
Were the holy object of his heavenly thought
Upon the which eternally it wrought.
It may be also, that God meditated
The worlds Idea, ere it was Created:
Alone he lived not; for his Son and Spirit,
Were with him aye, equal in might and merit.
The Prolegomena of the Fabric of the World; The second Chapter.
Of God, the beginning and Workemaster of all things, according to the
Platonists.
THE Platonists from the communion of the Species, which is discerned in
things, and in the order, which appeared in them, have ascended unto that one,
who is the first, and the beginning of all things, that is (according as Paul
says. Romans 1.20.) that in beholding the disposition, and most adorned harmony
of all things, perceived after some manner in them, the existence of some
Providence and understanding them to be the work of some one; have attained so
far, that they were drawn, as well to the meditating of them, as to the
affirming their Creation. First of all, in that they make the intellect or
Spirit Fabricator of the world, out of this one, and distinguish him entirely
from him, and make him another afterward. Again, in this, that separating the
matter it self from all form, they understand it not to be the generation of
any Idea: for Ideas are species or forms, which can engender nothing but
forms, and so consequently must of necessity follow, that they understand it,
not to have been Created, but that it is eternal. The original of this
error is, because they believed the matter was only susceptible of forms,
and that it had no communion with the forms of nature, and therefore have not
only once dreamed, that it was in the seeds of forms, and that the force
thereof might be conducted by the worker. Whence they were at length
constrained to constitute a certain perpetual, and a formal beginning out of
the matter. By the same reason, they were induced to set down one selfsame
out of one, and diverse from him, so cutting too near the quick, and spoiling
this one, and primary beginning of all things out of this one, begotten of one,
but distinct in Essence and propriety of nature, from whom alone as from the
Father, first, and immediately depended the first model of the work of the
world, and of the immediate virtue formatrix of things. The traces of which
doctrine Valentine following added other fancies unto it, having found out a
mean, whereby one, whom he calls Proarch and Bythum, has proceeded to the
generation of the Spirit, and by some generation coming betwixt afterward.
Finally, deducing it to the Creation, as well of the matter, as of all things,
and even mixing therewith this prodigious Philosophy of Pythagoras, whom his
disciples following, taught the same doctrine in obscuring and adulterating the
truth in all parts; more then with old wives fables, but seeing the raving of
these men, vanished of it self, we will rather have respect to the Theology of
the Platonists, and to the original of the world, the which as it has more
appearance of divinity, then all others, and seems to come near to the
Mosaicall truth: so likewise it may more easily draw us to true and sacred
Philosophy. And therefore in propounding a brief sum thereof, we will oppose
against it a true narration of things drawn as well from the secrets of the
holy Scripture, as from nature, confirming the one, by solid reasons, and
rejecting the other wherein it strayeth from the truth; to the end that under
the color of a more divine Theology, the eyes of understanding be not dazzled
in the search of this philosophy, wherein much falsitie is contained. That it
may also appear to all men, that among the Ethnicks, there was never School
so holy, no care so fervent, no wit so excellent, that by their own industry
could attain unto the truth of things; considering also the most Religious
among them, even the Platonists themselves wandered astray, and ministered matter
of erring to others. Wherefore let us give thanks unto God alone, who is the
beginning, the Creator, the Animatour, the Conservatour, and the end of the
work of the world: And that it pleased him by Moses, and his other Prophets to
reveal unto us the Fabric of the universe, the beginning and fountain of
all Philosophy and of all truth.

This then is the Sum of the Platonists Theology, they lay down three
beginnings, One of good. Simonides being asked what God was after three days
deliberation said, that the longer he thought what God should be, the less he
understood him.

And Plato, It is hard to find a God, but to understand him unpossible. The
Spirit.


in things divine, to wit, one Spirit and Soul which are called in their
fables Coelus, Saturnus and Jupiter: following one another in order. The
chiefest whereof is he, whom they make to be their first and Sovereign God. Him
they call one, in regard of his most simple essence, and good by reason of his
superabundant fruitfulness to engender, and facility to communicate himself:
they describe him to be, neither being, nor essence, neither intellect, nor
good, adjectively: neither to understand no not himself, neither to live nor
to move, but to be above all these things, that is, the beginning and original
of being, and essence of intellect, and of intelligence, of life, and of
motion, and the first and supreme of all things, that may be apprehended,
beside himself. Again, that he has nothing in himself, that he differs from
all things, that he consists in himself, and cannot be mixed with things
sequent, and yet nevertheless that he is present in all things, and that he
contains all things, and in like manner he is every where and yet no where,
that is to say, he has no need of any place, neither is he finite, nor
determined, neither within, nor without, but is the power of all things: yea
the greatest power of all powers, and yet is not all things, but above all
things.

That this one or good, produces from his own abundance, not by consent of
any cogitation, not by any counsel, not by any determinate will, not being
moved by any means, but abiding in his own habitude, by his own peculiar
perfection, accompanied by a potentiall act, or an efficacious power,
internally he created a beam, which he dispearseth almost like the Sun,
that abiding one and the same immovable, spreads its light, which beam in
as much that on a sudden, it is made that which it is, abiding in him, it
becomes a being, but in that it is converted naturally to the Parent, whence
it received its motion, it is made living, from whom being fortified, and
replenished with power, and perfection, is enriched by it self, of the same
Intelligence, and becomes a Spirit, and Intellect, and as well in respect to
his Father, as to himself becomes Intelligent: but in as much as regarding
himself, and being well acquainted with his own power (how far it is
extended, as that from whence the virtue, which is the Genetrix of all takes
her force) defines to himself his essence, which hitherto was indefinite, and
indeterminate, and makes it explicate, not in applying thereto his Spirit, or
in passing it into his understanding, as a man does in seeking that which he
has not, or desires to know, that which he is ignorant of: but by a sole and
perpetual Act of his understanding, which never slumbreth. An Internal act,
(I say) of his essence, having evermore an eye to his power, and knowing
determinately things, which were hidden, without addition of Intelligence, so
(I say) he conceives in his understanding the Ideas, or formative species of
all things, which they call intelligible gods, and engenders them in some
sort. Distinguished by a formal reason, but the same in essence, as many
existents One. I say not One, and many, but One many, as Parmenedes will have
it, for the less numerous unity, as well in the thought, as in the soul, and
as the Intellect is replenished with power received from One: so likewise being
full of Ideas, or the forms of all things remain one and the same with them,
all beings existing in this, and them true, because they are immutable and
eternal, which as Saturn suddenly swalloweth them up, as being engendered from
him, and in him, suffering them to fall into the matter of things natural and
frail: but keeps all things in himself, and contains without dissolution
or partition, and possesses all things in one, being present also to all
things, and in all places, and yet nevertheless is not in them, but they in
him, as depending of him, and consisting in him. Now as the intellect is One
many, that is one being of himself all, and in identity of essence, or an
unity impartible, but distinguished in himself, according to the parts,
abiding together, and inwardly by an alterity, is not partible in sequent
being, but remains always with it self, as one is not distributed into
sequents. For it is not dispersed distinctly into many things, according to his
internal alteritie, but procreateth one only, according to the seminall
reasons, being already by act, and power many together, to wit, the Soul,
whereof we shall come to speak immediately. They term this intellect, the
great God, the second God, and besides not any, but All God, from whom as from
the primary, and sole all-being, all beings immediately obtain their essence,
and therefore all gods. They call this also the word of God, and an act
produced from the same good, and again the Image of God, because it imitateth
the goodness of his begetter, with all his strength, by a copious and a
fruitful propriety to engender, which forces seeing he receives them from
his Begetter, are yet so conjoined to him, that it seems only to be
distinguished from him, by a certain alterity. And Plato calls it Idea,
because it comprehends in its essence the Pattern and sole individual
species of all things. He calls it both the cause and the maker of the world,
inasmuch as being made the first being, it afterward becomes the Parent of
all beings.

The Soul.
The generation of this Spirit is the Soul of the world, the third God, no
otherwise proceeded from thence, then it from one, for it self is the word of
the Spirit. It is the light streaming forth by the Spirit Creator of the
world, it is an act, and the whole, produces outwardly, and the life, which
quickneth things inferior, according as it is enlivened by conversion to one,
and as being which looks to its begetter is made intellect: so the Soul also
having regard to the Spirit is made reason from the same intellect. Light and
truth evermore depending from thence. It being likewise of the same
conjunction, but comprehending from thence inferior things, one and many
existing together, according to Parmenedes: One, because that under a Common
intellectual essence, it receives the reasons of all forms, and is
replenished, when it has regard to its Father the intellect, and so many
together, because that when it is converted to it self, it conceives a part
by it self, the seminall reasons of all forms, and their number by order, and
by their exceeding great fecundity to produce, being heated within: it
animateth them, and gives them a beginning of motion, to engender forms, in
the matter, to wit, to Create sense to living Creatures, Nature Vegetative to
plants, Motion to caelestiall bodies, and besides all this, whatsoever
appertains to order, Species, Nature, proportion, and the motion of things.
Therefore, the Soul being so constituted into her essence, that as the one,
and the Intellect, the same may also be in every place, and being present to
all things, it cannot be otherwise, but it must ordain all things in this
visible world: dispose, vegetate, animate, and conduct every thing as it were
in hatching it to its proper being and form: yet the Spirit abides, not in it
self impartible, but in some sort to all bodies, and insinuates it self into
them in every place, that is according to the reason of every Species, but not
distributed into parts divided by it self: for it is both according to its
substance, and according to all its essence indivisible, and is both together
in all places, and things, but works diversely, in exercising its forces by
the seminall and specificall reasons, which are many, and make one resemblance,
to wit, of Species in things of it self, and therefore though that in its
essence it becomes divisible: yet nevertheless, that is done by a proper
necessity of division (for it abides always wholly in it self) but it is
because that the bodies by reason of their divisibilities, cannot receive
indivisibility, so that this partition of bodies, is not a passion, or
necessity of the Soul.

The Platonists then ascribe to Divine things, these three beginnings in the
same manner, as I have declared them. As for the first, they do not agree,
that it is an act of some One (as it ought not to be) or that it has any
action: yet they grant that it is potentiall, that is to say, that it has the
power to produce; retayning the simplicity of One. But that the Intellect, is
is an act flowing from one. And that the Soul also is an Act from this same
intellect, and that both the one, and the other, are differing from him, from
whom they proceed. That he also who begets is greater, and better then he
which is begotten of him: and therefore the intellect is less, and worse then
the One; but that it is better, and greater then the Soul, and likewise the
Soul then the Species, which it produces. This is the meaning of all the
Platonicke-Theologie, against which we will here oppose that which is more
true.

The Prolegomena of the Fabric of the World: The third Chapter.
The true Confession of God, and of the Trinity drawn from the secrets of the
Scripture.
THE Word of God proposes unto us one God, God is that one Spiritual essence,
whose being is of himself from everlasting to everlasting. Again God is one
essence most simple, pure and absolute, and being essentially indivisible is
personally distinguished into the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and is
therefore called Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, or Vni trinity, or
Triniunity.
under three hypostases (or subsistences) distinct but not divided, or
separated in himself, every of them has their proprieties, whereby it is
distinguished from the other. Now therefore the Father, the Word, or the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, which are one: not because they are of one essence in
number, for considering that they are inseparable in himself, and all the
hidden sciences of the Father, shines in the Word as by an eternal
generation, in such sort, that the Word is the shining Character and express
essence of the Father, and this same essence shines from the Father by the
Word, in all the universe, the splendor whereof is the holy Spirit. These
three have one and the same Deity, omnipotency, virtue, wisdom, goodness,
will, and may in no wise be called three. Seeing their force, power, and
action, is but one in number, as the Son teaches us. John the 17. speaking
thus of his Father. All mine are thine, and thine are mine, besides, the Father
that dwells in me he does the works, John 14.10. and John 5. My Father
works hitherto, and I work also. It is also most manifest by the sacred
Scriptures, that the holy Ghost, the Father, and the Son, work all things.
And in the first Book of Wisdom, The Spirit is there said to have replenished
the universe, so that of all these three, there is but one common operation,
but according to their personal propriety, proceeding otherwise from the
Father, otherwise from the Son, and otherwise from the Holy Ghost. Therefore,
we do not set down three Gods, nor three beginnings of things, as Plato does,
but one individed, according to himself, present in all places, of whom, by
whom, and for whom all things were created, existing by a triple reason: but
one and the same essence distinguished into three subsistances, or Persons, but
which differ not in essence, neither are divided among themselves, neither by
lesser consequents, are worser in order, as the Platonists make him, but all
equal in Divinity, Eternity, Power, and efficacy; the Propriety of whose
essence is neither less nor more then the other, but equally necessary to the
Creation of all things. For in every work three things are necessary in a
worker, Power, or beginning of the internal Act, the Conception and the
Disposition of the Act, or the Internal worker, and the issue of the Act. Even
as in fire, the beginning of the heat, is the nature, or form of the fire,
the act of it, is the internal heat. The Action, or act proceeding is the
heat, which comes out of it. And the Soul is the beginning and motive
power, it is the disposition, or will to move, it is finally the motion it
self. But because that God has not created the world, either by chance, or
through ignorance, searching the means how, or wisdom, but with a great
deal of Prudence, and wisdom, it cannot be denied, but that from all
eternity, he had conceived some certain determinate model, The Creation of
the world peculiarly belongs to God the Father.
and all the Idea's of his works, to which we give not beginning in the Word,
as Plato does, but to the Parent of the world, considering that whatsoever the
Son has, he has it from his Father, and for this cause we will place the
Father first, as the Seminary reason of the world, the Son, the force
vegetative, the Holy Ghost, the virtue Productive, and animative, the which
with him proceeding from the Father, and being shed out by the Son, it
passes into a work. So, the Holy Ghost, which is abounding in the Father,
awakeneth this Almighty and inexhaust fountain of the Eather, and the immense
fecundity of the Son encites him (as it were) to budde forth, and by the
quickening spiration of his holy Spirit, the Father begets the world, by a
mean and seminall reason, having conceived it, gives it to his Son, as he
who properly expresses the Father, from the Son already by act the world is
brought forth, but by the means of the Holy Ghost as being the Chariot,
whereby the world spreads it self, through its parts, and is animated in all
things according to the proper Idea of every one of them. Now the Spirit
accompanyeth the work always, and in all things, to the end that that which
is conceived by the impregnant activity, and formed by the quickening motion
thereof, is also conserved by the same: It accompanies not then all things in
such sort, that therefore it is divided into parts, but indivisibly, and in the
same manner as the Platonists call it, the Soul of the world to be present in
all things, and is not so severed from them, that it becomes, either the Soul,
or the form of every one, but abides in himself, and in all things present,
and diverse, and separated from all, he forms all things at once by the Power
of the Father, by the Act of the Son, every one in his essence, and form,
accomplishing by degrees, both the essence, and the matter, according to the
reason of the model, and afterward appropriateth all things, according to the
law, conceived of the Father.

CHAP. I. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Wisdom of the Creator.
HAving purposed (Friendly Reader) to treat of Geographie, it is requisite for
me, as the weightinesse and excellency of such a work requires, to apply all
the faculty of my understanding thereunto; that I may represent before the eyes
of evidence, as well the species, as the order of all things created: that by
this means I might the better conduct and lead the Reader to the
contemplation of the universe, and the knowledge of the Fabric of the world,
for so it is written, O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom thou have
made them, the earth is full of thy riches! Now it is wisdom to know the
causes, and the ends of things, which can never be better known, then by the
most excellent ordained frame of the world, drawn out by this great, and most
wise Architect, according to the causes expressed, and noted by order. For as
in creating, he gave to all thing their nature: so they also immediately
effected that, which was enjoined them, and shall so continue, till the
consummation of things. And therefore no thing is more sure, then to search out
diligently his work, as it has been wrought by this same Author, and it
has been left unto us in Writ by his holy Spirit, by the Ministry of Moses,
faithful in all his house. For we cannot so easily err, in assigning the
cause of things, when as we shall contemplate; the primarie, and principal
laws of nature, commonly known, and that we describe the like effects. So
then nothing is more certain, then that all things ponderous, fall downwards,
and all light things ascend upwards, that nothing, which has motion in the
world is infinite, and that which is the subtilest, evaporeth from the grosser,
whence we collect that heavy things, meet all together in the Center: that
the world has a special form, or round. And the order of all its parts, and
the difference of its subtlety, and mobilitie. By the order of things, their
causes, and their ends being demonstrated, we shall easily perceive, and soon
convince the errors of the ancient Philosophers, touching the beginning and
causes of things, that by this means, the truth may be firmly fixed and
settled in the minds of men, to the end they may not be shaken nor seduced by
diversity of opinions, and ambiguous reasons, whatsoever appearance of
persuasion they may have. And so by the site and nature of the Celestial
bodies, mavelous things shall be declared, which as yet have not been well
sought into, nor well known: so there are many things yet to this day desired
in the knowledge of the Elements, which by Art, and the diligent study of the
Learned, might be cleared by adding to the Fabric of the world; the
observations and laws of many Learned men dispersed in diverse kingdomes' and
so in fine, some matter of truth may be found out; touching the increase, and
decrease of the Moon, the admirable flowing and ebbing of the sea, and of the
causes thereof, and so the search of things which concern the art of
Navigation, may be enlarged, wherein it seems, some things of great
consequence are yet deficient. And so by this means all Geographie might be
accomplished, and made perfect, to the great good and commodity of Princes,
and of the whole world, the necessity whereof is such, that without the help
thereof, Merchants cannot have any access into strange and foreign countries,
which might make them familiarly acquainted one with another; neither Princes
themselves know well the large and long extent of their Realms and Dominions:
some years since, I have begun this Work in the description of the
neighboring parts most desired, before whom now, I set forth the first Tome of
our Geographie, with the Septentrionall and Sarmaticke tables: being minded
(God willing to describe by Tomes all the universe, according to that
knowledge, which God has given me.

CHAP. II. Of the Fabric of the World, Of the beginning of the Creation, and
of the matter created. The first Day begins.
A Little before the time of Moses, Saturn was borne, and before him other
gods of the Gentiles; who being given to study natural things, were the
inventers of diverse things, and sowed many heresies, which afterward falling
into the hands of Philosophers great disputers of the beginning of things, and
of great variety of opinions, among themselves, produced diverse sects: Moses
therefore giving a true narration of these same beginnings, opposes this most
ancient verity, against all their errors, and convinces them taking his
beginning from the first matter of things, whereof they had forged many
leasings in their brains, and ending the whole Fabric of the world, he
speaks thus in the second and fourth Chapters, of Genesis: These are the
generations of heaven, and of earth, and not those, which the folly of men has
invented. Herein we will follow the text of Moses, considering it
particularly, and diligently, according to the gift of grace which I have
received from the Lord. In the beginning (says he) that is, when as yet there
was nothing created, and that the divine Majesty, by the counsel, and
determinate laws proposed to begin the Creation. In the first point (I say)
and moment of their existence of things, which yet were as nothing, but a
beginning only of things, without any form, or condition of things, or of
existence, even (I say) in the moment of time, he begun to create: and after
God created without any prepared matter, by his immense, and incomprehensible
power this huge mass, which was without form, rude, and confused, out of
which he afterward drew all the parts and members of the world. In this
creation of matter, as also in that which ensues, three things were
necessary. The fruitfulness of the Paternall power, the effectual and
pregnant power of the Word, and the force fructifying, conceiving and quickening
of the holy Spirit, for the matter extracted had the beginning of its existence
from the power of God, as from a Seminary reason, by the fructifying virtue of
the holy Spirit, both formed it, and brought it into being, even as the fruit
in the belly, and being at last hatched by the power of God, quickening, and
nourishing, the same, is made manifest. So the only God Almighty, conceived,
formed, and brought forth into the light, out of nothing in the vigor of his
triplicitie, and without the assumption of any subject, the matter of all
things, which were to be created, not by the operation first of the Father,
afterward of the Word, and finally of the holy Ghost; but all working, and
conspiring jointly together inseparably, and uncessantly, among themselves in
the unity of the divine essence. Now this which is said, In the beginning,
ought to be so understood, as Esdras does, lib. 4. Cap. 6. saying: O Lord thou
have spoken from the beginning of thy creature, saying, Let it be made, etc.
Now in that he says from the beginning of the Creature, he shows
sufficiently, that this beginning or original, ought not to be understood of
the Son of God, but of the first moment of the Creation, which is also
manifest, as well by the preposition, as by the construction of the words, In
the beginning, and Creature, for to join this verb; Thou have spoken, with
that of creature, the thing it self contradicts it: seeing the creature was
not yet in being, to which God might speak. Moreover for as much as Moses (as
I have said) wrote deliberately against the Gentiles, setting down a beginning
to the world. This beginning can be no otherwise understood, then as we have
interpreted it: for if he had said, to have created in his Son (which is also
true) and means thereby no other thing, whence then can we gather an argument
against the Eternity of the world, or of its matter, seeing the beginning it
self is eternal. Moses speaks simply of a temporal beginning, and not
otherwise.

By the heaven and the earth, he understands not two distinct and different
bodies, signified at this day by the names of heaven and earth, for then
neither heaven nor earth had their beings, according to their proper form, but
that heaven was made the second day, and the earth last appeared, the third
day; the waters being separated, afterward the other parts of the world,
created of this Primative mass were reduced into order. By the heaven and the
earth then, he understands figuratively, this first mass without form,
whereof the heaven and earth were formed. Moses then had to do with the
Gentiles, to whom he testifies, that the heaven and the earth which we behold
had heretofore been created of God, as he will show afterward, and uses names
and things known, the better to lead men to the consideration of their
beginning. For Moses meaning was, to pull out of all humane understandings, all
Rapsodies of Philosophers, and their false doctrine, touching the eternity of
the world, and its matter, and by this way to submit it to the glory of God, as
he silently shows in his second and fourth Chapter. But, he takes the heaven
and the earth figuratively for the matter of them. These Epithites following
demand it, Thohu and Bohu, which he attributes to the same mass, created
first of all: because it was without form, vast, void, solitary and vacant,
and does not adjoyne those Epithites to the heaven and earth, but to the earth
only, carrying the Reader by this means, from the contemplation of perfect
bodies, to their primarie matter, and hereby understands, not the earth only
in her form; but this indigested and deformed Chaos, using nevertheless the
word earth, because it better resembles the condition of the earth, when he
continues the description of this mass, and calls it The Hom, that is to say
an Abisse. And so by degrees constrains the understanding of a contemplating
man; yet being void of all determinate kind of things, for the contemplation
of the first matter of heaven and earth: nevertheless in this word Abisse, he
painteth out some certain kind of form, of this primarie matter, to wit,
that it was a liquid and fluid matter, and that bottomless, as that which in
all things, was like and equal unto it self, as water to water, and clay to
clay. Also in the 38. Chapter of Job, verse 38. The first matter is called
Aphar, that is clay, which God in the beginning reduced to a sollid earth. It
is also called by the most ancient Grecian (...), that is clay, the first
matter of all things. And again, Chaos, from (...), because it is fusible, by
which its first form was undoubtedly made known unto them, and to all the
world, from the first Hebrew Fathers, and Moses. That mass then first of all
created of God, was clay, and a fusible matter, not of diverse natures, but of
one simple and undividuall substance and form, having in it self the seminary
virtue of a terrestrial, waterish and a celestial form, and of all things
which God was to form out of this mass.

CHAP. III. Of the Fabric of the World. To what end this Chaos was created,
and of the foundation, and form thereof.
NOw after that all things were made, all men may easily understand the end,
which God proposed touching the Chaos, to wit, that he might divide it, and
form out of it, as many species of things, as he from all eternity had
pecreed to be necessary for the Economy and government of the world, and gave
and establish to all things at once, their force and law, that it might abide
immovable to the end for which he ordained all things. But, for as much as he
created all other things for man's use, and subjected them to him, till the time
shall come when as he will transport mankind into his heavenly mansion^; as
Paul teaches us in the 8. of the Romans. This most wise Architect, created
and constituted them to such an order, that by a submissive service and a sweet
harmony, they should all be serviceable to man: which harmony chiefly
consists herein, that the superior causes rule over the inferior, and that
all effects pass the chief causes by the meanest and lowest. Afterward also
in this, that there is a mutual inclination in all things, according to the
consequence of causes and effects and as it were a certain love, whereby
inferior things respect their superiors, as their Benefactors: and likewise
the Superior the Inferiors, as receiving also some benefit from them. And
albeit it comes to pass in these two conditions of nature, that there is
some contrariety and strife found in the meaner species of things:
Nevertheless, every one of them agree well together in their order, and have
their recourse to the primary cause, as to their center, and yield their
service, both to God their Ceatour, and to man: So that all things according to
their proper office, agree together among themselves; but of these things we
will speak more at large hereafter. For the present, I will advertise the
Reader to observe well and diligently in the creation of things, to wit, that
thou may know by what order, of what things, and how, and by what means God
works; and so thou shall learn that which ought to be first in all the
government of nature; and that which ought to be last, what the causes of
works are, what the generations of all things are, and also the definition of
things and their natures, their simpathies, and antipathies, their differences
in strength, and debilitie, their nobility, and ignobility, what is of
durance, and what in corruptible, with many others. For whatsoever may be
disputed of the nature of things depends on their generations and primary
creation. He that can comprehend let him comprehend. There are many things that
are very difficult, in the searching of them out: nevertheless, man by a deep
speculation can reach high, principally, when after having invocated the holy
Ghost, his maine end and search be, to glorify God in his works. Thou may
here also well observe, the meaning of things natural, and another order in
the work of nature, than that which the Philosophers have caught, which was
impossible for them to conceive by their natural reason, the beginning of the
world, in such sort, as Moses has described them unto us: but let us put our
Chariot again into the right way. The Chaos being created, first it is to be
thought upon, how God first of all did dispose thereof. Above all things it is
necessary, first of all to assign it a fixed place, for we see that the
heaviest of all bodies is the earth, to which this mass has a better
resemblance than to the heaven. Now had it not bin in a fixed place, it might
easily have fallen into an infinite of pieces, the weight always urging the
motion. But to the end he may here mark well the beginning of things, let him
well observe, that God of the most basest and grosest Element, of the most
illfavouredst, and without any form begins his creation by little and
little, mounting up to the highest, to the noblest, and to the divinest things.
Observe likewise, he begins with the most solid, and most firm bodies, that
the things which ought to be prepared appertaining to the life and perfection
of creatures, which are all frail, and changeable, to the end (I say) that all
these things might have a firm subject to which they might be fastened and
made firm: he assigned them a place for the earth and the Chaos, to wit, a
point in the midst of the void, upon which it rested, and beyond which it is
not permitted to move. This is the greatest miracle of all nature, surpassing
the capacity of man, and humane credence: were it not that the wheeling course
of the stars, and the navigations round about the world, did not manifestly
witness the same for who could believe, that so ponderous a weight could
subsist hanging in the midst of the Heaven? and yet the truth thereof makes us
believe it, who is he that could understand, that so huge and so heavy a
mass can subsist, and without any supporter settle it self? What man is he
that can imagine that it has a foundation there where it has no
underpropping? Rightly did God then disputing with Job, in the midst of his
anguish demand of him, if he understood where he laid the foundations of the
earth, he should declare it, Job 38.4. Here is the inscrutable wisdom of God,
and his incomparable power, therefore it is not possible for a man to give a
sound reason touching this goundwork, but only the will of God, who follows
the causes and reasons which are hidden in himself, and whom all things must
obey. As he willed, so it was done, his will ministers him matter for the
framing and forming of all things, his will from one sole body, from one only
form, fashioneth many of diverse forms; from that which is without life, and
without any activity, he produces it immediately into force and vegetative
vigor, into life, motion, sense and intelligence, and which is more, all
things which he created, are so tied, and agree together, by a mutual love,
whereunto all things tend, that he causes them by the sole impression of his
will, to have a natural affection, and a certain inclination to that duty
which is imprinted in them, according to their Creators will, by the harmonious
consent of the Ideas in the divine thought: So this Chaos, and above all that
which is the heaviest in it, to wit, the earth desires uncessantly the point
which is assigned to it in this vacuitie, by an impression from the will of
God, and is moved toward him, by a certain desire in its ponderositie, till
that it has obtained a like resting place on all parts, supporting and
sustaining upon it, the other parts of the world, as upon its shoulders. This
then is the nature of the earth and so likewise of the Chaos, and the sympathy
which it has with all other creatures, which he subjecteth to all in the
seat, which he has appointed to it, which is the Center of the world, and
being settled firm round about the Center, rests and bears up all other
things; and seeing it bears up all other things, and seeing it is most
imperfect, it seeks help and blessing from on high, to produce that which it is
enjoined to do. In this point then the Chaos rests necessarily, because the
Lord has appointed this for its place of repose, and as a bound for the motion
of its weight, which bound and limit it cannot nor will not pass; because the
Lord has spoken, it must be so: and this nature, this Sympathy is given to it
from the Lord, as a necessary sustentation of all the Species, and individuals,
for which reason, David says Psalm. 104.5. He has laid the foundation of the
Earth upon Bases, that it should not be moved for ever. And Psalm. 136.6. O
give thanks to him that stretches a out the Earth above the Waters. Now
because this Chaos is the mother of all Creatures, not only of the inferior
bodies, but also of the caelestiall, and of all things Created, as we shall
hear anon, we ought not to doubt but all the Elements, yea, all the Heavens,
up to the very highest, bear the nature of their mother, some more, some
less, and have some weight for to incline downwards, toward the midst, and
exercise their Sympathy, as well toward the Earth, as among themselves, by a
certain cherishing, a gentle touching, and as it were by a feeling. Now
experience also teaches us that the weightiest things, by nature draw more
easily, and nearest to the Center of the World, and the seat (I say) of
ponderous things: Whence proceeds a most certain reason of order in the
universe, that the things which are lightest, and subtilest have the superior
place, and not only that, but also the Shpaericall figure of the Chaos, and of
the whole world, take from hence their Sourse, for seeing the nature of the
Chaos was floating, and so altogether, and that all sides of equal virtue and
facility, was borne by its weight to this resting place, so that all the
extremities were equally distant from the Center, and subsisted from every part
of the Center with a like weight: for if the distance hereof had been unequal
from the Center, more weight had lain upon the one side of the Center, than
upon the other. Suppose that in this Cube the Center be a, the extremities, b c
d e and that thou beholdest b out of d, to the Angle d cube a b c d

in the middle side, the line d a is much longer, than the line c a or e a. The
matter then which should rest upon the Center, according to a b or d a would
have much more weight upon it, then that which is according to c a, or e a the
weight then of d a wou^d bear it down, and it shoving it forward, it would
fall topsie-turvie, upon c a and e a till it came together into a like weight,
that is to say, of alike distance from the Center, the matter being liquid and
sleeting. The Chaos then must necessarily consist of an equal weight under the
Sphaericall figure, and no figure else could be so convenient for the world,
since that the supreme and most perfect bodies, ought to march about the
circumference of the Earth, for the help of generation by a perpetual
circumvolution. John de Sacrobosco and some other Mathematicians, approve best
of the Sphaericall figure of the Earth, by some apparent accidents: but it is
much more excellent, to demonstrate every thing from the fountain it self,
and out of the causes (I say) because the sollid science proceeds by this
way. It is clear then, that the point found out of these things all ready
prooved, ought to be called the Center of the world; because of the weight
thereof, and the settling place of all ponderous things. Now Physicians call it
the lowest of all, and the other the highest, in affirming that the motion
toward the middle, is made downward, but from the middle upward, and that
rightly, because that ought to be called Supreme, which is most perfect, and
which may confer upon others some more excellent nature, but the lowest is
the farthest from off them, as well in place, as in condition, The first world
yet was a most formelesse form,
A confused heap, a Chaos most deforme,
A Gulf of Gulphs, a body ill compact,
An ugly medley, where all difference lackt,
Where the Elements lay jumbled altogether.
Where hot and cold, were jarring each with other;
The Earth in Heaven, the Heaven in Earth was placed.
Earth, Air, and Fire, were with the waters mixed,
Water, Earth, Air, within the Fire were fixed,
Fire, Water, Earth, did in the Air abide,
Air, Fire, and Water, in the Earth did hide.
For yet the immortal mighty Thunder-darter
The Lord-High Marshall unto each his quarter
Had not assigned, the celestial Arkes
Were not yet spangled with their fiery sparks.
All, all was void of beauty, rule, and life,
All without fashion, soul and motion quite.
But this dull heap of indigested stuff
Had doubtless never come to shape or proof,
Had not the Almighty with his quickening breath
Blown life and Spirit into this lump of death.


CHAP. IV. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the nature and form of the Chaos,
or primary matter.
MOses shows most clearly; that the light which was Created out of the Chaos
in the beginning, was the principle of al things made by God, producing out of
the same all the works of the six days: now his first proposition argues
evidently, that there was nothing Created by God before this matter, otherwise
he would not have constituted therein the beginning of the Creation. Seeing
then, that all things are made after this manner, and out of it, to search as
is requisite the original of nature, and to constitute the beginnings,
according to the truth of natural philosophy. It is necessary above all things
to consider most diligently, what this primary matter was. The heathen
Philosophers troubled themselves much in the consideration of this matter, they
durst not deny, but that it was, and yet would in no wise grant it to be
essence, they said it was neither quantity, nor quality, and that it had
neither of them in it, and so made it naked of all quality and form, when they
testified it to be as a mere Privation. And some of them proceeded so far in
their impudency and temerity, as to say, that God labored to subdue this
matter, and to make it subject to forms. What can be said more foolishly, or
spoken more villanously against the omnipotency of God? to wit, as if he, who
was able to make and to induce forms elsewhere (much more noble then the
matter it self, as they would have it) could not also Create a a matter, which
he himself might subject to all the work? But such is the obscurity and
blindness of humane understanding, that without the guidance of the word of
God, it cannot, as it ought, comprehend and know any thing certainly, of that
which is so far from sense; and which has its original Divine: Likewise
this is a very great folly, to go about to measure and search out of their
shallow brains, the most deep mysteries of nature, her primary original (I
say) and the extreme Abyss of the counselles and works of God. Nature her
self can teach us, that all things were created of a matter, but who dare be
so bold, as to obtrude for Oracles, the manner and conditions of that matter,
which are no where shown, either by Gods word, or any footestep of nature, yea
which are contrary to the manifest Word of God? they spoil the first matter of
all form, and of all condition, and kind of being, in such sort, that it
cannot be said, what way it can subsist in it self. But Moses calls it in
Express words, Earth, Water, and the Deep, before that the concreate form,
or any new Species was wrought upon it. And in Ecclesiastes 3.20, It is called
Aphar, that is, clay, whence it appears, that the same had from the beginning
some kind or form of Earth and Water, and consequently greatness and weight.
But some one may object, that Philosophers to distinguish between things
considered the matter by it self, and likewise the form by it self, to teach
more evidently the causes of things depending on qualities and forms, not on
the matter, as also the generation or production of the kinds, which is
wrought by the access of the form to the matter, which is well said; and we
also our selves affirm the qualities, and forms to be active, and begetters
of Species, but not the matter void of them. But herein they err grievously in
two things, first of all in this, that ascending from the last and most perfect
form to the first of all, which can be imagined, they separate them all
equally from the matter, and hold them as accessors, and induced from
elsewhere, so that at length they leave the matter naked, whereas according to
the true production of Species, described by Moses, it is not lawful, to
ascend above the definition of the Chaos, signified by Moses, for this having
been the first beginning of things, in this all things are finally resolved,
according to Ecclesiastes. Chap. 3. Whether could they amount higher paring
that, seeing they cannot prove it to be compounded? Secondly, they fail yet
more grievously in this, when as they make all forms so estranged from the
matter, that they deny it to have in it any seminary virtue, or small note, but
will have it to take its primary beginning elsewhere from without the matter,
which we impugn, seeing it is manifest out of the generation of the world, and
divine testimonies, that the primary matter has had its own form, quality
and quantity, and that out of the form thereof, the forms of other things did
proceed. Moreover, it is most absurd, yea, contrary to the nature of God, to
Create something without form, and without all virtue and quality, as well by
reason of his purpose, as by reason of his Majesty; and Omnipotency; of his
purpose, because seeing he has appointed all things for the service of man, to
what purpose should an idle mother serve, which neither can do any thing of
her self, nor is able to bend the qualities and virtues received, but rather
slackens them, for if thou will say, she conferreth something to the qualities
received, thou affirmest at once things contradictory. The matter not to be
neither quantity nor quality, nor yet to comprehend either as her own in her
bowels, and yet nevertheless to be endowed with some virtue, as she works
something. Now in respect of his omnipotency, and Majesty it does in no wise
beseem God, to create a matter wholly void of form, for seeing that he is a
form forming all forms, a pure light, a pure virtue and efficacy, a pure
life, and a breathing goodness; how can he produce any thing void, and dead,
who has directed his maine scope unto life? He who conceived to Create man
after his own Image, how should he begin a sluggish and dead foundation, and
form man of that then of which nothing can be more unlike, yea, more contrary
to, and estranged from God? He who makes the beginning of such an excellent,
and incomparable work to be so vild, injureth the Almighty, and does detract
from his Majesty and Omnipotency. Empedocles, and Anaxagoras seem to have had
a better and a righter opinion of the primary matter, whom Plotinus reprooveth
in his Book de Materia, Chap. 7. For Empedocles did not so endlesly pare from
the matter, nor denude it of all quality, but when he had learned by
experience, that all bodies are resolved into the Elements, whereof they were
composed, and did not find any further resolution, he cease to search out any
higher the beginning of the matter, as being ignorant of the first matter,
whereof the Elements were produced. Now whereas Plotin objecteth against him
the corruption of the Elements, it has no place, because the Elements are not
corrupted, but only the mixtures, by whose putrefaction and resolution the
Elements are repurged and restored to their integrity. But Anaxagoras coming
nearest to the nature of the Chaos affirmed a certain waterish mixture to be
the primary matter, erring indeed in the mixture, but perhaps because the right
name did not occur he would describe it by a similitude the nearest to the
thing, being taught by a most ancient tradition, that the first matter of all
was APHAR and (...), he added that this same matter, had not only a passive
fitness to all things, as others would have it, that it might receive forms
induced from elsewhere, but that it actually (supply not expressly nor
potentially) contained in it self, or in its own essence all forms, and all
Species, wherein surely he erreth not far from the truth, as it shall appear
in the progress, but if we would have the Species to be formed from the
matter, as Plotin seemed to say, certainly therein he erred: for the most
imperfect cannot produce the most perfect, but it self has need of one to
perfect it. Now for to attain to the true doctrine of the primary matter,
omitting the dreams of the Pagans (I say) briefly, what I think ought first
to be thought of it, and in the pursuit thereof will prove it out of the Word
of God, and the consent of perceptible nature with it: such then is the state
of this matter.

The Omnipotent God, Lord of nature, is able only to Create whatsoever he
wills, whereof John the Baptist gives testimony in the third Chapter of Saint
Matthewes Gospel, and in the third likewise of Saint Luke. That God is able of
those stones, to raise up Children unto Abraham, verse 9. And who without any
subjected matter to work upon, was able out of nothing to Create this visible
world, much more could he then also in a moment, make out of all, all
whatsoever he would. Nevertheless he himself, has followed in Creating a
manner, and rule, which he gave to nature as we shall see anon. Now nature
being once ordained, and constituted by God, does not all what she wills, out
of all that she wills, but she engenders it out of the matter, which is the
nearest to that, which nature proposes, for such is infinite providence. So
she engenders not out of a stone Corn, but of an earthly and waterish
moisture, neither does she produce fire out of water, but out of oil, and yet
more out of brimstone, A quality then accommodated to things, which are
engendered, is required in the matter, and we see by this universal law of
nature once constituted by God; that nothing is begot is out of nothing, nor
out of a matter affected to the contrary, or improper to generation.

All opperation then of nature, in the matter affected to the contrary and
improper, is violent, less nevertheless in the improper, than in the affected
to the contrary. Now that, which suffers force, the operatour being taken
away, it returns to its natural course, unless it be vanquished by an act
of longer durance, and by little and little is drawn into the nature of the
operator. All generation then in the matter is violent, if we say, that it was
without all quality, and natural affection, whereby it may be inclined to
engender. Now the generation, and continuation of the species, their
multiplication and their agreement, and sympathy of things among themselves, is
necessary as it is said, in the fifth Chapter, and as a may see manifestly,
throughout in the Oeconomie of the world: It was requisite then that the matter
out of which something was to be engendered, should first have some nature, and
condition proper to it self, which might be meet to the Species intended,;
which ought to be engendered out of it.

This same nature if in some sort, it had not had a root in the primary
matter, out of the Creation, how could it be inclined to that duty, whereunto
God had appointed all things, to wit, to serve for the use of man? What
sympathy could there ever be of things among themselves? which is so necessary
to be known and observed by us, that the Holy Ghost, which sustaineth, and
directs all things created to this use (the Apostle Paul speaking in the
eight Chapter to the Romans describes it amply) when he shows us, the
incomparable greatness of the glory, which shall be manifested to us by the
service of these Creatures, saying. The earnest expectation of the creature
wayteth for the manifestation of the Sons of God in glory, that is, it does
the duty, which God has imposed upon it cheerfully, sustayning carefully
mankind in this life, with a desire that they might be saved, and be led to God
their Creator* And so this service of the Creature says he is done to many
vain and unprofitable, and nevertheless it is not subject to this vanity of
its own accord, that is, it is not all one, whether it is serviceable to the
good, or to the bad, but as much as it is able does the office which is enjoined
to it, to the glory of God, and the Salvation of man. Nevertheless, God has
subjected it to this vanity, that it might serve also to the wicked, though in
vain, yet not simply, but by reason of him, who has subjected the same in
hope, if peradventure they might in groping, taste the benignity and
benevolence of God, and be converted. And to show, that it serves to the
wicked unwillingly; adding that it shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God, after which the
whole Creation groaneth, to wit, till Christ our Lord, and nature having
finished the last propagation of mankind, shall bring his faithful ones into
the glory of God his Father: thou see here most manifestly, how great the
Sympathy of all things is between them and man which were impossible to be
done out of a matter without all form, or void of any quality or affection.
But thou will say out of the Philosophy of the Pagans, that God has since
given a form unto the matter created, out of which thereafter generation and
propagation is made. And to what purpose I pray you, has he made in the second
place, and by a second operation, that which he might have done at the first,
and by the first Creation? might he not as well from the beginning, have given
the matter properly qualified, in its own nature, as afterward to have given
the quality, and that by force? Again, can he which is al form, virtue, a
most perfect, a most mighty, and a most good Act, the beginning it self, and
the fountain of good, procreate something altogether without form, and most
alienate from all manner of affection and action? Now the Lord would create man
his chief work, after his own Image, for otherwise how could he enjoy the
glory of God in dissimilitude? Things that are unlike, delight not in things
unlike, but abhor them, it is then requisite for man to have a great
similitude with God, as he which ought to participate greatly of his glory.
But the holy Scripture witnesses, that the universal glory of God shall be
manifested to his Saints, and that we shall be like unto him, because we shall
see him as he is, the greatest similitude then, between man and God, shall be
in the life to come, the beginnings of which excellency he has received in the
Creation, as Moses testifies in Genesis, as he who from the beginning of his
Creation, should converse with God, and serve him in this world in all
obedience, until he were accrued into the similitude, which God concreated
with him, and should receive his highest perfection in the Heavens.

Seeing therefore that man is Created after the Image of God, and that also the
other Creatures, for having a true sympathy with Man, to whom they ought to be
serviceable; have likewise obtained some similitude with God in the Creation it
self, especially, the primary matter, to wit, the Chaos out of which all
things were created; yea man himself ought to have some similitude with his
Creator, for it had been absurd (as I have said before) that God the
fountain of all goodness should have created some ill thing, and that he, who
is all life, and quickening virtue; should create a stupid body, void of all
quality or affection, which should be immediately reformed, to the end it might
agree, as well with the Species, which were to be created, as with man. For
seeing the work of every Artisan, shows the industry, wisdom, and the
study of his Spirit, how much more then the works of God, represent as well
his intention, as in some sort his Image. He then, who from the beginning has
thus formed and ordained nature, that she might bring forth a generation, no
otherwise then from a matter properly qualified, has also created and produced
the first Species of things, out of a Chaos convenient thereunto.

We conclude then, that the Chaos was the first of all things, having in its
essence, the seed of all qualities and forms, a nature (I say) simple, and
not compounded, deducible and distributive into so many qualities and species,
as there is now in universal nature. Also that it was like to its Creator in
this, that as God the Father is the beginning of all Deity, having all things
covertly in himself, which are expressed actually in the The Father works of
himself by the Son and the holy Ghost, the Word his Son from the Father by
the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son.
Word, his Son, and shed abroad by the Holy Ghost, and communicated with the
Creatures, that so also the Chaos comprehended all the forms of things,
substances and qualities, secretly within her bowels, and intrinsicke essence,
according to the Seminary and Radical power, which being by the Creator
extracted out of it, perfected and distributed into several Species, served
man by an act of egredient. And as in God the Father, the multitude of Idea's,
not as many, but comprised under one simple unity, is brought forth from God by
the Creation into every Species, so the Chaos being a nature simple, and not
composed, is produced, and made perfect by the Creation in so many substances
and kinds, as is requisite for the body, and Oeconomie of the world. And like
as the substance of God is not compounded, neither consisting of matter or
form, but an indivisible essence, yea in thought, so also the substance of the
primary matter, or Chaos, is not compounded, nor consisting of matter and
form, introduced from elsewhere, or a new Created in it, but in a simple
essence, Created from one act by a simple being God and a vital substance and
life, or a substantial form, or essential substance, or in any such sort,
that the unity of the matter and form may be expressed existing: in this
nevertheless, before other differences the most distant from God, that it is
corporeal, and gross, actually finite in virtue and power, being only a
small beginning of these things, and divisible into different substances, yea
even to contraries, not immediately, but by the degrees of generation, which
are betwixt both. The ancient Philosophers have not given a sound division of
the Primary matter, in having made two beginnings of things diverse, and not
communicating, to wit, the matter, and form. In things which are engendered,
such a distinction brings with it some light to the understanding, when as we
contemplate the matter out of which something is made, and the form which it
ought to be, introduced: and which as yet does not exist in the several parts,
according as the cause of the thing requires, but when as we make this in the
first matter, and out of the cause of generation, we conceive a matter wholly
without form and void, and we wander astray from the true natural beginnings.

The Chaos is then in things which are created out of God, essence of essences,
form of forms, substance of substances, not by act, but by power, and that
not foreign, but interior, making the matter and the beginning of the form,
as a mother to all things. But first of all, God is the Worker, then the virtue
specificall: ordained by God, in forming them, perfecting and preparing for the
birth. We shall see then this opinion of the primary matter, and of the Chaos
to be confirmed by the Creation of the World, and the certain experience of
things.

CHAP. V. Of the Fabric of the World. Touching the false and true
understanding of the Idea's.
BUT forasmuch as through the sinister understanding and considerations of
Idea's and forms, many absurd things are taught by the Philosophers,
questions, and intricate disputes are moved, and the true order of the
operations in nature is obscured, it behooveth us to search out more deeply
the condition and nature of the Idea's and fermes, that not relying upon a
false foundation, we do not deceive our selves, and instead of true science,
constitute so many vain opinions as foolish dotages. When the Philosophers
would that the forms should be brought elsewhere into the matter, they assign
unto them another beginning, and separated from the matter, to wit, a certain
eternal Idea, out of which they flow, and are joined to the matter, so that
every essence is not simple, but one compounded of diverse things, and
separated, and incommunicable of matter and form, and therefore the matter and
form had not any similitude in the essence, nor any Sympathy between them,
before the composition. It is well known and usual, that every good workman,
before he begin his work, conceives a certain Idea thereof, by the
contemplation of which, he begins and accomplisheth it, but are many things
oftentimes, which present themselves ever and beside the model conceived, he
adds or takes from it, and if diverse men shall undertake the same work in
Species, there will be as many differences, as workemasters. There is not then
any Idea out of man, which conceives and frames such a model in his
understanding, but he himself by the clearenesse of his understanding, and
according to the knowledge which he has of things, which are required, be it
true, be it false, and according to the judgment of his reason, he imagines
and frames the accident by experience, or elsewhere he amendeth it, after upon
better knowledge. So God as by himself, being the most wise, most mighty, and
the most skillfull Architect of the world, has created all things no
otherwise, than by a most good and exquisite reason. It is necessary therefore,
that he of himself from all eternity had conceived an Idea most requisite for
his work; for it is not the property of a wise man, to make any thing without
good order, manner and reason, for the things which are so made, are either
made casually or rashly, and cannot promise a certain good issue. But he took
not this Idea, for the framing of his work, out of a fore knowledge of things
with a foreknowne rationation, and meditation as from a certain model after
the manner of men, seeing he of himself, and without any motion of
understanding, alteration, inspection, and auscultation, is all wise, Almighty,
having in the virtue of his essence represented before his view, and pondered
all the beginnings of things, the means, ends, manners, conditions, number,
proportions, habitudes, and all whatsoever should appear visible, a
workemaster (I say) so perfect from the most internal Center, and fountain of
his essence, has this increated Idea, shining forth in all things, and
possessed it eternally; and this Idea is one, and simple, as the essence of God
is one and simple, but proceeding by fruitfulness, as from the generation and
propagation into branches and all forms and Species, according to the
intention and scope of the Creation in the alone species of man. Therefore
whenever thou art desirous, to contemplate inwardly, the creation of things,
and art willing to search out well their affinity and Sympathy, it is requisite
for thee to contemplate the same, with all the subtilty, and force of thy
understanding, by what order every thing is created, and whereof, and in what
manner the one species exceeds the other, for from thence the Creatures are
known, and the order of subjection of every one of them, as far, as may
concern man. It is now in no wise lawful to place this Idea out of the
substance and essence of God, for it is most properly proper to God himself,
and communicable to no other but to God only, as his essence agrees to no
other, then to God: nevertheless we desire with some, to make fools of our
selves, who have dreamed that all things have been engendered out of the
essence of God, and are as parcels of him, and for this cause that the Souls
of all return again unto him. Seeing therefore that this Idea, is inseparable
from the essence of God, it is not lawful for any man to think of any primary
beginning of forms and species but in God. Now if any one should place the
Idea's out of God, they should not be the primary, but secundary Idea's,
created of the primary which is in God, the which when they are placed by the
Philosophers out of things, and are said to enter into the matter, and to
constitute things themselves, and the species compounded, what is that else,
but to add a help to the Creator, which forms all things, sufficient for
all things? as if he himself had not been able to do that immediately, or at
least, that he vouchsafed not, who is enflamed with such a great love to his
work, and that he delights to be with the Sons of men. And if we grant
him, who is all virtue, and a pregnant efficacy, and Almighty for most noble
effects, to have created a matter without form, idle and wholly imperfect, and
of no quality of it self, why should we say it is created of forms, more
worthy and noble than the matter, by strange and ministered Idea's? were not
that to diminish the glory of the Creator? or will thou that the matter be
created by secondary Idea's? What Idea I pray can be fained from that which is
nothing, and bereft of all essence? For (they forsooth) would have the Ideas to
be effectives of forms. Now if any man should affirm these Idea's to be made,
not only in respect of the first Creator of things, but for the perpetual
propagation of the Species, what difference then would there be, between the
propagation, and the primary constitution of the thing? The Species, should it
not be wholly compounded, the form being induced into the matter? So then, God
has created the first man, and the same work of the Creation is consequently
renewed in every man; how is it said, that the Lord rested the seventh day,
and afterward to create? Genesis 2. verse 2. As those who have been cast out of
the assembly of the faithful, for Heretics, who did affirm that the Angels
were worldly Creatures, no less should such be, who affirm the Idea's are
placed out of God, to constitute the Species of things. For such Idea's are
also Creatures, no less than the Angels: to this may be added that which I
have said before, that if thou do constitute the Species, and the matter
separated, and incommunicating (as it is necessary when thou make the matter
to be wholly without form, and that the same joined with the form, yields
a compound not simple) it cannot be, that there is any inclination of the
matter to the form or appetite, or any Sympathy whatsoever, rising out of the
different similitude. Many frivilous questions, and altogether, unprofitable,
are sprunge out of these Idea's separated from God, and from things, the which
in what manner soever thou resolvest them, yet shall thou never attain unto
the truth of the Creation, and Generation, and therefore can not affirm any
thing certain, neither of the beginning of nature, nor of the end and Sympathy.

We say then, that there is an universal Idea, residing essentially in God,
which is the total reason of all the things, which God was willing to Create,
disposed and destinated, according to his infinite wisdom and will, and that
this Idea is expressed by an eternal act, especially in the framing of the
world, and that the species are multiplied and increased, into many
individuals, without any Idea, cooperating out of God; in this act of every
species, there is imprinted the character of the Idea of this species, existing
in God, out of which impression, it is afterward inclined to the propagation of
its species. We call also this Idea, or reason of all things, to wit, an
internal act from the essence of God, to have proportion to the same essence:
therefore the Creatures which are Images of the same Idea, are said to have
some Analogy to the Substance and essence of God. From whence the most high
mysteries of the Trinity, shine a loose off as through a grate, and the
Catholic Doctrines may be illustrated excellently, against all the heresies of
Trinity, and may in some manner be made more clear, these obscurities being
dissipated: and if any one having invocated the Holy Ghost, search with all his
might and a pious zeal, the Analogy of the Creature to the Creator. But
seeing the particular reasons are excited in this universal Idea, by the
ligament of a mutual dependency, and perpetual harmony, in a most consonant
melody: it is necessary also that the reasons creaturall assemble together
after some manner in a Symphonie by a similitude, but not proportion, because
there is no proportion between that which is finite, and that which is
infinite. Out of this Symphony also of the Creatures, or the consent and
concordance of nature and office, follows a Sympathy, the which is necessary,
because of the end of the Creation. The things which hitherto have been spoken
of, partly in general, and also partly demonstrated touching the matter and
form of the species, ministry, and Sympathy, shine forth more clearly, and
shall be proved in the history of the Creation. Let us now then come to speak
of them.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the time of the beginning of the
Creation. The first Day.
WHen as the Lord began to Create the Stars, and their motion was not yet
in being, and consequently, as yet there was no time, according to the
Philosophers definition; nevertheless in this darkesome space, which proceeded
or went before the light, is accounted for a part of this day, and is called
night and evening: Genesis 1.5. and constituted with the light following, unto its
setting, a natural day, equal to them that followed. This eternal space then
is measured by God, by the first, and last, according to the greatness of the
parts, and there is no difference, with the time of the Physicians, saving that
it cannot be measured, but by the comparison of measure, borrowed out of the
Creation; for this eternity going before the world, had neither as yet years,
months, or days, or any such like accident whereby it might be measured. And
if the time of the Physicians cannot be measured, shall it therefore cease to
be time? for the measuring of a time is an accident belonging to time, it
cannot be defined. Whatsoever is known to be, has its definition in the
nature of it, though it cannot be expressed by words. So eternity is truly
known to be, because common understanding shows it: considering, there is
not any man confesses that to be, which never was, and that which is,
sometimes not to be, and therefore that which is, there is no doubt, but that
sometime, or in some time it was, and this is a common opinion, that that which
was in no time, and which is no part, that that is not at al. For it is
impossible to conceive the essence of any thing, without the circumstance of
time and place. Therefore for the shunning of ambitious and captious terms,
and many vain imaginations, drawn from the definition of time and place,
although at this day in use, and whereby deceiveable Sophisters obscure the
understanding, as it were with a thick mist, it is better to apply the spirit
to the substances themselves of time and place, or if thou will may rather be
called essence, and if ye cannot express their reasons, because express words
are wanting, nevertheless to contemplate them, after some conceived simile. So
thou may imagine time to be a certain extention of durance, between the
first, and the last, which after the Creation of the World, is exquisitely
measured, by the constant and immovable motions of the stars, and though
there were no such measurings before the Creation of the World, yet it ceased
not to have time in it, and if any speculation requires the measuring, we will
apply by this our thought the measures of this our time, touching the extension
to the eternal parts thereof. As we would in some sort declare the eternity of
God, we may say it was a thousand Ages (I speak of so great an extension)
before the Creation of the World, and besides them, a thousand more also, and a
thousand besides, and so foreward withous end. And so a common understanding
may in some sort measure the parts of eternity, and what need have we here of
any subtle Tergiversations, and Labyrinths? Things which are eternal and
uncreated, are easily conceived by some such like conception, when they are not
defined or well described. And the Word of God ascribes often to him, eternal
and infinite ages, from the first, to the last, accommodating it to the common
capacity, which he likewise has formed. We may also suppose the place to be a
certain space, wherein the thing is, which we will divide into three species,
into that which exceeds the comprehension, into the equal, and into the
lesser, not determining of any thing touching the greatness of the
comprehension. According to the first, man is in a house; for the second, every
body is in the water, or air, comprehending on all sides the extremities:
according to the third, every thing, and God principally is also in the very
least place: the Creature according to the figure Synecdoche, but God according
to his whole essence. If any one, these things being thus determined, should
doubt that something was ordained eternally besides God, he must consider, that
time and place are brought in God, yea from his essence, considering that
essence cannot be without time and place. For God (as John Damascene speaks
excellently. lib. 1. cap. 10.) is place of himself. In the like manner, and by
the same reason may one imagine, that he is also time himself. And Tertullian
against P^axea writes thus: God, before all things were Created, was alone
himself to himself, and the World, and place and all, Page 675, if he
searches any other substance of time and place, he will be swallowed up into
a bottomless pit inscrutable, and go astray into obscure speeches, because
the depth of God surmounteth exceedingly all understanding.

Before all time, matter, form and place
God all in all, and all in God it was.
Let us say then with Moses verse the fifth, that the beginning of the
Creation, and first natural day, was made by night, and that the night is the
first part of the day, and that we ought to begin the time of the world, from
the first motion of the Creation, and that God therefore has not only
ordained a week of days, as a memorial of the Creation, but he would also
have us, that we should take likewise the beginning of every day, from the
setting of the Sun, and from the evening, and that those judge amiss, who
would have that the ancient Hebrews did begin the day, from the rising of
the Sun, persuading them thereunto by some passages of the holy Scripture,
misunderstood and perverted in Exodus, chap. 12.18. The solemnity of the
passover is commanded to be celebrated for seven days, the beginning, and
the end whereof is appointed in the evening. And the Lord ordained the first
and the last day solemn ver. 16. So that the first of John, the 19. ver. 31,
it is called the High Sabbath, and the Hebrews call Parasceve, that is, the
preparation, the fourteenth day of the month, in which the Lamb was
sacrificed, between two Evenings, and distinguished from the Passover
immediately following, as appears. Matthew 27.62. Mark 15.42. Luke 23.54.
John 19.31. These are then, two days, and two evenings following one another.
The first is the end of the fourth day, the other after Sun setting, of the
night following, which appertains to the day following. Between these two
evenings, he commands in the sixth verse, that the Lamb should be prepared
and slain, but that could not be done in a moment, dividing the one, and the
other day; therefore the evening is taken more largely, for the vespertine
time, and enclining to the end of the day, or next ending the day, and
following incontinently. So ver. the eighteenth, when he commands them to
eat the unleavened bread, upon the fourteenth day from the evening, he means
from the evening ending immediately, the day being shut up. For seeing that the
setting of the Sun, distinguishes the days, as the night in which the
paschall Lamb was eaten, and the part of the day before the Sunne-setting, in
which they slew the Lamb, may be referred to a day? In Mark the sixteenth it
appears more clearly, that the night was the beginning of the natural day.
When the Sabbath day was past (says he) the women brought sweet ointments,
which was not lawful for them to do upon the Sabbath, they did this then on
the evening, the Sabbath being ended, because he adds, that very early in the
morning, the first day of the week, they came unto the Sepulcher. The Hebrews
then began their natural day, from the evening and the setting of the Sun,
because the first day of the creation began from the night.

CHAP. VII. Of the Fabric of the World. The Works of the First Day.
THe first thing which God created, was this Chaos, whereof hitherto we have
discoursed, to wit, this huge undigested mass, the matter and mother of all
things that were to be created, which he calls Earth, because it approaches
nearest to the nature and condition terrestrial, for the earth was first
finished, and brought forth her fruits, and incontinently after, the Chaos
being not yet divided, he calls it waters, not because that then the waters
were separated from the earth, but he shows, that as soon as the water was
created, the distinction of the Elements was begun, and therefore before he
names it Water, he names it Abisse, as some mean thing between a mass
without form, and the first distinction beginning to appear, or rather he
gives us to understand, the nature of this mass, that it was Aphar, a fleeting
matter, inclining to the generation of Waters, which he purposed first to
separate from the Earth. Now all this mass, how great soever it was, was an
Abisse, because that yet it was uniforme, not formed into any species. The
living creatures were not yet, the plants, the bright heaven, yea the Elements
themselves, the Earth, the Fire, Water, and Air (but there was says Moses)
solitude, vacuitie, or solitary unprofitable, and void, according as we do
call the Earth uninhabited, barren, and producing nothing for the use of man,
Desert. So, this mass was a pure solitude, having nevertheless in it the
speices, from whence all things which are now might be deduced and formed,
which speices is specially understood, under the farm of Aphar, of clay, and
Abisse.

He adds that this Chaos had not yet, that which was necessary for the
constitution of nature, generative and procreative of all things, to wit, the
life. Two things ought principally to be observed in the creation: First of it
all, that it proceed, by the order of things most imperfect, and most ignoble,
to the most perfect and most noble, as first of all from the Chaos, to the
Earth, then to the water, from thence to the heavens, and so consequently.
Secondly, that it institute the nature of all things, their power, actions,
order, the manner of doing, the beginnings and the end, and the periods of
either of them, and the universal law of nature, such in the creation, which
he would have to be perpetually. Willing then, that the inferior world, to
wit, the Earth, the Water, and the Air, was the mother of all things, which
ought to be engendered, and that the superior, was the father endowed with
masculine virtue, that is willing to ordain a seminary reason in the Elements,
but the prepatartixe, and excitratix to engender power in the heavens,
presently after that he be began to extract the Elements, he extracted withal
the matter of the heavens, to the end, that the father, and the mother might
grow up together, that the power, and all the virtue of the one and the other,
might receive engendring, his laws and rules in the same creation. And
therefore from the beginning of the distribution of the Chaos, he ordained two
orders of creatures, and proceeds by little and little in the one and in the
other, to the most perfect, and most noble, and then when he began to
distinguish the mass into Elements, he produces with the Air, a Celestial
and lucent matter, of which afterward the Firmament and the Stars were to be
formed and collected, and as in perfecting his work, he divided to every one
his speices apart: so also he gave to all of them the proper laws of nature,
to the Elements Elementary, and to the Celestial, matter Celestial. It is
to be understood nevertheless, that as well the Elements, of the Air, as the
heaven it self, wherein the Stars are, have been noted afterward in the
sacred Scriptures, under one and the same name, as for that then which
concerns the name, which was ordained to them by God, these two were in the
beginning of the one, and the same condition, and were created together,
without distinction, but presently began to be separated, to wit, when it was
requisite to form the Firmament, and the Stars of the noblest part of it.

Observe now, what the matter of the Celestial substance was. The Element of
Water, began now to appear, and be gathered together in the arch of the Chaos,
ere there was there light, which was necessary to the operations of nature. And
behold (says he) the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters, he
stirred up a vehement wind out of the Chaos, to move the Waters, not yet
separated from the Earth, and to make them mount up into higher waves, that by
this agitation, the Water might begin by little and little to separate it self
from the most gross substance of the Earth, and the most subtilest being
stirred out of this waterish part of the Chaos, was made Air, and the more
part of the Aeth eriall Air, or Celestial substances. This blast made of
these three things, the first day, which without all doubt, made the agitation
to endure longer, and it became more forcible, and vehement, a greater
abondance of this windy spirit being stirred up, till such time, that at last,
the Earth began to sustain it self, and to gather it self more together, it
allayed by little and little this agitation, and this windy agitation being
somewhat exhaust and consumed, it began, by degrees to rest. When then thou
beholdest the heaven to be extracted, and formed of Water, not yet separated,
thou may easily from thence understand, that it has some affinity with the
Earth, much more with the Water, from whence the Hebrews call it Shamaim, from
the word ESH, which signifies Waters, because it is made of waters, and
carries the Stars about it, as enflamed waters, according to that which
Egibine writes, touching the Etymology of the nowne. But seeing that the
Chaos had heaviness, as well as greatness, and whatsoever has been made
thereof, resembles in somewise the nature of a mother, the heavier, and the
more ignoble, settled together in one, but the lighter and more noble substance,
which as it were the fatness of all the Chaos, being carried upward, was a
long time coupled with the superior, whence it came to pass that the heaven
was created of the more noble part of the one, and of the other Elements,
before they were separated every one into his place, hence it is the heavens
excel in beauty, nobleness, and virtue; all the other Elements, as having
been created of the more noble substance of the Chaos, yea likewise in the
heaven, the higher things are more excellent than the inferior: Moreover, the
Coelestials have a perpetual simpathy, affinity, with the Elements, by which
they are mutually inclined, the one to the other, likewise also the higher
things of the Heaven to the lower of them, in such sort, that there is nothing
in the world, which by the simpathie given to it, serves not in some stead,
and order for the use of man; so the Heavens and the Stars, by reason of the
inclination, which they have to inferior things, their form being round, and
resting upon the center of the universe, make their motion circular and diverse,
that they might communicate their virtues to inferior things, as much as is
necessary for generation. Now this Heaven was yet in the first day, of one and
the same nature and condition with the other things, and without any
difference, and therefore had only one sole motion, which distinguished the
day and the night.

But as the workmanship of the creation continued, the most lucent matter of
the heaven began to be gathered apart, into diverse Spheres, and Globes of
Stars, and Planets, and as every thing began to grow to perfection, and to
have its own proper nature and motion, so also every one of them, obtained
their own sympathy, and operation. So the light, or most resplendent matter,
ordained for the Sun, began immediately to gather it self, into the demi part
of heaven, and to enter within the Globe of the Sun; so that about ten
hours after the creation (for it began to come into the sign Leo, as has
been demonstrated probably in the Chronology) it gave light to the world, and
fourteen hours after, by the daily motion of the heavens it set. This light
in the beginning, was also more feeble, and weak, because the matter of the
Sun was as yet dispersed, until that in the fourth day it was shut up and
gathered togethered into its greatness. This speculation of the gathering
together of the Stars into the Globes, and increasing of the light cannot be
in vain, considering it was needful, that there should be light the first
day, which made the day, seeing the Sun was not perfected, till the fourth
day: considering also that God had not ordained any other light to make the
day, but the Sun; likewise we must not think, that the Firmament of heaven,
the col^ection of the Waters, into the matter, the dryness of the Earth, the
production of herbs, fruits, and trees, and all things which God commanded to
sole nature, having been made in a moment, as the commandment seems to
impart, but by degrees and in the same order and manner which he afterward
willed that nature should use, and therefore, that all, and every work began
then to be, when the matter proper to its nature, was prepared, but
principally, on that day in which the commandment was given. So then, the
separation of the waters, began the first day, and was finished on the third.
For if all things had been created in a moment, God should have seemed rather
to have intended to produce things, then to ordain the laws and natures of
them. The contrary whereof we shall see in the third day. It being so then,
that every thing ought to be made, with its proper nature, and natural law,
immediately when every thing began to be created, the efficatious virtue
thereof began withal, the mean and rule of working, whereby it ought to serve
God in his creation; so that all things in their beginning have had in their
creation, as their fore-exercises, and by nature once ordained, have served
their Creator in the disposition of others. So having made the weight in the
Chaos, and the Center and seat of all things being settled, the disposition and
order of things have followed naturally: So the mass being moved by the wind,
made naturally the separation of the Earth, and of the Water, and the
exhalations ascended upward. The things which were formed of a Celestial
condition by their Creator, have also exercised a Celestial operation in the
generation of herbs, trees, and living creatures: so the creation went
forward, the natural operation followed it, and these two afterward concurred
in the other works of God. Seeing then that this is the order of things,
wisely ordained, and brought to the scope of the whole intention of the
Creator; the lover of true Philosophy, may diligently observe the order,
whereby all things have been created, what nature of matter, the Creator gave
first of all to them, and what he added to their nature, how far the speices
is extended in forming the things: Moreover to know if the things environing
this creation, did give any help thereunto, this is not to be despiced, for by
how much the more we consider things that are more high, so much the more we
shall attain unto the knowledge of the things created, the efficacy and the
communion thereof with other creatures, and consequently its sympathy, and all
its operation. Now to the end that the matter of every thing, may be known,
we must begin with the first matter which is the Chaos, for as much thereof as
may be known, according to the form and quality thereof, so much the better
also may be known the things which are first created of it, and as of them so
of all others. As for the rest, what matters are added by the Creator for the
establishing of the speices, and the nature of the thing, this primary nature
created cannot teach it, but it must be sought out by the latter, as by the
apparent greatness of the thing, the weight, lightness, firmness, rarietie,
fleeting figure quality, colors, office, and such like accidents, and
proprieties. The causes efficient whereof nevertheless, are known by long
study and experience. I give chiefly of these things, because they are the
first foundations (whereunto a Philosopher ought above all to bend his
studies,) to find out the causes and Economy of things. Let every man do as
he pleases, but for our part, we will follow the parts of the world, its
seat, its proportion, and local motion, and other things appertaining to
Geography, the rest we will leave to the co^templation of spirits more divine:
When Moses says, God said, he does not show a sentence given for some peculiar
time, but the perpetual will of him which speaks and effects the things
without words or express speech, and produces them in time definite. So also
in the actions of God, when he says, God divided the light from the
darkness, he intends not an external action, but the perpetual will of
God, whereby alone he begins and perfecteth all things preordained in time.
Now I will not say that in this day; this division was complete, after which
the fourth day, the Sun and all the Stars were finally perfected, but he gives
the wise not obscurely to understand this collection of light, whereof I have
spoken, and that the same proceeded thus far this day, that the light
gathered together in one part of the heaven, might have power to set, leaving
behind it the night, and darkness. After the works of this day ended, he
adds this light to have been approved, and testified by God for good, which
he did not of all Creatures, but of these only, which above all others
brings to man an excellent benefit, and illustrateth, and recommendeth
excellently, the work, and the intention of God. So in things following he
extolleth with the same praise the dryness of the Earth, the generations of
Herbs, Trees, and Fruits, the offices of the Sun, Moon, and the Stars,
the waterish living Creatures, after also the terrestrials. All which things,
man being finally created, he approoved them to be very good, as those which
were most convenient for his service, for whose sake they were created. The
works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein. Psalm. 111. verse 2. Light being then brought into the world, the first
day was accomplished, which he says consists of the evening, and of the
morning, or of the night and of the day, he calls it natural from the
Latins. He places the night before, because that from it the Creation began,
for the light could not be created the first of all things, according to the
Idea of all things conceived in the understanding of the Workemaster, but the
matter was requisite before, out of which it ought to be formed. The end of the
first day.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Heaven. The second Day
begins.
AFter the couching of the light, followed the second day, wherein the
firmament was Created. But he adds not out of what matter, God would it
should be made: but this is manifest by the Creation of the light. For seeing
the light was produced out of the waters, such as we have said, and all light
comes from the firmament, it is certain that that lucent substance which
brought forth the day, and obtained the circular motion, was made this day into
the firmament. Whence the firmament in the holy tongue is called Shamaim,
because it is of the same substance with the light; to wit, waterish, though a
little more ignoble. For the light, as being the more noble, required also the
more noble part of the same substance, wherefore the species, and nature
thereof, was also later perfected; to wit, the fourth day. This firmament Moses
calls RAKIA, by which word diffusion, extension, expansion, and distension,
are signified. The reason therefore of this name is taken out of the work of
the Creation, which was made in this order, and success. By and by so soon as
the wind fell to blow upon the deep, it exhaled upward, and the ayrie and
celestial substance was diffused, wherein whatsoever was proper to light
(digested into a luminous essence) straight begun to be gathered together, to
make up the day: as also the substance of the future firmament, wherein the
light was gathered together, and permanent, elevated on high from the element
of the air; diffused, extended, and displayed, as a sail or tent about the
whole inferior world, and having diurnall motion, even from the first day, and
carrying about with it the light. This firmament therefore by reason of this
diffusion, extension, and expansion, is properly called Rakia, not for the
sollidity, or compact force of the substance, which Rakia does not signify.
Neither does the matter, whereof this firmament is made, nor that expansion
which here Moses attributes to it; and also Isay. 42.5. and 40.22. Also Psalm
104.22. carry with it necessarily such a solidity, and such a force of
substance; nor is to be supposed to carry with it; unless some argument
thereof in the word of God did clearly appear. The comparison taken from a
sail spread and extended with the winds, and a tent firmly set up and
displayed; does rather declare the stability, immobility, and incorruptibility
of it: such a firmament would God signify, and have to be, that it might be a
perpetual aid, and upholder, of frail and corruptible things. And what
profit, I pray you, should be there of the rigidity and force of iron, or
hardness of the Adamant, where there is no wearing nothing that can corrupt.
God also called this firmament, Heaven, or Shamaim, that we might understand it
to be of the same substance with the light, and together with it to have been
Created. Here is to be observed that Esdras lib. 4. cap. 6. repeating the
Creation of the world, says of this firmament; And on the seventh day (says
he) thou createdst the spirit of the firmament, and commandedst it etc. The
order of the Creation teaches, the proportion of ponderous and heavy things
teaches, the rarity of substance and experience teaches that by how much
higher from the Center of the world bodies are distant, they are more rarefied,
lighter and more spiritual: and therefore it necessarily follows that those
things that reside highest of all, are most spiritual. Now this firmament is
much higher than the elements, wherefore it is also much more spiritual than
the air, and most of all in the extreme sublimity of it, where so many
stars have a perpetual, most constant, and less variable motion. Now it was
necessary such a Heaven to be made, after that the masculine force, which
subsisteth in the spiritual substance, was to be inserted into it: to help
the imperfect power of engendring of these inferior things. Neither did it
suffice, the substance thereof to be such equally throughout the whole, that is
to say, homogeneall, but according to the variety and nature of things, a
variable and turgent fecundity was also required, which should extend it self
abroad by a natural inclination to ripen the fruits, of the inferior world;
and as it were to do the office of a midwife in helping them to bring forth.
But that fecundity lies in the exundant spiritual essence, and fortitude
thereof, wherefore there need to be made a collection of this spiritual
substance, which is in every heaven or part thereof, into one body sphericall,
as a member genitall. So in the Heaven of the Sun, the chief force of the
Spiritual substance is collected into the Globe of the Sun: Mercury, and
Venus adjoined to it for the help of generation. So the Moon and the Stars,
from the first beginning of the created light, according to the exigence of
their office, were collected, every one into their several Globes: and the
fourth day finally perfected. Also the heat and splendor of the light, or
rather irradiation was necessary to the act of the generation of the spiritual
virtue, production and intention: wherefore when God created the light, he made
light also the spiritual substance of heaven. Now if it were possible for any
one to know the natural cause, and original of light in substance, he should
attain unto a great mystery to enquire after, and in some sort to find out,
the nature of the Stars, which without doubt follow their efficient and
material cause, for if thou do apply all the subtilty of thy mind, thou
shall see the creation of things almost follow the natural order of causes,
and from causes to deduce causes, until it come to the effect proposed. And
this is the incomprehensible wisdom of God, that of one first created, he did
so form and institute nature, according to the universal Idea, that he may be
thought no less to have imitated, than Created or ordained it. For creating by
his will and power the universal Idea of nature, most exactly conceived, he
does also most exactly imitate and express, that both in the Idea and
Fabric, the same natural success of things, and of causes should appear.

Oh the most wise, and most powerful wisdom of God, above all admirable! How
great ought the affinity of nature be unto its Creator! He spoke the word, and
it was made, his will is the essence of it, wherefore as he wills, so is it,
and he wills it for the same. God willed, and willed with delectation and
study, that the Heaven, and every Star in it, by a variable motion, should
serve man, and for man every Creature.

This will, this study, even with a certain delectation, remains imprinted
in the Heaven: the Heaven wills the same, is inclined to the same, and
executes it diligently, with a certain delectation: the affection of God
therefore toward his Creature, is made the affection of one creature toward
another. This is the first and chief cause, and the original of all Sympathy,
whereby every thing is excited to the execution of their duty. It is not
needful that we should attribute to the Heaven any other cause, or the Angels
to be moovers, as though it were of it self immovable, and dispersed his
beams idely and without any affection and Sympathy to inferior things,
wheresoever it happens, and much less that we should say, that it is
perpetually moved of a divine Spirit, but by a perpetual nature, according to
his will once imprinted in it, yet in the mean time if thou will perfect this
Philosophy concerning Sympathy, thou must enquire what similitude, what
Analogy with the Creatures, and with which of them, he has given to the
Heaven, whereby it is inclined unto them: as also from whence, by what order,
and after what manner that similitude and Analogy was inducted into it.

But when thou have ascended upon this theater, thou will cry out, Oh the
profundities of the riches, wisdom, and Knowledge of God; how
incomprehensible are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! which if
thou find nothing, yet it shall be a great gain unto thee, to have learned
this imperscrutability; to the end thou may learn more highly to admire the
infinite wisdom of God, and with a more ready mind to reverence his Majesty.

This also shall thou easily gain, that thou shall find, there is nothing
created of God without cause, and just reason, tending to one scope or end. And
now I hope thou understandest what Esdras means, when he says, Thou have
created the Spirit of the Firmament, and commanded it: to wit, that the
celestial matter, which is most spiritual, perceiving the Word of God, or
the impression of his will, does with him put on the same affection toward
man: to wit, that for his cause waxing hot, is extenuated, is made spiritual,
does elevate it self on high, above the Element of the air, extend it self,
and there remain fixed; dividing the waters from the waters. Therefore, the
celestial matter, having from the will of God and his impression, obtained
this Sympathy, as yet mixed with the Air, and turned into a more spiritual
essence, by its own inclination mounted upward; and this is that which he
says. The second day was created the Spirit of the firmament, though as yet
there was no contraction of the Stars, and Planets, into Globes. It executed
also the rest of the Commandment, to wit, the division out of the same
Sympathy, and inclination the same day; and remains in the same office,
until the will of God (from the which the Sympathy thereof has dependence) be
accomplished, as witnesses that of David Psalm. 148. He has established them
(the celestial things) to endure perpetually and for ever, he has given them
a statute, and they shall not pass it.

This Firmament was not any particular heaven divided from others, but one
machine of the heavens, as is manifest: for that the fourth day he set the
Sun, Moon, and Stars in this Firmament, comprehending all the Heavens
which appear unto us. But because these bodies which God has set in the
Firmament (and according to the testimony of David, established with certain
laws) are found to have diverse motions. It appears that this heaven is
divided into more heavens, but how many they are we shall probably discourse in
the Astronomicks. But the manner of the division appears in the precedent,
when as perpetually the superour things (as more extenuated, dilated and
lighter) have ascended from the inferior, as the Water from the Earth, the
Air from the Water, the Firmament from the Air. So without doubt in the
common substance of the Firmament, by little and little such an extenuation
being made, discretion and subduction on high: first, in the lowest place was
the sphere of the Moon left, and rested. Secondly, the sphere of the Sun,
with Mercury, and Venus. Thirdly, Mars, then Jupiter; and there after the rest:
in manner that the last separation of the supercelestiall waters, the same
remains and is the highest part of the machine of the world. The universal
and perpetual nature of things, as is the law of things, heavy and light
ordained of God, requires the Economy of the distribution of the heavens. For
seeing that all things are created and formed of the first, and one self
matter, and therefore do resemble the natural disposition thereof, the
superiors would be no otherwise affected among themselves, than the inferiors
among themselves: except we will say, that when he came to form the Heavens,
he did make again the first matter, and gave it another much differing
essence, nature, and law, but this what were it, but to extenuate the wisdom
and power of God, as though he had not made the first matter fit for the
Creation of all things. This being granted, what communion of natures could
there be, between the celestial and elementary things? What sympathy? Were
not this to disturb all order of things, and to overthrow Gods scope and
intent in his creation? When therefore the universal law of nature does so
comport it self through all things, communicating among themselves, it can be
no doubt to any, but that those things which proceed from one, conformable in
it self, and not discordant obtain the same reason unto that one, as the
Son to his Parent, and every thing engendered, to his progenitor express in
some sort the nature thereof, and be inclined unto him, as to his beginning
bound with the bond of love: Therefore there will be the same reason of
celestial things among themselves, as of Elementaries, seeing that all things
were created successively of the same mass, conformable and concordant in it
self, and the superiors out of their nobleness and perfection, will embrace
these inferiors, as their beginnings so much the more strongly, by how much
they do more communicate in nature and serve man to their utmost power. The
superiors also being more purified, more distilled, and excoct, having a more
noble form superadded, will be also the more noble instruments of God, unto
his scope, and end, and will more strongly perform their office thereunto.
Wherefore in my opinion, that which the Astrologians persuade themselves of the
malice of Saturn, and of Mars, is most absurd, as we shall discourse more at
large in the Astrologicks.

The Firmament being created and set in his place, was made (says Moses) from
the evening and the morning, the second day, to wit, beginning from the evening
as the first, and ending again at the setting, and couching of the light: The
reason of the day is the same as before, the which serving all the time of the
Creation, it signifies, that we ought perpetually to retain the remembrance
of the creation. But he called this Firmament, Heaven; in Hebrew, SHAMAIM: if
he called it by a vocal distinction, he so called it for Adam: otherwise that
which I have said, for God to say, to be: this is the very same as to call; to
wit his eternal Will whereby he willed the Firmament to be out of the Waters
and made it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the supercelestiall waters, and the
Creation of Angels.
OF the Supercelestiall waters, there is no where any open mention made, but
Genesis 1.7. Psalm. ^48, and 4. Esdras 6.41. Of them the opinions of writers are
diverse. Iacobus Zeiglerus imagines very foolishly, that the first matter of
God was created infinite, least there should be thought any thing to be left
without the world void: and that in Creating the world out of that matter, he
did not exhaust the infinity thereof, but only assumed so much as sufficed for
the Creation, and left the rest as it was, which he calls the celestial
waters, void, and darkness, which he affirms to be excluded from the World,
by the Firmament: which opinion is too absurd.

For how can it be admitted that the infinite wisdom of God should create any
thing in vain? For that is done altogether in vain which is left void without
the world, and of no form or use. Which if thou will say was done to fill up
that vacuum; I will demand, whether there was any vacuum there from Eternity,
and whether also this was not created? It would bring an inextricable Labyrinth
of questions, nor any measure, order, and law, in the deduction of the parts of
the World, out of the Chaos should appear, but all things should be done
without reason, and without natural consequence: for there should be no place
of extenuating the matter, dilating, and ennobling it. Others, and truly not a
few, think the Supercelestiall waters, to be the Clouds, which are carried in
the middle region of the Air, and that they are separated by the inferior
air, which is also comprised under the name of Heaven from the Sea and from
the Rivers. But hereunto is contrary the holy Testimony of Moses, which gives
the division to that Firmament, wherein the Sun, Moon, and Stars are
placed. For the Air which is under the Clouds, and subject to great
mutabilities, cannot be called the Firmament: which if they will call the
Firmament, because of the perpetual and immutable situation of it in its
place, then should the water also be the Firmament, but another firmness is
required. Such a Firmament was requisite (as I have said) which should subsist
immutable in substance and virtue for ever, to sustain the generation and
multiplication of things, according to their Species: but this was made after
the light, and therefore after the Air, for the light could not be without the
Air, which ought to environ the Mass, and to carry the light, and to make the
Day and the Night. Wherefore seeing that this Firmament, and perfected one day
after it, without doubt it is another different from this inferior, and more
perfect than it, above the which also David places these waters. Observe (
Psalm. 148. his order in praising of God. First, in general he cites
celestial things to praise him: then summoneth all in a just order, and
distinctly. First, those that inhabit the Heavens, to wit, the Angels and the
Spirits of the blessed, then the parts of the Heavens: the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, that is to say, the Firmament. Thirdly the Heavens, of heavens, to
wit, the Heavens which are the Firmament, and comprehend it within themselves:
or the Heaven of Heavens, as it is Psalm. 113. Last of all he mooveth the
waters which be above the Heavens.

Thou see how he proceeds in order from the basest, and lowest, to the
supremest and highest: adding also a singular and special cause wherefore they
ought cheifely to praise God: to wit, because God has established them to
endure for ever, and has given them a law and office which they cannot pass
unaccomplished. After the celestial things, he passes to the terrestiall,
wherein he comprehends the winds, lightnings, hail, clouds, fowls of the
Heaven: to wit, all elementary things, thou see then two orders of praisers:
the celestriall and the elementary. Seeing then he places the Super-celestiall
waters, among things celestial, and immutable, we may in no wise believe them
to be the Clouds. And Psalm. 104.3. God is said to make continguate, to touch
one another, to lay the beams of his high chambers (that is to say, of the
world) among the waters: which can be no other but these waters which are above
the heavens.

Now whereof these waters are created, and to what end, it does not appear out
of Moses. For seeing they are not visible, cannot be perceived with the eye,
and do not reprelent any thing which might be taken of Gentiles, as matter of
Idolatry, and further seieng they are the most hidden things, and the highest
of the universe Creature, which cannot be searched out by any man, it imported
not much to explicate their original and end, or scope, wherefore also Moses
concealeth them, and the holy Spirit does not openly reveal them. Yet does he
not make mention of them in vain, but offers to godly minds, matter of
conceiving something higher, and intimates the wisdom of God highly to be
admired, and his inexplicable power, where the most sharp of the understanding
is dulled, and is not able to prosecute any further, the ways and profound
depth of them. But the original and matter of them, from hence may be
comprehended, in that he names them waters, for he shows that they are
conformable and co-naturall, of the same nature with the Firmament. As also
David when ( Psalm. 148.) he attributes, together with Moses, the highest place
in all the universe unto them. For seeing all things which hitherto, (after the
waters moved, and light created) were made, by order of extenuation, and of
perfection, were carired up on high, and fixed in their place, it may not be
doubted, but by the same continued order, it was come to the extreme (as I may
so say) distillation, and sublimation, in those supercelestiall waters. Then
these waters are the most clear, and pure heaven of all; which the divines
rightly call empyreum, for seeing there is so great light in the Firmament, and
collected out of the same substance of the Firmament, which represents to the
eyes and sense, pure fire, the substance also of this last, and most purified
heaven, must be a fire much more noble and resplendant, of an equal
clearenesse throughout: as in the which there is made no contraction of the
light into Globes, which appears to be so made, for that God would terminate
the Oeconomie of whole nature, with the connexity of the Firmament, and
therefore writes that division of waters to be committed to the Firmament; to
the end that we should understand, that the works of nature are there
terminated, and do not extend higher than the supreme extremity thereof: to
wit, the convexity of the first moveable; but that they are wholly contained
within it, and that without that convexity, all things are quiet and immovable.

Now for what end this Supercelestiall water, and this most clear Heaven was
created. I will say which to me seems probable. That the Angels were created
there is no man that doubts, seeing there is nothing eternal except God
only, all the rest are Creatures, and have a beginning. But when these Angels
were created, it is not easy to say. That they were not created before the
world, it may be convinced and prooved, for that it is said, in the beginning
God Created the Heaven and the Earth, that is to say, that Mass without form,
the mother of heaven and Earth. Now if the Creation did begin from that
Mass, then could not the Angels be first created. Yet when the lucent, and
bright Stars were placed in the Firmament, from that time they took their
being: for so does the Lord speak to Job chap. 38. v. 6. Who laid the corner
stone thereof (to wit, of the Earth) when the morning Stars sang together;
and all the Sons of God shouted for joy.

The Sons of God could be no other than the Angels, for man as then was not
Created: Now if the Angels sang praises to God the Creator, then when he
established the Earth upon the corner stone, and together with them, the bright
shining Stars gave praise: therefore the third day the Angels were, and also
the Stars were, although as yet imperfect. For the first day in the morning
they began to be created, and the fourth day were perfected, therefore they
were much more then half perfected, and begun to shine, the light being
extended, and to praise and glorify God in his service and obedience. But that
place in Job 38.6. has relation to the third day of the Creation, thou may
easily understand, if thou comparest the two precedent verses. For in the
first, he speaks of the first Foundation of the Earth, that is, when God gave
it a place of rest, the Center of the universe: which is the very basis of the
Earth.

Of this foundation speaks David, Ps. 104.5. Saying, thou have established
the Earth upon her Bases, that it should not be moved for ever. In the other
he speaks of the figure which the Earth has obtained by its weight, on every
side equally affecting the Center; to wit, Sphericall. But in the sixth verse,
first, he makes a most profound question, to wit, how that Center which is the
basis of heavy things, should be fixed: seeing it hangs of the fluent, and
moveable Air? Immediately after he speaks of the superstruction which is
accustomed to be elevated on high, and presses chiefly unto the Angles, or
corners of the edifices. Who (says he) has laid the corner stone, which
sustaineth the Mass, ascending up on high? Thou see three parts of the earth
brought in question, to be settled and established, in that order wherein they
mutually succeeded one another in the Creation, For first the Chaos being
created, the Earth began to settle into the Center. Secondly, in the settling
received a Sphericall figure. Thirdly, the Earth at length becomes dry,
showed it self above the waters, and was there established, yea, the most high
Mountains thereafter hanging above the waters. Of which establishment David
speaks thus ( Psalm, 24.2.) For he has founded it upon the Seas, and
established it upon the Floods. The sixth verse demands in the second part,
who has raised these most high hilly tops, so great a distance above the
waters, and so established them, that they fall not, and return not to their
own natural place? Seeing therefore the firmness and stability of these was
made the third day, when the Earth was made dry, solid, and firm, it is
altogether manifest, that the Angels were created before this scicity, and
firmitude was accomplished: to wit, the second day. And with this agrees most
elegantly, the Creation of the Super-celestiall waters, made the second day:
out of which it is very likely the Angels were created. For there was no
substance in the whole Creature more fit hereunto, then that clear and ardent
Air, in the which the Creator pleased that they should have their seat, and
habitation. Neither was there any other element more convenient for their
bodies, than from whence they should take their spirit. And Paul. Heb. 1.
testifies that the Angels are Spirits, and a flame of fire, that is to say
clear spirits, like the most clear flame, as is almost the substance in the
Empyreall Heaven: So that the Angels seem to be created of the supercelestiall
waters; as the Stars: but animated rational, and mooving themselves up on
high, and down below for the service of God: whereupon they are called Angels
of light, that is to say, light shining Angels, created out of the light, and
dwelling in heavenly light, and do appear unto men with great clearenesse of
light: as to the Shepherds. Luke 2.9; And to the women Matthew 28.3. And to
Peter, Acts 12.7. The end of the second day.

CHAP. X. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Congregating of the elementary
waters: and preparation of the Earth for generation. The third Day begins.
THE third Day God said, Let the waters which are under the Heaven be gathered
together into one place, and that which is dry appear. Moses minded not to
say, that finally the third day he said this, and began to separate: but that
his eternal will was that this third day, the division of the earth and water
should be perfected, and the earth be dried up, and should appear more high
above the waters, having received the waters within her bosoms, to be the
seat and habitation to all future living creatures, and a storehouse to afford
all sustenance: What things soever are in God are eternal: his will of
dividing, as well as of creating was from eternity; and also of accomplishing
the division, this day was eternal: and it was finished he willed it to be
made from eternity, and approoved of it eternally. His sentence stands fast,
whereof he cannot repent, it cannot be redargued, reprooved, amended, nor
better conceived, because his wisdom and prudence is infinite, and does admit
no change of counsel and will. Therefore seeing this day the division was
complete: God said, (says Moses) that is to say, from all eternity, that the
division should be made, and that which is dry appear, that is to say, that
the division should be made until that which is made should appear. And when
did the dry appear? even now the third day of the Creation: for he adds and
it was so, to wit, even now incontinent after the second day, which a little
before he said was complete, and before the end of the third day, which he
will conclude after in the third verse.

Now if any one would comprehend together, the division begun, and perfected
in one day, what constitution there was of the order, and law of nature, in the
creation, when as now we see it to work successively, and by causes, and
consequent means? It will then necessarily follow, that God has created all
things without any order, and law of nature, and that after he ordained and
gave these things to nature: which were very absurd, and impious to think: for
things ought to bring with them their nature, and law of working from the
Creation, unless we should think that God in creating wanted either counsel,
or was not of power sufficient. When therefore in the second verse he moved
the waters with a strong blast; we understand that he instituted the natural
cause, in the works following, and that from the time the Earth was begun to
be separated from the water: but that the third day this separation was
perfected, and complete.

This natural cause of separation being observed, the cause also of the
inequality of the Earth, and of the Gulphes of the Sea may be known. For this
by this violence of the wind, this Aphar created in the beginning, it so came
from diverse parts, that it elevated very high, and from hence cellected the
low settled earth up aloft, but thereupon made deep, and great valleys. Thou will think then that in that part in the which is now the Atlanticke Sea, a
most vehement wind to have fallen upon Aphar, and in like manner in that part
where now Asia, and new India are divided: and that the same winds have made in
the same place vast concavities of the low settled Earth, and have heaped and
raised it up on high into the firm lands: also that from hence are raised
diverse boisterous winds, which have caused the lesser concavities, and the waters
being on both sides carried on high, have congested the earth into mountains,
so by the callission, repercussion or beating of the waters one against
another, thou may understand, that the earth was separated from the Waters,
and collected through the middle region into most high mountains. So through
Africa the hill Atlas, and the hills of the Moon. By Asia, the Mountain Imaus,
and the Caspian Mountains, and other Mountains every where produced. Now the
waters after a long agitation being purified from all earth, and collected into
those places, resided where the Lord set unto them abound: as David says,
Psalm. 103. ver. 9. to wit when as all heavy things approach as near as ever
they can to the center of the world, and the water which is fluent, and gliding
not able to consist accumulated as the Earth can; it does always glide
downward to the nether place, until it come to the very bottom, the
plummet, or lead, from whence it cannot ascend again, unless a more heavy
thing possess the bottom. Thereof it comes, that all waters not being
opposed, or stopped by higher bars, do run into the sea.

Now here it is to be thought, the Sun, the Moon, and the other Stars, to
be so far forth collected and compacted together, that in the nature which is
given them, they begin to have more vehement forces. For now they increased
unto the third day, in clearenesse of light, and natural virtue, wherefore it
is certain that it helped much in drying up of the earth. The Wind also in
some sort as yet blowing through the air, drew out of mire and dirt, humors
perfectly excocted, and extenuated by the Sun: that for two causes the earth
might be dried up, and grow into a greater soliditie without the which it had
remained fluxative, and (relapsed to the deep places) had, according to its
nature, settled under the Waters: to wit, as being more heavy; and therefore
forcing them upwards. But we must understand this siccitie of the earth, not
to be absolute, but in mediocritie: so great as sufficed for the establishment
of the earth, and creation of Plants. For the herbs were created before it
ever rained, which have need of moisture, and man was formed of clay the sixth
day. But withal consider this, if the earth had been altogether dry, it could
not have been raised into high mountains, and remain firm. For there is a
certain moisture which binds the earth, whereof coming to be deprived, yet
glideth away as the sand; neither had it been fit for the engendring of those
things, which God would produce in the bowels thereof. Here is also to be
observed, how great the wisdom of the Creator was in making hollow these
bays, and channels, as receptacles of the Waters; for so has he distributed
the sea throughout the whole world, that all the kingdoms of the world may
have commerce one with another, and what things soever either nature or art
affords, may transport whether they will. And (which is most of all) that the
Earth, with the Waters collected together, making one sphere, might remain in
one equal balance: for otherwise the Earth should not be established upon the
Waters, but the more heavy weight being collected into one part, should press
down all the mass of the Earth, toward the center of gravitie, and of the
world, and that depression of the Earth, having elevated more high, and aloft,
the Waters lying on the other part, would have caused them to overflow, and
possess the next adjoining Islands. For after that the Earth in the same
quantity is heavier than the Waters, it is necessary that the body of the
Earth consist by it self in an equal balance: And also that the Seas
environing the orb of the Earth, and communicating together, should be so
distributed, that on every side lying in an equal balance, they should not
bring more weight into one half of the sphere, in what circle soever you
compass it, than in another thereunto opposite.

If the Seas did not communicate together, but some remained shut up within
their own bays and channels, the Earth could in some sort (although not
throughout, and in it self) consist equally balanced. For what weight wanted
in one half thereof the Waters would supply shut up in it. But seeing the use
and office of the Seas, required a communion of them among themselves, for the
necessary circuit of Navigation: the same also the exoncration and
disburthening of Rivers requires, which by the only communication of the Seas
equally, and according to an equal balance, may be distributed into all the
parts of the Sphere; it was first and chiefly necessary (as I have said) that
the Earth should remain in an equal balance, neither could that be supplied
by the Waters: for they should be raised, and heaped up higher, in the lighter,
then in the heavier part: and therefore should flow down, till they had
obtained an equal height on every side from the Center. Now if we grant, that
these waters supplying that equal balance, are shut in, that they cannot flow
out: yet two inconveniences would follow; the one, that being subject to
corruption, they would infect those things next unto them, and should not be so
useful for humane things as they ought: the other, that the earth having
drawn their substance into her bowels, or being by little and little extracted
by exhalation, they should abandon their place, and take away that equality
that retains the whole, that it cannot budge one way nor other. Which if any
one will maintain that the Waters may be there conserved, we will answer that
in vain are employed a great number of means (wherein there is more operative
labor, and to the rest unprofitable) to do that which may be done without the
same: and indeed both more compendiously, and more profitably. Whereby then
the sentence stands fast, that the machine of the earth is in it self
equally balanced without budging one way or other, and consequently also the
Sea, which is contained within the bosom of it. And also that the Sea is in
continual motion, lest it should be corrupted and infect the air, and kill
the fishes. Moreover, it washes the Earth both within and without, that all
things should be clean and wholesome: all corruption being consumed and
dissipated by motion and attrition. The constitution of the weight of the
Center, and of the world imports all these things: which if they had been
known, and examined by the ancients, they had judged almost true, that which
is of the situation, and greatness of the continent of the new land found out
in our age: and the Meridionall continent, not yet discovered situate under the
Pole Antarticke. For seeing that the lands known to the continent, and
comprehended in a hundred eighty degrees of longitude, that is to say, do
only possess the one half of the Sphere, it was necessary there should be
also as much land in the other half. And seeing that Asia, Europe, and Africa,
for the greater part, are situated beyond the Equinoctial toward the North,
it was necessary as great a continent to remain under the Pole Antarticke,
which should be equivalent in the other lands, with the meridionall parts of
Asia, or new India or America.

God (as says Moses) called the dry land EREZ, separated from the Waters, and
prepared for the life of living creatures, that is to say, the Earth and the
Waters gathered together, MAIM, that is the Seas. But it is not to be thought,
that so soon as this separation was made, he gave these names no more than
before, the names of the day, of the night, and of the heaven. For to whom
should he have told them, when as man (whom it chiefly concerned to know
these works) was not yet created? Unless any will maintain, that they were
told to the Angels. But I hold for an assured truth that here is insinuated
another, and a very great mystery, to wit, a testimony of the immense love,
and most loving and bountiful conversation of God with man, whom with a
singular purpose, and affectionate study he created. For I think that this
manifestation of names, signified not that present day it was, but after in a
familiar conference with Adam. For when God brought the creatures to Adam that
he should give them names, there is no doubt but he had longer speech with him,
and treated with him amply of the Creation: naming the light, the day, the
night, the heaven, the earth, the sea, the Moon, and principal parts of the
world: by means whereof he might leave to his posterity the true History of
all this great work; as also to be conserved in some measure after Adam, even
to Moses.

This word EREZ (that I may use the words of Augustine Eugebine) properly
signifies that which is trampled and trodden upon, derived of the word RAZAZ:
the letter Aleph added according to the propriety of the Hebrew tongue, which
demonstateth the counsel and intention of creating the earth. For it was
created, to the end that the most excellent creatures, for the which all things
were created might tread, and walk upon it. MAIM, which is as much to say, as
reasounding, braying, tumultuating; comes of the verb Hamah, which
signifies, to bray, cry, and make a noise. From this deduction therefore of
the said Augustine, it appears, that EREZ and MAIM, signify such an earth,
and such waters, which is now the earth that serves as a payement to
terrestrial creatures, and a stay to them which walk and rest upon it; and
the vast sea, which being gathered together by the exaggeration of the Rivers,
has a perpetual flux and refluxe roaring and making a great noise. And
truly, seeing the Latin word Terra, is derived of tero, it answers very
properly to the word EREZ. Note this also, which the same Augustine
admonishes, that the word TEHEMON, is derived from the same verb HAMAH, and
signifies, the resounding, or tumultuating Abisse, or deep: therefore by the
signification of the name, thou understandest that separative wind, which in
the seventh Chapter I have declared to have been incontinent from the
beginning in the Chaos: nor any other spirit but this blast, to be understood
to have agitated the whole mass; and therefore the distinction of the water
from the earth, to have been made partly in a natural manner.

CHAP. XI. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the fourefold degree and order of
things created.
HItherto has been no other creation but of those things, which pertained to
the generation of things necessary to the life of man; and might serve them for
their habitations, to wit, the Elements, of which, or by the which these things
ought to be engendered and sustained. Common sense divides all things created
into three classes, or rather degrees; into those things which have a being;
those things which have life or faculty vegetive; and those things which have
sense. Which division well understood and considered, agrees very elegantly to
our subject, and aideth greatly our speculations, and gives understanding. In
the first degree, it behooves not to understand one naked essence, without all
form, quality, and efficacy, such as the Philophers dreamed the first matter
to be: for I have showed that God never created any such thing, but it behooves
to understand the things, the which whatsoever they are invertue and power, yet
are they without all motion: that in whatsoever place they are, there they
rest, there hang, there by themselves they remain immovable, neither do
assume to themselves any augmentation, or, to speak more plainly, which have
not in themselves force of increasing: but as nature first formed them, so they
are, and remain, not having in them any life. In the second degree are all
things which have in them the first degree of life, to wit, faculty
vegetative, and virtue of increasing, and aspire no higher unto life. In the
third degree are those things which (besides virtue vegetative) have also
sensitive, and move themselves by their own proper virtue, according to the
condition of their sense. Hitherto the degrees of the Creation proceed from
the first matter: and because the vulger opinion is, that the spirit of man (by
which only he differs from bruit beasts) is not created of the first
matter, but particularly and singularly of God: they do put man himself in
the number of other living creatures, and comprehend him in the third degree of
creatures. But when I shall have showed in his place, that even the spirit of
man is extracted out of the first matter, by intermediate degrees of
perfection, it will appear that we must constitute in him a fourth degree of
creatures. Therefore the first degree is of those things which are. The second
of those things which are, and have a vegetative virtue, which is the first
degree of life. The third, of those things which are, which live, and have
sense: and by sense move voluntarily. The fourth of those things which are,
which live, have sense, understand, and discourse: for the superior degrees
comprehend the inferior. To these four degrees it behooves a Philosopher
diligently to apply his mind, and ascending, and proceeding by these degrees,
to observe the order of the Creation. Neither yet is it to be imagined, that
all those things which are of the first degree were procreated before things
which are of the second: for it was not necessary that precious stones, and
mettalls should be before herbs. For we must set down this in the first
place: that those things were first to be created, which were first most
requisite for the use of man. Pearls and mettalls, though they had been
created long after man, could bring nor cause no discommoditie at all unto him.
But thou will say unto me, it was necessary those things to have been created
before the seventh day; thou say well, but understand, it is to be judged,
those things then to have been created, when God commanded the earth to
engender them: for the earth is ordained to be the mother of these things, and
remains mother, and in her self, and of her self conceives seed, whereof
she produces perpetually these things, and according to her fecundity
perfecteth them in their time. But the tardity and slownesse of the perfection
of a new species, does not hinder generation; because it is the last and does
not engender consequently. For if one pearl should procreate another pearl,
and one metal another like unto it self, then was it necessary a specificall
and seminary virtue to have been given to metal, and pearl: which was the
proper work of the Creator, and not of the earth. So had it been also
necessary, that pearls, and metals should have been perfected, and received
from God into them, a specificall virtue before the seventh day. So that we
observe the order expressed in the generation of the world, it seems that it
behooved to have been made, the third day; for there should have been a like
manner of engendring, both in the one, and the other: and both the one, and the
other, should have been numbered in the same degree: to wit, of things
vegitative, and alike increased in growth, the one, as the other. Therefore
seeing that the Seminary faculty of these things consists in the earth;
although some asistant, and (perhaps) formative virtue come from the
celestials; it is to be thought that the Creation of these things was then
perfected, when the seminary property, and generative virtue was given of the
Lord to the earth which nevertheless according to the natural progress of
things it is credible was done the third day, when as the earth was
sufficiently made solid, and the stars now next had received their complete
form. No inconvenience therefore does from thence arise if metals, and
pearls, and all things which in like manner are engendered of the earth, have
not a proper virtue of propagating their species: they are said to have been
procreated certain years after, when as the seminary property, and
specificall virtue, which makes the generation complete, was in the beginning
given to the earth.

Here now is presented a double consideration of generation, which must be
prudently distinguished, to the end that the just order of the Creation,
manifestly represented in Genesis, be not disturbed: and that the reason of the
order may be thoroughly known. There is one property of the generation of the
same species, which always produces his like, as a horse produces a horse, a
sheep a sheep etc. to the very end of the world, because it is done of its
proper substance, and by its proper virtue of engendring, Of the admirable
mystery whereof we will speak in the Chapter following. Another generation
there is which engenders not his like, but differing in species, according to
the quality of the Spirits of a diverse kind which concur together. So the
Earth engenders gold, sulphur, lead, and such like things, unlike unto it
self and of another Species: the virtue whereof it has in it self from the
Creation, and not after, not does acquire it any where else; but from the
workemaster the Creator.

You see then a double generation of Species, of the which that which is made
of the same Species, requires also the perfection of the species within six
days of the Creation: whereby it may receive from the Creator this
specificall faculty of engendring, which neither the Earth, nor the heaven, nor
any species before created can give: it only belongs to the Creator, to
communicate this virtue to the species that are created. And therefore although
that the waters had produced the first species of fishes, and flying fowls,
yet he did not make the same specificall virtue perpetual, and proper to them
all, but perfected the same virtue begun with the living Creatures, in the
proper matter of the same species, taken from the waters, and imprinted in it,
and gave it unto them, saying, Increase, and multiply, and fill the waters of
the Sea, and let foul multiply in the Earth. But whatsoever species received
not this benediction, they could not be multiplied of themselves, but have a
certain accidentary generation other where: to wit, of a certain element, or
elements, whereunto God has imparted that virtue of generation, then no doubt
when every of them, having obtained a perfect species, received also his proper
nature, and his proper spirit, as also he communicated this same virtue to
perfect living Creatures. And therefore seeing that the specificall virtue of
these species was imprinted in the elements already perfect, it was not
necessary to produce stones, pearls, metals, and such like to be conspicuous
before the seventh day; for their Creation was already effected in the
elements. Neither had they need of any further creation; their generation
depending now naturally from the elements.

Now these degrees of things being constituted, let those who are studious of
the farther secrets of Philosophy, take diligent heed, which of these are most
noble, and by what order, by what also, and how many means they are brought to
the perfection of their Species. But because the understanding, and reason,
add something above sense, and motive virtue, and this has more than the
vegetative: and again, that this is the first access of those things which
are unto life, it is easy to be understood, that by the same order that these
degrees are numbered, they are also formed and enabled by nature. We have an
example of all in the generation of man, in whom the specificall virtue
imprinted by the Parents in the seed, and therein produced, first, forms the
body, and the entralls, which all the while till the heart be formed, consist
in the first degree; but so soon as the heart is formed receive a vegetative
nature, and begin to attract to themselves nourishment, and to grow, but in
the end almost of six weeks, having obtained the third degree, they moove:
and then truly, can a man discover no appearance at all of understanding, or
of a reasonable soul in the fruit, even from the first conception: if we
grant that the soul was engendered of the Parents, but then as yet it is
formed, and finished last, as being the most noble. All generation then
proceeds from the ignoble to the more noble, and is perfected by the
sovereign degree of every Species, nor does ascend further. For nothing is
able to overpasse the bound of his species, because further forces of extending
it self, are not given to it, but the benediction of generation is terminated
in the same species. So those things which only are, although in nobility they
excel others in their kind, yet they cannot attain to the power of growing.
Of those things which have the faculty vegetative, some are more noble than
others: but they cannot attain unto sense: and living creatures, whose mark
in their species is sense and motion, do not attain unto understanding: for
this surpasses all things, and represents the Image of God.

The same order (now Reader) thou will observe to have been kept in the
creation of things: for hitherto God has created the things which are:
hereafter, (the more noble substance being taken from these) he will create
those things, which are of the second degree, to wit, herbs, and plants; that
done, living creatures, which are of the third degree, and among them; first,
those things, which come from the waters, and more ignoble, after the
terrestrials, which being endowed with a more subtle, dry, and warmer spirit,
are also more subtle in sense, and approach something to the understanding:
Finally man himself, who should have the dominion over the other in reason and
wisdom: So the more noble are last after all created, because they have need
of a more noble matter, and more purified and digested, and therefore they are
later perfected: nature, which was first created, always working according to
the spirit, and manner given him from Gods Idea. But the Idea of God, is the
work of his wisdom, the will of order, virtue, and proportion of things to
be created, and sustained. In sum, if any man will search more diligently the
order of things, and consider the communion and difference of Species, he will
perceive that the Creation of things (beginning from the more base and ignoble
Species) so almost ascended upward, as a tree has at first but only a
truncke, wherein all things which are from the root to the very top, are but
one and the same thing by the communion of Species, every of the parts in the
mean time having their veins therein: but when they begin to have any
difference among themselves, the first division of the truncke is made into
branches, after (every branch remaining a certain time until their veins
divide themselves one from another) is made the second division, and so
consequently until we come to the last branches and fruits. So the Chaos is
the only truncke of all the Species to be created, having his root and
beginning in the universal Idea Creatrix, which is in the mind, and divine
will. In this truncke all things as yet are one, lying hid and communicating in
the seminary propriety of the Chaos. Furthermore, as this universal Idea,
creatrix of things, by the division of the species into their determinate
number and form, ascending by little and little, does divide it self, so of
one simple species of Chaos without form, the difference of species by little
and little do arise, for so long the substances of all the destinated species
remain one, until they tend perfectly to the difference in that wherein they
communicate. Whence those things which as yet communicate, being contained in
one branch, do cohere and stick together, until they come into the way of
their proper species, every one following their own high, and extreme, and
perfect species. So there being of all the parts, as through all the branches
of the Creature, made all excoction, distillation, purification, extenuation;
sublimation, or after what else soever this last act, tending to the extreme
end of operation, is to be named, at length we come to all species conceived.
But that is to be remembered, that those things which are of a most high degree
are more slowly perfected. Seeing they ascend by intermediate degrees. So a
living creature seeing he ascends by three degrees, to wit, by being, and by
a vegetative species, even unto sense and motion, it is necessary that that
which is vegetative be perfected in one degree first. For so it is to be
thought of that universal Idea, which is in God, that it does so make its
impressions in the Creation, that beginning from the truncke by inconfused
order, and right way, it does by little and little go by the less noble, and
more noble species, to the production of the highest, and perfecteth together
those that are of the same degree: after those which are of a sequent, and more
noble rank, as we see in the creation of plants, living Creatures, and of man.

Now the species, which consist in one degree, or are of one kind, as in the
kind of plants, the willow, and the Oak; are distinguished by certain
degrees, or by a kind of excellence, and nobleness one from another, wherefore
there is some thing more perfect, and more noble, and later effected in the one
than in the other, thence it comes that the Oak grows and increases more
slowly than the willow, yet nevertheless the Creation of the Oak was finished
the third day, as well as that of the willow. For (as we shall anon see) the
specificall virtue is brought forth together with the bud of the herb, and
imprinted in the plant by the Idea formatrix. For the creation of things which
are like to engender like to themselves, is finished by these two, to wit, by
the same species, and by the specificall virtue, that is to say of propagating
the species: the encreasements which follow after, and the generation of fruits
are natural works of the same species, which follow that virtue and the
Creation. But here it behooveth to remember what we have said in the seventh
Chapter, which is, that so soon as the matter of any thing was prepared, there
withal together the species of things to be created was brought forth; although
the thing it self was of later growth, as the Sun begun to be Created the
first day, when God Created the light, and yet was not perfected till the
fourth day. So the waters being prepared, the species of fishes begun to be
created the third day, and the earth being dried up, the species of
terrestrial living creatures: and yet these things were not perfected till the
fifth day. So the third day the species also of herbs, and plants began to be
created, and yet were not finished till the fourth day. For Moses only notes
the time when the works were finished. The species therefore of plants, and of
terrestrial living creatures, were brought forth when the earth, the mother of
them, was perfectly finished: but the things of a more solid substance were
finished, as the Oak the fourth day did grow later than the herbs. These
things concerning the degrees and order of things to be created and considered,
come we now to the creation of plants, which is the other part of the work of
this third Day.

CHAP. XII. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Creation of Herbs, Trees,
and of the spiritual substance.
AFter the separation of the waters (which are under the heaven) from the
Earth, during the blast, as yet followed the other work of this day, the
Creation of herbs, whereof now we will treat. Forasmuch as man, and the
other living Creatures, were to live of herbs and fruits, the creation
passes to the second degree of things, which is the first of life, and because
they were to serve for their nourishment, God found out a means whereby they
should be multiplied by seed, and specificall virtue, or propagative, which God
blessed that they might suffice unto all living Creatures. For although the
benediction of multiplication be not added, a man may well understand that it
was done, because he has annexed it to other Creatures and verse. 29.30. of the
second of Genesis. he gives these things there for food to all living
Creatures. But the benediction which is expressed, of fishes and of fowls, is
ver. 22. Increase, and multiply, and replenish the waters, and the Earth, and
to men he says, ver. 28. Increase, and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and
subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul of
the air, and over every living thing that mooveth upon the Earth. The Earth
then being prepared for generation, God said, Let the Earth put forth her bud,
every herb producing seed, according to its kind, that is to say, from
whence may grow the herb of the same species, and every Tree bearing fruit,
yielding fruit according to its kind, whose seed is in it self upon the
Earth: that is, let it bring forth fruit wherein the seed of the same species
may spring in the mean time, while the tree grows upon the Earth out of
which another tree of the same species may spring. When he says, Let the Earth
put forth her bud, it is certain that the herb and the tree had not their
perfection in the same instant that he said it, but both the one and the other,
by the specificall Idea, and benediction of God, from one point, and at once
(as it were) of the Earth; no otherwise then from a seed (which being but
small, has yet all its virtue in the least part, and bud thereof, which is
contained and lies hid in one of the ends) comes to burgeon, bud, and by
little and little to grow into a great plant, or tree.

Now that we are come to the first degree of life, it is necessary first to
search diligently, and prosecute the nature and condition of the Spiritual
substance, from whence life takes its beginning. As I have said from the sixth
Chapter, that all things are come by evaporation, and exhalation from the
Chaos: afterward the elements being so prepared for generation, and the
celestial things for influence, the omnipotent Creator took the Atoms of
virtues, or the least particles of the water and the earth, whereinto he put a
specificall virtue according to the Idea's, and according to the number of the
Idea's comprehended in his wisdom, and withal added the benediction of
engendring their like, to the end they might multiply the same species, being
perpetually conserved. But the spiritual substance is the more noble part of
element or generative body, which attracting nourishment, converting it into
its nature, and protruding it forward to the increase and growth of the body,
has virtue from the benediction, and from nature. So the Earth, the water, the
air, and other bodies, exhale from themselves a spiritual substance, by
means of the heat, which by the specificall substance of the seed is
converted into the same nature and species, and affords increase, and growth,
or motion, and sense, according to the condition of the species. The like
substance when it is engendered in the bowels of the earth, and produces its
species within the earth, does not bring any increase at all to the species,
but is coagulated, curdled, and bound together into it indissoluble, not
possible to be disjoined from it: neither does exhale otherwhere, diffusing its
odor, or virtue, but only by contraction and operation of the permanent
quality. So Gold is coagulated and joined together in the quality of the
Spiritual substance, and receives not increase, but rather is contracted by
the sulphurous heat, that it may be made more ponderous, and weighty. Stones
are in like manner engendered. Herbs and trees, seeing they are to grow and
increase, have a more soft nourishment, apt to extend: therefore also they
exhale and yield odours and virtues, and at length by little and little are
consumed, being come by growth to maturity. This spiritual substance is that
alone which preserves its species (I mean that which is in the plant, not
that which is without) for this being first attracted, and drawn from that, is
changed into the species and afterward does nourish it, and conserve it: and
does nourish it so long time, as there is nothing which corrupts the same
species, conserving always the same characterismes, and marks of leaves, of
flowers, branches, and fruits; the odor, savor, color, and other accidents,
so firmly, that if but a little slip, or bud, be graffed into another plant,
there also will it follow its own natural property, changing all its
nourishment into its own species. But all the nourishment so attracted; is
changed into the form of that part whereunto it last comes. So the juice of
a tree being come to the fruit, is changed into the species of fruit; being
come to the leaf, is changed into the species of the leaf. And the
nourishment of the living Creature, when at last it is attracted to the liver,
is converted into the liver, when to the roots of any musile, it passes into
its substance, and so of all others: and every member draws unto it self,
that which is most fit for it self. But some things which are unfit to nourish
the body, nature expels, some into hair, some into nails, some into scabs,
others otherwise: or quite out of the body. Some things which by a hidden
virtue are appropriated to some part of the entrals, do strive thitherward by
a natural property. Therefore this seminary and spiritual substance, is a
thing very divine, wherein there is from the Creation all specificall faculty
and virtue formative, wherein is stirred up by means of the heart all motion
of the body necessary to the living Creature, that the virtue thereof might be
still ready to assist all the extreme parts of it: and does afford like seed
for generation, that the continuation of the same species may remain to the
end of all things. But we must know and consider this, that the same species
does not come by influence from the stars, but from that into the which God
first put it, and whereunto he gave the benediction of generation: the Stars
surely are a help, but the original and root of all species, is in these
inferior things. But seeing that this world is (as it were) one body, having
harmonious parts among themselves, and conspiring together in one, as also all
living creatures, to the image whereof, and of God, man (as a little world) was
created, bearing the Image of God, and having like Economy of parts; it is
credible that the world has also the Sun for its heart, as the beginning of
all life, and that it had its being from the beginning, when the light was
created, and that it performs the same office in the world, within the
Concavity of the Firmament; that the heart does in man, cherishing all things
above, and below, by its heat and light, and that therefore it has been
placed in the middle of the world, or a little higher, even as the heart in man.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Tree of Life.
GOD has given such a seminary species throughout the whole world, where the
temperature of the element was proper thereunto, that the virtue of that
species was never anywhere wanting; for the Plants do not change their place,
nor walk upon the earth like living creatures, but abiding in their place, do
there cast mature seed: neither was care of transplanting them imposed to man,
as to whom all things necessary presented themselves voluntary and of their
own accord. And seeing that the wisdom of God has created nothing in vain,
and without cause, which is not profitable to some necessity of life, it was
most certain that there is not any disease, nor defect of nature, for the
which he has not provided a most propitious remedy. Wherefore he has caused
to bud and spring so many species of Plants, as was needful for the
conservation and sustentation of the life of man, and of all living creatures,
and placed the tree of life in the midst of Paradise, to the end that man by
the use thereof, might preserve his life in health, until, being made more
divine by the exercise and obedience of the commandment, he might be
translated into heaven.

So also the bruit living creatures seek succor for their nature: the
Swallow, the Chelidony, the Catineppe, named the herb, from the Cat, the
Toad, the Plantine, and Sage, the Dogge-grasse, called Dogges-tooth, the
Torteise marioram, the Weesell rue, the Storke origan, the Partridge parierary,
called also perdicium, the Hawke hierac, the Dove vermin, the Pie also being
sick, is said to carry baye leaves into her nest, that she may chase away her
sickness by them. So believe that the Hearts have showed, that the herb
dictamnum heals them being wounded with arrows, the weapon ejected by eating
thereof, we suppose that the Hindes have demonstrated the herb called
Saselis, and that the Serpents have made Fennel in high estimation: for we
know that by the tasting and eating thereof, they have stripped themselves of
old age, and by the juice thereof, regained the sharpness of their sight.
Which also a man might show more at large, seeing that beasts themselves
instructed by nature, have showed to mortal men the virtues of many herbs
known unto them. But he has created in every region such species of Plants,
as are most agreeable in temperature to men, and living creatures there borne,
which by experiments is often proved; so that by the only abundance of Plants
which one sees spring, a man may almost perceive to what popular (that is to
say, ordinarily diseases) every region is subject. So among the Danes, Frises,
Hollanders, who are much subject to that disease, commonly called Scorbut,
there is in abundance the herb called Cochlearia, as a proper medicine to
that disease; so in marish places. So the Tamariske acknowledges the native
soil: the inhabitants are exposed and subject to the indispositions of the
spleen, as their pale color shows, which is discovered in their swelling
skin, and puffed up Hypochondries. In like manner is observed that in those
quarters where Wormwood grows about hedges, in courtyards, the inhabitants
are ordinarily affected with the obstructions of their entrals, weakness of
the stomach, and suffusion of the gall, that if the passages of the entrals be
not opened by the use of the said herb, and strengthened, and made firm by
the evacuation of the gall, they come first to have the Iaundise, and after, by
little and little, endender water between the skin and the flesh. And
although that some things are contrary and venomous to some, yet being used in
their kind, they are healthful; so of the very worst poison, is made the
noble treacle, and there is nothing created so averse from the nature of man,
the use whereof is not some way or other profitable. Now let us treat of the
seed. God created the herbs and the plants of the Atoms of the earth, by
the work of the wisdom, Idea, and benediction of God; but so he created them
as they now spring of seed, for there is the same operation of the first
generation, as of the second seeing the same species is, and remains.

As then out of the seed grows the plant, so it is produced of the Atome of
the earth, formed by the Idea into a certain species: and on the contrary. And
from the seed a little young bud, contained in one of the ends thereof: in what
part it makes the point of the seed, it attracteth the humor of the Earth,
or of the water, and forms one little root or more, according to the
property of the species, and the nourishment being attracted by them into the
other end of the seed produces the trunk, and thereafter the branches and
leaves, that adhere unto it. But the specificall virtue is in this little young
bud, which changes into its nature and species, all the nourishment which it
attracteth. The same reason is in the terrestrial Atome, formed by the Idea,
for it produces its buds no otherwise then does the seed. Furthermore, as
this nourishment attracted, is carried higher, so is it more and more changed
into the form of that which springs from it, into branches divided from the
truncke, into leaves, into flowers, and into fruits. The most perfect of all
is the fruit, wherein is perfectly accomplished the seed which is given for
the multiplication of the species. And the higher things excied to increase by
the heat; do attract juice from the inferiors, but the root not able to
administer sufficient nourishment to the higher, takes new attractive roots:
whereby it gathers nourishment more copiously. Hence it follows that those
plants which have more roots* their higher parts have need of more
nourishment, and their fruits are more moist, except the roots be of greater
use then their fruits: wherein the divine wisdom has provided for the use
of the living Creatures, So the herbs, the roots whereof are ordained to be
eaten, attract more juice, and their roots are more succulent, and more
gross: nature procuring increase principally to roots, and not to herbs:
those that are more long, are ordinarily of a more dry and a more fat
substance: as those which seek a more dry nourishment at the bottom. From the
accident, and properties of roots, many things may be observed, which
appertain to the search of nature, and of those herbs. But in herbs, the
juice attracted is carried upward by the parts not yet changed: but in trees,
by the bark, as being more spongious, till that (having stayed there a
certain space of time) it be changed from the nearer part, and that which is
most noble, and more purified, is then carried upward into flowers, into
fruits, and for seed. Many speculations will present themselves here to one
that will search after them. Now that the juice attracted is so carried upward,
as I have said, the graffings of young scienes in trees, teaches us
sufficiently; for in them the humor attracted is first communicated to the
bark of the young scienes, there staying some space of time, does unite the
barks of the young scienes to the barks of the stemmes, and after conjoyneth
wood to wood: but the species which is in the stem, is changed into species
of the young sciene, which is engraffed. So according to the commandment of
God, the same species produces always the same things, whether from the
seed, or from the young sciene engraffed, and consequently brings forth
branches, leaves, fruits, and seed, according to the nature of the species. It
is not unprofitable also to consider, in how long time, and how long space from
the earth, the fruit and the seed come to their growth, and with what humors
the plants are delighted above the roots, and what they avoid: and (if it be
possible) after what manner the juice is changed through every degree, in the
root, in the trunck, in the leaves, in the flowers, in the fruit, and in the
seed: for so the nature of the species may be more exactly known. This at
leastwise is acknowledged, that the nourishment of the plant, is much more
noble in the fruit, than in the plant: but most noble in the seed, as that
which is the end and scope of the Creation of all this species.

Now by those things we have already said, a man may gather, that diverse
herbs and trees have been created in diverse regions, and experience
teaches, that there be some in America, or new India, which are found no where
in this our continent, Asia, Africa, and Europe; which have not been in the
use of men until some traveled thither, which I suppose was after the time of
Christ and his Apostles. In like manner there be there living Creatures, which
are not at all found in our continent, which without doubt have been there
from the Creation of the world. Whereupon I presume that these lands were not
overwhelmed with the Flood, when God would destroy mankind, Genesis 6. unto verse.
7. For no men at all were there, and therefore the living Creatures there
Created, and there inhabiting, ought not to be destroyed, as man was to perish,
whom it repented that he had Created, seeing that in living creatures he found
no cause wherefore they ought to be destroyed, But in this our continent the
living creatures ought to perish; except some had been preserved in the Arc,
for they were not able to live in the waters.

When therefore God Created here and there throughout the world the virtue of
the tree of life, by one and the same means he provided, both for the one, and
the other estate of man; for that of innocence, and the other of sin; and the
virtue of the tree of life in paradise, or dispersed throughout the world was
not for naught. For the world coming to be replenished with men, all should
have had access to the tree of life: but the herbs and the plants growing
here and there; had been equivalent and man had a certain choice, and the
benediction had diverted all sickness. Seeing then that they were most wisely
created for the use and service of man, as well in the superior, as in the
inferior world, what a fair harmony was there then? when the lower things did
accord with the highest, and expected help from them; and the highest
communicated their gifts to the lowest, and all things served man, until he
should be translated of God into his heavenly habitation. This correspondency,
this beauty of state had continued immutable if Adam had not sinned, yet this
same harmony, if one consider it more diligently, is as yet discovered in the
traces of their first nature, for there is nothing so little which does not
serve to something, and which does not depend of one more perfect: all things
are for man.

Seeing therefore all things tend to their end and scope, and that scope (that
is to say man) consists of diverse parts, which yet keep among themselves a
most agreeable harmony, as that wherein life consists: of those some serve to
the stomach, some to the liver, some to the heart, some to the blood, some to
the reins, etc. wherefore there are so many simples, or plants, as there be
entrals in man, and affections of them. And seeing that every thing changes
into its species the nourishment that it attracteth, and that there are diverse
stations in man's body, and diverse ways to every extreme station, by the which
the nourishment passes, as in the ventricle, the liver, the blood, the spleen
etc. those simples are stronger, or pass sooner as friends by the middle
stations, which carry their virtue, entire even to the extremes, and there
work: and as for those which cannot be there changed by nature, either they
are venomous, or noisome to nature. Those things which are changed in the first
stations are friends to nature, or of small virtue. Those which of an entire
virtue penetrate, unto the extreme stations, being friends to nature, are they
which are more appropriate to that member, or to that part of the entrals, and
have certain characters, whereby they may be known, if a man take diligent
heed. For we see that those which resemble nature, greatly communicate also in
figure, as Onyons, Garlike, and such like, have a form of a small scallion for
their root, and produce almost alike herb upward, if their flowers differ in
color this comes to pass by a certain difference and peculiar property
that is in them.

So there are many herbs and trees which have dented leaves about like a
Saw, which for the same cause so bud, and therefore they have something alike
in nature, wherein they do agree. Many herbs also and plants have their
leaves not dented about, but terminated equally; many that are dented, grow
pointed, many round, as rue, many sharp edged, hard, and pricking, as the yewe
tree. All ought diligently to be observed, for they are not such by casualty,
but by nature so producing them perpetually: wherefore seeing nature produces
nothing temerary, rashly, and the cause of the same figure is created to be
perpetually the same, it is necessary that many things, by a certain law of
species, are alike, and have a certain communion of nature. Moreover seeing
there is a conspiration, and society both of celestial and terrestrial
things, tending to the same scope and end, which is man: and the celestial are
eternal, and the species also in this inferior world are eternal, having
always the same generations in form, and in figure, and depending every one
of their proper celestial causes; it is necessary that taking heed to the
characters of the plants, a man do gather, and observe many things which have
respect to one and the same Star, and many things also participating of the
same nature (among the Physicians) in which things they have a mutual
correspondence, as in figure, color, taste, and other qualities: for so, by
the resemblance, a man may learn to judge of the nature of things. For every
nature has its proper character, which it ever keeps alike, nature in the
Heavens communicating its virtue thereunto. These things according to my
speculation (such as it is) I was desirous to admonish the Reader, that he
might advance by his studies, a thing above all other most profitable, wherein
Solomon obtained much praise, 3 King. 4.33. For why may not a man search by
study and industry the things which are before his eyes, and follow perpetually
in figure, and in form, the same law of nature? It is a laborious work
indeed: but labor overcommeth all things.

I have heard the most learned Reinerus Solinander, Physician to the
illustrious Prince Iuliers, discoursing most accurately and pertinently
touching the charecters of herbs: who I would God he would proceed to take
some pains in so necessary a part of Philosophy (if there be any able to do
it, it is he, being of that great dexterity of judgment, in the searching out
of the nature, and causes of things) we should have in brief the
demonstrations of the characters, and hidden apparitions of them to every part
of the entrals.

Therefore while God does constitute every where the virtues of the tree of
life, the Psalmist says well, Psalm. 111.2. The works of the Lord are great,
sought out of all them that have pleasure therein: he does always direct to
his scope or end, the work which he had preordained: be it that Adam obeyed
the first commandment, or not obeyed, and that in sovereign wisdom, mercy,
goodness, and justice.

After that, according to my small understanding, I have treated of the nature
and variety of Plants, there is one sovereign miracle of nature very
remarkable; which is that so many things which are in every species, as for
example, the greatness, the form, the figure, the odor, the taste, the
color, the leaves, the sinews, the roots, the bark, the virtue; and
infinite things which are in one only plant, are hidden in one so small grain
of seed as I have said. For all the virtue of the species is hid in one so
small a grain, when as that little grain has nothing in it like unto all
that, no not any appearance at all, but is wholly homogeneall, of the same
kind, and appears altogether of the same nature. Wherefore me thinks I
judge aright that the most simple Idea which in the beginning formed the seed
accompanies as yet the species, and continues the same work until
generation cease. And this is that which Christ says, Ioh. 5.17. My father
works hitherto, and I also work. Whence it appears that there be a
Sabbath, or rest from the creation, yet is it not from the sustentation of the
Creatures, but that this work endures even to the end of all things: I do
not see what other thing can be here said.

He that is curious of this speculation, let him consider chiefly what
accidents are proper to every species, and search out the causes of them if he
can: in the first place that he give good heed to the figure, and that he
observe by what order the growth thereof is made from the root unto the top:
in what manner also it does proceed, and is distributed by the bark, by the
veins, and by the sinews, even to the compass thereof, and so at length
without doubt, he shall find out the proper character of all nature: The end
of the third Day.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Creation of the Lights. The
fourth Day begins.
ALthough the creation of Lights was not perfectly finished till the fourth
Day, yet they begun to be created the first Day, that is, evident, because
there is no other light that distinguishes the day from the night, than that
of the Sun: as verse 14. that property is ascribed unto it: and now three
days are already passed, wherefore that light which distinguished the first
day from the night, without doubt was that light of the Sun to come,
dispersed as yet, but contracted into the Hemisphere of heaven, environing the
whole Chaos, and which from the beginning turned upon the Poles of the world.
So that the first day, the heaven and the motion thereof, together with the
light begun to be created. For in the fourth verse it is said, that God
separated the light from the darkness; which could not make the day and the
night, but by the collection of the light into one part of heaven, and
extending it to Paradise. Therefore, seeing the day follows the night, the
creation of the light fell to be in that moitie, which was under the Horizon of
Paradise, where becoming more strong and more collected, by its motion toward
the West, ascended from the oriental part of Paradise above the Horizon
thereof, and made the Day. But the collection of the substance of the Sun, of
the Moon, and of the Stars, was not perfectly finished, till the fourth day;
for Moses describes the time when the works were fully finished, which
depends, and is defined from the perpetual Will of God. Yet the Sun (which
I have said before, Chapter the twelfth, to be the heart of the world, even as
the heart is in living creatures) ought to have been created before all
things: therefore he begun with the first Creation of the light. But the Sun
having received a most clear, and lucide substance, obtained the dominion and
rule of the day; the Moon of the night, as not illuminating the night by its
own light, but very little, yea in the whole Eclipse thereof when the air is
clear, yet appears the circle of it, but the light very small. But the
Stars and constellations, seem to have a stronger light, but far inferior
to that of the Sun.

That is to be observed which he says, that the lights were placed in the
firmament of heaven: and verse 8. He calls the firmament heaven, whence a man
may gather, that the Chaos was created much less than the world now is, and
from Aphar, and (as it were) a slimie Abyss of the Chaos, the matter being
educted and extenuated, was elevated upward, and by little and little, as it
departed farther from the Center, being made more and more subtle and noble,
as it extended it self, begirded and composed the more gross Elements. And so
the Empyriall heaven was made the most subtle and noble, as being the throne
of God, and the habitation of the blessed. Under that the Primum mobile, the
first moveable, a heaven a little more gross, and less noble. Under that the
other Heavens and Planets, which by how much nearer they are to the earth, by
so much they are of a more gross and less noble substance, less extended. So
that the heaven of the Moon is the most gross, and next in condition to the
elements. This expansion or entending, makes the superior things lighter, and
the separation of them from those that are more gross; makes them more noble.
Moreover, the luminous matter which was prepared for the substance of the
Stars and lights, was not extended, but contracted, that they might shine
more strongly, and become more conspicuous. So it comes that the Stars are
of a thicker substance than the rest of the heaven, yet equally light, because
it is fiery, and also thicker, that the light might be the more strong and
powerful, and the reflection of the beams; cast from the other Stars, which
does illuminate the night: especially that which is reflected from the Moon;
but that light which is directed from the Sun, does divide the day from the
night.

Besides these offices of the two lights, it is added, that they may be for
signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for years. Here the Astronomers by
signs understand certain aspects of the Stars, whereby things to come are
betokened: but they err greatly, for that wherefore the lights were created,
is of far greater moment than the diverse divinations of the Astrologers, to
wit, that men, whom God had lodged in this edifice, might learn to know the
omnipotency and goodness of their Creator, which David shows very clearly,
Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handie work. And Saint Paul, Romans 1.19. That which may be known of God is
manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them: for the invisible things of
him, from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead. These two lights
therefore are for this cause chiefly set in heaven, that by these works of
God, the omnipotency, majesty and divinity of the Creator might be made
known unto men, and not to the intent they should serve for the vanity of
Astrologers. Moreover, they are given for the designation of times, when they
are to be changed. So they will demonstrate the end of times, and judgment of
the world, when they shall be obscured, and desolved. So at the time of the
passion of Christ, when the time of the Law was to be changed, Dionysius the
Areopagite saw the admirable eclipse of the Sun. And Joshua perceived the
admirable hand of God by the Sun, Josh. 10.13. They are also set to define
the days and the years. The Stars also, which by night adorn the heaven
above, do also illuminate the earth below, and by their position show the
annual circuit of the Sun. The end of the fourth Day.

CHAP. XV. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Creation of Fish and Foul. The
fifth Day begins.
THE second degree of things having been treated of, now is handled the third,
concerning things which are, which have vegetation and motion: and first of
those which come from the waters, which are of a less solid substance, do
more easily increase, and are not so long lived, which are divided into many
species, and every one of them engender among themselves the seed of their
species from the which species coming to maturitie, and dispersed, the same
species grows: but the individuals of every Species, have always the same
characters or marks. So that there is always the same number and figure of
the bones, the same color, the same form of body and of other members, the
same force, nature and savor, as also in herbs and in plants, but diverse
species have also diverse impressions of characters; differing in figure, or
some accident: of which difference, if thou can gather the cause, thou may
contemplate more nearely the proper nature of every species. For the proper
nature of every species makes different impressions of the Characters, and
this does follow the other as from the effect a man may gather the cause, and
from the cause, the nature. In the contemplation of fowls, the same things
offer themselves to be considered. But because that the substance of fowls is
more solid, and consequently longer lived, therefore also the workmanship of
them was later finished this day: although they begun to be formed together,
when the waters were gathered into the Seas. For the matter of every thing
being prepared, incontinent the Creation proceeded, and ceased not till all
things were fully finished, and the Sabbath, or rest from all the work of the
Creation was come. For there is no cause wherefore the matter being once
prepared, the Creation of things should be suspended. God Created many things
as well as one, and the natural order of creating things, is elegantly
observed. The Stars also, which served more nearly unto life, were now also
the precedent fourth day perfectly finished, that they might the more
powerfully confer their aid, than when the herbs were created. So the
nature of things Created, so soon as it was prepared, began to exercise its
office, and all things cooperating together, the Fabric of the world went
forward. Oh admirable wisdom! which sufficed for the creating of the order,
the nature, the ornament, the perfection, and the virtues of so many different
things, and all without study or reasoning! for he speaks the word, and they
were made. It shall be good here to make an anatomy of every one of the
species, that it may be known in what things the impressions of the characters
of every one are different, and in what manner, and by how many stations the
nourishment is changed into the species, in what station the blood is created
in fishes. Thou shall find also in fishes, by the admirable providence, a
little bladder full of air enclosed in it, which takes increase together with
the fish, whose office is to sustain it pendant, in what part of the water
soever it be, least by the weight of the body it sink to the bottom. Thou
shall find also in females many eggs, which being broken against the rocks,
or otherwise by the virtue of nature forced out, come to multiply their
species, and even as the seed of the plant, being cast beyond its mother
(seeing it has a specificall virtue in it self) produces the same species in
its element: be it in the Earth or in the water. So also these eggs of fishes
being cast into the water, there receive life, and show the same species, and
the same character of their mother. Neither shall it be unprofitable also to
rip up the several species of birds, and to consider their inferior parts,
and the functions of every one of them, that the causes of the impressions of
the characters, and the original of their proper nature may more rightly be
known. In the which are procreated eggs one at a time, and are excluded,
having for there coverture a shell somewhat hard, least the specificall virtue
should more easily come to exhale: the which also being separated from their
mother, keep their specificall virtue, and being hatched by the heat of the
mother, or also by stoves, as is used in Egypt for the space of six months,
or a month produce birds of the same species. Moreover, they are conceived by
the copulation of the Male and Female, as other living Creatures. But here
heed is to be taken principally to the difference of fish, and of fowls, that
though they were perfectly finished in one and the same day, yet do they not
consist of the same matter: but fowls because they resemble more terrestrial
living Creatures, as is manifested by the blood, and by the whole constitution
of their body, they have more terrestrial substance than fishes, that they
seem to come of muddy water, and fishes of more pure water. Fowls therefore
are of a middle rank between terrestrial living Creatures, and fishes;
nearer to the nature of terrestrial living Creatures, than of fishes: and
therefore later this day finished. But there is one thing most worthy to be
observed in all living Creatures, that is, that they do imitate in some sort
the shape of man; whole nature (as it were) tending to the forming of man, and
not having its entire perfection but in man, for although they have a longer
head, they are furnished with all instruments in some sort alike, for sense,
and motion; the bones of the head are alike, their back bone answers in some
sort to the back bone of man, and their ribs to his ribs, and all the
members are formed according to the nature, and operation of every one. The end
of the fifth Day.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Creation of terrestiall living
Creatures. The sixth Day begins.
WE have seen two sorts of the third degree of things created, Fishes and
Fowls; now follows the third kind, terrestrial living Creatures, which how
much the later they were created, so much the liker are they unto man, both in
sense and motion; but in reason man surpasses them all, they being destitute
hereof. But of terrestrial living Creatures some are more like man then
others, as they write of the Elephant, that it is a docible beast, and comes
near to man in understanding; What shall we say of the Ape, which sporting
imitateth man's actions? is angry, laugheth, applaudeth, seriously smells,
warily beholds a thing, as deliberating whether it be good to eat; crackes
nuts with her teeth like a man, and while she is busy about her own work,
looks upon the bystanders what they do: she has head, feet, and hands very
like those of man, and in all things, is that amongst living Creatures, which
comes nearest the characters, and nature of man. For this cause it were not
amiss diligently to consider the anatomy of this Creature, and to examine how
much and in what, the interior disposition thereof differs from that of man;
that the animal virtues may be known by the inward impressions. For I think
that those depend upon these, or being after a special manner engraffed by
nature, are by impression of the character, as by a fit instrument stirred up
unto action, which yet seems ambiguous and doubtful. For it appears that
every thing has in it self a certain principle of its own nature, which
dies with it, so that the cause of the nature of every thing is created
together with it, and is not from elsewhere. But we must anatomize every
species, that the inward difference of all living Creatures amongst themselves,
may be perceived, and the difference of the animal virtues may appear, from
the diversity of the impressions of their characters, so shall you find out,
for what reasons, the virtues animal are more excellent in fowls, than in
fishes, in beasts than in fowls, in men than in beasts, and understand a most
excellent order, from things less solid; from the less perfect, to the more
perfect, from the less lively, to the more lively; from things temporal to
those eternal.

All living creatures are nourished of such things as the earth brings forth,
every one choosing naturally what best agrees with his own nature, and this
is profitable to be known. For although the nature of every one changes his
nourishment into his species, yet is there some virtue in herbs, and fruits,
which turns and alters the said aliment into their own nature, especially
where there is affinity of natures, and easy digestion, yea they can also
change venime, and corrupt it: but by the force of a contrary nature. Birds
also feed on fishes, as being in kind nearer them, and every thing delights
in that which comes nearer the nature thereof, except that which is of the same
species, which every living Creature loves, man only excepted, who has
forgot his original. Venomous beasts, besides their nature good for something,
have this commodity, that they every where suck up the vemine, and are
nourished with it, but other beasts devour them without harm, so well has
nature provided for the safety of living Creatures. But here remains one
question to be answered: whether that the same condition of living creatures
which now is, had been the same, in case man had not sinned? without doubt
they should have dyed, their life being worn out, and should have been food
one for another, otherwise the world could not have contained their
multiplication. And to what end should they have been immortal, when they
were only ordained for the service of man? seeing such infinite increase
should have been for no use: They had reverenced man undoubtedly, and been
obedient to him, for God, Genesis 1.28, 29, 30. made Adam Lord of all things under
Heaven. And Genesis 3.21. God made Adam and his Wife coats of skins, which
doubtless were taken from brute beasts, for God had before made an end of
Creating.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the Creation of Man, and the
first and principal end of the Creation.
THE fourth degree of things created, and the most perfect is man, for use and
service all things were hitherto created, and as all those things among
themselves have a kind of order, and harmony, for their mutual assistance;
so all these together have a certain conformity, and harmony unto man, in
nature, quality, and operations, and therefore man is of the Greeks called
the little world. But this conformity, and hermonie, is so far as concerns
the animal part of man.

Furthermore, there is a thing far more noble in man, that he exceeds the
dignity of all creatures, to wit, the reasonable soul, according to which he
was created after the Image and the similitude of God. And because man,
according to his substance is a reasonable creature, and received a blessing
that he should increase and multiply by the generation of his species: there is
no doubt but from that blessing, he has also received power to beget a
reasonable soul, which is the chief part of the species. Which that it should
be new created in every man, is not agreeable, seeing God the seventh day
ceased from all the works of his Creation, and then kept the Sabbath.

And there are yet in this inferior world, the relics of that matter, of
which the celestial and supercelestiall things were created, so that there is
a natural inclination, and sympathy, of the superior world, unto the
inferior, and a respect and desire of the inferior unto the superior. For
from hence also depends the proclivitie and cooperation of things superior,
unto the inferior. The thing most noble, that is in the higher world, is the
Empyriall heaven, or those supercelestiall waters, out of which I have showed
the Angels to be created. So that the reasonable soul may be begot of the
relics thereof, in this inferior world: and why may it not, seeing gold
which is corruptible, is begot of the far more gross and ignoble matter of
the earth? Therefore the eternal and immortal soul, may much rather be begot
of the relics of the supercelestiall waters, that it may be like unto Angels,
and the blessing and commandment of God gave power to beget the soul of such
relics, to propagate and multiply the species. Now see what gifts of the holy
Ghost or God are in his soul. Here are understanding, reason, judgment,
memory, love of what is truly good, justice, joy in the holy Ghost, free
election of will, and what else. For in these things he bears the resemblance
of God and his Image, in the immortal substance of the reasonable soul. For
man was created in this order and manner, first he formed the humane shape of
Aphar, or clay, in which undoubtedly those bowels which are first made in
generation begun to be formed, as the heart, then the liver and those things
which depend immediately upon the heart: Which being formed he breathed into
his face the breath of life. All living things draw breath through the mouth
and nostrils, whereby the heart is kindled with life and motion; so through the
mouth and nostrils he breathed spirit, which was without question of the
relics of the supercelestiall waters; or some part of them was first
conceived in the mass or lump of the body, of which the reasonable soul by
the holy Ghost accompanying it, was at length formed: but first the animal
life was produced by the common air. For the reasonable soul; seeing they
have different offices the one from the other: and the animal soul going
before, the rational remains, and the animal soul is a certain harmony,
and common operation of the interior entrals, conspiring to the life of the
animal; as for the rational, it is the Image of the divine essence. But that
the animals have obtained life, it comes to pass undoubtedly by the Spirit
of God working with the like blast of air; although it be not said so, for it
is easily understood, that in like things God has wrought after a like manner.
The gifts which the reasonable soul, brought with it, were necessary in man,
if he ought to be the Image of God; that he might contemplate the works of
God, and might acknowledge, adore and worship his Creator. For the knowledge of
God was required unto the scope of the creation of man; for what blessedness
had he had with God, without the knowledge of him? Seeing therefore he knew the
chief power and goodness of God, and that the contemplation and familiarity
of God was pleasant to him, God would try him, whether he that was enriched by
him with greatest gifts, whereby he could obey God, would acknowledge and
reverence God his Creator: for so bountiful a father required voluntary and
willing obedience and love, whereby to be worshipped, and condign service
received from him. He gave him an easy command, that he should not eat of one
tree, where there were so many full of the best fruits, for sight and taste,
that he should only abstain from that, and it is credible, that he obeyed
God awhile, for as many think, he remained not in Paradise one hour, or some
days or weeks.

It is likely rather that he remained some years in the obedience of God, as
George Cedrenus thinks, that being sollidly taught the works of God, by the
help of the holy Ghost, and longer contemplation, he might declare them to his
posterity: And seeing men then lived long, the true doctrine of God, by the
tradition of a few, to wit, three ( Adam, Methusalem, and Noah) came to
Abraham, by whose holy covenant with God, it was easily preserved in the
posterity of Jacob, even unto Moses. But idolatry too much prevailing about
the time of his birth, God would by the description of the chief of his works
by Moses, reduce men to the acknowledgement and worship of one only God. Here
then is propounded to our contemplation, the generation of the world, which he
described partly by tradition, and partly by the revelation of the holy Ghost;
whereby we may attain the true and perfect description of the whole world
which we seek for. He had without doubt frequent talk with God, wherein he
was taught concerning the creation, the nature of things, Gods counsel, and
other things, which were necessary for man to know. God brought to him the
living creatures, that he might behold them every one, and give them names
according to there nature; which could not be done in a small space of time.
George Cedrenus in the abridgement of Histories, says, some ancients were of
opinion, that Adam sinned not, nor was cast out of Paradise, until the seventh
year, and makes it probable by good reasons.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the fall of Adam.
IN the mean time whilst Adam dwelt in Paradise, being made more familiar with
God, perhaps not seriously considering Gods command, he lent his ears unto
Satan, and heard him long with patience, who being become Gods enemy, because
by his just judgment, he was cast out of heaven, laid wait for man, persuaded
him that Gods commandment was given him for some other end, than he had heard
from God, when nevertheless he knew that God his Creator was true and just,
and had not given his commandment in vain, but that the Serpent was a lier,
and justly thrown down from heaven. For it is not to be doubted, but that he
had much conversation with God in Paradise, and diverse discourses whereby he
was instrctued concerning the Creation, and nature, and the end of all things.
Yea acknowledged the power of God from so wise a Creation, and the right
judgment given against the Serpent, that of right he should not have given
ear to the Serpent, and that it was folly for him so to do: nevertheless in
this he did not sin against God, because God had not forbidden it. For it
made for the greater glory of God, if Adam had not sinned: for then had man
given a certain testimony of himself, that he was well created, as all
things were very good, Genesis 1.31. He could have interrupted the serpents
speech, and rejected him, and he had not sinned. It was the beginning of sin,
but it was not sin that he gave ear to Satan, for God had not forbidden
this, and as yet he had power to contradict him: but his longer patience and
familiarity caused consent, and he forthwith sinned by transgressing the
commandment, wherewith the holy Ghost offended, left him, and spoiled him of
his gifts, which he had received in the Creation, and were preserved in him by
the holy Ghost, so long as he did not sin, God considering the event, but not
approving it, because he had forbidden it, and Adam so making experiment of his
constancy. Of this lapse Ecclesiasticus writes most plainly, and most
truly, Chap. 15. verse 14. God created man from the beginning, and left him in
the hand of his counsel, giving him these ordinances and commandments, if
thou will thou shall keep the commandments, and testify thy good will. He
has set before thee fire and water, put forth thy hand to which thou will.
Life and death are offered unto man, good and evil, which he pleases shall be
given unto him. But now, since God knew before that he would sin, why did he
not create him such a one, as could not fall? God did all things well and like
a father. It was his favor that man was adorned with such excellent gifts of
mind, that he might easily obey so small a commandment, and man of right
ought to have been thankful for so great gifts by obeying his Creator. He
could therefore as Ecclesiasticus says, have stood if he would, but that he
fell it was not of God predestinating or willing, for God had created all
things very good, and Fatherly ordered them. So when he sinned, he was deprived
of the holy Ghost, which dwelt before familiarly with him, from whom he had
life not mortal, if he had not sinned, who had sustained him in holy life by
the grace and favor of God: being destitute therefore of the familiar presence
of the Spirit of God, he perceived nothing in himself but carnal affections,
whereby his mind being drawn away, (as is evident by Paul, Romans 7.15. and the
verse following, and 24.) he also was made carnal, that is, addicted to the
concupiscence of the flesh, as being constituted in the same subsistence, for
he says, there is another law and necessity in the flesh, than in the spirit
or understanding; and that it draws the spirit captive into servitude. And
that which is captive, is not in its own power, but is subjected to the power
of another. He shows then that the spirit in the beginning was not carnal
but became such when it was made captive to the flesh. It is altogether
necessary to know, and observe this original of original sin, that the
spirit from the beginning was not created carnal, or frail, or unable to
resist evils, for this would argue the impotencie of the Creator, that he could
not create man fit for that end which he had conceived, and would violate his
authority. Now what calamities are accrewed unto mankind from this sin,
learn from that place of Saint Paul, Chap. 7. for if the flesh could do so
much against the Spirit, adorned with so many abilities, and preserved by the
holy Ghost, what shall it not do against the same spirit made captive
thereunto, and forsaken of the familiarity of the holy Ghost. Hear what the
Apostle says, Romans 3.12. of all, both Jews and Gentiles, They have all gone
out of the way, they are all become unprofitable, there is none that does good,
no not one. He speaks of man's natures alone, but when it is Christ, and man is
helped of the holy Ghost, he is not such, the natural gifts of the mind,
understanding, reason, judgment, memory, and other gifts suffice not, if the
spirit be not present, the supporter and governor of these. But the
concupiscence of the flesh is not only a privation of righteousness, but a
true inclination to those things which please the flesh, from whence all sins
arise, and therefore that inclination is called original sin. Now if it were
only a privation of righteousness, Paul had no occasion to exclaim: Wretched
man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7. For a
regenerate man is freed from his mind. But in the regenerate sin original
yet abides, which is an argument, that original sin is more then a
privation, and an evil which cleaves to nature, and is propagated by
generation. In sin (says the Psalmist) my mother conceived me. But God
foreseeing that this sin would come upon man, said, In that day in which thou
shall eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the
death; for this sin was to be expiated with the death of the body. Therefore
it is a law unto all once to dye, to the end, that that which is come upon them
besides the creation, may be abolished in those that are to be saved. As for
Paradise, where it was, and what the Rivers thereof, I will show in the ancient
reformed Geography. Man having been created out of Paradise, was transported
into it.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Fabric of the World. Of the second and subordinate purpose
of the Creator in Creating Man.
BEcause God foresaw that Man would sin, lest so wise a Creation of all
things, and the end whereunto it was ordained should be in vain, which Adam
violated by sinning, it pleased him therefore to repair the fall of man, by a
new benefit, ordayning a means whereby being delivered, he might be restored
to his former condition, and that the intent of his first Creation might take
effect, he promised his Son should take flesh upon him, who should satisfy
for the sin of Adam, with which all men were taynted from their birth, that
he should appease God the Father, and obtain the help of the Holy Ghost
again, which being promised, and believed, they might by the same intention,
as before attain to eternal life. From this foreknowledge, God using his
wonderful providence, so finished the Creation of all thing, that in both
estates, of obedience, and the fall, he preserved for man the means to obtain
eternal life, so that nothing was made of God in vain, only the death of the
flesh remained, which was due to original sin, until that was taken away
from man altogether, and he being wholly pure, as he was Created, might come to
God, according to the end wherefore he was Created.

Moreover, because all men were guilty of orignall sin, as I showed in the
former Chapter, so that they could not by the gifts of nature, come unto
Christ, God therefore ordained Repentance, Baptism, and Communion, the chief
Sacraments, whereby man before all the world, might yield himself unto Christ,
and by faith might approove and accept his sacrifice for the sins of man,
whereby he might be armed against the force of sin, be delivered by this
only means, from the power of original sin, and obtain the help of the
Holy Ghost against the force thereof, yet the fight with sin remains so
long as we live, till it be abolished by the death of the flesh, on which the
original thereof depends, and therefore the death of the flesh was enjoined
of God, because of the fall of Adam, that that sin which is besides the
Creation, might be rooted out: by means whereof, man is saved, yet is there no
access unto God the Father, but by Christ. It is written, John 3.13. No man
ascends up to Heaven, but the Son of Man, who descended from Heaven. The
way was to be opened by Christ: And it behooved Christ to suffer, and to enter
into his glory, Luke 24, 26. That therefore I may add that which of many is
not rightly disputed, before the incarnation of Christ, none of the holy
Fathers ascended into Heaven, but were reserved in a certain place of joy and
happy expectation, until the coming of Christ. This place, the Fathers called
Limbus, not that of Hell, but as I suppose, that of the Heavenly Paradise, in
which Abraham, as Father of the faithful, was most eminent, into whose bosom
or Congregation Lazarus after his death was carried by the Angels. But after
the death of Christ they were brought into Heaven, according to his testimony.
Father I will that where I am my Servants may be also. So that Christ Jesus in
his time, ascended with his spoil, and captivity into Heaven. Therefore this
original sin and fight therewith, continues unto the death of the flesh;
but by faith in Christ we are armed and preserved against it, by the help of
the Holy Ghost, as Adam had been preserved if he had not sinned. Because of
the sight thereof with the Spirit, Paul cries out Wretched man that I am who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? (to wit, that is assayed thereby)
I thank my God (says he) by Jesus Christ, whom the Father has given me for a
Savior, and an Helper by his Spirit, till this sin be utterly abolished in
the death of the flesh.

An Introduction To Universal Geographie, as well modern, as ancient.
CHAP. I. What Geographie, the Globe, or the round earth is.
GEography is a description of the whole Earth, as much as is discovered to us.
This Greek word Geography, is compounded of the Noune (...), or (...), instead
whereof this word (...) is used in composition, that is to say, Earth, and of
the verb (...), I write, whence is made this compound word (...), that is to
say, a description of the Earth.

Geography is differing from Cosmography, as the part from the whole, and is
also distinguished from Chorographie, as the whole from the part: for
Cosmographie is the description of all the World, which is derived from the
Greek Noune (...), that is to say World, and from the verb (...), that is to
say, I write, when one speaks of the whole world, we understand the world, as
well elementary, as Celestial.

Corography is the particular description of some Region, or Country, and
comes also from this Greek word (...), or (...), that is to say, Region, and
from the verb (...), which is to say, I write, as the description of Spain,
Italy, Germany, France; etc.

Topographie is the particular description of a certain place, as of a
Country, of a Territory, or of a Town, or of a village, under which are
comprised Manured Land, Meadows, Trees, Places and buildings, represented by
writing. This is also a Greek word, and compounded of the Noune (...), that is
to say, a place, and of the verb (...), that is to say, I write.

But Geographie is properly the description of the situation of the Earth
alone, where in first is to be marked, that in the term of Geographie, this
word is not only taken for one of the four elements, as in a Physical term,
but thereby we understand conjoyntly, the earth moistened with the waters,
which are showred upon it, making both together the Center of the whole world,
which because of the round figure is called Orbis, or the Globe of the Earth.
For the Globe is a solid body round on all sides, contained in a Superficies,
having in the middle thereof a Center or point, whereof all lines which are
drawn from thence, unto the superficies, are equal: this then is a sole
Globe, compounded of the one and the other Element, from whence rebounds one
only unequal or Superficies, that is to say, which appears without concavity.

The Geographers distinguish diversely the Globe of the Earth, into certain
Circles and parts whereof we are to treat in order.

CHAP. II. Of the parts of the Globe or of the Sphere, and of its Circles.
IN the first place the Axletree is set in the Globe which the Latins call
Axis, or a right line, which passes through the Center of the Earth, and is
the Diameter of the whole world, called by the Greek Diameter, compounded of
the preposition (...), that is to say per, or through, and of the verb (...),
that is to say, I measure: as a measuring through the middle, about which the
whole world wheeleth, and turns about.

The extremities of the Axletree are called the Poles of the world, so called
Poli from the Greek verb (...), that is to say, I turn, whence they are
called by the Latins, vertices, as turnings and hinges, because all the round
frame of the world wheeleth about them, whereof the one of them is called
Arcticus ursalis, or the Beare-pole, from the Greek word (...); that is to say,
a Bear, which is a constellation in Heaven, near unto this Circle, the other
is named Antarcticus, because it is right against, and Diametrically opposite
to the Pole Arcticke.

The Pole Arcticke, is that which appears always in the places, where we
inhabit, and has diverse names, as Borealis, or Boreas, and also Aquilonaris
or Aquilonius, from the wind Boreas, or Aquilo which blows from this corner,
and is called also Septentrionalis, from the seven Stars, which the Latins
call Triones, and which are commonly called Charles Waine.

The Pole Antarcticke, is termed also by the Latins, Australis, and Austrinus,
and Notius, from the wind called Auster, and Notus, and Meridionalis, which is
the Southern winds, taking the name from that Region of the world, and is
never seen in this our Hemisphere, but lies hid under the Horizon. Moreover,
the Globe of the earth is accompanied with eight principal Circles, doubly
divided. First, into an equal number, the greater and lesser: the greater are
these which have the same Center as the world has, and which cut and divide
the Globe, or the Sphere into two equal parts. They are called in this manner
Aequinoctiall or Equator, Zodiaque, Horizon, Meridian. The lesser circles are
those, which have a different Center, and other then that of the Globe, or of
the Sphere, and part the Sphere or Globe into two equal parts. These are the
two Tropickes, and the two Polars, or the Poles of the world.

Again among all these aforesaid Circles, some of them are termed, Rights, or
Parallels, that is to say distances, which have an equal space the one from
the other, because they have the same Poles, as the world has, and in regard
that they are of an equal distance among themselves in Latitude. These are
called the Equator, the two Tropickes, and the two Polars, the other three
called Oblique, or byassing, because they have their Poles differing from the
Poles of the world.

CHAP. III. Of the four great Circles.
THese great Circles are distinguished into fixed, and mooveable. The fixed.
immovable are those, which always hold one and the same place in the Globe,
or in the Sphere, and hence it comes, that they are pointed out upon the
superficies or upper face of the Globe. These are the Equator, and the
Zodiaque. The moveable are those, which are not always settled in one place,
but change their place diversely, and according to the variety, and change of
places and Countries, and for this cause are placed, without the Superficies of
the Sphere, these are they which are named Horizon, and Meridian, but it
behooves us to speak of each of them in particular.

(...), Horizon, by the Latins is called Terminator, Finitor, and Finiens, a
Bounder. a Finiter, or Finishing, which is a great Circle, moveable, which
separateth the visible part of the world from the invisible, that is to say,
the inferior Hemisphere from the Superior. It is very well represented upon
the covercle or upon the upper face of the Globe, for the superficies thereof,
which is the upper part, makes the true office of the Horizon, when it
divides the whole Globe into two equal parts. Now the said Horizon is of two
sorts; the one which is conceived by reason, and understanding, the other,
which is known by the sense. That which is comprehended by the Intellect has
it extention unto the Sphere of the fixed Stars, and divides into two equal
parts, the whole Globe of the world, so that one of these Hemispheres appears
above the Earth, and the other is hidden under the earth, and is divided again
into two sorts, the one right, the other oblique; the right is that which
passes a thwart from the two Poles of the world, has its Pole, or point
vertical under the Equator, which cutteth between them in form of right
angles. The oblique is called that, whose pole, or point vertical meets
either on this side, or that side of the Equator, and cutteth the Equator by
oblique angles. The one being elevated on high from the Poles of the world, the
other altogether declining downward. Those which have this Horizon, perceive
the rising, and the setting of the Sun, and of the other Stars by oblique
motion. But the Horizon we know by sense, is that which being bounded and
terminated by our sight, extends as far as our sight can pearce, separating
the visible part of the Globe, from that which is invisible, the Diameter
whereof, is a hundred and fourscore furlongs in length, that is to say, two
and twenty thousand paces, and a half, or five thousand of Germane, with the
five eight parts. And is thought that it passes no further; because that our
sight cannot extend any further. The Horizon is called moveable or diverse,
because one cannot change the place, to any place whithersoever he goes,
besides, if one move out of his place never so little, which ways he will,
even in that instant he changes also the Horizon, the Heaven, and the Region,
and by this means one may imagine an infinity of Horizons. It is likewise to
be known, that the Horizon has two Poles, whereof one of them in the Arabicke
tongue, is called Semith, and by the vulgar corrupted, Zenith, and is no other
thing, than a point which is right over the crown of our heads, the other is
commonly called Nadir, but to speak more properly Nathir, Diametrically
opposite to the other, and is right over the head of the Antipodes.

Equinoctial is a word borrowed from the Latin Aequinoctialis, which is also
called Aequidialis, and in Greek, (...), from the word, (...), that is to say,
alike, and from (...), that is to say, day, and besides is termed by the
Latins Equator. This is a Circle of the Sphere, the greatest of the five
Parallels, and which divides the Globe into two equal parts, the
Septentrionall, and the Meridionall, distant by an equal space from the two
Poles, whereunto, when the Sun is once come, it makes through the whole
world, the night and the day of an equal length and durance, whence likewise
it takes the name of Aequidiall, and Aequinoctiall. The Aequinoxe, or
Aequidiall, as the ancients call them, happen twice a year, the one in the
beginning of the sign Aries, or the Ram, which is called vernall, and the
other in the beginning of Libra, or the Balance, called Autumn. But
Navigators commonly call the Equator, the middle line, or simply the Line, by a
certain Emphasis, or by prerogative and excellency.

The Zodiaque is one of the greatest Circles of the Sphere, placed crosse-wise
between the two Poles of the world, which touches with the one side the
estivall Tropicke, in the beginning of Cancer, or of the Crab, and with the
other the Hyemall Tropicke, in the beginning of Capricorn, cutting the
Equator in the middle, and is likewise by the same Equator, cut in the
beginning of Aries, and Libra, so that the one half thereof boweth toward the
Pole Arctique, and the other on that part of the Pole Antarctique: it is
divided into twelve parts, which are commonly called the twelve signs, from
whence comes the Latin word Signifer, that is to say, Signe-bearer, and the
Greek (...) from the Greek word (...), that is to say, Animal, or Beast;
because there are represented in it the twelve signs of living Creatures, the
names whereof, the Poet Ausoinus has comprised in this Distique.

Sunt Aries Taurus Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libraque, Scorpius Arcitenen,
Caper, Amphora, Pisces.


The first of these verses contain the six Septentrionall signs, and the
second the six other Meridionall. To every sign there is attributed thirty
degrees, which make together 360. degrees, and make also the division of the
whole Globe of the earth.

The Meridian circle called by the Greeks (...), from the Greek work (...),
that is to say, Demi, or half; and (...), that is to say, Day, as the
Meridionall circle (to wit, that which passing through the Poles of the world,
and the point vertical of every place) cutteth athwart the Aquinoctiall
circle, and divides the whole earth into two equal parts, leaving one of its
parts to the Eastward, and the other to the Westward, and is so called, that
when the Sun is ascended up to the highest point of our Hemisphere, it makes
always with us midday, or the half of the day, and all those which are under
one and the same Meridian, situated toward the North, or toward the South.
And on the other part, makes always midnight, or the half of the night, when
it comes to the same point in the inferior Hemisphere. This is because the
principal office of the Meridian is, to show the midday, and the midnight.
Now the vertical point is nothing else, but the top, or the highest part of
heaven being right perpendicular over the head of every one. The Meridian is
called moveable, because that if you, or any other, stir never so little
toward the East, or toward the West, you presently have another Meridian; in
such sort, that it alters with us continually, according to the change of
places, or of country wherein we are, and by this means, a man may see there
is an infinite number of Meridians, for look how many right points may be
given over our heads, so many Meridians there may likewise be given.

CHAP. IV. Of the four little Circles.
THE Tropicks are two circles, distant one from another; of an equal distance
from the Equator, whereof the one of them nearest to us, is called the tropicke
of Cancer, the other lying Southward, is called the tropicke of Capricorn. The
Latins call them Solstitiales, that is, Solstices, because the Solstices are
in them: for the Sun never passes beyond them, but when it comes to one of
them, it returns backwards: from whence they have taken their name from the
Greek verb (...), that is, to turn, or from the reversion. The tropicke of
Cancer, or the Crab, which is also called Estivall, is nearest to the North
among all the circles, through the which the Sun makes his course; to which
when it comes, it goes no further toward the North, but returns again to
the other part of the world, toward the South, taking again his Estivall
course, in which time, the days are at the longest of all the year in our
Hemisphere, and the nights the shortest: and this name, the tropicke of Cancer
was given to it, from the sign Cancer, or the Crab, which is in the Zodiaque,
instantly, whereupon, the Sun begins to return. The tropicke of
Capricorn, which is called also Hybernall, is the circle nearest to the South
of all other, through the middle whereof the Sun passes, whereunto the Sun
being once come, goes no further toward the Meridionall part, but makes his
return in the Winter toward the Septentrionall part, which makes us to have
the longest nights of all the year, and shortest days. It is called the
tropicke of Capricorn from this sign, when the Sun comes to pass it.

There are two polare circles farthest of all, and next neighbors to the
Poles, being equally distant from their Poles, whereof the one of them, is that
which we always see, and is called Arctique, as the Pole it self is, from the
Greek word (...), that is to say, Bear; because it is marked near the feet.
with the little Bear: it is called also Septentrionall, Boreall, and
Aquilonian, from that part of the world, under which it is situated.

The other polare circle, equal and parallel to the Pole Arctique, is called
Antarctique; because it is diametrically opposite to the Arctique, it is wholly
hidden under the earth, by the opposition whereof we cannot perceive it. It is
also called Austrine, or Australl, and Meridionall.

CHAP. V. Of the Zones.
THE four lesser circles, divide all the superficies of the earth into five
distances, spaces, or regions, which the Geographers call Zones, the Greek
word (...), signifies a girdle, and is taken for a space and internal, which
is in the globe of the earth, between two small circles, or else closed
between a little circle, and the Pole.

The Zones receive sundry denominations, according to the quality and the
nature of their situations; the one is called the Torride, or burning Zone, the
two others are called cold, and somewhat temperate: that which lies in the
midst between the four others is called the Torride, because of the heat
of the Sun, which is perpetually hot and burning in this place, over which he
passes, and the way through which it goes, for which reason the ancients
thought it unhabitable.

This then is the Torride zone, which is a space of place situated, between
the two Tropickes, which contains 47. degrees in latitude, and over which the
Equinoctial circle that cutteth it, and divides it in the middle is situated.
The two others, which are situated in the extremities of the Globe, next to the
Poles of the world whereof the one of them lies next the Pole Arctique, and
the Northern part, and the other toward the Pole Antarctique, on the other
side of the South, are called friged or cold, because they are extremely
distant from the course and way which the Sun holds, and for this cause, by
reason of the extremity of the cold, the ancients held them not habitable.
Their bounds are limited one from another by their proper Pole, and are also
called Polars from the said Poles, touching their extention in latitude, it is
three and twenty degrees and a half.

The other two Zones remaining are called temperate, and accounted habitable,
because they are placed between the cold and the hot, and participate of the
temperature of them both; the one whereof is called Septentrionall, shut in
between the circle Articke, and the tropicke of Cancer, or the Crab: the other
is called Australl or Meridionall, bounded with the circle Antarctique, and the
Tropicke of Capricorn, both which contain 43. degrees.

CHAP. VI. Of the Parallels, and Climats.
THere is another way also to divide the superficies of the earth, to wit, by
the change and the diversity of the length of days, for those who inhabit
right under the Equator, have perpetually the day and night of an equal
length, just twelve hours long, but as much as is gained on this side, or on
the other side of the Equator, lying toward the one, or the other Pole: So
much in Summer the days increase in length, and on the other side the nights
are made the longer in Winter; for this cause the Geographers, according to the
increasing of the days, have diversely distinguished the regions, or parts of
the earth, which they call Parallels, or Climats.

Parallels are circles equally distant one from another drawn from the West to
the East, any man may see them at his pleasure, delineated upon the Globe of
the earth. But Ptolomy, who was followed by a great number of other
Geographers, has made twenty one Parallels, in that part which extends it
self twards the North, keeping this proportion, and internal; so that one of
the longest days of a parallel surpasses the longest day of the parallel
precedent. The climate is a space of the earth, between two parallels, in which
on the longest day it makes the change, or increase of half an hour. But the
word climate and and parallel signify sometimes a space, comprehended
between two circles.

Moreover the climats are distinguished into those, which are Septentrionals,
and the Meridionalls, either of them taking their beginning from the Equator,
extending toward their proper Pole. Hence it comes to pass, that where the
climate lies furthest from the Equator, so many half hours, the longest day
exceeds the day equal to the night, to wit, which is twelve hours, and
going backward gives you to understand, under what parallel, or climate every
place is situated, you are to mark well the number of hours, of which the
longest day in the same place, exceeds the day of the right sphere (which as
is said) is always twelve hours; for this number being doubled, shows the
number of the Climates, and being quadruple, gives you to understand the
number of the parallel.

Moreover, antiquity knew only but seven Climates, being of opinion, that
that which was beyond the seventh climate, could hardly be accounted habitable,
being not as yet discovered.

These climates took their denominations from the most renowned places, over
which the middle place of the climates extended, namely, the first was called
per Meroen or dia Meroes, which was an I Will lying upon the river of Nilus, and a
city in Africa^ The second, per Sienem, a town of Egypt. The fourth, per
Rhodum, or dia Rhodes, an Island well known. The fifth, per Romam, or dia
Romes. The sixth, per Pontum Ex^inum, or dia Ponton. The seventh, per Boryst
henem or dia Borysthenes: some others add unto them two more, that is, per
Ripheos, the eight, and per Damam the ninth. But our modern Authors, who have
found out by experience, that the earth was inhabited beyond these above said
climates, have supposed five and twenty climates, reaching over the 67. degree
of the elevation of the Pole; the first was over Meroes, the second over Syena
under the Estiuall tropicke, the third over Alexandrino, the fourth over
Rhodes, the fifth over Rome and Hellespont, the sixth over Millan and Venice,
the seventh over Podolia and Tartaria the lesser, the eighth over Wittenberge,
the ninth over Rostocke, the tenth over Ireland, the eleventh over Bohoja a
fortress in Norway, the twelfth over Gutie, the thirteenth over Bergin a town
in Norway, the foureteenth over Viburgh a town in Finland, the fifteenth over
Arotia a town of Sweatbland, the sixteenth over the mouth of the river of
Dalenkaul, and the other which remain over the other places of Norway,
Sweathland, Russia, and the places bordering upon the next Isles by the like
internal. Now it is certain that from the Equinoctial circle, to the place
where the longest day is limited to twenty four hours, it has the extension
of twenty four climates, but from this place to the Pole, the climates cannot
be certainly distinguished; because that from thence afterward the days
increase in such a sort, first not by half hours, but from the beginning by
whole days: after by weeks, and in time by months, so that under the Poles,
one of the Hemispheres is enlightened and dried by the light of the days, which
last six months: the other by the like space of time, is overcast with a
thick darkness and a continual night.

For the rest the same consideration, which has been made of the climates
from the Equinoctial toward the Pole Arctique, the like also must be observed
from the same Equinoctial on that side, which lies toward the Pole
Antarctique, in making alike number of them, nevertheless, the Authors have
given no other proper appellations to such climes, but named them by those
which were opposite to them, adding this Greek preposition (...), to them, as
(...), that is to say, opposite to that which is over against Meroe, and so of
the others, as (...), which is opposite to that which passes over Syena,
notwithstanding, a man may call them by the same proper name, as the others: as
the first Climate, by the mountains of the Moon, and the sources of Nilus;
the second, by the Promontory commonly called Cabo de Corientes, under the
Hybernall tropicke, and so of others: but for the more easy conceiving of the
latitude of the Climates and Parallels from the Equinoctial, the distances of
the one from the other, and the length of the longest days, we have prefixed
this following Table.

A Table of the Climats, Parallels, and Longitude of the days.
Climats. Parallels. Days longer. Order of hours. Latitude. Order of degrees.
Internals of Climats. 0 0 1 12 12 0 15 0 4 0 18 4 18 1 2 3 12 12 30 45 8 12 34
43 8 25 2 4 5 13 13 0 15 16 20 33 73 7 50 3 6 7 13 13 30 45 23 27 10 36 7 3 4 8
9 14 14 0 15 30 33 43 45 6 9 5 10 11 14 14 30 45 36 29 30 2 5 17 6 12 13 15 15
0 15 41 43 22 32 4 30 7 14 15 15 15 30 45 45 47 29 20 3 48 8 16 17 16 16 0 15
49 50 1 33 3 13 9 18 19 16 16 30 45 52 53 58 17 2 44 10 20 21 17 17 0 15 54 55
29 34 2 17 11 22 23 17 17 30 45 56 57 37 34 2 0 12 24 25 18 18 0 15 58 59 26 14
1 40 13 26 27 18 18 30 45 59 60 59 40 1 26 14 28 29 19 19 0 15 61 61 18 53 1 13
15 30 31 19 19 30 45 62 62 25 54 1 1 16 32 33 20 20 0 15 63 63 22 46 0 52 17 34
35 20 20 30 45 64 64 6 36 0 44 18 36 37 21 21 30 ^5 65 65 49 36 0 36 19 38 39
21 21 30 45 65 65 21 35 0 29 20 40 41 22 22 0 15 65 65 47 57 0 22 21 42 43 22
22 30 45 66 66 6 14 0 17 22 44 45 23 23 0 15 66 66 20 28 0 11 23 46 47 23 23 36
45 66 66 28 30 0 5 24 48 24 0 66 31 0 0 Months. 1 67 15 2 69 30 3 73 20 4 78
20 5 84 0 6 90 0

CHAP. VII. Of the division of the earth into three hundred and sixty degrees,
with the Longitude and Latitude thereof.
THE circumference and roundnesse of the whole circle, according to the
Geometritians, is divided into 360. parts, and this same division is received
into the section of the Sphere and of the Globe. The earth then, as the sphere
is divided into 360. parts which they call degrees. Every degree is divided
into 60. scruples, which make a thousand Roman spaces, or an Italian mile, or
an ordinary Almaine mile: so that every degree contains 15. German miles,
and the whole counted together, make five thousand and four hundred: which is
the whole circumference of all the Globe of the earth: and its Diameter, or the
half part thereof equally in two, is a thousand seven hundred and eighteen
Germane miles, with two elevenths: the semi-diameter, from the superficies of
the center, eight hundred fifty nine, with one eleventh.

Moreover, the degrees by which the earth is measured, are of two sorts, the
one of Longitude, the other of Latitude. The longitudes are distinguished by
the Meridian circles, and the Latitudes by the Parallels. There are thirty
six Meridians, which are fastened upon the Globe, every Meridian having ten
degrees, which number being multiplied, makes three hundred and sixty Ptolomy
has placed the first Meridian in the fortunate Isles, which at this day are
called the Canaries, since the Spanish Pylots have placed it in the I Will of
Gos-hawkes, which their language is called Assores, and some of them placed it
in the midst of Spain. From the Equator to the one or the other Pole, are
marked out nine Parallels, each of them containing ten degrees: then
multiplying this number by four, ye shall find in all thirty six parallels,
as in the Longitude: Now we must hold that the Longitude is a certain space
or internal of the Equator, closed between Meridians, the one from the Isles
called Assores, from whence it takes the beginning, the other from that place
or Region, whereof we would know the distance. As touching the breadth or
elevation, that is, a going backward, or the length of a place or of a
Country distant from the Equator, either toward the one or the other Pole.
Also the elevation of the Pole is the same as is the Latitude from a place. But
this Latitude is of two sorts, the one is Septentrionall from the Equator, to
the Pole Arctque in our Hemisphere; the other is Meridionall or Austral, from
the Equator in the inferior Hemisphere to the Pole Antarctique.

CHAP. VIII. Of the four quarters of the World, and of the Winds.
THis whole, which bears the name of the world, and of the heaven, is no
other than a body, which in its own circuit, boundeth and enfoldeth all
things, it receives difference in the parts thereof, which are called the
Regions of the world, or the points and places from whence the Sun arises,
and that part is called Orient or Levant: where the Sun goes down, that is
called Occident or Couchant. The space through which the Sun makes his
course of the one side, is called South, and the part opposite to it, is called
the North* to these four there are added four other Regions and parts of the
world, interposed and interlaced between the four first. Betwixt the
Septentrionall or North, and the Orient and the Levant Equinoctial, the Oreant
of the Summer is called the Orient of the Sun in Summer: between the Levant
Equinoctial and the South, the Levant or Orient Hybernall or Winter. Between
the North or Septentrionall and the Occident Equinoctial, the Occident or the
Couchant Summer. Between the Occident Equinoctial and the South, the Couchant
or the Occident Winter. Moreover, in the four principal parts or hinges of
the world, there are attributed four principal Winds, which from thence are
called Cardinals. Their names and their Regions are represented in this sort
by Ovid. lib. 1. of his Elegies De tristibus. Elegy 2. l. 1.

Nam modo purpureo vires capit Eurus ab ortu
Nunc Zephyrus sero vespere missus adest.
Nunc gelidus sicca Boreas bacchatur ab arcto.
Nunc Notus adversa praelia front gerit.
Now straight takes Eurus strength from purple East.
Now Zephyrus at night is ready pressed.
Now boisterous Boreas from North does blow.
Now Notus in his forehead wars does show.
SEPTENTRIO

ortus Aestinus Oriens Solstitialis

ORTVS ORlens

Ortus hipe^^us Oriens brumalis

MERIDIES

Occasus Hibemus Occidens brumalis

OCCASVS Occidens

Ocasus Aeshuus Occidens Solstitialis

BOREAS

Coecias

EVRVS

Vrlturnus

NOTVS

Africus

ZEPHIRVS

Caurus sieve Corus



But the names of these aforesaid Winds, being described unto us by the Poet in
Greek terms, the Latins have given them proper names in their language, and
have called that which blows from the North Aquilo; that which comes from
the East Subsolanus; from the South, Auster; and from the West, Favonius, which
may easily be known by the figure here represented, B.

But of all these winds distinguished by their names, as well ancient as
modern Authors have ordered the situations so diverse and variable, that a man
can scarcely compose thereof a certain figure, to gather all their sundry
opinions. It is true that the Italians, who ordinarily sail upon the
Mediterranean sea, which is called the interior sea, and has its extention
between Europe, Asia, and Africa, have made 16. sorts of winds, which are
divided according to this manner following, C.

But the Europeans, English, and all the Germans, who sail upon the enteriour
sea, or the great Ocean, have given proper names to the winds, as seemed best
unto them, and have made of them two and thirty; which they call by names, as
is demonstrated in this Table.

CHAP. IX. Of Dimensions, or measuring of places.
THE Romans measured the distance of places by the number of a thousand paces,
which they called milliare, and because they marched every space of a thousand
paces with a stone: thence they called their miles, or milliaries, lapides. As
for example, when they said, ad decimum lapidem, that was, ad decimum milliare,
ten thousand paces, or the tenth milliar. Four thousand paces make a common
Germane mile, hence it is that one degree of the Globe of the earth, contains
sixty thousand paces, miles, or Italian milliers, but are fifteen thousand
ordinary German miles. The Grecians measured the distances of places by
furlongs, the furlong is an hundred twenty five paces, whereof eight furlongs
make an Italian mile, that is a thousand paces; and two and thirty furlongs
make an ordinary German mile. The Persians measured the length of their lands
by that which they called Parasanga, every one of them containing 30. furlongs.
The Egyptians had also that called Schoeni, that is Cortles, which French word
is yet in use in many places of France: but the Schoeni of Egypt were not
always of an equal distance and length; for some allowed sixty furlongs to
the Schoenus, others TRAMONTANA

Greco Tramontana

GRECO

Greco Leuante

LEVANTE

Sirocco Levante

SIROCCO

Ostro Sirocco

OSTRO

Ostro Garbino

GARBINO

Ponente Garbino

PONENTE

Pononto Maestro

MAESTRO

Maestro Tramontana

NORTH

North and by Est

North North Est

North Est and by North.

NORTHEST

North Est and by Est

Est North Est

Est and by North

EST

Est and by north

Est sorth Est.

Sorth Est and by Est.

SOVTHEST

Sorth Est and by sorth

Sorth Sorth Est

Sorth and by Est

SOVTH

Sorth and by West

Sorth Sorth West

Sorth West and by sorth

SOVTHWEST

Sorth West and by West

West Sorth West

West and by Sorth

WEST

West and by North

West North West

North West and by West

NORTHWEST

North West and by North

North North West

North and by West

forty, some gave them only thirty. At this day the thousand or milliers are
very commonly used among the Germans. The Danes, the people of Norway, Sweds,
English and Scottish use the word mile or meile, the same also do the Poles,
Bohemians, and other Nations, as Slavonia, which have their mila, or mile. Also
the Italians use this word, and call it in their language, niglio. The French
and Spaniards measure the distance of countries per leguas, or leucas; the one
call them lieues, the other, leguas. The Italians also and the English,
speaking of the length and distances of the Countries of Germany, Slavonia,
France and Spain, distinguish them by miles. The Italians call them leghe, and
the other leagues. The Russians and Muscovites measure their land by certain
spates, which they call in their language, vorest. But all these sorts of
measures and dimensions may easily be known by the figure, which is hereunto
applied, E.

Nevertheless, we must here observe there is not a Nation, but has and
keeps always their own measures and dimensions, and of places equal: for
the Germans according to the diversity of their countries, have great miles
and little; and others common, whereof fifteen make a degree in the Globe of
the earth. There are also in France and Spain miles unequal, as are the miles
among other Nations, and some English Mathematicians, as the Italians make
sixty miles for a degree.

FJNJS.
The Preface upon ATLAS.
ATLAS King of Mauritania, was borne of a Royal race, and had for his father
Serrenus, or Indigena (as Eusebius witnesses out of the most ancient
Historians) whose surname was Coelus, and whose mother was Titea, surnamed
Terra; his great Grandfather on the fathers and mothers side was Elius or Sol,
King of Phoenice, who with his wife Beruth, dwelt in Biblius, both of them
excellently versed in Astronomy, and in natural disciplines, so that for their
learning sake, they were accounted worthy of the names of Sol and of Coelum;
undoubtedly this Atlas, as the Ancients report (namely Diodorus in his fourth
Book and fifth Chapter) was a most skillful Astrologer, and the first among
men that disputed of the Sphaere. He had many brethren to the number of forty
five, whom Coelus begat of diverse women, whereof 17. of them he had by Titea, a
most prudent Matron, that did many good offices to men, whom he after their
mothers name called Titanes. He had also sisters, among whom the principal
were Basilea, who in favor of her mother, brought up all her brethren, and
therefore they called her Grandmother, and Rea Pandora. Now after the decease
of Coelus, Basilea being the eldest, and excelling the others in prudence and
virtue, by the common consent of her brethren and the people being a Virgin
and unmarried, she obtained the kingdom. Afterward being desirous to leave
an heir behind her, she was married to her brother Hyperion, and she bare him
two children, to wit, Sol and Luna, whose prudence Hyperions brethren admiring
to the intent the kingdom might not be settled upon his issue, they massacred
him, and drowned Sol his Son, being yet an infant in the River of Eridanus.
Then the Sons of Coelus whereof the noblest of them were Atlas, and Saturnus,
shared their Fathers kingdom, between them. Atlas had for his part, those
Countries, which lay next unto the Ocean, and Lybia, and the straights of
Gibraltar; whence Mount-Atlas, and the Atlanticke people in Mauritania took
first their name, and Saturnus obtained Sicilia, and Lybia, who being afterward
hated of his people, for the cruelty he used against his father Coelus, fled
into Italy, where by Ianus he was made partaker of the kingdom. Now for as
much as Diodorus alleges, that Coelus was the first King that reigned amongst
the Atlantickes, the people being before dispersed up and down in fields in
Colonies, he admonished them, to gather themselves together, and to build
Towns. Without all question these Kings were very ancient, because Atlas,
son of Atlas, having chased away his brother, Hesperus was King of Iberia,
which afterward in the year 738, after the universal flood was called
Spain. Hesperus flying into Etruria, where he was made tutour to Ianus. The
Grandfather of Atlas (Elias) reigned in Phoenice, anno 662. after the deluge.
And Diodorus witnesses, that those Kings out of the nature of things, and the
contemplation of them, attained to excellent knowledge, and withal became
pious, and more humane, that as Diodorus truly says, the Atlantiks bore away
the Bell for their piety, and humanity to strangers, from all other Nations
whatsoever, when there were scarcely not above 22. or 23. generations
complete, and many parts of the earth not yet inhabited. Atlas had many
sons, but among the rest, one famous for his piety, justice, and courtesy to
his subjects. His name was Hesperus, who ascending up to the top of mount
Atlas, to search out diligently the courses of the stars, was on a sudaine
violently carried away with wind, and appeared no more. So much Diodorus
speaks of him: but in my opinion (as I have said) I find he was King in
Iberia, into which at last, he came with a prosperous wind, where he lived so
prudently, and religiously, that when he fled into Etruria, being driven from
thence by his brother, for his excellent wisdom and prudence, he was made
Tutor to Ianus, and administrator of the Kingdom, which offices Atlas his
brother undertook. My purpose then is to follow this Atlas, a man so excelling
in erudition, humanity, and wisdom (as from a lofty watch tower) to
contemplate Cosmography, as much as my strength and ability will permit me, to
see if peradventure by my diligence, I may find out some truths in things yet
unknown, which may serve to the study of wisdom. And as the world contains
the number of all things, the species, order, harmony, proportion, virtues and
effects; so beginning from the Creation, I will number all the parts thereof, so
far as methodical reason requires, according to the order of the creation, and
will contemplate physically, that the causes of things may be known, whereof
consists that science of sciences wisdom, which directs every good thing
to a good end, by a provident wisdom, which does facilitate the way to the
ends. This is the maine scope I aim at. Afterward J will handle celestial
things in their rank: then the Astronomicks; which appertain to conjecture by
the Stars. Fourthly, treat of things Elementary, and lastly, the
Geographicks, and so as (in a mirror) will set before your eyes, the whole
world, that in making use of some rudiments, ye may find out the causes of
things, and so by attaining unto wisdom and prudence, by this means lead
the Reader to high speculations.

The Race of ATLAS.
Drawn out of the Evangelicall preparations of Eusebius, Lib. 1. Cap. 7. which
he noted out of Sachoniaton a Phoenician Historian, translated word by word, by
Philo Biblius, and partly out of Diodorus Siculus.

Elius or Sol King of Phoenice Terrenus, or Indigena, surnamed Coelus, to whom
by his sister Titea were borne. Illus, which also is called Saturnus, his wife,
his sister Rhea. Jupiter Olympius Iapetus, to whom by Climenea, daughter of the
Ocean were borne. Prometheus Deucalio^ Epimetheus.
Basilia. Boetilus. Hyperion, his wife was his sister Basilia. Sol being an
infant was drowned in Eridanus. Luna.
Dagon the god of the Philistines, called Jupiter Aratrius, whom the people of
Azotus adored. Atlas, to whom by Pleion daughter of the Ocean were borne.
Hesperus. Atlas. Alcyone. Merope. Electre. Celeno. Tayete. Sterope. Maia of
whom by Jupiter was borne. Mercurius.

Titea his daughter otherwise called Terra.


THE TYPE OF THE GLOBE OF THE EARTH.
WHereas by the Necessity of Nature, Order does always require, that
Universals should be set before Parriculars, and the Whole before the Part,
for the better understanding of the present Matter: I also, being bound by this
Law, ought to set before this first Volume of our Geographie, an universal
Type of the Globe of the Earth; and of the four Parts thereof, Europe, Africa,
Asia, and America, that so I may more happily follow my intended matter: and
also, that in the several following Tomes hereafter, he that shall desire to
have the Delineation of his own Country, may have a perfect Work before him,
being not deprived of this so profitable a speculation. For the contemplation
of Generals is pleasant, and very necessary to him, who desires to have the
least knowledge of the World and natural things. For if you please to consider
the manner of the rising and setting of the Sun, what is the cause of Summer
or Winter, whence is the inequality of the Days and Nights, or lastly, what
has been the originals, or propagations of things, what has been the
actions, the achievements, the mutations, and conversions happening in any
place, even from the first Creation, you shall learn all this no where better,
than out of these five adjoining Tables, without all danger, and with honest
recreation of mind. And even as it is not sufficient for any one, though he
have a large dewlling place, to know the several parts of his house, as the
Porch, the Wine-cellar, and Butterie, the Kitchen, the Parlour, the
Supping-roome, the Bed chamber, the Closet, the Study, etc. whereby he may
use them conveniently; but also it is fit and necessary, that he should know,
in what part and street of the City his house stands, and thence he may
straightway discern, if any fire or tumult happen in the City, how near or
how far he is from danger: So it is no less necessary to know in what part
of the world thou dwell, what people are near thee, and which are farther
off, that when war approaches, thou may know when to fear, and when to be
quiet in mind. Lastly, though Cosmographie be the light of all Ecclesiastical
and Political History, and that the beholder may learn more from thence,
than the Traveller by his long, tedious and chargeable labor, who often
changes his Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt. Horat.
Climate, only, but not his condition; yet you shall receive little benefit
thereby, if you do not join the General Tables to the Particular. Now these
General Tables are gathered out of the great description of the Globe of the
Earth (whose beginning of Longitude, or position of the first Meridian we have
followed in every one of them) and out of my great Europa, which I published at
Duysburg. In the mean time, Reader farewell, and enjoy this work, and
diligently consider with the Poet Buchanan, the glory of this thy habitation
granted unto thee only for a time, who does so compare it with the heavens,
that he may thereby lift up those minds which are drowned in these earthly and
transitory things, and show them the way to more high and Eternal matters.

How small a part that is, thou may perceive
Which we into proud Kingdoms here do cleave
With stately words; we part it with our sword,
And buy it with our blood that forth is powered;
We make great Triumphs when that we have got
Some part of this same little earthen clot:
For this same heap it self being viewed alone
Is large, and of a great extention:
But it will seem a Point, if that it be
Compared with Heavens starrie Canopie.
Or like unto a seed, upon which ground
Ancient Gargetius many worlds did found:
This is man's seat, and this a house affordes
Unto wild Beasts, and to all sorts of Birds.
And how much from this prison house of clay
Does the Seas flowing water take away.
And that which breaks through the Herculean bounds,
And parts Europe from the Lybian grounds,
With Seas, which limits to Arabia yields,
And those which straighten the Hyrcanian fields.
Then add to these the Lakes that are beside,
With Moors and Marshes being large and wide;
And Rivers which the Mountains down do throw
From their high tops, or those which stand below
In Lakes unmoved; and while with hasty course
These take part of the earth away by force;
And these with deep gulfes drown the world again,
The greatest part of land that does remain
Is covered over with water, and does seem
Like a small Island in the Sea to swim.
In this again what barren sands there be,
And great vaste Mountains without fruit or tree?
How much of it is scorch't with too much flame?
Or how much is benumbed with cold again?
Or how much lies unfit for to be tilled?
Or how much is with mortal poisons filled?
O shame, O madness, of a fond desire!
How little cause has glory to aspire!
Anger does rage; fear troubles, grief does fret;
And want even by the sword does riches get;
By treachery, fire, nor poison does it spare:
Thus humane matters full of troubles are.
OF THE WORLD.
THis Universe, which rather presents it self to the contemplation of the
mind of man, then to the sight of the Eyes, for the perfect elegancie, and
absolute purity thereof, is called in Latin Mundus. This Pliny, in the 11.
The name by whom, and why given.
Lib. Cap. 1. of his Natural History, calls, That which covers all things
with his Circumference. And Apuleius painting forth an admirable picture of it
calls it, That which consists in the society of heaven and earth, and of
those things which belong unto their natures. The same Apuleius more
elaborately describes the world thus; or to this purpose. The world (says he)
is a garnished ordinance of things, the just charge and custody of the Gods,
whose pole, (for so I call the Center) being strong and immovable, passes
through the earth, the Mother and nourisher of all living creatures. All the
higher parts, as may be seen, being enclosed and hidden with the moistness of
the air in manner of a covering: Beyond is the house of the Gods, called
Heaven, which we see is full of divine bodies, as the fair and shining lights
of the Sun, Moon, and the other Stars, with which it is carried about by
the diurnall and nocturnall motion in such a perpetual course, as shall never
have an end. Now that the form thereof is gathered round together like a
Globe, the name thereof does declare, and the consent of men calling and
painting it in manner of a Globe; besides diverse arguments that prove the
same: As because such a figure is most capable, most simple, and does bend in
all parts toward it self, sustaines it self, includes and contains it
self, wanting no joining together, nor having any end or beginning in any of
its parts: as also because wheresoever you behold it, it has a circular form
in all its parts, which cannot happen in another figure. Therefore it was a
ridiculous imagination of them who supposed that it had not a Lactantius lib.
5. Institut. cap. 24. de^ideth those that say the Heaven is Sphericall.
Sphericall round figure, but either an angular, or ovall, or some other form.
There be two parts of the World, the Aetheriall or heavenly, and the Elementary
or sublunary. The Aetheriall is that clear part which contains all the
celestial Spheeres, and is free from (...). Aristot. de Caelo lib. ^. cap. 3.
alteration. The Elementary is that which is placed beneath those Orbs, and it
admits generation and corruption, and contains not only simple Bodies, as
Fire, Air, Water, Earth: but also those which are compounded of them, whereof
wise men have delivered five kinds. For some are imperfectly mixed, which we
call Meteors, as Hayle, Rain, Snow, Thunder, Lightning, Wind; others
perfectly mixed, but without life, as Stones, Mettalls, etc. There are others
which have a vegetable soul, as Plants; and those which have a sensible soul,
as Brute Creatures: Lastly, there are some in the highest and last degree of
compound things, which beside all these have a reasonable soul, as Men. We,
leaving those things which belong to Astronomers and Philosophers, will chiefly
consider the Globe of the Earth. The whole Earth being diversely divided by
Seas, Rivers, and Marshes, does make altogether an absolute Globe. Homer for no
other cause calls it Orbicular. And Numa Pompilius for the same
consideration, did consecrate a round Temple to Vesta, the mother of Saturn,
whom Poets take for the earth. And that the figure thereof can be no other,
both Aristotle has demonstrated by the reason of heavy things making toward
one certain point, and also Mathematicians prove by the Eclipses, and shadows
of Dyalls. Besides it is found out by the long and certain observations of
Travelers, that the longitudes and latitudes of places do vary according to
their several distances, so that it is most certain without any farther
demonstration, that there are So called from the Greek (...). i. habito c^rcum.
Perioeci, that is to say, those that dwell under the same Parallel, and So
named from (...). i. ex adverso habitaere.
Antoeci, that is, those that dwell alike distance from the Equator, but the
one Northward, and the other Southward, and So styled from (...) and (...) q.
d. adversa vestigia figentes. The compass of the Earth.
Antipodes, that is, people dwelling on the other side of the earth, with their
feet directly against ours. Antiquity shows that the compass of this Globe,
where it is largest, is 360 degrees; and this latter age does affirm the same,
wherefore if to every degree you allow 15 Germane miles, or 60 Italian miles,
it will be easy to find out the The circumference according to this account
is 5400. Germane miles or 21600. Italian miles.

The quality of the Earth.


circuit of the whole earth. All the parts whereof (as Pliny says in his 2d
book of Natural History, Cap. 68. and as others also have delivered) are but
a point in respect of the World, for the whole Earth is no better. This is the
matter and seat of our glory, here we bear honors, here we exercise
government, here we covet riches, here men do make tumults, and wage civil
wars, thereby to make themselves room upon the earth by slaughtering one
another. And (that I may pass over the public fury of nations) this is it
in which we drive forth our bordering neighbors, and by stealth encroach upon
their Country, so that he that has most enlarged his territories, and driven
the adjoining inhabitants from their bounds, in how small a part of earth does
he rejoice? or when he has enlarged it to the measure of his own
covetousness, what portion does he obtain for all his labor? Thus far
Pliny. And let this suffice concerning the earth as it does make one Globe
with the Sea. Now as it is distinguished from the waters, and called in the
Scriptures dry land, it is the proper habitation of men. And for the great
desert thereof, we give it the name of Mother. This receives us at our birth,
nourishes us being borne, and being once brought to light, it does always
sustain us: Lastly, when we are cast off and forsaken by nature, then chiefly
like a mother she hides us in her bosom. This also is to be added, that a The
outmost end whereof is called a Cape.
Promontorie is called a part of land lying out farther than the rest, and map
of the world OF THE WORLD.
TYPUS ORBIS TERRARUM

Domini est terra and plenitudo ejus, orbis terrarum, and universi qui habitant
in eo. Psalmo 24 is contrary to a Bay. Such are the Lacinian and Sephyrian in
the farthest part of Italy, the Lilybaean in Sicilie, and the Sigaean in Asia.
That is called an Island which is washed on every side with the Sea: such are
Crete, Cyprus, Sicilie, etc. A So called, quasi Pane Insula.
Paninsula is that which is joined to the Continent by a narrow ridge of Land,
which the Greeks call Isthmos, and the Paeninsula it self, Chersonesus is a
compound word of (...) and (...) q. ^. Insula deser^a aut inculta.
Chersonesus: such are the golden Chersonesus; the Cimbricke, the Dacike, the
Tauricke, and others.

In this place something also is to be added concerning the Sea: one Sea is
called the This Sea some Writers call Mare magnum, others Mare internum^
Eustathius calls it Mare Hesper^um; and because of France Spain, Germany,
Britain, etc. it is toward the East, the Spaniards call it Mar de Levante. 1.
The East Sea, although in holy Scripture it be called Mare Occidentale, as
being West from Jerusalem.
Mediterranean, the other the The Ocean is so called from the Greek word (...).
1. velox as Solinus affirms, and has been called Mare Atlanticum, or the
Atlanticke Sea: as it is evident in Tullies Somnium Scip. where it is said,
that every Country that is inhabited, is compassed about with the Atlanticke
Sea, which we call the Ocean.
Ocean. The Ocean, which the holy Scripture does call the gathering together of
the waters, does exceed all the other Seas in bigness and largeness, and is
spread abroad through the whole earth, and wandering with a winding course by
diverse coasts of the world, and by the Shoares, Isles and Promontories of
several Nations, it changes its name with those places As in one place it is
called the Western Ocean, in other places the Eastern, Ethiopian, Spanish,
Atlanticke, Scythian, French, British, Germane, Northern, and Frozen, and
elsewhere by modern observation it is called Mare del Sur, or the peaceable
Sea, the Archipelagus of Lazarus, the Indian Sea, Lantchidol. There are many
Bays belonging to it, as the Arabian, the Persian, the Gangeticke, the Great,
the Sarmaticke, the Mexican, and the Vermilian. There are two famous Streights
of the Ocean, the one of This Straight is by diverse diversely called, sometime
Fretum Herculeum: Pliny lib. 3. cap. 5. calls it Fretum Gaditanum: Avienus,
Herculis viam; and Herma, Strabo, Fretum columnarum; Livie, Fretum Oceans:
Florus, Ostium Oceani; Ausonius, Fretum Iberum, etc.
Gibraltar, the other of This Straight deriveth its name from one Magellanus a
Spaniard, who first discovered it about the year of our Lord 1520.
Magellan, to which may be added Ania, which lies between the farthest
Western parts of America, and the Eastern parts of Tartaria. The
Mediterranean Sea divides Afric from Europe, and has diverse names
according to the situation of diverse Countries. As the Iberian, the Balearick,
the French, the Tuscane, the Sicilian, the Adriatic, the Ionian, Cretian,
Egyptian, Pamphilian, Syrian, Aegean, Myrtian, Icarian, and the Sea of
Propontis. Concerning the motion of the Sea, which they call the Tide, seeing
it is a matter most worthy of admiration, we are to speak something of it in
this place. The Tide is said to be a motion of the Sea, whereby it flows
upward, and having finished his course, ebbeth back again. As there is one
cause thereof so there are many events and effects concerning it. For in some
places there is little or no Tide at all. On the Northern Coast of the
Pacificke Sea, there is none. In the Tuscan, Tyrrhene, and Narbonian Sea, in
the Celtiberian Sea at Barchino, and in the Mexican at Cuba, with the
neighboring Islands there is none at all. But elsewhere it is great; as at
Bengala in the Indies near to Ganges, in the Gothicke, Germane, British, and
Portugal Ocean, and so great in the Erythrean, that the despisers of holy
Scriptures have fained, that Moses used to pass over on dry-land by the
opportunity of the Ebb, which could not be, because even to Sues, which lies
backward, the Sea covers that Shore; neither going backward does it leave it
so naked as that by its ebbing it should discover the lower parts, over which
the Hebrews passed. The Tides in the Ocean are always greater then those in
Bays, yet are they more discerned about the shoares, then in the deep. But
concerning them we will speak more in another place. The commodities of the
Sea.
The Sea is not altogether barren, but brings forth Fish, Plants, and
precious stones, and it is to be noted how Nature, with Dedalus cunning, has
represented in the Sea all the chiefest things which are seen either on the
Earth, or in the Air. I let pass the Sea-Elephants, the Sea-Hogges, the
Torteises, Dog-fishes, Sea-calves, Sea-horses: I omit the Falcons and
Sea-swallowes, seeing Nature has expressed even man himself, in the Mairman, in
the Siren, and Nereides: and also in the Monke-fish: as for the Corrall, the
Pearls, the Amber, Gum, Sponges, and infinite other things. Whom do they not
worthily draw into the admiration and adoration of Gods power? But of this we
have spoken sufficiently. Let us come now to the distribution of the Globe of
the Earth. The Ancients have divided the Globe of the Earth sometimes into two
parts, sometimes into three: the division into three parts, Europe, Asia,
Afric, or Libya, is most famous among the Ancients, to whom the new World was
not yet known. But America being found, our age has added that for the fourth
part. Our Mercator does distinguish this Globe of the Earth into three
Continents: he calls that the first, which the Ancients divided into three
parts, the second that which we now call America: the third, the Southern, or
Magellanicke land. But we will divide the whole Globe into five parts, Europe,
Afric, Asia, America, and the Southern Land.

EVROPE.
EUROPE, though it be least of all, yet with the chief Delineators of the
terrestrial Globe, we will describe it in the first place, either for the
excellency of the soil, or the company of the inhabitants, or in regard of
their famous acts, who have hitherto possessed it. Pliny calls it the Nurse
of a People conquering all Nations, and the most beautiful part of the Earth:
besides, though other parts be greater, and larger, yet they are less
inhabited; and therefore for these and other causes we may justly begin first
with Europe, which was the most noble inheritance of And therefore by some
called Iapetia.

Europe, whence so called.


Iaphet (who being Noah's eldest son enlarged his Territories even to the Land
of his brethren, Sem and Cham) so much concerning the order: in the next place
we must show the Etymology of the name. Herodotus notes, that the original
of this name was not known: some say it was called so from one Europa a Whence
also called Tyria. vid. Herod. l. 4.
Tyrian, the daughter of Agenor King of the Phoenicians, of whom it is an
ancient Vid. Ovid. l. 3. Metamorph.
fable, the Jupiter having transformed himself into a Bull, and having set her
on his back, carried her from Sydon into Creete, or Cyprus. Others rejecting
fables, do think she was carried away in a ship built in the form of a Bull:
Others say it was a ship which had the protection of Jupiter, and the image of
a Bull upon it. Palephatus of Creete writes, that it was a ship called the
Bull, which brought away from the Tyrian Country, Europa the Kings daughter as
captive, with other maids: Some do suppose that it was a military Legion,
which among other Ensigns had one Standard with the figure of a Bull in it.
Some say it was so called in regard of the beauty of this Region which may be
compared to a Virgin, carried away for the love of her beauty. And some (not
unlikely) have said, that it was called so from Europus, who, as it is left to
memory, had heretofore a Kingdom in this part of the World. Becanus, being
unwilling to be persuaded that Europe has a Greek name, seeing the Cimmerians
did inhabit it before the Greeks, and the former had a different Language from
the latter, thinks that it was so called from the excellency of the people.
For the monasyllable Heylin in his Geographie. page 29. derides this derivation
with Oh the wit of man!
VER, being pronounced by the dipthong, signifies some great and excellent
thing; and HOP, does denote a multitude of men. The Asiaticans do generally at
this day call the Europeans Frankimen: the Turks call those of the Romish
Religion Franki, and those Romei who are addicted to the Greek Religion. The
Abyssines in Afric, which diverse Records do testify, do call us Alfrangues,
and the Christians Country Frankia. So much for the Name: the Situation and
Quantity follows: concerning which it is to be held, that Ptolomy, and other
Ancient Writers did place Europe between the 4. and 9. Climes, between the 11.
and 21. Parallels: between the Degrees of Latitude is the distance of a place,
North or South from the Equator or middle of the World.
Latitude 36. and 54. and of Longitude is the distance of any place, East and
West, from the chief Meridian, and is measured by the Degrees of the Equator.
Modern Geographers place the first Meridian, not as the Ancients in the
Canaries, or Fortunate Islands, but in the Island of S. Michael, one of the 9.
Azores in the Atlantic Sea.
Longitude 17. and 61. but in our age, seeing the Declination of the Sun, as
it is observed, is changed, and many places are added to this our Europe, for
they have now discovered to the 72. Degrees of Latitude map of Europe EVROPE.
toward the North; a further description of Climes and Parallels has been
devised, so that Europe is situated between the 4th and 18th A Clime is a
space of the Earth comprehended between three Parallels, lesser innominate
Circles which compass the Earth from East to West. Climes serve to distinguish
the length of days in all places; in the first 24. from the Equator, both
North and South, every one lengthens the day half an hour, afterward they
increase by Weeks and Months, till it comes to the length of half a year.
Climats; and between the Parallels 11. and 36. Lastly, between the degrees
of Latitude 36. and 72. but almost between the degrees of Longitude 17. and
71. If it be considered from the Promontorie of Spain, which is called at this
day Cabo S. Vincentij, even to a right line drawn from the head of the River
Tanais to the Northern Ocean: but the shortest Longitude is between the 17th
and 58. degrees, counting it from the same Promontorie of Spain, even to Malea
a Promontorie of Peloponesus, and excluding the Islands of the Aegean Sea,
which may be reckoned as part of Europe: so that the most Southern parts of
Europe are in the 36. degree of Latitude, as the Mountain Calpe in Spain, one
of Hercules Pillars, the Southern Promontory of Sicilie, heretofore called
Odyssia, and the head of Peloponnesus, or Morea, anciently Taenaria, and now
Cabo Maini: in which places the longest day is 14. hours, and 30. minutes. But
the most Northern limits of it are in the 71 degree and a half, as the
Promontory of Scandia, the farthest Land Northward, now called Wardhuys, where
the longest day is 2. months, 22. days, and 7. hours. Moreover, we make
account that a line drawn straight forward from the head of Tanais to the
Northern Ocean is the Eastern limite of Europe, following the common account.
For ancient Writers do not agree concerning the Eastern bounds of Europe.
Aristotle, Plato, Herodotus, and others who are of their opinion, do divide
Europe from Asia by the River or Isthmus of Phasis, which is between the
Euxine and Caspian Sea. Dionysius, Arrianus, Diodorus, Polybius, Iornandes, do
divide it by the River Tanais. Abraham See Ortelius in his Theatrum orbis
terraram.
Ortelius makes the bounds of Europe toward the East to be the Aegean Sea, the
Euxine Sea, the Maeoticke Lake, the River Tanais, and the Isthmus which lies
straight forward from the head Springs thereof toward the North; and others
make other bounds. Ptolomaeus does part Europe from Asia, by the same River of
Tanais, and a line drawn from the head thereof toward the Northern Sea. Now
(we subscribing unto him with other most skillful Geographers, and descending
from the Line and River of Tanais toward the South) let us with others place
the Eastern bounds thereof in the Maeoticke Lake, the Cimmerian Bosphorus, the
Euxine Sea, the Thracian Bosphorus, the Propontis, and the Aegean Sea even to
the Mediterranean Sea, which parts it from Afric Southward: on the West, the
great and wide Ocean beats upon it. Lastly, on the North it is encompassed
with the Northern Sea. Strabo does attribute to it the form of a Dragon, of
which Spain does represent the head, France the neck, Germany the body,
Italy and the Cimbrian Chersonesus the right and left wings. The
temperatenesse of the Air.
For the most part it enjoyes a temperate Air, and mild Weather. Whence
Europe is every where inhabited, although very incommodiously and hardly in
those places which are beyond the 60th degree of Latitude, in regard of cold.
And it does not only far excel the other parts of the World in the
wonderful temperatenesse of the Climate, temper, pleasantness, and great
company of the inhabitants; The fertility of the Soil.
but also in the abundance of Fruits, Trees, Plants, all kind of living
Creatures, Metals; and in the plenty of all other things which are necessary
to sustain man's life. Yet it has not vines everywhere, but where wine is
wanting it supplies the defect thereof with drink made of fruits. The
government of the Ancients, and their successors.
This (for here I cannot refrain from praising it) is the mother of the
Conquerours of the World. Here Macedon did heretofore bring forth Alexander,
Italy the Romans: who in a certain succession (God in his Eternal
Providence so decreeing) did conquer the whole World, so far as it was
known: and Germany does at this day bring forth Princes of great Prowes. Have
not here been borne many noble Heroes, which have added to their Empire
America unknown (as the most do suppose) to the Ancients, and the better and
stronger parts of Asia, and Afric? Is it not the only mother of many Kings
and Princes fighting in Christ's cause? This our See Ortelius in his book
before cited.
Europe, besides the Roman Empire, has above eight and twenty Kingdoms
instructed in Christian Religion, if we add the fourteen, which Damianus a
Goes reckons to be in Spain, whence we may estimate the dignity of this
Country: what shall I speak of the populousness, and renown of the cities
thereof. Heretofore Africa has been proud of her Carthage, Asia has been
puffed up with her three Cities, Babylon, Ninivie and Jerusalem. America does
glory at this day in Cusco, and new Spain in Mexico: but who sees not in
these times the like and greater, almost in every Country of Europe? Let any
one in his mind only walk over Italy (for this does afford an example of all
the rest) the sumptuous magnificence of Rome, the Royal wealth of Venice, the
honorable Nobility of Naples, the continual commerce and traffic of Genoa,
the happy and fertile pleasantness of Millaine, and the famous wonders, and
commodities of other places. So that the other parts of the World may be
silent, for none are equal to Europe. The Countries in it (as they are now
called) are Spain, France, Germany, Italy, Hungary, Transylvania, Dalmatia,
Greece, Poland, Lithuania, Moscovie, Russia, Denmark, Swethland, Norway:
besides the Isles in the Northern Ocean, which are, England, Scotland,
Ireland, Island, Frisland, and others in other places; and those in the
Mediterranean Sea, as the Baleares, which are two Isles in the Spanish Sea
called Majorica and Minorica, also Corsica, Sardinia, Sicilia, The Lakes and
Rivers.
with the Isles of Malta, Corfu, Creete, and many others. And as for the Lakes,
standing Pooles, Rivers, and Waters having diverse virtues in them, which
(beside their fish, whereof they yield an incredible company) are as it were a
wall unto Countries, who can number them? What should I mention the Seas? The
Seas.
it would be tedious in this place to reckon up their commodities, profits, and
delights, these things shall therefore be unfolded in their proper places.
Europe does not want Mountains, among which the Pirenean hills, and the Alps,
are always white with continual snow, The public and private works: The
Laws and Institutions.
and it has many woods and forests, which afford pasturage for cattle, and
have few harmefull beasts in them. What should I speak of the private or
public works, both sacred and profane that are in this part of the World?
Here are innumerable magnificent Temples, innumerable Abbeys, many famous
Palaces of Kings, innumerable fair and magnificent houses belonging to
Noblemen and Princes: and many rare buildings, both public and private. We
have here Justice and Laws: we have the dignity of It is observable that
there is no part of Europe, whether Continent or Island, that has not long
since been Christened.
Christian Religion, we have all the delights of mankind, The company of
Senators.
we have the strength of Arms, innumerable Senators, Men venerable both for
Wisdom and Learning: and if you please to compare famous men together, there
was never so great a company of Heroes, and Noble men in other parts of the
World, as in any one part of Europe. Besides, this part of the World is so
studious of Arts and Sciences, that for the invention and preservation of many
things, it may worthily be called, The Universities
the Mother and Nurse of Wisdom. In this are many excellent and flourishing
Who number it no less then 78.
Universities, but in other Countries there is nothing but mere Barbarism. It
would be too much to reckon up the virtues of the Inhabitants; but as for the
vices (as who is without some?) they are noted in some short sayings, which I
will here add: The people of Franconia are foolish, rude, and vehement. The
Bavarians are prodigal, gluttons, and railers. The Grisons are light,
talkative, and braggers. The manners of the people.
The Turingi are distrustful and contentious. The Saxons dissemblers, crafty,
selfe-willed. The Low-country-men are horsemen, delicate, and tender. The
Italians proud, desirous of revenge, and witty. The Spaniards haughty, wise,
covetous. The French eloquent, intemperate, and rash. The People of Denmark
and Holsteine, are great of stature, seditious, and dreadful. The Sarmatians
great eaters, proud, and stealers. The Bohemians inhumane, newfangled and
robbers. The Illyrians unconstant, envious, seditious. The Pannonians cruel,
and superstitious. The Greeks miserable. And there is another saying no less
pleasant. A Bridge in Poland, a Monk of Bohemia, a Knight of the South, a
Nun of Suevia, the Devotion of Italy, the Religion of Prutenicks, the Fasts
of Germans, and the Constancy of Frenchmen are nothing worth.

AFRIC.
AFRIC follows: which was so called, if we believe Nisias, from Afer a
companion of Hercules, who accompanied him even as far as Calis. But if we
trust Josephus, and Isidorus, The name by whom and why given.
from one of the posterity of Abraham, whose name was Afer: or (as Festus does
suppose) from the Greek word And a pr^vativum.
(...), which signifies cold, for it is free from cold, because the most part
of it is situated between the The Tropicks are two, nominate Circles that be
Parallel to the Equator, from which the Northern Tropicke, called the
Tropicke of Cancer, is distant 23. degrees and the Southern, called the
Tropic of Capricorn, as much.
Tropicks. The Arabians do call it Fricchia, from the word Farruca, which with
them signifies to divide: for Afric is almost divided from the other parts of
the Earth. Or else it was so called from Ifricus a King of Arabia Foelix, who
(they report) did first inhabit this Country. The Greeks call it Libya either
from Libya the daughter of Epathus, or from the Greek word (...), which
signifies stony, or because Libs or the Southwest-wind blows from thence. In
the Scriptures it is called Chamesia; the Arabians, and Aethiopians do call it
Alkebula, and the Indians Besechath. The So styled because when the Sun is
under that Aequinoctiall Circle in the Heaven, which answers to this on the
Earth, the days and nights be of one length.
Aequinoctiall Circle does almost cut the middle part of Afric. The So
called, from Cham the son of Noah, who inhabited this Country, See Psalm
105.23.
map of Africa AFRIC.
Tropicks pass not beyond it, The Situation.
either Northward or Southward, but it is stretched out beyond either of them
ten degrees and more. It is bounded toward the North, with the Mediterranean
Sea, and the Streights of Hercules; toward the East with the Arabian Bay, or
the Erythraean Sea, and with the Isthmus which is between the Mediterranean
Sea and the Arabian Bay; to the South it is washed with the Ethiopian Ocean:
and on the West with the Atlanticke. It has the form of a Peninsula, which is
joined to Asia by the Isthmus above mentioned. And though the length thereof
which lies from West to East, is shorter then the length of Europe; yet the
length thereof from the North, toward the (i.) Habassia, or the higher
Aethiopia.
South is such, as Europe can hardly be compared with it: for it takes up
almost 70 degrees, but Europe scarce 35. Beside, Europe is full of windings,
but Afric is uniforme and continued. Europe (as I said before in the
description thereof) is every where inhabited; but this is full of Deserts and
inhabitable places. That was formerly known, but not this: where it is
inhabited, The fertility.
Afric does excel in fruitfulness. But for the most part, it is not
inhabited, but full of barren Sands, and Deserts, and troubled with many kinds
of living Creatures. It is reported that the fruitfulness of the fields is
very wonderful, and does give the tillers such a harvest, as does requite the
labor with a hundredfold increase for that which is sown. That is wonderful
which is spoken of the fertility of Mauritania: viz. that there are Vines
which two men cannot fadome about, and bunches of Grapes a cubit long. There
are very high trees near to the Mountain Atlas, plain and smooth without
knots, and leaved like the Cypress tree. Afric does bring forth Elephants
and Dragons, which lie in wait for beasts, and kill them with winding about
them: besides, it has a great number of Lions, Buffs, or wild Oxen, Libbards,
wild Goats, and Apes. Herodotus reports, that Asses with horns bred here,
besides Dragons, Hyenaes, rough Wolves, begotten of the Wolf and Hiena,
Panthers and Ostriches, and besides many kinds of Serpents, as Aspes, and
Crocodiles, to which nature has made the Or Ratt of India, who steals into
the Crocodiles mouth when he gapeth and eating his bowels kills him.
Ichneumon an enemy, etc. But, as the same Author witnesses, there is neither
Stagge nor Boar in it. Afric brings forth the Basiliske: and although many
things are thought to be fabulous which are reported of him; Yet it is certain
that Leo being Pope, there was a Basiliske which infected Rome with a great
plague by his noisome breath. There are also diverse kinds of Hence came the
old proverb, Africa semper aliquid apportat monstri.
Monsters, whose diversity and multitude they ascribe to the want of water,
whereby the wild beasts are enforced to come together at a few Rivers and
Springs. The Romans divided Afric into six Provinces. The Proconsularie
Province, wherein was Carthage; Numidia, under the jurisdictin of a Consul;
Bizacchius, Tripolitana, Mauritania Caesariensis, and Mauritania Sitiphensis.
The Division.
Ptolomie in the beginning of his fourth Book does reckon twelve Provinces or
Countries, Mauritania Tingitana, Mauritania Caesariensis, Numidia, Africa
properly so called, Cyrenaica or Pentapolis, (for so Ptolomie calls it)
Marmarica, Lybia properly so called, the Higher and Lower Egypt, the Innermost
Lybia, Aethiopia under Egypt, and the Innermost Aethiopia. Leo Africanus does
divide all Afric into four parts, Barbary, Numidia, Lybia, and the Country
of Black-Mores. But in this Leo is deceived, because he has not made the Red
Sea the bound of Afric, but Nilus; whereby it comes to pass that he joins
Egypt and the Eastern part to Asia. Let us therefore, besides those four
parts reckoned up of Leo, place in Afric, Egypt, the Higher Aethiopia, the
Lower and outermost Aethiopia, and the Islands. Egypt is stretched forth in a
long tract of Land, from the South unto the North. The bounds thereof, on the
West side are the Deserts of Barca, Lybia and Numidia beyond Nilus, together
with the Kingdom of Nubia. On the South it is bounded with the Country of
Bugia and Nilus, where it runs a little from the West Eastward. On the
Eastside there are the Deserts of Arabia, which lie between Egypt and the Red
Sea; and on the North side it is enclosed with the Mediterranean Sea; Other
things concerning Egypt we will unfold in the particular Description thereof.
At this day they call all that part of Afric, which reaches from Egypt to
the Straits of Gibraltar, and is included with the Mediterranean Sea and the
Mountain Atlas, Barbaria: and it contains the Kingdoms of Morocco, Fesse,
Tremisen, Tunis, and Barca, of which we will speak more largely in the
Description of Barbary. At this time it shall be sufficient to show the Reader
the division and bounds thereof. The Kingdom therefore of Morocco is divided
into these Provinces, Hea, Susa, Guzala, the Land of Morocco, Ducala, Hoscora,
and Tedletes: it is bounded with the Atlantic Ocean, with the Mountain Atlas
it self, and the Kingdom of Fesse. The Kingdom of Fesse has on the West the
Atlanticke Sea, on the North the Straits of Hercules, on the East the River
Mulvia, on the South the Kingdom of Morocco. The Countries therein are
Temesna, the Territory of Fesse, Asgara, Elhabata, Errifa, Garetum and
Elchausum. The Kingdom of Tremison, is bounded on the South with the Desert of
Numidia, on the East with the great River, on the North with the Mediterranean
Sea. The Kingdom of Tunis does contain the whole tract of Land from the great
River, to the River of the Country of Mestata. The Countries thereof are five,
Bugia, Constantina, the Territory of Tunis, Tripolis, and Ezzaba, Barcha now
called, but that it was anciently called Barca is evident out of Virgil, when
he says, Late^ne furentes Bar^ai.
Barca, or Barcha is stretched forth from the borders of Mestata to the
confines of Egypt. Numidia is called at this day Biledulgerid; the bounds
thereof are the Atlanticke Sea on the West side, the Mountain Atlas on the
North, the confines of Egypt on the East, the Deserts of Libya on the South.
The Regions thereof are Tesset, Tegelmessa, Seb, Biledulgerid, Dara and Fezzen.
Lybia was called by the Ancients Sarra, because it is a Desert. It begins
from the Kingdom of Gagoa near Nilus, and is extended toward the West, even
to the Kingdom of Gualata, which lies near to the Atlantic Sea, on the
North the Kingdom of Numidia does border on it, on the South the Kingdom of
the Nigritans or Blackmoores. The Nigritans are so called either from the
black color of the inhabitants, or from the black river which glideth through
their Country. They have on the East the Confines, or the Borders of Nilus, on
the West the Western Ocean, on the South partly the Ethiopian Sea, and partly
the Kingdom of Manicongus; but on the North the deserts of Libya. The
Kingdoms thereof are five and twenty, namely, Galata, Gumea, Melli, Tombutum,
Gago, Guber, Agadez, Cano, Caseva, Zegzeg, Zanfara, Gunangara, Bornum, Goago,
Nubia, Biro, Temiamo, Dauma, Medra, Gora, the Territory of Anterot, the
Territory of Giolosa, the Coast of Guinea, the Territory of Meligens, and the
Kingdom of Benin. The Abyssines do inhabit the higher or innermost Aethiopia,
whose Prince is called Abusively so called, but rightly Priest Johan or Gyam,
which in the Ethiopian tongue signifies Great or Mighty Prince.
Prester John. His Country is large, and does almost touch either Tropicke, and
it is extended between the Ethiopian and the So called from the redness of
the sands.
Red Season the North it has the people of Nubia and Bugia that borders on
Egypt; on the East the Red Sea; on the South the Mountains of the Moon, on
the West the Kingdom of Manicongus, the River Niger, the Kingdom of Nubia,
and the River Nilus. These Kingdoms are subject to him, Barnagnes, Tigremaum,
Tigraim, in which is the City Caxumo, Angote, Amara, Xoa, Goyami, Bagamedrum,
Gueguere, Fatiagar, Damar, Dancali, and Dobas. The lower or outermost Aethiopia
is the Southern part of Afric, unknown unto Ptolomie. The beginning thereof
on the East side is above the River Zaire not far from the Aequinoctiall, and
it does contain all the littorall part of Africa, and beyond the Aequinoctiall,
even to the Straits of Arabia. The Regions thereof are five, first the Country
of Ajana, in which are the Kingdoms Del, and Adea Magaduzzum. Secondly, the
Country of Zanguibara, the Kingdoms whereof are, Melinda, Mombazza, Quiloa,
Mozambique, Manoemuci, Cephala, Manomotapa, Torra, and Butua; the Kingdom of
Cafria, and Manicong, in which there are six Provinces, Sunde, Pango, Songo,
Bamba, Barra and Pemba, to which are added the Kingdoms of Angola, Loangi, and
Anzichi. There are some very great Lakes in Afric, which seem rather to be
Seas, the^ Lakes, of which the chiefest is Zembre, which is fifty miles in
compass, and out of it there flow the Rivers, Nilus, Zaire, and Cuama.
Besides, this part of the World has great Rivers, as Nilus, Niger, Senaga,
Cambra, Zaire, Cuama, and the River called the River of the Holy Ghost, all
which by their overflowing do wonderfully water it, and make it fruitful. It
has many great mountains, The Lakes. Rivers. Mountains.
amongst which the chief is So called from Atlas, in times past a K. of the
Moors, whom the Poets feign to have been Metamorphosed into this Mountain:
this hill is now called Anchisa: the inhabitants that dvvell about it name it
Adiris; Solinus, Darius; others call it Astrixis, or Astre^xis. but Dioscorides
calls it Tmolus.
Atlas, who rising out of the vast sands lifts up his high head above the
clouds, so that the top thereof cannot be seen. The inhabitants call it the
Pillar of Heaven. It begins from the West, where it gives the name to the
Atlanticke Sea, and from thence by a continued winding ridge it extends it
self toward the East: toward the borders of Egypt it is round, rugged,
steep, and unpassable by reason of steep rocks; also woody, and watered
with the breaking forth of springs. The top of this Mountain is covered even
in the Summer with deep snow: yea sometime the back thereof (if the North
wind be sharp) is covered with a snow deeper then the highest tree, whereby
both men and cattle do perish. There is another very high mountain called
This Mountain is called by Ptolomie, Pliny, and others, Deorum cursus.
Sierra Liona, whose top is always hid with clouds, from whence a terrible
noise is heard at Sea, so that it is called the Mountain of Lions. The
Mountains also of the Moon, much renowned by the Ancients, are here placed
under the Tropicke of Capricorn: they are very rugged, of an incredible
height, and inhabited by wild people; and near them there are such low and
deep valleies, that it may seem that the Center of the Earth is there.
Lastly, there are the Mountains Gantaberes in the Kingdom of Angola, very
rich in silver mines, and other which we will mention in our particular
Descriptions. The chief Islands about Afric are these. In the Atlanticke
Ocean, there is the Isle called, Portus Sancti, or the Isle of the Holy Port:
Madera, the Canarie Islands, and Caput Viride, or the Green Cape. The Isle of
the Holy Port was so called from the discoverers, who having sailed thither
with much danger and difficulty, would have this place so called in memory
thereof. The compass of it is about fifteen miles. Madera took his name from
the great plenty of trees that grew here. The circuit of it is about an hundred
and forty miles. The Canaries were so called from the multitude of dogs that
were found there: they were called by the Ancients, the So named either from
their fruitfulness or goodness of A^e as Stephanus thinks:
Fortunate Islands. Pliny does mention six: Ombrio, Innonia the greater, and
lesser, Capraria, Navaria, and Canaria. Ptolomie calls them Aprosuum, Hera, or
Autolala, Pluitalia, Casperias, Canaria and Centuria, and does place them all
almost in a right Line toward the North. Cadamustus makes ten, seven tilled,
three desert: the names of those that are manured are the Islands of Fracta
Lancea, Magna Sors, Grand-Canarea, Teneriffa, Gomera, Palma, and Ferro. Cape
Verde, or the green Cape is planted with green Trees, and from hence it has
that name. The Isles thereof toward the West, do lie in the midst of the
Ocean: as the Islands of S. Anthony, S. Vincent, S. Lucia, S. Nicholas, the
Island of Salt, Bonavista, Maggio or May, Saint James, and the Island called
Insula del fuego. In the Ethiopian Ocean are the Islands, called Insula
Principis and Saint Thomas his Island. Behind the Promontory called Caput
Bonae spei, or the Cape of good Hope, there are other Islands, but none
inhabited except the Island of Saint Laurence.

ASIA.
The name by whom and why given.
ASIA succeeds Afric in my division. This name was allotted it from the Nymph
Daughter to Oceanus and Tethis.
Asia (as Varro witnesses) of whom and Iapetus Prometheus was borne: Others
say it was so called either of Asius the son of Atys, or from Asius the
Philosopher, who gave the Palladium of Troy to the custody of the City, for
which, that they might gratify him, his whole dominions (which before was
called Epirus) they called Asia. And from hence afterward, as from the more
noble part, all the whole tract of Land began to be called Ovid. lib. 9.
Metamorph. calls it Asis.
Asia. Moreover, as Lybia does both signify a third part of the World, and a
part of this part: So it is observed, that Asia does signify both the whole
Continent, and that part which is hemmed in with the Mountain Taurus, wherein
do dwell the Lydians, the Carians, the Lycaonians, Paphlagonians, Ionians,
Aeolians, and others; which part, for distinction sake, is commonly called Asia
the Less: the Turks call it From the Greek word (...), which signifies the
East, because it lies Eastward of Asia the Great.
Natolia. There is says Varro, Lib. 4. an Asia which is distinguished from
Europe, in which is Syria: and there is an Asia which is called the former part
of Asia, in which is Ionia, and our Province. But all Asia is called in the
Holy Scriptures From Sem the son of Noah.
Semia. It is almost wholly situated in the Northern part of the World from
the Aequinoctiall Circle, to the 80th degree of Northern Latitude, except some
Islands pertaining to Asia, some whereof are stretched out beyond the Equator
Southward. The Situation.
Hence arises a great difference through all Asia, in the length of the
artificial days. For in the last Parallel, which is drawn not far from the
Aequinoctiall, the longest day is almost twelve hours. About the middle of
Asia, the longest day is fifteen hours, and in the most Northern Parallel
their light continually endures almost for four whole Months in Summer.
According to the Longitude, Asia is stretched forth from the Meridian of 52.
degrees, even to the Meridian of 196. according to some: but if we follow the
description of Mercator, the most Western Meridian thereof passes through the
57th degree near to the furthest Western part of Asia the Less; and the most
Eastern Meridian through the 178th degree. On the North it has the Scythian
Sea, on the South the Indian, on the East the Eastern Sea, on the West the Bay
of Arabia, or the red Sea; the Mediterranean and Euxine Seas. And as in the
higher part it cleaves to Europe, so in the Southern part it is joined to
Afric by an Isthmus: yet Pliny and Strabo with some others do stretch out
Asia even to Nilus, The temperatenesse of the Air.
and do reckon all Egypt to Asia. In Asia the face of the sky is both
pleasant and wholesome, the Air mild and temperate. Yet all Asia does not
feel this temperatenesse: for the right hand and left hand parts thereof are
exceeding hot and cold. The pleasantness of this Country is so great, that it
became a Proverb: All the Land is so renowned both for the fertility of the
fields, The fertility of the Soil.
the variety of fruits, and large pasturing of cattle, and for the abundant
plenty of those things map of Asia ASIA.
which are exported, that it does easily excel all other Countries. Here is
wonderful plenty of Fruits, Spices, and Mettalls. Hence we receive Balsam,
sweet Canes, Frankincense, Myrrh, Cassia, Cinnamon, Gariophylus, Pepper,
Saffron, sweet Woods, Rozine, Musk, and all kind of precious stones. Here we
may behold many different sorts of living Creatures. The various kinds of
living Creatures.
For it brings forth a number of Elephants, Camells, and many other living
Creatures both tame and wild: we may here also admire the wits, riches, and
power of the Inhabitants. Here Man was first created by God; here was the first
Seat of the Church of God; here Arts were first invented; here were Laws
first made; here the Doctrine of the Gospel first granted to miserable mortal
men, with the hope of Salvation through Jesus Christ the Son of God. Here the
confusion of Languages was sent down amongst men, in the destruction of the
Tower of Babel. The government of the Ancients.
Here first Dominion over inferiors began. Here Nimrod began to reign, of
whom we read in Gap. 10. verse. 8.9.10.
Genesis. But the first Monarchs of the whole Country of Asia were the
Assyrians, the last whereof was Sardanapalus, a man given to wantonness, and
effeminate softness, who being found by See Justin. lib. 1. and Diodorus
Siculus. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Arbactus amongst a crew of whores, and not long after being overcome by him in
battle, he made a great fire, and cast himself and his riches thereinto.
Afterward the Empire came to the Persians: Among whom Whom Iunius says, the
Scripture calls Abasuerus. Esther 1.4.
Xerxes the son of This is meant of Darius the son of Histaspis.
Darius did maintain a war, begun by his father, five years against Greece,
and he brought out of Asia into Europe an army of ten hundred thousand men, and
passed them over a bridge which he built over Hellespont: he came also
accompanied with Herodotus reckons all his forces by Sea and Land to be 2641610
men, besides Concubines, Eunuchs, women bakers, and other officers an infinite
company.
ten hundred thousand ships, but with a vain endeavor; for he that durst
threaten God, insult over the Sea, put fetters upon Neptune, darken the
Heavens, level Mountains, and shake the whole World, was feign, his army being
put to flight, to pass over the narrow Sea in a fisher-boate, the Bridge being
broken by the tempests of Winter. Darius was the last Persian Emperor, whose
being conquered and overcome by Alexander, made way to the Monarchy of the
Macedonians, for Alexander did first translate it out of Asia into Europe. All
Asia, according to the several government thereof, may thus be divided. The
first part is under the Turks command, the original whereof is from Mahomet,
and is a large Territory. The Duke of Moscovia does possess a second part,
enclosed with the frozen Sea, the River Oby, the Lake Kitaia, and a Line drawn
thence to the Caspian Sea, and to the Isthmus which is between this Sea and
Pontus. The Great Cham Emperor of Tartarie does possess the third part, whose
borders on the South are, the Caspian Sea, the River Iaxartes, and the
Mountain Imaus; on the East and North the Ocean: on the West the Kingdom of
Moscovia. The King of Persia, called the Sophie, has the fourth. This has on
the West side the Turk; on the North the Tartarian; on the South it is washed
with the Red Sea, but on the East with the River Indus. The fifth part does
contain India, both on this side and beyond Ganges; which is not governed by
one alone, but by many Rulers, for every Country thereof has almost a several
Prince, some whereof are tributarie to the great Cham. The sixth part contains
the large Kingdom of China. The seventh contains all the Islands scattered
up and down in the Indian and Eastern Sea. Among which are Tabrobana and
Zetlan, the two Iavae found out not long since by the Portugalls, Borneo,
Celebes, Palohan, Mindanao, Gilolo, with the spice bearing Moluccoes, also
Iapan, with Nova Guinea lastly found out; concerning which it is not yet known
whether it be an Island, or joined to the Southern Continent. But the Ancients,
as Strabo and Arrianus, have made many divisions of it. Ptolomie does divide it
into 47. Countries and Provinces, the description whereof he delivers in his
fifth, sixth, and seventh Books of Geographic, and does set them forth in
twelve Tables. It has three Cities famous through the whole World, Babylon,
Ninivie, The Cities.
and Jerusalem. It has great Lakes full of fish, Lakes.
and the Caspian Sea in manner of a Lake, which never comes to the Ocean.
Also many Rivers, Rivers.
among which the chiefest are Tigris, Euphrates, which Moses mentions in
Genesis, Iordane, Indus, Ganges, etc. Mountains.
Here are also great and wonderful Mountains, among which is the Mountain
Eustathi^^ affirms that this Mountain was so called by the reason of its
magnitude, for, says he, among the Ancients all great and strong things were
called (...), and as it is called Taurus, and many other names by humane
Writers: so the Scripture calls it Ararath, if we shall believe Arias
Montanus and Becanus.
Taurus, which coming from the Eastern shore, divides all Asia; on the right
hand where it first rises from the Indian Sea, it bears Northwards: on the
left hand, it is Southern and bending toward the West, until the Seas meet
with it: as here the Phaenician, and the Ponticke. There the Caspian and
Hyrcanian Seas, together with the Meoticke Lake; as if Nature on purpose had
opposed it: But though this Mountain be shut as it were between these
bounds, yet with many windings it runs forth even as far as the neighboring
Cliffs of the Rhiphaean Mountains, being famous wheresoever it goes; and
known by many new names. At first it is called Imaus, and by Emodus,
Paropanisius, Circius, Chambades, Pharphariades, Croates, Oreges, Oroandes,
Niphates, and Taurus: where it does as it were exceed it self Caucasus, where
it spreads its arms as if it would embrace the Sea, Sarpedon, Coracesius,
and Cragus, and again Taurus. But where it opens it self, it takes its
name from the Havens, which are sometimes called the Armenian, elsewhere the
Caspian, and Cilician. The breadth of it in most places is three thousand
furlongs, which is 5625. Italian Heylin says, that reckoning its several
bendings in and out, it is 6250. miles long, and 375. miles broad p. 519. The
public works.
miles: that is, from the Coast of Rhodes, even to the farthest bounds of China
and Tartaria. But of these things enough. I pass now to the public works,
which have been heretofore very stately and magnificent, and worthy to be
numbered among the seven Miracles of the World. Amongst them the first were the
walls of Babylon, which See Justin. Hist. lib. 1.
Semiramis built, or at least did repair being ruinate, with brickes joined
and laid in a pitchy kind of mortar, they were two hundred foot high and fifty
broad, so that Chariots might meet thereon; they had three hundred Towers, and
should have had more, but that in some parts the Marshes were instead of walls.
It is reported that for this so great a work three hundred thousand workmen
were employed. Herodotus reports, that the walls of Babylon were fifty
royal cubits thick, and two hundred high, and round about there were placed
in them a hundred brazen Gates. The second was the Temple of Diana of Ephesus,
which was built by all Asia in two hundred and twenty years, as Histories do
testify: And it was seated in a Moorish place, least it should be endangered
by Earthquakes; And least they should place the foundation of so great a
building upon unfirme ground, they strewed it over with coals trodden down,
and on it they laid fleeces of wool. The length of the Temple was 425. feet,
the breadth 220. The Pillars in it were an hundred and seven and twenty, all
made by several Kings, of which 36. were carved: Ctesiphon was the overseer of
the work. There was also a Monument which Artemesia Queen of Caria did erect
in memory of her deceased husband, which is to be counted among the wonders of
the World; it being 25. Cubits high, and compassed about with thirty Pillars:
it was six and thirty foot wide Northward and Southward. Lastly, there was
that magnificent Temple, which Solomon began to build in the fourth year of
his reign, not unfit to be reckoned with the seven wonders of the World.
First of all, Read 1. King. chap. 5. and 6.
thirty thousand men were set to cut trees, as Cedars and Cypress in Lebanon:
and there were fourscore thousand stone-cutters. The breadth of the Temple was
twenty Cubits, the length sixty, and the height an hundred and twenty. The
matter of the nethermost building was of white stone: the largeness of the
Porch was ten Cubits, there were twenty secret chambers, passing one into
another, and others placed under these. The beams were of Cedar, the roofes of
Cedar gilded over, and the walls in like manner: The Sanctuary of the Holy
place was distinguished from the body of the Temple with a wall, in which were
carved gates, with drawing Curtains interwoven with many flowers and winding
borders: besides two Cherubins of pure gold, the pavement under foot was beset
with studdes of gold: the gates were twenty Cubits in height, and twelve in
compass. There was a brazen vessel of so great a bigness, that it was fitly
called the Sea; round about which stood twelve Calves, three together, and
looking severally toward the four corners of the World. This vessel did hold
three thousand measures containing 72. Sextaries. There were also other
figures, which it would be too long to rehearse. There was a brazen Altar of
ten foot height, and double as much in length. Also one golden Table, and ten
thousand golden Pots and Dishes, etc. But let these things suffice which have
been spoken of this part of the Word: I come now to America the fourth part of
the World.

AMERICA.
America, whence so called.
WHen Christophorus Columbus had In the year 1492.
found out this fourth part of the World unknown to the Ancients; some call it
But improperly, for the true India is a part of Asia, and deriveth its name
from the River Indus, which this Country cannot.
India, others for the largeness of it Novus Orbis, or the new World: for it
is as great and big as all our World, that is, Europe, Afric, and Asia,
being joined together: as it may appear by viewing our general Table. It is
called also America from Americus Vesputius a Florentine, who next after
Columbus discovered the Eastern part of the Southern America: in which are
the Countries of Paria and Brasilia; but it is uncertain when America began
first to be inhabited: certain it is, that for many ages it lay unknown; map
of America AMERICA.
for that which some suppose concerning the Romans, is more easily said then
proved, and that fiction is accurately refuted by Gasparus Varrerius. Some
suppose that Venient annis secula seris, quibus oceanus vincula rerum laxet,
and ingens pateat tellus, nec sit terris ultima Thule.
Seneca by Poetical inspiration did sing some raptures concerning it in his
Medea: but it is madness to suppose that these parts in that age were known
either to him or any other. Christophorus Columbus of Borne at Nervs in the
Country of Genoa.
Genoa, after it had been many ages unknown unto us, did first find it out
being employed by the King of Castile, after he had learnt it out, (as some
believe that would detract from the glory of so famous an enterprise) from a
certain Spanish Mariner, who had long endured foul weather on the Atlanticke
Sea; it was performed in the year 1492. After him Americus Vesputius did
attempt the same for the King of Portugal, and brought back the reward of his
enterprise, because (as we said) the whole Continent is called from his name
America. The Situation.
The whole Country from the North to the South, is stretched out in the form
of two great Peninsulaes, which are joined together by a slender Isthmus: the
one of them is called Northern America, the other, Southern America. The
Longitude thereof is extended between the Meridionall degree 190, and the
Meridionall degree 67. The term of its Latitude toward the South, is the
Straits of Magellane, that is, under the degree 52. and toward the North, it
is not known higher then 67. It has therefore on the East the Atlanticke Sea,
which they commonly call Del Nort, on the South, the Southern Land of
Magellane, disjoined from it by a narrow Sea flowing between: on the West,
Mare Pacificum, or the Peaceable Sea, called Mare Del Zur; and on the North it
is doubtful whether there be Land or Sea. The whole compass in sailing round
about it, is about 32000 miles, as the most approved think. For it has been
sailed round about, except that Country which lies Northward, whose coasts are
not yet discovered. The whole Country is changeable and full of variety; at
first it wanted both Corn and Wine: but instead thereof it brings forth Read
Heylin. page 770.
MatZ, a kind of pulse, for so they call it; as they call Wine Chichia, boats
Canoas, their Princes Cacicos. They do not plough the ground to reap, but
having dug ^renches of a small depth, they put three or four granes in one
of them, and so cover them with earth. The several stalks do bear three or
four ears, and every one of the ears do bear three or four hundred
grains and more. The stalk of Mayz does exceed the height of a man, and in
some Countries it is gathered twice in a year. They have also another kind of
bread, beside that which they make of Maiz, which they call Or Cassader.
Cazabi. This is made of Iucca, which is a root of the bigness of a Turnep,
which sends forth no seed, but certain knottie, hard stalks, clothed with
green leaves like Hemp. Those stalks when they are ripe, they cut into
pieces of two hands length, which they bury in heaps under the earth; and as
often as they would make that kind of bread, they dig up of them as much as
they think good, because they will soon be corrupted and grow naught.
Moreover, there are two other kinds of roots, the one they call the Or
Potatoes.
Battata, the other the Haia, almost alike in shape, but that the Haiae are
less and more savory: they eat the fruit of them within six Months after
they are planted, which though they have a kind of sweet taste, yet such as
will soon cloy one; beside, they have but little juice, and do procure wind
in the stomach. Those Countries have also a great number of trees, which do
bring forth wild Grapes. Their Grapes are like Sloes which grow upon thorns
and bushes, and are covered with black leaves: but because they are more woody
then juycie, therefore the inhabitants do not make wine of them. There are in
this Country Trees bearing Olives, but such as are of an unpleasant smell, and
of a worse taste: and diverse other kinds of fruits in great abundance, as
those which they call Hovi, Platani, Pineae, Guiavae, Mamei, and Guanavanae; it
brings forth Sugar, Cotton-wooll, Hemp, and other things as with us, beside
diverse sorts of strange Trees and Herbs. It has sweet Spices, Pearls and
precious stones; it abounds with incredible plenty of Gold and Silver, and
with other Mettalls, and Mineralls. But it had not when it was discovered,
either Oxen, Horses, Mules, Asses, Sheep, Goats, or Dogs. Wherefore it is no
wonder if the inhabitants were stricken with amazement at the first sight of a
Horse. Mice were first brought thither by a Ship of Antwerpe, which sailed very
far through the Straight of Magellane. Since which time either by the
fruitfulness of the Country, or of the Creatures themselves; they are
multiplied and increased in so exceeding a manner, that they spoil the fruits
of their harvest by knawing the herbs and trees. It does bring to us diverse
living Creatures, partly known to us, and partly unknown. Among other things
there is found a prodigious Beast, which has on her belly another belly placed
in the likeness of a purse: and as often as she changes her den, she hides
and carries her young ones in that bag. This Creature has the body and
snowte of a Fox, the feet and hands of a Monkey, and the ears of a Batte.
There is also another kind of Creature (which the inhabitants do call
Cascuij) like a black Hog, hairy, hard skinned, having little eyes, broad
ears, cloven hoofes, armed with a short trunk or snowte like an Elephant; and
having so terrible a cry or braying, that he makes men deaf: but his flesh is
sweet to eat. Here is found a great company of wild Boares, and fierce
Tigers; and Lions also, but those very fearful, and such as will run away
at the fight of a man. Here are also Peacocks, Phesants, Partridges, and diverse
other kinds of Birds, but far differing from ours: But of these we will
speak more largely in our particular descriptions. All America is divided (as
we said before) into two great Peninsulaes, whereof the one, which lies on
this side of the Aequinoctiall, is called the Northern America; the other the
Southern, because the greatest part of it is stretched out beyond the
Aequinoctiall: although some Countries of it are near unto the Aequinoctill.
The Northern America is divided into many Regions, as namely, Quivira, Nova
Hispania, Nicaragua, Iucatan, Florida, Apalchen, Norumbega, Nova Francia, Terra
Laboratoris, and Estotilandia. There are many parts of the Southern America,
but these are the chiefest which have already been gotten and taken from the
Savages: as Castella aurea, Plopaiana, Peruvia, Chile, and Brasilia: It does
glory especially in two Cities, Cusco and Mexico. Cusco is the Metropolis or
chief City of Southern America, which, both for bigness, strength and
magnificence, for the invincible fortification of the Castle, and the great
company of nobility; for the order and placing of the houses, and for
pleasantness of situation, may worthily compare with the fairest Cities of
France or Spain. No common people are admitted into it, but it is the seat of
Noble men and great Princes, who in that Country do live in great numbers,
partly within the w^^^ of the City, and partly in Villages near the City.
Here are four especial Palaces of Noble men, who do govern the
Commonwealth, which are stately and with great cost built with square carved
Marble stone. And all the streets being straight, in many places make the form
of a Cross, and through every one a pleasant River runs in a channel
walled on each side with stone. The form of the City is four square, lying
sweetly on the side of a hill: on the steep ascent of a Mountain, a
wonderful fair Tower does adorn the City, whose beauty or largeness if you
consider, those which have viewed many Countries, have seen few in all Europe
like unto it. Mexico or Temistitan is a rich and famous City in Nova Hispania,
whereof we will treat hereafter in the description of Nova Hispania: now we
proceed to other things. This part of the World is watered with many famous
Rivers, The Lakes and Rivers.
the most whereof do bring down gold; and it is full of Lakes and Springs. In
the Lakes and Rivers there are great plenty of fish: among which there is one
kind of them of chief note, which by the inhabitants of Hispaniola are called
Manati. This Fish is somewhat like a Trout; he is five and twenty foot long,
and twelve foot thick, in his head and tail he resembles an Ox; he has
small eyes, a hard and hairy skin, of a light blew color, and two feet like
an Elephant. The femalls of this kind of fish do bring forth their young
ones, as Cowes do, and do let them suck at their two dugges. The Mountains.
Here are also very many Mountains, among which, as Benso witnesses, is a
fire-vomiting Mountain, which out of its hollow mouth does send forth such
great flakes of fire, that the blazing of it in the night does cast forth a
light which may be seen above an hundred miles. Some have supposed that the
gold melting within, does afford continual matter to the fire. For a certain
Dominican Friar, when he would make trial thereof, caused a vessel of gold to
be made with an iron chain: and afterward going to the Mountain with four
other Spaniards, he let down the vessel with the chain into the hole of the
hill; and there by the heat of the fire the vessel with part of the chain
was melted: and having tried it again with a bigger chain, it happened to melt
again in the same manner. Here the Cities generally are stately built, the
ways paved, and the houses very fair and beautiful. It is reported that here
was a Kings garden, wherein herbs and trees, with their body, boughs, and
fruits did stand of solid gold, and as big as those which grow in Orchards.
And it is reported that here was a Kings Conclave, in which there were all
kinds of living Creatures, made of precious stones, partly painted, and partly
inlaid, and engraven. That which is reported concerning the two ways in this
Country is worthy of memory, the one whereof lies through the rough
Mountains, the other stretches through the plain fields, from Quito a City
of Peru, to the City Cusco, for the space of five hundred miles. The beauty of
this work is increased, by many wonderful heaps of stones, which were not
brought thither by the strength of Horses, or Oxen, (both which the inhabitants
wanted) but by the hands of men. The field way is defended on both sides with
walls, and it is five and twenty foot broad, within which little streams do
run, having their banks planted with shrubby trees, which they call Molli.
The other being hewed out of stones and rocks, passes through the middle of
the Mountains, having the same breadth: Moreover the way in the uneven and
lower part of the Valleys, is fortified with fences, as the nature of the
Country requires. These ways King Gninacava (who lived not long since) caused
to to be cleansed, and the ruinous walls to be repaired and adorned, otherwise
the work is more ancient, and there were placed all along by the way side
Innes both fair, and pleasant, (they call them Tambi) in which all the Kings
train were received. And let this suffice concerning the four parts of the
World in general: now our method does require that we should describe
particularly the parts of Europe, which was set before in the first place.

THE NORHTH-POLE: AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRIES SITVATE ROUND ABOUT IT.
HAving made (courteous Reader) a General Description of the whole Globe, and
the four parts thereof methodically, and according to the order of nature; I
purpose, in Imitation of Ptolomie the Prince of Cosmographers, to begin the
Geographie of particular Countries from the Pole it self and the Countries
lying round about it, that so descending from the higher to the lower parts,
and proceeding from the left hand to the right hand, I may by degrees join the
North with the South, and the West with the East, which I pray God may be
profitable to the Commonwealth. The Pole is the extremity, or end of the
Axis, which is a Line drawn through the Center of the Globe, the Latins call
it vertex. There are two Poles, the Northern, and the Southern. The Northern
is that which is always beheld toward the North, and therefore also it is
called the Northern and So called for its nearness to a constellation in the
North Hemisphere called (...) which signifies a Bear.
Articke Pole. The Southern, is that which appears to those only which
dwell toward the South, and therefore it is called the Meridionall, Southern,
and So called because it is opposite to the Articke Pole. Greenland, whence so
called.
Antarticke Pole. And thus much in this place shall suffice concerning the
Poles. I come to the Countries situate round about the Articke Pole: which are
Groenlandia or Greeneland, Frizlandia, or Freesland, Nova Zembla with some
others, of which we will entreat briefly as far as they are known. The
London Merchants call this Island K. James his new Land.

The quality of the Air and Soil.


Groenlandia, or Greeneland is so called from the greenness thereof, and is an
Island for the most part yet unknown, it is situate between the Northern
Circle and the Pole, the farthest paralels thereof toward the South are the
Degrees of 65, and toward the North the Degrees of 78. In this Island, if we
believe Nicolas Zenetus (who in the year 1480. endured much hard weather in
the bordering Sea) there is continual winter for nine Months, all which time
it does never rain there, neither does the snow, which falls at the
beginning thereof, melt until the end, yet is not this harmefull to the
grass, for here is a great increase both of grass and fodder. Therefore here
is great store of milke-beasts in regard of the great plenty thereof, so that
they make store of Butter and Cheese, which they sell to those they traffic
withal. There are only two inhabited places known unto us in Groenland, Alba
and the Monastery of Saint Thomas, of which we will speak by and by. The
Slow Sea, which is also called the frozen Icie Sea, does touch upon Greeneland.
There is in Greeneland a Monastery of the Preaching Order: and not far from
it a fire-vomiting Mountain like Aetna, at the foot whereof there is a
fountain of running waters, by whose great heat map of the North Pole THE
NORTH POLE.
they do not only make hot all the rooms of the Monastery like a hot-house,
but also they bake their bread and dress their meat, without the help of
fire. The whole fabric of the Monastery does consist of brittle sandy
stones, which the Mountain does cast forth in the midst of the flames. This
fountain does warm the neighbor gardens so that they continually flourish
with diverse kinds of flowers and herbs. And the Sea near unto it, by the
virtue of these waters, is never frozen, but lies continually open both for the
fish and the use of man: which makes so great a concurse of fish to resort
hither from colder places, that not only these Monks, Freezland.
but also the Inhabitants round about do live plentifully. Frislandia or
Freezland was an Island altogether unknown to the Ancients: being greater
than Heyling says almost as big as Ireland.
Ireland. The Climate is very intemperate. The Inhabitants have no fruits, but
live for the most part upon fish. The chief Town thereof has the same name
with the Island, and it belongs to the King of And therefore now subject to
the King of Denmark.
Norway. The Inhabitants for the most part live by fishing. For in the Haven
thereof so great a plenty of all kind of fish is taken that many ships are
loaded with them, and so carried to the Islands lying near it, as Zieglerus
writes. The same man writes that the Sea next to the Island on the West being
full of rocks and sands, is called the Icarean Sea, and the Island in it is
called by the Inhabitants Icaria. Nova Zembla.
This Island in our time begins to be known again, and that by the
Discovery of the English. Nova Zembla is an Island situated under the 76
Degree. Here the air is very sharp, and the cold most vehement and
intolerable. It is a wild, woodie, and rugged Country, where neither leaves nor
grass grow, nor any living creatures, but those which live by flesh as Foxes,
and Bears, whereof there is great store not only in this Island, but in most
of the Northern Countries. There are Sea Monsters here whose bodies does
exceed the bigness of an Ox, and are commonly called Walruschen: they are
headed like a Lion, their skin hairy, they having four feet, and two teeth
sticking forth of the upper part of their mouth being smooth, hard, and white,
and are worth as much as Elephants teeth. The Bays here are called Weggates
Bay, Forbishers Bay, and Davises Bay; Weigates Bay is streitched out toward
the East even to the place called Crucis Angulus, toward the Aerctapelietes to
the place called Dissidii Angulus, a a little enclining to the East. On the
Southern side of the Continent of Weggats Bay, William Barendson found some
wild men called Samiutae. The shape of their clothes which they use, is like
that which our Painters do bestow on woodmen, or Satyrs, but yet they are not
wild men, but endued with a good understanding. They are clothed from head to
foot with the skins of beasts called Rangiferi: for the most part are of
Pigmies are here supposed to inhabit.
low stature, broad faced, small eyed, short and splay-footed, and very nimble
both to run and leap. They have coaches unto which they put one or two of
these Rangiferi, which will draw it with one or two men in it with more speed
then any of our Horses can do. Forbishers Bay was so called from Martine
Forbisher an English man, who in the year 1577. seeking a passage to Cathaia
by the North, arrived at this Bay, in which he found both Islands and many
men, concerning which we will add some things. The men thereof being
strangers to all civilitie, do eat and feed upon the raw flesh of beasts and
fishes. They are clothed with the skins of wild beasts taken in hunting, and
they eat raw herbs like beasts. Their Tents are covered with Whales skins;
the cold being continually very sharp in these parts. They use Dogs which
are like unto our Wolves, and having yoked them together, they do make them
draw things over the ice. Their weapons are Bows and Arrows, and slings.
There is no wood there, but much Dear. The men do not plough the ground, as
being content with that it brings forth of its own accord: they live by
hunting: their drink is the warm blood of wild beasts, or else ice water:
there are no Rivers nor Springs, because the violence of the cold does so shut
up the Earth, that springs of water cannot break forth. The men are very
laborious, strong, hunters, and cunning fowlers: they use a certain kind of
boat made of leather, wherein one man can but sit, who makes use but of one
Oar, his right hand holding his bow wherewith he shoots at the birds. The
like has been seen in England. Davises Bay also was so called from John
Davis an Englishman, who in the year 1585. and the two following years did
search along the Coasts of America, or rather the Southern Coasts of Greenland
from the 53. Degree to the 75. to find out a passage that way unto China.
Concerning the four Euripideas in the table those things which you see are
taken out of the Register book of James Cnoxen Buscoducensis, who does report
that a certain English Minorite Friar of Oxford, being a Mathematician, did
describe the Countries lying near unto the Pole, and measured them with his
Astrolabe in this following shape, as Mercator has gathered them out of James
Cnoxens Book. He says that these four Seas are carried with such violence
to the Innermost Gulf, that ships being once entered can never be driven back
again with any wind, and that there is never so great a wind, as that it can
drive about a windmill. But these things are as true as Lucians fables, seeing
they who have viewed these places in which those seas are said to be, do find
no such Euripi, or swift flowing Seas at all, namely the Hollanders who have
discovered the Sea even to the 81. Degree of Latitude. But concerning the
habitation of the Northern people, let us hear Julius Scaliger in his 37.
Exercitation, where he thus speaking concerning a voyage from the Northern Sea
toward China. There are (says he) diverse arguments brought by diverse men on
both sides, and it is diversely judged of, whether it be possible to sail by
that Sea. But these are ours. They would have us to sail from the mouth of the
River Duvina, all along that Country which encompasses all Scythia even to the
East corner: in which winding course we are to change the Northern wind for
the Western. But those which speak thus, it is certain they do not know the
nature of this Sea, nor of the Winds and Coast: For the West and East winds
are so rare in this Sea that they are almost scarce known. But so many North
winds are there here that it seems Nature has committed the government of
these parts unto them alone. There are many foards blind and muddie. In
winter, which continues ten months, the superficies or upper part of the Sea,
is as hard as any pavement. In Summer there are continual mists, which in the
afternoon as fast as one is expelled another rises. Besides, the Ice is very
dangerous, the great pieces whereof floting up and down, are like moving
Islands running one amongst another. It is certain that by the late
Navigations of the Hollanders in the year 1594. and in the two following
years, it was hoped, that we might sail out of the Northern Sea to the
Eastern parts of the World. But very difficultly, in regard of the Ice, and
long winter nights. William Barentson did deny that it was possible to sail
by the Bay of Nassovia to China, not only for the Ice, but also because he
found by diverse observations, that it was not a Sea but a Bay, and especially
because he found there was no Tide nor Ebb: and yet he was in great hope
that a way might be found out by the most Northern part of Nova Zembla. But
seeing there are every day new voyages made to discover the passage that way to
China, experience will teach them at last whether it can be done or not. It is
manifest that our ships have sailed even to the 81. Degree of Northern
Latitude, and yet found the Sea open: but yet afterward at the 76. Degree they
have been hindered with great pieces of ice, and the night coming on, so that
they could proceed no further. The Sun left them the 4. of November in the
year 1596, and was seen again the 24. of January in the following year, all
which time these valiant Argonautes, for so I may call them, hid themselves in
a little shed which they built up in Nova Zembla, until the 14. of June. For
though the voyage of the Jason and his Companions, who sailed to Celchos to
fetch the golden fleece, of whom read Valerius Flaceus Lib. 1.
Argonautes is made so famous by posterity, yet if it be compared with this it
will seem but a toy; for who has been, for the space of 13. Months
separated from the society of men, before the Hollanders, who wanting all
necessaries, and enduring extremity of cold, did even under the 76. Degree of
Latitude, build themselves houses to receive them, and defend them from the
violence of the weather, in which they lay buried and covered over with deep
snow almost ten whole months? I conceal that which they suffered in
returning, being compelled to leave their ships and betake themselves to their
boat. I omit to speak of the cruel, fierce, and great Bears, and
Sea Monsters, with which they oftentimes were enforced to fight. All which
troubles, labors, and difficulties they most valiantly by the protection and
favor of the Divine power did overcome.

ISELAND.
ISELAND is the greatest of all those Islands in the Western Ocean, which are
subject to the Kings of Norwey; it takes this name from the cold, The name by
whom, and why given.
wherewith it is partly frozen. It is also called Suelandia, from the Snow:
Also Gardartsholme, that is, the Island of Gardart. The most do suppose this to
be that Thule mentioned by the Ancients, which also Ptolemie does call Thule;
the middle whereof he places in the 30. Degree of Latitude, and 63. of
Longitude. Solinus places it five days and nights sail from the Orcades. An
Island the most famous of all other with Poets, when by this, as being the
farthest part of the World, they would intimate any thing far distant. Whence
Virgil says, Tibi serviat ultima Thule, may the farthest Thule serve thee. But
Sinesius doubts whether there were ever any Thule: and Giraldus writes, that
it was never seen, and the more Learned are doubtful in their opinions. See
Heylin. p. 8.
The most do affirm (as we said) that Iseland was heretofore called Thule:
yet Saxo the Grammarian, Crantzius, Milius, Ionius, and Peucerus are of a
contrary opinion unto them. But of this enough: I return again to Iseland. It
is situated not under the Which is a great circle rounding the Earth from Pole
to Pole, and passes through the Islands called Azores: See marg. page 10.
first Meridian, The Situation.
as one has noted, but in the eigth Degree from thence. The length of it is an
hundred German miles, as the common Writers have it, and Jonas adds to these
four and forty. The Latitude or breadth is six and fifty German miles. It
has an ungentle air, and for the most part it is unhabited, especially
toward the North, by reason of the vehement Western winds, which will not
suffer the shrubs (as Olaus writes) to rise up. The Land is unfit for tillage,
neither does it bear any grain; but all that have written of this Isle do
report, that it has such abundance of grass, that unless the Cattle were
sometime driven from the pasture, The quality of the Soil and Air.
they would be in danger to die, and be choked with their own fatness. Jonas
himself confesses, that they have no laboring beasts, but Horses and Oxen:
and here all the Oxen and Kine have no horns, nor their Sheep likewise. They
have little white Dogs, The variety of living Creatures.
which they very much esteem. They have abundance of white Faulcones, and
white Crows, which prey upon the young Lambs and Hogs. Also there are white
Bears and Hares. Also (as Islandus witnesses) there are Eagles with white
trains: which Pliny (as he says) called Pygargos. Velleius reports, that
this Island bears no tree but the Birch and Juniper trees: so that there is
great scarcity of wood through the whole Island, unless by chance (which
sometimes happens) some great trees being rooted up by the violence of the
wind, are brought out of the Northern parts, and like wracks cast upon these
moors, which the Inhabitants use in building houses and ships. It has been
subject to the King of Norwey, (as Jonas reports) from the year 1260. in
which they first did homage to him: In regard whereof, the King of Denmark and
Norwey does yearly send thither a Governor, who keeps his residence in the
Castle called Bestede, whom they now obey, as heretofore they did their
Bishops, by whom they were converted to the Christian Faith, under the reign
of Edelbert. In the time of Harald the Faire-haired, the first Monarch of
Norwey, some think it began to be inhabited: for when he had expelled a great
company of Noble men out of Norwey, they (forsaking their own Country) came
with their whole Families and dwelt here. It is likely, that these things
happened a thousand years after Christ; but as Islandus Jonas writes about
the year 874, who declares the succession and names of these Bishops.
Crantzius names Islephus to be the first Bishop. But it seems, as we may
collect out of the Eclogues of Nicolas Zenius, that it was under the command of
the Norwegians two hundred years before, where we read, that Zichmus King of
Frisland did attempt to get this Island by force of Arms, but was repulsed by
the King of Norwey's Garrison Soldiers, placed in this Island. The whole
Island is divided into four parts. The Eastern part they call
Austlendingafiordung, the Western Westlendingafiordung, the Northern
Nortendingafiordung, the Southern Suydlendingafiordung. They have no Cities,
The Fountains.
but Mountains in stead thereof. Here is a Fountain, the exhalations whereof
will change any thing into stone, and yet the shape thereof shall still
remain. And there is a Fountain of pestilent water, which will poison any one
that tastes of it. There is water that tastes like beer. The Northern Ocean,
in which this Island is situate, does afford such great plenty of fish, The Sea.
and is so commodious to the Commonwealth of Iseland, that all the Inhabitants
do live and maintain their Families by it. I should want time to reckon up
the several kinds of Fish that are in the Sea, yet it will not be amiss, to
remember some of the rarest. Among which there is a kind of Fish called Nahual,
whereof if any one eat, he dies presently; and he has a tooth in the
innermost part of his head, which stands forth 7 cubits in length, which some
have sold for an Unicorns horn, and it is believed to have a great virtue
against poison. This Monster is forty yards long. The Royder is an hundred and
thirty Else long, and has no teeth; his flesh is most sweet and pleasant in
eating, and his fat does heal many diseases. There is the British Whale,
which is thirty Else long, having no teeth, but a tongue seven Else in
length. And there is a kind of a great Whale, which is seldom seen, being
rather like an Island it self than a Fish. In regard of the hugeness of his
body, he cannot follow the lesser fishes, yet he takes them by cunning and
craftiness. There is also an other Fish called Stantus Valur, all grisly, and
something like a Thornback, but much greater; when he appears he seems like
an Island, and overturneth Ships with his Fins. There are also Sea-Oxen, called
Seenaut, of a grisly color, and diverse other fishes. I come now to the
Mountains. The Mountains.
In Iseland (says Georgius Agricola) there are three very high Mountains,
whose tops are always white with continual Snow, the bottomes do burn with
continual Fire. The first is called Hecla, or Hecklfort; the second, the
Mountain of the Cross; and the third Helga, that is, the holy Mountain. Not
far from Hecla there are Mines of Brimstone, which is the only commodity of
traffic, that belongs to the Inhabitants of Iseland. For Merchants do
freight and load their ships with it. The Mountain when it rages, does send
forth a map of Iceland ISELAND.
noise like thunder, casts forth great stones, vomiteth out Brimstone, and
fills all the ground with ashes round about it, so that the Country cannot be
inhabited for two entire miles round about it. They which draw near to this
Mountain to consider and view more curiously the causes why it burns, are
sometime swallowed up alive by some hidden breach in the Mountain, for there
are many, and those covered so with ashes, that no man can beware of them:
therefore they call this place The Papists think, that here is their feined
Purgatory.
Carcer sordidarum animarum, the prisonhouse of unclean souls. Besides it
happens, that the ye being loosed, does in great pieces for 8 months
together beat against the shore, and makes such an horrible sound, that the
Inhabitants say, it is the crying and howling of those souls. There is an
other Mountain of the same nature called Helga: this Mountain in the year
1581, (as Jonas witnesses) did cast forth fire and stones with such a
thundering noise, that four score miles from thence, they thought some great
pieces of Ordnance had been shot off. In one part hereof, strange Spirits are
seen in the liknesse of men, so that those who do not know them to be dead
before, would think they were alive: nor do they find their error before
the ghosts do vanish away. But these things Jonas thinks are fabulous, or
else the delusions of the Devil. Crantzius and Olaus do write, that the
Islanders, for the most part, do dwell in Caves, which they dig in the sides
of the Mountains, especially in the Winter time. But Jonas, on the contrary,
says, that there are many Temples and houses built of wood very fair and
costly. The Island has two Cathedral Bishoprics, as Holar, or Hallen, under
which are the Monasteries Pingora, Remested, Modur, Munkeniere; and Scalholt,
under which are those Monasteries Videy, Pyrnebar, Kirckebar, and Shieda. Yet
we understand by the writings of Velleius the Author of this Table, that
there are nine Monasteries in it, and three hundred and nine and twenty
Churches. The Bishops are sent thither out of the Universitie of Haffnia, the
only University in Denmark; one of them governs the Northern part of the
Island, the other the Southern. And each of them has a free School joined to
his house, in which he is bound to be at the cost of the bringing up and
teaching of four and twenty Children. The manners of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants live, eat, and lodge in the same houses with their Cattle.
They live in a holy simplicity, seeking nothing more than what Nature grants
them; for the Mountains are their Towns, and the Fountains their delight. A
happy Nation, not envied by reason of their poverty, and so much the happier
because it has received the Christian Religion. Yet the English and Danish
Merchants do ^ouble their quiet, not suffering them to be content with their
own; for they frequenting this Island, to bring away fish from thence, have
brought among them their vices together with their wares. The memorable acts of
their Ancestors, they do celebrate in Verse, and do keep them from oblivion
by engraving them on Rocks. Their food.
They live, for the most part, by Fish, which being dried and beaten, and so
made into a kind of meat, they use at their Table instead of bread. But the
wealthier do eat bread twice baked. Heretofore they drank water, and the
richer milk, but now they have learned to mingle corn with it, which is
brought hither from other places, and they scorn to drink water, since
strangers have begun to traffic with them. For those of Lubeck, Hamburrough,
and Rostoch coming every year with their ships to this Island, do bring
thither corn, bread, Their Traffic or trade.
beer, wine, honey, English clothes, linen cloth, iron, steel, gold,
silver, women's coyfs, and wood for building houses and ships: and they do
expect for these, Iselandish cloth (commonly called Watman) great store of
Brimstone, dried fish, butter, tallow, hides, skins of wild beasts, foxes,
white faulcons, horses, and the like. Here is so great plenty of fish, that
they lay them in great heaps out of doors, and so sell them, the heaps being
higher than the tops of their houses. There is also so great store of salt
butter, that they put it up in sweet chests of forty foot long, and five foot
deep, besides that which they barrel up. And here we will add Erasmus
Michael's Verses concerning Iseland, as he has them in his third Book Of Sea
matters.

Vltima Parrhasias Islandia spectat in Arctos, etc.
The farthest part of Iseland looks North,
And Westward some Degrees it is straight forth,
Which has not only a rich pleasant soil
While as it does the yellow Brimstone boil
Within its cavernes blind, which at the last
All mingled with sand, it forth does cast:
Or when the Meddowes bring forth fodder store,
And all the vales with grass are clothed over;
But when upon the shore it fish does heap,
Whose number cannot be told, it is so great:
Or be distinguished every several sort,
Which it by shipping does abroad transport.
For though here plenty of all things is found,
Yet most of all in fish it does abound.
It Is rich, the Inhabitants are stout of mind,
And where it lies against the Southern wind
Hecla still burns with continual flame,
Which it at open holes sends forth again.
It casts forth ashes with a fearful sound,
While pitchie flames do to the Stars rebound.
THE ISLES OF BRITAIN. ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND: WITH THE ISLANDS LYING
ROVND ABOUT THEM.
BRITAIN contains all those Islands which lying between Spain and
Germany, are stretched forth in a great quantity of Land toward France.
Lhuyddus says that not long ago it was called Prydanium; The name by whom,
and why given.
Sr Thomas Eliott would have it called Prytania, being incited thereunto
through the love of contention rather then truth, against the authority of
Aristotle, Lucretius, Julius Caesar, and other ancient Writers. But because
heretofore all the Britains did paint themselves with woade, which gave them
a bluish color, that so their faces might be more terrible against their
enemies in war; and in regard that in their ancient Language they did call any
thing that was painted and colored, Brit: some do rightly suppose that the
Graecians, understanding that the inhabitants were called Brith and Briton, did
add to Brith Tania, which signifies a Country, and therefore If this be true,
then did it not receive its denomination from Brutus. See Heylin page 455.

The temper of the Air.

The fertility of the Soil.

The variety of living Creatures.


Britain was called the Country of Britains, that is, the Country of
painted and colored men; like as Mauritania is called so of the Moors,
Lusitania from Lusus, and Aquitania the Region of Waters. Britain is endowed
by Nature with all gifts both of Air and Soil, in which neither the cold of
winter is too violent, (as the Orator has it, speaking to Constantine) nor
the heat of Summer, and it is so fruitful in bearing corn, that it is
sufficiently stored with Bread and Drink: Here the woods are without wild
beasts, and the earth without harmefull Serpents. On the contrary, innumerable
flocks and herds of tame cattle, full of milk, and laden with their
fleece; yea, whatsoever is necessary to life is here: the days are very long,
so that the nights are not without some light, and the Sun which seems in
other Countries to go down and set, does seem here only to pass by. The I Will
of Albion.
Among all the Isles of Britain, two do exceed the rest in greatness: Albion,
(under which are contained England, and Scotland,) and Ireland. The greatest of
these is Albion, now alone called Britain, which was a name formerly common
to them all: and this name is rather deduced out of Books, than used in common
speech, only the Scots do yet call themselves Albinich, and their Country
Albin. Concerning the name of Albion, the Grecians first gave it to this I Will
for distinction sake; seeing all the neighbor Islands were called the Isles of
Britain: so that it did first arise from the vain and fabulous lightness of
the Grecians in faigning names. For seeing they called Italy, from Hesperus the
son of Atlas, Hesperia; France, from the son of Poliphemus, Gallatia, etc.
It is not unlikely that they fabulously named this Island Albion, from Albion
the son of Neptune, which Perottus and Lilius Giraldus map of the isles of
Britain THE ISLES OF BRITAIN.
do confirm. Others would derive it from Verstegan affirms it was so
called ab albis rupibus: the white rocks toward France. The figure.
(...), which, as Festus witnesses, in Greek signifies white; whence also the
Alps are so called. The figure of it is Triangular, or three cornerd, and it
runs forth into three several Angles. The first Promontorie, toward the
West, the Englishmen do call the Cape of Cornwall. The second in Kent, which
looks toward the East, the English call it North-forland. The third is
Orcas, or Tarvisium, which lies far North, the Scots call it Dungisbehead:
Livius, and Fabius Rusticus, have likened it to a Cheesell. On the West side,
whereon Ireland lies, the Which the English and French call the channel of S.
George.
Vergivian Sea brea^eth in, on the North it is beaten with the wide and great
Northern Ocean; on the East, where it lies against Germany, with the German^
Sea; on the South, where it butteth upon France, it is beaten with the British
Sea. Diodorus in his sixth book, writes that the compass of it is two and
forty thousand furlongs. Martian says, that Britain is eight hundred miles
long, and three hundred broad, and in compass 6000. miles. The learned and
accurate Writer Camden, does thus account it from the Promontorie Tarvisium to
Belerium, following the winding of the shore, is eight hundred and twelve
miles: from thence to Kent, 320. miles. Lastly, from Kent to Tarvisium seven
hundred and four miles: the whole sum is 1836. miles. This Island formerly
was divided into two parts, as Ptolomie witnesses in his second Book: where
he parts the whole Island into Great Britain and Little Britain. The Great
he calls the This division was made by Severus the Emperor, says Camden. p.
98.
Hither part toward the South; the Lesser the Father toward the North. But the
Romans neglecting the farther part, because, as Appian says, it could not be
commodious to them, the hither part being reduced into a Province, they at
first divided into the The Romans, says Camden, called those Provinces of any
Country they conquered which were next the^, Primas and s^periore, and the more
remote, secundas and inferiores. p 99.
Lower and Higher, as it is gathered out of Dion. For the hither part of
England with Wales, he calls the Higher, the farther and Northern he calls
the Lower. Afterward they divided it into three parts, as appears by Sextus
Rufus, into Maxima Casariensis, Brittania Prima, and Brittania Secunda.
Afterward, when the form of the Commonwealth was daily changed, they divided
Britain in What Countries these five parts contained, and why they were so
denominated. See in Camden page 98. and 99.
five parts, the First, Second, Maxima Caesariensis, Valentia, and Flavia
Casariensis: And these were divisions of Britain when it was under the
Romans. Some have written that the whole Island was heretofore divided into
three parts, Leogria, Cambria, and Albania, but Camden believes that this was
a later division, which seems to arise from those three People, the
Englishmen, Welsh, and Scots, who last of all divided this Island among
themselves. Afterward, the Island was divided into two Kingdoms, namely
England, and Scotland: but at last, under the happy reign of James the sixth
King of Scotland, these two Kingdoms were They were first united in the year
of grace 1603. The Sea.
united, and the whole Island called Great Britain. Britain, as we said
before, is every where environed with the great and wide Ocean, which S. Basil.
says is a great Sea, and very terrible for those that sail on it. Now it
flows far into the Land, and then it returns back again and leaves the
Sands naked: it feels the efficacy of the increasing Moon very powerfully,
and does flow in with so great a force, that it does not only drive back
Rivers, but it sometimes sweepes off cattle from the Land, casts forth the
fishes on the shore, and at the ebb leaves them there. In a word, so great a
matter it was held to sail upon this Sea, that Julius Firmicus in his Book
concerning the errors of profane Religions, cries out thus to Constantine
the Emperor. In Winter (which was never heretofore done, nor shall be done)
you have passed over the swelling raging waters of the British Ocean, the
waves of a Sea almost unknown to us have trembled under our Oars: and the
Britains have been afraid at the unlookt-for presence of the Emperor. What
would you more? The Elements themselves were conquered by your valor. It does
not belong unto us to speak here of the commodities which this Sea yields,
of the time when it cherishes the Earth, of the vapors with which it nourishes
the Air, and bedewes the fields, of the diverse kinds of Fish, as Salmons,
Playces, Crabfishes, The commodities.
Codfishes, Herrings, etc. of which it brings forth infinite numbers. Yet the Sea Camden page 640. and 595.
Pearls are not to be passed over in silence, which in a round shape do
swim in great shoales as it were following one Leader like Bees; so that
Iubas calls it the Sea of Bees: and also Marcellus makes mention of it.
Suetonius does report that Caesar did first attempt Britain in hope of
getting these Pearls: and so much concerning Albion or England, now let us
pass over to the rest. Among all of them, Ireland does far excel, of which
we will speak nothing here, intending to speak of it in particular Tables.
The Orcades do follow, The Orcades.
now called the Isles of Orkney, which are about Heylin says they are 32. page
511.
thirty in number, and do lie a little way distant one from another, which a
certain ancient record does so call, as if it were Argath; which is there
expounded as much as supra Getas, above the Getes: Camden would rather have it
above Cath, for it lies over against Cath a Country of Scotland, which in
regard of the Promontorie, they now call Cathnesse: whose Inhabitants Ptolomy,
though wrongfully, does call Carini instead of Cathini. In the time of Solinus
they were not inhabited, The fertility of the Soil.
being overgrowne with Reeds and Bullrushes, but now they are tilled and bring
forth Barley enough, though they want both wheat and trees: there is no Serpent
or poisonous Creature in them. They have great numbers of living Creatures in
them; as Hares, Cunnies, Cranes, and many Swans. There is good fishing in them,
of which the inhabitants make great profit. Julius Agricola first sailing in a
Ship round about Britain, did find out and conquer the Orcades at that
time unknown; and therefore it is unlikely that Claudius did first overcome
them, as Hierom affirms in his Chronicle. Afterward, when the Romans were
Commanders over Britain, they were the seats of the Picts; and after that
they came under the power of the Norwegians and Danes: whence the Inhabitants
do speak the Gothicke tongue. Last of all, Christiernus King of Denmark in
consideration of a sum of money, in the year 1474. did pass over all his
right unto the King of Scotland. The chief of these is Pomonia, famous in
regard it is the seat of a Bishop, which was called by Solinus for the
continual length of the day Pomona diutina: now it is called by the
Inhabitants Mainland, as if it were a Continent. It has abundance of Tin and
Lead, and is adorned with a Bishops See in the Town Kirkwale, and with two
Castles. Among these Ptolomie also reckons Ocetis, which Camden supposes
should now be called Hethy. And says the same Camden, I am not yet resolved
whether I should call Hey, which is among these Plinies Dumna. If it be not
so, I had rather think Fair I Will, which has only one Town called Dume, to
be that Dumna, than with Becanus to think that it is Wardhuys in Lappland.
John Major does also call one of these Zeland, being fifty miles in length.
Moreover, the Inhabitants of these Isles do make a very strong drink by
putting store of Barley in it, and are the greatest drinkers of all others; yet
Boethius witnesses that he never saw any of them drunk, or deprived of sense.
The next to these are the Islands called the Hebrides, The names of the Hebrides.
in number four and forty, which Beda calls Maevaniae; Ethicus, Betoricae
Insulae, Giraldus calls them the Incades and Leucades, the Scots the Western
Isles: Ptolomie with Pliny and Solinus calls them Stephanus calls them the
Hebudes, others Ebonia Insula.
Ebudae. Pliny writes that there are thirty of them, but Ptolomie reckons
only five. The first is Ricina, which Pliny calls Rinea, and Antoninus
Ridunas, but now it is called Racline, which is a little Island just against
Ireland. The next is Epedium, now called Ila, an I Will, (as Camden witnesses)
very This Island is 24. miles long, and 16. miles broad.
large, and having very fruitful plains: between this and Scotland lies
Iona, which Beda calls Hy and Hu, being plain ground, in which there is an
Episcopal See in the Town Sodore, whence all the Islands were called
Sodorenses: it is famous, because here lie buried many Kings of Scotland. Then
there is another which Ptolomie calls Maleos, now Mula, which Pliny
mentions when he says that Mella of all the rest is more then 25 miles over.
The Eastern Hebuda, now called Sky, is stretched along by the Scotch shore,
and the Western Hebuda lying more toward the West, is now called Jews, of
which Maccloyd is Governor, and in the ancient book of Mannia, it is called
Lodhuys, being mountainous, stony, little manured, but yet the greatest; from
which Eust is parted by a little Euripus or flowing Sea between them. The
rest, except Hyrrha, are of no note, as being rockie, unpassable, and having no
green things growing in them. The Islands of Man and Wight do follow, of which
see those things that are spoken in the seventh Table of England.

THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND.
THE Island of Ireland follows, which Orpheus, Aristotle, The new and ancient
names, by whom, and why given.
and Claudian do call Isacius calls this Kingdom Britannia O^cidentalis, or
Western Britain; and Isidorus and others call it Scotta, because the Scots
coming from Spain dwelt here; the Irish Bards call it Ba^no, whence Festus
Avienus calls it Insula sacra: See Camden page 643.
Ierna, Iuvenal and Mela Iuvernia, Diodorus Siculus Iris, Eustatius Vernia and
Bernia, the Inhabitants Erin, the Britains Yverdhon, and the English call it
Ireland. Diverse opinions (as in obscure matters) do arise concerning the
original of these names. Some would have it called Hibernia from Hiberus, a
Spanish Captain, who first possessed it, and peopled it: some say from the
River Iberus, because the Inhabitants thereof did first inhabit this Island:
some ab hiberno tempore, from the winter season, because it enclines toward
the West: the Author of the Eulogue, from Irnalphus, a Captain. It was called
without doubt Hibernia and Iuverna, from Ierna, which Orpheus and Aristotle
mention; but that Ierna, together with Iris, Yverdhon, and Ireland, did
proceed from the word Erin, used by the Inhabitants; therefore the Etymology
is to be drawn from the word Erin. Here page 642.
Camden affirms, that he knows not what to conjecture, unless, says he,
it be derived from Hiere an Irish word, which with them signifies the West,
whence Erin seems to be drawn, being as much to say as the Western
Country. This Island is stretched forth from the South Northward in an ovall
form, not twenty days sail, as Philemon in Ptolemie delivers, but only 400.
The Situation.
miles; and is scarce 200. miles broad. On the East it has Britain, from
which it is parted by the Irish Sea, which is one days sail: On the North,
where the Deucaledon Ocean, which Ptolemie calls the Northern, breaks in, it
has Iseland: On the South it looks toward Spain. The temper of the Air.
The Air of this Island is very wholesome, the Climate very gentle, warm and
temperate; for the Inhabitants neither by the heat of Summer are enforced to
seek s^^adie places, nor yet by cold to sit by the fire: yet the seeds in
regard of the moistness of Autumn do seldom come to maturitie and
ripeness. Hence Mela writes, that it has no good Air for ripening of
seeds: yet in the wholsomnesse and cleernesse of the Air it does far
exceed Britain. Here are never any Earthquakes, and you shall scarce hear
thunder once in a year. The Country is a fat soil, and has great plenty of
fruits, yet it has greater plenty of pasturage than fruits, and of grass than
grain. For here their wheat is very small, so that it can hardly be winnowed
or cleansed with a fan. What the Spring produces, the Summer cherishes, but
it can hardly be gathered, in regard they have too much rain in Harvest time;
for this Island has winds and rain very often. But (as Mela says) it is so
full of pleasant sweet grass, that when the Cattle have fed some part of the
day, if they be not restrained and kept from grazing, they will endanger the
bursting of themselves. Which also Solinus witnesses concerning this Island.
Hence it proceeds, that there are infinite numbers of Cattle, which are the
Inhabitants chief riches, and many flocks of Sheep, which they sheare twice a
year. They have excellent Horses (called Hobbies) which are not paced like
others, but do amble very gently. No creeping thing nor Serpent lives here,
nor also in Crete: and Serpents being often brought hither out of Britain, as
soon as they came near the Land, and smelled the Air, they died. Beda
witnesses, that he has seen some, who have been stung with Serpents, that
have drunk the leaves of Books (brought out of Ireland) in a Potion, and
straightway the force of the poison was allayde, and the swelling of the body
went down again. Ireland has greater store of Faulcons and Hawks, than
other Countries. And here Eagles are as common as Kites in some places.
Besides, here is so great a number of Cranes, that you shall often see a
hundred in a company together. In the North part also there are abundance of
Swannes, but there are few Storkes through the whole Island, and those black.
There are few Partriges and Pheasants, but no Pies, nor Nightingales. Here is
such great store of Bees, that they do not only breed in hives, but also in
hollow trees, and in the cavernes of the earth. Giraldus also writes a strange
thing concerning a kind of Bird, commonly called a Barnacle, that out of
certain pieces of wood, floating up and down in the Sea, there comes out first
a kind of Gum, which afterward grows into a hard substance, within which
little Creatures are generated, which first have life, and afterward have bills,
feathers and wings, with which they do fly in the Air, or swim in the water,
and in this manner and no other this Creature is generated. This Giraldus does
testify, that he has seen some of them half formed, which as soon as they
came to perfection did fly as well as the rest. There are also many birds of a
twofold shape, (as he witnesses) which they call Aurifrisij, lesser than an
Eagle, and bigger than a Hawke; whom Nature, to delight her self, has framed
with one foot armed with tallents sharp and open, the other smoothe with a
plain web. There are other Birds which they call Marineta, less than a
Blackbird, being short like a Starling, yet differing from him by the
whiteness of the belly, and the blackness of the back. It is a wonderful
thing which was reported concerning these Birds, for if when they are dead
they be kept in a dry place, they will not putrify or corrupt: and being
placed among garments and other things, it will preserve them from moathes.
That which is more worthy of admiration is that, if being dead, they be hanged
up in some dry place, they will every year renew and change their feathers,
as if they were alive Ireland contains all kinds of wild beasts. It has
Hearts that are so fat, that they can hardly run; and by how much they are
lesser in body, by so much the larger are their horns. There are great store
of Bores, many Hares, etc. but the bodies of all the wild beasts and birds are
lesser here than in other places. It has many Badgers, and Weesils. It has
few or no Goats, fallow Dear, Hedghogs, Moles; but infinite store of Mice. It
has also Wolves and Foxes. But enough of these things, I return to other
matters. Heretofore Ireland was ruled by many Earls, The Government.
now it is subject to England, and is governed by the Kings Substitute, who is
called the Lord Deputy. It came to be under the dominion map of Ireland
IRELAND.
of the Kings of England about the year Camden says it was in the year 1172.
p. 649.
1175, at which time Roderick King of Connaught styled himself King of all
Ireland; and striving to subject the whole Kingdom to himself, waged
continual war with the other Earls; by whose sedition it came to pass,
that the other Earls of their own accord, and without any effusion of blood,
did put themselves under the obedience of Henry the second, King of England,
from whom all the Kings of England were called Lords of Ireland, until the
time of Henry the eigth, who by the Nobles of Ireland was declared King of
Ireland, The Cities.
because the name of Lord grew hateful to some seditious people. There are
four special Cities in this Island: First This Town was built by Harald
Hayfager, the first King of Norwey.
Dublin, the Metropolis or Mother-Citie of Ireland, being the royal
Archiepiscopall Seat, giving name to a County. The next in dignity is
Waterford, the third Limbrick, the fourth Cork. There are many other very
great Towns, of which we will speak more largely in the particular
Descriptions of Ireland. This Country has many Lakes and standing waters,
Lakes.
among which there is a Lake in Vlster, twenty miles distant from the Lake
Erne, of which we will speak more largely hereafter. There is a little Lake
beyond the City Armack, in which if you stick a Spear up some months, that
part which stuck in the mudde will be iron, that which is in the water stony,
and that which is out of the water will remain wood. There is also the Lake
Erne, which is thirty miles long, and fifteen miles broad, being compassed
about with thick woods, and so full of Fish, that the Fishermen often break
their nets, by taking too many at one time. The Rivers.
This Island is divided and watered with many fair Rivers, whose names are
these: or the River Liffie.
Avenliffe, running through Dublin; Boandus through Methe, Banna through
Vltonia, Linut through Connack, and Moadus through Kenel-cunillia, Slicheia,
and Samaira: Besides Modarnus and Furnus through Keneleonia, and many other.
But of all the Rivers of Ireland, the River or Shennin, as some interpret it,
the ancient River.
Synnenus is the chief both for the breadth and It runs (says Heylin) a
course of 200 miles, to the Vergivian Sea, and is navigable 60 miles.
length of its course, and for the plenty of Fish which is in it. But in
general, the Rivers and Lakes are full of fish bred in them. This Country is
unequal and mountainous, soft and waterish: you shall find Lakes and standing
waters on the top of the Mountains. The Mountains abound with Cattle, and
the woods with wild beasts. Solinus writes thus concerning the Sea, which
flows between Ireland and England: The Sea between Ireland and England is
rough and unquiet all the year, and is scarce navigable but in some part of
the Summer. But he erres; for it is quiet enough, unless it be stirred up
with winds. And not only in Summer, but also in Winter passengers do sail
to and fro. All the Sea shores do abound sufficiently with Fish. Ireland has
in all three and thirty Counties, and four Archbishops. The Bishop of Armach,
Primate of all Ireland: the Bishop of Dublin: the Bishops of Cassil and Toam:
and these four have nine and twenty Suffragans or Vicegerents. Ireland (from
the manners of the Inhabitants) is divided into two parts. For those who refuse
to obey the Laws, and live more uncivilly, are called Irishrie, and commonly
Wild Irish. But those who are willing to obey the Laws, and appear before the
Judges, are called the English-Irish, and their Country the English Pale: they
speak English naturally and uncorruptly, yet they understand Irish, in regard
of their daily commerce with the Irish-men. The Irish-men have some certain
Lords, under whose command the most of them are: but they live under the
jurisdiction of the English, but counterfeitly, and as long as the English
Soldiers do waste their Territories: yet they appoint Sessions to be kept at
certain times and places, to restrain and punish robberies and theft,
committed by night. There those that are accused, if they be convicted, have
certain Arbitratours to judge of the cause, whom they call Brehoni: these are
all of one family, and although they have no knowledge in the Law, yet for
their wisdom and honesty of life they are accounted divine. Their war is
partly on horsback, and partly on foot. The Gentry have horses well managed,
so that without any advantage they will mount them in their armor, and taking
a Javelin or dart of great weight by the middle, they will throw or brandish it
against their enemy with much ease. Among the footmen, some are Soldiers in
Cassocks very strong, whom they call Galeglacii, having Cuttle-axes as sharp
as razors, and they are the chief strength of the Irish wars. The next are
Footmen wearing a light armor, with swords in their hands, and these are
called Karnes, and they think a man is not dead, until they have cut off his
head. In the third place are footmen, whom they call Daltines, who going
unarmed, attend upon the horsemen. The footmen as well as horsemen, as often as
they come to fight with their enemies, do cry with a great voice The reason
of this, See in Camden, p. 678.
Pharro, Pharro: and they use a Bagpipe in stead of a Trumpet. The Irish do
fare sumptuously and magnificently: for though they have no delicate dishes,
Their Diet.
nor great service in their banquets, yet their Tables according to the season
of the year are well furnished with Beef and Porke, and other meat. In their
Feasts they lie upon Beds: the first place at the Table belongs to the Mother
of the Family, who wears a long Gown or Mantell reaching to her ancles, often
dyed, and also sleeved.

THE SECOND TABLE OF IRELAND. IN WHICH ARE VLTONIA, CONNACIA, MEDIA, AND PART
OF LAGENIA. VLTONIA.
IRELAND being described in general, I think it worth my labor, before I
come to a particular description of the several parts: first to make a
division thereof, Ireland is divided into five Parts or Provinces. Into
Lagenia, which being Eastward is next to England: Connacia, or Connachtia,
which lies toward the West: Vltonia on the North side: and Momonia which is
situate in the Southern part. The fifth part is called Media, which being
placed in the midst, is enclosed with the rest. In these five Provinces there
are many notable Territories. As Lagenia does include Fingal, Offal, Leis,
Ossir, and Ormund. Media contains Slani, Four, and Delvin. In Connacia is
contained Clar: in Vltonia is contained Vril, Antrimen, Lecal, and Treconch. In
Momonia are included Trippitate, Kerie, Cosmay, Desmond, Tomond, and some
others. There is another division of Ireland, which we have touched in our
general Table, which is diligently to be considered if any one desire to know
the state of this Country, wherefore he must observe that Ireland is divided
into two parts: the English part, and the Irish part. The latter the native
Irish do inhabit, the former the Englishmen, and that part in common speech is
called the English Province, because it is as it were empaled and environed
with the Territories of the English. For after that the English having suppressed
the Irish Rebels, had restored Dermicius to his Country and Kingdom, they
seated themselves and built themselves seats in the chiefest places of Ireland.
Afterward seeing that as it were certain Islands did part them fromt he
subdued Irish, they called that part in which they placed a Colonie, the
English Province. In this is contained the greater part of Lagenia, and Media,
and that part of Vltonia which is called Vril: but the chiefest part of
Lagenia, which is called Fingal, near to Dublin on the North, has the chief
place, and Media is next to that. But Mercator uses the same division which
we made of it in the former Tables, describing it in four Tables, beginning
with Vltonia, Connacia, Media, and part of Lagenia. I will make a brief
description of all these parts, in the same order as our Author places them.
Vltonia offers it self in the first place. This part of Ireland was first
called by the Welsh Vltun, The names of Vltonia.
by the Irish Cui-Guilli, by the Latins Vltonia, and by the English Vlster:
toward the North it is parted with the Narrow Sea: The bounds.
toward the South it stretches it self to Connaught and Lagenia; the map of
Ireland THE SECOND TABLE OF IRELAND.
East part is bounded with the Irish Sea, and the West part is beaten with the
great Western Ocean. This Country being near to Scotland, is reckoned one
of the Scotch Islands, which are called the Hebrides, and lie scatterd in the
Sea between both Kingdoms: which Islands the Irish-Scots, the successors of
the Ancient Scythians, do inhabit. It is round in form, and in length from the
Haven Coldagh in the North, to Kilmore in the South, it is about an hundred
miles; and it is in breadth from Black-Abbey in the East to Calebegh, a
Western Promontorie, an hundred and thirty miles and more. The whole
circumference or compass of it is about four hundred and twenty miles. The
Form.
This Country has seldom any intemperate weather, for the sudden and fresh
gales of wind do refrigerate and cool the heat of Summer, and soft and gentle
raines do mitigate the cold of Winter. Briefly, it is neither in the Cold nor
Torrid Zone. The clouds are fair and clear, and when they are most impure,
yet the wind continually driving them about does make the air wholesome, The
Air.
and at length quite dispelleth them. The equal temper of the Clime is the
cause that the soil does plentifully bring forth diverse kinds of trees, some
bearing fruit, and others for building. The Country is full of grass and fit
for pasturing: very rich in horse, and sheep, The Rivers.
and Oxen. The Rivers are, as I may say, doubly commodious, being navigable to
bring up Vessels, and Barques, and also being full of fish and very convenient
for the inhabitants in other uses. Among these the first is Vinderius, which is
now called the Bay of Knocfergus, from the Town seated on it, and from the
safety of the Haven, which the English call Knocfergus, the Irish Caregfergus,
that is Fergus his rock, which name it received from A famous Scot, as Camden
affirms. page 669.
Fergusius who was drowned there: There is also Banna which (as Giraldus says)
is a very fair River as the Banna in Irish signifies fair. Camden. p. 669 The
plenty of Salmons.
name witnesses, it runs out of the Lake Eaugh, and discharges it self
into the Ocean with a double Channel; it is fuller of Salmons than any River
in Europe, because (as some think) the water is so clear, in which Salmons do
chiefly delight. And there is the River Logia, which Ptolemie mentions, and
now is called Lough Foil, which falls into the Sea with a great stream.
There are many great Lakes in it, in which is the Lake Eaugh which spreads it
self abroad from Armaugh: The Lakes.
and on the East side are the woods Kilulto, Kilwarney, and Dyffrim, into which
the Lake does so insinuate and wind in it self, that it makes two
Peninsula's, Lecale toward the South, and Ard toward the North: Lecale runs
out farthest toward the East of any part of Ireland, and the farthest
Promontorie thereof Mariners do now call Saint John's Foreland, Ptolomie calls
it Isanius, perhaps from the British word Isa, which signifies Lowermost. In
the Isthmus thereof stands Dunam, Here was buried S. Patricke, who as they say,
being sent by Celestinus the Bishop of Rome, An. 433. converted this Island to
the Christian faith.
which Ptolemie mentions, now called Down, being an ancient Town, and the Seat
of a Bishop. Ard lies over against it being divided from it by a little slip
of land. There are also Lakes, of which we have made mention in our general
Table. The Country is shadowed with great woods. To speak in a word, although
it be barren in some places by reason of Lakes, Bogs, and thick Woods, yet it
is every where full of Cattle, and Grass, and at all times it abundantly
requiteth the labor of the husbandman. Nature is so little beholding here to
Art or Industry, that the flourishing banks of Rivers embrodered with
flowers, the shadie Woods, green Meadows, bending Hills, and Fields fit to
bear corn if they were tilled, do seem to be angry with the Inhabitants,
The Ancient Inhabitants.
because by their carelessness and negligence they suffer them to be rude and
wild. The Voluntii, Darni, Robogdii, and Erdini in Ptolemies time held all
this Country, who also dispersed themselves into other parts of Ireland. The
special place in this Country is Armach, near the River Kalis, which
although it be not very fair, yet it is the seat of an Archbishop, and the
Metropolis of the whole Island. The Irish-men do fabulously report that it was
called so from Queen Armacha, but See Camden. page 668.
Camden thinks it to be the same which Beda calls Dearmach, which signifies
in the Scotch and Irish language, the field of Redmen. There is one Archbishop
in Vltonia, who has his Seat at Armach, and has these Suffraganes and
substitutes under him, with the Bishop of Maeth and Deren, Ardach or Apde,
Kilmore, Clogher, Down, Coner, Klancknos, Raboo, or Ropo, and Dromoore. For
the keeping of the Inhabitants of this Country and Province in order, it was
fortified with six and fifty Castles, there are also nine Market Towns in it.
The names of Connagh.
And it is divided into the Hithermost and Furthermost. The Hithermost has
three Counties, Louth, Down, and Antrimme. The Farthermost has seven,
Monahon, Tiroen, Armack, Colrane, Donergall, Fermanagh, and Cavon. Connacia is
the second part of Ireland, some call it Connachtia, the English call it
Connagh, The bounds.
and the Irish Connaghti: it is bounded on the East with part of Lagenia, on
the North with part of Vltonia, on the West it is beaten with the Western
Ocean, and on the South it is environed with part of Momonia or Munster, which
is enclosed with the River Sineo or Shennin, and lies over against the
Kingdom of Spain. The Figure of it is long, The Form.
and at either end both Northward and Southward it is very narrow, but toward
the middle it grows longer on either side. It is an hundred and six and
twenty miles long, from the River Shennin in the South, to Engi Kelling in the
North, the greatest breadth is about foure-score miles, from Tromer the
Eastern bound, to Barrag-Bay the Western limit. The whole circuit and
compass of it is about four hundred miles. The Air.
The Air in this Region is not so pure and clear as in the other Provinces of
Ireland, by reason of some wet places bearing grass, which are called in
regard of their softness Bogges, being dangerous, and sending out many thick
vapors. The chief City of this Province, being the third City of note in
Ireland, is Galway, in Irish Gallive. Built in the form of a Tower, The City.
having a Bishops See in it, and being famous for the frequent resort of
merchants thither, and also profitable to the Inhabitants by the conveniencie
of the Haven which is beneath it, and by the easy exportation of Merchandise:
not far from hence on the Western sidely the Islands which are called Arran,
of which many things are fabled, as if they were the Isles of the living, in
which no man could either die or be subject to death. The Province of Connaught
at this time is fortified with foureteen Castles, it has nine Market Towns,
and it is divided into six Counties or Shires in this manner: the County of
Clare, of Galway, of Mago, of Slego, of Letrimme, and of Roscomen. Media is the
third part of Ireland, The names whence derived.
which in their Country speech they call Mijh, the English Methe, Giraldus
Midia and Media, perhaps because it is in the very middle of the Island. For
the Castle Killaire in these parts, which Ptolemie seems to call Laberus, The
Situation.
is in the middle of Ireland, as the name Killair does denote. The Country
reaches from the Irish Sea, even to the River Shennin, which river parts it
from Connacia. It has a wholesome and delightful air. It is fruitful in
corn, pasturage, and flocks, abounding with Flesh-meate, The fertility of the
Soil.
Butter, Cheese, Milk, and the like: and in regard of the multitude of people,
the strength of fair Castles and Towns, and the peace arising from thence, it
is commonly called the Chamber of Ireland. Here is the Town Pontana, which is
commonly called Drogheda, a fair Town, and having a convenient Haven for Ships
to ride in. But there are some who think that the middle part of this Town,
on the other side the River, The Towns names.
is in Vltonia. There are also these Towns in Media, Molingar, Four, Delvyn,
Trim, Kelles, Navan, Aboy, Dulck, and Scrin.

THE THIRD TABLE OF IRELAND. IN WHICH ARE MOMONJA, AND THE REMAINDER OF LAGENIA
AND CONNACH.
CONNACIA is the second part of Ireland, some call it Connachtia, the English
Connach, and the Irish Connachty. The names.
It lies toward the West, and is bounded with the River Sen, the River Banna,
and the Ocean. This, the Auteri and Nagnatae in the time of Ptolomie did
inhabit. But there is so near an affinity between these two words,
Nagnatae and Connaghty, that they seem one to be derived from the other:
unless we suppose that the word Connaghty did arise from the Haven Nagnatae,
which Ptolomy mentions, and from thence the Country got this name. For a Haven
is called in their native speech Cuon, to which if you add Nagnata, it will
not be much different in sound from Connaghty. The fertility of the Soil.
The Country as it is in some places fruitful and pleasant, so in some wet
places covered over with grass, and by reason of their softness, called Bogs,
it is very dangerous, as other parts of the Island are, and full of dark and
thick woods. But the Coasts having many Bays, and navigable in-lets, does as
it were invite and stir up the inhabitants to employ themselves in
navigation, yet sloth is so sweet unto them, that they had rather beg from
door to door, then seek to keep themselves from Poverty by honest labor.
The ancient government.
It is reported in the Irish Histories that Turlogus O-mor O-conor, was sole
Governor of this Country, and that he divided it between his two sons,
Cahelus and Brienus. But when the English came into Ireland, Rodericke did
govern it, and called himself King of Ireland, but he being afraid of the
English wars, not trying the chance or fortune of the field, put himself
under obedience to Henry the Second King of England. Who after revolting from
his faith given, Miles Cogane was the first Englishman who did attempt, but in
vain, to get Connachtia. Afterward, William the son of Adelme, whose
posterity were called in Irish Bourki, Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester,
and William de Bermingham chief men in England, did subject this Country, and
brought it to civilitie. But Bourke, or de Burgo, and his Posterity were a long
time styled and called Lords of Connach, governing this Province together with
Vltonia in great peace and tranquillity, and did receive great revenewes out
of it, until the only daughter of Richard de Burgo being sole inheretrix of
Connachtia and Vltonia, was married to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the son of
King Edward the third. But he living for the most part in England, and his
successors the Mortimers did neglect their Patrimony, the Bourks being their
kinsemen, to whom they had committed the overseeing of those Lands, making use
of the absence of the Lords, and the troublesome times in England, contemned
the authority of the Laws, entering into league with the Irish, and making
marriages with them, and got all Connachtia to themselves, and by degrees
degenerating, having left off the English habit, they followed the Irish
manners. It is at this day divided into six Counties: Clare, Letrimme, Galwey,
Resecomin, Maio, and Sligo. There are in it the Baron of Atterith, the Baron of
Clare, and others. Here is also Galloway, a Town much frequented by foreign
Merchants. It is reported that an Outlandish Merchant who did traffic with
the Townsmen, did once ask an Irishman, in what part of Galloway Ireland
stood? valuing this Town as the whole Country, and the whole Country as this
Town. There are reckoned to Galloway, Anner, Clare, Sligo, Arctlo, and Alon,
Towns of note.

The Auteri, whom I mentioned before, did heretofore possess the more
Southern part of this Connacia, where is now Twomondia, or Claria, the Country
of Clan-Richard, and the Baronie of Atterith, which plainly intimates whence
came the name of the Auteri. Tmomond, called by Giraldus Theutmonia (which
though it lie beyond the River Senus or Shinnin, may be added to Momonia) is
stretched forth into the Sea with a great Promontorie, famous for the Seat of
an Archbishop which they call Toam, and for the Earls thereof, namely the
O-Brennis, who descending from the ancient Earls of Connack, were honored by
Henry the Seventh, with the Title of Earls of Twomond. This Country of the
most part of it the English call Clare-shire, from Thomas Clare the youngest
son of Gilbert, the first Earl of Gloucester, to whom King Edward the first
gave this Country. Clan-Richard, that is, the Land of the sons of Richard, is
next unto this; it took its name, according to the Irish custom, from one
Richard an Englishman, called de Burgo, or Burgensis, who afterward in this
Country became a man of great note and power; and out of this Family Henry the
eighth created Richard de Burgo Earl of Clan-Richard. Atterith, commonly
Athenri, does glory in that warlike Baron, John de Bermingham an Englishman,
out of which Family the Earls of Louth are descended: but these Berminghams of
Atterith, degenerating into the Irish Wildenesse and incivilitie, will scarce
acknowledge that they were once English. In this Atterith Geographers do place
the mouth of the River Ausoba, which is now called the Bay of Galway: for
Galway, in Irish called Gallive, is seated on it, being a fair Town, which
through the benefit of the River, is filled with many commodities brought
thither, both by Sea and Land. Geographers do also place the River anciently
called Ravius, but now Trowis, in Connack; it is also known by the name of
Bannus, for the inhabitants do call it Banny: This River coming out of the
Lake Ernus is the bounds of Connack, and Vlster.

I return to the Inhabitants. The rest of Connack toward the North was
heretofore possessed by the Nagnata, even to the River Bann^^, which does part
Vltonia and Connack; where O-Conor, O-Rorck, and Mac-Diarmod, being wild
Irish, do govern and rule. The shore is map of Ireland THE THIRD TABLE OF
IRELAND.
backed from Ausoban with the Isles of Arran, Inisceath, known heretofore by
reason of Colmans Monastery here seated, and Inis Bovind, which Beda
translating out of Scotch, calls Vitulae albae Insulam, or the Island of the
White Calfe. Then the shore runs back to the mouth of the River Libinus,
which Camden brings unto Dublin, but the place which Ptolomie assigns, is
now called the Bay of Slegah. Here Ptolomie places the City of Nagnata, but
Camden says, he cannot tell what that City should be. There is one
Archbishop here who keeps his residence at Toam; under whom are these
Suffragan Bishops, the Bishop of Kilmako, Olfine, Bishop Helphen, Avaughdoune,
Clonfert, and Moroo.

MEDIA.
MEDIA is the third part of Ireland, which in the Country speech is called
Mijh, Whence the names are derived.
the English call it Methe, Giraldus Midia, and Media, because perhaps it lies
in the very middle of the Island. For the Castle of Killaire in those parts,
which Ptolomie calls Laberus, is held to be in the middle of Ireland, and so
much the Sea Camden page 663.
name it self does express: for Lair in the Irish speech signifies the
middle. Richard Stanihurst writes thus concerning the Etymon or signification
of the word Media. In the year of the World 2535. five brethren possessing the
Islands, they resolved to divide it equally into four Provinces, that so they
might govern in them severally. But least their younger brother whose name was
Slanius, might be without some honor, they consented together to bestow on
him a share taken out of all four parts: Which was received by him
chearefully, and hence some suppose that it was called Media. It stretches and
extends it self from the Irish Sea, The Situation.
even to the River Shennin, which River does part it from Connack. It has a
wholesome pleasant Air and deligthfull Prospect. The fertility and
fruitfulnes.
It abounds with corn, pasturage and cattle, having store of Flesh, Butter,
Cheese, Milk, and the like, and in regard of the strength of the Towns and
Castles, and the peace arising thence it is called the Chamber of Ireland. The
Irishmen do write that this Country heretofore had Kings, and that Slanius
afterward became sole Monarch of all Ireland. The ancient government.
But when the English had set foot in Ireland, Hugh Lacey did conquer the most
part of it, and King Henry the Second King of England granted it unto him to
hold in fee, and styled him Lord of Media. He having his head on a sudden cut
off by an Irishman while he was building the Castle of Derworth, left behind
him Hugh Earl of Vltonia, and Walter Lord of Trim, the Father of Gilbert, who
dyed before him. But by the daughters of Gilbert, Margaret, and Matilda, the
one part fell by the Ienvills of the House of Lorraine, and the Mortimers, unto
the King: for Peter of Ienvill being borne of that Matilda had issue Ioane, who
was married to Roger Mortimer, Earl of March: the other came by the Verdons to
many Families in England. In our forefathers time by an Act of Parliament it
was divided into two parts, namely, into East and West Media. The River Boand
or Boyne, which Ptolomie calls Buvinda, runs through the East side, and
afterward when it has washed Droghda, a fair and populous Town, called so
from the bridge, it divides that part from Vltonia. The Western Media has
nothing worthy of memory or note beside Laberus (which Camden seems to call
Kaillair) and the Town of Delvin which heretofore did honor Peter Meset, and
now the renowned English Family of the Nogents, with the title of Barons. For
Gilbert Nogent (as Richard Stanihurst has it, who writ eloquently of Irish
matters) having a gentleman's estate, was rewarded by Hugh Lacy, for his service
performed in the Irish wars, with the Colonies of Delvin and Four; from him
are the Barons of Delvin descended. Those Irish Countries of O-Malaghlem,
Mac-Coglan, O-Madden, and Mogoghian, whose names have a barbarous sound, we
leave unto others. Among the Towns of Media, Pontana is reckoned which is
commonly called Droghda, being a fair Town and having an Haven fit for the
receipt of Ships. But there are some who place the middle part of this Town
in Vltonia, beyond the River. There are also in Media these Towns, Molingar,
Four, Delvin, Trim, Kelles, Navain, Aboy, Dulek, and Scrin. There are also in
this Province near Fonera three Lakes, not far one from another, whereof
every one contains his several sorts of fish, which never come one to
another, although the way be passable by the River flowing between them: and
beside if the fish be carried from one Lake to another, they either die, or
return to it again. Here is the River Boand aforesaid, called so from the
swiftness of it: for See Camdens Brit. page 663.
Boan both in Irish and Welsh, does signify swift, and Nechamus has sung of
it.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF IRELAND.
WHICH CONTAINS THE EASTERN PART, AND DOES present these following
Territories to view. Glandeboy, Tirone, Arde, Lecale, Enaugh, Arthule, Newry,
Morn, Fuse, Vriel, and many others, also the Cities Armack and Down.
LAGENIA.
IN our Authors division Lagenia follows Media, being the fourth part of
Ireland, The names.
which the Inhabitants call Leighnigh, the Britains Leyn, the English
Leynster, the Latin Writers Lagenia, and the book called the holy lives of
the Saints Lagen. It lies all toward the Sea on the East side of Ireland, even
from Momonia to the River Neorus, which it goes beyond in many places: it is
divided from Conack by the River Sen^t or Shennin, and from Media by the bounds
thereof. In Ptolemies time it was the seat of the Brigantes, the Coriondi, the
Menapij, the Cauci, and the Blani, and perhaps from these Blani, their names
Lein, Leinigh and Leinster were derived. It is a fertile and fruitful Country,
it has a gentle Air, and the Inhabitants are of a courteous disposition. It is
now divided into these Counties, Weishford, Caterlogh, Kilkenny, Dublin,
Kildare, Kings-shire, Queenes-shire, Longford, with which Fernes and Wickle are
now reckoned. These Counties we will now view in order, with Camden, according
to the people which the Geographer writes did inhabit this part of Ireland.
The Brigantes were seated between the mouth of the River Suirus, and the two
Rivers Neorus and Barrow, which Ptolemie calls Birgus, which flow together
under the City of Waterford. Because there was an ancient City of the
Brigantes in Spain, called Brigantia, therefore Florianus del Campo, striveth
to fetch the original of these Brigantes out of Spain; though if there were
any ground for such a conjecture, they might as probably be derived from the
Brigantes in Britain, which is a neighbor Nation and very populous. But if
it be true, as some copies have it, that they were anciently called Brigantes,
then the very name does persuade us that they were so called from the River
Birgus, which they inhabited round about. The Coriondi did inhabit between the
Rivers Neorus and Birgus, where is now the County of Carleo or Caterlogh, a
great part of Kilkenny, and farther even to map of Ireland THE FOVRTH TABLE OF
IRELAND.
Ossiria the Higher, beside Ormondia, which the Irish call Vrrown, the English
Ormond, and vulgarly Wormwood. In both of these there is nothing memorable,
but the Earls thereof. For Ossiria the Higher has been renowned by the Earl
Barnabie Fitzpatrick, who was dignified by Edward the sixth with that honor.
And Ormond has had, accounting from James the first, thirteen Earls of the
famous Family of the Butlers, whom Edward the third advanced to that honor,
and whose honorable Ancestors were heretofore the Butlers of Ireland, whence
this name Butler was given them. That which some of the Irish, and those that
would be thought men of good credit, do affirm concerning certain men in
this Country that are every year turned into Wolves, I think it to be
fabulous: Although it may be indeed the abundance of melancholy, wherewith they
are possessed, (called by the Physicians Lycanthropia) does stir up such
fantasies, that they imagine themselves to be transformed into Wolves.
Neither dare I imagine any other thing of these Lycaons transformed in Livonia.
At the mouth of Surius the Menapij held a Promontorie toward the Southwest,
which is now the County Weishford, in Irish County Reogh. The name it self
does seem to intimate that these Menapij came from the Menapij a Maritime
people among the Belgians. But whether that Carausius, who being made King
defended Britain against the Emperor Dioclesian, was descended from the one
or the other, let others determine. For Aurelius Victor calls him a Citizen
of Menapia, and the City Menapia is placed by Geographers not in Holland, but
in Camden thinks this Menapia to be that which now is called Weishford, see
him page 659.
Ireland. Ptolemie calls this Promontorie Hieron, that is, holy, and I doubt
not but it was called so by the Inhabitants for the same respect. For they
called in their Country speech, the farthest Town hereof, at which the English
first landed in this Isle, Banna, which signifies Holy. From this Holy
Promontorie the shore runs forth in a large tract toward the East and
North, near to which there are shallow sands very dangerous for shipping,
which Sailors call The Ground. The Cauci, who were a Maritime people of
Germany, did inhabit next to the Menapij. These had that Maritime Country,
which the Irish Families of the O-Mores, and O-Brins do inhabit, together
with the County of Kildare. The County of Kildare is very pleasant, concerning
the pastures whereof Giraldus uses these verses of Virgill.

Et quantum longis carpunt armenta ditbus,
Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponit.
How much the flocks do eat in the long day,
The cold dew in the short night does repay.
But for the company of Giants which Giraldus places in this Country, I leave
it to those who admire fabulous antiquities, for I would not willingly doat
too much on fables. Beyond the Cauci lived the Eblani, where is now the
Country of Dublin and Meth, being one of the five parts of Ireland. The County
of Dublin toward the Sea is of a fertile soil, having pleasant Meddowes, but
so bare of Wood, that for the most part they use Turfe and Coal dug in
England. It is full of Towns and People; where the River Liffe hides it self
in the Sea, Houth is almost environed therewith, from whence the Family of the
Laurences are called Barons of Houth. On the North side of Dublin lies Fingall,
a fair Country well tilled, and is as it were the storehouse or Barn of the
Kingdom, in regard it yields yearly so great a quantity of corn, that in
a manner the earth does strive with the labor of the husbandmen, which lying
in other parts of the Island, neglected and untilled, does seem to complain
of their ignorant sloth. These things being unfolded, let us now pass to the
Cities and Towns. Here Kilkenny meets us in the first place, being near to
the River Neorus, The names of the Towns.
Kilkenny signifies the Cell, or Chapel of Canicus, who formerly in this
Country was famous for his Religious solitary life. It is a neat fine Town,
abounding with all things, and the chief of the innermost Towns of this
Island. The Town is divided into the English and Irish part, the Irish part is
as it were the Suburbs, wherein is the Temple of Canicus, who gave the name to
it, and it is the Seat of a Bishop. The English Town is newer, being built by
Ralph the third Earl of Chester, it was fortified as some do suppose, with
walls on the West side by Robert Talbot a Noble man, and strengthened with a
Castle by the Butlers. Below this, upon the same River of Neorus, a walled
Town is seated, called in English Thomas Town, in Irish Bala mac-Andan, that
is, the Town of Antonius his son, both names were given unto it by the
builder Thomas FitZ-Antonius an Englishman, whose heirs are still acknowledged
the Lords thereof. There stood in this Country that ancient City Rheba,
mentioned by Ptolemy, which was also called Rheban, but instead of a City it
is even (...) a City and no City, as he himself says, being a few Cottages
with a Forte. It honors the Saint-michaells with the title of Baronet. There
is Lechlinia, in Irish Leiglyn, a royal Town, fortified with a Castle by that
Noble Deputy Bellingham. The great City of Rosse, has likewise here
flourished in times past, as having been full of Inhabitants, and Merchandise,
and fortified with a wall of great circuit, by Isabell the daugher of Richard
Strongbow Earl, which walls do now only remain. For discord arising among
the Citizens concerning Religion, the Town is ruinated and fallen to nothing:
but enough of these things, The Mountains and Rivers.
I pass to the Mountains and Rivers. Beneath Ormund the hills Bliew Blemi
(which Giraldus calls the Mountains of Bladina) do lift up their heads with
their unequal tops, out of whose bowels as it were, the Rivers Suirus, Neorus
and Birgus, do arise, and running in several channels before they come to the
Ocean they join all in one stream, whence the Ancients did call them Tres
Sorores the three Sisters. Neorus hemmeth in many Castles and Towns; Birgus,
now called Barrow, flowing out of the Mountain Bladina, and running along by
it self with many windings, at last passes Rheba and other Towns. Afterward
Neorus and Birgus do mingle their Waters, and having for some miles run in
one channel, they resign their name and waters to their elder sister Suirus,
which by a rocky mouth discharges her self into the Ocean, where on the left
hand there runs forth a little Promontorie with a straight neck, which
bears a little Tower as a defense or mark for Ships, built by the Rosses
when they flourished that they might safely enter into the Haven. In this part
Ptolemie placed the River Or Modana, which Camden thinks to be Slane. See him
page 569.
Modanus aforesaid, and Ovoca near the Sea, on the back whereof the Castle
Arckle is seated, which River as Giraldus says, both in the flowing and ebbing
of the Sea water, does still retain its native sweetness, and does preserve
its waters unstained or unmingled with saltness a great way in the Sea. Called
Lifnius, or Libnius Fluvius.
Here is the River Liffie, which slideth by Dublin, it is not carried with any
violence except after a great storm of rain, but flows very gently. This
River without doubt is mentioned by Ptolemie: but by the carelessness of
Bookemen, it is banished out of its place. For the River Liffie, is placed in
Ptolemies Tables in the same Latitude toward the other part of the Island,
where there is no such River. But let us call it back again to Or Dublin,
which is called by the West Britains Dinas Dublin, and by the Irish
Balacleigh. 1. the Town upon Hurdles, for it is reported that the foundation
thereof was laid upon Hurdles.
Eblana its proper place, and give these verses of Necham concerning it.

Visere Castle-cnock non dedignatur Aven-liff,
Istum Dublini suscipit unda Maris.
Aven-liff to see Castle-cnock does not disdain,
Which the Sea near Dublin does receive again.
I will also add that which Giraldus has concerning Wiclo a Port of Haven
near to Ovoca: which he calls Winchiligello. There is a Haven at
Winchiligello, on that side of Ireland which looks toward Wales, whose waters
do flow in when the Sea does ebb, and when the Sea flows, it ebbeth. There
is also another very notable one, which when the Sea ebbeth, yet still
continues salt and brackish in every part and creek thereof. There is one
Archbishop in Lagenia, which has his seat at Dublin, and Clandelachy, he is
called, Glandeloyloug, and Primate of Ireland, having these following Suffragan
Bishops under him, the Bishop of Elphine, or Bishop Helphen; of Kildare, of
Fernes Ossorie, and of Leighlyn called by some Laghlyn.

THE FIFTH TABLE. OF IRELAND. CONTAINING THE BARONIE OF Vdrone, part of the
Queens Country, and the Lord Fortonesy, in the middle of Vdrone lies the
City Laglyn, otherwise Leighlin, adorned with a Bishops Seat. MOMONIA.
MOMONIA follows in our propounded method, in Irish called Mown, in English
Munster: the fifth and last part of Ireland, it lies on the South upon the
Vergivian Sea, being divided in some places from Connacia by the River Shennin,
and from Lagenia by the River Neorus; it was formerly divided into two parts,
the Western, and the Southern. The Western part the Gangani, Luceni,
Velabri, and Vterini did anciently inhabit, the Vdiae or Vodiae the Southern
part. Now it is divided into seven Counties namely Kerry, Limrick, Corck,
Tripperary the County of the Holy Cross, the County of Waterford, and
Desmond. We purpose to run briefly over these Counties with Cambden,
according to the several people which the Cosmographer attributes to them.
The Gangani whom we formerly mentioned in the first place, do seem by the
affinity of their name to be the same with the Concani of Spain, whose
original was from the Scythians, and Silius witnesses that they drank
horses-blood, which heretofore the Wild Irish did often use to do; Kerri (as
it is now called) at the mouth of the River Shennin, was Anciently their Seat.
A country full of inaccessible and woody mountains between which there are
many hollow valleys, having thick woods in them. The Earls of Desmond were
heretofore honored with the dignity of Counts Palatine hereof, but by the
wickedness of men, which would have liberty and yet knew not how to use it,
it was long since converted into a sink of impiety, and a refuge for
seditious persons. A ridiculous opinion has invaded and persuaded the minds
of the Wild Irish, that he that does not answer the great shouting or warlike
Which is Pharick
cry which the rest make, when they join battle, should be suddenly taken up
from the earth, and as it were flying be carried into these desert valleys,
from any part of Ireland, and there feed on grass, drink water, and yet know
not what he is, having reason, but not speech, and at last should be taken by
hunters, and brought home again. The middle of this Country is cut into two
parts by a River which has now no name, but flows by a small Town called
Trailes, now almost ruinated, where the Earls of Desmond had their mansion
houses. This River, by the situation of it in Ptolemies tables, does seem to
be Dur, and says Camden, I would avouch no less, if Duris, which at this day
is reckoned among the Havens of this Western Coast, be at the mouth of it, as
I have understood by some. Not far from hence is the Haven Smerwick (the word
being contracted in stead of S. Mary-Wick,) of which, not many years ago,
when Girald Earl of Desmond, a man profound in treachery toward his Prince
and Country, did daily by several inrodes waste the Country of Momonia, a
mixed band or company of Italians and Spaniards arrived, being sent unto his
aid from Pope Gregory, and the Spaniards, who having engarrison'd themselves
in a place, called Fort del Ore, seemed not to fear Heaven it self. But when
that famous and warlike Deputy the Lord Arthur Gray came with his forces, he
did soon decide the matter. For forthwith they yielded themselves, and most
part of them were put to death, because it seemed most safe and fit so to do,
the affairs of the Kingdom requiring it, and the rebels being on every hand.
The Earl of Desmond himself fled to the woods, and having hid himself in a
Cottage was wounded by a Soldier or two who rushed in upon him, and afterward
being known, he was beheaded for his treachery and wasting of his Country.
All Desmonia toward the South is subject to the Gangans, which the Irish call
Dassown, the English, Desmond, heretofore three sorts of people dwelt in it,
namely the Luceni, the Velabri, the Iberni, which are conceived in some Maps to
be the Vterini. The Luceni seem to have drawn both their name and original
from the Lucensii of Spain, which held the opposite Coast. The Velabri were so
called from Aber, which is as much to say as Aestuarii, because they were
seated near the arms of the Sea: hence also the Artabri and Cantabri were so
called. Orosius places these at the Promontorie Notium, which Mariners at this
day do call Some call it Cabo del Mar. others Cara and Cabo de Cler.
Biar-head: under this Promontorie the River Iernus is received into the Ocean,
near to which stands Dunck-eran a Bishops Seat, this Dunck-eran, which in the
Scottish-Irish, is as much as to say, the Town Eran, does not only expressly
show it self to be that City Ivernis which Ptolemie mentions, but the river
to be that Iernus whereof he speaks, which has its appellation together
with the whole Island from Hier an Irish word signifying the West. For it is
the farthest River of this Country toward the West, as Ireland is the farthest
Island Westward of all Europe. The Iberni, who are also called Vterni, (that is
according to Camdens interpretation, the High Irish) did inhabit by this River
on one side of the Promontorie, where are the Havens Berehavim and Baltimore,
well known for the plenty of Herring taken therein: near to which dwelt
Mac-Carti More, an Irish Nobleman who in the year 1566. did deliver and render
his Lands and possessions into the hands of Elizabeth Queen of England, and
received the^ again from Her, to hold the^ by fealty after the manner of
England. And at the same time he was created Earl af Glencar, and baron of
Valentia. A man in this Country of great name and power, and an enemy
heretofore to the Giralds, who deprived his Ancesters, being heretofore, as he
contended, the lawful Kings of Desmond, of their ancient right. For these
Giralds, or FitZ-Giralds, being descended from the house of Kildare: and having
conquered the Irish, did here get themselves large possessions, and of these
Giralds Maurice FitZ-Thomas was created by Edward the third map of Ireland THE
FIFTH TABLE OF IRELAND.
the first Earl of Desmond in the year of Grace 1355, and left so firm and
so established an inheritance, that the aforesaid honor in a continued
succession did descend to this wretched rebel, of which I have spoken before,
who was the tenth Earl after him. Next to the Iberni dwelt the Vdia who are
also called Vodiae, of which names there remains some tokens in the Country
of Kilkenni; for the greatest part is called Idou and Idouth. These did inhabit
the Counties of Cork, Triperarie, Linrick Kilkenni, and Waterford. In the
County of Triperarie, there is nothing worthy of memory, but that there is a
Palatinate in it, and the little Town called Holy Cross, that has great
immunities and freedoms granted (as the Monks have persuaded them) in honor
of a piece of our Saviors Cross which was kept there. The Rivers, Cities and
Towns.
The famous River Suirus, which the inhabitants call Shower, is carried out of
this Country of Triperarie into Kilkenni. This River running out of the
Mountain Blada through Ossiria the Lower of which the Butlers are styled
Earls, and afterward Thurles, of which they are styled Vicounts, first passes
by the City Cassilia or Cassel, adorned by Pope Eugenius with an Archbishop,
under whom are nine Suffragan Bishops. And from thence growing bigger by the
receipt of two other Rivers into it, near Waterford it discharges it self
into the Ocean. Hitherto I have run over this part of Ireland with Camden,
now it remains to unfold some things concerning the Cities and Towns in the
same. Among them the first that offers it self is This City the Irish and
Britains call Porthlargy.
Waterford, which is the second City in Ireland, and always faithful and
obedient to the English government. For after Richard Earl of Pembroke
conquered and took it, it always continued in peacable quietness and
obedience to the English, endeavoring to bring Ireland into subjection; whence
the Kings of England did grant them many and diverse immunities and freedoms,
which Henry the seventh did increase and confirm, because the Citizens did
behave themselves valiantly and wisely against Perkin VVarbeck, who with the
wings of impudence thought to aspire to the royal Throne. This City was built
by Pirates of Norway, which although it have a thick air, a soil not very
pleasant, and very narrow streets, yet such is the conveniencie of the Haven,
that it is the second Ctity in Ireland for wealth and populousnes, and is
filled with many wise and well behaved Citizens. It has a safe and quiet
Haven, and which is often full of outlandish and foreign ships. For there are
many Merchants in Waterford, who in trading do so wisely use their stock, and
so warily cast up their accou^ts, that in a short time they get great store of
wealth; they are not for the most part indebted, but have ready money. There
are very few usurers, which by fraudulent and intolerable interest live upon
the goods and spoil of the Citizens by taking them to pawn. The Citizens are
courteous, bountiful, thriftie, hospitable to strangers, and serviceable both
in private and public affairs. This City was anciently called Menapia, as
Dublin Eblana: or rather Amellana from Amellanus, who built it, as it is
reported that Sitaracus built Waterford, and Ivorus Limrick; They being
Cosen-Germans, and heretofore of great authority in Ireland. There is also in
this Country Limrick, which is the third City, that excells the rest, for
commodious situation, and for the fairness of the River, being watered with
Shennin the chief of all the Irish Rivers; though this City be distant from
the Sea sixty miles, yet the ship-masters do bring ships of great burden
even to the walls of the City, neither need they fear any rocks all the way
they come up. It is wonderful to see what store and plenty of fish you shall
find there. John King of England being enamoured with the pleasantness of
this City, built there a fair Castle, and a Bridge. There is also Corcagia
in the County of Cork, which the English call Cork, and the natives Korkcach,
environed with a wall, not very wide in compass. It is stretched out so as to
make but one street, yet there is a pretty and very fair market place; it
has an excellent safe harbor, but has heretofore been so encompassed with
seditious neighbors, that they keep continual watch and ward, as if they
were always besieged, and they scarce marry their daughters into the
country, by reason whereof, marrying among themselves, all the Citizens are
somewhat allied one to another. The Citizens are strong in Soldiers, they
addict themselves to merchandise, and govern their affairs both at home and
abroad very frugally. Coenalis writes, that the holy man Briacus came from
hence, from whom the Diocese of Sanbrioch in Britain, commonly called S.
Brieu, took its name. But in this he wandereth from the truth, because he
places the Coriondi of Ireland in this City. For Ptolemie does not mention it
at all. Yet the River which flows by it seems to be the same, which
Ptolemie calls Daurona, and Giraldus calls Sauranus, and Saverenus by changing
one letter. Learned page 655.
Camden says, that the affinity which is between these names did intimate so
much unto him, and that with greater probalitie, then if he should call the
next River Daurona, which running through the County Cork and Triperarie
falls into the Ocean by Lysmor, and is called by Historians Avenmor, that is,
the Great River, of which Nechamus thus writes: Vrbem Lissimor pertransit
flumen Avenmor,
Ardmor cernit ubi concitus aequor adit.
Avenmor runs by Lissimors wall
And at Ardmor into the Sea does fall.


THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND.
The names.
THE Northern part of the Island of Britain is called Scotland, heretofore
Albania. The Inhabitants who keep their ancient speech, do call it Albain,
and the Irish Albany, as if it were an other Ireland, which the Bardes call
Banno. For Historians do call Ireland Greater Scotland; and the Kingdom of
Scots in Britain the Lesser Scotland: Ptolemie does call it Little Britain,
Rufus the Second Britain; Tacitus calls it Caledonia, from a certain
Forest so called. But the Scots were so called from their Neighbors the or
Scitti, a people of Germany that seized on a part of Spain.
Scyths: For as the Dutchmen call the Scyths and Scots by one name Scutten,
that is, Archers: so also the Britains did call both of them Y-scot, as
appears by the British Writers. And it is manifest, that they descending from
the Scyths, came out of Spain into Anno 424.
Ireland, and from thence into that part of Albain which they now possess, and
grew with the Picts into one Nation. Thus much of the Name, the Situation
follows. The Southern bounds toward England are the Rivers Tweede and
Solwey, on the North is the Deucaledon Ocean, The Situation.
on the West the Irish, on the East the German, other parts the Ocean and the
German Sea do compass. It is 480 miles long, but no where above 112 miles
broad. The temperature of the Air.
The Country is more temperate than France, the heat and cold being more
remiss, in like manner as it is in England, but yet it cannot be compared unto
it in fruitfulness. The Earth, for the most part, The fertility of the Soil.
is full of Sulphur or moorish, which affords them coal and turfe for
firing, especially in those places where there is want of wood. Yet here
grows as much corn as the Inhabitants can spend. The Earth also brings
forth diverse metals, as Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, Iron, Lead, and Copper. It
has in Drisdale a Gold Mine, in which the Azure stone is found. It has also
precious stones, especially the Gagate, which burns in the water, and is
quenched with oil. Also excellent pastures, which do feed and bring up all
kinds of Herds: whence they abound with plenty of flesh, milk, butter,
cheese, and wool. When the Scots came to the Picts into Britain, although
they still provoked the English by wars and robberies, yet the Scottish
affairs grew not upon a sudden, but a long time they lay hid in that corner
in which they first arrived; neither (as Beda notes) for more than an hundred
and seven and twenty years, durst they bear Arms against the Earls of
Northumberland, until at one and the same in the year of grace 740.
time they had almost slain all the Picts, and the Kingdom of Northumberland
by domestic troubles, and by the incursions of the Dane, was almost ruined.
For then all the North part of Britain came to be called Scotland, together
with the Country beyond Cluide, and Edenburgh-Frith. The Scots are valiant in
war, and stout soldiers to endure hunger, watching, or cold. The chief
City of Scotland is This City the Scotch-Irish call Dun Eaden, i. the Town
Eaden.
Edinburgh, commonly called Edenburrow, map of Scotland THE KINGDOM OF
SCOTLAND.
this royal Seat Ptolemie calls the Which the word Edenburrow much resembles,
for (says Cama^n) Adain in the British tongue signifies a wing. See page 627.
Winged Castle, and not only the Metropolis of Lauden, but also of all
Scotland; it has its situation on the Mountains, much like to Prague in
Bohemia; the length stretched from East to West is a thousand paces, or a mile,
the breadth is half as much. The whole City hangs, as it were, on the side
of a Mountain, and is highest toward the West; toward the North it fortifies
the City with its steepness, the other parts toward the East and South are
environed with a wall. On the East side of the City is the Kings palace,
which they call King Arthurs Chair: on the West there is a steep Rock, and on
the Rock a great Tower, which the Scots do commonly call the maiden Tower,
which is the same which Ptolemie calls the Winged Castle. There are also other
Cities and famous Towns in this Kingdom, which we will describe particularly
in their places. In the Valeys there are many Lakes, Marshes, Fountains and
Rivers full of Fish, the greatest part whereof arise out of the Mountain
Grampius, The Sea.
of which we will make mention in our next Description. The Scottish Sea is
full of Oysters, The Ports.
Herrings, Coral, and shellfish of diverse kinds. Scotland has many Havens
and Bays, amongst which Letha is a most convenient Haven. Mountains.
The Country it self is very rugged and mountainous, and on the very
Mountains has plain level ground, which does afford pasturage for Cattle.
Grampius is the greatest Mountain, and does run through the middle of
Scotland: Woods.
it is commonly called Grasebaim, or Grantzbaine, that is to say, the crooked
mountain, for it bending it self from the shore of the German Sea to the
mouth of the River Dee, and passing through the middle of this Country toward
the Irish Sea, ends at the Lake Lomund: it was heretofore the bounds of the
Kingdom of the Picts and Scots. At Aberdon there are woody mountains. It is
thought, that here was the Forest of Caledonia, which Lucius Florus calls
saltus Caledonius, very spacious, and by reason of great trees impassable; and
it is divided by the Mountain Grampius. Moreover not only ancient writings
and manuscripts, Public works.
but also Temples, Friaries, Monasteries, Hospitals, and other places devoted
to Religion do testify, that the Scots were not the last The Gospel was first
preached here by Palladius anno 431.
among the Europaeans, who embraced the Christian Religion, and did observe and
reverence it above others. The royal Palace of Edinburgh, of which I spoke
before, is very stately and magnificent, and in the midst of the City is their
Capitol or Parliament House. The Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Nobles of the
Kingdom have their Palaces in the City, when they are summoned to
Parliament. The City it self is not built of brick, but of free squared
stone, so that the several houses may be compared to great Palaces. But
enough of this, let us pass to other things. The people of Scotland are
divided into three Ranks or Orders, the Nobility, the Clergy, and the Laiety.
The manner of Government.
The Ecclesiastical Order has two Archbishops, one of S. Andrews, Primate of
all Scotland, the other of Glasco. There are eight Bishoprics under the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, of Dunkeld, of Aberdon, of Murray, of Dunblan, of
Brecchin, of Rosse, of Cathanes, and of Orkney: Under the Bishop of which is
also called the Bishop of Galloway.
Glasgo there are three, to wit, the Bishop of Candida casa, the Bishop of or
Argile.
Argadia, and the Bishop of the Isles, namely Sura, Mura, Yla, etc. This is the
manner and order of the Nobility, the Kings and the Kings Sons lawfully
begotten have the first place, of which if there be many, the eldest Son is
called Prince of Scotland, the rest are only called Princes, but when the King
is publicly crowned, he promises to all the people, that he will keep and
observe the Laws, Rites, and Customs of his Ancestors, and use them in the
same manner as they did. The Dukes have the second place, the Earls the third,
and those Nobles the fourth place, who are not known by that Title in foreign
Countries, but the Scots do call them My Lords. This name is so much esteemed
amongst them, that for honors sake they attribute it to their Bishops, Earls,
and chiefest Magistrates. In the fifth place are the Knights and Barons, who
are usually called Lords. They are in the sixth and last place, who having
attained to no title of honor, but yet descended from a noble Family, are
therefore commonly called Gentlemen; as the Brothers, and Sons of Earls and
Lords, the youngest Sons of Knights, who have no part in the Inheritance,
because (by the Laws of Scotland) that comes unto the eldest Son, for the
preservation of the Family, but the common people call all those Gentlemen,
who are either rich or well spoken of for their hospitality. The whole weight
of war does depend on the Nobility of the lowest degree. The Plebeians or
Citizens are partly chief men, who bear office in their Cities, partly
Merchants, and partly Tradesmen, or Handy-craftes-men, all which because they
are free from Tribute and other burdens, do easily grow rich. And least any
thing should be too heavily enacted against any City, the King permits that in
public assemblies or Parliaments three or four Citizens, being called out of
every City, should freely interpose their opinion concerning matters
propounded. Heretofore the Clergy was governed by the authority of Decrees
and Councels, but now (as the rest) they are ruled by the Laws, which the
Kings have devised, or confirmed by their royal assent. The Book which
contains the municipall Laws, written in Latin, is entitled Regia
Majestas, the Kings Majesty, because the Book begins with those words: In the
other Books of the Laws, the Acts of their Councels (which are called
Parliaments) are written in Scotch. There are many and diverse Magistrates in
Scotland, as in other Nations. Among these, the chief and next to the King is
the Protector of the Kingdom (whom they call the Governor.) He has the
charge of governing the Kingdom, if the Commonwealth at any time be deprived
of her King; or the King by reason of his tender age cannot manage the affairs
of the Kingdom. There is also a continual Senate at Edenburrough, so framed
of the Clergy and Nobility, that the Clergy does in number equal the
Laiety. The Clergy have a President over them, who has the first place in
delivering his opinion, unless the Chancellor of the Kingdom be present,
for he has the chief place in all affairs of the Kingdom. He that sits on
matters of life and death, they call The great Justice; he that looks to
Sea-matters, the Admiral: he that looks to the Camp, the Marshall: and he
that punishes offenses, committed in the Court, is called the Constable. There
are also in several Provinces, which they call Viecounties, those which are
Governors of them, whom by an ancient name they call Vicounts. Their authority
in deciding those matters which belong to civil causes, does depend on a
certain hereditary right, by which they claim also unto themselves those
Vicountships. So that these Vicounts may be said not to be created by the King,
but borne unto it by right from their Parents. The Cities also and Towns have
their Governors, their Bailiffes, and other Magistrates of that kind, who
keep the Citizens in obedience, and do maintain and defend the Privileges
of the Cities, whereby it comes to pass that the Commonwealth of Scotland, by
the apt disposition and ranking of Degrees, by the holy Majesty of Laws and
the authority of Magistrates, does flourish, and deserves great praise. These
are the names of the Dukedomes, Earledomes, and Vicountships of Scotland: the
Dukedom of Rotsay and Albania, and the Dukedom of Lennox, the County of
Carnes, Sutherlant, Rosse, Murray, Buchquhan, Garniach, Garmoran, Mar, Mernis,
Angus, Gowry, Friffe, March, Athole, Stratherne, Menteith, Wagion, Douglasse,
Carrike, Crawford, Annandale, Ourmonth, and Huntley. The Vicountships are,
Berwick, alias North-Berwyk, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Twedale, Dunfrise, Niddisdale,
Wigton, Are, Lanarke, Dunbretton, Sterueling, Louthean, Lauden, Clacmanan,
Kiuros, Fiffe, Perth, Angus, Mernis, Aberdone, Bamph, Fores, and Inuernes.
There are the Universities of Saint Andrew and Aberdone, the later was adorned
with many privileges by King Alexander, and his Sister Isabel, about the year
1240. The former was begun to be established under King James, in the year
1411. To which is added the University of Glasgo, founded by Bishop Turnbul,
anno 1554, and Edinburgh. The disposition of the Scots is lively, stirring,
fiery, hot, and very capable of wisdom.

THE SECOND TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
I Have ended that which I purposed to speak of Scotland in general, our
method requires that we should run through the parts of it in special.
Scotland is divided (by the Mountain Grampius, cutting it in the midst) into
the Southern or Higher part, and into the Northern or Lower part. It is
divided from England by the River Tweede, by the high Mountain Cheviota, and,
where the Mountain fails, by a trench made not long ago, and lastly by the
Rivers Eske and Solway. Beyond these bounds the Countries even from the
Scottish Sea to the Irish, do lie in this manner. The first is Marcia, Merchia
or March so called, because it is the limits, and lies on the Marches of
Scotland; this reaches to the left side of Tweede: on the East it is bounded
with the Forth Which is an arm of the Sea, where the water ebbes and flows.

The names of Cities


Aestuarium, and on the South with England. In March is the Town of Berwyke,
Borwick, or Borcovicum; which the English hold. Here is also the Castle of
Hume, the ancient possession of the Lords of Hume, who being descended from the
Earls of March, became at last a great and renowned Family. Near to this
Castle lies Kelso, famous by a certain Monastery, and the ancient habitation
of the Hepburni, who a long time by Hereditary right, were Earls of Bothwell,
and Admiralls of Scotland, which honors by the Sister of James Earl of
Bothwell, married to John the lawful Son of King James the fifth, did descend
to Francis his Son. From thence we may see Coldingham, or Childingham, which
Beda calls the City Coldana, and Vrbs Coludi, and Ptolemie perchance calls
Colania. On the West side of March on either side of Tweede is Tifedale, being
so called from the River Tyfic. It is divided from England by the Mountain
Cheviota. After this are three small Countries, Lidesdale, Eusedale, and
Eskedale, so named from three Rivers of like name, Lide, Eve, and Eske. The
last is Annandale, which is so called from the River of Annan, dividing it in
the midst, which runs along by Solway into the Irish Sea. Now that we may
return again to the Called by Ptolemie Boderia by Tacitus Bodorria and by
Boethius Fluvius Levinus. Lothiana.
Forth or Scottish Fyrth it does bound Lothiana or Lauden on the East side: the
Cochurmian Woods, and the Lamirian Mountains do separate it from Marcia. And
then a little toward the West it touches upon Lauderia and Twedia: the one so
called from the Town Laudera, the other from the River Tweede, cutting through
the middle of that Country. On the South and West Lidesdale Nithesdale and
Clidesdall do touch upon Tweede, the name of Nithesdale was given unto it from
the River Nyth, called by Ptolemie Nobios, which glideth through it into the
Irish Sea. The Country is now called Lauden, and anciently ^^ctland.

The fertility of the Soil. The Rivers.


Lothiaria was so called from Lothius King of the Scots. On the East side it is
bounded with the Forth or Scottish Sea, and on the West it looks toward the
Vale of Clide. This Country both for courtesy and plenty of all things
necessary for man's life, does far excel the rest. It is watered with five
Rivers, Tin^, The names of Cities.
both the Eskes (who before they fall into the Sea do join together in one
channel) Letha, and Almone. These rising partly out of the Lamirian
Mountains, partly out of the Pictland Mountains do run into the Forth. It
has these Towns, Dunbarr, Hadinia, commonly called Hadington, Dalneth,
Edenburrough, Leth and Lemnuch. Somewhat more toward the West lies Or
Cluiddesdale.

The Rivers.


Clydesdale, on either side of the River Clide or Glotta, which in regard of
the length is divided into two Provinces. In the former Province is a hill not
very high, from whence three Rivers do discharge themselves into three diverse
Seas. Called Vedra by Ptolemie.
Tweede into the Scotch Sea, Annand into the Irish, and Clide into the
Deucalidon Sea. The chiefest Cities in it are Lanarick and Glasco. The names of
Cities.
The latter the River Coila or Coyil runs by on the West: beyond Coila is
Gallovidia or Galloway. It is separated from Nithesdale with the River
Claudanus, almost enclining toward the South, whose banks do hemme in the
other side of Scotland. The whole Country is more fruitful in Cattle then in
Corn. Galloway.
It has many Rivers which run into the Irish Sea, as Vrus, Dee, Kennus, Cray
and Lowys. It is no where raised into Mountains, but yet it swells with little
Hills. Among which the water settling does make innumerable Lakes, The Situation.
which by the first rain which falls before the Autumnall Aequinox do make
the Rivers rise, whence there comes down an incredible multitude of Eeles,
which the Inhabitants having took up with wickar-weeles, do salt up, and make
a great commodity of. In this Country is the Lake of Myrton, part of whose
Waters do congeale in Winter, the other is never frozen. The farthest part on
this side is the Promontorie Novantum, under which in the mouth of the River
Lowys is the Bay which Ptolemy calls And Camden Gerigonius, because there is a
Town situate called G^rgeny.
Regrionius. On the other side there flows into it the Bay of Glotta, commonly
called the Lake Rian, which Ptolemy calls Vidogara. That Land which runs
between these two Bays the Inhabitants call Rine, that is the Eye of
Galloway: they call it also the Mule of Galloway, or the Mules nocke. The whole
Country is called Galloway, or Gallovid, which in the language of the Ancient
Scots signifies a Frenchman. Beneath Vidogara on the backside of Galloway,
Caricta gently bends toward the estuarie of Glotta. Rivers.
Two Rivers do cut through it: one called Stinsianus, and the other Grevanus,
on both of which many pleasant Towns are seated. Lakes.
Between the Rivers, in those places where it swells into little hills, it is
fruitful in pasturage, and has some Corn. The whole Country has not only a
sufficiency of all things, for the maintenance of men both by Sea and Land, but
also does furnish the neighbor Countries with many commodities. The River Dun
does separate it from Coila, arising out of a Lake of the same name, which has
an Island in it with a small Castle. There are in the Country of Caricta, very
exceeding great Oxen, whose flesh is tender and sweet in taste, and whose fat
being once melted never hardneth again, but always runs abroad like oil.
Coila follows, which Galloway does bound on the South, on the East it
touches Clidesdale, on the West it is divided from Cunningam by the River
Vrwyn, the River Air map of Scotland THE SECOND TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
runs through the middle hereof, on which is seated Air a fair Market Town.
For the general, this Country has greater plenty of valiant men, then of
fruit or cattle, for it is altogether of a light sandy soil: which does
sharpen the industry of the Inhabitants, and their sparing life does confirm
the strength of their minds and bodies. In this Country about ten miles from
the Town Air, there is a stone almost twelve foot high, and thirty Cubits
thick, which is called the deaf stone, for if you hollow or shoot off a
Musket on the one side, he that stands on the other side next to the stone
cannot hear it, he that stands farther off shall hear it better, and he that
stands farthest off shall hear it best. After this Cunningam runs to the
North, and straightneth Glotta, until it become a small River. It is manifest
that the name of this Country came from the Danes, and in their language
signifies a Kings house, which is a sign that the Danes sometimes possessed
it. Next on the East side is situated Renfroan, so called from a Town, in
which the Inhabitants kept their public meetings, it is commonly called
Baronia. Two Rivers do cut through the middle of it, which are both called
Carth. After this Country is Clidesdale aforenamed, stretched forth to either
bank of Glotta, and pours forth many Noble Rivers: on the left hand Aven,
and Duglasse, which do run into Glotta: on the right hand another Aven,
which seperates Sterling on the South from Lothiana, and on the East from the
Fyrth, until at last growing lesser, it has a Bridge over it near Sterling.
There is one River that cutteth through this Country, which is worthy of
memory, called Carron, near to which are some ancient Monuments. On the left
side of Carron there are two little hills built by the industry of men, which
are commonly called Duni pacis. On the right side of Carron, there is a plain
field that at last rises into a little hill, being in the middle between Duni
pacis, and a little Chapel. On the side of this hill there appears yet the
ruins or remainder of a small City. But the foundation of the Walls, and the
description of the streets, partly by tillage, and partly by digging forth
squared stones for the building of rich men's houses, cannot be distinctly
known. This place Beda does call Guidi, and does place it in a corner of the
trench made by Severus the Emperor. Many famous Roman Writers have made
mention of this Trench and Bulwark. Here many tokens do remain, and many
stones are dug up with inscriptions, which are either testimonies of aid
formerly received by the Tribunes and Centurions, or of their Sepulchers in
those places. Beyond Sterling is Levinis or Lennox, divided from Renfroan by
Glotta, from Glasco by the River Keluin: it is parted from Sterling or
Striveling with the Mountains, from Taichia, by the Forth: at length it ends
at the Mountain Grampius, at the foot thereof the Lake Lomund through a hollow
Vale extends it self 24. miles in length, and 8. in breadth, which
contains above 24. Islands. Besides a multitude of other fishes, it has some
particular unto it self, which are pleasant in taste, called Pollacks. There
are three things reported of this Lake very memorable: First the Fish have no
Finnes, but otherwise are of an excellent taste. Secondly, the water when there
is no wind is sometime so rough, that it would affright the boldest Mariner,
from weighing Anchor. Lastly, there is a certain Island fit to feed flocks of
cattle, which moves up and down, and is driven to and fro with every tempest.
But I return to the Lake, which at last breaking forth toward the South, does
send forth the River Levin, which gives its own name to the Country. This
River near to the Castle Brittanodun, or Dun brittan, and a Town of the same
name, enters into Glotta. The farthest Hills of the Mountain Grampius do
somewhat raise the farthest part of Levinia, being cut through with a little
Bay of the Sea, which for the shortness of it they call Gerloch. Beyond this
is a far larger Bay, which they call Longus, from the River Long that falls
into it. This is the bound between Levinia and Covalia. Covalia it self,
Called also Argile, and Argadia.
Argathel or rather Ergathel and Cnapdale, are divided into many parts by many
straight Bays made by the estuarie of Glotta, or Dun-Brittan Fryth. There is
one famous Lake amongst the rest; they call it Finis from the River Fin, which
it receives, it is 60 miles long. There is in Knapdale the Lake Avus, in which
there is a small Island with a fortified Castle. From hence the River Avus
runs forth, which alone in these Countries emptieth it self into the
Deucalidon Sea. Beyond Knapdale toward the West Cantiera or Cantyre runs
out, that is, the head of the Country, over against Ireland, from which it is
parted by a small narrow Sea, being longer than broad, and joined so
straightly, and in such a narrow manner to Cnapdale, that it is scarce a mile
over, and even that is nothing else but sand. On Cantyre Lauria touches, lying
near to Argathel, and reaching near to Abry: it is a plain Country, and not
unfruitful. In that place where the Mountain Grampius is somewhat lower, and
more passable, the Country is called Braid Albin, that is to say, the highest
part of Scotland, and where it is highest it is called Drum Albin, that is the
back of Scotland; and not without reason. For out of the back Rivers do
run into either Sea, some into the North, some into the South: out of the
Lake Iernus, it sends forth the River Ierna into the East, which having run
three miles falls into Taus beneath Perth. From this River Strathierna or
Stathierna, extended to either bank thereof, took its name. For the Scots are
wont to call a Country which lies on a River, Stat.

THE THIRD TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
THe Mountains of Ocellum do border upon Tachia, which for the most part,
together with the Country at the foot thereof, are thought to be in the
Country of Iernia: but the rest of the Country even to the Forth ambition has
divided into many parts, as Clacman, Colrosse, and Kinrosse. From these and the
Mountains of Ocellum, all the Country which is bounded by the Forth and Tay,
grows straight in the form of a wedge Eastward, toward the Sea. And by one
name is called Fife, having sufficiency of all things necessary to life: it
is broadest where the Lake Levinus cutteth it, and thence gathers it self
into a narrow form, even to the Town Caralia. It sends forth one notable
River, to wit Levinus, whose banks are beautified with many Towns, of which
the most renowned for the study of good Arts, Rivers.
is Fanum Andraeae, or Andrews Chapel, which the ancient Scots did call Fanum
Reguli, and the Picts Rigmud. In the middle of the Country is Cuprum or Cuper,
whither those of Fife do come to have their causes tried: on that side where it
touches Iernia, there stands Abreneth the ancient Palace of the Picts. Here
Ierna runs into Taus. But Taus runs four and twenty miles, having
broken out of the Lake Taus which is in Braid Albin, and is the greatest River
in Scotland. This River bending toward the mountain Grampius, does touch
Atholia a fertile Region placed in the wooddie Country of Grampius. Beneath
Atholia Caledon is seated on the right hand bank of the River Taus an old Town
which only retains a name, common-called Duncaldene, that is, Hasell-trees.
For the Hasell trees spreading themselves all over, and covering the fields
thereabout with their shadie boughs, gave occasion of that name both to the
Town and people. These Caledones or people of Caledon, being once reckoned
among the chief Britains, did make up one part of the Kingdom of the Picts.
For Ammianus Marcellinus divides them into the Caledones and Vecturiones, but
of their names there is scarce any memory left at this day. Twelve miles
beneath Caledon lies the Country of Perth on the same right hand bank. On the
left hand bank beneath Atholia is Gour, looking toward the East, renowned for
corne-fields: and beneath this again is Angusia stretched out between Taus
and Eske: this the ancient Scots did call Aeneia. Some suppose it to be called
Horestia, or according to the English speech Forest. In it is the City Cuprum
which Boethius, to gratify his Country, ambitiously calls This is also
called Allectum.
Dei Donum, the gift of God: but I suppose the ancient name was Taodunum, from
Dunus, that is, an Hill situate by Taus, at the foot whereof there is a Town.
Beyond Taus the next fourteen miles off, on the same bank is Abreneth,
otherwise called Obrinca. After this Country is the Red Promontorie, very
conspicuous. The River Eske called the Southern, cutting through the midst
thereof, the other Northern Eske divides it from Mernia. It is for the most
part a map of Scotland THE THIRD TABLE. OF SCOTLAND.
plain field country, until Grampius meeting with it beneath Fordur^^ and
Dunotrum the Earl Marshalls castle, it somewhat remitteth in height, and so
bends down into the Sea. Beyond it toward the North is the mouth of the
River Deva commonly called Dea or Dee, and about a mile distant from it the
River Don; by the one is Aberdon, famous for the Salmon-fishing, by the other
another The mouth of the River Don: this Town is called by Ptolemie Devana, for
Denana, because it is situate on the River Den or Don.
Aberdon, which has* Bishops Seat, and Public Schools flourishing by the
studies of all Liberal Arts. I find in ancient monuments that the Hithermost
was called Aberdea, but now these Towns are called the old and new Aberdon*
From this strait Foreland between these two Rivers begins Marri^, which by
little and little enlarging it self runs 60. miles in length even to
Badenacke or Badgenoth. This Country extends it self in one continued ridge,
and does send forth diverse great Rivers into either Se^ Abria does border on
Badenacke, being somewhat inclined toward the Deucalidon Sea, and is as
plentiful as any Country in Scotland with a^^ Sea and Land-commoditie. For it
has good corn and pasturage, and is pleasant as well in regard of the shadie
woods as cool streams, and fountains. It has so great plenty of fish, that
it is not inferior to any part of the whole Kingdom. For beside the plenty
of river fish, the Se^ storeth it; for breaking in upon the plain ground, and
there being kept in with high banks it spreads it self abroad, Abria.
in manner of a great Lake: whence it is called in their country speech Abria,
that is a standing water. They give also the same name to the neighbor
Country. Northward next to Marria is Buchania or Buguhan divided from it by
the river Don. This of all the Countries of Scotland does stretch it self
farthest into the Germane Sea. It is happy in pasturage and the increase of
sheep, and is sufficiently furnished with all things necessary for man's life.
The fertility of the soil.
The rivers thereof do abound with Salmons. Yet that kind of fish is not found
in the river Raira. There is on the banks of this river a Cave, the nature
whereof is not to be omitted, which is, that water distilling drop by drop out
of the hollow arch thereof these drops are straightway turned into little
Pyramides of stone, and if it should not be cleansed by the industry of men, it
would quickly fill up the cave even to the top. Beyond Buchania towarps the
North, are two small Countries, Boina and Ainia, which lie by the river Spaea
or Spey that separateth them from Moravia. Spaea rises on the backside of
Badenach aforesaid, and a good way distant from its fountain is that Lake
whence Iut^^ breaks forth, and rowleth it self into the Western Sea* They
report that at the mouth thereof there was a famous Town, named from the river
Emmorluteum: the truth is, whether you consider the nature of the Country
round about it, or the conveniencie of Navigation and transportation, it is a
place very fit to be a Town of traffic. And the ancient Kings induced
thereunto by the opportunity of the seat, for many ages dwelt in the Castle
Now called Dounstphage.
Evon, which now many are falsely persuaded was Stephanodunum. For the ruins of
that Castle are yet seen in Lorna. Moravia follows from beyond Spaea even to
Nessus, heretofore it is thought it was called Varar. Between those two rivers
the German Ocean, as it were driving back the Land into the West, flows in
by a great Bay, and straightneth the largeness of it. The whole Country round
about does abound with Corn and Hay, and is one of the chief of the whole
Kingdom both for pleasantness and increase of fruits. It has two memorable
Towns, Elgina near the River Lox, which yet retains its ancient name, and
Nessus near the River Nessus. This River flows four and twenty miles in
length from the Lake Nessus. The water is almost always warm, it is never so
cold that it freezeth. And in the extremity of winter, pieces of ice carried
into it are quickly dissolved by the warmth of the water. Beyond the Lake
Nessus toward the West, the Continent is stretched forth but eight miles in
length; so that the Seas are ready to meet, and to make an Island of the
remainder of Scotland. That part of Scotland which lies beyond Nessus, and
this strait of Land North and West is wont to be divided into four Provinces.
First beyond the mouth of Nessus, where it drowneth it self in the German
Ocean, is the Country Rossia, Rossia.
running out with high Promontories into the Sea: which the name it self
shows. For Ros signifies in the Scottish speech a Promontorie. It is longer
then broad. For it is extended from the German Sea to the Deucalidon, where it
becomes mountanous and rugged, but the fields of it, are not inferior to any
part of Scotland in fertility and fruitfulness. It has pleasant valleys
watered with Rivers full of fish, and many Lakes that have fish in abundance,
but the greatest of them all is Labrus. From the Deucalidon Sea, the Shore by
degrees bends in, and inclines toward the East. From the other Shore the
German Sea, making a way for it self between the rocks, and flowing into a
great Bay, makes a safe and sure Haven against all tempest. Secondly, next to
the farthest part of Rosse toward the North, Navernia.
is Navernia, so called from the River Navernus: and this Country commonly
(following their Country speech) they call Strathnaverne. Rosse bounds it on
the South, on the West and North the Deucaledon Sea washes it, on the East it
touches Cathanesia. Sutherland.
In the third place Sutherland is near unto all these, and touches them on
one side or another: for on the West it has Strathnavernie, on the South and
East Rosse, and on the North Cathanesia. The Inhabitants of this Country by
reason of the condition of the soil are rather given to pasturage than
tillage. There is nothing that I know singular in it, Mountains.
but that it has Mountains of white marble, (a rare miracle in cold
Countries) which is not gotten for any use, because wantonness has not yet
invaded those parts. Lastly, Cathanesia or Cathanes is the farthest Country of
Scotland toward the North, where Navernia meets it, and these two Countries of
Scotland do contract the breadth of it into a strait and narrow front. In this
front of Land three Promontories do raise themselves. The highest was Navernia,
which Ptolemie calls Orcas, Tavedrum and Tarvisium: the two other being
nothing so high are in Cathanesia, namely Vervedrum, now Hoya, and Betubium,
called (though not rightly) by Hector Boethius Dame: Cathanesia.
now it is commonly called Dunis Bey, others call it Duncans Bey. Out of this
name by taking away some letters the word Dunis Bey seems to be derived. In
this Country Ptolemie places the Cornavii, of whose name there do still
remain some tokens. As they commonly call the Castles of the Earls of
Cathanesia, Gernico or Kernico: and those who seem to Ptolemie and others to
be the Cornavii, the Britains think to be the Kernes. For since not only in
this Country, but in a diverse part of the Island they place the Cornavii,
namely in Cornwall, they call those wh^ do still retain the ancient British
speech, Kernes. Now it remains th^^ we should speak somewhat of the Islands.
The later Writers ha^^ made three sorts of all the Islands, which do as it were
crown Scotland the Western, the Orcades, and the Zeland Islands. Those are
called (...) Western Islands which are stretched from Ireland almost to the
Orc^^ in the Deucalidon Sea on the Western side. These some call the He^^des,
others the So called from Eb. rid. which signifies in the British tongue sine
frugibus, without fruit, as Camden thinks. page 698.
Aebudae, others the Mevaniae, others the Beteoricae. T^ Orcades, now called
Orkney, are partly in the Deucalidon Sea, and partly the German, and are
scattered toward the Notherne part of Scotland* Concerning their names Ancient
and Modern Writers do agree, b^ it does not appear who first possessed them.
Some say they had the original from the Germans: But out of what Country
these Germ^ came it is not delivered. If we may conjecture by their speech,
the used formerly, as at this day, the ancient Gothicke tongue. Some supp^^
them to have been the Picts, enduced thereunto chiefly, because (...) narrow
Sea dividing them from Cathanesia, is called from the Picts ^^tum Picticum. And
they think that the Picts themselves were of the Saxon race, which they
conjecture by a verse of Claudians: -- Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule:
Scotorum tumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
The Orcades with blood of men grew wet,
When as the Saxon did the worser get:
Thule even with the blood of Picts grew hot,
Ierne wail'd the death of many a Scot.
But seeing we have entreated of these things formerly in the Descript^on of
the British Isles, thus much shall suffice concerning Scotland.

ENGLANG.
THE Southern and greatest part of the Isle of Albion, is called in Latin
Anglia: from Angria, a Country of Westphalia, commonly called Engern, The name
by whom it was given.
as some would have it. Some suppose it was so called from angulus a corner,
because it is a corner of the World. Others from Angloen a Town of Pomerania.
Goropius deriveth the word Angli, or Englishmen, from the word Angle, that is
from a fishing-hooke, because, as he says, they hooked all things to
themselves, and were, as we say in England, good Anglers: but this conjecture
rather deserves laughter than belief. Some suppose, it was so called from
Anglia, a little Country of the Cimbrick Chersonesus, which was named Engelond,
that is, the Land of Englishmen, by Egbert King of the West Saxons: or else as
it were Engistland, that is, the Land of Engist, who was Captain over the
Saxons. But he that shall note the Etymology of the words, Engelbert,
Engelhard, and the like German names, may easily see, that thereby is denoted
the Englishmen. These are people of Germany that possessed Britain; and, as
Camden shows, were one Nation, which now by a common name are called English
Saxons. This part of the Isle of Albion is diversely called by the Inhabitants;
for they divide it into two Countries. That part which looks to the East, and
the German Sea, the natives of England, being people of Saxony, call in their
Language Because it is of an angular form, for Eng in the Saxon tongue,
signifies a corner, or nooke.
England. And the Western part, which is divided from the other by the Rivers
Sabrine or Severne, and Dee, Wales. The Northern bounds of it toward Scotland,
are the Rivers Tweede and Solway: on the South lies France, and the British
Ocean; on the West Ireland, and the Irish Ocean; on the East the German Ocean.
It is 302 English miles long, and 300 broad, that is, from the Cape of Cornwall
to the Promontorie of Kent. The Air here at any time of the year is temperate
and mild, for the sky is thick, in which clouds, showers, and winds are
easily generated, by reason wereof it has less cold and heat. It has a
fertile and fruitful Soil, and so furnished with all kind of fruits, that
Orpheus says, it was the seat of Ceres. With whom agrees Mamertinus, who
speaking a Panegyric Oration to Constantine, said, that in this Country was
such great plenty, as that it was sufficiently furnished with the gifts both of
Ceres and Bacchus. It has fields not only abounding with rank and
flourishing Corn, but it produces all kind of commodities. Here grows the
Maple and the Beech-tree in abundance: and as for Laurels or Bay trees it
surpasses Thessalie it self. Here is such plenty of Rosemary, that in some
places they make hedges with it. Here is Gold, Silver, Copresse, though but
little store of it, yet here is great store of Iron. Here is dug abundance
of the best black Lead, and white Lead or Tin, and so transported to other
Nations. Here are many Hills, on which flocks of sheep do graze, which are
esteemed, not only for their flesh, which is very sweet and pleasant, but
also for the finenesse of their wool; and these flocks of sheep do prosper
and increase through the wholsomnesse of the Air, and goodness of the Soil,
as also by reason of the scarcity of trees on the Hills, and the freeness of
the whole Country from Wolv^^. This Country abounds with all kind of
Cattle and living Creatures, except Asses, Mules, Camels, Elephants, and a few
other. There are no where better or fiercer Mastiffes, no where greater store
of Crows, or greater plenty of Kites, that prey upon young Chickens than here.
The Romans did command the better part of Britain, almost five hundred
years, namely from the time of Fifty years before the birth of Christ.
Caius Julius Caesar to the time of Which was An. Dom. 446. according to Bid.
Theodosius the younger: when the Legions and Garrisons of Rome, being called
to defend France, they left the Isle of Britain, whereby it came to pass,
that the Southern parts thereof were invaded by the Picts and Scots, whose
violence, when the Britains could no longer sustain, they called the Saxones
out of Germany, men accustomed to war, for their Aid. These Saxons assisted
them in the beginning, but afterward being allured with the temperature of the
Air, or persuaded by the friendship and familiarity of the Picts, or stirred
up by their own treacherous minds, they made a league with the Picts against
the Britains, and having driven out their Hosts, they themselves possessed
their places. England contains many Cities, The Cities.
and fair Towns, among which the chief are London, York, Canterbury,
Bristoll, Gloucester, Shrewsbury, Winchester, Bathe, Cambridge, Oxford, Norwich,
Sandwich, with many other which we will delineate in our particular
Descriptions. The Rivers.
The chief Rivers are Thames, Humber, Trent, Ouse, and Severne, of which in
their places. The Ocean which washes this Isle, The Sea.
does abound with plenty of all kinds of Fish, among which is the Pike, which
with the Inhabitants is in great esteem, so that some times they take him out
of moorish Lakes, into fish ponds, where after he has scoured himself, being
fed with Eeles and little fishes, he grows wonderful fat. Moreover there are
no where more delicate Oysters, or greater plenty of them than here. The
especial Havens of England are these: Ports.
first Davernas commonly called Dover, which is the farthest part of the
County of Kent, it is fortified with a Castle seated on a Hill, and well
furnished with all kind of Armor: secondly Muntsbay of a great breadth in
Cornwall, where there is a safe harbor for ships. There is also Volemouth, or
Falemouth, Torbay, South-hampton, and many others. The King of England has
supreme power, and acknowledges no superior but God: The manner of
Government.
his Subjects are either the Laiety or the Clergy: the Laiety are either
Nobles or Commons. The Nobles are either of the greater rank, as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons, and Bannerets, who have these Titles by
inheritance, or else are conferred upon them by the King for their virtues. The
lesser Nobles are Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and those which commonly are
called Gentlemen: the Gentlemen are those who are honored by their birth, or
those whose virtue or fortune do lift them up, and distinguish them from the
meaner sort of men. The Citizens or Burgesses are those, who in their several
Cities do bear public Offices, and have their places in the Parliaments of
England. The Yeomen are those, whom the Law calls legal men, and do receive
out of the Lands which they hold, at the least forty shillings yearly. The
Tradesmen map of England ENGLAND.
are those, who work for wages or hire. All England is divided into nine and
thirty Shires were first made by King Alfred, for the better administration of
Justice.
Shires; and these Shires are divided into Hundreds and Tithings: In each of
these Counties is one man placed, called the Kings Prefect or Lieutenant,
whose office is to take care for the security of the Commonwealth in times of
danger: and every year there is one chosen, whom they call the Sheriff, that
is, the Provost of the Shire, who may be rightly called the Questor of the
County or Province. For it is his office to collect public money, to
distraine for trespasses, and to bring the money into the Exchequer, to assist
the Judges* and to execute their commands: to empannell the Jurie, who are to
enquire concerning matters of fact, and bring in their verdict to the Judges
(for the Judges in England are Judges of the Right, not of the Fact) to bring
the condemned to execution, and to decide of themselves small controversies.
But in great matters those Judges do administer right, who^ they call
Itinerarie Judges, and Judges of Assise, who twice every yeard visit most of
these Shires, to determine and end matters of difference, and also to give
judgment upon Prisoners. For as much as concer^ Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
England has now two Provinces, and all two Archbishops: the Archb. of
Canterbury Primate of all England, (...) the Archb. of York: Under these are
seven and twenty Bishops, two and twenty under Canterbury, and the other five
under York. The Tribun^ or Courts of Justice in England are of three sorts,
for some are Spirit^ some Temporal, and one mixed, which they call the
Parliament, consisting of the three Orders of England, and it represents the
body of the whole Kingdom. This Parliament the King calls and appoints
according to his pleasure: He has the chief authority in making, confirming,
abrogating, and interpreting of Laws, and in all things that belong to the
good of the Commonwealth. The temporal Courts are twofold, namely of Law,
and of equity. The Courts of Law are the Kings Bench, the Star Chamber, the
Common Pleas, the Exchequer, the Court of Wards and Liveries, the Court of the
Admiraltie and Assizes; we omit others which are obscure. The Kings Bench is
so called, because the King is wont to sit in it, and it handles Pleas of the
Crown. The Star Chamber, or rather the Court of the Kings Counsel is that,
in which criminal matters are handled, as perjuries, impostures, deceits, and
the like. The Common Pleas is so called, because common pleas are tried there
between the Subjects, by the Law of England, which they call the Common Law.
The Exchequer deriveth its name from a four square Table, covered with a
Chequer-Cloth, at which the Barons sit; in it all causes are heard, which
belong to the Exchequer. The Court of Wards has his name from Wards, whose
causes it handles. The Admirals Court handles Sea-matters Those which we
call the Assizes, are held twice in a year in most Shires; in which two Judges
of Assise appointed for it, with the Justices of peace do enquire and
determine of civil and criminal matters. The Courts of Equity are the
Chancerie, the Court of Requests, and the Council in the Marshes of Wales. The
Chancerie draws its name from the Chancellor, who sits there. This Court
gives judgment according to equity, and the extreme rigor of the Law is
thereby tempered. The Court of Requests hears the causes of the poor, and of
the Kings Servants. The chief spiritual Courts are the Corporatition of the
Clergy, the Courts which belong to the Archbishop himself, and the
Chancellours Courts, kept in every Diocese. There are two famous Universities
in this Kingdom Oxford and Cambridge. England does produce happy and good
wits, and has many learned men, skillful in all Faculties and Sciences. The
people are of a large stature, fair complexion'd, and for the most part,
gray-eyed, and as their Language sounds like the Italians, so they differ not
from them in the habit and disposition of their body. Their food consists,
for the most part, of Flesh. They make Drink of Barley, being a very savorie
and pleasant drink. It is transported often into foreign countries. They use
a habit not much different from the French. And thus much shall suffice
concerning England in general, we will declare the rest in the particular
Tables following.

THE SECOND TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAINING, The Counties of Northumberland,
Cumberland, and the Bishopric of Durham.
WE have finished that which we intended to speak concerning England in
general: Our Method does require that we should go through the parts thereof
in particular. The Romans diversely divided the hither part of Britain, being
reduced into a Province. But the Saxons instead of the Pentarchie of the
Romans, made an Heptarchie of it, in which are Kent, Sussex, Eastanglia,
Westsex, Northumberland, Essex, and Mercia. At this day it is divided into
Counties, which the English by a proper word call Shires. And first, in the
year of Christ 1016, in the Reign of Ethelred there were only two and
thirty. Afterward under William the Conqueror there were 36. And lastly, these
being augmented by three more, came to be 39 Counties. To which are added 13
Shires i^ Wales; six whereof were in the time of Edward the first, the other
Henry the eigth ordained by Parliamentarie Authority. These Counties or parts
of England, with some Islands, our Mercator does lively express in six Tables.
Of all which Tables, we will make a brief Description or Delineation,
Northumberland.
in that order as our Author propounds them. In the first place
Northumberland offers it self, commonly called Northumberland, The Situation.
lying, in a manner, in the form of a triangle, but not equilaterall. The
Southern side thereof Derwent flowing into Tine, and Tine it self do enclose
where it looks toward the Bishopric of Durham. The East side is beaten with
the German Sea. But the Western side is drawn out in length from the North to
the South, first by a continued ridge of Mountains, and afterward by the River
Tweede; and being opposite to Scotland, The quality of the Soil.
it is the bound of that Country. The Soil it self, for the most part, is
barren and unfit for tillage. Toward the Sea and the Ti^^, if tillage be used,
the Husbandman receives sufficient increase, but in other places it is more
unfruitful, and rugged. In many places great store of Sea-cole (as the English
call them) are dug forth. The Cities.
There is in Northumberland the City of New Castle, famous for the Haven,
which the River Tine makes, having so deep a channel, that it receives ships
of great burden, and defends them both from tempests and sands. The last Town
in England, and the strongest in all Britain is Berwick, which some do
derive from a certain Captain, called Berengarius, Leland from Aber, which in
the British Language signifies the mouth of a River, as if it were, Aberwick,
a Town at the mouth of a River. But whence soever it has its name, it stands
far in the Sea, so that it is map of England THE SECOND TABLE OF ENGLAND.
compassed round about therewith and the River Tweede. The Rivers.
The Rivers here are the Southern and Northern Tines (which are so called,
because they are bound in with straight and narrow banks, for so much Tine
does signify in the British speech, as some do affirm:) the Southern
rises out of Cumberland, near Alstenmore, where there is an ancient Mine of
Br^sse; and having run a good while toward the North, it turns toward the
East, and runs straight forward with the Picts Wall. The Northern Tine
arising out of the bordering Mountains, does join it self with the River
Read, which being powered out at the Mountain Redsquier, waters Readsdale,
that is, the Vale of Read, which nourishes the best Foul. Both the Tines do
flow beneath Collerford, and growing bigger and bigger, do hasten their
journey to the Ocean in one channel. Tweede for a great way parts England
from Scotland, and is called the Eastern bound. This River breaking forth of
the Mountains of Scotland, runs a great while in a winding course: but
where it comes near unto the Town Carram, growing strong in waters, it
begins to distinguish the Limits of the two Kingdoms, and at last having
received the River Till, it disburthens it self into the German Sea. There are
also other Rivers, as Coquet, Alaunus, or Alne, Blithe, Wanspethel, which I
omit, and so pass to the second part: and that is, Cumberland.
Cumbria, commonly called Cumberland: this lies before Westmoreland on the
West side; The Situation.
It is the farthest Shire in this part of England, insomuch, that it touches
Scotland it self on the North side, being beaten on the South and North with
the Irish Ocean, but on the East side above Westmoreland it joyneth to
Northumberland. It takes its name from the Inhabitants, The quality of the
Soil.
who were the true and native Britains, calling themselves in their Language
Kumbri, and Kambri. Although the Country seems, in regard of the Northern
situation, to be cold and very mountainous, yet it delights the beholder with
much variety. For behind the Cliffes and cluster of Mountains, between which
the Lakes do lie, there are grassie Hills full of Flocks, under which again
there lie plain and fruitful Valleys. The Cities.
There is in this Country an ancient wel-seated City, called Carlisle, being
defended on the North with the deep Channel of Ituna, or Eeden; on the East
with Peterill, on the West with Cauda; and besides these fortifications of
Nature, it is strengthened with strong Walls of square stone, with a Castle, and
a Cittadell. There are other Towns, as Keswick, Wirkinton, Bulnesse, called
anciently Blatum Bulgium, Penrith or Perith: that I may pass over Villages and
Castles: This Shire has 58 Parish-Churches. It has also Lakes abounding with
all kind of flying Fowls: Lakes.
and many Rivers, among which is the little River Irton, Rivers.
in which while the gaping shellfish receive the dew, they become presently, as
it were, great with child, and bring forth pearls, which the Inhabitants when
the water setleth do seek for. There are also the Derwent, Cokar, Olen or
Elen, Eden and others, all abounding with Fish. Besides, this Ocean which
beats on the shore, does bring forth great shoales of excellent fish, and
does seem to reproach the Inhabitants with negligence, because they use
fishing so lazily. Here are many Mountains close together, being full of
metal, among which there are the Mountains called Derwentfels, in which
near to Newland are found rich veins of Brass not without Gold and Silver.
Here also is found that mineral earth, The Mountains.
or hard and shining stone, called by the English Black-lead, which the
Painters use to draw their lines and proportions withal. That famous Wall,
which was the limit or bound of the Roman Empire, The Wall of the Picts.
being 122 miles in length, does divide and cut through the higher part of this
Country, it was built by Severus, who (as Orosius says) took care that this
part of the Island should be separated by a trench from the other wild and
untamed people. Beda writes, that it was eight foot broad and twelve foot
high, standing in a right line from East to West, some ruins and pieces
whereof standing for a good way together, but without Battlements, may be seen
at this day, as Camden witnesses. The Bishopric of Durham
The Bishopric of The City of Durham was called by the Saxons Dunholme; Dun
signifies a hill, and Holme a piece of land compassed with a River like an
Island in the Saxon tongue, and this name agrees with the situation of the
place.
Durham, or Duresme bordereth upon Yorkshire Northward, and lies in a
triangular or three cornered form, the top whereof is made by the meeting of
the Northern bound, and the Fountains of Teisis. On the Southern part,
almost where the River retreateth back again, the Cathedral Church is seen,
being beautified with an high Steeple and many Pinnacles: on the top of a great
Hill the Castle is seated, in the middle of two Bridges, made of stone, by
which the two streams of the River Vedra, the one on the East side, the other
on the West side are joined together. On the North side from the Castle lies
the Market place, and S. Nicholas Church. Here are also these Market Towns
Standrove or Stanthorpe, Derlington, Hartlepole or Heorteu, Binchester or
Binovium, and Chester upon the street, which the Saxons called Concester, with
many Villages and Castles. In this Shire and Northumberland there are an
hundred and eighteen Parishes, besides many Chapels. The Cities or Towns.
Here are many Rivers, of which the chief is Tees, called in Latin Tesis and
Teisa; Polidorus calls it Athesis, and Camden thinks it was called by Ptolemie
Tucsis, though this name be not found in him, by reason of the carelessness of
the Transcribers of his Book. This River breaking out of the Quarri-pit of
Stanemore, and having gathered into it self many torrents, running by the
Marble Rocks near Egleston, and afterward washing many places, at last by a
great inlet, it casts it self into the Ocean, whence the basis of the Triangle
begins. There is also the Rivers Vedra or Wear, Gaunlesse, Derwent, etc.

THE THIRD TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAING THESE FOLLOWING Shires, Westmorland,
Lancashire, Cheshire, Caernarvanshire, Denbigh-shire, Flint-shire,
Merionedh-shire, Montgomerie-shire, and Shropshire, with the Islands of Mann,
and Anglesey.
Westmoreland The situation.
I Come unto the third Table, wherein Westmorland first offers it self, being
bounded on the West, and North wi^^ Cumberland, The quality of the Soil.
and on the East with Yorke-shire and Durham It is so called, because for the
most part it is unfit forthlage: for such places as cannot be tilled, the
English e^^ Moors, so that Westmoreland signifies in English nothing but a
Mori^^ and, for the most part, untillable Country toward the West. The
So^therne part being narrowly enclosed between the River Lone and ^^nander
Mere, is fruitful enough in the Valleys, (although it has ^^ny ruff and
bare cliffes) and is called the Baronie of So called, because the River Kan
runs through it.
Kendale or Kandale. Afterward, above the spring heads of Lone, the Count^y
grows larger, and the Mountains run out with many crooked wi^dings: In
some places there are deep Vales between them, which by reason of the
steepnes of the Hills on both sides seem like Caves. The chief Town here is
Aballaba, The Towns.
now called Apelby. The antiquity and situation whereof is only worth regard:
for it is so far from elegant and neat building or structure, that if the
antiquity thereof did not give it the prioritie to be the chief Town of the
Country, and the Assists held in the Castle, it would not differ much from a
Village. There is also a Town of great resort called Kendale, famous for
Cloath-making and in this Shire there are six and twenty Parishes. The Rivers.
The Rivers are Lone, Ituna or Eden, and Eimot. Lancastria is commonly called
Lancashire, Lancashire.
and the County Palatine of Lancaster, because it is a County adorned with the
title of a Palatine. The Situation.
It lies Westward, under the Mountains which do run through the middle of
England, and is so enclosed between Yorke-shire on the East, and the Irish Sea
on the West, that on the Southern side where it looks toward Cheshire (from
which it is divided by the River Mersey) it is broader, and so by degrees as it
goes Northward, there where it boundeth on Westmoreland it grows straighter
and narrower; and there it is broken off with a Bay of the Sea, yet so, as a
great part of it is beyond the Bay, and joyneth to Cumberland. Where it has a
level of field ground, it has sufficient store of Barley and Wheat, The
fertility of the Soil.
but at the foot of the Mountains it bears most Oats: The Soil is
tolerable, unless it be in some moorish and unwholesome map of England THE
THIRD TABLE OF ENGLAND.
places, which yet do requite these inconveniences with greater commodities.
For the upper grass being pared off, they afford Turfes for fuel, in digging
of which trees are often found, which have laid a long time buried in the
earth: and digging a little lower, they furnish themselves with Marle, or
Marmure to dung their fields. In this Country the Oxen excel all other, The
ancient government.
both for the largeness of their horns, and fairness of their bodies. I
pass now to the Cities, among which we meet first with the ancient Town of
Manchester, which Antoninus calls Mancunium, and Mannucia, this does exceed
the neighbor Towns for beauty, populousnes, the trade of Clothing, and for
the Marketplace, Church, and College. There is also Ormeskirke, a Town of
traffic, famous by being the burying place of the Stanleyes Earls of Derby.
There is also Lancaster the chief Town of the Country, which the Inhabitants
do more truly call Loncaster, and the Scots Loncastle, because it took that
name from the River Lone, vulgarly called Lune. Camden supposes this City to
be that which the Romans did call Alona instead of Arlone, which signifies in
the British language, at or upon Lone. In this Shire are but 36. Parishes, The
Lakes.
but those very populous. Here are many Lakes and Moors, among which is the
Moore Merton, and the greatest Lake of all England called Winander Mere, which
has abundance of one sort of Fish peculiar unto it self and Huls, Rivers.
which the Inhabitants call Charre. The Rivers are Mersey, Idwell, Duglesse,
Ribell, Wyre, Lack, and Lone, which flowing out of the Mountains of
Westmoreland, toward the South with narrow banks, and an unequal channel
enricheth the Inhabitants in the Summer season with Salmon-fish. The Mountains.
Here are many Mountains, and those very high, among which is that which is
called Ingleborrow Hill, which (as Camden says) we have admired rising by
degrees with a great ridge toward the West, and the farthest part of it being
hightned with another Hill, as it were set upon it. The next is Penigent, so
called perhaps from the white and snowie head, which is raised to a great
height. Lastly Pendle Hill, which is raised with a high top, in manner of a
race mark, famous for the damage which it does to the neighbor grounds under
it by sending down great streams of water, and by the certain foreshewing of
rain, as often as the top of it is hidden with clouds. Cestria follows
commonly called Cheshire, Cheshire.
and the County Palatine of Chester, because the Earls of it have the rights
and privileges of a Palatine. The Situation.
It is bounded on the South with Shropshire, on the East with Staffordshire,
and Derbyshire, on the North with Lancashire, and on the West with
Denbighshire, and Flint-shire; near Chester it runs far out into the Sea
with a Chersonesus, which being included between two Bays, does admit the
Ocean to break in on either side, and into these Bays all the Rivers of this
Country do run. The quality of the Soil.
The Country is barren of Corn, and especially Wheat, but abounding with
cattle, and fish. Here is a fair City which Ptolemie calls Deunana, The
Cities.
Antoninus calls it Deva, from the River Dee, on which it stands, the
English call it Chester, and Westchester. This City stands four square,
having walls two miles in compass; toward the Northwest is seated a Castle
built near the River by the Earls of Cheshire, where the Courts for the
Palatinate are held twice every year. The houses are very fair, and there are
as it were cloisters to go in on both sides of the chief streets. There are
also the Towns of Finborrow, and Condate, now the Congleton: The Rivers.
and this Shire has about 68. Parishes. The Rivers which water this City, are
Deuca, in English Dee; having great store of Salmons, and rises out of two
Fountains in Wales: Whence it is denominated in the British tongue, Dyffyr
Dwy, i. the Water of Dwy, which word Dwy signifies two; Besides, there are the
Rivers Wever, Mersey, and Dane. Caernarvanshire. The Site. The fertility of
the Soil.
Caernarvanshire called, before Wales was divided into Shires, Snodon Forest,
in Latin Histories, Snaudonia and Arvoma, has the Sea on the North and West
side; Merioneth-shire boundeth the South side, and Denbighshire the East side,
the River Conovius gliding between. The Town^^.
Toward the Sea the Soil is fertile enough, and full of little Towns: among
which is the Town of Bangor, the Seat of a Bishop, which has 90. Parishes
under it, and is situated near the jaws of the narrow Sea. There is also the
River Conovius, commonly called Conway, which bounds this Country on the East,
and brings forth shell-fishes, which filling themselves with the dew of
Heaven, do bring forth Pearls. The Inland Parts of this Country are
Mountainous, rugged, and cliffie. The Mountains.
Camden says that you may worthily call these Mountains the British Alps.
Denbigh-shire is more inward from the Sea, Denbigh-shire. The Situation. The
quality of the Soil.
and runs out toward the East, even to the River Deva. On the North side,
the Sea for a while does encompasse it, and afterward Flint-shire: on the West
Merioneth and Montgomery-shire, on the East Cheshire and Shropshire, are the
bounds of it. The Western part is barren, the middle part, where it lies in a
Vale, is the most fruitful, a little beyond the Vale Eastward Nature is more
sparing in her benefits, but near Deva much more liberal. In this Country is
the Vale of Cluide, very happy in pleasantness, fertility of Soil, and
wholesomnesse of Air, The Towns.
of which Ruthun or Ruthin, is the greatest Market Town. After this is the
Territory, called in Welsh Mailor Gimraig, in English Bromfield, very
fruitful and full of Lead. The chief Town in this Country is Denbigia,
commonly called Denbigh, and anciently by the Britains, Clad Frynyn. Beyond
Denbigh-shire more Northward is Flint-shire: Flint-shire. The Situation. The
qualiti^ of the Soil.
It is beaten with the Irish Sea, and the Bay of Deva, on the North; on the
East it is bounded with Cheshire, and in other parts with Denbigh-shire. This
shire is not Mountanous, but somewhat rising with swelling Hills, which are
gently levelled into pleasant fields, especially those toward the Sea, which
every first year in some places do bear Barley, in other places Wheat,
which being reaped, does yield a twenty fold increase: and afterward they bear
Oats four or five years together. There is a Town here which the English
call S. Asaph, and the Britains Llanelwy, (because it stands upon the River
Elwy,) where there is a Bishops Seat, under which are many Parishes: and
Ruthlan, a Town beautified with an excellent Castle. Here is also the River
Alen, near which in a hill at a place called Kilken is a Fountain, which in
emulation of the Sea at set times does ebb and flow. Merioneth-shire, in
Latin called Mervinia, Merionethshire.
and in the British language Sir Verioneth, The Situation.
does reach from the Town Montgomery, even to the Irish Ocean, with which it
is so beaten on the West, that some part thereof is supposed to have been
washed away with the violence of the waves. Toward the South it is bounded with
the River Dee, toward the North it joyneth to Caernarvan and Denbigh-shire. By
reason of the frequencie of the Mountains, it is the ruggedst and hardest
Country of all the Shires in Wales. The Towns.
Towns of any note here are very scarce, yet here is the Town of Harlech well
fortified with a Castle, being the chief in the whole Country. And here are
two famous Bays, Traith-Maur, and Traith-Bochum: that is, the greater and the
lesser Bay. It has very high Mountains, The Mountains.
narrow and sharp pointed like Towers, and so many of them joined together by
equality of distance, that (as Giraldus reports) sheepheards either
conferring or brawling one with another on the tops thereof, if they both
intended to fight, yet could they hardly meet together, though they should
endeavor so to do b^ going from morning till evening. Great flocks of sheep
do wander o^ these Mountains, which feed not in danger of Wolves.
Montgomeryshire is circumscribed on the South with Cardigan-shire and
Rad^^shire, Mongomeryshire. The Site. The fruitfulnes of the Soil.
on the East with Shropshire, on the North with Denbigh-shire, an^ on the West
with Merioneth-shire: and although it be raised with many Mountains, yet it is
happy in the fruitfulness of the Valleys, Fields, and Pastures, and in times
past famous for breeding of an excellent sort of Horses, which (as Giraldus
says) were as it were Pictures of Natures workmanship, and were commended
both for their excellent shape, and incomparable speed. The chief Town in
this Country i^ Mongomery, situate upon an easy ascent of a Hill, and built by
one Baldwine President of the Marshes of Wales, The Towns.
in the time of William the Conqueror, whence the Britains call it
Trefaldwin at this day: and secondly Lanuethlin, a market Town. Salopia,
commonly called Shropshire, as (...) is a County, no less pleasant and
fruitful then the rest, so it is much bigger. It is enclosed on the East with
Staffordshire, on the West wi^ Montgomery-shire, on the South with
Yorke-shire, and on the North wit^ Cheshire. It is a Country fortified with
many Castles and Towns, a^^ bordering upon the Welsh, who a long time rebelled
against the English, and therefore the Saxons called it the Marches. It is
divided into two parts by the River Severne: The chief Towns thereof are
Shrewsb^^^ (anciently called Sloppesbury, and by the Britains Pengwerne)
Ludlo^ (called by the British Dinan) Bridgmorse, or Bridgnorth, Vriconium, o^
Viriconium, called by Nennius Caer Vrvach, but commonly by the English
Wreckceter or Wroxceter, Draiton, and Bewdley. The chief Rivers that water
this shire, are Sabrine or Severne, Temdus, called by the Welsh Tefidianc,
Colunwy or Clun, Corve, and Terne: and there are in it 170 Parish Churches for
Gods sacred and divine service. The Isle of Man.
The Isle of Man Caesar calls Mona, Ptolemie Monaeda, as it were Moneitha i.
the farther Mona to difference it from another Mona, The names.
Pliny calls it Monabia, Orosius and Beda Menavia, Gilda calls it Eubonia, the
Britains Menaw, the Inhabitants Maning, and the English the Isle of Man. It
lies in the middle between the Northern parts of Ireland and Britain, and
is from the North toward the South about thirty Italian miles long, The
Situation.
but the breadth thereof where it is broadest is scarce 15. miles, and where it
is narrowest it is but 8. This Island brings forth Flax and Hemp in great
abundance, it has very fair meddowes and plowed map of Wales A PARTICVLAR
DESCRIPTION OF WALES.
fields, it is fruitful in bringing forth Barley and Wheat, but especially
Oats, whence the Inhabitants do for the most part live upon Oate^ Bread. Here
are great store of cattle, and great flocks of sheep, but both sheep and
cattle are of a lesser stature then those that are in England. The Inhabitants
here wanting wood, use a pitchie kind of Turfe for fireing; which, while they
dig up, they do sometimes find trees hid in the earth, and these they
convert to the same use. It is evident that the Britains did possess this
Island as they did Britain, but when the Northern People like a furious
storm fell upon the Southern parts, it came into the hands of the Scots. The
Towns.
The chief Town of this Island is thought to be Russin, situated on the
Southern side thereof, which from the Castle and Garrison kept therein, is
commonly called Castletowne: but the most populous is Duglasse, because it has
an excellent Haven, and easy to come into, by reason of which the Frenchmen
and other Forrainers come with Salt and other commodities to traffic with the
Islanders for hides, raw wool, barrell'd beef, etc. On the West side of the
Island stands Balacuri, where the Bishop lives, who is subject to the
Archbishop of York; and the Pyle, being a forte placed on a small Island, in
which there are many Garrison Soldiers. Over against the Southern^ Promontorie
of the Isle, there lies a small Island called the Calfe of Man, which is full
of those Sea-foule which they call Puffins, and of those Geese that are
generated of putrified wood, which the English call Barnacles, and the Scots
do call Clakes and Soland Geese. Toward the middle Mannia swells into
Mountains, The Mountains.
the highest whereof is Sceafell, from whence on a clear day both Scotland,
England, and Ireland, may be discerned. The manner of government.
The Judges, being called Deemsters, which the Inhabitants of this Isle have
amongst them, do decide all controversies without writings or other charges.
For any complaint being made, the Magistrate takes a stone, and having marked
it, delivers it to the plaintiff, by which he summons his adversary, and
witnesses: And if the matter in controversy be doubtful, and of great
consequence; it is referred to twelve men whom they call the Keys of the
Island. Here also Coroners supply the office of Undersheriffes. The
Ecclesiastical Judge, when he cites a man to make appearance at a definite
time, if he obey not the summons within eight days, The manners of the people.
he is cast into prison; but neither Plaintiff nor Defendant pay a penny
either to him or his officers. The Inhabitants do hate both lying and
stealing, they are wondrous Religious, and all conformable to the English
Church. They hate the Civil and Ecclesiastical disorder of their neighbors,
and whereas the Island is divided into the Southern and Northern part: the
former speaks like the Scots, the latter like the Irish. Now remains the
Isle of Anglesey, of which we will entreat in the fourth Table of England.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. IN WHICH ARE THESE SHIRES, Cornwall,
Devon-shire, Sommerset-shire, Dorcet-shire, VVilt-shire Gloucestershire,
Monmouth-shire, Glamorgan-shire, Caermarden-shire, Penbrock-shire,
Brecnock-shire, and Hereford-shire.
CORNWALL, Cornwall.
which is also called Cornubia and in the British language Kernaw, is enclosed
on the South with the British Ocean, on the North with the Irish, The
Situation.
on the West with Penwith, called by Ptolemie Bolerium, and the French Ocean,
and on the East it is parted from Devonshire with the River Tamar. It is a
Country having a fruitful soil, The quality of the Soil.
and abounding with mettall-Mines. It has also store of fruits, which yet will
not grow without the industry of the husbandman. This Country is full of
Towns, and especially the Sea Coasts, as namely Heuston, The Towns.
called by the natives Hellas, a town famous for the privilege of sealing of
Tin, as also Peryn a fair market Town, together with Arwenak, Truro, which
the Cornish call Truscu, Granpound, Fowy by the, Britains called Foath,
Lestuthiell, called by Ptolemie Vzella, Leskerd, Bodman, S. Iies, S. Colombs,
Padstow, anciently called Loderick and Laffenac, Stow, Stratton, Tamerton, or
Tamerworth, Lanstuphadon, vulgarly called Leuston and anciently Dunevet, and
Saltash anciently called Esse. And there are in this Country 161 Parishes. The
Rivers are Vale, Fawey, Loo, Liver, Hail, Alan, or Camel, and Tamar. Havens.
One of the famousest Havens in the Country is Volemouth or Falemouth, which
Ptolemie calls the Bay of Cenio, being equal to Brundusium in Italy, as being
capable of as many ships, and as safe an harbor. Devonia, commonly called
Denshire, and by the natives Deunan, De vonshire.
follows. The bounds hereof are on the West the River Tamar, on the South the
Ocean, on the East Dorcet-shire, and Somersetshire, The Situation.
and on the North the Bay of Severne. This Country as it is stretched out
broader on both sides than Cornwall, so it is encompassed with more commodious
Havens, and is no less rich in Mines of Tin, besides it is diapred with more
pleasant meadows, and clothed with more frequent woods: yet the soil in some
places is very barren. The chief City here the English at this day do call
Excester, The Latins Exonia, Ptolemie calls it Isca, Antoninus Isa of the
Damnonians, and the Britains call it Caeruth and Pencaer, that is, the chief
city. There are also many other Towns as Plimmouth, anciently called Sutton,
The Cities and Towns.
which of late days from a little fisher-towne is become a fair Town, and
for populousness it may compare with some Cities. Here was borne Sr Francis
Drake Knight, who for matters of Navigation was the most excellent of late
times. The Rivers.
Here are also the Towns of Lidston or Lidford, Plimpton, Modbery or
Champernouns, Dartmoth, Exminster and many other. This County contains 394.
Parishes. The Rivers here are Lid, Teave, Somersetshire.
Plim, Dert, Totnes, Teigne, Isca, Creden, Columb, Otterey, Ax, Towridge, The
Situation. The temper of the Air.

The fertility of the Soil.


Taw, Ock, and North Ewe. Somersetshire follows, the bounds whereof on the
East are Wiltshire, on the South Dorcetshire, on the West Devonshire, on the
North the Bay of Severne, and Gloucestershire. This is a very rich soil,
being in every place exceedingly fertile in fruits and Pasturage and in some
places affording many Diamonds, which do exceed those of India for beauty
though they are not so hard. The Cities and Towns.
The chief City of this shire is Bristoll, (called anciently by the
Britains Caer Brito, and by the Saxons Britstow) a pleasant place, which is
beautified with many fair houses, a double River and wall, a fair Haven, much
traffic, and the populousness of Citizens. It has also the town of
Theodorudunum now called Wells, from the many wells or springs that there
break forth; and Bathonia, styled anciently by the Britains Caer Badon, by
Stephanus Badiza, but commonly called Bathe. And in this country are 385. The
Rivers.
Parishes. The Rivers are Ivell, Erome, Pedred, Thon, Avon, Somer, Brui and
Welwe. In the next place Dorcetshire, which is bounded on the East with
Hampshire, on the West with Devonshire, on the South with the British Ocean,
and on the North with Wilsthire and Somersetshire. Dercetshire.
It is of a fertile soil, and the North part full of many woods and forests,
from whence even to the Sea coast it descends with many grassie hills, on
which feed innumerable flocks of sheep. Durnovaria, which Ptolemie according
to diverse copies calls Durnium and Duneum, and now is called Dorchester, is the
chief town of this Shire, yet it is neither very great nor fair, her walls
being ruined long since by the fury of the Danes. There are also other towns,
as Birt-port, or Burt-port. Lime, Weymouth, The Towns.
Poole, Warham, so called because it stands by the River Vari^, Shirburne,
Sturminster, and Winburne, called by Antoninus Vindogladia from the British
word Windugledy because it stands between two Rivers. Here are in this Shire
248. The Rivers.
Parishes. The Rivers are Lim, Trent, now called Piddle, Carr, Ivell, Wey,
Sturn, Alen, Varia, so called by the Latins, but Fraw or From in the Saxon
tongue. Wiltonia so called by the Latins from Wilton once its chief Town,
Wilsthire.
but commonly called VVilshire, is an inland Country, The Situation.
having Oxfordshire, and South-hamptonshire to bound it on the East, on the
West Somersetshire, on the North Glocestershire, and on the South Dorcetshire,
The quality of the Soil.
and South-hamptonshire. The Country is every where full of pasturage and
fruits. Towns.
The Towns are first Wilton, anciently called Ellandunum, which was
heretofore the head Town of the Shire. Secondly, Sarisbury or new Sarum, now
the chief city, and famous for its Cathedral Church, and for that a stream
of water runs through every street thereof. Here are also the Towns of
Malmesburie, Chippenham, Trubridge, Calne, Marleburrow, etc. And this Shire
contains 304. Parishes. The rivers are Isis, Avon, VVilleybourne, Adderburne,
Ellan and Kennet. Gloucester.
Glocestria commonly called Glocestershire, has on the West Wales, on the
North Worcestershire, on the East Oxfordshire, on map of England THE FOVRTH
TABLE OF ENGLAND.
the South Wilsthire, it is a pleasant and fertile Country, lying East and
West; The Towns.
and has in it many other mines. The chief City of this County is
Gloucester, which Antoninus calls Cleve, and Gleve, the Latins Glovernia, and
some Claudiocestria: it is an ancient City built by the Romans, and is seated
by the River Severne, having a strong wall in those places where the River does
not wash it. Rivers.
There are also other Towns, as Teukesburie, anciently called Theoesburie,
Deohirst, Campden or Camden, VVincelscombe, Cirencester or Circester, Tetburie,
Barkley, etc. and 280. Parishes contained in this County. The Rivers which
water it are Severne, Avon and Isis, commonly called Ouse, which afterward by
the marriage of Them unto it is called by a compounded name Thamisis or
Thames. Monmouthshire.
The County of Monmouth, called anciently VVentset and VVentsland, The
Situation.
and by the Britains Guent, is enclosed on the North with the River Munow,
which does part it from Herefordshire, on the East with the river Vaga or Wye,
which divides it from Glocestershire, on the West with Remney which disjoynes
it from Glamorganshire, and on the South it is bounded with the Severne Bay,
into which those former Rivers together with the River Isc, which runs
through the middle of the Country, do roll themselves. It has not only
sufficient provision of things necessary for life for it, The quality of the
Soil.
but also furnishes other Countries. The chief Town thereof is Monmouth,
called by the Inhabitants Mongwy: toward the North where the River does not
fence it, it was encompassed with a wall and a ditch; In the middle near the
Marketplace is a Castle. The Towns.
There are also the Towns of Chepstow, called Castlewent, Abergevenny, or
contractly Abergenny, which Antoninus calls Gobanneum, New-port or Brunepegie,
and the City which Antoninus called Ifa, where the second Legion named Augusta
lay, now styled by the Britains Gaerleon, and Caer Leonar Vsk. Here the Saxon
Heptarchie, obeyed the Welsh Mountainers, who notwitstanding, as we may
discern by the ancient Laws, The Government.
were under the government of the West Saxons. But at the coming in of the
Normans, the Captains of the Marches did grievously afflict them, especially
Hamelin Balun, Hugh Lacy, Gualter and Gilbert de Clare called Earls of
Strigulia, and Brian of Wallingford, to whom when the King had granted
whatsoever they could get in that Country by conquering the Welchmen, some of
them reduced the Higher part of the Country into their power: and others the
Lower part which they called Netherwent. Glamorganshire lies wholly by the Sea
side, Glamorganshire.
it is longer than broad, and is beaten on the South side with the Bay of
Severne. But on the East side it has Monmouthshire, on the Norrh
Brecnock-shire, The Situation.
and on the West Caermardenshire. The Northern part swells with mountains
which descending toward the South, The quality of the Soil.
remit somewhat of their height, and at the foot of them the Country lies
plain toward the South. The Cities and Towns.
In this country is the little City of Landaffe, that is the Chapel at Taff;
under which there are 156. Parishes. Also Caerdiffe, or as the Britons call it
Caerdid, Cowbridge, called by the Britains Poratuan from the stonebridge
which is there, Neath, Sweinsey, The Rivers.
and Loghor, which Antoninus calls Leucarum. The Rivers that wash it are
Ramney, Taff, Nide, and Loghor. The Earls of this Province from the first
vanquishing were the Earls of Gloucester descending in a right line from the
Fitz-hamons, the Clares, the Spencers, and after them the Beauchamps, and the
two Nevils, and by a daughter of a Nevill, Richard the third King of England,
who being killed, Henry the seventh enlarged the inheritance of this Country,
and gave it to Gaspar his Uncle and Earl of Bedford, but he dying without
issue, the King took it again into his own hands. Caermardenshire.
Caermardenshire is bounded on the East with Glamorganshire, and
Brecknock-shire, on the West with Penbrockshire, on the North with the River
Tay separating it from Cardiganshire, on the South with the Ocean. It is
sufficiently fruitful, The Towns
abounding with flocks of cattle and in some places with pit-coales. The chief
town of the Shire is Caermarden, which Ptolemie calls Maridunum, Antoninus
Muridunum, having pleasant Meadows and woods about it, it is very ancient, and
as Giraldus says, it was encompassed with a stone wall, part whereof yet
stands. There is also the ancient town of Kidwilly, which now is almost
ruinated, for the Inhabitants passing over the River Vendraeth Vehan did build
a new Kidwilly, being drawn thither with the conveniencie of the Haven, which
yet is of no note. The Rivers are Vendraeth Vehan, Towy or Tobius,
Pembrokeshire.
and Taff. Penbrokshire is on every side encompassed with the Sea, The
Situation.
except on the East, where part of Caermardenshire, and on the North where part
of Flintshire lies against it. The temperature of the Air.
The country being near Ireland has a temperate, and wholesome air, and is
plentiful in all kind of grain. The chief town hereof is Penbro now called
Penbroke, The Towns.
and feated on a craggie long rock. The other Towns of note in this Country
are Tenby, Hulphord now called HarfordWest, and Menevia or Tuy Dewi, which the
English at this day do call S. David's. I find but two Rivers in this Shire:
but here is a Port called Milford-Haven, The Government.
which is the fairest and safest in all Europe. Gilbert Strongbow was the first
Earl of this County, on whom King Stephen did first confer the title of
Earl of Penbroke, and he left it to his son Richard Strongbow, who subdued
Ireland, from whom with his daughter Isabel, William Lord of Hempsted and
Marshall of England, a man flourishing both in times of peace and war,
received it as her dowry. Concerning the other Earls read Camden.
Brecnockshire is called so from the Prince Brechanius, Brecnock-shire. The
Situation.
as the Welchmen suppose. This is bounded on the East with Hereford, on the
South with Monmouthshire and Glamorganshire, on the West with Caermardenshire,
on the North with Radnorshire. The country is very full of Mountains, yet it
has every where fruitful valleys. The fruitfulness of the Soil.

The Towns.

The Rivers.


The chief town in it is Brecnock, styled in the British tongue Aber-hodney,
and placed in the midst thereof. There are also the towns of Blueth or Bealt,
and Hay or Treketble. The River Vaga called by the Britains Gowy, and by the
English Wye, waters the Northern part of the country: and Vsk runs
through the middle thereof. Herefordshire, Hereford-shire.
called in the British tongue Ereinuc, is as it were of a circular form, The
Situation.
it is environed on the East with Gloucestershire, on the South with
Monmouthshire, on the West with Radnor and Brecnock shire, and on the North
with Shropshire. It is a pleasant country, full of fruit and cattle. Hereford
or Hareford is the chief city of this country, having round about it fair
meadows, and fruitful fields; it is encompassed with Rivers almost round
about, on the North and West with a namelesse river: on the South with Vaga,
which hasteneth its course hither out of Wales. There are also the towns of
Lemster (called anciently Leonis monasterium, and by the Britains Lhanlieni)
Webley, The Rivers.
Ledburie, and Rosse: and there are in it 157 Parishes. The chief Rivers here
are Vaga, Lug, Munow, and Dor.

THE FIFTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. Containing these Shires, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire,
Darbyshire, Staffordshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire, and
Northfolke.
THE fifth Table of England comes to be unfolded, in the which, the first that
we meet withal is Yorkshire, Yorkshire.
the greatest Shire in all England, and called by the Saxons Ebona-ycyne. The
Situation
On the East it is bounded with the German Ocean, on the West with Lancashire,
and Westmoreland, on the North with the Bishopric of Durham, and on the South
with Cheshire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and Lincolneshire. The quality of
the Soil.
It is held to be temperate and fruitful. If in one place it be sandy,
stony, and barren, in an other place it has fruitful fields, if here it be
void of woods, there it is shadowed with thick trees, Nature being so
provident, that the Country is more pleasant by this variety. The Towns.
Here is Eboracum called by Nennius Caer Ebrauc, and by the Britains Caers
Effroc, but commonly styled York. It is the second City of all England, and
the fairest in all this Country, which is a great strength and ornament to all
the North parts. It is pleasant, large, strong, beautified both with private
and public Buildings, and full of wealthy Citizens. The River Ouse does, as it
were, part it and divide it into two Cities, which are joined together by a
great stone Bridge. There are also the Towns of Kingston upon Hull, Dancaster,
called by the Scots Dancastle, and by Antoninus Danum, Halifax, anciently
Horton, Pontfreit, Shirborne, Wetherby, Kingston, Patrington, called anciently
Praetorium, and many others, for there are in this Shire 39 great Towns, and
459 Parishes, besides many private Chapels of ease, which great Parishes are
feign to provide in regard of the multitude of the Inhabitants. The chiefest
Rivers are Don or Dune, The Rivers.
Calder, Are, Wherfe, Nid, and Ouse, which arising out of the Mountains, do
run through the fruitfullest parts of the Country. There are also other
Rivers, as Cokar, Fosse, Derwent, Foulness, Hull, Teyse, Dow, Rhte, Recall, and
Wisck. Lincolneshire is a great Country, Lincolnshire.
being almost three score miles long, and in some places more than thirty miles
broad. On the East it is beaten with the German Ocean, on the North it touches
the Aestuarie of Abus or Humber, in the West it looks toward Nottinghamshire,
and on the South it is parted from Northamptonshire with the River Welland. It
is a Country that produces much fruit, The quality of the Soil.
and breadeth up abundance of cattle. The chief City of this Shire is
Lincoln, which Ptolemie and Antoninus call Lindum. The Towns.
The City it self is large and fair, being seated on the side of a Hill,
where the River Witham bends toward the East. There are also the Towns of
Stanford, Grantham, Ancaster, anciently called Crococalana, Crowland, Spalding,
Boston, rightly called Botolps town, and others. And there are in this Shire
about 630 Parishes. The Rivers.
This Country is watered with many Rivers, as Witham, which is full of Pikes,
Lud, Trent, Welland, Idle, Dan, etc. The next Country that follows is
Darbyshire, Darbyshire.
which on the South is enclosed with Leicestershire, on the West with
Staffordshire, on the North with Yorkshire, on the East with Nottinghamshire.
It is of a triangular form, but not equilaterall, The Situation.
or having equal sides. It is divided into two parts by the River Derwent. The
Eastern and Southern parts are till^ble, and fruitful, the Western part is
all rockie, and full of craggie barren Mountains, The Towns.
though they be rich in Mines of Lead, and are commodious for to feed sheep.
The head Town of the Shire is Darbie, famous for the best Ale in England which
is brewed there. There are also the Towns of Saint Diacre, Workesworth, so
called from the Lea^ works there, and Bakewel. And this Shire does contain an
hundred and six Parishes. The Rivers.
The Rivers that water it are Trent, Dove, and Derwent. The Western part of
this Shire, which is mountainous, is called the Peake, and is very full of
Lead: for in these Mountains Lead-stones (as the Mettallists call them) are
daily dug forth, which when the wind is Westward, they dissolve with a wood
fire, and (having made trenches for the metal to run in) melt into pieces,
which they ca^ Sowes. Moreover, not only Lead, but also veins of Antimonie,
which the Grecian women were wont to use in dying, are found in these Hills*
Here also Millstones are cut forth, as also whet-stones, and sometimes a white
substance is found in the Mines, like to Crystal. But of this enough:
Staffordshire.
I pass to Staffordshire, which is encompassed on the East side with
Warwickshire and Darby-shire, The Site.
on the South with Gloucestershire, o^ the West with Shropshire, and on the
North with Cheshire. It bears the shape of a Rhombus, running from South to
North, and being broadest in the middle, and narrowest toward the two ends. The
Northern part is mountainous and less pleasant, The quality of the Soil.
the middle part is more delightful, as being watered with the River Trent,
clothed with green woods, and diversified with variety of fields and meddowes.
The Southern part is rich in Pit-coales, and veins of Iron. The head Town
hereof is Stafford or Stratford, The Towns.
anciently called Betheney, and is much graced by the Castle called Stafford
adjoining to it, which the Barons of Stafford built for their own dwelling.
Here are also the Towns of Lichfield or Licidfield, Burton, Vtcester,
anciently called Etocetum, Stone, Drayton Basset, Tameworth, Wolverhampton, or
Vulfrunshampton, Theotenhall or Totn^ll, and Weadesbrig or Wedsborow. And in
this Shire are reckoned 130 Parishes. The Rivers.
The chief Rivers which glide through this Country are Dove, Hanse, Churnet,
Tayn, Blithe, and Trent, which arising from two spring-heads, is the third
chief River of Britain. There are also Sous, Ta^, and Penke. The Northern
part is somewhat mountainous, and full of hills, The Mountains.
which beginning here, do run, like the Apennine Hills of Italy, with a
continued ridge through the middle of England, even to Scotland, yet often
changing their name. In the midst of this Shire is Needwood a spacious wood,
The Woods.
in which the Nobility and Gentry of the Country do map of England THE
FIFTH TABLE OF ENGLAND.
daily recreate themselves with hunting. Nottinghamshire.
Nottinghamshire is bounded on the East with Lincolnshire, on the North with
Yorkshire, on the West with Darbyshire, The Situation.
and on the South with Leicestershire. The Southern and Eastern part of the
County is fructified by the famous River of Trent, The quality of the Soil.
and other Rivulets that flow into it. The Forest of Shirwood takes up the
whole Western side: this (because it is sandy) the Inhabitants call the Sand:
the other (by reason the soil consists of Clay) they call the Clay; and they
divide their Country into these two parts. The chief Town which gives a
denomination to the Shire, The Towns.
is Nottingham, being pleasantly seated; for on one side fair Meddowes lie
along the River side, and on an other little Hills do raise themselves, to add
a grace thereunto: It is a Town abounding with all things necessary to life.
For besides other conveniences, it has Shirewood, which does furni^^ it with
store of fuel, and the River Trent does yield it plenty of Fi^^^ The Streets
are large, having fair buildings, and two great Churches* with a spacious
Marketplace, and a strong Castle. Besides, here are other great Towns, The
Rivers.
namely Suthwel, Newarke, Mansfield, Blithe, Scr^^y and Workensop.
Leichestershire.
And in this Shire there are 168 Parishes. The River are Trent, Lin, Snite, and
Idle. Leichestershire, anciently called Ledecest^-shire, The Situation.
bordereth upon the South with Northamptonshire, on the East wi^^
Rutland-shire and Lincolnshire, on the North with Nottingham shire*
Darby-shire, The fruitfulness of the Soil.
and on the West with Warwickshire. It is all field-ground and very fruitful,
but for the most part it wants wood. The chief^ City is Leicester, The
Towns.
called heretofore Legecestria, Leogara, and Legeocest^ more ancient than
beautiful. There are also the Towns of Longburres, Lutterworth, Hinckly and
Bosworth, near which Richard the third was slain; and in this Shire there are
200 Parish Churches. The River S^^ running toward Trent, waters the middle of
it, and the little River Wit^ which at last mingleth his waters with Soar,
Rutland-shire.
does gently wind ab^^ through the Eastern part. Rutland-shire, which was
anciently call^^ Rudland and Roteland, The Situation.
that is, red land, is, as it were, emcompassed w^^^ Leicestershire, except on
the South side, where it lies by the River (...) land, and on the East where
it joyneth to Lincolne-shire: It is the le^^ Shire in England; for it lies in
a round circular form, so that a m^^ may ride quite round about it in one day.
The fruitfulness of the Soil.
This Country is no les^ pleasant and fruitful than others, although it be
not so spacious. The chief Town in it is Vppingham, The Towns.
so called, because it stands on the^ scent of an hill; it has a fair free
School in it, which was built for the nurture and bringing up of children to
learning, by R. Johnson, Minister of Gods word, who also built an other at the
town of Okeham, so called, because it is situated in a vale, which once was
very woody and f^^^ of Oaks. This Shire can reckon 47 Parish Churches. The
little River Wash or Gwash, gliding through the middle of it from East to West
does divide it into two parts. Northfolke.
Northfolke remains yet to be described that is to say, the Northern people.
The bounds thereof on the South are Suffolk, The Situation.
on the East and North the German Ocean, and on the We^^ the River Ouse. The
quality of the Soil.
The Country is large, and for the most part field-ground unless it be where
there are some smaller hills; it is very rich, full of flocks of sheep, and
especially of Cunnies: it is watered with pleasa^^ Rivers, and is sufficiently
stored with wood. The soil differs according to the diversity of places, for
in some parts it is fat and rich, in other parts light and sandy, and in other
clayie and chalkie. The Towns.
Amongst the chief towns in this Shire, old Thetford is the first, which
Antoninus calls Sitomagus, that is, a town situate by the river Sit. It has
now but few dwelling-houses, though heretofore it were fair and very populous:
There is also in this Shire the famous City of Norwich, called by the Saxons
North, that is, the North Castle, and This Town the Saxons called Garmouth,
because it is situated ad Gartenis ostium, ^. the mouth of Gerne.
Yarmouth or Garmouth, a fair Haven Town, fortified by its situation, and
man's industry; for it is almost entrenched with water; on the West with the
River, over which there is a draw Bridge; on other sides with the Ocean, except
it be on the North side, toward the Land, and there it is encompassed with
strong walls, which with the River do lie in a long square-sided-figure. There
are also these Towns, Ashelwel-thorp, Dis or Disce, Shelton, Skulton or
Burdos, Attleburgh, Wauburne, Lynne, Swaff ham, North Elmeham, Dereham,
Windham, Icborow, and others. For this Country has 27 Market Towns, and 525
Villages, and about 660 Parish Churches. The rivers that do water it are Ouse,
Thet, The Rivers.
anciently called Sit, Waueney, Gerne or Year, and Wents anciently Wentfare.
There is not in the world any town which gets so much by taking and
catching of Herrings, as the town of Yarmouth in this Shire. The commodities
of the Sea.
For it is incredible to think, what great Faires and Markets they have here
at Michaeltide, and what a number of Herrings and other fish are carried from
hence into other parts. Besides, from hence (as Varro advises) thou may
collect the goodness of the shire, The manners of the Inhabitants.
the Inhabitants being well colored, crafty witted, and sharply insighted
into the Laws of England. But of these Counties we have entreated largely
enough, I pass now to the sixth Table.

THE SIXTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. IN WHICH ARE THESE Shires, Warwickshire,
Northamptonshire, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Suffolk, Oxfordshire, Buckingam,
Bedford, Hartford, Essex, Bark-shire, Middlesex, Hampshire, Surrey, Kent and
Sussex.
Warwickshire.
IN the Sixth Table of England is first Warwickshire, being bounded on the East
with Leichestershire, and Watling-street way, on the South with Oxfordshire
and Gloucestershire, The Situation.
on the West with Wiltshire, and on the North with Staffordshire. This Country
is divided into two parts* Feldon and Woodland, The quality of the Soil. The
Towns.
heretofore called Arden, that is, into the Field and Wood-Country. The chief
Town hereof is Warwick, called by the Britains Caer-Leon; besides the
Towns of Leamington, called so from the River Leame by which it stands,
Vchindon, now called Long Ichingdon, Harbury, Mancester, called anciently
Manduessedum; Coventry, called heretofore Conventria, Stratford upon Avon, and
others; and there are in this County 158 Parish Churches. The Rivers are Avon,
Leam, Arrow and Allen, commonly called Alne. The next that follows is
Northamptonshire, Northamptonshire.
which from the East, where it is broadest, lesseneth by degrees, and is
extended Eastward. The County is bounded on the East with Bedford-shire and
Huntingdon-shire, The Situation. The quality and fruitfulnes of the Soil.
on the South with Buckingham-shire, and Oxfordshire, on the West with
Warwickshire, and on the North with Leichestershire, Rutland-shire, and
Lincolne-shire, which are parted from it by the River Welland. It is a
field-Country, of a very rich soil, The Cities and Towns.
both in upland grounds and meddowes. The shire Town hereof is Northampton,
the other Towns are Brakley, Torcester, anciently called Tripontium, Grafton,
Daventry, Weden, Higham, Oundale, rightly Avondale, Peterborow, called
anciently Petriburgus, Welledone, etc. And to this Shire there appertains 326
Parishes: The Rivers. Huntingdon-shire.
the Rivers are Ouse, Avon, and Welland. In the third place is
Huntingdon-shire, being so situated, that on the South it looks toward
Bedford-shire, on the West toward Northamptonshire, on the North where it is
parted with the River Avon, The Situation. The fertility of the Soil.
and on the East, toward Cambridge-shire. It is a Country fit for tillage, and
feeding of cattle, and toward the East where it is low ground it is very
fruitful, having every where pleasant hills and shadie woods. The chief Town
of this Country is Huntingdon, called heretofore Huntesdune, to which it gives
the name of Huntingdon-shire. Here are map of England THE SIXTH TABLE OF ENGLAND.
also the Towns of S. Ives, which the Saxons anciently called Sleep, Saint
Needs, or Saint Neotifanum, and Cunnington; here are 78. Parishes. The two
Rivers Ouse, The Rivers.
and Avon do water the Country. In the fourth place is Cambridge-shire,
Cambridg-shire. The Situation. The quality of the Soil.
which lying toward the East, does butte upon North-folke and Suffolk, on the
South on Essex and Harford-shire, on the West on Huntingdon-shire, and on the
North on Lincolne-shire, and the River Ouse, which running through it from East
to West, does divide it into two parts. The Towns.
The Lower and Southern part is more tilled and planted then the rest, and
therefore more pleasant; it lies in the manner of a bending plain, being a
Champion Country, and yielding excellent Barley, except where it bears
Saffron: the farther and Northern part flourishes more with green Meddowes.
The chief Town in this Shire is Cambridge, anciently called Camboritum, and
by the Saxon Grantcester, The Universitie.
this is one of the Universities of England, yea the Sun and Eye thereof, and
a famous Nurserie of good learning and piety, it is seated upon the River Came.
Besides, here are these Towns, Roiston, Rech, Burwell, Ely, and here are 163
Parishes in this County, and the Rivers are Came and Stour. Suffolk.
Suffolk follows in the next place, having on the West Cambridge-shire, and
on the South the River Stour, which divides it from Essex, The Situation.
on the East the Germane Ocean, and on the North the two little Rivulets, The
fertility of the Soil.
Ouse the less, and Wavency, which arising as it were from one spring head,
and running a diverse course, do part it from North-folke. The Country is
large, and of a fat soil, except it be toward the East, for it is compounded
of clay and marle, so that the fields do flourish every where; here is
fruitful pasturage for fatting of cattle, The Towns.
and great store of cheese made. The Towns in this County are Sudbury, that is
the South-Towne. Ixning, Saint Edmunds-bury, called anciently Villa Faustini,
Bretenham, Hadley, Ipswich, called anciently Gippwic, Rivers. Oxfordshire.
Debenham, Oreford, and many others. The Rivers are Stour, Brete^, Gipping,
Deben, Ore, Ouse, Wavency, and Gerne or Year. Oxfordshire, which comes next
to be spoken of, on the West is joined to Gloucestershire, and on the South it
is parted from Barke-shire by the River Isa or Ouse, on the East it is bounded
with Buckingham-shire, and on the North with Northamptonshire and
Warwickshire. The Situation. The fertility of the Soil.
It is a fertile and rich Country, the plains thereof being adorned with fair
fields and meddowes, and the hills crowned with many woods, filled with fruits,
and all sorts of cattle which graze thereon. In this Shire the City of Oxford,
anciently called Ousford from the River Ouse, lifts up her head, being the
other Universitie of England, The University.
the other Sun, Eye, and Soul thereof, and a most famous. Nurserie of
Learning and Wisdom, from whence Religion, Humanity, and Learning are
plentifully diffused and dispersed into other parts of the Kingdom. The Towns.
Here are also the Towns of Bablac, Burford, which the Saxons called Beorford,
Minster Lovell, Whitney, Woodstocke, Banbury, Burcester, or Burencester, Tame,
Dorchester, called by Bid Civitas Dorcinia, and by Lelandus Hydropolis,
Watlington, and 280. Parishes in it: the rivers here are Isis, Cherwell,
Windrush, and Evenlode. Buckingham-shire.
Buckingham-shire so called, because it is full of Beech-trees, comes to be
viewed in the seventh place, which being but narrow, does run length-wayes
from Thamisis Northward. On the South it looks toward Berk-shire, being
parted from it by Thamisis, The Situation
on the West toward Oxfordshire, on the North toward Northamptonshire, The
fertility of the Soil.
and on the East it looks first toward Bedford-shire, afterward toward
Hartford-shire; and last of all toward Middlesex. It has a plentiful soil,
and the fruitful meddowes thereof do feed innumerable flocks of sheep. The
head Town is Buckingham, The Towns.
besides which it has also the Towns of Marlow, Colbroke, Amersham, Crendon
or Credendon, so called from the Chalk or Marle, by which the Inhabitants
thereof manure their Land, High-Wickam, Stony-Stratford, Oulney,
Newport-Pannell, etc. and in this Shire are reckoned 185 Parishes: the Rivers
are Them, Colne and Ouse. Bedford-shire follows, Bedford-shire. The
Situation. The quality of the Soil.
being joined on the East to Cambridg-shire, on the South to Hartford-shire, on
the West to Buckingham-shire, and on the North to Northamptonshire, and
Huntingdon-shire; it is divided into two parts by the River Ouse. That part
which is Northward is more fruitful and woody, the other part toward the South
which is larger, is of a meaner soil, but yet not barren: for it has great
store of very excellent Barley. In the middle of it there are thick Woods, but
Eastward it is more bare and naked of trees. The chief Town is Lactodorum,
now called Bedford, which communicates its name to the Shire. It has also
other Towns, as Odill, Bletnesho or Bletso, Eaton, Dunstable, The Towns
built by Henry the first for suppressing of the robberies of the rebel Dun
and his companions: it contains 116 Parishes, and is watered with the River
Ouse. Hertford-shire.
Next to Bedford-shire on the South side lies Hartford-shire, the West side
thereof is enclosed with Buckingham-shire, the Northern side with Middlesex,
and the East side with Essex, The Situation.
and partly with Cambridge-shire. It is very rich in corne-fields, pastures,
meddowes, and woods. The chief Town in the Country is Herudford, The
fertility of the Soil.
now called Hertford, which does impart its name to the whole Shire. There are
also the Towns of Watling-street, Fane, S. Albane, or Verulamium, Roiston,
called anciently Crux Roisiae, Ashwell, Bishops-Stortford, and many others: and
this Shire has an 120. Parishes. The Rivers are Lea or Ley, Stort, Mimer and
Benefice. Now come we to Essex, The Towns Essex.
which the River Stour on the North divides from South-folke, on the East the
Ocean beats it, The Situation
on the South the River Thames now grown very wide, does part it from Kent, on
the West the River Lea divides it from Middlesex, and the little River Stour
or Stort, from Hertford-shire. The fertility of the Soil.
It is a large Country, fruitful, abounding with Saffron, being full of woods,
and very rich: here is Camalodunum, now called Maldon. The Towns.
Also Colchester, which the Britains call Caer Colin, Leyton, Bemslot, Leegh.
Rochford, Anger, Ralegh, anciently called Raganeia, Dunmow, Plaissy or Plessy,
called anciently Estre, Chelmesford, now called Chensford, Ithancester, Earls
Colne, Barlow, Walden, called likewise Saffron Walden, etc. the Parishes are
415. the Rivers are Ley, Thames, Chelmer, Froshwell, anciently called Pante and
Colne. In the next place follows Berroc-shire, Berk-shire.
now called Berk-shire, the Northern part whereof Isis, The Situation.
which is afterward called Tamisis, does compass with a winding pleasant
stream, and does divide it from Oxfordshire and Buckingham-shire: the
Southern part the River Kennet does separate from Hampshire, the Western part
is held in by Wiltshire and Gloucestershire, and the Eastern part is confined
with Survey. This County on the West side where it is broadest, and in the
middle thereof is very rich, and full of corn, especially in the Vale of White
Horse, and on the Eastern side which is less fruitful, The Towns.
there are many long and spacious woods. The Towns are Fare^don, Abington,
called anciently Abandune, and by the Saxons Sheoverham, Wantage, Wallingford,
Hungerford, Widehay, anciently called Gallena, Ne^bery, Reading, Bistleham, or
Bisham, Southealington, now called Maidenhead* and Windsore, called by the
Saxons Windlesora. This Country has 140 Parishes: the Rivers which water it
are Isis, Thames, Ocke, Cunetio or Kenet, Middlesex.
and Lambor. Middlesex is divided on the West side from Buckingham-shire with
the River Colne, on the North side from Hertford-shire, with the known bounds,
The Situation.
on the East side from Essex with the River Le^, and on the South side from
Surrey and Kent with the River Thames. The temperature of the Air. The Towns.
It is every where very pleasant by reason of the temperatenesse of the Air,
and goodness of the Soil, besides the fair Towns and buildings. The Towns
here are Vxbridge, Draiton, Stanes, Radcliffe, and others: but above all
London, called also Londinium, Longidinium, Augusta, and by Stephanus
Lindonion, which is an Epitomy of all Britain. It is seated by the River of
Thames, having a fertile Soil and temperate Air it is distant from the Sea
threescore miles, it has a stone Bridge over the River, being three hundred
and thirty paces long, adorned on both sides with magnificent and fair
buildings. It has also a strong Tower, which is the chief Armory of England,
and in this the Mint is kept. Near to London is Westminster, anciently called
Thorney, famous for the Abbey, the Courts of Justice, and the Kings Palace. The
Abbey is most renowned by reason of the Coronation, and burial of the Kings of
England, The Rivers.
and in this County are 73 Parishes, besides those in the City. The Rivers
that water it are Lea, Hampshire. The Situation.
Colne, and Thames. Hampshire or Ha^-shire touches on the West Dorsetshire and
Wiltshire, on the South the Ocean, on the East Sussex and Surrey, and on the
North Berk-shire. It is fruitful, having pleasant thick woods and flourishing
pastures: it has two Cities, the one Southampton, so called, because it stands
on the River Test, The Towns.
anciently called Ant or Hant: the other Winchester, called heretofore Venta
Belgarum. There are also these Towns, Regnwood or Ringwood, Christ-church,
Whorwell, Andover, Rumsey, Portsmouth, Kings-clea^e, Odiam, Silcester, called
anciently by the Britains Caer Segente, and others, Surrey.
and it has 253 Parishes: the Rivers are Avon, Stour, Test and Hamble. Surrey,
called by Bid Suthriona, joyneth on the West partly to Berk-shire, The
quality of the Soil.
and partly to Southampton-shire, on the South to Sussex, on the East to Kent,
and on the North it is watered by the River Thames, and divided by it from
Middlesex. The Towns.
It is a Country not very large, yet very rich: The Towns are Godelminge,
Aclea, or Ockley, Effingham, Kingstone, Merton, Cradiden, or Croydon,
Beddington, Wimbandune, or Wimbledon, Wandlesworth, The Rivers.
and the Borrough of Southworke, called by the Saxons Southwerke, and this
Country has 140 Parishes: The rivers are VVey, M^le, (so called, because for a
certain space it runs under ground like a Mole) Wandale, Kent.
and Thames aforesaid. Now follows Cantium or Kent, a Country so called from
the situation, The Situation.
for it looks toward France with a great corner, which the word Canton in the
French signifies, environed round about with the mouth of Thames and the Sea,
The quality of the Soil.
unless on the West side where it joyneth to Surrey, and on the South side to
part of Sussex. It is unlevell, yet plainest toward the West, and shaded with
woods, on the East it is raised with high hills. The chief City is
Durovernum, which Ptolemie calls Darvernum, and in English is called
Canterbury. There are also the Towns of Dover, The Towns.
anciently called Durbis, and by the Saxons Dufra, Hith or Hide, Rumney,
anciently called Rumenal, Sandwich or Sondwic, Gravesend, etc. The Rivers are
Thames, Rivers.
Darent, Medway, anciently called Medwege, Stoure, called by Bid Wantsome,
Sussex.
etc. Sussex toward the South bordereth upon the British Ocean, and that part
of the Country which is toward the Sea is full of high white hills, The
Situation.
which because they consist of a fat kind of Chalk are very fruitful: the
middle of it has goodly meddowes, pastures, fields, and many pleasant groves.
The hither part has many woods, and it has many veins of Iron. The Towns
here are Chichester, or rightly Cissanceaster, The Towns.
so called from one Cissa a Saxon that built it: Arundal, so called, because it
stands upon the River Arun, and other. It has many Rivers, and 312 Parishes.

THE SEVENTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAINS THESE FOUR ISLANDS which belong to
England, Anglesey, Wight, Gersey, and Garnsey.
THe seventh and last Table of England contains the^^ four Islands which
belong to England: The Isle of Anglesey.
the former two whereof namely Anglesey and Wight, do lie near the English
shore, the latter Garsey near the French shore. The first is Anglesey, The
names.
which the Britains call Mon, Tirm^^, and Ynis Dowyl, (that is) the dark
Island, the Saxons call it Moneza, being divided by a slender Bay from the
British Continent. It is a brave Island, The Situation.
and the ancient seat of the Druides, the length whereof 22 English miles, the
breadth 17, and the whole compass of it 60 miles. This Island, although
Giraldus says, it was in his time, dry, stony, unpleasant, and deformed, yet
now it is delectable, and being tilled yields so much wheat, The
fruitfulness of the Soil.
that it is commonly called the Mother of Wales. It has milstones, and in some
places aluminous earth, out of which they have lately begun to make Alum. It is
also rich in cattle. It was first subjected to the Roman Empire by Paulinus
Suetonius, and Julius Agricola as Camden out of Tacitus a learned Writer. Many
years after being conquered by the English, it came to be called Anglesey, as
it were, the English Island, Camden adds, that when the Roman Empire in
Britain began to decrease, the Scots crept out of Ireland into this Island.
For besides the hills which are entrenched round, and called the Irish
cottages: The Government.
there is a place which the Irish call In Hericy Guidil, where being lead by
their Captain Sirigi, they gave the Britains a great overthrow, as it is
mentioned in the book of Triads. Neither has this Island been invaded by the
English, but likewise by the Norwegians. For in the year 1000. The navy of
Aethelred sailing about it did wast it in hostile manner. Afterward two Norman
Hughs, one Earl of Cheshire, the other of Shropshire did most grievously
afflict it and built the Castle Aber-Lienioc to restrain the Inhabitants, but
Magnus a Norwegian arriving at this Island killed Hugh Earl of Cheshire with an
arrow, and having took booty on the Island departed. Afterward also the
English often attempted it, until Edward the first reduced it into his power.
Heretofore it had 363 Villages, and at this day it is full of Inhabitants, but
the chief Town is Bellus Mariscus, The Towns.
commonly called Beaumarish, which Edward the first built in the East part of
that Island in a moorish place; and in regard of the Situation, he gave it this
name, and fortified it with a Castle. The second Town to this is Newburge, in
Welsh Ressur, because it was map of England THE SEVENTH TABLE OF ENGLAND.
much troubled with the sands which were continually cast upon it. Here is also
Aberfraw heretofore the chief City of Wales. Also the holy Promontorie which
the English call Holyhead: the Inhabitants call it Ca^ Guby from Kibius a holy
man who was Scholar to Hilarious Pictave^sis. The Inhabitants are very rich and
strong, and they use the Brittis^ language having no skill in English, albeit
they, together with the rest of Wales, The Isle of Wight.
have been subject to the Kings of England these three hundred years. Now
follows Vecta or Vectis, the Isle of Wight, which the Britains call Guith.
The names.
It is broken off from the Continent of Britain by so small an Euripus
running between, called heretofore Solent, that it seems to cleave unto it,
and hence that British name Guith, which signifies a separation, seems to be
derived: even as Sicilie being divided from Ital^^ took his name, (as learned
Julius Scaliger pleases to derive it,) a secand^, that is, from cutting. From
this vicinitie of situation, and affinity of the name, we may conjecture that
this Vecta was that Icta, which when the Sea Flowed did seem an Island, but
when it Ebd again, the shore being almost dry, the ancient Britains were
wont to carry Tin thither in Carts to be transported thence into France. I
suppose it cannot be that Mictis of Pliny, which joyneth close to Vecta,
because out of that there came white lead, and in this (says Camden) there is
no metal vein so far as I know. The Situation.
This Island between East and West lies twenty miles in length in an ovall
figure, the breadth thereof in the middle where it is broadest is twelve miles
over, the one side lies toward the North, the other toward the South. It has
a fruitful soil, and very profitable to the husbandman, The fruitfulness of
the Soil.
so that it exporteth and sends forth diverse commodities, it is every where
full of Cunnies, Hares, Partridges and Pheasants, The variety of the living
Creatures.
it has also a Forest and two Parkes full of Dear for hunting. Through the
middle of this Island there runs a long ridge of hills, on which flocks of
sheep securely graze, whose fleeces are held to be the best wool, except that
of Lemster and Cotteswold, and therefore being chiefly bought up by Clothiers,
the Inhabitants do make a great gain and commodity thereby. The Northern
part has green meadows, The Sea
fields, and woods: the Southern part is all corne-fields, enclosed every
where with ditches and hedges. At either end the Sea on the North side does so
penetrate and wind into it, that it makes almost two Islands, and the
Inhabitants do call them Islands, namely that which looks toward the West the
Fresh Water Isle, that which lies toward the East Binbrydge Isle. Vespasian
serving under the Emperor Claudius did first reduce this Island to the
obedience of the Romans, as In Vespasiano cap. 4.
Suetonius writes in the life of Vespasian. The first Saxon that made it his
own was Cerdicius which gave it to Stuffa, and Whitgarus, who carried away the
British Inhabitants to Caresbrok, and put them to death; afterward Wolpherus
being of the Mercians, brought Vecta or Wight under his power, The ancient
government.
and gave it to Edelwalch King of the South Saxons. After that Caedwalla King
of the West- Saxons, (the aforesaid Edwalch being slain, and Arnaldus
Governor of the Island being made away) adjoined it to his territories. The
nature of the Inhabitants.
But see more concerning these things in Camden. The Inhabitants by nature are
warlike, bold, and forward, and the Soldiers very stout. In Bedes time there
were thought to be in this Island a thousand and two hundred families, but now
it has six and thirty Towns besides Villages and Castles. The chiefest
Towns are New-port, the chief Market-towne of the Island, heretofore called
Medena, and Novus Burgus de Meden, from whence the whole Country is divided
into East-Meden, and West-Meden, The Towns.
according as it lies East o^ West. Also Brading, Newton, and Yarmouth which
have their Majors, and do send up their Burgesses to the Parliaments of
England. This Yarmouth and another also called Sharpnore have Castles, which
together with the Fort Worsteys do defend the coast on the West side. Over
against which scarce two miles off stands the Fort Hurst on a little tongue
of ground in Hampshire. Here is also the Town Quarre where a little Monastery
was built in the year 1132 for veiled Virgins or close Nuns, and Gods Hill
where I. Worseley founded a School for the nurture of children. Here is
situate Westcow and Eastcow, now ruinated, which Henry the eight built in the
very jaws and entrance of New-port. And on the East is Sandham a Castle
fortified with great Ordinance, as the rest are, beside the fortifications of
nature, for it is encompassed about with ragged cliffes, underneath which are
hidden rocks. As these two Islands lie near to the English shore, somewhat
more toward the West, some Islands do appear in the Sea near to France, and
yet belong to England, among which are Gerzey and Garnzey; and first Gerzey,
called Caesarea by Antoninus, lies near to Normandy, or the shore of
Lexobii, whom our Britains do call Lettaw, that is, dwellers on the shore,
or coasters: Gersey.
this word Caesarea the Frenchmen have contracted into Gersey, even as Caesaris
Burgus, a town in Normandy is by them contractly called Cherburgh and Caesar
Augusta a Town in Spain is by the Spaniards called Saraggosa. The names.
Into this Island condemned men were heretofore banished, The Situation.
for the Bishop of Lions was banished hither. Papirius Massonius calls it the
Isle of Constantine shore, because it lies over against the ancient city of
Constantia, which Ammianus thinks was heretofore called Castra Constantia,
and in former times Muritonium. This Island is about 20 miles in compass,
being defended by rocks and such sands as are dangerous to seamen. The earth
is sufficiently fertile, abounding with diverse fruits and with flocks of
cattle; it has many sheep, and most of them such as have four horns, is
beautified with so many green Orchards and Gardens, and those so fruitful
that the Inhabitants make a kind of drink of apples, which they call Sisera
and the English Sider, therewith; but in regard they have little fuel, instead
of wood they use Sea weeds (by them called Vraic) which seems to be that sea
grass which Pliny mentions, and they grow so plentifully on these rocks, The
fertility of the Soil.
that they seem a far of to be thick woods. These being dried in the Sun
and after burnt for fuel, they make use of the ashes for manuring their
fields, and making them fruitful. This Island is likewise full of Villages,
having twelve Parishes. It is fortified with a strong Castle seated on the hill
Montorguel, and he that governes it for the English is also governor of the
whole Island. Twenty miles hence toward the West is another Island, which
Antoninus named Sarnia, Gernsey.
the English at this day call it Garnsey, lying from East to West in the form
of a harp, it is not to be compared either for largeness or populusnesse with
the aforesaid Gersey, for it has only ten Parishes. Yet in this it is to be
preferred before it, because it has no venomous thing in it: beside it is more
fortified by nature, as being encompassed on every side with broken cliffes
among which the Smyris an hard and rough stone is found, which the English call
an Emrall, with which Jewellers do cut their stones, The quality of the Soil.
and Glaziers do cut their glass. This Island also, as the former, has green
Gardens and Orchards planted with diverse trees, whence for the most part, the
Inhabitants use the drink made of apples called Cider, The Haven.
as the Gersey people do, in regard of the conveniencie of an Haven, and the
traffic of Merchants it is more famous than Gersey. For on the farthest part
toward the East, on the Southern side, it has a Haven like an half Moon,
near which is seated the Town of Saint Peter, being one long narrow street,
S. Peter's Town.
full of warlike provision, and frequented much with Merchants when wars
begin in other places. The entrance into the Haven is fortified on either side
with Castles, on the left hand is an ancient Castle, and on the right hand
another which they call Cornet, seated on a high rock, and environed with the
Sea. The Inhabitants of either Isle are originally either Normans or
Britains, and do speak French. In both Islands they use that which they call
Vraic instead of fuel, or pitcoales dug in England, and both of them have
great store of fish. These Islands with other adjacent and lying near unto
them did heretofore belong to Normandy, but when Henry the first had
overthrown his brother Robert in the year of Christ 1108, The ancient
Government.
he adjoined Normandy and these Islands to the Kingdom of England, since
which time they have continued in faithful obedience to England, although the
French (banishing King John) possessed Normandy and Henry the third sold his
right in Normandy, and yielded up the possession of Aquitaine in consideration
of a certain sum of money. It Is true that the French in the reign of Henry
the fourth, did hold Garnsey, but by the industry of Richard Harlest^^,
Valectus de Carona (as they then called him) they were driven out, in reward
whereof the King did confer and bestow upon him the government of the Island
and Castle. And let so much suffice to have been spoken concerning these four
Islands, and also concerning England, both in general and particular.

NORWEY, AND SVVETH-LAND. The first and second Kingdom of the North part of
the World.
BRITAIN being described as faithfully as we could, that Northern part of
the world now follows in our method, which the Ancients did call Scandia and
Scandinavia, Pliny calls it the Nurser of Nations, and the receptacle of
people of a great stature. That part which is nearest to the farthest Northern
shore of Germany, is distinguished at this time into the three Kingdoms of
Norwey, Swethland, and Denmark. Norway.
Norway or Norwegia comes in the first place to be viewed. Whence so called.
The Etymology whereof is easy to be known; for it is so called from Nord
which signifies the North, and Weg which signifies a way, as if we should
say, the Northway, or Northern Country. It has on the South Denmark, on the
West the Sea, on the East Sweth-land, and it is bounded on the North with
Lapland, from which it is parted with high and rugged Mountains, covered over
with continual snow. All the Country toward the West is unpassable by reason
of rocks and sharp cliffes, and it is also stony toward the South, especially
in that part which lies against the Cimbrick Chersonesus, from whence it is
250 miles distant. But all the Country both toward the West and South has a
gentle Air, for the Sea is not frozen, neither do the Snowes lie long. The
quality of the Soil.
And though the Country it self be not so fertile, that it is able to
furnish the Inhabitants with food: yet it abounds with cattle and wild
beasts, The variety of Creatures.
as white Bears of an unusual bigness, Beavers and innumerable other. Norwey
was sometime a very flourishing Kingdom, under the jurisdiction whereof were
Denmark and the Isles of the Sea, until it came to be governed by hereditarie
succession. Afterward in the Interregnum it was agreed upon by the consent of
the Nobles, that the Kings should be chosen by election. From Suibdager the
second to Christierne the last, there were 45 Kings. Now it is under the
command of Denmark. There are at this time in it five royal Castles, and so
many special Provinces, whereof the first and farthest toward the South is
Bahusia, The Cities and Towns.
or Bay. The Towns subject unto it are Marstand, feated on a rocky Peninsula,
and famous for herring-fishing; and the Towns of lesser note, are Koengeef or
Congel, near Bahus and Oddewold, otherwise called Odwad. The second Castle is
Aggerhusia, out of the Province whereof high Masts of ships, oaken and maple
plankes and wood fit for building houses, is yearly carried into Spain and
other Countries. The Towns subject unto it are Astoia, the Seat of a Bishop,
to which strangers do chiefly resort, because there is held the Court whither
causes are brought for trial out of all parts of Norwey. Also Tonsberg or
Konningsberg, Fridrichstad, Salizburgh, and Schin or Schon, where there are
Mines of Coppresse and Iron, also Hammaria the Greater and the Lesser,
heretofore being Bishoprics, but now committed to the care of the Asloi^^
Bishop, and divided by the Bay of Mosian, gliding between them. The third is
the Castle Bergerhusia, under which are the Cities of Bergen, or Berga, and
Staffanger. But Berga is the most famous City of all Norwey for traffic, and
as it were the Barn thereof: here resideth the King Lieutenant, and a Bishop;
and here that delicate fish is sold, which being taken near the shore of
Norwey, is called the fish of Bergen, being transported from hence by Merchants
into diverse Countries. Here lie the Factors of the Vandals and the Sea Towns,
who continuing he^^ all the year, for traffic sake, do take up one part of
the City, which the Inhabitants call the Bridge. Here is also an excellent
and safe Heaven. The City Staffanger, although it have the same Governor wi^^
Bergen, yet it has a Bishop peculiar to it self, and living therein. The
fourth Castle is Nidrosia, called so from the River Nideros and Rosa, whi^^ is
the name of a Temple, commonly called Trundtheim, and heretofore Trondon; it is
the Metropolis of all Norwey, and now reduced into the form of a Town. It was
the chief seat heretofore of the Archbishop and of the whole Kingdom. It has
a large Jurisdiction, in which (...) fish and precious skins are gotten, and
afterward carried to Bergen to sold. And here is at this day a Cathedral
Church, and such a (...) as there is scarce an other like it in the Christian
world, both for (...) largeness of the stones, and for the carved work. The
Border (...) groundwork about the Altar in this Church was burnt with fire,
(...) the year 1530, and the loss redounding thereby was valued at se^^
thousand Crowns. The fifth and last Tower toward the North (...) Norwey is
Wardhuise, standing on the little Island Ward; it is now ve^ small, and almost
decayed, having neither castle nor munition, yet (...) it a little Town
adjoining unto it, which consists all of fisher-me^ houses. In this Tower or
rather Cottage, the Kings Prefect lives Summer, and governs this cold
Northern part of Norwey, eve^ the borders of Russia. Moreover the Western
shore of Norwey (beca^ it is of an unsearchable depth) in the Spring time is
much troubled (...) Whales, The Sea.
to prevent whose violence, the ship-men use a kind of Oy^ made of Beavers
stone, which is a present remedy, for as soon as (...) cast into the Sea, and
mingled with the water, straightway that gre^ Sea Monster makes away and
hides himself in the deep. The Commodities.
Here (...) good fishing in the neighboring seas, and especially of
Stock Fish, which being dried and hardened in the cold and hung up upon poles,
they se^ into other Kingdoms of Europe. The Merchandise.
The best taking of them is in the Month of January: for as then in regard of
the cold, they are more ^sily dried, so the sea does yield more plenty of them
and fatter. The commodities of this country in general, are precious Skins,
Tallo^ Butter, Hides, the fat of Whales, Tar, Oak timber, Masts, and Plan^
and Boards of all sort, The manners of the people.
to the great commodity of those who sell the^ The Inhabitants are honest,
loving and hospitable to strangers, neither map of Norway and Sweden NORWEY AND
SVVETHLAND.
have they robbers, thieves or Pirates among them.

Swethland.
The Kingdom of Swethland is an ancient Kingdom, as Pliny witnesses. The
Countries.
It has on the West Norwey, on the North Lapland and Botnia, on the East
Finland, separated from it by the Botnian Bay, or Finnish Sea, and Livonia or
Liefland, Situation.
disjoined from it by the Baltic Sea, called by Tacitus Mare pigrum, Fertility
of the Soil.
by the Suevians Mare Suevicum, and on the South Gothia. It is a country the
most fruitful of all the North parts: it has a plentiful soil, and seas,
lakes, and rivers abounding with fish of diverse kinds: it has also Metals,
as Lead, Iron, Brass, and Silver, which is dug up in very pure oar near
Slaburg: and likewise woods full of wild beasts and honey. It is thought that
it does doubly exceed Norwey, both in largeness, fruitfulness, and goodness
of soil, yet in some places it is rugged and moorish. This Country being for
some ages valiantly and happily defended and enlarged by the native Kings
thereof, afterward came to the Kings of Denmark: and having been subject to
them more than an hundred years, at last did shake them off, under color,
that the Laws which they were sworn unto at their Coronation, were not
observed; and hence it stood a while in a very uncertain condition. But now it
is returned again to the natives, out of which it chooses it self a King.
There are diverse Provinces of this Kingdom, some belonging to the Goths, as
Ostgothia, whereof Lince^ is the Metropolis: The Government.
Westgothia separated with an ancient Lake from Ostgothia, whereof Scara is the
Bishops seat: Also Southern Gothia or Smalandia, Tuiscia, Verendia, in which
Vexio or Wexo is the chief Town. Also Meringia, and the Isle of Ocland,
fortified with the Castle Borgholm. Other Provinces there are that belong to
Swethland, specially so called, as Oplandia, in which is Vpsal in the very
center of Swethland; here are an Archbishops seat, public Schools, and many
sepulchers of the Kings of Swethland, magnificently and fairly built. Also
Stocholm, a fair Mart Town, and one of the Kings places of residence, being
fortified both by Nature and Art. It is seated in a marshie fenny place like
Venice, and is named, as aforesaid, because it is built upon stakes. There is a
passage to it out of the Eastern Sea, by a deep channel through the jaws of
Melerus; and it does let the sea flow so far into it, that ships of great
burden may easily come with full sails into the Haven. But the tower Waxholme
on the one side, and Digna on the other side do so straighten the entrance,
that no ships can come in or go forth against the Governors will, who keep
watch there. On the Southern bank of Melerus lies Sudermannia, whose towns
are Tolgo, Strengenes the seat of a Bishop, and the Castle Gripsholme. In the
third place is Niricia in which is the castle Orebo, and toward the West the
country of Westmannia, and the cities Arosia, (near to which there is such
excellent silver, that Artificers can extract out of fifteen pounds of
silverone pound of gold) and Arboga do lie near unto a Lake. From thence
toward the West do lie Western Dalia, the Eastern and Solies Dalia, so
called from the Lake Solion; which three Provinces together with the greater
part of the mountainous Provinces, are under the Bishop of Sarosse. Here are
mineral veins, which stretch themselves Eastward to the Baltic Sea, and to
the Bay of Helsingia, and toward the West they run almost without
interruption through Wermeland to the Western Ocean, so that in every part
there is dug up some kind of metal, as Silver, Coppresse, Lead, Iron,
Steel, or Sulphur. Toward the North near unto Opland are these Countries,
first Gestricia, then Helsing, after that Midelpadia, and beyond that the
Northern and Southern Angermannia. Then is there North-Botnia, divided into
West-Botnia and East-Botnia, both of them being large Provinces: and after
these toward the North lie So called from the sliding and leaping gate of the
Finn^ which are the Inhabitants thereof.
Scricfinnia, So called from the blockishnesse of the Inhabitants, for Lappon
signifies Foolish.
Lapland, and Biarmia. These or most of these ancient Provinces of the Kingdom
of Swethland, the Botnick Bay stretched forth from the Balthick straight
Northward to Toronia, and beyond the Artick Circle, does divide from Finland a
large Peninsula: at the Southward point whereof are the Islands of Alandia or
Alant, and Abo a Bishops Seat, and on the North point Withurgeum. Finland is
divided into the Northern and Southern Finland, to which the higher and lower
Natagundia, Savolosia, Tavastia, all very large countries are adjoined. From
thence beyond the Finnick Bay is Which with Biarmia aforesaid, belongs to the
Duke of Russia.
Corelia, the Metropolis whereof is Hexholme or Kexholme: and toward the West
Wotichonia, in which is the mouth of the River Lovat, that glideth by
Novogardia, which the Inhabitants call Ny: above Copora is Ingria, in which
stands the Forts Iamagrod and Solonscia, wherein stands Ivanogrod, over
against Nerva or Narva; confining upon these toward the South are the provinces
of Lieflandia or Civonia, extended even from Nerva to Revalia or Revel, and
Prenovia or Parniew; as first Allantacia wherein Nerva is a Bishops See; then
Wiria, whereof Wesemberg is a Bishops See: besides Wichia, wherein Habsay is a
Bishops seat, and the Isle Dagen or Dachlen, most of which Countries beyond
the Finnick Bay were added to the Kingdom of Swethland, in the year 1581; by
the valor and good success of King John the third, after that Revalia had
willingly yielded it self to Ericus the fourteenth King of Swedes, Anno 1561.
The Rivers.
Swethland has many fishing-waters, Mountains.
and many rivers gliding through it. The Country it self is rugged, being
full of mountains and woods. Woods.
The subjects are partly Churchmen, partly Laymen; the Laymen are either
Nobles or Commons. The Senators.
The chief title of Nobility is Knighthood, which is solemnly conferred by the
King as a reward of virtue. The Manners.
The provinces are governed by the natives. If the Inhabitants be compared with
the Germans, they have less civilitie, but are more industrious and witty, so
that every countrey-fellow with them has skill almost in all trades, and all
mechanic Arts.

THE STATE POLITIC OF THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK.
DENMARK is a large and populous Kingdom, commonly called Danemarch, as it
were the Country of the Danes. But whence the original of the Danes came,
they themselves do not know: Some do fetch it from Danus, their first King,
and some from the Dahi, a people of Asia, Dudo de S. Quintino, an ancient
Writer (as Camden reports) does affirm, that they came out of Scandia into
the ancient seats of the Cimbri^ans. But they seem to be so called from the
waters, because AHA with them signifies a River, and they do call themselves
Daneman (that is) ^s it were, River-men, or Watermen. All Denmark is a
Peninsula, as the Description shows, and is divided into 184 Prefectships or
Provinces, which they call Harret, and they are governed by so many Prefects
skillful in the Danish Laws. It has a King rather by election of the Nobles,
than by succession of birth: the ancient manner of choosing him was, that when
they gave their voice, they stood in the open field upon stones, devoting by
the firm stabilitie of the stones under them, the constancy of their election.
The Kings are crowned at Hafnia in the Church of the blessed Virgin Mary
before the Altar, and are led into the aforesaid Church by the Senators of the
Kingdom, the ensigns of regality being carried before them, as the Sword,
Globe, and Crown. Neither are these things attributed to special Families, as
it is in most Countries, but as every one excels in virtue and dignity, so
is he chosen to that place. First the King is compelled to swear that he will
observe certain written Articles, and that he will strictly defend the
Christian Religion, and the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom. Afterward he
is anointed by the Bishop of Roeschild, and first the Crown is set upon his
head by all the Senators, who then take their oath to his Majesty, if they
have not done it before the Coronation, and then the King makes out of the
Gentry some Knights by the light stroke of a sword, for some service done
either in peace or war. Thus the ancient Danes did establish an excellent
Political State and Monarchy, neither has any Nation ever brought them into
subjection, or took away their Country Rites and Privileges. But on the
contrary the Northern people, as the Danes, Swedens, Norwegians, have wasted
almost Europe, and in some places have established Kingdoms. For the
expedition of the Cimbrians against Italy is known unto all Historiographers,
as also the Goths subjecting of Spain, the Longobards establishing of a
Kingdom in Italy, the Normans seating themselves in France, the erecting of
the Kingdom of Naples and Sicilie, and the attempt of Godfride upon Freseland
against Charles the Great. To these may be added the late King of Swedens
prosperous victories in Germany.
Canutus the Great, his holding five Kingdoms a long time. For he was King of
Denmark, Swethland, Norwey, England, and Normandy, and son in law to Henry
the third Emperor, of whom these verses are yet extant.

Desine mirari quos garrula laudibus effert
Graecia, quos jactat Roma superba duces. etc.

Cease thou to wonder at those Captains bold,
Of which both Greece and Rome did boast of old.
For now the Danish Land has brought forth one,
That is in virtue second unto none.
By my achievements I much fame attained,
Five Kingdoms subject were to my command.
And me he chose his son in Law to be,
Who was third Emperor of Germany.
My Justice famous was, I showed the way,
How powerful Kings should their own Laws obey.
By which it appears, as also by the followig wars, which diverse Kings of
the Family of the Oldenburgs happily waged, that it is a warlike Nation, and
fortunate in vanquishing their enemies both by Land and Sea. The Noble men and
Senators of the Kingdom have a free power to elect the Kings, but for the
most part they choose the Kings eldest son, unless there be some sufficient
cause for the contrary. However, they always choose one of the Royal blood,
and they do not suffer the Kingdom to be divided, unless they be compelled
thereunto by civil wars. They send the younger sons or brothers into other
Countries, seeing they cannot participate in the government of the Kingdom:
and hence it is that so many expeditions are undertaken by them. Moreover,
seeing all the Nobles and Common People cannot live conveniently in their own
Country, therefore they seek out to get themselves a more fit seat. For the
Northern people have abundance of children, in regard of their abundance of
blood and heat; they are quarrellers and fighters, they drink and eat much,
(for the cold Air excites their appetite) and yet digest it well, whence it is
that they live long; they are fair complexioned, of great stature, crafty and
faithful. And an argument, that they are long lived, is that their Kings have
reigned very long, many of them thirty years, some forty, and some longer.

The Political government.
THere are five States or Orders in the Commonwealth of Denmark: The first is
of the Kings Family, the second of the Nobles, The Situation.
among which there are neither Earls nor Barons, yet all of them can show how
their Nobility descended to them by a long pedigree of Ancestors. They carry
Bucklers, which they will not change nor alter, because they anciently used
them. There are some Families yet living, whose Ancestors were present at the
Parley between Charles the Great, and Hemmingus King of Denmark, upon the
River Egidora or Eider, as the Family of Vren and others. These hold their
goods and lands in Capite, and they have free liberty to hawke and hunt in
their own lands, as the Counts have in Germany. Their goods are not feudatory,
but hereditary. All the Castles, lands, and goods, as well moveable as
immovable, left them by their parents, are equally divided among the brethren:
and the sisters by a special privilege have a share also, yet so, that the
brother has two parts with the Castles and places of strength, and the sister
but one. By this means the eldest sons have not much lands, yet some of them
coming of a good Family, and being endued with virtue, through the Kings
favor, do advance themselves to great possessions by marriage. Out of this
order the Senators of the Kingdom are chosen, who are seldom more then 28.
These Senators have a certain allowance from the King and Kingdom, for they
have Castles so long as they be Senators, for which they pay no rent to the
King, but are charged to keep certain horses both in peace and war, and
whenever the King calls them, they are to be ready at the proper charge of
the Kingdom. If they be sent on any Embassage out of the Kingdom, they have
allowance out of the Exchequer, that they may perform their journey in a
Princely manner, as becomes a Kings Ambassadors. The other Nobles also have
sufficient maintenance from the King, whether they live at Court or not. For
the King has lands which in the Danish speech are called Verleghninge or
Benefices, and out of these he gives maintenance, either for term of life,
or for years, to those who have done him or the Kingdom any service. And
those who hold these Benefices of the King, are charged to keep certain
horses, and to pay yearly a certain sum of money into the Exchequer, yet so
as they may gain something in reward of their labor and service. There is
also a good Law and Institution in the Kingdom of Denmark, whereby the King
is prohibited and restrained from buying any immovable goods of the Nobles,
least any dissension should arise between the King and them. For otherwise the
King might by violence take into his hands those lands which the Nobles would
not sell: yet the King may change any immovable goods with the Nobles, though
on the contrary the Nobles cannot buy any of them of the Kings Farmers, many of
which have hereditarie, and (as it were) free lands.

Here follows the names of the special Families of the Nobility, in the
Kingdom of DENMARK.
THe Lords of Kaas, the L. Guldensteen, the Lords of Munc, of Rosencrantz, of
Grubbe, of VValkendorp, of Brahe, of Schram, of Pasberg, of Hardenberg, of
Vlstant, of Bing, of Below, of VVepfert, of Goce, of Schefeldt, of Ranzow, of
Schelen, of Frese, of Iul, of Bilde, of Dresselberg, of Green, of Brockenhusen,
of Holke, of Trolle, of Knutzen, of Biorn, Schested, of Iensen, of Steuge, of
Mattiesse, of Lunge, of Banner, of Luc, of Rastorp, of Krusen, of Fassi, of
Lindeman, of Suvon, of Stantbeke, of Quitrowe, of Lange, of Gelschut, of
Glambeke, of Krabbe, of Marizer, of Kragge, of Achsel, of Bec, of Ruthede, of
Negel, of VVirfelt, of Split, of Ofren, of Appelgard, of Iuenam, of Poldessen,
of Reuter, of Podebussen, who were all in times past Barons in the Dukedom of
Pomerania, and some of whose Family are still remaining there. Also the Lords
of Vren, who lived in the time of Charles the great: Also the Lords of Blic, of
Galle, of VVogersen, of Bassi, of Solle, of Daac, of Bax, of Baselich, of
VVensterman, of Hoken, of Lindow, of Bille, of Reutem, of Hundertmarc, of
Heiderstorper, of Would, of Papenhaimb, of Spar, of Falster, of Narbu, of
Worm, of Bilde, of Bocholt, of Budde, of Swaben, of Santbarch, of Gram, of
Lutken, of Vhrup, of Spegel, of Bammelberg, of Rosenspart, of Duve, of Hube, of
Schaungard, of Must, of Gris, of Falcke, of Brune, of Laxman, of Duram, of
Baggen, of Norman, of Goss, of Matre, of Rosengard, of Tollen, of Ronnoun, of
Krimpen. Out of this Nobility is chosen the Prefect or Master of the Court,
which is such an office, as the Governor of the Kings House in France: He
dwells, for the most part, at Haffnia, being, as it were, the King
Substitute, and does dispatch matters as he is directed by the Kings. Next to
him is the Marshall, which in the time of war and peace does provide those
things which appertain to expedition. In the third place is the Admiral,
which does build new ships, repair the old, and every year order the
sea-matters, for the securing of the coasts. He has under him an other
Admiral appointed, and in every ship a Captain, who must be borne a
Gentleman. There is also the Chancellor of the Kingdom, to whom out of all
the Provinces and Isles they appeal and make suite unto, and from whom appeal
is also made to the King and the Senate of the Kingdom. All the Provinces are
divided into Haeret, as they call them, or into Dioceses, under which are many
Parishes, here, if there be any controversies, matters are first tried. And
from hence they appeal to the Judge of the Haeret. Afterward to the
Chancellor, and last of all to the King and Senators, where it has a
determinate and final Judgment. They have a written Law, composed by
Woldemare the first, together with the Bishops and Senators, which is very
agreeable to the law of Nature, and not much differing from the Roman Laws,
and that causes and suites may sooner have an end, and judgment be given and
put in execution, It is provided that Judges, if they do any wrong or give
false judgment, are condemned to lose half their goods; whereof the King has
the one part, and the injured party the other. Woldemare the first (except I
be deceived) added the Bishops to the Senators, whom Christianus the third, for
rebellion and certain other causes did put out again. The Kings Chancellor,
who for the most part follows the King in the Court, has seven or eight
Noble men adjoined unto him as Assistants, besides Secretaries and Clerks; and
all businesses are dispatched by the King himself. But if it be some matter of
consequence, as concerning peace or war, entering into league with foreign
Nations, or into consultation concerning the defending of their own
Territories, then the King calls a Council of Senators. Neither can the King
impose any tax upon the Kingdom or Country, without their consent, and the
consent of the Nobles. There is also in this Kingdom a Master of the
Exchequer, who collecteth and gathers all the Revenues of the whole Kingdom,
both of Castles, Farms, and Customs, as well by Sea as by Land. He takes
account of them, enquireth into them, and gives acquittances for the receipt of
them. He has two Assistants of the Nobility, and many Clerks under him; and
for his office has a yearly stipend or pension.

The third State is of the Clergy, in which there are seven Bishops, as the
Bishop of Lunden, the Bishop of Roeschild, the Bishop of Otthon, of Rip, of
Wiburg, of Arhuse, and the Bishop of Sleswich, to whom the other Canonical
persons have relation. These have the Tenths of the Kingdom; which in diverse
Countries are divided in a diverse manner for the Bishops have an half part of
the Tenths, and the King an half part, the Canonists and Preachers have a
part, and a part is contributed toward the building and repairing of Churches.
And as concerning the Popes authority in this Kingdom, as also in France, the
ordination of Prelates and Bishops have been always in the Kings power, as
may appear by the answer of Woldemare the first, King of Denmark, which here
I have annexed. When the Pope required these and the like privileges from the
King, it is reported, that the King writ back unto him, We have our Kingdom
from our Subjects, our life from our Parents, our Reliligion from the Romish
Church, which if you will take from us, I send it you by these presents. And as
the wise Decree of Charles the fifth is praised, prohibiting Ecclesiastical
persons from buying any immovable thing without the consent of the King, so
Christian the third as wisely did ordain, that the Clergy should not sell any
thing without the Kings express commandment. In other matters the Clergymen
through the whole kingdom are well provided for by Christian the third, of
famous memory, and many Schools erected in many places, as also two in
Iseland, where they have likewise a Printing House. There is but one
Universitie in the whole kingdom, called the Universitie of This City is
called by the Germans Copenhagen, that is, the Merchants Haven.
Haft^^ or Hafnia, founded by Christerne the first, by permission of Pope
Sixt^, in the year of Christ 1470: which Frederick the second, although he
were seven years encumbered with the Swethish wars, did so enrich that the
yearly revenues thereof are very much.

The fourth State is of the Citizens and Merchants, dwelling in Cities and
Towns. These have proper and peculiar privileges which they enjoy, besides
certain fields and woods that belong to them; and these do traffic both by
Sea and Land in all parts of Europe. Out of these, as also out of the
Countrey-people, the Bishops, the Canonists, the Preachers, and Senators of
Cities, the Clerks of Bands, the Lievtenants of Towers, and the Masters of
Ships are chosen, and some of them are Masters of the Customs or Tributes;
lastly, of these all lesser Councels of Justice do consist, one of the
Nobility, for the most part, sitting as President.

The fifth State is of the Rustic, or Countrey-people, and there are two sorts
of them, the first they call Freibunden, that is, Freeholders. These do hold
Lands of Inheritance, yet paying for the same some little free-rent every
year. These do also use merchandise and fishing. They are not oppressed with
doing services, neither do they pay any taxes, unless the Senators of the
kingdom do grant it as a subsidy. The other sort is of those, who do not
possess goods of inheritance, but do farm them of the King, the Nobles or
Ecclesiastical persons, and are constrained to do many services for their
Lords, in such manner, as they shall covenant with their Landlord. These are
the chief things which I thought good to declare concerning the State politic
of Denmark; whereby it appears, that the Danish Monarchy was, for the most
part, well framed: for the free election of the Kings being in the hands of the
Nobility, and yet notwithstanding out of the royal Progeny, as we said
before: it follows, that the Danes have no civil wars or dissentions,
unless those which are between such as be of the Blood Royal, which are
quickly composed by the mediation and help of the Nobles; but especially
seeing the Kings younger Sons can have no part of the kingdom. Moreover, as
they are all styled but Nobles, and know not the titles and names of Barons,
Earls, and Dukes, so there are none that have so much wealth and power, as
that reposing trust therein, they dare oppose themselves against the Royal
Family; because the Fathers Inheritance is always divided between the Sons
and Daughters. Thus the Kings of Denmark have a flourishing Commonwealth,
which may easily be defended from foreign enemies, whom their Subjects,
living in unanimity and concord with them as their natural Lords, are able to
resist both by sea and land.

THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK. BEING THE THIRD KINGDOM OF THE NORTH.
DENMARK is joined only in two places to the Co^tinent, The Situation.
on the West the Ocean beats on it, on the Ea^^ the Balticke Sea, on the
North lies Norwey and Sw^^land, and on the South Holsatia, Megalopolis, and
Pomera^^ It has many several Islands lying by it. The temperature of the Air.
The temper (...) the Climate, together with the wholsomnesse of the Air (that
I man use Ioh. Coldingensis his words) does make the Danes fresh complexio^ed.
The fruitfulness of the Earth does nourish them, the sweet h^^mony of Birds
does recreate them; their Woods and Groves, in which great numbers of Hogs do
feed, The fruitfulnes of the Soil.
and fat themselves with Akornes (...) Beech-maste, do refresh them; and the
diverse sorts of Cattle and f^^^rishing Meadows do yield them much delight. The
Sea does affo^^ them such plenty of provision, The variety of living
creatures.
that the Danes thereby not only furnish themselves, but also many other parts
of Europe. In a word, they wa^ nothing that is necessary to life, so loving
has Nature showed her self to this Country. Concerning the ancient
Government thereof M^^ster writes, that one Danus many ages before Christ, was
the first King of Denmark, The Ancient Government.
from whom the other Kings of Denmark did descend in a fair and orderly
succession; therefore concerning the names of his successors, and the other
Kings of Denmark, read Munster, largely discoursing. All the Country of
Denmark having many arms of the Se^ reaching far into the Land, does
consist of many parts, the chief whereof are these Iutia, Fionia, Zelandia and
Scania, besides the Islands lying near to several parts thereof.

Iutia, which some would have called Gotia, being heretofore the Sea of the
Cimbri, is called by Historians and Geographers the Cimbri^^ Chersonesus, and
is divided into the Southern and Northern Iutia. The Description of this
Northern Iutia you may behold in the second Table of Denmark. Southern
Iutia, heretofore called Nordalbingia, does contain the famous Dukedom of
Sleswick to which the Dukedom of Holsatia may now be added, whereof you shall
find a more ample declaration in the third Table of Denmark.

Also there follows a more particular Description of Fionia, in the fourth
Table of Denmark.

Zeland, otherwise called Staland, and by some Authors Selandunia, is the
greatest of all the Isles of Denmark, which Olivarius and Ortelius think to
be that Codanonia which Mela mentions. Others call it Zeland as if it were
Sealand, because it is on every side encompassed with the Sea. Some would have
it so called as if one should say Seed-land, because map of Denmark THE
KINGDOM OF DENMARK.
of its own accord without any yearly manuring it is very fruitful in
bearing of corn. This Island is For it is 64 English miles in length, and 52.
in breedth.
two days journey long, and almost as much in breadth. It has 15 Cities in it,
and twelve royal Castles. But among the Cities the chief is Hafnia, which is
the Metropolis or mother City of all Denmark, and famous, not only for the
largeness and wealth thereof, but for a convenient Haven, which the incredible
depth thereof, and the lying of the Island Amaggor over against it does make a
safe Harbor to Sea-faring-men. This City, being an Universitie, affords a
continual supply of Doctors, learned Pastors, and Preachers for all the
Churches of the Kingdom of Denmark and Norwey. Above Hafnia is Helsingor
called also Elseneur, and near unto it the royal Castle of Croneburg of which
we will speak hereafter: over against this Castle on the other side of the
Sea, there stands another like unto it called Helsinborch or Hilsemburg with
a Town of the same name. Here Zeland and Scania do lie so near together with
their Promontories, as it were meeting one the other, that the Sea between them
is scarce four miles over, and is called De Sund, or the Sound. At this place
all the ships that are bound toward the East, are compelled to come as to one
common Center, and pay Custom to the King. And there being a Castle on either
Shore, the King when necessity requires it, having placed his ships in the
middle of it, can so shut up the mouth thereof, that he can restrain a great
Navy either from entering in, or going forth; for sometime 200, and sometime
300 ships do arrive there together in one day out of diverse parts of Europe.
Here is also Roeschild heretofore the Seat of a Bishop, where are to be seen
diverse famous monuments of many D^nish Kings and Dukes, now almost wasted and
decayed. Beneath Zel^^ are the Islands following Amigria, Huena, Weem,
Moenesland in which ^s the City Stegoa and many others. Zeland has one
Bishop, whose Se^ the Prelate of Roeschild (as I said) did hold heretofore.
Scania.
Scania among a^ the Provinces of the Kingdom of Denmark is famous for the
large ^s and wealth thereof. This some have called Scandinavia for Scond^^^
that is, the pleasant part of Denmark, some Scania, and others Sconing^^
commonly it is called Sconen. Pliny calls it Scandia and Scand^^^via, which
he falsely supposes to be a very large Island. But Orte^^ thinks that this
Scandia and Scandinavia which Pliny mentions was (...) Scania, but that
Peninsula, which at this day does contain three very large Kingdoms, The
Situation.
Norwey, Swethland, and Gothland beside other Countries. This Scania is every
where encompassed with the Sea, except it be where an arm of Land stretches
out Northward, and from thence be^ding back Eastward is joined to Swethland:
yet the deep valleys and high Rocks which lie between these two Countries,
make it to be s^ difficult a journey out of Scania into Gothland and part of
Swethland, that it is easier to adventure to go by Sea, than to undergo the
trouble by land. This Country is inferior unto none in the temperature of the
Climate, The fruitfulness of the Soil.
the fruitfulness of the Earth, the conveniencie of the Havens, i^ Sea
commodities, in fishing, in Lakes or Rivers, in hunting of will beasts, in the
inexhaustible veins of Gold, and Silver, Brass, and Lead, in the frequencie
of Towns, The quality of the Soil.
and in their Civil institutions. Whence as Munster witnesses, it still
retains the name of Scandia. It was heretofore divided into two Dukedomes
Halland and Bleking, now it contains three and twenty Prefectorships, and
fifteen Cities. The Metropolis or chief City thereof is Londa or Londia,
where the Archbishop of the Kingdom resideth. Here is also Malmogia, which is
also called Ellebogen, being a famous Mart-towne, and the special City of the
whole Country for Faires and continual traffic, which the people of the
Country do use there. In Halland is the Castle Warburg, built on the high tops
of Mountains. It was taken by the Swedens, and fortified with a Garrison of
their own in the year 1565, when Daniel Ranzovius by by the command of King
Frederick the second, did straightly besiege it, that at last it was enforced to
yield it self up. This man famous for his virtues and valor was slain in the
year 1569. being shot through the head with a bullet sent from a brass piece
of Ordinance. Near unto this Country are the Islands Landoe, Hannoe, and
Bornholm, a famous Island divided into four Prefectorships, and containing
three Cities and one Castle. There is also Gotland, in which the ancient and
once flourishing Mart-towne of Wisby is seated, but now the traffic being
removed to other cities, it is decayed, both in Inhabitants, and wealth.
Besides corn, with which this country abounds, it affords not only
plenty of cheese, butter and diverse sorts of skins, but fair fur trees, of
which there are great woods for the making of masts for ships, and also lime
and stone for building. The Rivers of Denmark are Egidora, commonly called
Eyder, which Ptolomy calls Chalusus. This River divides the Frizians from the
Ditmarsians, and so discharges it self into the British Ocean. The fish-full
and navigable River Stora, (which arising in the inner part of Holsatia,
waters and washes some Towns, together with the noble house of Brandenberg
belonging to the Ranzovian family, and afterward powers it self ito the
River Albis) and diverse others. The This Sea is called by some Mare Suevicu^,
by Pom^p^^us Mela, Sin^^ Colanus, and by Strabo, Sinus, Venedicus.
Balticke Sea which we have made to be the bound of Denmark on the East, the
Germans call it Oastzee, but the inhabitants do now call it Belts from the
Latin word Baltheus which signifies a Belt or military girdle, because in
manner of a girdle, it embraces and encompasseth either Chersonesus. Tacitus
seems to call it Mare pigrum, that is, the slow Sea, from the effect, as
Ortelius thinks, because it is not moved as other Seas, for the Tides thereof
are scarcely discerned, as they do affirm that have often sailed on it, and it
flows in a perpetual course from East to West. Helsingera at the Bay of the
Sund, has the royal Castle Cronburg, being the defense and strength of the
farthest Island from the shore of Zeland. This Castle Frederick the second
King of Denmark, did build with great cost, and raised it from the bottom of
the Sea by laying many stones under water between wooden planks for a
foundation; it is so strong and firm, that it despises the huge waves of the
Sea with stormy weather rowles against it. There is in the City Lundis a very
curious Clock wherein much Art is expressed, called Saint Laurences clock:
and set up in the lower part of the Church, where it has a Table of wood
fastened to the wall distinguished with many circles of diverse colors. In this
clock by certain Indexes the present year, month, and weeks, also the
particular day and hour of the day is represented to the eye, thereby are
showed the fixed and moveable feasts, the motion of the two great Luminaries,
the Sun and Moon, their places in the Zodiac every day, and their
positions and aspects one toward another. And as these things appear
outwardly, by reason of certain engines, and wheels framed within to that
purpose, So is there added a covering so made by Art, that as often as the
Clock strikes, two little Images like two Champions do meet together, and do
give one another so many blows as the Clock strikes strokes. But that which
is more wonderful is this, in the middle of this Table, as it were in a
Throne, is placed the Image of the Virgin Mary, holding her Infant in her
arms: on both sides of her there are, as it were, two Gates, and before her
feet a Theater of a semicircular form, with the arch thereof turned toward the
spectators, within there is a devise with the Images of the three wisemen,
having every one their servant. The whole engine being turned as he pleases
that keeps it, straight way the Images come forth. And before the rest there
comes as it were a threatening Herald, who brandishing his sword knocks at the
left doare, that being opened he goes forward while two Images seem to blow
two trumpets before him. He that is the first of the wisemen, walks with a
stately pace. But when he comes to the Virgin Mary's Image he reverently
bends himself unto it, as if he did adore her. And so also do the other two.
The servants go on without doing any obedience or making any show of
reverence, the last of them shuts the right gate, that the sound of the
Clock when that is shut may be heard more plainly. But of this enough.

THE SECOND TABLE OF DENMARK. WHICH CONTAINS PART OF THE NORTHERN IVTIA.
THE Western and special part of Denmark is Iutia, commonly called Iutland,
The names.
which Ptolemy calls the Cimbrian Chersonesus, and Pliny Cartrin. This
runs forth Northward in manner of a Peninsula, between the British and
Germane Seas, as Italy does toward the South. The Southern bound thereof is
the River Eydera, The Situatio^.
and it lies many miles in length from the River Albis or Elve, toward the
North: The greatest breadth of it is not much. This Country is divided into the
Northern and Southern part, as we have already spoken. The Northern Iutia,
Iutia.
called the Northern Cimbrica, which is described in this Table, extending it
self toward Norwey, does over against Saga, a Town famous in regard of the
quicksands and shallow Sea near it, The Situation.
end in a strait and narrow form like a wedge. This Country is broadest about
the Market Town of Aleburg, where Lymford winding it self into it, and
passing almost through all Iutia Westward, parts the Country Wensussel from
the rest, except it be for a very little space, and so makes it as it were an
Island. This River being carried in a great channel, makes many famous
Islands by encompassing them about; and having many Bays as it were, and
several branches, it does divide and give limits to diverse Provinces.
Northern Iutia is fertile in producing and bearing Fruits, Corn, Barley, and
the like: It has also in some places very fruitful pastures. It abounds
with so many herds of Oxen, and brings up so many Cowes, that it sends an
incredible number of cattle into foreign Countries, and especially into
Germany, whither there are yearly brought almost 150 thousand Oxen, besides
Cheese, Butter, Tallow, and Hides. It does bring forth an excellent breed of
Horses, of which a great number are transported to other places. Iutia
heretofore was subject to the Saxons, but not the other Northern Countries.
Out of this Country the Cimbri 150 years before Christ's birth, came and fell
upon Italy like an impetuous storm, to the great terror thereof. For they
having joined to themselves the Teutons, the Tigurines, and Ambrones, conspired
utterly to extinguish the Roman Empire. Syllanus could not resist the violence
of their first approach, nor Manilius their second onset, nor Caepio the
third. All of them were put to flight and beaten out of their Tents, insomuch
as Florus thinks they had been quite undone and overthrown if Marius had
not lived in that age. This Cimbrian war continued eight years after the
Consulship of Syllanus, even to the fifth Consulship of Marius, who at the River
Athesis, called by the Germans Etsch, and by the Italians L'adica, did quite
cut off their Army consisting of Cimbrians, Teutons, and and Ambrones. But
because in this place we have by chance made mention of the Cimbrians, whose
name is famous in Histories, we will speak somewhat more of them: and because
Iunius a learned man does discourse most learnedly of them, I will not think
it much to set down his own or other words to the same effect.

It appears in Moses Books, says he, that Iaphes had a son called Gomer,
or by changing of a letter Comer, which word signifies with the Hebrews one
perfecting a circle. But the genuine sense of the word, (hitherto unknown to
Writers unskilful in the Cimmerian language, because none has declared the
obscurity) will be as manifest and clear as the Meridian Sun, i^ you
gently break the word in pieces. For what other thing does ^^om her, being
disjoined, signify in that language, or if you pronounc^ it Gomer, than I go
about in a circle, or I finish a perfect course? Hence also is that orbicular
order of Arts, which the Grecian Writers cal^ Encyclopedia, and Fabius the
circle of learning, (because it is endless as a ring) called Gomera. Rightly
therefore that auspicious name happened unto the offspring of Iaphet, which
spread themselves over the World, and as the name does signify, did finish
that course th^^ was given and prescribed to them by lot, having traveled over
al^ Countries from the rising of the Sun to the setting thereof. For (...)
man is so rude and ignorant in the knowledge of History, that knows not that
the Goths and Vandales (who were the offspring of the Cimmerians or Cimbri) did
possess both the Hesperiaes. Wherefore, since by the consent of all men the
Cimmerians did descend from Gomer, who at first did possess the inward part of
Asia, and being expelled by the Scythians, repairing Westward did pass into
Scandia, and from thence unto the Cimbrian Chersonesus, I see no reason how a
more convenient name can be given to Gomer the Author of the Cimbrian Nation,
and to the people retaining their fathers na^^ than from the desire of
circuiting and wandering about. For I think no man has read of any Nation that
has traveled a greater circuit of earth, as Josephus, an accurate Writer of
the Jewish antiquities, does perspicuously and diligently explain when he
writes that the post^rity of Gomer coming out of Armenia, did run out into
the Riv^^ Tanais, and from thence with their multitudes, did overspread al^
Countries of Europe, as far as the utmost coasts of the Gades. Plutar^ in the
life of Marius has clearly explained the desire that was in the Nation to
propagate and finish this their course when he reported thus of them. The
Cimbrians, as often as they change their seats, do^ attempt the neighbor
Countries by wars, yet not with a daily or continual violence, but every
year when the season serves they make some inroade, and seeing there are
diverse and several names of people amongst them, they call their troops by a
common appellation Celtoscythians. Some do report that there was no great
company of Cimbrians, who were anciently known to the Grecians, but that some
banished men or seditious persons, cashiered by the Scythians,

map of Denmark THE SECOND TABLE OF DENMARK.


passed from Now called Mar delle Sabacche.
Maeotis into other parts of Asia under the conduct of Lygdamis: and that the
greatest and most warlike part of the Nation did seat themselves on the
outmost coasts of the Or Northern Sea, called now Mare Cronium, or Mare
Scythecum.
Ocean, and did inhabit a dark Country, which in regard of the high and
thick woods, reaching even to the Forest of Hircynus, was to the Sunne-beames
inaccessible. Hitherto I have for the most part rendered his own words: but I
understand not whence Plutarch from the Germane Etymology, or Festus Pompeius
from the French, can prove that the Cimbrians were called thieves and robbers,
unless we take hired Soldiers for thieves and robbers, or unless it seem
that Plutarch did refer it to the manner of warring peculiar to that Nation,
who did set upon their neighbors with secret ambushment and assaults like
thieves, for he relates that Italy was strooken with fear by their fierce
inrodes, when they understood that a Nation of no name or settled habitation,
was like a sudden cloud of rain ready to fall upon their heads. Hitherto
Iunius. This Iutia is divided into four large Episcopal Seats, The Towns.
into the Ripensius, which is kept at Ripen, the Arhusian which is at Arhusium,
the Vandalica^ which is at Alburg, and the Wiburgian which is at Wiburg. The
Ripensi^^ Diocese has 30 Prefectures, seven Cities, and ten royal Castles.
Queen Dorothy the widow of Christian the third erected and built a School at
Kolding, at her own proper charge and cost. The Arhusian Diocese has one and
thirty Prefectures, seven Cities, and five Castles, Ar^^sium or Arhusen is a
famous Mart-Towne, in regard of its Haven made by the great Promontorie of
Hellen, which extends it self through the Country of Mols, from the royal
Castle Kalloe, even to the high Mountain Ellemansbergh, and by its own
situation, and some Islands lying near unto it, makes the Sea very placable
and calm for Mariners. Under this Diocese there are the Islands Samsoe,
Hielm, Tuen, Hiar^^, sometimes called Gerno, Hilgenes, and many other. The
Vandalican Diocese, called also the Diocese of Burglaw, has thirteen
Prefectures, and six Cities. The most special parts thereof are Wendsyssel,
Handhaeret, Thyland, and Morsoe. Wendsyssil or Vensilia, that is the Land o^
Seat of the Vandalls has six Prefectures, three Towns, and one Castle. Here
is the Mountain Alberg, in which are certain Monuments of Giants, the
adjacent Isles are Grysholm, Hertsholm, Tydsholm and others. In Handhaeret is a
Rock of great height, called Skarringelint, and on the coast thereof those two
quicksands, which they call Sandores and Braccae. The Isles subject unto it
are Oland and Oxeholm. Thyland has four Prefectures, one Town called Thystad
or Tystet, where Christian the third built a School for the nurture of Youth,
and one Castle called Orumna. Under it are the Islands Hansholm, Ostholm,
Iegen, Cifland, Egholm, Bodum. Morsia has three Prefectures, the City
Nicoping, the Castle Lundslod or Lundgard, and an Island adjacent near unto
it, called Ageroa. The Diocese of Wiburg does contain sixteen Prefectures,
three Cities, and as many Castles. At Wiburg the general Council of the most
Noble and wise Trium-viri, concerning enquiring into, and judging of civil
matters, is continued almost all the year, unless sometimes when they are
wearied with that troublesome office, they refresh themselves, and recollect
their strength in their own Country houses. Hither are brought the causes of
all the Cimbrian Chersonesus, as complaints of bounds, controversies concerning
inheritance, and all capital causes, as slaughters, adulteries, thefts,
poysonings, etc. Near to the Peninsula Wenslia, where ending in a Cone, it
bends by degrees toward the East, is that corner of Iutia, so perilous and
fearful to Mariners: for a great ridge of rock^s run so far into the
Sea, that those who would be free from danger, come not near to the shore by
8. miles. Such also is all the Western shore of Iutia, so that those who
purpose to sail into Norwey, or out of the Ocean Eastward, are enforced to
take a large compass to avoyde it: and to this purpose there are four
Mountains on this shore, which the Mariners observe as Sea-markes. The
Inhabitants of this Country seeing they have no fit Haven for ships to ride in,
draw them out of the deep upon the shore so far, that the waves of the Sea
by beating upon them cannot bruise them. The Sea.
In this Sea there is plenty of fish, and especially of Herrings; The
commodities.

The manners of the people.


and therefore the Inhabitants use fishing much. These things being declared, I
will add something not impertinent to conclude this place withal, which is,
that the people in these Northern Countries have been, and yet are cold and
dry, of a large stature, fair complectioned, well colored, merry, jocund,
suspicious, crafty, and provident in business, healthful, proud, loving to
their friends; they eat and drink much, they digest well, and therefore live
long, they abound with blood, they are blunt in behavior, and in regard of
much heat about their heart, they are quarrellous and contentious, they love
dangers, hunting and traveling, they are obstinate in defending their own
opinions, and yet mindful of Justice, they are very docible and apt to
attain Languages, they are lovers of the Muses, and do strictly perform
their covenants and bargains, they have many children, which the weomen with
great difficulty bring forth; their women are also beautiful, and both wise
and sparing in the government of their Family: but they die for the most part
of Catharres, the Kings evil, the Pleuricy, the Fistula, the Dropsy, or
Ptisicke. Achilles Gassarus affirms that Guns were here first invented by a
Monk.

THE THIRD TABLE OF DENMARK. Jn which are part of the Dukedom of SLESWICH and
HOLSATIA.
The Dukedom of Sleswick.
SO much concerning Northern Iutia, the Southern ^^^loweth, which the Ancients
did call Nordalbingia, because it is separated and parted toward the North from
the (...) of Germany, by the river Called by the Germans Elve, which
signifies in their tongue eleven, because it has so many fountains, whence
so called.
Albis. It contains the (...) Dukedomes of Sleswick and Holsatia, of which
we will speak in order. The Dukedom of Sleswick takes his name from the
Metropolis and ancient Mart Town of Sleswick. Heretofore this Country was
called the Dukedom of Iutia, which Woldemare Nephew (...) Abel King of Denmark
received to hold in fee of King Ericus, about (...) year 1280. But the Royal
Line of the Kings and Dukes being exti^^^ and the Dukedom of Sleswick being
thereby fallen to the Crown^ Margaret Queen of three Kingdoms gave it to
Gerard Earl of Hols^ on this condition, The ancient Government.
that he should acknowledge to hold it of the (...) of Denmark. The Towns.
The Cities which are subject to this Dukedom, bec^^ they have the same
privilege with other parts of Denmark, therefo^^ they have the same Laws
with them. The Subjects may appeal from the Sentence of the Magistrates of any
place to the Princes and th^^ Senators, and not farther, as it is provided by
their privileges. But (...) general government of both these Dukedomes
belongs to the King of Denmark, and the Duke of Holsatia by turns. When it
is devolv^^ and does fall to the King, it is governed by his Substitute in his
name The chief Town of this Dukedom is Slesvicum, commonly called
Schleswick. It has its name from a German word, in regard it is situa^^^ near
Slia, in the Bay of the Baltic Sea: for Wick signifies in the Sax^^ language
both a Town, and a crooked winding or Bay of the Sea, (...) Becanus has
observed in his Books of Gothish and Danish matters. Cr^^Zius and those who
have writ the Saxon Histories, do give it an other appellation besides
Sleswick, which is still in use with the Danes and Fr^^landers: for they call
this Town in their language Heidebui or Heid^^^, because, they say, it was
first built by a certain Queen of Denmark, whose name was Heth. It has a
convenient situation for traffic, and a convenient Haven for commerce and
trading. Not far from this Town is seated the Castle Gotorpi. Here is a
famous Custom or Toll, for it has been observed, that in plentiful years,
fifty thousand Oxe^ being driven out of Denmark into Germany, have here
been paid toll for. There is also in this Dukedom, Flensburg, a famous Town,
lying among the high Mountains, near the shore of the Eastern Sea. It map of
Norway THE THIRD TABLE OF NORWEY.
has a Haven so convenient, deep, and safe, that many of the Citizens may
load and unloade ships even at their own doors. And here are the Towns
Husenum or Hussum, and Haderslebia. This Dukedom has only one Bishopric,
two Chapters, three Monasteries, and diverse Castles belonging to the Prince and
his Nobles. The Senators.
The order of Senators, whereof I have heretofore made mention, does consist of
the number of 24 persons of the Gentry, to whom is joined a general
Chancellor, and two Doctors of the Law.

The Dukedom of HOLSATIA.
Holsatia whence so called.
SOme do suppose, that Holsatia was so called from the many Woods and Forests
which are in it, for the Cimbrians and Low Germans do call a wood holt: and
some do derive the Etymology of the word from a hollow stone, because the
Dukes of Holsatia were formerly called Dukes of the hollow Stone. The Situation
It is bounded on the East with the River Bilena, on the West with Stora or
Steur, on the South with Albis, and on the North with Eider. The quality of
the Soil.
The Country it self is woody and full of Forests, whence they have such
store of fuel, that they are able to supply Freesland with wood, when they
themselves also do keep great fires. But although their woods are very
spacious, so that they seem to have no end, yet they seldom have any great
Oaks in them, but are full of Beech-trees, with whose waste an innumerable
sort of Hogs are fatted. The Land, for the most part, does afford them every
three years great store of fishing, and a very rich and plentiful harvest.
For three years together it is tilled, sowed, and mowed, and three years
afterward the Lakes are let in, to feed the fish and grass, thereby a
certain fat and slimie matter is brought in, The variety of living Creatures.
which does fertilize the fields. This place bears neither Vines nor Olives;
but there is much hunting of wild beasts. And this Country does breed a
great number of horses. Holsatia is divided into four parts, Dithmarsh,
Holsatia, Stormaria, and Wagria. These were heretofore Counties, and afterward
changed into a Dukedom, by Frederick the third Emperor, at the suite and
request of Christierne the first, who now is charged to maintain 40 horsemen,
and fourscore foot, for the use of the Roman Empire. Dithmarsh at the first
enjoyed freedom and liberty for some hundred years; The ancient government.
and albeit it were granted by the Emperor Frederick to Christierne the first
in fee, yet it was not at that time subjected. Afterward his Sons, King John,
and Duke Frederick did undertake to make an expedition against it, in the year
of our Lord 1500, but the Dithmarsians having overthrown their Army, defended
their own liberty, until they were conquered and overcome by the Nephews of
Christierne the first, namely Duke John, Adolphus, and Frederick the second
King of Denmark, in the year of our Lord 1559. In Holsatia are these Cities,
first Segeberg, in Wagria, a Country of Holsatia, 16 miles from Lubeck. 2,
Itzohoa, a fair Town in regard of the nature and situation of the place, and
the resort of ships unto it. 3, Stormaria is encompassed, and, as it were,
embraced in the arms of a fishie and navigable River, which arising in the
inner parts of Holsatia, does wash the walls of certain Towns, and the noble
Ranzovian House of Bredenberg, and afterward does discharge it self into the
River Albis. Here is in this Country Chilonium, commonly called Kile, which
is an ancient Town, and has a large Haven, in which (to the great commodity
of the Holsatians) diverse sorts of merchandise are brought out of Germany,
Livonia, Denmark, and Swethland. Also Krempe, and Reinholdsburg or Rensburg,
the former takes his name from the River gliding by it, the later from the
first builder. Here are moreover Meldorp, Heiningsted or Henste, and
Tellingsted in Dithmars, This Town was anciently but a little Castle, and
called Hochburg.
and Hamburg the Metropolis of Stormaria, a renowned Mart-Towne near the River
Albis, which after many devastations and calamities suffered in the wars, was
at last reedified, and in the time of Henry the fourth Emperor, it began to be
encompassed with walls, and to be beautified with three Gates and twelve
watch-towres. In this City Albertus Crantzius, an eloquent and true Historian
lived and was buried. This Country is full of Lakes, and especially Dithmars,
whose Inhabitants (trusting to the benefit of their Lakes) did refuse to
acknowledge obedience to the Kings of Denmark, though of late they have been
compelled thereunto. The chiefest River of note which waters this Country is
Egidora or the Eidera, there are also some others, the most whereof may rather
be called Brooks or Rivulets than Rivers: but the Baltic Sea, in that part
where it washes the Dukedomes of Holsatia and Sleswick, has safe and pleasant
Bays, which are safe harbors for Merchants, and weather-beaten ships. In some
places also it affords great store of fish, and especially of Salmons. It is
a plain Country, seldom raised with any mountains, yet one it has between
Lubeck and Hamburg, of a pleasant situation, and famous for the ornaments of
peace and war, with which Henry Rantzovius did adorn it. It has an ancient
Castle seated on it, famous for the antiquity and first builder thereof, and
at the foot of the hill a Town adjoining to it. Here are many woods, with
which the Country of Holsatia is beset and replenished, The Woods.
but especially Dithmars, as the woods of Borcholt, Burgholt, Alverdorpenholt,
Resenwalde, and many others. The Senators.
The Holsatians had heretofore 48 men, who were Presidents and Governors of
the whole Country; to these they made their appeal out of the several
Parishes, and they did judge all matters. But they being subdued, and the
Country now divided into two parts, in each of them there are twelve special
and principal men, together with a Prefect, who, for the most part, is a
Doctor or Licentiate at Law. These have all yearly pensions from the Princes,
and they have a Clerk joined to them, as also an Overseer or President out of
the Holsatian Nobility. The one of these Prefects, which is for the King, is
called the Prefect of Steinburg, and the other being for the Duke, the Prefect
of Gottorpe. Yet the Subjects have leave to appeal or make suite to the
Princes and Senators of either Dukedom, as well of Sleswick as Holsatia, but
not further. They had heretofore a written Law, which now by degrees is
changed, and reformed according to the Common Law, compiled by Henry Rantzovius
the Kings Substitute, The Laws and Institutions.
by Sigefrid Rantzovius, heretofore Lord of Nienhs, the Lord Adam Trazigerus,
and the Lord Erasmus Kirslemius, according to which Law all causes are decided,
and punishments pronounced against delinquents and offenders.

Holsatia has four Orders or degrees of people: The Nobles, the Clergy, the
Citizens, and the Countrie-men, whereof there are two kinds, for some possess
goods of their own being hereditarie and free; others hired goods or lands,
for which they pay rent and do certain services. The Nobles have Castles and
Lands, together with the royalty of hunting, fishing, and hawking, which, for
the most part, are hereditarie unto them. The Noble Families.
The whole Country has not above 24 Families, whose names are mentioned in
the Holsatian Chorographie, but diverse Families there are that are descended
from the same stock, as the Rantzovians do at this time possess an hundred
and fifty Castles, and diverse other possessions. The Aleseldians and
Powischians have almost as many. Holsatia has one Bishopric, namely Lubeck,
for the Bishopric of Hamburg is subject to the Bishopric of Breme. The
contentions which happen among the Nobles are judged by a Senate of Dukes, the
Princes, for the most part, sitting Presidents in judgment as it is provided
by their privileges and Laws. From the order of Senators any one putting in a
sufficient caution may appeal to the Imperial Chamber. The Citizens enjoy
privileges peculiar to themselves, and use the Roman Law, or else the Lubeck.
The Subjects may appeal from the judgment of the Senate of their own City,
to the judgment of four Cities, appointed to judge and determine of all
special matters. From them again they are permitted to appeal to the Princes
and Senators of Holsatia, and also further even to the Imperial Chamber, so
that fit security be put in. Countri-mens cases or suites are pleaded by their
Lawyers, even in the open fields, where are present the Noblemen thereabout,
the Prefects, and two Assistants. There they come forth and do make their
appearance, who have any suit one against an other; the Defendant and
Plaintiff being both heard, the whole company or assembly of Countrie-men are
bidden to go forth; and then their causes being diligently weighed on both
sides, they return again, and the suitors being called in, they give sentence
in their case according to Law and right.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF DENMARK. CONTAINING FIONIA WITH THE ISLANDS LYING ROUND
ABOUT IT.
SO much according to our Method concerning the Dukedom of Sleswicke and
Holsatia: Fionia follows with the Isles lying round about it. Fionia, Fionia
whence so called.
commonly called Fuynen is the chief of all other Isles lying in the Bay of
Codonus from Zeland. The Situation.
It takes its name from the beauty thereof, both in regard of the form and
situation. It is separated from the Continent of Denmark, by so small and
narrow a Sea flowing between them, called Middlefar, that it seems almost to
cleave unto the Continent. This Island as it looks on the West toward Iutia,
so on the East toward Zeland. It is 48 miles in length, and 16 in breadth. The
Land (that I may omit the Sea which is full of fish) is a fruitful soil, The
fruitfulnes of the Soil.
and very profitable to the husbandman. For it abounds with such plenty of
corn, that it sends store thereof yearly to other far Countries, especially
Wheat and Barley. And the ground, albeit it be very fruitful and endowed with
the gifts of Ceres, yet it is never dunged. Whence the Cities and Towns
thereof are annoyed with filthy smells of the dung of cattle, which is cast
out, being thereof no use, as Munster writes. This Country abounds with so
many Droves of Oxen, The variety of living creatures.
and breeds such a number of Cowes and Horses, that it sends yearly into
Germany great Herds and Droves of them. And in regard of the many woods which
are in the Island, there is great store of game for hunting, as Hearts, Hares,
and Foxes. The Cities.
In the middle of it is the Metropolis or mother City called Ottania, or
Ottonium commonly called Ottensel being a Bishops Seat, built as it appears by
many testimonies by Otto the first, about the time when he compeld King Herald
to receive the Christian faith. This City is a famous Mart for the whole
Island, in which about Epiphanie or Twelfetide there is a great meeting of the
Islanders and especially the Nobles, as there is at Kile in Holsatia. Fionia is
divided into five and twenty Prefectures, sixteen Cities, and six royal
Castles. The other cities are in a manner equally distant from Ottonia, which
is as it were the Center, and are so built of the Sea shore, that in regard of
the conveniencie of the Havens, they traffic not only in the Balticke Sea,
but also exercise their negotiations throughout all Swethland, and Norwey,
Russia, the Low Countries, and Germany: the chief amongst them are Niburch,
Swynburch, Foborch, Assens, Bowens, Middlefart, or Milvart, and Kettemynde, or
Cortemund. The chief royal castles are Newburg, Hagenschow, Hinsgagel,
Eschburg, and the Court of Rugard. Here are many Villages, and not a few
Noble-mens houses. For this Island in regard of the pleasantness of the
Climate, and fertility of the soil is much esteemed by the Nobles. The sea
does yield great plenty of fish, and every Bay is so full thereof, that ships
or boats being over set with them can hardly sail or row against them, which
yet they do not take with any fishing engines, but with their hands. Those who
dwell by the Sea side, besides tillage and husbandry, do use fishing, both
which do furnish the^ with all things necessary for housekeeping. There are
some places in this Island famous for warlike achievements done not many
years past. The commodities of the Sea.
For there is a certain mountain called Ochenberg, not far from the Castle
Hagenschow, in which John Rantzovius Knight and General of the field, for King
Christian the third, in a great battle did overthrow Christopher Count of
Oldenburg, in the year of Christ 1530, on the eleventh day of June, in which
conflict were slain two Counts, the one being the Count of Hage, the other of
Tecklenburg, whose bodies being afterward taken up out of the field were
brought to Ottonia, and buried in Canutus his Church about the same time also
on the Mountain Fa^c^burg, which is 4 mile distant from the Town Ascens, some
thousands of the Rebels were slain and put to flight. This Country is adorned
with many woods in which are great store of wild beasts. In the city of
Ot^^nium there are two famous Temples or Churches, one consecrated to Canutus,
The public buildings.
the other to Saint Francis. In this latter John King of Denmark, and his
son Christierne, when they had spent 37 years in banishment and captivity,
were buried in the year 1559: about the other is a large and spacious
courtyard, in which the King of Denmark did renew his ancient league of
friendship, with the Dukes of Holsatia and Sleswick^, An. 1580, they report
also that the mother of King Christian the second did place up a certain Altar
here belonging to the Minorite Friars, a wonderful curious piece of work
carved in wood, the like whereof is not to be found in Europe. The Islands.
Out of this Island from the Town Asc^^ it is eight miles into Iuitland or
Iutia, and from Nyburge into Zeland is a passage of sixteen miles long through
the Baltieke Sea, which is very dangerous, especially if the Sea be rough, for
when the East Sea being increased by the receipt of many rivers is thrust
forward with a violent course, it often happens that contrary winds do raise
such mighty waves, and make the sea so unquiet, that Mariners are many times
to great danger drawn in with these gulphlike windings of the waters and
sometimes swallowed up by them. And so much concerning Fionia: now let us pass
to the other Islands. Under Fionia are contained ninety Islands situated toward
the South, and the most of them habitable: the chief whereof are these:
Langeland.
Langeland, Lawland. Falstre, Aria or Arr, Alsen, Tosing, and Aroe. Langeland
is 28 miles in length. In it there is a Town called Rudkeping, and Traneker a
royal Castle, beside many villages, Parishes, and Noble-mens houses. Lawland.
The fertility of the Soil.
Lawland is separated by the strait of Gronesand from Zeland, and by a small
arm of the Sea from Falstre. It is so fruitful in corn and filberd Nuts,
that ship-loads are brought from thence into other Countries. The Towns.
It has five towns which are these, Nistadt, Nasco, Togrop, Roth, and Marib:
besides royal Castles, Noble-mens houses, many Parishes and Villages. Falstre
Falstre is 16 miles long, and has these two Cities map of Denmark THE FOVRTH
TABLE OF DENMARK.
Stubecopen, and Nicopen, which in regard of the pleasantlesse and beauty
thereof is called the Naples of Denmark. Out of this Island near a royal
Palace, there is a frequent passage into Germany, namely to Warnemund, which
is 28 miles long. It furnishes neighbor countries every year with much corn.
Aria being distant 6 miles from Elysia, is clothed with woods, and therefore
affords much recreation for hunters, it has three Parishes, and some
Noble-mens houses, with the Town and Castle of Coping. It belongs together
with Elysia to the Dukedom of Sleswicke, and is under the government of the
Duke thereof. Elisia or Alfa, commonly called Alfen, is an Island of a
reasonable bigness, for it is 16 miles in length, and 8 in breadth, being not
far distant from the Dukedom of Sleswicke, and looking toward the Bay die
Flensburger Wick, it is parted by it from the first seat of the English. The
Rantzovian Musaum tells us that the Romans did call these Islanders Elisians.
As also those who inhabit the next Island, Arians: which appellation or name
they still retain to this day. Ptolomie relates, that the English were the
ancient inhabitants of the Northern Countries, by the Sea side: to which
Tacitus adds the Elisii, Arii, and the Monimy, whose names also are still
used in the Islands Alsen, Arr, and Moen. There is a Town in Alsen or Elisia
called Sunderburg and a Castle of the same name, with other Towns, as
Norborch, Osternholm, Die Holle, and Gammelgard. It has thirteen populous
Parishes, whence it can set forth many thousands of Soldiers. It is very
woody, by reason whereof it affords Hearts, and many kinds of wild beasts
for hunting. It has great store of Seafish and fresh-fish, and much wheat,
and it is every where fit for feeding and pasturing of cattle. Tussing or
Tosinga being the chief Isle among all the other Islands, lies near unto a
town of Fionia called Swineburg, and is four miles in length. In this Island
besides Parishes, there is the Palace of Kettrop, belonging to the
Rosenkransians, and Rantzovians. Aroe is situated near the Dukedom of
Sleswicke where they pass to the Town Alcens in Fionia by the Arsensian Bay,
and has four Villages. There are also these Islands, Ramso, Endelo, Ebilo,
Fenno, Boko, Brando, Toroe, Aggerius, Hellenis, Iordo, Birkholm, etc. Let so
much suffice to have been spoken concerning Fionia, and the Islands lying
round about it. And now to conclude, I will here, rather then no where, add
unto the rest a Description of Huena or Ween seated in the Sound, in which is
the Castle of Vraniburg, filled with many accurate and elaborate Astronomicall
instruments, The middlle of this Island, where this Castle stands, has the
Pole elevated about it 56 Degrees and 55, and is situate from the West 55
Degrees. It is in compass 8160 paces, every pace being 5 foot, so that the
whole circuit of it is equal unto two common German, 18 English miles. This
Island being placed in the most famous strait of the whole Kingdom through
which many ships sail out of the Eastern into the Western Sea: and on the
contrary with a gooly prospect has in view many chief Towns of this
Kingdom, which stands as it were round about it; in Zeland Hafnia, 12 miles
distant from it South, Southwest also Helsinger, (where those ships that sail
or pass by, do pay custom or tribute) and the Castle Cronaburg both distant
from it on the Northwest 8 miles, Helsingburg which lies on the shore of
Scania, is as far distant from it toward the North, and on the same shore is
Landskrone being four miles from it: toward the East lies Lunda or Londen,
which although it be not a Sea-towne, The fruitfulness of the Soil.
yet is but 16 miles distant from hence. And although the Island be not very
great, yet no part of it is barren or unfruitful, but produces great store of
frui,t and abounds with cattle, it brings forth Does, Hares, Cunnies, The
variety of living Creatures.
and Partridges in great plenty, and is very convenient for fishing. It has a
wood of Hasell trees, which are never worme-eaten, but has no Dormise.
Heretofore it was remarkable for four Castles, whose names do yet remain,
Synderburg, which was seated on the Southern shore, Norburg on the opposite
Northern shore. Karheside which stood toward the East side of the Island, and
Hamer toward the West, the foundation of these four Castles may be yet seen,
but there are no ruins thereof remaining. This Island lies very deep in the
Salt-sea, and yet it has many fresh Rivers and Springs, among which there is
one Spring that never freezeth with the violence of the Winters cold, a strange
thing in these Countries.

BORVSSIA, OR PRVSSIA.
The name, and whence so called.
BORVSSIA being the farthest coast of Germany, take^^ its name from the people
called Borussians, as Erasmus S^la witnesses. These, as Ptolemy affirms,
placed themselves by the Riphaean Rather by the Riphaean woods which are a part
of Hy^cinia, for there are no Hills as Ortelius observes. The Situation.
Hills, where they run out Northward, not far from the head of Tanais arising
out of the^ and weary of their own habitations, with a strong head and viole^^
force, they seated themselves in these places, and called the wh^^^ Country
from their own name Borussia, which now by wiping out (...) letter, and
pronouncing another more softly, is called Prussia. Bor^^^ beginning from the
River Vistula, which boundeth it on the West, (...) running to the Balticke
Sea, The quality of the Soil, and fertility thereof.
which compasses the Northern side the^^ of, has the Alani or Lituanians, on
the East, and on the South the ^^maxobij, i. the Scythians inhabiting the
European Sarmatia. It has a ple^sant air, but somewhat cold: All the Country
is more fruitful that the neighbor Provinces. The ground is very fertile in
bearing of co^^ and such as far excells the corn of Poland and Lithuania. It
has a great store of Bees and Honey, The variety of living creatures
as any of the other Northern Countries. There is also in it much cattle, and
great store of game for ^^^ting. The great and vast woods bring forth many
kinds of wild be^^^ as Bears and Boares, with which they abound, yielding a
sort of Be^^^ very strong and swift, called Bubali. They bring forth Buffons
being wild kind of Oxen, and wild Horses, whose flesh the Inhabitants (...)
eat. They bring forth Alces, which they commonly call Elandes: (...) white
Weesels or Ferrets. The Borussians for the most part were Idol^ters until the
time of the Emperor Frederick the second, in what reign, and in the year
1215. some These Marian or Dutch Knights had the first institution of their
order under the walls of Achon. Anno 1190.
Knights of the Dutch order, or the order of the Cross did overcome them, and
taught them the Christian Religion. After the Provinces and Cities of Borussia,
An. 1419. being moved thereunto by the covetousness and cruelty of those of
the order of the Cross, did revolt to Casimirus King of Polonia. And 30 years
after the first defection revolting again, they sold Mariburg with other
Castles and Cities to the King for 476000 A Floren is according to the English
valuation, three shillings.
Florens. But the Mari^^ refusing to yield obedience to the King, they a long
while contended by a doubtful and uncertain war, until at last the whole
Country came into the hands of Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, the last
Governor of that Order, who afterward at Cacrovia was made a Duke, and a
secular Prince by Sigismund King of Polonia. They report that Prince Venedusus
did divide Borussia into twelve Dukedomes, whereof these a^^ the names: The
names of Cities.
Sudavia, Sambia, Natangia, Nadravia, Slavonia, Bart^^^^, Galinda, Warmia,
Hockerlandia, Culmigerin, Pomesania, and Michlo^^^* map of Prussia BORVSSIA, OR
PRVSSIA.
Sudavia was so wasted by those of the order of the Cross, that now of a Noble
Dukedom at this day there are scarce seven Towns remaining, and those very
mean. In Sambia are many Cities, as Lebenicht built in the year 1256:
Kneyback built in the year 1380. Regimount, called by the Germans Keningsberg,
and built in the year 1260 by Duke Albert. Fischusen built in the year 1269:
and lastly Lechstet, built in the year 1289. In Natangia there are these
Cities, Valdonia, Girania, Zinten, Crentzburg, Heiligenbeil, Fridland,
Shippenbeil, and Brandenburg. In Nadravia there are a few Cottages only
remaining, but all the Towns of note wasted. In Slavonia are these Cities,
Ragnet, Tilse, Renum, Liccow, Salaw, Labis, Tapia, Vintburg, Christaderder,
Baytia, Cestia, Norbeitia, Vensdorfe, Angerbury, and Dringford. In Bartonia are
these Towns, Nordenburg, labansburg, Iurgburg, Insterburg, Richtenerder,
Barton, and Rhenum. In Galinda are these Towns, Ortleburg, Rastenburg, Neyburg,
Passenhume, Dreschdo^, and Luzenburg. In Warmia are Ressen, Seburg, Bitstein,
Wartenburg, Allensteyn, Melsak, Heilsberg, Werinedit, and Gustat. In
Hockerlandia are Brunsburg, Tolkemit, Munhuse, Scorpow, and Elbing the greatest
of them all, being built on the Sea shore, and famous for the wealth of the
Citizens, and frequencie of Merchants. In Culmigeria are Turunia, or Thorn, a
famous Mart Town, built near the River Vistula, or Weisel, in the year 1235.
Also Culmina or Culme, Wentslaw, Althasis, Graudentz, Gilgehburg, Schonsee,
Strasburg, Bretchen, Neumarckt, Pappaw, Fridech, Leippe, Lesen, Golb, Reden,
Berglaw, and Lantenburg. In Pomerania is Marienburg, a large City, built in the
year 1402. Also Newtich, Stum, Christburg, Preusmarck, Salfeld, Merinec,
Holand, Lichstad, Osterod, Rosenburg, Marienweder, Garnesie, Lebmul,
Hohenstein, Schonenberg, Culenburg, Neunburg, The Rivers.
and Salaw. In Michlovia all is wasted and destroyed, except Straburg, only.
Prussia is a Country, in regard of the navigable Rivers, Bays, and Havens, fit
for the importation or exportation of diverse commodities and merchandises. The
chief Rivers are Called at this day Dravaniza and anciently Visula, Bisula,
and Eridanus. The commodities of the Sea.
Vistula, Nemeni, Cronon, Nogent, Elbing, Vusera, Passerg, Alla, Pregel, Ossa,
Vreibnitz, Lua, and Lavia. In which, as in the Lakes there are great store of
fish, Moreover, on the shoares of Borussia near the Balticke Sea, a certain
kind of Amber is gathered, which the Inhabitants call Barstein from burning,
and Augstein, because it is very good for the Eyes. The Greeks call it
Electrum, because the Sun is called Elector, having recourse as it were to
the fable of Phaethon. Servius upon the eighth Aeneid says, that there are
three kinds of Amber, one of which comes out of trees, another which is
found in the earth: a third which is made of three parts gold, and one part
silver. Pliny writes that the Germans called it Glessum or Glesse, because
it is not unlike unto it, seeing both of them are perspicuous and transparent;
and from thence the Romans did call this Country Glessaria. There are many
kinds of it, the white has the best smell, which was cheap at the first, the
next are the yellow and waxe-colour: the yellow is the best of all, having a
translucent shining color like flames of fire. There is some which is as soft
as boiled or decocted Honey, and therefore is called Honey-Amber: there is much
used of this Amber in many things; being heated with rubbing, it draws unto
it chafe and dry leaves, as the Lodestone does Iron. Borussia has also
woods which were never cut, The Woods.
whence great store of wood is carried away for the building of ships and
houses: they have straight trees to make Mastes for Ships, which are carried
from thence into far Countries, and lastly they have other riches of their
own, from which the Inhabitants receive great profit; as Bees and wild Beasts
of which we spoke before. The Country is divided at this day into Russia
Regis, and Russia Ducalis. The King of Poland does immediately possess either
bank of the River Vistula, even to the mouth thereof. Also the Island which is
enclosed with Vistula and Nogo, the Towns and Castles to the new Bay, as
Elbing, Tolkenit, Frawenberg, and Brunsberg, even to the mouth of Passaria, and
the whole Diocese of Warmia, being large toward the South, and adorned with
Towns and fields, hanging like a Bladder, in the middle part of Borussia. The
manner of government.
But although Borussia be immediately subject to the King, and is but one
Kingdom with Poland, yet it has a public Council, Laws and Judgments, an
Exchequer, and the management of wars peculiar to it self. There are two
Bishops in it, one of Warmia, who has his residence at Brunsburg, and the
other at Culmes. There are three Palatines, as the Palatine of Culmes, of
Marienburg, and of Pomeran. Three Castles, as the Castle of Culmes, Elbing, and
Gedane, commonly called Dantzick, and so many Under-chamberlaines. There are
three chief and prime Cities, Turunia, Elbing, Dantzick. These assemble
themselves together to deliberate and give Judgment in matters of controversy
twice every year, in the month of May at Margenburg, and at Michaelmas at
Graudents. There are eighteen Captains or Prefects of the Kings Castles and
revenues. The Senators.
As in the Palatinate of Marienburg, the Captain of Stuma, Gneva, Meva,
Stargardia. In Pomeran the Captain of Slochovia above Tuchol, near the River
Bro, the Captain of Sueza, Tuchol, Dernias, and Puske. In the Palatinate of
Culmes the Captains of Brodnicke, Graudents, Radine or Reden, Colba, Rogosna,
Rogenhausen, and three others. The Dukedom of Borussia belonged heretofore to
the Germane Order, or the order of the Cross, being converted into an
hereditary Dukedom by Albert of Brandenburg Master of the Order, and being
rent away from the Germane Empire, it came into the protection and obedience of
the King of Poland, in the year 1525. The Prince thereof taking his place in
all Counsels, meetings, and assemblies next to the King. If any contention
arise between the King and the Duke, it is decided at Marienburg or Elbing by
the Kings Counsel, who are sworn by a new oath to Judge rightly. But the
Nobles or others having an action against the Duke do commence it before the
Dukes Vassalls, The Laws and Institutions.
being deputed and appointed by the Duke to give judgment, and from them an
appeal is permitted to the Kings and the Dukes Counsel residing at
Marienburg. Every one ought there to be called into judgment where his goods
are, or where he dwells, neither can he be compelled to stand to foreign
trials, and so be kept from his right. The Judges are so placed in the
Provinces, that out of three named by every Province, the Duke chooses one, to
judge according to the Law of Culmes, and the Institutions of the Province: But
if the Duke do any thing against their Privileges, Laws, or customs, and
upon suite made do not hear their grievances, it is in the choice of the
chief men in the Province, without being thought to be rebellious and
seditious, to fly unto the protection of the Kings Majesty of Poland, and by
the virtue of some covenants and agreements between the King and the Duke, may
request him to defend their Privileges. The Mountains.
There are in the Dukedom of Borussia two Bishops, one of Sambia, who has his
residence at Kings Mount, commonly called Ko^ningsperg: the other of Pomesania,
whose seat is at Marienwender, and these have all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
in their own power. Concerning the Religion and Rites of the ancient
Borussians, Meletius tells wonderful things in his tenth Epistle to Georgius
Sabinus. They worshipped Devils (says he) instead of Gods, and now also in
many places do secretly worship them. They Religiously worshipped several
unclean creatures, namely, Serpents and Snakes, as if they had been the
servants and messengers of the Gods; for these they kept within their houses,
and sacrificed unto them as unto their household Gods. They held that the Gods
did dwell in Woods and Groves, and that they were to please them by sacrificing
unto them in those places: and to pray unto them to send them rain or fair
weather. They held that all wild Beasts, especially the Alces living in these
Woods, were to be reverenced as the servants of the Gods, and therefore they
were to abstain from injuring of them. They believed that the Sun and Moon
were the chiefest of all the Gods. They did worship Thunder and Lightnings
according to the opinion of the Heathens, and were of opinion that they might
by prayers raise or calm storms and tempests. They used a Goat for their
sacrifice, in regard of the generative and fruitful nature of that creature.
They said that the Gods did inhabit in excellent fair trees, as Oaks, and
the like: wherefore they would not cut down such trees, but did religiously
worship them as the houses and seats of the Gods. In such account also was the
Elder tree, and many others. They were heretofore barbarous and ignorant of
Learning, so that they would have thought it an incredible thing, if any one
should have told them that men could make known their minds one to another by
the sending of letters. But of these things enough, he that desires to know
more, let him have recourse to Erasmus Stella his antiquities of Borussi^, in
his second book thereof.

LIVONIA OR LIEFLAND.
IN my method Livonia or Levonia, commonly called Liefland, does follow, The
Country whence so called.
concerning the original of whose name I dare affirm no certainty. But
Althamerus writes thus of it. It may be, says he, that the Livonians, the
farthest people of Germany toward the So called, because the Veneds anciently
lived there.
Venedick shore, dwelling under the Parallel of the Island Scandinavia, which
is called Gothland, were derived from the Lemovians, but I had rather derive
them from the Efflui, for that they are commonly called Eyflenders. Ptolemie
also mentions the Levonians in his second Book, cap. 11. And a little after
speaking of the Aestii, he says, that Beatus Rhenanus did correct the corrupt
reading of Tacitus, and did again rightly set down the Nation of the Aestii.
In as much as Rhenanus says, it did appear, that it was in the first copy
Aestui in stead of Aestii, the ancient Writers of Books putting U for I. And
Althamerus says, if it were in the ancient copy the Efflui, he durst
affirm, that the Eyflanders were so called from them, by a little alteration of
the word. These people also are called Sudini, and their Country Sudina,
joining to Prussia. Some do place the Lectunni hereabouts, from whom it may be
that their name was derived. Livonia is stretched toward the Balthick Sea, or
the Venedick Bay, being 500 miles in length, and 160 in breadth. Borussia,
Lithuania, and Russia do encompasse most part of it, the rest the Livonian Bay
does hemme in. The Situation and fruitfulness of the Country.
The Country is plain and very fertile, it brings forth corn in such
abundance, that in dear times and years of scarcity it supplieth the wants of
other Countries. It abounds also with the best flax, and breeds store of
cattle. Besides, there are in the woods of this Country many Bears, Alces,
Foxes, Leopards, Cats of the mountains, and here are many Hares, The variety
of living Creatures.
which according to the season of the year do change their color, in like
manner as they do in Helvetia upon the Alps: in the Winter they are white, in
Summer of an Ash color. And here is such plentiful hunting of wild beasts,
that the Countrie-people, though they be cruelly used by the Nobles, are not
prohibited from it. In brief, Livonia wants none of those things which are
necessary for the preservation and sustentation of man's life, except wine,
oil, and some other things, granted by the divine bounty to other Countries,
as being under a more warm and gentle Climate, which yet are brought hither in
great abundance. Livonia (being Anno 1200 by the industry and labor of the
Merchants of Bremes, and especially by the Knights of the Dutch order, brought
and converted to the Christian Faith) when it had a long time suffered the
miseries of foreign and civil wars, The Government.
and had been made, as it were, a prey to the neighbor Kings and Princes, at
length in the year 1559, being under Gothardus Ketlerus the last Governor of
the Dutch Oder, it was received into the protection and government of
Sigismundus the King of Poland, as a member of his Kingdom, and of the great
Dukedom of Lithuania. But Gothardus resignin^ his Order on the fifth day of
March Anno 1562, in the Castle of Rig^ before Nicholas Radziwilus the King of
Polands Commissarie, and Pal^tine of Vilna; as first the Cross, afterward the
Seal, then his Lette^^ Patents, and all Charters which the Order had received
from the Emperors and Popes, besides the keys of the Castle of Riga, and of
the gates of the City, the office of Commendator, the privilege and power of
coining money, the custom of fish, and all other rights belonging to him: he
was presently proclaimed by the aforesaid Palatine in th^^ Kings Majesty's name
Duke of Curland and Semigallia, and straightwa^ the Nobility of Curland and
Semigallia did take their oath of allegeanc^ before him, as to their lawful
and hereditary Lord. The next day t^^ Duke of Curland, sitting in estate, was
proclaimed in the Court of Rig^ Governor of Livonia, and received the keys of
the castle and the g^^^ of the City; after which the Nobility and the Citizens
had all their rights and privileges restored and confirmed unto them. Livonis
(...) divided into three parts, The Cities.
distinguished both by situation and language namely into Estia, Lettea, and
Curlandia. The Provinces of Estia of E^^land are Harria or Harland: the chief
City whereof is Revalia or Rev^ being situated toward the North, near unto
the Balthick Sea, and nothing inferior unto Riga; it was built by Voldemata,
and has a famou^ Haven. The Citizens use the Lubeck Law, and do coin
foure-square money. Also the Province of Viria, Virland, or Wirland, in which
a^ Weisenburg, Tolsberg, and Borcholm, the Seat of the Bishop of Rev^b^ In the
third place is Allantika, where is the Town Nerva or Nerve, by a River of the
same name; over against which is the Castle called I^now Gorod, belonging to
the Moscovites, for the river that runs between these towns does part
Livonia from Moscovia: also Nyschlot or Ne^^chlos. In the fourth place is
Odenpoa, in which is Derpt or Topatum, a Episcopal City, Wernebe^, Helmet,
and Ringen. In the fifth place is ^^via or Ierven, in which are Weissenstein,
Lais, Overpolen or Ober Paln, and Vellin or Fellin. In the sixth place is
Wichia or Wicke, wherein is Abs^^ or Hapsel, Leal, Lode, and Pernaw. Near to
the Estians lie the Island Osilia or Osel, Dageden or Dachden, Mona, Wormse or
Worist, Wrange^ Kien, and many others, in which they use partly the Estian
language, and partly the Swedish. The Cities of Lettea or Letten are Riga,
Kokenh^ses, Wenden, and Wolmar. Riga is the chief city of Livonia, near the
River Duina, which does discharge it self into the Venedick Bay. This city is
fortified with a strong Wall, with strong Towers, and pieces of Ordnance
against any assault, and is strengthened or fenced with double ditches and
sharp stakes round about it. It has a Castle well provided, in which
heretofore the Governor of Livonia (being of the Teutoni^^ or Dutch Order)
kept his residence; and this Castle, though Gothard^ Ketlerus, aforesaid, did
govern in the King of Polands right, yet he did usurp no authority over the
City: for the Citizens being strong, and defenders of their liberty, cannot
endure to have any Governor or Captain over them. They do only pay tribute
and yield obedience map of Livonia LIVONIA. OR LIEFLAND.
to the King of Poland, in other things they have Laws peculiar to themselves.
Besides, here is a Market of all Northern commodities, as of Pitch, Hemp,
Wax, Timber, and such other things. The Towns and Castles of Curland are
Goldingen, Candaw and Windaw, which the Polanders call Kies, and the Germans
Wenden: this Town was famous heretofore, for that the Master of the Teutonick
Order did keep his Court here, and Parliaments were here wont to be held; now
it is defended by a Garrison of Polanders. There are also the Cities Durbin,
Srunden, Grubin, Pilten, Amboten, and Hasenpot. The Cities of Semigallia are
Mitovia, commonly called Mitaw, where the Duke of Curland kept his Court; also
Seleburg, The Lakes.
Bassenburg, Doblin and Dalem. The River Duina does divide Semigallia and
Curland from Lettea, and the rest of Livonia. In Livonia there are many Lakes,
the chiefest is Beibus which is 45 miles long, and does abound with diverse
kinds of fish. Rivers.
The Rivers are Duina, Winds, Beca, and some others. Duina or Duna (which
Ptolemie calls Turuntus, and Peucerus Rubo) running out of Russia, a great way
through Lithuania and Livonia, at length eight miles below Regia powers it
self into the Livonick Bay and the Balthick Sea. Winda in like manner
discharges it self into the Balthick Sea, which near unto the mouth thereof
is very deep, and dangerous. The River Beca, which the Inhabitants call
Einbeck, is carried in one channel to the Ocean, and there rushing down
headlong from the steep Rocks, as Leunclavius says, does make those deaf
which dwell near unto it, as they report the Water-fals of Nilus does those
who inhabit near unto them. The Country has no mountains, The Woods.
but is full of thick woods: for here are the great arms of Hercynia, and
other such. At the mouth of Duina near to the Sea is Dunamunta or Dunemund (an
impregnable Castle, not far from Riga) kept by a Polish Garrison, The public
works.
to which all ships do pay a certain tribute as they pass by. There is also
in the midway Blokaus, a royal fortress, which commands ships as they
sail by it. There is moreover the castle and city Felinum or Fellin, in the
Dukedom of Estland, which the German hired Soldiers, together with the last
Governor of Livonia, William Furstenberg, by most detestable treachery did
betray to the Duke of Moscovia. Ternestum (which others call Taurum) in this
Country was heretofore a strong castle, but after it had been taken by the
Moscovites, the Lithuanians marching under the conduct of their Captain
Nicholas Radziwilus Palatine of Vilna, by undermining, and by planting powder
under it, did quite demolish it in the year 1561. In Livonia many yet do live
in a heathenish manner, and wanting the true knowledge of God, Their Rites and
Customs.
some adore the Sun, some a Stone, and there are those who do worship
Serpents, and Bushes. When they are to interre and bury a dead body, they
banquet freely round about the dead carcass, and do drink to the dead man,
pouring also upon him a great pot of drink. Afterward they put him in a
Sepulcher, and lay by him an hatchet, meat, drink, and some money for his
journey, and then they cry out, Get thee gone into an other world, to rule
over the Germans, as they have here ruled over thee and thine. They first
received the Christian faith under the Emperor Frederick. They account it a
fault to be laborious and painful. The women borne in the country carry a
great state with them, and do despise those women which come from other parts.
They will not be called women, but Mistresses, and they never busy themselves
with any woman's work, but do vagarie and wander abroad in the Winter time in
Chariots, and in the Summer by Boat. The drink of the country is Mede,
Beer, and Wine (which the richer sort only use, being brought from foreign
countries) especially Rhenish Wine. Their habit
The women do disgrace the beauty and comeliness of their bodies, by the
disguisednesse of their garments. The commodities which are transported out of
Livonia into Germany and other Countries, are Wax, Honey, Ashes, Pitch and
Tar, Hemp, Skins of diverse wild beasts, and Hides. Their commodities.
Also that kind of corn which the Latins call Secale, and we Rye, is
yearly transported in great plenty from hence into Germany and other
bordering countries. Having explained and declared thus much concerning
Livonia, I hope it will be a matter acceptable to the Reader, if here for
conclusion I shall add some thing concerning those Lycaons, or men transformed
(...) wolves, who are reported to be very frequent and common in this place.
There are Writers, who think themselves worthy to be believed (among which is
Olaus Magnus) that do affirm, that in this Country every year some men are
turned into wolves. I will here set down his own words, thereby to recreate
the mind of the Reader with the relation of an unheard of noveltie: and thus
he writes in his 18 Book cap. 45. Although in Prussia, Livonia, and
Lithuania, all the Inhabitants all the year are much endammaged by ravening
Wolves, because every where in the woods they tear in pieces, and devour a
great number of their cattle, if they stray never so little from the flock or
heard; yet they esteem not this loss so great, as that which they sustain,
by men changed and transformed into wolves. For in Christmas, in the night
time, such a company of men-wolves do gather themselves together, and show
such fiery cruelty both toward men and other creatures, which are not wild
by nature, that the Inhabitants of this Country do receive more detriment and
loss from these than from true and natural wolves. For as it is found out by
experience, they do besiege men's houses standing in the woods with much
fierceness, and do strive to break open the doors, that so they may destroy
and prey upon the men and other creatures that are within. But of these things
we have spoken enough, let us go forward to Russia.

RUSSIA, OR MOSCOVIA.
The names.
RUSSIA which is called also Roxolonia, is twofold, t^^ Black and the White:
The former bordereth on Polo^^ the latter is a part of Moscovia. Moscovie was
with^^^ doubt so called from the River Moschus or Mor^^^ which gives its name
also to the chief City Mo^^ through which it flows. The Etymology.
The Territories thereof are extende^ far and wide, and it is bounded on the
North with the Icie Sea, on the East it has the Tartarians, on the south the
Turks and Polonians, and (...) the West the Livonians and the Kingdom of
Swethland. In all which spaces of ground many large countries are contained,
Moscovie.
and therefore the Duke of Moscovie does thus enstile himself. The Great Lord,
and by the grace of God Emperor and Governor of all Russia, also Great Duke
of Vol^miria. The Situation.
Moscovia, great Novogrodia, Pskovia, Smolonskia, Thweria, Iuga^^ Permia,
Viathkia, Bulgaria, etc. Governor and Great Prince of Novog^^^ the Less, of
Czernigovia, Rezania, Wolochdia, Resovia, Bielloia, Rostovia, ^rostania,
Poloskia, Biellozeria, Vdoria, Obdoria, and Condimia, etc. The tem^^rature of
the Air in Muscovia is immoderately cold and sharp, The temperature of the
Air.
yet (...) so wholesome, that beyond the head of Tanais toward the North (...)
East, there is never any plague known, although they have a disease (...) much
unlike unto it, which does so lie in the head and inward parts, (...) they die
in few days of it. The Country in general neither bring^^^ forth Vine nor
Olive, nor any fruit-bearing tree except it be Mell^^ and Cherries, in regard
that the more tender fruits are blasted with (...) cold North winds. Fertility
of the Soil.
The corn fields do bear Wheat, Millet, a gr^^^ which the Latins call
Panicum, and all kind of Pulse. But their (...) certain harvest consists in
wax and honey. Here is the wood Herc^ being full of wild beasts. In that part
which lies toward Prussia gre^^ and fierce Bugles or Buffes are found, which
they call Bison. And also the beast called by the Latins Alces like an Heart
save that he has a fles^ snout like an Elephant, long legs, and no bending
of the hough, and this creature the Moscovites call Iozzi, The variety of
living creatures.
and the Germans Hellene. Besides there are Bears of an incredible bigness,
and great and terrible Wolves of a black color. No Country has better
hunting and hawking that this. For they take all kind of wild beasts with
Dogs and Nets, and with Hankes which the Country of Pecerra does plentifully
yield, they kill not only Pheasants, and Ducks with them but also Swannes and
Cranes. The Countries of Russia or Moscovia are very large. All the Cities, The
Government.
Towns, Castles, Villages, Woods, fields, Lakes, and Rivers are under the
thereof command and government of one Prince, whom map of Russia RVSSIA, OR
MVSCOVIA.
the Inhabitants do call the great Czar, that is King or Emperor, and (...)
the revenues that arise from them, are brought into the Princes exche^quer.
There are no Dukes or Counts, which can possess any thing by (...) Tenure of
Freehold, or can pass the same unto their heirs. He d^^ bestow some villages
and Towns upon some, but yet he uses the ^^bour of the husbandman, and when
he list takes them away again. S^ that he has absolute command over his
Subjects, and again his S^^jects honor and reverence him as a God, and do
show obedience to (...) in all things, without any refusal. The chief
Metropolis or mother ^tie of the whole Kingdom is Moscovia commonly called
Moschwa, ^ing conveniently situated, as it is thought, in the middle of the
Coun^ It is a famous City as for the many Rivers which meet there, The Cities.
so (...) the largeness, and number of the houses, and for the strength of
(...) Castle. For it lies near the River Moschus with a long row of hou^ The
houses are all of wood, and divided into Parlers, Kitchings, (...)
Bed-chambers: all of them have private gardens both for profit, (...) for
pleasure. The several parts of the City have several Churches (...) has two
Castles one called Kataigorod, the other Bolsigorod, both wh^^ are washed with
the Rivers Mos^hus, and Neglinna. Moreover in (...) there are many Countries,
as first, the Dukedom of Volodimirta, wh^^ title the Great Duke does assume to
himself, it is named fom the ch^^ city Volodomire being seated on the banks
of the River Desma, w^^ runs into Volga. This Province is of so fruitful a
soil, that the ^^crease of one bushel of wheat being sown is oftentimes
twenty (...) shells. Secondly, Novogrodia which though it be inferior unto
the forenamed Country in pasturage, yet not in the fruitfulnes of the s^ It
has a wooden city, called by the same name with the whole D^dome Novogrod,
being seated where the Rivers Volga and Occa do (...) one into another. This
city had always the chief pre-eminence in^gard of the incredible number of
houses, for the commodity of a br^^ and fishie Lake, and in regard of an
ancient Temple much reveren^^ by that Nation, which about five hundred years
ago was dedicated S. Sophia. Near to this Town was sought the battle
between the Sarmatians and their slaves, of which read Justin.
Here is a memorable Castle built of stone upon a rock at (...) great Charge
of the Duke Basilius. This City is distant from the C^^^ Moscovia an hundred
Polish miles, and from Riga, the next haven town is little less than five
hundred. Thirdly Rhezan which is a Province ^tweene the River Occa and Tanais,
having store of Corn, Honey, F^^^ and Foul: it has these Cities built of
wood, Rhezan seated on (...) bank of Occa, Corsira, Golluga, and Tulla, near
to which are the Spri^ heads of the River Tanais. Fourthly the Dukedom of
Worotinia, whi^^ has a City and a Castle of the same name. Fifthly, Severia
which is great Dukedom abounding with all things, it has great desert field
and many Towns among which the chief are these, Starodub, Sicwi^sey, and
CZernigow. The bees in the woods do yield them great store (...) honey. The
Nation in regard of their continual wars with the Tar^rians is accustowed to
arms, and ready of hands. Sixthly, the Dukedom of Smolensko, which being
seated near the River Borysthenes has a City of the same name, watered on
the one side with Borysthenes, an^ on the other side environed with deep
ditches, and rampires arme^ map of Moscow MORE PARTICVLAR DESCRIPTION OF SOME
PROVINCES OF MOSCOVIA.
with sharp stakes. There are also these Dukedomes and Provinces, Mosaiskia,
Bielskia, Rescovia, Tweria, Pleskovia, Vodzka, Correllia, Bicleizioro, Wolchda,
Vstiuga, Iaroslavia, Rostow, Dwina, Susdali, Wiathka, Permia, Sibier, Iugra,
Petzora, and Novogrodia the Greater, which they call Novogr^^ Wielki in which
is a very great City of the same name, bigger than Rome it self. Petzora
takes its name from the River which the mountains and rocks do hemure in on
both sides. There are spacious countries which pay Tribute to the great Duke
lying northward in a great space of Land; as Obdora, in which is the Idol
called Zolota Babs, that is, the Golden old woman, also Condora, Lucomoria, and
Lappia. There are many great Lakes in Moscovia, The Lakes.
as Ilmen or Ilmer, also Ladoga, and the White Lake which the Inhabitants call
Bielejezioro. There are also many fair Rivers, The Rivers.
as first Boristhenes or Pripetus, commonly called Nioper and Nester, or by the
addition of a letter Dnieper and This River is also called by others Brisna and
Berisna.
Dnester. Secondly, Taruntus which is that same with Ptolemie, which
Herberstemius calls B^bo, but the Inhabitants Duina and Oby. Thirdly, the
River Rha, which Ptolemie mentions, and is now called Volga and Edel. There is
in this country the River This River was anciently by the Scythians called
Sylus and Amazonius.
Tanais, which the Italians call Tana, the Inhabitants De^. Beside, the river
Occa and the lesser Duina, called likewise Omega, etc. Here are the Montes
Hyperborei or Riphaean mountains, mentioned by Pliny in his 4 Book Chap. 12.
and by Mela in his 3 Book, which are impassable, Mountains. Woods.
because they are covered over with continual snow and ice. The wood Hercynia
which Isidorus calls the Riphaean wood, takes up a great part of Moscovia,
it is inhabited, having some few scattering ho^ses in it, and now by long
labor is made so thin that it cannot, as most suppose, show such thick
woods, and impenetrable forests as heretofore. Moscovia has innumerable
costly Temples or Churches, and very many Monasteries. The Duke looks to
matters of government, and administration of Justice by the help and
assistance of twelve Counselors who are daily present in the Court. The
Senators.
Among them, the Prefectureships of all the Castles and Cities are distributed:
and they receive the letters and Petitions which are directed to the Prince,
and do answer them in his name. For the Prince himself receives no letters,
neither does he set his hand to any that are written to his Subjects, or any
foreign Prince. The Bishops are chosen out of the Friars as men of a
s^^ctimonious and holy life: There are many Monasteries of these Fr^its in the
Kingdom of Moscovia, and yet all of the same habit and Order, of which they
say that S. Basil was the first founder. There are in the whole Kingdom of
Moscovia eleven Bishops which they call Wladdicks, that is, in their language
Stewards or Dispensers. The Rites and Customs.
They call their Priests Poppes or Archipoppes. The Metropolitan Bishop lives
in Moscovia, who was heretofore confirmed by the Patriarch of Constantinople,
but now being chosen by the great Duke only, he is consecrated by two or three
Bishops, and is displaced at the Kings pleasure. Under this Metropolitan are
two Archbishops, the one at Novogardia the Greater near the River Low^^, the
other at Rostovia. There are no Universities or Colleges in all the Empire of
Moscovia. The Moscovites are of the Greek religion, which they received in the
year of our Lord 987. They suppose that the Holy Spirit, being the third
person in the Trinity, does proceed from the Father alone. They took the
Sacrament of the Eucharist with leavened bread, and permit the people to use
the Cup. They believe not that Priests Dirges, or the piety or godliness of
kindred or friends can be avaleable to the dead, and they believe that there is
no Purgatory. They read the Scripture in their own language, and do not deny
the people the use thereof. They have Saint Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, and
Gregory translated into the Illyrian tongue, and out of these, as also out of
Chrysostom, Basil and Nazianzenus, the Priests do publicly read Homilies
instead of Sermons; for they hold it not convenient (as Iovius says) to admit
of those hooded Orators, who are wont to Preach too curiously and subtlely to
the people concerning divine matters, because they think that the rude minds
of the ignorant may sooner attain to holiness and sanctity of life by plain
Doctrine, than by deep interpretations and disputations of things secret. They
make matrimonial contracts, and do permit Bigamie, but they scarcely suppose
it to be lawful marriage. They do not call it adultery, unless one take and
keep another man's wife. They are a crafty and deceitful Nation, Their Diet.
and delighting more in servitude than liberty. For all do profess themselves
to be the Dukes servants. The Moscovite line rather prodigally than
bountifully, for their tables are furnished with all kind of luxurious meats
that can be desired, and yet not costly. For they sell a Cock and a Duck
oftentimes for one little single piece of silver. Their more delicate provision
is gotten by hunting and hawking as with us. They have no wine made in the
Country, Their Traffic.
and therefore they drink that which is brought thither, and that only at
Feasts and Bankets. They have also a kind of Beer, which they cool in Summer
by casting in pieces of ice. And some delight in the juice pressed out of sour
cherries, which has as clear and pure a color, and as pleasant a taste as any
wine. The Moscovites do send into all parts of Europe excellent Hemp and Flax
for rope-making, many Oxe-hides, and great store of Wax.

THE DVKEDOME OF LITHVANIA, Samogitia, Blacke-Russia, and Volhinia.
SOME would have Lithuania so called from the Latin word Lituus, (that is) a
Hunters horn, because the Country does use much hunting. The Country whence so
called.
Which opinion Mathias a Michou rejects, and delivers another concerning the
Etymology thereof: for he says that certain Italians, forsaking Italy in
regard of the Roman dissentions, entered into Lithuania, calling the Country
Italy, and the Nation Italians; and that the sheepheards began first to call
it Litalia, and the Nation Litalians, by preff^ing one letter. But the
Ruthenians or Russians, and the Polonians their neighbors changing the word
more, at this day do call the Country Lithuania, The Situation.
and the people Lithuanians. It is a very large Country, and next to Moschovia:
It has on the East that part of Russia, which is subject to the great Duke of
Moscovy: on the West it has Podlassia, Masovia, Poland, and somewhat toward
the North it bounds on Borussia; but full North it looks toward Livonia and
Samogitia: and on the South toward Podolia and Vothinia. The quality of the
Climate. The fertility of the Soil.
The air here is cold, and the winter sharp. Here is much wax and honey
which the wild Bees do make in the Woods, and also much Pitch. This Country
also affords abundance of corn, but the harvest seldom comes to maturity
and ripeness. It has no wine but that which is brought hither from foreign
Countries, nor salt, but such as they buy and fetch out of Britain. It
brings forth living creatures of all kinds, but small of growth. In the
Woods of this Country there are Beasts called by the Latins Vri, and others
called Alces, The variety of living creatures
besides Buffes, wild Horses, wild Asses, Hearts, Does, Goats, Boares,
Bears, and a great number of such other. Here is great plenty of Birds, and
especially of Linnets. Besides in this Country and Moscovia there is a ravenous
devouring beast called Rossomak^, of the bigness of a Dog, in face like a
Cat, in the body and tail resembling a Fox, and being of a black color. The
Nation of the Lithuanians in former years was so unknown and despised by the
Russians, The Ancient Government.
that the Princes of Kiovia did require nothing from them but Corke-trees, and
certain garments as a sign of their subjection in regard of their poverty,
and the barrenness of their soil, until Vithenes Captain of the Lithuanians
growing strong, did not only deny tribute, but having brought the Princes of
Russia into subjection, compelled them to pay tribute. His successors did
invade the neighbor Nations, and by hostile and sudden incursions did spoil
them, until the Teutonick order of the Cross began to war against them, and
to oppress them, which map of Lithuania THE DVKEDOME OF LITHVANIA.
they did even to the days of Olgerdus and Keystutus Captains of the
Lithuanians. But at last Iagello, who afterward was called Vladislaus, was made
great Duke of Lithuania. This man being oftentimes oppressed by those of the
order of the Cross, and by Christian Armies, did at last incline to the
Polanders, and having Which was in the year 1386.
embraced the Christian Religion, and married Hedingis the Queen of Polonia,
he was made King of Polinia, committing the government of the Country of
Lithuania to his Cozen German Skirgellon, as to the supreme Duke of Lithuania.
The great Dukedom of Lithuania is now divided into ten special Palatinates or
Provinces, The Cities.
the first whereof is the Palatinate of the Metropolis or chief City Vilna,
which the Inhabitants call Vilenski, but the Germans commonly Die Wild: it was
built at the confluence or meeting of Vilia and Vilna by Duke Gediminus, in the
year 1305: and is the Se^ of a Bishop, subject to the Archbishop of Leopolis,
and also of the Metropolitan of Russia, who has seven Bishops under him, that
be of the Greek Religion, as the Bishop of Polocia, Volodomiria, Luca in
Volhi^^, Luckzo, Pinsca, near to the River Pripetus, Kiovia, Praemislia, and
Lepol^, Vilna or Wilna is a populous large and famous City, being encompassed
with a wall and gates which are never shut. The Churches thereof f^r the most
part are built of stone, and some of wood: there is in it a c^^ous Monastery
of the Bernardines, being a famous structure of squa^d stone: as also the Hall
of the Ruthenians, in which they sell their commodities which are brought out
of Moscovia. The second Palatinates the Trocensian, the Towns whereof are
Grodna by the River Cro^ where Stephen King of Poland dyed. And Lawna at the
confluence (...) Cronus, and Villia or Willia, also Kowno, Lida, and Vpita. The
third P^latinate is the Minscenfian, wherein is the City Minsko, and the
Castle Keidanow, also Radoscowice, Borissow, Lawisko or Liwsko, Swistocz,
^^broisko, and Odruck. The fourth Palatinate is the Novogrodian, in whi^^ is
Novogrodeck, a large City, and built of wood: also Slonim, Wolkowi^ and many
other Towns. The fifth Palatinate is the Briestian, so call^^ from the City
Briesti, being large, and built of wood, and here is the C^tie of Pinsko. The
sixth is the Palatinate of Volhinia, in which is Lucz^ the Seat of a Bishop:
also Voladamire, and Kerzemenesia. The seven^^ Palatinate is Kiovia, in which
there was heretofore a large and ancie^^ City of the same name, seated by the
River Boristhenes, as the ruin^ which lie six miles in length do easily
demonstrate. There are als^ the Towns Circasia or Kerkew, Kaniova and Moser.
The eighth is the Palatinate of Miceslow, near to the Rivers Sosa and
Borysthenes in the borders of Moscovie, wherein are the Towns of Miceslaw,
Dubrow^ Copyz, and Sklow; beside Mohilow, Bychow, Reczycza, and Strissin with
their Castles. The ninth Palatinate is the Witebscian, in which is the City
Witebsk situated by the River Duna, and Orsa, near Borysthe^ The tenth
Palatinate is the Polocensian, which is so called from Polotesk^ a City lying
near to the confluence of the River Polota and Duna, between Witsbek and
Livonia: There are also the Towns, Disna, Dri^^, and Druha, with their
Castles. These things being explained, let (...) speak something of the Rivers
of Lithuania. On the East side Lith^ania is bounded with the Rivers Oscol, The
Rivers.
Ingra, and the lesser Tanais, (...) which with many others do run into
great Tanais. There is also in Lithuania the River Borysthenes, which arising
out of a plain marish ground, and running through Russia, does vent it self
at last into the Euxine Sea: and the Rivers Wilia and Niemen, the latter
whereof runs a great way with a very crooked winding stream, and at last
disburthens it self into the Prutenick or Finnish Sea: also Duina and other
Rivers, beside Lakes, and standing waters, of which the Country is full, and
all these do afford great plenty of fish, which are very delectable and
pleasant in taste. Moreover the Country is covered with very great and spacious
woods. Sigismund that happy and auspicious King of Poland, The Woods.
did unite the Palatines and Castellans of the Provinces of Lithuania into one
body of a Commonwealth with the Polanders, and did design a certain place
and order in the Senate of the Kingdom, The Senators.
to all the Noblemen, Bishops, and Palatines of this Country, so that out of
the Kingdom of Poland, and the Provinces united unto it, there are in the
Senate fifteen Bishops, one and thirty Palatines, thirty of the greater
Castellans or governors of Castles, and fifty of the less, beside those who
are called the Officialls of the Kingdom; as the Marshalls, the Chancellours,
the Vicechancellors, and the Treasurers, of which we will speak more largely
in the description of Poland. Their manners
Marriages amongst the Lithuanians are easily dissolved by mutual consent, and
they marry again and again. The wives have openly men-concubines by their
husbands permission, whom they call connubij adjutores, i. helpers in marriage;
but on the contrary, for men to follow whores is counted a reproach. When any
one is condemned to die, he is commanded to punish himself, and to hang
himself with his own hands, which if he refuse to do, he is threatened and
beaten with stripes until he kill himself. Their flocks do afford them
great store of milk for their food. The common bread which they use is very
black, Their food.
being made of Rye or Barley together with the branne: but the rich men's bread
is very white, being baked and made of pure Wheat. They seldom use any wine,
for the common people drink water, and such as are of ability drink Ale,
which they brew of diverse sorts of corn, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, and
Millet, but such as is unsavory. They have abundance of thick and thin Mede
boiled in diverse manners, and with it they make themselves merry, and
oftentimes drunk. Lithuania seems almost to be inaccessible, as being almost
all overflowne with waters: but in Winter there is more convenient trafficking
with the Inhabitants, and the ways are made passable for Merchants, the Lakes
and standing waters being frozen over with ice, and spread over with snow.
Their chief wealth is the skins of beasts, as of Weesills, Foxes, and those
which are more precious, as Martens, and Scythian Weesills. Their commodities.
Of these they make a great profit, as also of their Wax, Honey, Ashes, and
Pitch. The best Wainscot is cut here and brought into Germany through the
Balthick and Germane Sea, and out of this Country all wooden Architecture both
public and private through all Germany, and the Low countries is made, as
also for the most part such wooden housholdstuffe as belongs to houses: but
enough of Luthuania, we will now add something concerning the rest. There
follows in our Title Samogitia (which in their language signifies the Lower
land) the Russians call it Samotzekasemla, Samogitia. The names.
it is a Northern Country, and very large, being next to Lithuania, and
environed with Woods and Rivers. On the North it has Livonia, on the West it
is washed with the Balthick or Germane Sea, which is properly called the
Balthick Bay, and toward the Northwest Borussia joyneth unto it. The
fertility of the Soil.
It abounds with the best, whitest, and purest Honey, which is found in every
hollow tree. It has no Town nor Castle; Their manners
the Nobles live in Lodges, the Country people in Cottages. Their food.
The people of this Country are of a great and large stature, rude in
behavior, living sparingly, drinking water, and seldom any drink or Mede;
they knew not until of late the use of Gold, Braffe, Iron, or Wine. It was
lawful with them for one man to have many wives, and their father being dead
to marry their stepmother, or the brother being dead to marry his wife. The
Nation is much inclined to Fortune telling and Southsaying. The God which they
chiefly adored in Samogitia was the fire, which they thought to be holy and
everlasting, and therefore on the top of some high mountain the Priest did
continually cherish and keep it in by putting wood unto it. In the third place
is Russia, Russia.
by which name in this place we understand the Southern or Blacke-Russia,
whose chief Country is Leopolis or Lemb^^g built by Leo a Moscovite: it is
famous by reason of the Mart kept there, and the Bishops Seat. The City
Leopolis.
Beside the Country of Leopolis there are three other in this Russia, to wit,
the Country of Halycz, Belz, and Praemislia. In the fourth place is Volhinia,
Volhinia.
which is situate between Lithuania, Podolis, and Russia, The Situation. The
fertility of the Soil.
it abounds with fruits in regard of the fertility of the soil. The
Inhabitants are strong and warlike, and do use the Ruthenian language. This
Country did pertain once to the great Duke of Lithuania, but now it is joined
to the Kingdom of Polonia. It has three divisions, the Lucensian,
Wolodomiriensian, and Cremenecensian, and there are three Provincial Cities,
The Cities.
Lucko, Wolodomiria, and Kerzemenec, which have many Towns and places of
Defense under them. Lakes.
Here are many Lakes and standing waters full of fish, Woods.
and woods full of wild beasts. There is also in this Table Podolia, Podolia.
situated by the River Tyras. It is a most fertile Country, The fertility of
the Soil.
being sowed once, and reaped thrice: the meddowes are so proud and rank, that
the Oxens horns as they graze can scarce be seen above the grass. The
Cities.
The chief Cities are Camienies, Bar, Medzibo^, Brezania, and Braslaw. But let
these things which have been spoken hitherto, suffice concerning this table,
we pass now to Transylvania.

TRANSYLVANIA, OR SIEBENBVRGEN.
TRANSYLVANIA is the mediterranean part of ancient So called from the Daci, the
first Inhabitants, who afterward passing into the Cimbrick Chersonesus were
called Dani.
Dacia, which the Romans called Dacia Ripensis, The names.
and it takes its name from the woods and mountains wherewith it is
encompassed, as the Hercynian woods, and the Carpathian hills. It is called
commonly Because it has on the Frontiers thereof 7 Castles for its defense. The
Situation.
Septem castra, by a ^he borrowed from the German word Siebenburgen, and the
Hungarians (...) it Herdel. On the West it is bounded with Pannonia, on the
North ^^th Polonia, on the South with Walachia, and on the East with Molda^^a.
Transylvania is very fruitful, and has great plenty of corn through (...)
whole Country, which (besides daily experience) that coin of ^rajans does
witness, in which Ceres stood, holding in her right hand ^he horn of the
goat Amalthaea, which signifies plenty; and in her ^eft hand a Table, with
this inscription or motto Abundantia Daciae. i. ^he abundance of Dacia. The
fruitfulness of the Soil.
It brings forth excellent wine about Alba ^^lla, D^va, Egmedine,
Birthilbine, and Fenuscine, It has also great store ^f fruit, among which (to
omit the rest) it has most excellent Damask Prunes, Quinces, sweet Cherries,
which may be compared with those that grow in Italy, and Mellons. Here are
also excellent choice herbs, which grow in every place, as Rhubarbe, the
greater Centory, Gentiana with a yellow and purple flower, Sea-wormewood, the
herb called Libanotis, saffron, and many others. There are many famous Mines
of Metal in this Country, as Mines of Gold at Sculattin, which the Hangarians
call Zalakna, and at Rimili DominurdZ, which signifies the River or Rivulet of
Lords. In these places great wedges or pieces of gold are cut forth, which as
soon as they are dug out they can presently make use of without any
accurate refining. The Roman pieces of golden coin which are often dug up in
these places, do witness this plenty, for they have on the one side the
image of a man with a broad hat, and with this inscription on it C. Cato, and
on the other side, Dacia in the form of a Goddess, holding a Book in her
right hand with this inscription AVR: PVR. Moreover, there are silver Mines at
Offera and Radna. Copper is dug out of the same Mountains, out of which the
gold and silver comes. Steel is dug and found at Cyk, Iron at Thorosco,
and Vaidahuntada: and lastly Sulphur and Antimonie are found in the Copper
Mines. There is such great store of salt. ^pits in Transylvania, that it
sends abundance of salt to other Countries. And there is such a great company
of Oxen in it, The variety o^ living Creatures.
that the largest and fairest ones are often sold for a Floren. What shall I
speak of the ^^cellent metall'd horses which it breeds, which amble and pace
naturally? What should I mention the diverse kinds of Birds? as Eagles,
Faulcones, Pheasants, Partridges, Peacocks, Woodcocks, Snipes. And what should
I reckon the water-fowle? as Swans, Bustards and Bitterness, etc. I pass from
these to the wild beasts: for this Countri^^ has great Forests, and spacious
woods, in which are Bears, Buffes (...) wild Oxen, Elkes, Hearts of a large
stature, Leopards, Martins, Do^^ and white Hares. Diverse Nations heretofore
inhabited this Countries of whom there is yet a remnant in Hungaria, as the
Iazyges, called by Pliny Metanastae, beside the Getes, Bastarnians, Sarmatians,
Grecians, Romans, Scythians, Saxons, and Hungarians. The Romans did conquer
(...) when the Emperor Trajan overcame Decebalus King of Dacia, and ^^duced it
into the form of a Province, The ancient Government.
calling the City Zarmizegeth after his own name Vlpia Trajana; but Galienus
lost it two hund^^^ years after, and from that time the Inhabitants having
laid aside (...) Roman humanity, speech, and eloquence, began to resume their
for^^ wildenesse and barbarism, calling themselves Walachians. After (...)
Romans, the Scythians under the conduct of their Captain Artitlas s^^ted
themselves in this place, and built seven free Towns. The Sax^^ succeeded the
Scythians in the time of Charles the great, who forsaki^^ their Country,
seated themselves likewise in these parts, and built themselves seven free
Cities, following the example of the Scythians. The Hungarians came last, who
partly allured with the vicinity and neerne^^ of the place, mingled themselves
with the Dacians: and afterward be^^ provoked by injuries, they conquered the
whole country, in the rei^^ of Stephen King of Pannonia, whom they styled the
holy. By them so^^ Towns were also built. The mountainous part of Transylvania
(...) lately subdued by Matthias Huniades, whose surname was Corvinus, and
afterward by Stephen King of Hungary. This Matthias took alive (...) Dracula,
a Vaivode or Prince of the mountainous Transylvania, a (...) of unheard of
cruelty, and after ten years imprisonment, restored hi^ to his former place.
Transylvania is now divided into three Natio^^ differing both in manners and
laws, and inhabiting several parts of the Country: namely into the Saxons,
the Ciculi, and Hungarians: T^^ Saxon Transylvanians, as all other German
Nations, have a pecul^^^ dialect or language unto themselves: they inhabit the
strongest (...) and castles, and do excel the other Nations. They have seven
Sea^ namely Zarwaria, Zabesia, Millenbach, Reusmarke, Segesburg or Sches^^^
Ollezna, Schenkerstall, and Reps: all which have some villages (...) them. The
Ciculi near to Moldavia, being descended from the Scy^^ans, do live after
their own laws and customs, and do distrib^^ their offices by lot. They are
divided into seven Regions, which they call Seats, the names whereof are,
Sepsi, Orbai, Kysdi, Czyk, Gyrgio, M^^cus Zeek, and Aranyas Zeek. The
Hungarians and Transylvanian Nobl^ being mingled with the Saxons, and the
Ciculi do, for the most part, ^gree with them both in speech, habit, and
armor. All Transylvania (...) able to set forth ninety thousand armed men and
more. There are seven chief Cities in Transylvania, The Cities.
having a reasonable distance one fr^^ an other, among which Cibinium is the
Metropolis or Mother-citie, and is now called Hermanstat: It is seated on a
plain, not shut up with mountains, but spread into a great breadth. It is not
much less tha^ Vienna in Austria, but it is far stronger both by Art and
Nature: f^^ in regard of the many Fish Ponds and Lakes round about it, no Arm^
map of Transylvania TRANSYLVANIA OR SIEBENBVRGEN.
can come unto it. 2, This Town is also called Stephanopolis.
Brasso or Corona, which the Germans call Cronstat, and is sometimes called
Stephanopolis, being seated amongst pleasant mountains, and fortified with
Walls, Ditches, and Rampires. Here is a famous Universitie and Library. 3,
Bistricia or Noesenstat, which is seated on the plain of a large valley, and
has on either side hills full of Vines. 4, Segoswar or Schespurg, which is
partly situated on a hill, and partly at the foot thereof. 5, This Town is
called by Ptolemie Pirum.
Megies or Midwisch, which is situated in the midst of Transylvania, being
fruitful in wine, and stored with all commodities that are either gainefull or
necessary for food. 6, This Town is also called Millenbach.
Zabesium or Zaaz, which lies in a plain and deep valley, encompassed with
waters full of fish. They say that this was the first seat of the Saxons 7,
This Town is likewise named Claudiopolis.
Coloswar or Clausenburg, which is likewise sweetly seated in a plain, and is
beautified not only with fair walls without, but with stately buildings
within. Here is also Alba Iulia or Weisenberg, an ancient city, and a Bishops
Seat, it is situated on a steep hill, which has a large plain spreading it
self round about it. It has on the East the River More, and on the other side
the River called in the Hungarian language O^pay, which descends from the
Alps. Heretofore it was called Tumis, and in Trajans time it was the Palace
of King Decebalus. As touching the payments of taxes and tributes, there are in
Transylvania eight principal circles or divisions of ground called Chapters,
all which together they call the Universitie, as first the Bistricensian
Chapter, which has in it Bistricia with 23 royal Towns. 2, The Regnensian
Chapter, which has more than 30 Towns. 3, The Barcensian Chapter, which has
the city Corona, with thirteen royal Towns. 4, The Kisdens^^ Chapter, which
has Segesburg, and eight and forty towns. 5, The Chapter called the chapter
of two Seats, which does contain the city of Megies with six and thirty
towns. There are two Chapters of the Cibinians, one of which contains
Cibinium, and three and twenty towns, and the other which they call
Surrogative, contain about (...) Villages. Last of all, the Zabesensian
Chapter, which has Zabesium with seventeene Villages. The Lakes.
This Country has many Lakes and standing waters, which are full of excellent
fish. There are in it three navigable Rivers, The Rivers.
Which the Hungarians call Olt, and the Germans, Alth.
Aluta, Morus, (called also Marus and Marisus) and Sam^^^ the two former
arising out of the Scythian Mountains, the last of the^ falls into Tibiscus,
the other runs straight forward into Danubius, Samus (which the Germans and
Hungarians call Thimes) arises out of the Alps called Colota, and likewise
slideth into Tibiscus. There are also other Rivers, as Kockel the Greater and
the Less, Sabesus, Chrysus, Chrysoloros, and Strygius, etc. the three last
whereof have little grains o^ sand of gold in them, and do sometimes bring
down pieces of gold of half a pound weight. Diverse kinds of excellent fish
are found in them, and the aforesaid Rivers, as namely the greater and lesser
Sturgeon, three kinds of Carpes, the Salmon, the River and Lake-Lamprey, the
fish called Silurus, the Mullet, an other rare kind of Lamprey, the white and
black Trout, the scaly Gudgeons, and those that have no scales, unknown to
other places: besides Pikes, Perches, Tenches, and the common Lamprey, all
which are found there and of a great size. There are Mountains near unto
Walachia, Cisalpina and Moldavia, which do produce Agarick and Turpentine
Trees. The Woods.
There are many woods in Transylvania, and amongst the rest Hercynia, in which
besides the wild beasts abovementioned, there are wild Oxen and Horses,
whose manes do reach even to the ground. The public works.
There are also in this Country many Castles well fortified: among which the
chief is called the Red Castle, being a strong defense, and seated on the
Alps, near to a running stream, where there is a straight passage between
the Mountains into the Country, and it is, as it were, the fortress thereof,
so that no one can enter into it on that side, if the Governor of the castle
bar up the way. There is also an other fortified castle beneath the Town
Millenbach near unto the Town Bros, where also near unto the River, there is
a way leading into Transylvania between the vales and snowie Alps. Now it
follows that we should add something concerning their manners which are
diverse and various, because (as we said before) it was formerly possessed by
diverse Nations, and is still at this day. The people of Walachia are rude,
Their manners
and ignorant of good Arts and Disciplines, they are of the Greek Religion,
but their manners and customs savor of Paganism, in regard that they much
esteem of Oracles, swear by Jupiter and Venus whom they call Holy, and in
many other things come near unto the customs of the Gentiles. They have no
Towns, or brick-houses, but do live in the woods and forests, having no
defense against the violence of the weather but a few reeds, or cottages of
reeds. The other part of Transylvania in most places is of a more fruitful
soil, and the people are more civilized, and of a better behavior. The
Scythians speech in Transylvania differs little from the Hungarian speech at
this day, though heretofore they differr'd much both in speech and writing, for
they (like the Hebrews) did begin to write from the right hand to the left.
The Ciculi are a fiery and warlike kind of people, among whom there are no
Nobles or Rusticks, but all of them are of one rank. The Hungarians have great
power and authority above all the rest. And let so much suffice to have been
spoken briefly concerning Transylvania.

TAVRICA CHERSONESVS.
THis CHERSONESVS was so called by Ptolemie from the Tauri a certain people of
Scythia in Europe. Strabo calle^^ the Scythian Chersonesus. Pliny in his 2
Book and 96 chapter calls it, The names.
after the Latins, the Peninsula of the ^a^^ans. Appianus calls it the
Pontick Chersonesus, and P^^lus Diaconus calls it Stephanus says it has
been called by others Taunais, Alopecia, and Ma^tis.
Chersenesa. At this day it is called Precopska, and Gesara by Antonius
Pinetus. It is a large Peninsula, stretched out toward the East, between the
Euxine Sea, and the Maeotick Lake, even to the Cimmerian Bosporus which divides
Europe from Asia. It has a gentle winter, and most temperate Air. For at the
end of December wi^^^^ begins, and is at the sharpest or coldest in the
middle of February, as having then most snow, The Situation. The temper of the
Air.
which yet lies not above three d^^^^ when the cold and frost is most
constant. The Winter never last^^ longer than the beginning of March. All the
whole Country is very fruitful, The fertility of the Soil.
and very fit for feeding flocks of cattle. Yet albeit the Inh^^^tants have a
fertile soil: many of them do not till their fields nor So^ them. The variety
of living Creatures.
They have abundance of Horses, Camels, Oxen, Kine, and Shee^ on which they
live. There are also great store of dainty foul, which oftentimes the
Christians, and Turks, and sometimes the Polanders, th^^ come thither as
strangers, are wont to take. There is much hunting of Hearts, Goats, Boares and
Hares, both in the Tartarian and Turkish Dominions near the Sea. This
Chersonesus has hard and rugged mo^^taines, that running through the middle of
it do divide it into the No^therne and Southern part; as the Apennine
Mountain does divide Ita^^ Mahomet in the year 1475 did possess the
Southern part, and made^ tributarie to himself. But in the Northern part the
Tartars wandering in the broad fields between Borysthenes and Tanais, The
ancient Government.
and continually changing their places of feeding their cattle, possessed the
Town called Crim as a royal Seat, and from thence they were called Crim
Tartars. Afterward having cut through the Isthmus of the Taurick Chersomsus,
when, near unto the Ditch which they call Praecop, they built a City a royal
Seat of the same name, they were from thence called Praecope^ses. The King of
these Tartars, when being joined in league and society with the Turks, he
had at their request banished his own brother, who made war against him, and
had besieged Capha, at last both himself and his two young sons were cut in
pieces by his Counselors, whom he had with large gifts corrupted for the
aforesaid purpose, and so gave an unhappie example of the Ottoman friendship.
For he being slain, the Tartarians, who were hitherto free, untamed, and
companions and brethren to Ottoman were now made servants, and after the manner
of the other Turkish Provinces were compelled to receive and acknowledge not a
King but a Beglerbeg, that is a Viceroy to govern map of Chersonesus Taurica
TAVRICA CHERSONESVS.
them. But the Turkish Empire may be easily known by the Descriptions of
Wallachia, Greece and the Turkish Empire, and therefore for brevities sake we
refer the Reader thither. Besides Cazan and Astrachan which are Kingdoms
belonging to the Tartarians, who do till fields, dwell in houses, The Cities
and Towns.
and at this day are subject to the Moscovite, and besides the aforesaid
Praecopenses, there are other Field- Tartars, who live in the fields in great
companies, observing no limits, and of these we will speak in their proper
place, to wit, in the Tables of Asia. In the Southern part of this Chersonesus
is the Metropolis, Capha, heretofore called Theodosia, a famous Mart-towne,
being the ancient Colonie of the Genois. It is situate near the Sea. And has
a fair Haven. It seems that in the time of the Gene^ it was very populous.
But when the Turks almost two hundred years since, in the time of Mahomet the
Great took it from them, the Italians were reduced to such a strait, that
there are few tokens remaining of their being there: for the City has for the
most part lost her former beauty. The Italian Churches are thrown down, the
houses decayed, and the walls and Towers on which the Genois colors and
ensigns were placed, with Latin Inscriptions, are fallen to ruin. It is now
inhabited by Turks, Armenians, Jews, Italians, and a few Grecian Christians;
It is famous for traffic as being the chief Haven of the Chersonesus, and
has an infinite company of Vine-yards, Orchards, and Gardens, Besides this
town there is Perecopia called by the ancient Greeks E^^toria, Pompeiopolis,
Sacer Lucus, Dromon Achillis, Graecida, Heracli^^^ Heraclia. Also Costovia a
famous Mart-towne, and Ingermenum, having a stone Castle, beneath which is a
Church, and many Caves, that w^^^ great labor and pains are cut and hewed out
of a rock, for this tow^e is seated on a great high Mountain, and takes its
name from those T^^kish Caves. It was heretofore a fair Town and full of
wealth and riches. Here is Chersonesus Corsunum or Cherso, which is the
ancientest (...) of Taurica. This the Turks called Saci Germenum, as it were,
the Yell^^ Castle, for this Country has a kind of yellow soil. The
admirable and wondrous mines of this place do testify that it was heretofore*
proud, rich, delicate, and famous Colonie of the Grecians, and the ma^^ ancient
city of the whole Peninsula, being much frequented, magnificent, and having a
fair Haven. Here is the Castle and Town of Ia^^li or Balachium, Ptolemie
calls this City Taphros and Pliny Taphra.
Mancopia or Mangutum (as the Turks call it) and the Town of Cercum with a
Castle. Here is the city and castle of Crem^^, which the Tartars call Crim,
having an ancient wall very strong and high, and in regard of its largeness it
is far unlike the other cities of the Taurick Chersonesus. And in the utmost
part of this Country is the city Tanas near the mouth of the River Tanais,
the Russians call it Azac. It is a famous Mart-towne, unto which Merchants do
come out of diverse parts of the world, for that every one has here free
access, and free power to buy or sell. There are many great Rivers i^ this
Country, running down out of the Mountains. The chiefest whereof is
Borysthenes, commonly called Nieper a deep and swift River which runs from
the North into the river Carcinites or Hypaciris, now called Desna, The Rivers.
and so into the Euxine Sea near the Town Oczacow. Also Don or Tanais, Ariel,
Samar that runs into Don, with many others. The This Strait is called by
Martianus, Os Maotidis; by Marcellinus, Patares Angustiae; by the Italians,
Boccadi S. Iovanni, by Castaldus, Stretto de Caffa; and by the Tartars Vospero.
Cimmerian Bosphorus, to which this Chersonesus (as we said before) is
extended. It is a narrow Sea two miles broad, which divides Europe from Asia,
and by which the Maeoticke Lake does flow into the Euxine Sea. It is called
from the Cimmerians who dwell upon the coldest part thereof, or from the town
Cimmerium as Volaeterranus would have it. The This Lake is called commonly Mar
delle Sabacche by the Italians Mar della Tana, and by the Arabians Marel Azach.
The Sea.
Maeotick Lake is near the mouth of Phasis (commonly called Fasso, and by the
Scythians Phazzeth) receiving Tanais into it. The Scythians call it Temerenda,
that is, the mother of the Sea, as Dionysius witnesses, because much water
flows from thence through the Cimmerian Bosphorus into it, as also much from
other places, which does so replenish and fill the Lake, that the banks
thereof can hardly contain it. This Lake in regard it receives many rivers,
abounds with fish. There is also the This sea is called by some, mare
Boreale, by Claudianus, Po^tus Amaz^nus; by Fla^cus, Pontus S^ythicu by Festus
Avienus, Pontus Tauricus: by Herodotus, and Orosius, Mare Cimmerium: by Stralo,
Mare C^l^hirum: by Ap^lonius, lib. 4 Mare Cauchasium: by Tacitus, Mare
Pont^cum: by A^^st^des, M^^e Phasian^^^ by Ovid, M^re Sarmaricum: by the
G^^^^s, Tanais: by the Italians, Mar Majo^e: by the Greeks, Maurothalassa: by
Lucian, Pontus Niger: and by the Turks, Caradenis.
Euxine Sea, the upper part of whose water is sweet, and the nether part salt.
This being heretofore called the Axine, and according to Sophocles the Apoxine
Sea, because no Ships could arrive here, or in regard of the barbarous Scythian
borderers who killed strangers, they afterward called the Euxine, by the figure
which they call Euphemismus. But they called it Pontus as if it were another
Ocean, for they supposed that those who sailed on it did perform some great
and memorable act. And therefore says Strabo, they called it (...), Pontus, as
they called Homer the Poet. There are many rugged and steep mountains in this
Chersonesus, especially those which run through the middle thereof. The
greatest and highest of them has a great Lake on the top of it. But so much
hitherto concerning these things. Now let us proceed to other matters. Justice
is administered among the Tartarians by the Law of Mahomet in the Cities and
Towns of the Chan, and the other Sultanes. They have their Priests, their
Judges in their Towns, and their Begi or Praefects, who do hear and decide
private injuries. But the Chan himself with his Counselors does judge of
capital matters, as murder, and theft. In declaring whereof they need no
Lawyer, neither do they use the subtlety thereof, nor excuses, or prolonging
matters by delay. For the meanest of the Tartarians or strangers do freely
declare their own wrongs and grievances before the Judges, and the Chan
himself, by whom they are quickly heard and dispatched. They instruct their
sons when they are children in the Arabicke language, they do not keep their
daughters at home, but deliver them to some of their kindred to be brought up.
When their sons come to ripeness of years they serve the Chan or the
Sultans, and when their daughters are marriageable, they marry them to some of
the chief Tartars or Turks. The best of the Tartars in the Princes Court go
civilly and decently in their apparel, not for ostentation or pride, but
according as necessity and decency requires. When the Chan goes abroad in
public, The mountains. The manner of government. The Senators.
the poorest men may have access unto him, who when he sees them does examine
them what their wants and necessities are, and whence they did arise. The
Tartarians are very obedient to the Laws: and they adore and reverence their
Princes like Gods. Their Judges according to Mahomets Law are accounted
spiritual men, and of undoubted equity, integrity, and faithfulness. Their
manners.
They are not given to Controversies, Lawsuits, private discord, envy,
hatred, or to any wanton excess either in diet or apparel. In the Princes
Court, none wear Swords, Bows, or other weapons, except it be Travelers, or
strangers that are going on some journey, to whom they are very kind and
hospitable. The chief men eat bread and flesh, drinking also bu^^ Wine and
Metheglin, Their food.
but the Country people want bread, using instead thereof ground Millet
tempered with milk and water, which they commonly call Cassa. They use cheese
instead of meat, and their drink^ is mares milk. They kill also for their
food Camels, Horses and Ox^^ when they are ready to dye or are grown
unserviceable, and they often feed on the flesh of sheep. Few of them do use
Mechanicke Arts (...) the Cities and Towns, few do use Merchandising, and
those Artificers or Merchants that are found there, Their trading and traffic.
are either slaves to the Christians, (...) else they are Turks, Armenians,
Jews, Cercesians, Petigorians who are Christians, Philistines, or Cynganians,
all men of the lowest rank. But l^^ this which has been spoken suffice
concerning the Taurick Chersones^, and the Northern Countries. Let us pass to
the Description of Spa^^^ which we have placed next, and take a view thereof.

THE DESCRIPTION OF SPAIN.
SPAIN is a chief Country of Europe, and the first part of the Continent, it
was so called, as Iustine notes from King Hispanus. The names and whence so
called.
Some would have it so called from Hispalis a famous City, which is now called
Sevill. But Abraham Ortelius, a man very painful in the study of Geographie,
when he had read (in the Author that treats of Rivers and Mountains,
following the opinion of Sosthenes in his third Book,) that Iberia now called
Georgia, a Country of Asia, was heretofore called Pania from Panus, whom
Dionysius (having conquered the Country) made Governor over the Iberians, and
that from thence Modern Writers did call it Spain: moreover when he had
observed that almost all Writers did derive the first Inhabitants of Spain
from Iberia, he was induced to believe that the Country was so called rather
from that Spain, than from Hispanus or Hespalis. This opinion is the more
probable for that Saint Paul does call this Country Spania, in his Epistle to
the Romans, The Situation.
chap. 15. verse 28. as does also Saint Jerome, and many others. So called from
the Cantabri, a people of Spain who inhabited upon the coasts thereof.
But that which the Latin Writers call Hispania, and Ptolemie, Stephanus, and
others, do call Ispania, leaving out the aspiration, Strabo, Pliny, and others
do testify that in ancient times it was called Iberia and Hesperia. It was
called Iberia from Iberia a Country of Asia, The Atlanticke Ocean, though it
be sometimes taken for the whole Ocean, yet it is taken properly for that Sea
which washes Europe and Africa upon the West. It is called by Ptolemie Mare
occiduum and exterius, by Florus Mare externum: and the Arabians call it Magrib.
from whence many do derive the first inhabitants of Spain, though some do
fetch the word Iberia from King Iberus, others from the River Iberus, and
Avienus from Ibera a Town in Baetica or Andaluzia. Some report that it was
called Hesperia from Hesperus the brother of Atlas, or as Horace thinks from
Hesperia the daughter of Hesperus, or rather from Hesperus the Evening-starre,
under which it was supposed to be situated, because it is the farthest Country
Westward of the whole Continent of Europe. And seeing Italy might have the
same name, Horace calls this Hesperia ultima. Appian reports that it was
heretofore called Celtiberia, which yet is rather to be thought a part of
Spain heretofore called Celtica, as Varro witnesses. Gulielmus Postellus, and
Arias Montanus, in his commentaries upon Obadiah, do note that the Hebrews
did call it Sepharad: and so much concerning the name; the Quantity and
Quality follows. The Quantity does consist in the bounds and circuit
thereof, So called from two Islands in the Mediterranian Sea, named Majorca and
Minorca, but anciently both of them Baleares.
and in the form and figure which arises from thence. Concerning the bounds
of Spain, the Ocean does wash two sides thereof, the North side the Cantabrian
Ocean, and the West the Atlanticke. The Iberian or Balearicke Sea does beat on
the South side, where is the Bay of Hercules, and on the East it has the
Pyrenaean Mountains running along with one continued ridge from the Ocean,
(where stands Flaviobriga, at this day called Funtarabia) even to the
Mediterranean Sea. Hence it is that they make two famous Promontories, the one
called Called by Ptolemy, O^ase; by Mela, Eason; by Martianus, Iars^; by
Strabo, Idanus.
Olarso, which shoots o^^ into the Ocean, the other which taking its name
heretofore from the Temple of Venus, but now called Cape de Creus, does jet out
into the Mediterranean Sea. The utmost length of Spain is 200 Spanish miles:
the breadth where it is broadest is 140 miles, and where it is narrowest it is
60. Johannes Vasaeus in his Chronicle of Spain does report, that Spain is so
narrow at the Pyrenaean Hills, that when he traveled over them, on the
Mountain of Saint Adrian, he saw the Sea on either side: namely, the Ocean
which was next unto him, and a far of as far as he co^^^ see, he discerned
the white waves of the Mediterranean Sea. They s^^pose that the whole compass
thereof is 2480 miles. Ptolemy, Str^^^ and others do compare Spain to an
Oxe-hide stretched out on t^^ ground, the neck whereof is extended toward
France, which cleav^^ unto it. The neck I say, which reaches in breadth as
far as the ^^^^^^renaean Mountains, from the Mediterranean Sea, to the
British Ocea^ the fore part of it is stretched from New Carthage even to the
Canta^^^ans, and the hinder part from Hercules Bay, to Gallicia and the
Britt^^^ Sea: that which represents the tail of the hide, is the This
Promontorie some have called Sacrum Iugam, and others Caput Europa, i. the head
of Europe.
Holy Promontorie called at this day Saint Vincents Promontorie, which
stretche^^ it self out into the Atlanticke Ocean, far beyond any other part
(...) Spain. Spain is under the middle of the fourth, all the fifth, and part
of the sixth Climats, where there is an excellent temper for the producing of
all things. For it is neither scortched with the violent heat of the S^^ as
Afric, nor troubled with daily winds as France; but lying between^ them
both, The temper of the Air.
it has a temperate Winter and Summer. Hence it is (as ^^^^stine witnesses)
that Spain has a very wholesome air, the equal ^^^per thereof being never
infected with Moorish fogges. Beside the co^^^ blasts of wind which come from
the Sea, and do as it were search (...) parts of the Country, do drive away
all earthly vapors, and so make it very healthful. Yet all parts of Spain
are not of one quality, for towa^^ the North, as it is something cold and
obnoxious to the Sea, so it w^^^^eth fresh water, and therefore affords no
convenient habitation: especially, seeing the most parts of it are full of
Rocks, Forests, and wood^ places. Toward the South where it extends it
self in a contin^^^ ridge of Mountains, The fertility of the Soil.
it has a happy and good soil, being watered with many great Rivers, and
refreshed with seasonable rain, so that it brings forth fruits of all
kinds. It is not only a bountiful mother, b^^ also a nourisher and breeder
of living Creatures. It is very fruitful not only in producing those things
which do grow out of the earth, but also those things which are generated and
hidden in the bowels thereof: who can reckon up the excellent living
creatures, which are br^^^ on the Land and in the Sea? There is great plenty of
fruits through (...) Spain, and most of the fields are so fertile, that they
return unto the husbandmen thirty bushels for one that is sowed, and
oftentimes forty. It produces many herbs as well unsowed as sowed, which have
sovereign virtues in them, especially in mountanous places; where di^^^ring
from the other parts, it brings forth Hemp, and has more st^^^^ of fruit,
and fairer. There are two sorts of apples in this Country, which map of Spain
THE DESCRIPTION OF SPAIN.
are chief note, the wrinckled apple, and the King-apple. Also there are four
special sorts of Pears, sweet both in taste and smell, the Apian and
honey-peares; the pear called Muscatum, being the least of all kind of pears,
the wine-peare, and the pear called by some Pintum, and by the Spaniards Sine
Regula. What should I mention the Olives that are here? amongst which those are
the best which come from Hispalis, and are far bigger than any Wallnuts. What
should I speak of other fruits? The Lemmons and Orenges that grow here are
commended by all men: the Quince-peare which they commonly call Membrilles and
Pomegranats that are good for medicine, are here in great abundance. What
should I speak of the Wines of this Country, having an excellent taste and
smell, and being made in all parts, yet in some places better than in other?
Spain was heretofore (as now also) rich in mines of Gold, Brass, Iron, Lead,
and other metals: and it does not only boil and make salt, but in some parts
thereof it is dug out of the Earth. For as it is made in many places in
Spain of pit or Well-water, as at Seguntia and elsewhere, insomuch that the
King sets a great custom thereon, so there are Mountains (if we may
believe Marineus Siculus) which have native salt in them. Besides, Spain is
rich and plentiful in all kind of Cattle, so that the Woods, Mountains,
Meddowes, Fields, and Forests do resound with their bleating and lowing. It
breeds the best horses: Baetica breeds more than other parts: As^^ria
breeds the strongest, and Spanish Gennets are called Asturcones. In some
parts of Spain there are bred those that are of such swiftness and and
agilitie, that antiquity did fabulously believe that they were begotten by the
wind. It has no Lions, Camells, or Elephants, except those that be brought
from other places, The variety of living creatures
but there are great store of Does, Hearts, Boares, Bears, Hares, and Cunnies,
which do afford them much game and sport in hunting of them.

Haec sane docet versiculus Catulli,
Cuniculosae Celtiberiae fili.
These things Catullus verse
Does unto thee declare
O son of Celtiberia where
So many Cunnies are.
There are in Spain (besides other birds which invite them to fowling)
Eagles, Hernes, Hawks, and the bird called Atta, first brought out of Sicilie,
also Cranes, Geese, Partridges, ring-Doves, wild and tame Ducks, etc. But of
these things enough: I come now to the Government, which is the next point to
be spoken of, according to the order of our method. I do not purpose here to
weary the Reader by reckoning up out of Iustine, Diodorus, Josephus, Eusebius,
Hierome, Berosus, and his Translatour Annius Viterbiensis, the ancient Kings of
Spain, and their achievements both at home and abroad. The Government.
Tubal never was in Spain, not in Europe, but lived in Asia. Neither are
Iberus, Iubalda, Brygus, Tagus, Batus, and others to be accounted as Kings
thereof, unless we will grant that Kings in ancient time, were borne of Rivers
and other inanimate things. Again, the Catalogue of the Kings succeeding them,
is no better than fabulous, as also those things be which the Lydians, the
Thracians, Rhodians, Phrygians, Cyprians, Phoenicians, Egyptians, Milesians,
Carians, Lesbians, and Chaldaeans are reported to have performed successively
in this country. But those things are more certain, which Writers have
recorded were heretofore achieved by the Carthaginians, Romans, Goths,
Vandals, Alani, Swethlanders, Huns, and their Kings, for that the Writers of
them were either present at those actions, or else came to the knowledge of
them by the faithful relation of others. Of these things therefore I will
speak briefly, and thus it was. When the Carthaginians did rule all Spain,
and had all things under their own command, the Senate and people of Rome did
send first of all the two Scipioes against them with an army of Soldiers, in
the beginning of the second Punick war: who were slain in the seventh year
of that war, Q. Fulvius Flaccus and Ap. Claudius Pulcher being Consuls. The
next year P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus being sent next to his Father and
Uncle, did perform many things very prosperously, and first of all made a
Province of it, Q. Caecilius Metellus, and L. Veturius Philo being Consuls.
First, Asdrubal and Mago Carthaginian Captains, being overthrown and put to
flight in the battle, near to the City Baetula (which is supposed to have
been in that place where now Baeca and Vbeda are seated) and the Spanish Armies
beaten out of Spain, he established a league of friendship with Syphax King
of the Massilians, who is now called Biledulgerid; a little after he compelled
the rebellious people of Spain to yield themselves unto him, and having made a
league with Massanissa King of the Masaesulians, and the Gaditanes, he
committed the government of the Province to L. Lentulus and L. Manlius
Acidinus, and returned to Rome. After Scipio, L. Cornelius Lentulus the
Proconsul did govern Spain, and after many prosperous acts and achievements,
entered the City in triumph. Three years after, C. Cornelius, Cethegus, and
Minucius Rufus being Consuls, the two Spaines were first bounded, and two new
Pretors sent into them, C. Sempronius Tuditanus into the hither Spain, and M.
Helvetius Blasio into the farther. Two years being scarcely past, so great a
war began in Spain, that it was necessary, that a Consul should be sent out
with an Army: Marcus Portius Cato Consul being allotted to go into the hither
part, did so appease and quiet rebellion, that the Proconsul in regard thereof
triumphed. This is that Cato, who, as Livie writes and others, by a wonderful
stratagem, did throw down the walls of many Spanish Cities in one day. After
Cato's victory, Spain was diversely possessed, and many times lost and
regained again, so that there were above 30 triumphs for victories obtained
here. They did not begin to pay any tax, before the time of Augustus Caesar,
who having by long continuance of wars tamed all Spain, and overthrown the
Cantabrians and Asturians that had longest of all made resistance, divided the
whole Country into three Provinces, Baetica, so called from the River Baetis,
Lusitania, and Tarraconensis, so called from its city Tarracon; and every one
of these have their Diocesses or Circles of jurisdiction. In Baetica there are
four Diocesses Gaditana, Cordubensis, Astigitana, and Hispalensis. Lusitania
has three Diocesses, Emeritensit, Pacensis, and Scalibitana. Lastly,
Tarraconensis has seven, Carthaginensis, Tarraconensis, Caesar Augustana,
Cluniensis, Astura, Lucensis, and Bracarensis (See Pliny lib. 3. Strab. lib. 3.
and others.) Thus things by degrees being changed, the chiefest Provinces were
under the Romans command, even until the Consulship of Honorius the third, and
Theedosius the third. At which time the Vandals, Suevi, and Alani being called
into France by Stilico, when once (having passed the Rhene) they had set foot
in France, being in a barbarous manner spoiled by the Goths, and the Kings
Adolphus and Vallia, whom the Emperor Hon^rius had sent to aid and set France
at liberty, they passed at last over the Pyrenaean Hills. Afterward the Goths
inhabiting France, for many years possessed Spain, having taken it from the
Romans; for being assailed by the Frankes, they again made war upon the
Vandals. The Frankes drove the Goths out of France, and the Goths drove the
Vanda^^ and Alani out of Spain. At which time the Vandals and Alani being
called by Boniface into Africa, which he governed for the Emperor, left
Spain to the possession of the Goths. When the Goths, having driven out the
Roman Garrisons, had made Spain their own, and had a long time Kings of their
own who ruled in it, at length they were overthrown in a great battle by the
Whose chief Captain was one Tarif, who overthrew Roderick and his Army,
consisting of 130000 foot, and 35000 horse.
Arabian Saracens, and King Who having sent Julian on an embassage to the
Moors in Africa, in the mean time defloured his Daughter Cana; to revenge
which injury, her Father procuted the Moors to come into Spain.
Roderick being killed, they lost almost all Spain. Those that survived after
the battle, when they had fortified themselves in the Mountains of the
Astures, Cantabrians, and Galicians, by little and little they begin to recover
the Countries, Cities, and Castles which they had lost. At last the Saracens
party growing weak in Baetica Hispania, and the Goths having recovered all
Spain, they again were overcome by Ferdi^^^ Catholic King of Aragon, and
thrust out of Spain, so that the whole Country returned and came again into
the hands of the ancient Lords thereof. But whereas in the times of the Moors,
five Kings, namely of Castile, of Aragon, of Portugal, of Granada, and Navarre
did possess Sp^^^^, at this day Philip the fourth, son unto Philip the
third, who was Nephew unto the Emperor Charles the fifth is sole King thereof.
It was heretofore diversely divided. The Romans first divided it into the Hith^^
and Farther Spain. They called that the Hither part which was neer^^^ unto the
chief City and the principal Countries of the Empire, being situated
between the River Iberus and the Pyrenaean Mountains: they called that the
Farther part which lay more remote, being stretched out beyond Iberus even to
the Ocean. In following times we read^ that Spain was divided into six
parts, Tarraconensis, Carthaginensis, L^sitania, Galicia, Baetica, and
Tingitana beyond the narrow Sea in Afric^. In the time of the Moors there were
many Kingdoms in Spain, which were afterward divided into five, as the
Kingdom of Castile, of Aragon, of Portugal, of Granada, and Navarre. But now
by a new distribution the whole Empire is divided into three Kingdoms, namely
of Aragon, Castile, and Portugal. Under the Kingdom of Aragon is contained,
besides Aragon, Catalonia, Valentia, Majorica. Under the Kingdom of Castile
are comprehended Biscay, Leon, Asturia, Galicia, Estremadura, A^dalusia,
Granada, Murcia, and both the Castiles, with the Canarie-Ila^^* Under the
Kingdom of Portugal is comprehended, besides Portugal, Algarbia. The Cities
which are in the whole Kingdom are almost innumerable. The chief of them are
Hispalis, Madrid, Tarraco, Lisbon, The names of the Cities.
Granada, Pampilona, Valentia, Barcino, commonly called Barzelona. The seventh
German Legion now called Leon, S. Lucar, Corduba, Nebrissa, Compostella,
Toledo, Salamanca, Complutum, Pintia, Caesar-Augusta, now Saragossa, Asturica
Augusta, and many others. Here are admirable Lakes: near the town Beiara is
a commodious and wonderful Lake, which breeds Turtles, being a black kind
of Fish, but excellent in taste; and, as Marineus Siculus witnesses,
prognosticating and foretelling of rain and storms to come, by the great
noise which they make, so that the sound thereof is heard like the roaring of a
Bull, eighteen miles thence. The Lakes.
There is a certain Lake on the very top of the Mountain Stella, as Vasaeus
writes, in which fragments and pieces of Ships are found, when notwithstanding
it is more than 12 leagues distant from the Sea: and the same Author notes,
that the Inhabitants do affirm, that it boyleth, and is tempestuous, as often
as the Sea is rough or unquiet. The most diligent Writer Suetonius says, in
his Description of the life of Galba, that thunder fell down into the Lake of
Cantabria, and that afterward twelve axes were found therein: There is also the
pleasant Lake which Pliny mentions lib. 3. Nature. histor. cap. 3. not far
from Valentia, at this day it is called Albufera. The Rivers follow. Spain is
watered every where with many Rivers, there are some who reckon an hundred and
fifty, and over them 700 Bridges, the chief whereof is the Bridge of Segovia
and Alcantara. There is in this Kingdom the River which Ptolemie calls Iberus,
and now is called Ebro, it breaks forth in Cantabria out of the Mountain
Idubeda, with two fountains or spring-heads, that on the right hand in the
Aucens^an wood called Monte d'Oca, the other on the left hand near a Town
which the Inhabitants call Fuentibre: and so increasing with the receipt of
great Rivers, being first entertained in the fields of Galaguris, it runs
unto and visits Iuli^briga and Tudella, two Towns of Navarre, and then it
waters Iulia, Bolsa, and Caesar-Augusta. Departing thence, it glideth
Southward, and by and by Northeastward, by the people of Laletania, now called
Galetani, and the rich City Tortosa. At last being enlarged with many Rivers
flowing into it, and having run almost four hundred miles forward in length,
it enters so violently with two mouths into the Mediterranean Sea, that
having thrust it self 50 paces thereinto, yet the water is sweet and fresh.
This River is called also Doria, Durias, Dorius, and commonly Duero.
Durius is the greatest River in Spain, because so many Rivers do run into
it that it would be too tedious to reckon them up, it flows out of the
Mountain Idubeda, where it is called Sierra de Cocolo, it divides the
Vectones from the Asturians, and the Portugalls from the ancient Gallicians:
And having viewed the Tower Sullana, called Tordesillas, Salabris, Miranda, and
other Towns forty English miles beneath Lamego, near to a Town of Portugal
which is called Porto, with a violent course, it does mingle it self with the
Western Ocean. The River which Ptolemie and others call Tagus, arises in the
high cliffes of the Mountain Orospeda, some fifty furlongs from a little
town which is called Tragacet, not far from the City Coneia, now called
Guensa. And gliding by the Which is a people which inhabit the Country of
Toledo.
Carpetani, it visits Toledo, the royal city, and having a bridge there
over it, it waters the noted fair Cities of Talavera, Augustobroga,
Alcantara, and others, and so cutting almost through the middle of Portugal,
it discharges it self into the West Ocean beyond Lisbone, by a mouth or
outlet (as some observe) which is seven miles and an half broad. The
Inhabitants at this day call this River Taio. The Portugalls Tejo. The River
Tagus having sands mingled with gold, as Solinus in his Polyhistor, and
Isiodorus Lib. 13. Etymolog. cap. 21. do witness, has been preferred before
all the other Rivers of Spain. Emanuel Henricus, a man worthy of belief, does
affirm in Ortelius, that it has at this day golden sands, as also many other
Rivers of Portugal. And Pomponius does testify, that it has great store of
Fish, Oysters, and Pearls in it. The river Anas well known to the Latin and
Greek Writers takes its original out of the great Lakes, in Laminitania, as
Pliny writes Lib. 3. Naturalis Histor. cap. 1. now called Campo de Montiel,
and gliding by the A people of Tarraconensis Hispania.
Oretani, near to a Town, which the Spaniards call Cagnamanus, and so to
Metallina where Vitellius pitched his Tent, as the ancient inscriptions of the
place do show, it hides it self at last in the bowels of the Earth, though
Georgius of Austria Provost of Harlebeck does witness in Ortelius, that this
is rather a common opinion, than true, and by and by after it has run some
15 miles, as if it rejoiced to have many new births, as Pliny says, breaking
forth near Villaria, and having run and glided by Merida (where it has a
long stone bridge over it) and other Cities toward the South, it rowleth it
self into the Sea near the Castle of Marin. The Spaniards call it at this day
Rio Guadiana, by borrowing a word from the Arabian, for with them Guad
signifies a river. The river which Ptolemie calls Be^^s does arise near
Castaon out of the mountain Orospeda, as Strabo and Stephanus do write, and
out of that part thereof which is called Sierra d' Alcarat. This river running
Westward from its fountain, and gliding by Cuduba and other towns, at last
declineth Southward toward S^^^ and with a large mouth (being one league over
but full of flatts and sands) discargeth and emptieth it self into the
Atlanticke Sea not far from Caliz. Here is a fair river which the ancients
called Auro, and Obvetis, Strabo and Pausanias call it Tartessus. Livy notes
that the Inhabitants did call it Circes, which name it retained for a long
time, as M^rius Niger witnesses, notwithstanding the Africans had gotten
Spain, and yet at length it was by them called Guadalquivir, or as others
w^i^e Guadalchebir, as it were to say, the great river. Here is also the river
Mi^^ in Hispania Tarraconensis, the head whereof begins eighteen miles
above the Sextian Altars, which are now called Lugo, near to a town commonly
called Castle Verde. This river passing by the town called Porto-marin, and
sliding by the bridge Belsarius, and the City Orense, at last joyneth it self
with the river Avia at Valentia; and having run eighteen miles further it
does cast it self into the Ocean. There are other rivers as Lethe, Turius,
Limaea, Sicores, Chalibs, Austra and others of lesser note, which I leave to be
unfolded or described by others, lest I should be too tedious. The commodities
of the Sea.
The Sea calls on us nex to be entreated of, together with the Bays and
Havens, which belong unto it Spain is enclosed on every side with the Ocean
and the Mediterranean Sea, except that part which is joined to the Pyrenaean
mountains and to Aquitanis. In regard whereof it is very fit to traffic and
merchandise with all parts of the old and new world. The Sea round about it
does afford abundance of all kinds of fish, as Whales, Congers, Tunies,
Soales, Lampreys, and the like: beside Oysters and other Shellfish. There are
three famous Bays of Spain, which lie all toward the Mediterranean Sea, the
Sucronensian, Illicitane, and the Virgitane. The greatest of them all is the
Sucronensian, receiving the Sea, as Mela says, with a large mouth or inlet,
which within grows narrower and narrower. The Illicitane is the middlemost in
bigness, now called Puerto d' Alicante. The least is the Virgitane Bay, and is
so called, as Mela writes, from the town Virgi, now styled Vera or Bera:
Ptolemie corruptly calls this town Vrce or Virge, Antoninus as erroniously
calls it Vrci, and Pliny with no less error Vrgi. The Gaditane Bay was so
called in Mela (lib. 3.) from Gades: now it is called Baia de Cadiz. The chief
Havens in Spain are first that which the ancients called Magnus, between the
Nerian and Scythian Provinces, which now is called Corunna. Secondly, Amibalus
Portus, now called Alber, in the Kingdom of Algarbia. Thirdly, that which
Pliny calls Amanum, now Fuentarabie, as Villonovanus, or Barnino as Moralis
thinks. Fourthly, Portus Tarraconensis of which the Italian Poet Silius
writes thus, Lib. 15.

The stranger in the Haven then does land
Of Tarraconia, while the ships do stand
In the safe harbor, labor is laid by,
And fear of the deep Sea, while here they lie.
And lastly, the Haven of Venus, so called by Mela, Mountains.
which lies at the foot of the Pyrenaean hills. Now follow the mountains;
the chief whereof are the Pyrenaean mountains dividing Spain from France.
Ptolemie and others call them Pyrenea, and Stephanus calls them Pyrena,
Tibullus Pyrene, Livy and others call them Saltus Pyrenaeus, the Spaniards
generally call the^ Los Pirencos, for they have diverse names in diverse parts
thereof. Some would have them so called from fire, or because they are often
struck with thunder, or because all the woods thereof (as Diodorus writes in
his sixth Book) were heretofore set on fire by sheep-heards, and so burnt
down. Silius the Italian Poet does give them this denomination from a maid
called Pyrena, the daughter of Bebryx, whom Hercules lay withal upon this
mountain, and being afterward torn to pieces by wild beasts, she was buried
here. The Pyrenaan mountains (as they do) stretching and extending themselves
from the East unto the West even to the Celtick Promontorie, divide Spain into
that part which lies on the hither side of the mountains, and that which is
on the further side thrusts forth a mountain near the fountain of Iberus
toward the South through the breadth of Spain. Strabo and Ptolemie do name it
Idubeda. But it is commonly called Saltus Aucencis, and Monte d' Oca, from the
ancient City Auca, some ruins whereof may be discerned at Villa Franca beyond
Burgos. Also there is the mountain which arises out of Idubeda, called by
Strabo Orospeda, and by Ptolemie Otrospeda. Yet has it not one certain name
for all the whole mountain: for whereas Alvarius Gomecius calls it Sierra
Vermigia, Florianus Sierra Mollina, and Clusius Sierra Morena: these names are
but names to part of it. Calpe is reckoned with Orospeda. For so this mountain
is called by Ptolemie and others. It is near to the Bay of Hercules, which is
commonly called the Bay of Gibraltar. Part of Orospeda is high and rockie, and
reaching from the City of Hispalis to Granada, it does lift up it self near
Archidona. It has its name, and deserves still to be famous, by reason of a
memorable example of love, which was showed thereon, for the Spaniards call it,
La Penna de les Enamorades, or the Lovers Mountain. Paulinus calls it
Bimaris because it looks on two Seas, the Inward and the Outward Strabo says
that the mountain Calpe is not very large in compass, but that it is so high,
that to those who are far off (...) may seem an Island, some do fabulously
suspose it to be one of Hercul^^ Pillars, and Abela over against it in Afric
to be the other, both being the bounds of Hercules labors: they say that it
was heretofore o^^ mountain, and that Hercules dug it through, and so
altered the shape of it. Out of Alcarassum do arise the mountains called by
Pliny Mo^^ Mariani, by Ptolemie in the singular number Marianus, and by
A^^ninus mons Mariorum. They are now called Sicera Morena. The noble river
Baetis does water the bottomes of their mountains on the left side Near to
Barcinon or Barcilona there is a mountain which the Inhabitants call Mon-Iui:
some do translate it Jupiters mountain, and some (...) better render it the
Jews mountain, for that they were heretofore b^ried in this place, where many
of their Graves and Sepulchers do yet remain. On the top thereof there is a
Town, from whence a watchman, by setting up a linen flagge in the day time,
and a fire i^ the night does give notice to the City Barcinon of the
approaching of any ships. Spain is every where full of woods, and trees
bearing sing^lar and excellent kinds of fruit, which it would be too long to
recite is particular. There is a wood near unto the Town called Monte Maj^^e,
in which Nature alone has planted Oaks, Chestnut-trees, Nuts, Eberds,
Cherries, Prunes, Pears, Figs, wild Vines, and all kind of fruit trees,
very high and fairly spread. Not far from the Town Be^^ or Bigerra, is a
most pleasant wood, where Lucius Marinaeus Siculus w^teth, The public and
private works.
that he has measured Chesnut-trees, which have been fo^^e foot about. It
has many woods also to fell and cut, which do afford the Spaniard wood enough
for the building of ships. What shall I speak of the public or private works
in this kingdom? here are many magnificent Temples, many Abbeys, Friaries,
Monasteries, Hospitals for strangers, and for the sick. Here are many famous
Kings Palaces, many magnificent and fair houses belonging to Noblemen and
Knights, and innumerable other public and private edifices. The King of Spain
is borne not chosen or elected to the Crown, yet is he inaugurated, and
sworn to defend this people and their privileges when he takes the oath of
alleagiance of them. The Kings children are called Infantaes. Among whom the
eldest son, who in his fathers life is declared King by the consent and oath
of the Nobles the Citizens, and people, is called Prince of Spain. Although
the King have supreme power over all persons and over all causes, yet he
seldom decrees any thing, but with the consent, The manner of Government.
and by the counsel of twelve men, who being the chief of the whole Kingdom
do make a royal Senate. By them matters of moment are discussed and
determined, but matters of more secrecy are consulted of by a Privy Counsel,
which consists of the King, The Senators and their numbers.
the Dictator of Leon, the President, and the third part of the Kings Counsel.
Those things which concern the Indies and their government, are handled in the
Senate, which they call the Indian Senate, by one President, and twelve
Counselors. Matters of war are handled in the mi^itarie and warlike Senate,
which the 12 Royal Senators, the Dictators of Leon and Castile, with others
do make up. Besides these There are beside these Cou^sells the Counsel of the
Low Countries, the Counsel of the order of S. John, and the Counsel of the
Inquisition.
there are also in Spain three Prefectureships of Right and Justice, which
they call Places of hearing, or Chanceries, one being in Castile, the other in
Granad^, and the third in Gallicia: Every one has a President and 12 Senators,
and if that Suitors receive no satisfaction or redress of their greevances
from them, their causes are brought before the Royal Senate. Lastly there is
the Treasurer of Castile, having four Questors under him, whose office is to
receive the Kings Treasure, and to take and give account thereof. There is a
great company of Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls in Spain. Besides the Prince of
Assuria and others, I find that there are about 23 Dukes, as the Friensian
Duke, the Duke of Medina-Rivi-Sicci, of Alua, of Alcala, of Albuquerqua, of
Scalona, of Osuna, of Averi, of Bejar, of Gandia, of Sessa, of Infantasg, of
Medina Caeli, of Medina Sidonia, of Maqueda, of Najar, of Feria, of Segorbia,
of Sonna, of Villa-Formosa, of Verragua, Pastrana, and Franca-Villa. And these
have for their yearly revenues some forty, some an hundred thousand Ducats.
A Ducket is according to our English valuation 6 s. 8 d.
The Dukes of Infantasg, and Medina-Sidonia have a far greater revenue: for
the latter has 130000, and the former 120000 Ducats per annum. These are the
Marquesses, the Marquess of Villa Nova, of Astorga, of Aquilar, of Denia, of
Mondejar, of Navares, of Savia, of Velleza, of Coma^es, of Aiomonte, of
Altamir, of Veladra, of Vearina, of Carpio, of Camarassa, of Cortes, of
Monte-Majore, of Guardia, of Monte-Clare, of Las Navas, of Poza, of Steppa, of
Tanara, of Villa-Franca, of Drada, of Cavietis, of Falcis, of Fomesta, of
Molina, of Ciralva, of Valesis, of Vallis, of Zaara, of Ardalis, of Tarifa, of
Alcanisa, and For there are in all 45 Marquesates.
others, A Town in New-Castile, where this order was instituted by Ferdinand
of Leon, and confirmed by Pope Lucius Anno 1183.
the greater part having annual revenues from ten thousand to 40000 Ducats.
There are also about ^n hundred Earls, whose yearly revenues are from ten
thousand to 25 thousand Ducats, the chief of them are the Earls of
Benaventum, of Albua, Miranda, and Oropoza. It would be too tedious to the
Reader to ^eckon up, the Vicounts, which are ten in number, the Barons, the
long ^oll and Catalogue of Vice Roys, Governors, Prefects of Provinces, and of
the Sea: and lastly the long Catalogue of Gentlemen, and diverse ^rders of
Knights; as in Castle, Knights of the order of Saint Founded by King R^ynar of
Leon, Anno. 984.
James, of (...) Alcantara, of A Town which R^ymund Abbot of Pisoria, defended
against the Saracens, and therefore instituted this order.
Calatrava, and of the order of Saint John: in Aragon and Catalonia, Knights of
the order of Montesa: in Portugal Knights of ^he order of This order was
instituted by Denis King of Portugal, and confirmed by Pope John the 22th
Anno. 1321.
Jesus Christ, (whereof the King is the Master) being very ^reat, and having
all the Provinces which are found out in Afric, A^^ia, or America, annexed
unto it. But it will not be amiss if we observe ^y the way that of all the
Families in Spain, the ancientest is the Pacie^ian Family, for Hirtius in his
Commentaries makes mention of L. Iu^ius Paciecus, in that place where he
entreats of Corduba: as also Cicero ^n the 6th Book of his familiar Epistles
to wit, in his Epistle to Lepta. These following Families are also very noble
and Illustrious, to wit, the Meridonian, Toletane, Cerdean, Cardonean,
Larensian, Velascean, Gusma^an, Pimentellane, Stunican, Henritican, Oriosian,
Cordubentian, Limensi^^ and the Mondragonian Families, to which we desire
others to add^ others, and crave pardon if we mistake their places in ranking
of then We have spoken of the Politic State and government: the Ecclesias^^
call follows. The Church of Hispalis was in ancient time the Prim^^ and chief
of Spain, and afterward the Church of Toledo, until the great overthrow and
devastation of the Kingdom. For Toledo coming into the Barbarians hands, the
Bishopric of Bacara had that dignity: but when being recovered by the
Christians, the Toletan Bishopric sought its former dignity, and the
Baracensian to retain wh^^ had gotten, there arose a contention, as we may
read Lib. 1. Decre^^ so that the matter is yet undetermined. Moreover Vasaeus
to Chroni^^ cap. 20o. shows who were Presidents in Spain from the time of
(...) Romans and Goths. But after Spain was recovered again out of (...)
hands of the Barbarians, the Bishoprics with their ancient Cities we^
restored, and some newly instituted. We read that Spain has at^^ day seven
Archbishops, and 41 Suffragane Bishops subordinate (...) them. The first is the
Archbishop of Toledo, Chancellor of Ca^^^ who next unto the King and his
Progeny is the greatest man in dignity and wealth. The Bishops that do obey
him, are the Bishop of B^rg^ whose Seat was heretofore at Aura, (whence it was
called Au^t^^ Episcopatus, and corruptly in some Counsels and other public
Ac^^ Auxitanus) but was after translated from thence to Burgos, the Metropolis
of Old Castile, by Alphonsus the sixth, who restored Toledo to the Christians by
the authority of Pope Urban the second, in the year 1097. Also the Bishop of
Cuena, the Bishop of Osma, called common Episcopus Oxmensis, and corruptly in
Counsels Oxoniensis: the Bishop at Corduba, (whose Bishopric is most ancient
and famous by means of Osius once Bishop thereof) the Bishop of Iaenensia,
Palentia, and Segna The second is the Archbishopricke of Hispalis, under which
there were heretofore eleven Bishoprics, though there are now but three;
namely of Malaga, Gades, and the Canarie Isles. The third is the Archbishop^^^^
of Compostella. The Seat of this Bishop was heretofore Iria Fla^^s, (...)
Sea-Towne of Gallicia, and commonly called Padron: but being afterward
translated to Compostella, it began to be called the Bishopric of
Compostella, or of Saint James; under which are the Bishops of Cori^, ^centia,
Asturia, Gamora, Salmantica, Orense or Auria, Tude or Ty^^, (...) Town of
Gallicia, seated by the River Minius, and commonly called Tuy. The Bishop of
Badaios, (which is now called Episcopus Pace^^ and the Bishop of Mindonia,
whose Seat was heretofore Ribad^^ commmonly called Mandonnedo. The fourth
Archbishop is the Archbishop of Granada; under whom is the Bishop of Almeria,
and the bishop of Guadix, heretofore called Episcopus Accitanus, for that wh^^
heretofore was called Acce, is now called Guadix. The fifth is the Archbishop of
Valentia, under which are the Bishops of Carthage, Orign^^ Segobrica, (whin is
now called Segorbia) and Majorca. The sixth is the Archbishop of Tarraconia,
under whom are the Bishops of Herda, (commonly called Lerida) Tortosa, Herlua,
Barcinon, Genida, Vrgella, and Vich. Lastly, the seventh is the Archbishop of
Caesar-Augusta, who has under him the Bishops of Pampilona, Calagurris, Osca,
and Balbastro: the Bishops of Leo and Oviedo are subject to none. Portugal
has three Archbishops, namely of Bracara, Olisipona or Lisbon and Funchala;
under whom are the Bishops of Ebora, Visca, Guarda, Conimbrica, Porta, Lamego,
Silva, Cepta, and Leria. Concerning the other Bishops, you may consult with
Vasaeus, L. Marinaeus Siculus, Damianus a Goes, and others, who do curiously
observe and note what are the revenues which belong to every Bishopric, as
also to Abbeys and Monasteries. Those who belong to the Inquisition are of the
Ecclesiastical State: they were first instituted and ordained to examine the
Moors, Saracens, and Jews; but afterward in process of time they began to
extend their power and authority over all that were not of the Roman Church
and Religion. In the next place we will note the Academies or Universities in
Spain, which are about two and twenty; the chief whereof are Salamanca,
Compludo, Conimbrica, or Conimbra, Pincia, Saganta, Osca, and Lerida. The
Spaniards have happy wits, yet do they learn or study little, because they
think themselves learned when they are not: they love the craft and subtlenes
of Sophisters. In the Universities they speak Spanish more than Latin,
mingling their speech with many words belonging to the Moors. They seldom
leave any offspring or monument of their wit to their own posterity, much
less to strangers, in regard their language is defective. Yet there have
been, and are some learned men, who by their excellent learned works and
writings, have graced their Country, and made it famous unto other Nations.

If we seek for Divines, there will come forth Vigilantius Priest of Barcinon,
Aquilius Severus, Prudentius Bishop of Armentia, Osius of Corduba, Avitus a
Priest, Marcianus Bishop of Barcelona, Paulus, Orosius, Pacianus, and his son
Dexter, Audentius, Isidorus, the interpreter of the Apocalypse, Iustinianius,
the President of the Church of Valentia, Leander Bishop of Hispalis, Martinius
the President of Mandova, Fulgentius the Bishop of Carthage Eladius the
Archbishop of Toledo, Isidorus Bishop of Hispalis, John Bishop of Gerunda;
Eutropius, Valentinus, and Franciscus Ximenes Cardinal and Archbishop of
Toledo, and father of the Universitie of Compludo, who caused the Holy Bible to
be printed in diverse languages, which is commonly called the Complutensian
Bible. If we seek for those which have been skillful in the Canon Law, we
shall find Bernardus of Compostella, Raymundus de Pennya Forti, and Hugo
Barcinonensis. If for other Lawyers, we shall find Pope Calixtus the third,
Gomezius, Didacus Covarruvias, and Antonius Augustinus Archbishop of
Tarraconia, a man very learned and skillful in the Roman antiquities. If we
enquire for Physicians, we shall meet with Avicen, Averroes, Rasis, Almanca,
and Messahallah. If for Historians, we shall find Trogus Pompeius, Iustine,
and others. If for Philosophers, we shall meet with L. Anneius Seneca and his
sons Seneca, Nonatus and Mela, Lucius Iunius, Moderatus Columella, C. Julius
Hyginus, Sotion, and Johannes Vives Valentinus. If we search for
Mathematicians, behold Pomponius Mela, Abrahamus Cacutius, Alphonsus King of
Castile, Henricus the Infanta of Portugal, Henricus Marquess of Villena,
Arnoldus Villanovanus, and his Scholar Raimundus Lullius. If we enquire for
Orators, we shall find beside Seneca, Portius Latro, and M. Fabius
Quintilianus. Lastly if we would reckon up some Poets borne here, we may make
account of Sextilius Hena: L. Annaeus Seneca, and Lucan who were Cosins. M.
Valerius Martialis, Rufus Festus Avienus, Aurelius Prudentius, Pope Damasus,
Caelius Sedulius, and many others: I omit for brevities sake the later modern
Poets. The Spaniards are by nature hot and dry, swarthe-coloured, to help
which the women use a kind of painting: they are well limbed and strong set.
They are the most superstitious of all people, so that other people do learn
from them both ceremonies, complements, and large titles. They have a great
dexterity in concealing their thoughts both by silence and dissimulation. They
have a kind of an affected gravitie, which makes them incur the hatred of
all other Nations, which, as Marianus shows, is an individual concomitant or
companion to great Kingdoms. The women are not very fruitful in bearing
children: they abstain much from wine, and are seldom seen abroad, as
imitating therein the Roman Matrons. They use strangers discurteo^sly, and in
foreign Countries they will reverence, praise, and extol one another. They
are great observers of Justice, so that Justice is administered to all, even
from the highest to the lowest: and so great is the painful industry of
Magistrates, that there are few or no robberies committed. Beside, they keep
their hands free from blood, and other wicked acts, and whosoever offends
the Laws, or does trespass against any one, though never so mean, is
punished for it. They are still attempting some great matter, for having
suppressed their enemies at home, and overthrown the Saracens, they seek for to
discover and get for their King the most pote^^ parts of the world. When two or
three meet together, of what place or condition soever, they always discourse
of the Commonwealth and serious affairs, they seek ways how to weaken their
enemies force, they devise stratagems, and invent a thousand engines, which
they open and make known to the Captains. In the field they can endure both
hunger thirst and labor. In battle and matters of war they are more politic
than stout: they are of a light body, and being lightly armed, they not only
easily pursue their enemies, but when they are put to it, they can easily save
themselves by flight, (always meditating on some military or warlike
design). In their feasts and banquets at home they are frugall, sober, and
content with a little, but abroad they have more delicate fare. They use
handsome convenient garments, well made and fashioned. Spai^^ does afford to
the neighbor Countries, and also to remote Nations, Silke-wooll, Cloth of all
kinds, Salt, Sugar, Honey, Orenges, Pome-Granats, Lemmons, pickled Olives,
Capers, Grapes, Figs, Pruines, Almonds, Chestnuts, Anny-seed, Cumming-seed,
Coriander-seed, Rice, Saffron, Oil, Wax, Alume, Vermilion, Purple, Saltfish,
Bay Berries, preserved Fruits of all sorts, Alablaster, Coral, Gold, Silver,
Iron, Steel, Tin, Copper, Lead, Dying Oade, Quicksilver, Gotten, precious
stones, Aromatickes and sweet Spices, which are brought from the Indies and
other places. And in exchange for these, the Europaeans, the Africans, the
Asiatians, and the Americans, do give the Spaniards such commodities, as their
own Country does not afford.

PORTVGALL AND ALGARBIA.
HItherto we have described Spain in general, now our Method requires that
we should decipher it in particular and by parts. We said in our general
Description, The names and whence so called.
that it was diversely divided. But we will make a faithful Description of the
parts of Spain, in such order as it is delineated by Hondius. He describes
it in six Tables in this order. In the first Portugal is described: in the
second Biscay, Guipuscoa, and Legio: in the third the New and Old Castiles: in
the fourth Andalusia, in which is the Country of Hispalis and Gades: in the
fifth is Valentia: and in the sixth is Aragon, and Catalonia. Portugal which
offers it self in the first place, was anciently called Lusitania, and M.
Varro and Pliny do affirm, that it received this name from Lusus the Son
of Liber, and Lysa who was drunk with him: for it was called Lusitania, as it
were, the Country of Lusus. Marcianus thinks, it was called Lusitania from a
River which is now called Tagus. Some suppose it was called Portugal a Portu
Gallorum, which is as much to say, as the French-mens Haven. But Andraeas
Resendius, The Situation.
whose opinion other learned men do follow, does observe, that the name of
Portugal is derived a Portu Cale. This Country, if we consider the breadth
thereof from the South Northward, is greater than Old Lusitania, but if we
consider the length from the West Eastward, it is lesser. Portugal at this day
runs forth Northward, beyond the meeting of the two Rivers Minius and Avia
even to the Town Ribadania, seated on that bank of Avia which looks toward
Gallicia, and a straight line being drawn from thence Eastward, it reaches
even to Miranda, seated upon the River Durius, and from thence toward the South
to the Mouth of the River Ana, on that side where it bordereth on Castile,
Estremadura, and Andaluzia; on the Northwest it looks toward the Atlantic
Ocean, so that the whole compass thereof is thought to be 879 miles. The
temper of the Air.
This country has an excellent sweet and temperate Air, and a clear and
fruitful Climate. It abounds with Wine, Oil, Oranges, Pome-citernes, The
fertility of the Soil.
Almonds, Honey and Wax. The fruit of this Country does excel that which
grows in others near unto it. And though the Inhabitants have not out of
their fields sufficient store of corn, to sustain them with food, yet there
is much transported thither out of France and Germany. This Country does
breed many living creatures, especially great store of Horses, and those so
swift of foot, that they imagined them to be begotten by the wind. The
ancient Government.
The Kingdom of Portugal began about the year 1100, for at that time it
became a part of Spain. Chronicles do mention, that the first of the Line of
the Kings of Portugal was Henry Duke of Lotharingia, Earl of Limburg, (a man
of a great courage and ready of hand) who removing into Spain, married Tyresia
the Daughter of Alphonsus the sixth King of Castile and Legio, and took for a
Dowry that part of Gallicia and Lusitania which is now called Portugal, and
which not long before, by his own valor, he recovered and got from the
Saracens and Moors. He dying about the year 1112, there succeeded him his
Son Alphonsus, who calling himself Duke of Portugal, was enstiled King
thereof by his whole Army, in the year 1139, having obtained a victory
against Ismarius, and four other Kings of the Saracens and Moors, leaving to
posterity five Sc^cheons for their Arms, in remembrance of that achievement.
The^ succeeded him almost in a right line, Sanctius, Alphonsus the 2, Sanct^^
the 3, Alphonsus the 3, Dionysius who first began to usurp the title of the
King of the A people of Lusitania called also Turdetant.
Algarbians, also Alphonsus the fourth, Peter, Ferdina^^ John, Edward,
Alphonsus the fifth surnamed Africanus, John the 2, E^^nuel, John the 3,
Sebastian slain in Africa, Henry the Cardinal, and A^tonius who because he
was a Bastard was expelled, Philip the second King of Spain, Nephew to Emanuel
by Isabel his eldest Daughter, and Father to Philip the 3, whose Son Philip
the 4 does now reign. The Metropolis of Portugal is Olisippo, as it is called
in the ancient faithful copies of M. Varro, Pliny, Antoninus, and Mela. For in
vulgar writings it is written sometimes Olysippo, and sometimes So called,
because, as some say, Ulysses in his ten years travels coming hither built it.
Vlysippo, and divert other ways: now it is called Lisbone, or, as the
Inhabitants do pronounce it, Lisboa. It is a great Town of traffic,
abounding with riches, and it is a famous storehouse of foreign commodities,
which are brought thither out of Asia, Africa, and America. It has a pleasant
and commodious situation almost at the mouth of the River Tagus: it is now very
large, being built on five Hills, and as many Vales or descents, but heretofore
it was less, being seated only on one hill as some do report. On that side
which is toward the Sea it has two and twe^^^ Gates, and on that side which is
toward the Continent it has sixteen. It has threescore and seventeene
watch-Towres upon the walls. The Parish-churches are twenty five, besides many
Chapels and Churches belonging to the Monks, the Anachorets, and the Nuns.
The Cities beyond Tagus do acknowledge Lisbone to be the Mother-citie, as
E^^ra (called by Ptolemie Ebura, and now commonly Evora) Begia, commonly called
Bega or Beia, and heretofore Pax Iulia, by Antoninus and Ptolemie Setubal,
heretofore named (as Clusius supposes) Salacia: Also Alcasar de sal in the
Country of Algarbia, and Almada, which Ptolemie calls Caetobrix, and Antoninus
Caetobriga. Beyond Tagus not far from Lisbone Northward the Town of Cascala
is seated: and as you come a little nearer to the City you meet with a little
Town called Bethl^^m. There are also Leria, Tomar, and Guarda, all Towns of
note. Not far from Tomar lies Ceice, which Antoninus calls Celium: Also
Alanga^ra by the River Tagus, which Damianus a Goes being his own native Town
thinks to be so called, quasi Alankerke, (that is) the Temple of the Alanes:
It was heretofore called Ierabrica, but now Coimbra, and it was heretofore the
head City of the Kingdom of Portugal. There is also the Town Viseum,
commonly called Viseo, Pliny calls it Vacca, but now it is called Ponte
Fouga. The third Council of Toledo does map of Portugal and Algarbia PORTVGALL
AND ALGARBIA.
mention Lameca commonly called Lamego. Lastly Braga which lies between the
Rivers Durius and Minius, it is now so called, though Ptolemie calls it
Bracar Augusta, Antoninus Braccara Augusta, and Pliny Augusta Bracarum. It is
reported, that it was built by the Gauls, surnamed Braccati, in the year
before Christ's birth 290, and the Romans having conquered it, gave it the
surname of Augusta. It was heretofore so famous, that here were the seven great
Assemblies or Parliaments, which were kept and held in the hithermost Spain,
so that four and twenty Cities, as Pliny reports, did bring their suits
and causes hither to have them tried. The Rivers.
The Rivers of this Country are Anas and Guadiana, Tagus or Taio, Mondego or
Monda, Durius or Duero, and Minius or Mino: two of these being famous, to wit,
Tagus and Durius.) Portugal on the West and South looks toward the Atlantic
Ocean, which, The commodities of the Sea.
besides fish which it yields in great abundance, does afford many other
commodities. This Country is indebted unto, and receives all her plenty from
the Sea, which she acknowledges, in so much, that it may more worthily be
called the golden Sea, than golden flowing Nilus, because by the help hereof
they have commodities imported and brought in from all parts of the earth, so
that it stands in need of nothing; and again those commodities wherewith it
abounds, it exporteth by shipping to traffic with foreign Countries. There
is also (besides the Havens which we mentioned before) the Haven of Setubal,
The Havens.
Dubal, or Tubal, which lies Southward from Olisippo or Lisbone. Here are few
Mountains, and those not very great, as namely those which the Inhabitants
call Sierra de Monchiquo: The Mountains.
de Chaldecatao, de Sordedas, called heretofore the Mountains of the Moon,
etc. And these, for the most part, are full of woods and thickets. There are
also very great and thick woods, in which the Princes of Spain are wont to
hunt. The public and sacred works.
In the little Town of Bethleem, there is a Temple dedicated to the holy Virgin
Mary, and built very costly: also the Monument of Emanuel King of Portugal,
which he appointed to be built in his own lifetime, yet was it afterward
enriched and beautified by John the third the Son of Emanuel. There are
moreover in that part of Portugal which lies between Tagus and Durius (as
Vasaeus writes) besides the Metropolitan Church of Bracara, the Cathedral
Church in Portug^^, and five other Collegiate Churches, more than an hundred
and thirty Monasteries, the most of which have most large revenues, and about
1460 Parish-Churches. In that part which belongs to the Church of Bracara
there are reckoned eight hundred Parish-Curches, whereby you may easily collect
and know the fertility of this Country. I do not mention the Hospitals for
strangers, The Universities.
for the diseased, and for Orphans, the Towers, the fair houses, the pleasant
gardens, and Universities which are in this Kingdom, as namely Ebora and The
Masters of this University made the Commentary upon most part of Aristotle,
called Schola Conimbricensis.
Coimbra or Conimbrica; the first was lately instituted by Henry Cardinal of
Portugal, and President of the same City; the other also was lately
instituted by John the second King of Portugal. The Portugals are the
strongest of all the Spaniards, the quickest, the most nimble, and light of
body, so that they can easily pursue or retire from the enemy. Their
disposition is to be proud and selfe-conceited of themselves, Their manners
and their own affairs; and they say themselves, that they live by opinion
and conceit, that is, they sustain themselves more with that which they think
themselves to be, than with that which they truly are. Their traffic.
They are skillful in sea-matters, and are famous for their Navigations to
unkowne parts of the world, where they grow rich by trading and merchandising.

Under Portugal at this time is the Kingdom of Algarbia. Algarbia whence so
called.
It takes its name from the Arabic tongue, and does signify a happy and
plentiful Field or Meadow, in which are all things necessary for traffic. A
straight line drawn from the River Anas between the Rivers which are commonly
called Vataon, and Carei-vas to the little Town Odeseiza, The Situation.
that is, from the East Westward, does separate from Portugal this Kingdom of
Algarbia, which is the least and unnoted'st Kingdom of all Spain. There are
carried hither out of diverse parts of Spain, down the River Anas all sorts of
Wines, Sacks, Bastards, Roman Wine, and others of the like sorts, which being
shipped, are transported into France, the Low Countries, and other parts. The
Towns.
It has in it the Towns of Balsa, (so called by Ptolemie, Pliny, Antoninus,
and Pomponius Mela, but now Tavila, as Coquus supposes) and Ossonoba, so
called by Pliny and Antoninus; it is called also by Pliny Lusturia, by Ptolemy
Ossonaba, by Pinetus Gibraleon, by Clusius Exuba, by Varrerius Estombar, as
also by Moralis, and it is thought to be the same which is now called Silvis
or Selves. There was also in the same place near the Holy Promontory the City
which Pomponius calls Lacobriga, the ruins whereof are yet to be seen near
the Sea-Towne Lagos, at a Village which is called in the Portugal language
Lagoa, as Vasaeus writes. Algarbia at the first was given in dowry by
Alphonsus the 10 King of Legio or Leon, (as ancient Annals do report) unto
Alphonsus the third King of Portugal, The ancient Government.
when he married his daughter Beatrice, which he begat on a whore. Dionysius
was derived from this marriage, who first of all began to usurp the title of
King of Algarbia. But thus much shall suffice concerning Portugal and
Algarbia, I pass to the other parts of Spain.

GALLICIA, LEON, AND ASTVRIA DE OVIEDO.
GALLICIA (which is also written Galecia or Gallaecia, and takes its name from
an ancient people called Callai^^ has on the North and West the Ocean, on the
South Portugal with the River Durius flowing between the^ and on the East
Asturia. The Situation.
This Country in regard it has many rugged mountains, and wants water, is
but thinly inhabited. It abounds so with Horses, that they are supposed to be
begotten by the wind. Pliny notes, that here are rich mines of Gold. Niger
writes that the rivers hereof do bring down earth mingled with gold, silver,
and tin, and that the soil it self is full of gold, brass and lead, so
th^^ golden clods are oftentimes ploughed up. The mountains afford great store
of wood for building of ships. The fertility of the Soil.
Gallicia does exceedingly abound with fish: especially with Salmons, Congers,
a kind of fish which they call Pescades, and many other dainty fishes, which
being salted are carried into diverse parts of Spain. In the month of November
and December, a great number of those fish are taken, which they commonly call
Vesugos, being two or three pound weight; they are carried f^^^ and sweet into
Castile and are sold there, for the cold does easily preserve them: they have
an excellent taste, yet those are best tasted which are taken in the Ocean, and
not in the Mediterranean Sea. For the cold^^ of the Ocean does fatten the fish,
and therefore those which are tak^^ most Northward are the best. The most part
of the Inhabitants do live in mountains, on which they build convenient
houses. Concerning the name and original of the Callaicians, let the Reader
have recourse (...) Johannes Bishop of Gerunda, Lib. 2 Paralipomenorum
Hispaniae, Rodericus T^letanus (Lib. 10. de rebus Hispanicis cap. 4.) and
others. The Metropolis of Gallicia is Compostella, where is worshipped S. James
the Apostle, who together with the Universitie making the City famous gives
unto it the name of S. Iago, The Cities.
it was heretofore called Briantia, as Franciscus Tarap^^ Ambrosius Moralis,
and Villanovanus do think; Orosius calls it Brig^^tia, who says, that there
is in it a very high watch-towre: Ptolemie call it it Flavium Brigantum,
Beuterus, Coquus, and Ioannes Mariana do call it Betancos, Florianus and
Gomecius call it Coruna, and Johannes Bishop of Gerunda (Lib. 1.) calls it
Compostella, saying it was so called quasi Co^^^ Stella, for so the evening
star was called which makes these countries wholesome. There is extant at
Salamantica in the Library of the Colledg^ of our Savior the History of
Compostella, the growth and increase of the Church of Compostella described in
two volumes, written by the command of Didacus the first Archbishop thereof:
concerning which you may also read Lucius Marineus Siculus, in his fifth Book,
and i^ map of Gallicia Legio GALLICIA, LEGIO,
Chapter concerning religious houses in Spain, and the wonderful miracles
done therein. The Lesser Towns are Orensium, a City near the River Minius,
and called by Ptolemie Thermae Calidae, as Gomecius thinks in the life of
Franciscus Zimenius, where he adds, that the Swedish people of Germany, who
heretofore did subdue these parts, in their native language did call it
Warense; though Ortelius says it should rather be written Warmsee, which
signifies the Warm Lake. Also a Town called in Latin Lucus, and by the
Inhabitants Lugo, Pomponius calls it Turris Augusti, Pliny, Aresti, and Arae
Sextianae, and Ptolemie Promont^num Arae Sestii, near to the Cantabricke Ocean
in Artabria. Also, P^^vetus, Ponte Vedra, and Ribalaeum, commonly called
Ribadeo. Other towns Marinaeus Siculus mentions in the beginning of his third
Book. Gallicis got the title of a Kingdom a thousand and sixty years after
Christ: For that year Ferdinand (the son of Sanctius Major King of Navarre)
being King of Castile, when he had married Sanctia the daughter of Alphonsus
the fifth, and so united the Kingdom of Castile and Legio: having three sons,
he made by his will Sanctius King of Castile; Alphonsus King of Legion and
Asturia; and Garcia King of Gallicia (which he enjoying in the right of his
wife, was till then but an Earldom) and Portugal. Sanctius being not content
with this division which his father made, thrust his brother Alphonsus out of
his Kingdom, and slew G^^^ his other brother. Now when Sanctius had ruled
about six years, and was at last beheaded by Vellidus through treachery,
Alphonsus who lived as a banished man with the King of the Moors at Toledo, did
not only recover the Kingdom of Legio, which his father gave him by Will, but
also got the Kingdom of Castile, Gallicia, and Portugal. Alphonsus had three
children lawfully begot on three wives, by Isabell Queen of France he had
Sanctia, who was married to the Earl Rodoricke, who brought new Colonies into
the City which is commonly called Ciudad-R^^^go; by Zaida a Moore, daughter to
the King of Sevill, he had Sanctius, who was slain in a battle against the
Saracens; and lastly, by Constantia he had Vrraca, who out living Sanctius and
Sanctia (who dyed without issue) after she had been wife to Raimundus
Berengarius Earl of Tolosa, married Alphonsus King of Aragon, and had an heir
by him who was afterward. Alphonsus the seventh, the most powerful King of all
his predecessors, and one that deserved to be called Emperor of Spain. From
the time Gallicia, Castile, and Legio have had always but one King. Near to
Legio, Leon.
and bounding thereon on the North is Asturia, on the West Gallicis, and on the
South and East old Castile. The Situation.
It takes its name from the seventh German Legion, which was seated and placed
here under the command of the Emperor Nerva, as some suppose. The Metropolis
hereof is that famous City which takes its name from the Country, and is
called by Ptolemie Legio septima Germanica; Antoninus calls it Legio Gemina;
but it is now commonly called Leon, which name I cannot see why Franciscus
Tarapha should rather derive from Leonigildus King of the Goths, than from the
Legion it self. Moralis does deliver also that it was heretofore called
Sublantia, and writes that some evidences of that name are extant in a place
but a little distant from Legio, called Sollanco. L. Marina^s Siculus writes
thus concerning the Church of Legio, in his third Book of Spain. Although the
Church which the City of Hispalis has built in our age, does exceed all the
rest for greatness, although the Church of Toledo surpass the rest for
treasure, ornaments, and glass windows, and the Church of Compostella for
strong building, for the miracles of Saint James, and other things: yet the
Church of Legio (in my judgment) is to be preferred before them all for
admirable structure and building, which has a Chapel joining to it, in which
lie buried seven and thirty Kings, and one Emperor of Spain. It is worthy of
memory that this City was the first from which about the year 716. the
recoverie of Spain, (which formerly the Moors and Saracens almost wholly
possessed) was begun. For (as also Rodericus Toletanus in his sixth Book of
Spanish matters for many Chapters together, and Roderick Sanctius in the first
part of his Spanish History cap. 11. do relate) Pelagius the son of Fafila
Duke of Cantabria, and descended of the royal blood of the Goths, being made
King by the remainder of the Christians who fled into the mountains, made a
great slaughter on the Moors; and being scarcely entered into his Kingdom
took Legio from the enemies. This man afterward making it the Seat of his
Principality, built a new Castle there as a Fort and defense against the
violence of their incursions. Asturia.
And laying aside the arms of the Kings of the Goths, gave the Lion Rampant
Gules, in a field, Argent; which the Kings of Legio do use at this day. Fafila
the son of Pelagius succeeded him in the Kingdom, and (he dying issuelesse)
there succeeded him Alphonsus Catholicus, the son of Peter Duke of Cantabria,
being descended from the stock of Ricaredus Catholic King of the Goths, who
married Ormisenda the only sister and heir of Fafila. The government of
Legion remained in the hands of Alphonsus his family, even to Veremundus the
24 King of Legio, who dying in the year 1020. without a Successor, his sister
Sanctia married Ferdinando of Navarre, King of Castile, and brought the
Kingdom of Legio to be joined and united to his kingdom. Asturia has on the
North the Ocean, on the East Biscay, on the South old Castile, and on the West
Gallicia. It produces and brings forth gold, and diverse sorts of colors,
otherwise it is but little tilled, and thinly inhabited, except it be in those
places which are next to the Sea. Here was the Seat of the ancient Astures, who
were so called (as Isidore writes lib. 9. Etymolog. cap. 2.) from the River
Asturia, (whereof Florus makes mention in the fourth Book of his Roman
Histories, and others) From whom Ptolemie calls the Country it self (...),
and the Latins Asturia, as also Astyria, as is evident by what I have read in
ancient marbles. At Rome in the pavement of the Chapel which is in the Temple
of Saint Gregory in the mountain Calius, there is a broken marble-table
engraved with these words, Acontii
L. Ranio. Optato. V. C. Cos
Curatori. Reip. Mediolanensium
Curat. Reip. Nolanorum. Procos. Provincia
Narbonensium. Legato. Aug. Et Iuridico
Astyriae. Et. Galaecia. Curatori. Viae
Salariae, etc.
Moreover I see it called Asturica in a marble-Table, which is at Rome beyond
Tiber in a private Roman-citizens house. (I will set down the words in the
Description of Italy, where I shall speak of the Alps joining to the Sea)
And it is called at this day Asturias. Pliny (lib. 3. cap. 3.) does divide the
Astures into the Augustini and Transmontani. The one being on the hither side
of the mountains toward the South, and the other beyond the mountains
Northward near the Ocean. Concerning the Astures, Silius the Italian Poet
writes thus ( lib. 1.)

-- Astur avarus
Visceribus lacerae Telluris mergitur imis,
Et redit infelix effosso concolor Auro.
The covetous Asturian will go
Into the bowels of the earth below,
Whence he returns in color like gold Oar
Which he unhappily dug up before.
The Metropolis of the Province is This City is called by Moletius, Asturum
Lucus, and by Tarapha, Brigentium.
Oviedo, of which Rodericus Toletan^ writes much ( lib. 4. de rebus Hisp. cap.
14.) where among other things he gives the reason, wherefore it was called the
Bishops City. Here is also Astorga, called anciently Asturica Augusta, and
some other small Towns.

BISCAY, GVIPVSCOA, NAVARRE, and Asturia de Santillana.
BISCAY (as Johannes Bishop of Gerunda affirms) takes its name from the
Bastuli the ancient Inhabitants of Baetica, The Country whence so called.
for they coming from Lybia into that part of Spain which is called Baetica,
and being beaten and expulsed thence by the Moors, they fled into the
Mountains of Galaecia, and so building themselves houses, the whole Country
was called from that time Bastulia, which is now called Biscay. Some do call
Biscay Viscaia, which word has some affinity with the name of the Vascones.
The Situation.
Biscay is a Country of Spain lying near the Ocean, and very full of hills,
out of which arise 150 Rivers. It has a more temperate Climate than other
parts of Spain. For being environed with great Mountains, it is not troubled
with too much cold, nor burnt with too much heat. The temper of the Air.
The Country is full of trees fit for the building of Ships: which not only
Spain does acknowledge, but other Countries, whither whole ship-loades are
often transported. The fruitfulnes of the Soil.
Here are abundance of Chesse-Nuts, Hasel-Nuts, Oranges, Raizins, and all kind
of Metals, (especially Iron and Black-lead) besides other commodities. Where
they want wine, they have a kind of drink made of pressed Apples, which has an
excellent taste. Here are also store of beasts, The variety of living
creatures.
fish, foul, and all things which are convenient and necessary for the
sustaining of man's life. The Whence the Country was called Cantabria.
Cantabrians did heretofore inhabit that Country which we now call Biscay,
but it was larger than Biscay is now, and contained Guipuscoa and Navarre.
These Cantabrians were a famous people, and much celebrated by many Writers.
They thought that was no life which was without wars: and when all the people
of Spain were subjected, and reduced to the obedience of Rome, The ancient
Government.
they alone with the Asturians, and some others who joined with them, could not
be overcome, until at last C. Caesar Octavianus Augustus did subdue this stout
Nation, being broken and wearied by a war of almost five years continuance,
(he himself going against them, and the rest that were not obedient to the
Romans) by the industry and valor of Vispanius Agrippa, and of the other
Generals which he brought with him. The Towns.
There is in Biscay, besides other Towns, one special Town of note called
Bilbao, which is, as some do suppose, by changing of the letters (which is
frequent with the Spaniards) as much to say as Beluao, that is, Bellum vadum,
Didacus Lopeus de Hazo, Prince of the Cantabrians built it, in the year of
Christ 1300, or thereabouts. This Town is especially commended for three
things, the convenient Situation, the plenty of Co^ and the wonderful great
traffic and merchandising which is he^ for whatsoever comes or is brought
from England, France, or the L^ Countries, is transported and carried through
this Town into oth^ parts of Spain, and whatsoever Spain does communicate by
way (...) traffic unto other Countries, it is exported and carried through
Here are Citizens, who at their own proper charge do yearly b^ three or
four ships. On the side of the City there is a little town the Seacoast,
commonly called Portugallete, from whence a cert^ River, or rather a great arm
of the Sea does flow into it, even unto (...) houses of the Inhabitants. By
reason of which, diverse kinds of w^ are daily for a small matter imported and
exported. There are also f^ Havens in Biscay. There is no kind of fish but you
may have it he^ and that good and new. The Sea-shell-fish here have pearls in
the but of a mean sort. The people of the Country are courteous, me^^ and
eloquent. It is a custom and fashion that the Virgins in Biscay long as they
are unmarried, do never let their hair grow, neither (...) they cover
themselves with any veil; but presently when they (...) married, they cover
their heads with a Quoife, made like a Helmet, linen cloth of a golden color,
which they wrap up in such a man that it stands forth a pretty way like an
horn upon their forehea^ The Spaniards here have great store of trading with
the French, The traffic.
(...) Germans, the English, and other people. It especially affords wo^ so
that all Marketplaces are full of buyers and sellers.

GVIPVSCOA was heretofore the Country of the Cantabri^^ some do call it
Lipuscoa and Lipuisca, The Country. The names.
yet corruptly, as Stephanus G^bayus an inhabitant thereof notes. But whence
it has this appellat^ I cannot easily determine, The Situation.
unless perhaps it takes it from the anci^ City Opuscua. It is enclosed and
bounded on the East with the Ri^ Vidosone, (which is also called Vidorso,
Alduida, Huria, and B^^y^ being in the middle between France and Spain) and
the Pyrenaan H^^ on the South with the Kingdom of Navarre; on the West with
Bis^ (of which I spoke before) and on the North with the Cantabrick S^ This
Country is very temperate, The temper of the Air.
neither feeling too much cold, (...) too much heat of the Sun. It has a
moist and variable Climate. (...) is very rugged and mountainous, and therefore
it is not every wh^ tilled, but yet those places which are tilled are very
fruitful. It ha^ but few Vineyards, The fertility of the Soil.
except it be on that side which is next to the Sc^ But it has every where
great store of Iron and Steel, so that no Country has better or greater
abundance; for so much of it is dug he^ as is sufficient for many Countries.
Moreover, not only Vulcans sho^ but Mars his Armory seem to be placed here
by Nature: for there here so great plenty and store not only of Iron and
Steel, but also (...) wrought Armor, that in some writings belonging to the
Country it i^ deservedly called the Wall or defense of the Kingdoms of
Castile and Legio. Navigierus writes, that in this Country so much Iron and
Steel^ is dug, that every year they make 80000 Ducats gain thereof
Therefore not without cause does Pliny write, lib. 34. cap. 45. the there is a
whole mountain there of Iron: There is, says he, a very high map of Biscaia
and Guipuscoa BISCAIA AND GVIPVSCOA.
mountain of Cantabria on the Sea side (a thing incredible to be spoken) whi^^
is all of Iron. Ptolemie, Pomponius, and Pliny do place here the Oroge^^^nes,
the Autrigones, and the Varduli. The Metropolis is This is also called
Testosages by Ptolemy, and by Martialis Palladia.
Tolosa, seated at the confluence and meeting of Araxis and Orta: There are
also oth^^ Towns, as Placentia, where there is an incredible company of
Iron-smiths; Motrico, or as others think it should be written, Monte is Trico,
from the Rock which hangs over the Town; Fuentara^^^ which Ptolemie calls
Phlasiobriga; the Fane or Temple of Saint Sebasti^^ heretofore called Hisuru,
afterward Don Bastia, and now corruptly ^^nastien, signifying the same with
Saint Sebastian; for Don signifies the among the Cantabrians, which Sanctus
does with the Latins, and Sa^^^ with the Castellanes; and many places in
Cantabria have, for the mo^^ part, diverse names, in regard of the difference of
speech: the Cant^^ans call them by one name, the other Spaniards by an other,
and the Frenchmen by an other name, and yet they commonly signify one thing.
This Town is situated at the mouth of the River which is called by Pomponius
Mela Menascus, by Ptolemie Menosca, but now is called in Gurumea, The River
Chalybs.
or Vramea. The River Chalybs does rise up hereabout, the water whereof is very
good to temper Iron withal, so that the Spani^^ do approve of no other
Armor, but that which has been tempered therewith. Iustine lib. 44. says,
that the bordering people were called Chalybes from this River. The Havens.
The Fane of Saint Sebastian has a very large Haven (not made by humane Art,
but by Natures providence) whe^^ ships do ride securely and safely, being
defended from the violence (...) wind or Seas. The entrance into it is
between two Castles, the o^e whereof standing toward the East is built on a
high Mountain, The Mountains.
high^^ than that which is on the West side, which is only placed on a rock
The Inhabitants are like in manners to the Inhabitants of Bis^ay, and speak
the same language. They are by nature ingenious, politic, (...) accomplished,
neat, easy to be allured, but hard to be compelled, desirous of honor,
stout defenders of their own privileges, nim^^ courageous, ready and quick
in handling their Arms, and apt forw^^ The women also are very strong and of a
warlike spirit, well bod^^^ well favored, although they accustom and use
themselves to lab^^ which is a cause why they are less proud. Those that dwell
by the Se^ side do get much by fishing, and especially by taking those kind
(...) fish called Baccali.

The Kingdom of Navarre, which was also anciently called in Kingdom of
Sobabre, in all parts is as fertile, and abounding with (...) things necessary
for man's life, as any other Kingdom of Spain. A^though commonly it be
thought to be very small, yet it has six and fifty walled Cities. The
Inhabitants of this Country were heretofo^^ very stout and warlike, and such
as oftentimes shook off the yoke (...) the Roman subjection, yet at the last
they were wholly subdued, (...) brought into obedience to the Romans. When
Caius Julius the Dicta^^^ being killed at Rome, Octavianus Augustus succeeded
him. For Augus^^ sent four Legions against them, who entering the Province did
waste i^ with fire and sword. When therefore they saw that they were unable to
resist the Roman forces, the most of them fled to the mountains which were
very steep and inaccessible, and are now called Navaia; lying length-wayes
between Mescua, and Eulates. Here when they had dwelt a long time, they were
called from those Mountains Navinii, and afterward the Moors possessing
Spain did corruptly call them Navarri. But being oppressed by the Tyranny of
the Moors, and compelled to forsake their own habitations, they betook
themselves to the Some suppose, that Navarre had its name from a Town among
the Mountains called Navarrin.
Pyrenaean Mountains, where they chose themselves a King, and for many
successions of Kings lived according to their own Laws, even till the year a
thousand five hundred and thirteen, when Pope Julius the second did by the
sentence of Excommunication deprive Johannes Albretus King of Navarre of his
Kingdom as a Schismatic adhering to Lewis the 12 King of France, and gave a
fair pretext and occasion to Ferdinand the Catholic K. to invade Navarre,
which he long gaped for; he therefore sending Duke Alban, did drive King John
out of his Kingdom, and left it to his Successors. The chief City of
Navarre is now commonly called Pampelona, some call it Pompeiopolis, as if it
were built by Pompeius Magnus. It is situated under the sixteenth Degree and
eleven Minutes of Longitude, and the 44 Degree, and 43 Minutes of Latitude.
There are besides these chief Cities, Sanctus Johannes, Pedis Portus, Mons
Regalis, Amaya, Estella, Olyta, Taffala, and Tudela.

THE OLD AND NEW CASTILE.
The Country, whence so called.
CASTILIA or Castella, which takes its name from the C^stle, that King Pelagius
(having recovered Legion from (...) Moors) did build, was heretofore called
Bardulia. T^^ describers of Spain do make it twofold, the Old and (...) New.
Asturia and Biscay do compass the Old Castile (...) the North: The Situation
of Old Castile.
on the West, Portugal; on the South, New Castile; ((...) Mountains which
run through the length of Spain, lying between them) and on the East Aragon
and Navarre. The Country is ve^^ fertile, full of wine, and all kind of
Fruits, Saffron, and all kind of ^^ving Creatures: and this was the beginning
of the Kingdom. Pel^^^ having taken again Legio from the Moors, built a
Castle as a defe^^^ against the violence of the Barbarians, The fertility of
the Soil.
the Governors whereof were ^^^led Earls of Castile, and did acknowledge the
King of Legio a long time as their Prince, even to Ordonius the second, the
fourteenth King of Asturia and Legio; who having called the Earls and Nobles
of Castile (...) to him under the color of parley, beheaded them. This wicked
(...) the Castilians stomacking, The ancient Government.
and having cast off their obedience to (...) Kings of Legio, they choose two
Judges out of themselves, Nunius ^^ra, and Lainus Calvus, (one to give
Judgment, and the other to ove^^ matters of war) whose children and
posterity were afterward called Earls of Castile, even to Sanctius Major King
of Navarre, who (whi^^ by his warlike valor he had taken Corduba and Toledo
from the S^cens, and had thrust out all the Moors out of Navarre, Aragon,
Castile Legio, Portugal, and other parts of Spain) restored all Spain to the
C^^^stians; and having married Eluira the daughter of Sanctius, Earl of
C^stile, and sister to the last Earl of Garsia, writ himself in the right of
(...) dowry, not Earl, but King of Castile, and left the Kingdom to his S^
Ferdinand, who was enriched with the Kingdom of Legio by his w^^ Sanctia.
Sanctius the son did succeed Ferdinand, and after him his brother Alphonsus;
whose daughter Vrraca (for the heir male died) wh^^^ after the decease of
Raimundus Berengarius Earl of Tolosa (her for^ husband) she had married
Alphonsus King of Aragon; the Kingdom of Aragon, The Cities.
Castile, and Legio, came to be united. The Metropolis (...) Old Castile is the
City of This City was built, or rather repaired by Nugno Belides a German,
and contendeth with Toledo for the Primateship of Spain.
Burges, commonly called Burgos: Ptole^ thinks it should be called Bravum.
It is an ancient City, famous (...) many things, and deserves to be accounted
one of the chief Cities (...) Spain; for it has an hundred and fifty lesser
Towns under it, ever^ where beautified with great, fair, and convenient
houses, ado^^ with market places, streets, bridges, Temples, Friaries, and
Rivers and is very notable for the incredible diligence of the Inhabitants o^
whatsoever age, sex, or condition. Round about the Metropolis diverse Towns are
pleasantly and commodiously seated, as Palentia situate map of Castile THE OLD
AND NEW CASTILE.
on the bank of Carrion, Pliny calls it Palantia, as also Mela, Ptolemy, and
Appianus: Strabo calls it Pallantia, and Antoninus corruptly Peralantia. Also
the Town Valdoletum, heretofore a Royal Seat, and one of the seven Ancient
Universities of Spain. It is the fairest and most delightful place, not only
in Spain, but also in all Europe, as being seated on the most pleasant bank
of Pesuerga: neither is there any City which can be preferred before it, for
the fertilenesse of the soil round about it. It has a fair and large
marketplace, the circuit wereof is seven hundred paces; and whereas this Town
is very famous for many respects, yet it is especially honored by the birth of
Philip the second King of Spain. It is commonly called Valladolid, which some
do interpret the Vale of Oletus: Ptolemie calls it Pintia, and Antoninus
Pincia, as Cusius thinks. Also Simanca, called by Antoninus Septimanca; and
Camora which Ptolemy calls Sarabris, as Clusius thinks, but Antoninus
corruptly Sabaria. Yet Florianus del Campo, and Gomerius do think that
Sarabris was that Town, which is commonly called Tora, and in Latin Taurus,
near to the River Durius. This is a famous Universitie, and instituted by
Ferdinand the second of Castile. Anno 1140.
Salmantica is not the last in account which Pylaenus calls Salmatis, but is
commonly called Salamanca. Not far from hence, near the River which is
commonly called Gad^, is the City of Count Rodoricke, called anciently Ciudad
Rodrigo, which (as Vasaeus and Clusius think) Ptolemy would have to be
Myrobrigs. From hence Southward is Coria, heretofore called Caurita, as Clusius
writes: Andraeas Schottus does affirm that by the Modern Lau^^ Writers it
was called Cauria. About nine leagues on the East from Ca^ria is Placentia, a
fair City; whose Cittrons and other Fruits, as also their white bread, are
chiefly commended and desired: it is commonly called Plazentia. Placentia has
many pleasant Towns under her jurisdiction, among which is Xavahicium proud of
her woods, and lying in a Valley like an Altar, (as Marinaeus notes) in the
innermost part of a Church. The Mountains adjacent and lying near to
Placentia, are named from the City Verade Placentiae. Also Here Tostatus was
Bishop.
Avila, called by Ptolemie Olbula, as Clusius would have it. Not far from the
Fountains of A^eva lies Segobia, which Pliny and Antoninus call Segovia, and
Ptolemie Segubia: it is a City famous for Cloath-making, and wherein, as
Vasa^^ writes, this is memorable, that no man is seen idle, neither are there
any beggars, unless it be those who are impotent through age or sickness:
seeing none do want means how to get a living or how to employ themselves.
That City which is now called Aranda near the River Durius, Ptolemie would
have to be Rhanda of the Vaccaeans in Tarraconia: Antoninus calls it Rhanda
by the correction of Hyeronimus S^rita; for heretofore it was called
Randachunia. That Town which a^ uncertain Writer calls Exoma, Pliny calls
Vxoma, who often adds that this name is often used in other places; it is
read Vxsama, with an S. in an ancient Marble: and now it is called Osma. But
let so much suffice concerning the Cities and Towns: we pass to New Castile.
New Castile on the North cleaves to the Old Castile, New Castile.
on the other sides it is enclosed with Portugal, Extremadura, Andaluzia,
Granada, and Valentia: The Situation.
It abounds with corn and other grain, being situated on either side of the
River Tagus. The Metropolis of this Country is Toletum, as the Latins call it;
Ptolemy calls it Toleton, now it is called Toledo: and Villanovanus in Ptolemy
says that it was once called Serezola: The fertility of the Soil.
it is the Center and Navell as it were of Spain; it has a very cliffie,
rugged, and unlevell situation, and the ascents are so steep, that it is very
difficult traveling through it. The Cities.
The River Tagus does wash the greater part of it, and does fence it against
enemies: it is fortified with 150 watch-Towers. There are a great number of
Noblemen in this City: The Citizens are very industrious. It is beautified
with many fair Edifices and buildings, as also with a rich and stately Church.
There have been 18 national Counsels held here, when as so many have not
been held in any other place. Madritum, commonly called Madrid, does reverence
Toletum as her mother and Queen: it has an wholesome air and situation. It
abounds with all things, and the Kings of Spain have an house of residence
in it. Not far from hence is Villamanta, which (as Montanus and Villonovanus,
and Tarapha would have it,) is that Town which Ptolemy calls Mantua in
Tarraconia. That Town which by an Arabicke word the Spaniards do now call
Alcala de Henares, Ptolemy believes so certainly to be Complutum, that it is
called so in Latin in all public acts. It is seated on a plain, near the
River which they call Henares, and abounds so with all things necessary for
man's use, that it needs no supply from other places. Antoninus places
Segontia between Complutum and Casar-augusta: it is at this day called
Siguensa. Now I return to Hispalis, and from thence passing by the Palace,
the bridge of Alcantarilla, and the Towns Cabeca and Nebrissa, I come now to
the Town Fanum Luciferi, for so the Latins do name it, and Strabo in his
fourth Book, where he adds that it was heretofore called Lux Dubia, now they
call it Saint Lucar de Barrameda. Not far from hence almost four leagues
toward the Northeast, there is a Town which has a famous ancient Bridge, now
called Talavera, and as Beuterus and Moralis do suppose, named by Livy Aebura.
Here are also the Towns Cuenca, which Pliny calls Cacenses: Lebazuza, which
Antoninus calls Libisosa; and Caslola veja, which the same Antoninus calls
Castulo. The River Tagus does water New Castile, together with other Rivers and
Rivulets which run into it, and the Springhead of the River Anas or Guadiana
is in this Country. But enough of these things, I come now to the public
works. Five leagues from Madrid toward the West, you may behold the
magnificent and sumptuous Monastery of Saint Laurence, who was of the order of
Saint Jerome. The public seats.
It was the work of Philip the second King of Spain, and may compare with the
Egyptian Pyramides, the Grecian and Roman Temples, Theaters, Amphitheaters, or
other famous places for the structure: for there is scarce any thing equal or
second to it. Quade reports that it has eleven several Quadrangles, and
every one incloystered.
The Frontispice of it looking toward the West, has three stately gates; the
middlemost and chief whereof leads you into a Church, a Friery, and a
College: that on your right hand brings you into the Offices belonging to
the Monastery, and that on the left hand brings you into the Schools. The
four corners are adorned with four curious Towers, which are exceeded by two
other Towers placed one by another at the foot of the Church. Above the gates
of the Church do stand the Statues of the six Kings of Israel cut out in
Marble, and being 17 foot high: on the North side there is a Palace adjoined
to the Church, which is able to receive the King and all his train. On the
South side there are diverse sumptuous Galleries, and on the East side a garden
set with all kind of herbs and flowers, and enriched with many other
ornaments. Also an Hospital for the Sick, a Room for an Apothecarie, and
other places. Lastly, every thing does so amaze the beholder, that it is better
for me to be silent with modesty, than to make a mea^e description of those
things which remain. There is also in this Country the famous Palace of
Toledo, (reedified by Charles the fifth) adorned with new buildings and Royal
furniture: in which, besides many other singular things, there is a water-worke
made by the wonderful invention of an Italian, which by the help of a great
wheel, draws up water out of the River Tagus; and so imposing an artificial
violence upon nature, does force it to ascend through Pipes into the highest
pa^^ of the Castle, where it being received into one large Cisterne, is
dispersed again by Pipes, and serves for the use of the Castle and the whole
City: for it does water gardens, and serves for Noble men's houses, Stews,
Fullers of cloth, and other necessary uses of the City. Here are two
Universities, Complutum a famous Academie for all Arts, which was instituted by
Francis Ximenius Cardinal, and Archbishop of Toledo. The Universities.
The other is the Academie or Universitie of Toledo, being a famous nurserie of
Learning and Wisdom. All disciplines and Mechanicke Arts are greatly esteemed
in the City Toledo; The Trades and Mechanicke Arts.
and ten thousand men do live thereby, dressing Wool and Silk.

ANDALVZIA.
Jn which are the Countries of HISPALIS and GRANADA.
ANDALUZIA is a part of Hispania Baetica, it is supposed that it was heretofore
called Vandalia from the Vandals, The name and whence derived.
a people of Germany, who formerly came into these parts. Therefore some having
searched more nearely into the name do think it was called Andaluzia, quasi
Wendenhays, that is, the house of the Vandals, yet Marius Aretius does think
it was called Andaluzia quasi ante Lusitania, the letters being somewhat
changed. On the East it has Granada, on the North New Castile, on the West it
is bounded with the Diocesses of Badaios and Silvis, and the River Anas; and on
the South it looks toward the Atlantic Sea. The chief part of it is the
jurisdiction of Hispalis. This has on the East Corduba, on the West Algarbia,
on the North it cleaves to that part of Portugal which is called Magistratus
S. Iacobi. And the other part toward the South is enclosed with Gades, and the
Mediterranean Sea. It is in a temperate and flourishing Climate, and is
miraculously fertile in bringing forth Corn, The Situation.
Wine, Oil, and all kinds of fruits, with which it replenishes foreign
Countries. Spain in these parts that are encompassed with the Sea (as Pliny
says) may be compared with Italy: which commendations we suppose may be
chiefly understood of that part which looks toward Hispalis, as being exposed
to the Sea, The temper of the air, and fertility of the Soil.
and the gentle Western gales of wind. And indeed this Country so abounds
with all kind of things, and therein so far excells all the Provinces of the
World, that Pliny had worthily preferred it before Italy, but that he being an
Italian would not disgrace his own Country. Here is great store of all kinds
of Cattle, and especially of Cunnies. We said before, that Andaluzia took
that name from the Vandalls, because they being driven out by the Goths seated
themselves in this place: though afterward being thrust out from hence, they
went into Afric. Thus it was: Rodericke the 25 King of the Goths, The
Ancient Government.
in whom the line of the Kings of the Goths was extinguished, did send one
Iulianus an Earl to Mauritania Tingitana as Governor thereof: and in his
absence did violate his daughters chastity, making a whore of her; which when
her father heard, he called the Saracens out of Afric, thinking thereby to
ease his just sorrow, by revenging it on the King who was the cause thereof.
These Saracens coming in by the Straits of Hercules in the year of Christ
714. under the conduct of their Captain Muzamissus, in two years space got
possession of all Spain, except Asturia which was fortified by the natural
situation of the place. In this little time there were slain on both sides
700000 men. The Saracens having gotten the Empire, and having rooted out the
Christian Religion as much as they could, they divided the Kingdoms among
themselves. The first Kingdom that they instituted was at C^duba, which they
called Abenalibeticum. The other was at Hispalis, (...) the third at New
Carthage. But at last being driven out of these part (...) Ferdinand the third,
they went unto Granada in the year 1216. and a^terward by Ferdinand the sixth
were quite thrust out of Spain in the yea^ 1494. The Metropolis of this
Country is that which Pliny calls Hisp^lis, Ptolemie Ispalis, Silius Hispal,
Gratianus Spalis, and which now is called Sevill. Arius Montanus thinks that
Hispalis is a Carthaginian name, d^ved from Spila or Spala, which signifies a
plain or green country. So^ (among whom is F. Tarapha) do refer the name
thereof to Hispalis (...) son of Lybian Hercules, but Isidorus, as in many
other things, is ridicul^ in this matter, for when he had noted that this City
was built by I^ Caesar, and so called from his name and the City of Rome Iulia
Romul^ says that it was so named Hispalis from Piles or Stakes upon which
(...) supposed either all or part of the City to be built, as being situate
(...) moorish place. It is a City near Baetis pleasantly seated, It is 6
miles in compass.
great in compass, round in form, beautiful, and adorned with Temples, and
man houses. So many things may be declared concerning it, that there is (...)
ancient Proverb of it, Quien no ha Visto Sevilla, no ha visto Maravilla, has
been the mother and fosterer of many happy wits, among whi^ was Here likewise
studied Avicen, Pope Silvester the second, and Leander.
Benedictus Arias Montanus, a great Divine, and very skillful in ^vers
languages, as his works set forth by him do witness. Having s^ken something
of the Metropolis, I will describe some of the other C^ties, not keeping any
certain order, yet so, as that which is neare^ the Metropolis shall be placed
first. Five leagves from Hispalis is P^um, or Palantia, which is commonly
called Palacios, from an anci^ Castle that stands on one side of it. It is
seated in the way which ^deth to S. Lucar, and the Gaditane Straits. Next unto
this is Cabaca, a (...) Town seated in the entrance of the mountains, which do
extend themselves Southward toward Malaga, and Cabecis, (three leagves off tow^
the North East) commonly called Lebrixa, by Ptolemie Nebrissa, and (...) Pliny
Veneria. The builder thereof is supposed to be Liber Pater. It is pleasant and
a pretty little Town with an ancient Castle, encompas^ round about with
pleasant fields, and is famous by reason of Aelius A^tonius once a citizen
thereof and an ornament and honor to all Sp^i^ Moreover the Town which is
commonly called Carmona, by Sir^ Carmon, by Antoninus Carme, and by Ptolemie,
Chermenia and Marches heretofore (as says Onuphrius) called Martia; this Town
is seated (...) little hill which has a plain on every side for its prospect.
There are (...) so these towns, Loja, on the right hand bank of Baetis:
Axalita built old stone (as Clusius witnesses) and called Flavium Axalitanum,
as a^peareth by an ancient inscription: Moron, heretofore called by Clus^
Arucci; Ossuna called by Appianus, Orsona; by Strabo, Orson; by Pliny, V^ and
Genua or Gemina Vrbanorum; by ancient Inscriptions, Vrsaon; and (...) Hirtius,
Vrsao. The town Eceja, by the river Singulis, Xenil or Chenil, c^led by
Ptolemie, Astygis; and by Pliny, Augusta Firma, is a little Tow^ 13 leagues
from Hispalis. Penastor (in the mid way between Hispalis (...) Corduba on the
right hand bank of Baetis) which Ptolemie, thinks to (...) Illipula magna,
but Pliny, Ilpa Italica in the Jurisdiction of Hispalis; and (...) map of
Andalucia ANDALVZIA.
many miles hence on the bank of the same River, Corduba, commonly called From
hence comes our Cordovan leather.
Cordova. Pliny says, it was named Colonia Patricia, and Mor^^^ does also
prove the same by inscription on an ancient marble; Iohann^^ Gerundensis says
that it was called Corduba, quasi Cor Baetis, that is, the heart of Baetis. It
has bred famous Soldiers, and great Here was borne Lucan the Poet, and the
two Seneca's.
Scholars. And it is happy in her fruitful fields, pleasant gardens, and
beside many other gifts, in her wholesome waters, Silius the Italian Poet lib.
3. calls the soil of Corduba a golden soil when he says,

Nec decus auriferae cessavit Corduba terrae.
Corduba's soil is of so rich a mould
It will not yield to that which bears gold.
Five leagues from Corduba, Southward, is Mons Major commonly called Monte
Major, Ptolemie thinks it to be Vlia a City in Hispania Baetica, and so does
Antoninus. Some few leagues from Corduba is Montoro, Ant^^nus supposes it to
be Epora. Ptolemie erroneously calls it Ebura instead of Epora, (when
notwithstanding the former is not a Town of Ba^^^ but of Lusitania) but worst
of all Pliny who names it Ripepora Faeder^rum. Not far from Lucar is the
Town which the Spaniards call Xe^ de la Frontera, as though it were the
beginning and bound of Spain (...) that side where it stands. This town
Navagierus thinks to be the same with that which Livie and others call Asta:
Antoninus with (...) asperation calls it Hasta, Moralis writes that it does
still retain the name of Asta, and thinks it to be that place near the
river Gu^d^^, which is commonly called Masa de Asta. But Ortelius supposes
that (...) was drowned with the Island Tartessus in the mouth of Baetis. An
hundred furlongs from the mouth of Baetis stands the Town Chi^^^^ which
Strabo (lib. 3.) calls Capionis Turris. At the mouth of the Ri^^^ Lethes,
(which is now called Guadelet, or in the Arabian language B^^^^ there is a
Town which is called Portus S. Mariae, and commonly ^^^erto de S. Maria.
Having passed over Lethes the next town you shall (...) withal is Whose Duke
was Captain General of the Invincible A^mado, A. 1588.
Medina Sidonia, and somewhat more Southward toward the Sea-shoare is Conilium
a famous town of Spain, six leagues d^s^^^ from the City GadiZ, and subject
to the Duke of S. Lucar, and Medi^^^donia. There is also Carteja, called
commonly So called because Tariff, the Leader of the Moors into Spain, here
landed.
Tariffa; and not far (...) thence is the Town Vegelium, commonly called Vegel
It is indeed a (...) Town, but yet famous for the situation and beauty of it,
for it is (...) on a hill which is environed round about with a large plain,
so that (...) has a fair prospect, as far as the eye can reach, not only
upon the plains and green meadows, toward the East, as also the Mountains
(...) Afric, and the Southern coast, but likewise upon the great and trouble
some Ocean toward the North and West. Lastly, from hence toward the Northwest
lies the town Hard by this Town was fought the notable battle between
Caesar and the sons of Pompey.
Munda, for so Pliny names this tow^^ which now is called Monda, though some
do think that to be old M^^da which now is called Ronda veja. There are in the
Diocese of Hisp^^^, an innumerable company of Monasteries and Nunneries. It
would be a tedious thing to reckon up the Hospitalls for strangers that are in
this country, seeing there are in Hispalis it self an hundred and twenty, which
are richly endowed some of them having eight thousand Crowns, and some
fifteen thousand Crowns yearly revenue. Hispalis is the most beautiful of
all the Cities of Spain, in regard of the Religious houses and Churches which
are therein: among many Churches, the chiefest is the Church dedicated to Saint
Mary, than which the Christian world cannot show a better, if you consider
either the greatness and majesty of the work, which carries with it an
excellent beauty; or if you behold the height of the Tower, wrought with
admirable workmanship, from whence there is a pleasant prospect over all the
City, and the fields that lie round about it. What shall I describe the royal
furniture of the Kings Castle in this City, than which the Kings of Spain
have none more fairly or curiously built? What should I mention the Palaces
here belonging to Dukes, Earls, and other Nobles? Or why should I speak of
the Citizens houses, adorned with pleasant Fountains and Gardens? I pass by
the ancient Aquaeducts, by which water is conveyed into several parts of the
City, and those later which were brought with great cost and labor to the
Pillars, commonly called Hercules Pillars, and dedicated to public delight,
besides many other ornaments of this City since, I fear lest I be tedious.

VALENTIA AND MVRCIA.
The Country whence so called.
VALENTIA takes its name from the Metropolis the^ of, being a fair
Mart-Towne, and of great antiquit^ On the South it looks toward Murcia: on
the Westward both the Castiles: The Situation.
on the North toward Ar^ and on the East the Sea beats on it. It has a more
^perate Air, The temper of the Air.
and a more pleasant Climate than any other part of Sp^ yea the Kingdom of
Valentia has such a gentle Climate, (the wa^ Western winds breathing upon
it) that at any time, even at Chri^ and in the Month of January the
Inhabitants may carry Posies (...) flowers in their hands, as they do in
other places in April and May, It (...) an excellent Country, having plenty of
all things, as Sugar, Wine, Oil (...) Corn, and diverse other fruits. It has
Mines of Silver in a p^ which they call Buriel, The fertility of the Soil.
between Valentia and Dertosa. And there (...) stones found which have, as it
were, golden veins and lines runn^ through them, in a place which is called
Aioder. At the Promont^ Finistratum there are Iron Mines, and near to Segorbia
there are so^ signs remaining of a Quarrie, out of which Marble was heretofore
dug and carried to Rome. In some places Alablaster is dug up, b^ Alume,
Tin, Marking-stone, and Chalk is found every where. The Moors by a long
succession of Dukes held the City of Valentia for (...) long time, though it
had been often besieged by the Kings of Ara^ until James the first, King of
Aragon by a long siege obtained it, (...) enforced their Captain Zaen Maure
together with fifty thousa^^ Moors to depart the City, The ancient
Government.
and to fly unto Denia, carrying with the^ their Gold, Silver, Armor, and
Household Stuff. Valentia being the forsaken, King James sent a Colonie to
replenish it again. The Colo^ consisted of Catalonians and Aragonians, their
Captain being Bereng^us Palatiol Bishop of Barcelona: Vidalus Cavelia Bishop
of Ossa: Peter Fe^dinandes d' Acagra, and Simon de Vrrea Knights; they
distributed t^ whole City among the new Inhabitants, which were 384 families,
a^cording to their several dignities, and adorned the Common-wea^ with new
Laws. This Country obtained the title of a Kingdom (...) the year of Christ
788, as Ortelius writes out of Petrus Metinensis, (...) Petrus Antoninus
Beuterus. The History has it thus: Hisen King of C^duba being dead, there
succeeded him in the year of Christ 788 (...) son Alca, whose uncle Aodala
Lord of Valentia called to him (...) Brother (whose name was Culema, and had
been disinherited) out (...) Taviar; these two Brethren uniting their forces,
came to Corduba, a^ endeavoring to expel their Nephew out of his Kingdom,
were ove^ come in battle, so that Aodala fled for his safety, and returned to
Val^tia: map of Valentia and Murcia VALENTIA, AND MVRCIA.
But the chief of the Moors interposing themselves between the Uncles and
the Nephew, they brought them to that agreement, that Aodala should write
himself King of Valentia, and that Culema should receive every month out of
the revenues of Valentia a thousand of Moradines (which was a kind of money)
for the maintenance of his table, and five thousand Moradines more for the
provision of other necessaries. To which agreement when Aodala had consented,
he first styled himself the King of Valentia. The ancient Inhabitants of
Valentia were the Hedetani, which (as Ptolemie thinks) were the same with the
Sedent^ni. Secondly the Biscargitani, whose Metropolis was Biscargis, whereof
there is some mention made in the Inscription of Caesar's coin, as Ha^,
Goltzius witnesses: and these seem to have been of the Heditanians, seeing
Ptolemie names Biscargis to be amongst them. Thirdly the Leo^acenses, whose
Metropolis Ptolemie calls Leonica, and places it also among the Heditanians.
Fourthly the Contestani, from whom Pliny names the Country of Contestania in
Tarraconia. Their memory is preserved by the Town Contayna, or, as some
pronounce it, Contentaina, at the head of that River, at the mouth whereof the
Town Oliva is seated over against the Pityusian Islands. Fifthly, the Lusones,
whom Appianus places by the River Iberus in Iberia, near to the Numantines,
but Strabo at the Fountains of Tagus. Sixthly, the Lobitani, whose Metropolis
Ptolemie (...) Lobetum, and which Beuterus writes was first called Turia,
afterward Avarazin, and last of all as at this day Albarazin. Seventhly, The
Tuboletae in Iberia, near to the Saguntines, from whom Ptolemie calls the
City Turbula, now perhaps called Torres. Lastly the Celtiberi, so called by
Pliny lib. 3. cap. 3. Pomponius Mela lib. 3. cap. 13. and other Latins, but
by Ptolemie Celtiberes; for though some do place them in Old Castile, yet the
most in Valentia. Among the Cities of this Kingdom Valentia (commonly called
Valencia) is the Metropolis, and a Bishops Seat: It was built by King Romus,
as Vasaeus and others write, and from him called Rome: And the Romans having
afterward amplified and enlarged it, did call it Valentia, a name signifying
the same which (...) in Greek does. But this seems a fable to Resendius, who
reports, that it was built and so named by the Portugals and other Soldiers.
It is seated in the innermost part of the Bay of Sucronia, on the right hand
Bank of the River Turia. It is famous for its manners, institutions, and Here
S. Dominick Father of the Dominican Friars studied.
profession of all Arts both Liberal and Mechanic. It is happy in great
wits, and desirous to preserve peace and concord within it self. It has many
Gentlemen in it, and is very rich in Merchandise. We will not pass by that
which L. Marinaeus Siculus notes concerning the Valentians: They have (says
he) a custom every year on the Feast of Saint Matthew, that having made many
supplications and prayers, they repair to the place of execution, and there
they take up the bodies of those who have suffered death, whether they be
hanged up, or lie on the ground, gathering also together their scattered bones,
if any be; and by and by having laid all things on a Beer, they carry them to
the common burying-place of the City, and there with sacrifices and prayers
do bury them. Petrus Medinensis relates, that there are in this City ten
thousand springs of water. Heretofore on the left hand bank of Turia not far
from Valentia stood Saguntum, which Ptolemie affirms to be a City of the
Heditani, Strabo and Pliny do place it a mile off from the Sea; Strabo
calls it Saguntus, Stephanus Zacynthus, and Antoninus corruptly Secundum and
Secunthum. The most do think it now to be the same with Morvedere, being so
called, as some suppose, from the ancient walls thereof. Appianus makes it the
Colonie of the Zacynthi; some do suppose, that Saguntis the Son of Hercules
was the builder of it, and some would have it named from the Iberian Sagi.
Silius the Italian Poet describes the situation of it in his first Book:
Livie in his 30 Book says, that the walls of Saguntum were cemented with Lime
and dirt mingled together, which was an ancient kind of building. It seems
by Pliny, that the Saguntini did heretofore reverence Diana; being brought
thither by the Zacynthians their Progenitors, two hundred years before the
destruction of Troy. Pomponius Mela says, that the Saguntians are faithful in
the midst of troubles and adversity. Concerning the overthrow and devastation
of this noble City, which through their admirable constancy and great
fidelity toward the Romans happened in the year from the building of the
City 535, ( M. Lucius Salinator, and L. Aemilius Paulus being Consuls) you may
read and have recourse to Livie, lib. 21. Polybius, lib. 3. Orosius, lib. 4.
cap. 14. Eutropius, lib. 3. Florus, lib. 2. cap. 6. Silius the Italian, lib. 1.
Valerius Maximus, lib. 6. cap. 6. Augustine, lib. 3. de Civit. Dei, cap. 20.
Aemilius Probus in Hannibal, Cicero in his Philippicks, and many others. There
are also at this day these famous places in Valentia: First Segorbia, which
Ptolemie and Strabo, as also Vasaeus, Clusius, Tarapha, Emanuel Henricus, and
Augustus his coin do call Segobriga. Pliny also calls the Inhabitants
Segobricenses, placing them in the chief part of Celtiberia. But Moralis
thinks, that Segobriga should be called Injesta, or Cabeca el Griego: and
Ioannes Mariana is of the same opinion. Hieronimus Surita professes that he
knew not where this Segorbia was. Secondly, there is Denia, called by Cicero
and Pliny (as Florianus, Morialis, and Clusius will have it) Dianium, and
Dianium Stipendarium. Thirdly, Incibilis, so called by Livie, and by Frontinus
Indibilis, where Scipio put Hanno Captain of the Carthaginians to flight: It
is thought by Florianus to be Chelva. Fourthly, that Town which Pliny calls
Illici, Ptolemie Ilicias, Pomponius Illice, and in the Inscription of coin
Ilce Colonia; Ptolemie also calls it Illicitani (whence comes the appellation
of the Illicitane Bay) and now some call it Alicanta, and others Elche, which
comes somewhat nearer to truth. Fifthly Belgida, a City of Celtiberia which
still keeps its old name. Sixthly Leria, which Ptolemie calls Hedeta, (whence
the Heditani have their name) Clusius and Moralis Oliete, and later Writers
Liria. Seventhly the Town which Florianus calls Orcelis, and Gomecius and
Clusius Horivela and Oriola, but Nebrissensis Zamora. Eighthly, the Town which
Livie and Ptolemie call Bigerra, Beuterus and Vasaeus Bejar, and Clusius
Villena. Ninthly the Town which Strabo calls Setabis, Ancient Stones Saetabis,
(as Clusius witnesses) and is now called according to Florianus his opinion
Xativa. This Country has many Rivers, The Rivers.
and especially Turia, which Pomponius calls Duria, and Ptolemie Dorium. The
Inhabitants do keep the Arabic word, calling it Guetalabiar, which signifies
pure Water. This River brings great commodities to those places by which it
flows. There is also the River Xucar (called of old Sucron and Surus) which
rises out of the Mountains of Orespeda. The Mountains.
Valentia has two Mountains, which are called Mariola and Pe^nagolosa, which
being full of diverse sorts of rare herbs and plants, do cause a great number
of Physicians and Herbalists to resort unto them out of diverse parts of Spain,
in regard of the rarities which are found there. The City of Valentia being
venerable for antiquity, has many ancient Marbles which remain to posterity,
engraven with Roman inscriptions, some of which may be seen in Beuterus,
Ambrosius Morals, Hottomannus and others. The public works.
In the City of Saguntum, now called Morve^ there was a Theater, a Scene, and
many other Relics of antiquity, as the Sepulchers of the Sergii, of L.
Galba, and Sergius Galba, and other Romans, with the stones whereof a
Monastery was built for the Fri^s of the Order of the Trinity. Valentia has
a famous Universitie in the City so called, and also an other Universitie at
Gandia, which was (...) long since erected and founded by the Duke of Gandia,
that the Fathers of the Society of Jesus (of which Society he became one
himself) might study there. The City of Valentia, in regard of its
government of the Commonwealth, does excel all the Cities in Spain. The
Country wherein this City is seated is inhabited, for the most part, by a
Nation which are descended from the Moors, and therefore they do yet retain
their Ancestors speech and manner of life. That is not to be omitted which M.
Tully does speak in his last Oration against Ve^^, in the praise of Valentia:
Valentinorum (says he) hominum honestis^morum testimonio, that is, by the
testimony of the Valentians who are most honest men. The Trades.
Much silk is made in this Kingdom. Valentia (as Olivarius Valentinus
writes) has great store of traffic and trading: for diverse sorts of wares
are exported from thence, as silke-thread of all colors, and raw silk as it
comes from the Silke-worme, the best clock also is carried from thence into the
Isles called Baleares, The traffic.
and into Sicil^ and Sardinia: Besides, there is exported from thence Rice,
Wheat, Sugar, Raizins, Figs, and preserved fruits into many Countries in
Europe.

ARAGON AND CATALONIA.
ARAGON took its name either from the Autrigonians, a people of Spain, as
Laurentius Valla witnesses; The Country whence so called.
or from Tarracone an ancient City, as it pleases Antonius Nebrissensis and
Vasaeus. Some suppose it was so called from the River Aragon, which rising
there, does flow into Iberus. Some do derive it from the the Altar of
Hercules, called in Latin Ara, and his sports called Agonalia: which if it be
true, it is a wonder that Ancient Writers are so silent concerning Aragon. The
Situation.
Navarre cleaves to this Kingdom on the Northwest, Calatrava toward the
Southeast: On the Southwest it looks toward Castile, and on the North it
has the Pyrenaean Mountains. The quality of the Soil.
The Country is for the most part rugged and dry toward the Pyraenean hills,
so that you shall not meet with a house for many days journeys: yet here are
some fruitful Valleys abounding with the best corn, and other fruits, and it
is refreshed with sweet Rivers. All Writers do report that Ranimirus was the
first King of this Kingdom. The Cities.
He was made King of Aragon, in the year 1016. But concerning the Kingdom and
the Kings of Aragon, as also Valentia and Catalonia how and from whom they had
their beginnings, and of their union, The ancient Government.
you may read Rodericus Sanctius in the first part of his Spanish History.
cap. 13. Also Lucius Marinaeus Siculus de Regibus Hispaniae, lib. 8. and
others. The Metropolis and head City of the Kingdom, Pliny and others do
call Caesar-Augusta, Ptolemy Caesarea-Augusta. It is now called Sarragosa, and
is a famous Universitie. They report that the builder thereof was Iuba, King of
Mauritania, who called it Saldyba, that is, the house of Iuba: but afterward,
the former name being left off, it was called Caesar-Augusta. It is seated on
the bank of Iberus, in a plain place, and has a long stone bridge which
serves the Inhabitants to pass over the River, (as Strabo speaks in his
third book). The City lies in the form and shape of a shoo-soale: It has
four gates looking to the four quarters of the world. It is encompassed with
strong walls, and well fortified with many Towers. In this City the Kings of
Aragon were wont to be crowned by the Archbishop and Primate of the whole
Kingdom. The other Cities are these; first that which Ptolemy and Plutarch do
call in Latin Osca, and is now called Huesca; but Velleius Paterculus
fabulously calls it Eteosca, where he writes that Sertorius was slain.
Secondly the City Tyriassona near the Mountain Cacus, which some do suppose
was built by the Tyrians and Ausonians. Thirdly Iacca, lying in a valley,
heretofore the Seat of the Iaccetani. Fourthly Calatajut, standing in a
Plain, and built (...) of the ruins of Bilbilis, which together with many
other Monument^ Antiquity, are to be seen a mile and an half from the Town,
o^ Hill which is commonly called Bambola or Baubola. This Mountain enriched
almost on every side with the River Salon or Xalon, where ^lerius Martialis
lib. 10. Epigram. 103. does place Bilbilis, being bor^ Citizen of it; Paulinus
calls it Bilbilis hanging on the rock: Ptole^ corruptly calls it Bilbis,
and Martial calls it Augusta Bilbilis, as (...) do the Inscriptions of
ancient coin. Fifthly Barbastrum (famous (...) Iron Crosse-bowes) which
Ptolemie calls Burtina, and Antoninus B^rt^ as some think. Sixthly Monsonium,
seated in the middle or nave^^ the Kingdom, not far from the Bank of the
River Cinga, (...) which there is a hill, from whence the Town takes its
name. (...) Town that is famous by reason of the meeting and convention of
Kingdoms of Aragon and Valentia, and the Principality of Cata^ where it
stands. It is commonly called Moncon, and has not one^ fruitful Soil, but
a sweet and open Air. Seventhly Fraga, bet^ Ilerda and Caesar-Augusta:
Ptolemie calls it Gallica Flavia, and Anto^ Gallicum, as Varronius thinks,
though some do place Gallicum (...) where now stands Zuera. Eigthly Gurrea,
heretofore called (...) Gallorum, which Antoninus places between
Caesar-Augusta and the ^renaean Hills. Ninthly, Ajerbium, where it is thought
that E^ sometime stood, which Antoninus and others do mention. 10ly V^^ which
Aimonius calls Orgellum, and Ptolemie Orgia. It is a Town far from the
Fountains of Sicoris or Segre. There were also o^ Towns which are now so
ruinated, that there remains nothing (...) them; among which was the Town
Calagurris Nassica, being an^ besides that in Navarre. The Citizens thereof are
called Calagu^ by Caesar in his first Book of Commentaries: and Suetonius
notes (...) Augustus had a Guarde of them, (in the life of Augustus cap. 49.)
(...) names them Nassici. The Rivers here are Iberus or Ebro, and Gall^
Gallicum with others.

The Country whence so called.
Catalonia commonly called Catalunna follows. Volaterranus th^eth that it was
so called by the Goths and Alanes,, and that it should written Gothalania.
Beatus Rhenanus (lib. 1. Rerum German.) supp^ that it was called Cattalania
from the Catti and Alans, who joining ^^gether broke into this part of Spain.
Some think it was called so (...) the Castellans, the ancient people of
Spain, who seated themselves these places; and there are others who think it
was called Cath^ from Othogerius Cathalon, The Situation.
of whom Marinaeus Siculus lib. 9. De reb^^ spanicis: The quality of the Soil.
and L. Valla de Ferdinando Aragon: Rege lib. 1. have wri^ much. It is bounded
with the Pyrenaean Mountains, the Mediterre^ Sea, and the Rivers Iberus and
Cinga. The Country it self is, for (...) most part, barren, and has nothing
but some wild fruit in it. The ^tropolis at this day is Barcelona, a fair
City, which being situated; the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, The Cities.
does declare her antiquity, by (...) proof and witness of many ancient
buildings. The most of the Spa^^ards do report, that the builder thereof was
Amilcar surnamed Barc^ the Son of Hannibal Captain of the Carthaginians: who
being ow^ map of Aragon and Catalonia ARAGON. AND CATALONIA.
come at Sea, was hanged by the enemy) and the Father of Hannibal the great
Emperor: it is called by Ptolemie Barcinon, by Paulinus Baro^^^, by Iornandus
Barcilona, and anciently Faventia (as Pliny witnesses.) Marinaeus Siculus
lib. 13. de Rebus Hispanicis does praise this City largely, and describes the
situation of it lib. 15. It was heretofore much less than it is now, being a
furlong off from the Sea. It had four Gates, which looked to the four corners
of the world, equally distant one from an other, and are yet to be seen in
the heart of the City, having Ox heads carved upon them, in token of peace
and quiet ^illage, as some would have it. In process of time it was
encompassed with d^^ble strong Walls and Towers, and it grew to be so great,
that it is worthily now thought to be the chief City of Catalonia. Concerning
the Earls of Barcelona, and their original, we must have recourse to
R^^ricus Toletanus, lib. 6. de Rebus Hisp. cap. 3. and L. Marinaeus lib. 9. N^^
to this City follows the City Tarraco, which Ptolemie and Strabo (...)
Tarracon, it is now called Tarragona: It was a City so famous heretofore, that
the better part of Spain was denominated from it. And C^^la in his 2d Book
calls it the richest of all the Sea-Townes. Secondly Vigua, commonly called
Vicque or Vich, and by Ptolemie Ausa. Thirdly the City Girona, which Pliny
and Antoninus call Geronda, and Ptol^^^ Geroundes. Fourthly Tortosa, which
Ptolemie calls Dertoosa, an ancient Stone Dertosa, Antoninus Derdosa, and Strabo
Dertossa. Pliny me^^^neth a people called Dertosani. Fifthly Lerida, which
Ptolemie, Stepl^^ and others call Ilerda, the situation whereof is thus
described by L^^^ lib. 4. Belli Pharsalici: Colle tumetmodico, lenique excrevit
in altum

Pingue solum tumulo, etc.


A little hill, not steep, of fertile lands
Swells up, on which the old Ilerda stands;
Before the Town flows Sicoris soft stream
Among Spaines Rivers of no small esteem,
On which a Bridge of stone high-arched stood
TO endure the violence of a Winters flood.
Other matters are also entreated of concerning this City, as the vi^^ries
obtained there by M. Petreius, and L. Afranlus, Pompey his Generals: concerning
which Caesar has fully written in his first Book of the Civil War. Sixthly
the Town which Silius, lib. 3. Polybius lib. 3. and Ptolemie do call Emporia;
Stephanus Emporion, but is commonly called Empurias or Ampurias. Seventhly
Blanda, so called by Pomp^ni^^d Ptolemie, but commonly called Blanes, as
Beuterus, Florianus, and N^^gierus will have it. Eigthly. Manresa, which
Florianus thinks Li^^ does call Athanagia. Ninthly Rosae, commonly called
Roses, Livie^^s it Rhoda, Stephanus Rhode, Strabo Rhodope, and Ptolemie
Rhodipolis, (...) Colibra, which Ptolemie and Pliny call Iliberis, Strabo
Ilberris, and P^mpnius Eliberri. It is a Village which was heretofore part of a
great City; some would have Iliberis not to be Colibra, but an other Town,
Pal^^ would have it to be Salsulae, Olivarius Euna, and Mercator Illa. There
where Catalonia is now, heretofore stood Iulia Lybica, of which some ruins
only remain, not far from the Town Linca; also near the Pyrenaean hills, a
Town which Antoninus calls Cinniana, and the Tow^ called by Ptolemie
Deciana. Johannes Gerundensis lib. 1. Paralipom. dis^uteth and proves, that
the Country of Ruscilion among the Pyrenaean Mountains, belongs to
Catalonia, wherein was a Town which Pliny ^als Ruscino, Strabo Royskinoon,
Ptolemie Roysinoon, and Avienus Ruscinus. Some parts of it do remain not
far from a Town called Perpignan, ^eere to a Tower of the same name: for
they call it the Tower of Roscilion. Catalonia has a famous and ancient
Universitie called Ilerda, which (it is thought) Horace did point out Lib. 1.
Epist. ult. in these words.

Aut fugies Vticam, aut unctus mitteris Ilerdam:
From Utica thou either now shall flee,
Or else sent to Ilerda thou shall be.
Here Pope Calixtus the third taught publicly the knowledge of the Law, as
Platina witnesses.

These things may suffice which have been spoken hitherto concerning Spain.
But yet I think it fit to add, by way of conclusion, the excellent testimony
of a Frenchman concerning this Kingdom, wherein whatsoever we have hitherto
said in praise and commendation thereof, is briefly and pithily repeated by way
of recapitulation. This Frenchman whom I mentioned, was called in Latin
Pacatus, who writ a most learned Panegyric to Theodosius the Emperor being a
Spaniard, in which he speaks to this purpose. Now it will appear, that he
is declared Prince, who ought to be chosen of all men, and out of all men. For
first, Spain is thy Mother, a Land more happy than all other Countries, (the
great Fabricator and Maker of all things has been more favorable, in
enriching and adorning this Country, than the Countries of others Nations) for
it is neither obnoxious to the Summers heat, nor subject to the Northern
cold, but is seated in the temperate Climate, and by the witty diligence of
Nature, it is, as it were, an other world, as being enclosed on one side with
the Pyrenaean Mountains, here with the Ocean, and there with the shores of
the Tyrrhenian Sea. Besides, add to this the many famous Cities which are
therein, the whole Countries being either tilled, or full of fruits and
flocks, the gold-bearing Rivers that water it, and the sparkling precious
stones that enrich it; I know that Poets in their Fables which they have
invented to please the ear, have attributed miraculous things to some Nations,
which whether they are true or not, yet are very strange: neither do I now
seek out the truth: Let Gargara (as it is written) yield a great increase of
corn: let Menavia be praised for her flocks, Campania for the Mountain
Gaurano, Lydia for the River Pactolus, Spain has every thing that is
praiseworthy. It brings forth hardy Souldies, expert Captains, eloquent
Orators, and famous Poets. This Country is the Mother of Judges and Princes:
this Country yielded the Emperors Trajan and Adrian, and the Empire is
beholding to this Country for thee. Let Crete, which boasts of Jupiters
being nursed in it when he was a child, give place to this Country: let
Delos, honored by the birth of two Gods, and noble Thebes of Hercules who was
brought up there, yield unto it. We know not whether you believe what you have
heard, but Spain had lent us this God-like Emperor who is now present, and
whom we see* He that desires to know more concerning Spain, let him consult
a^ have recourse to Johannes Vasaeus, Marinaeus Siculus, Marius Aretius,
D^mianus a Goes, Franciscus Tarapha, the Bishop of Gerunda, Annius Vi^^biensis,
Florianus a Campo in Spanish, Ambrosius Moralis and others. Amongst the
Ancients also we may consult and have recourse to Caso Strabo, and others,
whom Damianus a Goes shows in his Book entitled Hispania.

CATALONIA MORE PARTICVLARLY DESCRIBED.
CATALONIA was heretofore called Marcha Hispanica; Comitatus Barcinonae, and
Hispaniarum Marchionatus. The names.
This Country of Spain lies farthest Eastward of all the rest. It has on
the West the Valentinians and Aragonians near unto it; from the former it is
separated by the River Alcanar or Cenia, from the later in some places by the
River Arnesius, in other parts by the Rivers Iberus, Sicoris, and Nogvera. On
the South it stretches it self lengthward toward the Mediterranean Sea: The
Situation.
On the East, near to the Lake Salsulae or Salsas, and a Castle of the same
name built there by the Emperor Charles the fifth, over against the
impregnable Castle of Leocata, which is upon the Frontiers or entrance into
France, it touches Aquitania: Lastly on the North it is bounded with the
Pyrenaean Hills. It is more than eight hundred Italian miles in compass. It is
in length from the Lake Salsulae to Valentia two hundred and fifty miles, and
in breadth from the Vale of Caralis or Calaris to the shore of Barcinon ninety
four miles. In Summer it has every where a good wholesome Air, and is
temperate in Winter, especially toward the Seashore, which lies Southward. The
temper of the Air.
For that part which is Northward is cold, and has many snowes. The whole
Country, unless it be in some part (...) is very mountainous, and yet it
has many green Meadows, flourishing Pastures and very fruitful Valleys. The
Country in general has such store of Corn and Pulse, The fertility of the
Soil.
but especially Apples, Wine, and Oil, that it is inferior unto none. Neither
does it want Mines of Gold, Silver, and other metals, which the River Sicoris
declares by those fragments or sands of gold and silver which it casts up
when it overfloweth; as also some other Rivers of Catalonia. The best Iron is
dug forth here in great plenty, besides Brass, Steel, and Lead. Of late
there was found near Signimont a fruitful vein of shining precious Stones,
which are of a blew or Violet-colour, called Amethysts. There is also found
near unto the Town of Tivica the Onix, which resembles a man's nail in
whiteness, having some veins which run through it, which are in color like
the Sardonix or Jasper: Blood stones also which have a great virtue to stay
blood are found on the East side of Rubricatum or Lobregat. The Dertosians have
many Quarries of Jasper, which shines and is of many colors, as purple
green, pale, Rose-colour, white, and duskish. At Tarraconia and Benda diverse
kinds of Marble are dug up out of the bowels of the Earth: and in some
places shining and translucent Alablaster is dug forth, of which they make
windows to let in the light, and to keep out the wind; these are the stones
with which Pliny confesses that the higher Spain does abound. Many places in
Catalonia do yield Alume, and Cobblers Ink or Blacking: also Hemp for
Rope-making, which (as Pliny witnesses) is as white and fine as any flax, by
reason of the nature of the water wherein it is steeped. And seeing I am fallen
into this matter, I cannot but in praise of the plenty of all things which
Catalonis has, make mention how that this Country does build Ships of great
burden, even from the Keele to the highest Sails, but especially Galleys; The
variety of living Creatures.
and having furnished them with all warlike provision, they lanch them forth
into the Sea near to Barcinona: Besides, innumerable wild Beasts do wander
through the Forests of this Country, and great store of Cattle every where.
The ancient Inhabitants.
The Ancients did place diverse sorts of people in this part of Spain, as first
the Castellani, whom Ptolemie calls (...), and Villanovanus and Verrerius do
call them Ducatus Cardone. 2 Those whom Avienus calls Indigeti: Ptolom. (...),
and Stephanus (...). 3 Those whom Livie and Ptolemie call Ilergetes, and
Polybius lib. 3. (...) Fourthly those whom Martial calls Laletani, Ptolemie
(...), Strabo (...), and (...). Fifthly those which Aimonius calls Cempsi, and
Dionysius and Eusthathius (...). Sixthly, those whom Pliny calls Coretani,
Iuliani, and Augustini, Ptolemie (...), Strabo (...), Silius Ceretani, Avienus
Ceretes, and Stephanus (...), of whom there appears and are yet remaining some
tokens in Cerveira, Puigcerda, and Condado de C^dania. Seventhly those whom
Xilander calls Vetteres an ancient people in Tarraconia, dwelling between
the River Iberus and the Pyreneus Hills, near to the Sea, and called by Strabo
(...), though Causa^^^ would have them called Secerrae, whom Antoninus makes
mention of Eigthly the Ligyes, whom Thucidides lib. 6. and Halicarnassus lib.
1. do call (...), who dwelt near to the River Sicanis, and are those perhaps
whom Avienus calls Ligures. Ninthly those whom Livie and Pliny call Ansetani,
and Ptolemie (...). 10, Those whom Pliny calls Lar^^s^^, near to the River
Larnus, at the roots of the Pyrenaean Mountains And lastly, those whom
Ptolemy calls (...), near to the City Dunsa, Livie Ilercaonenses, and Caesar
Ilurgavonenses.

Catalonia is famous both for strong and wise men, for wonderful achievements,
and for many victories gotten by diverse Nations. For in Catalonia the
Carthaginians heretofore contended against the Inhabitants, Their ancient
valor and virtue.
the Romans against the Carthaginians, the Goths against the ^^mans, the
Saracens against the Goths, and the French against the Sarace^^ besides the
contentions which afterward happened between the surviving remainder of the
Goths, and the Earls of Barcinon: Who can relate the wars which the Sons of
the Earls of Barcinon, being Kings of Aragon, did wage with other Nations? and
the great victories which were gotten to the admiration of all men? The
Baleares (commonly called Majorica and Minorica) Ebusa, Murcia, Valentia,
Sardinia, Sicilie, Naples, Athens, and Neopatria can only declare them.
Concerning the Metropolis or chief City of Catalonia, and the other Cities
and Towns, look into the former description. On the very top of the high
Mountain Canus in the County of Roscellion, there is a certain great I^le
which has abundance of those great fishes in it which we call Turt^^^ into
which if any one cast a stone, the water is presently troubled, and sends
forth vapors, which being condensed and converted into map of Catalonia
CATALONIA More particularly described.
clouds do cause a tempest immediately to follow with thunder, lightning, and
hail. The Country of Balneole or Aquae Voconis has a Fountain of a golden
color, so that you may see any thing that is cast into it. And there is a
wholesome Fountain in Catalonia, the water whereof being drunk often and in
great abundance, does not only not oppress the stomach, but also miraculously
cures men of many diseases: they fabulously report, that S. Maginus after some
prayers to God to give it that virtue, did dig and open it with his staff,
being in a dry mountanous and stony place. Over against the Town Aulotum
there are about 12 Fountains arising or springing from brass mines, which
both day and night all Winter and Summer do, as it were, breathe o^ a thin
vapor, warm in Winter, but so cold in Summer, that no man can endure it for
any while; and the water, if the Inhabitants do set any bottles into it (as
they often do) makes them as cold as Ice, so that the water which is in these
bottles affords a delicate drink to coo^^ the heat of the stomach. There
are also many Fountains always h^^, which shows, that there is some fire
there which lies hidden in the bowels of the Earth. There are more than four
such hot Fountains (...) Catalonia, and all of them very excellent to help
diverse kinds of diseases, wherefore many that have griefs and infirmities do
resort u^^ them from all parts. The Rivers.
Catalonia does abound with Rivers, for it has almost fifty which run
through it, and all of them very full of Fi^^: some are small, but yet very
pleasant streams, some are of a middle (...), and lastly there are some very
fair ones, as namely Tettus, (which is also called Ruscison) Techum (which is
also called Tetrum) Fluvianus (otherwise called Clovianus and Plumialbus)
Tardera (otherwise called T^num) Besotium (which is also called Bisocto and
Betulo) Rubricatus, Cin^^, Sicoris, and Iberus. All of them do flow and run
into the Sea except Cinga and Cicorus, the former whereof runs into Sicoris,
the later into Iberus, which being much enriched with the watery tribute of
these and other Rivers becomes one of the greatest Rivers in all Spain. The
best Coral grows in the Catalonian Sea on the East thereof. There are
Mountains and very high hills every where in Catalonia, The Mountains.
and those so clothed with the constant liverie of green bushes, shrubs, and
many kinds of trees, that the most of them are full of woods and thicke^.
There are many Beech-trees on them, many Pine-trees, abundance of Oaks, many
Holme-trees, innumerable Maple, abundance of Hasel, Nut, and Chesse-nut-trees,
and infinite store of Corke-trees, whose bark is very thick, and being bark't
and taken off, grows again. Crystal is found in the Mountains of Nuria, on
the Cardonensian rocks. And that which any one will wonder at, as being worthy
of admiration, there is found at the Town of Cardona a Mountain having very
wholesome salt growing in it, and shining against the Sun with a great deal
of variety and delight to the eye, out of which (as Pliny reports of the
Mountain Oromenus in India) salt is daily cut and dug, and yet grows
again; yea the Mountain still grows so much the higher, by how much the
more salt is cut out of the pits that are in it. There is also an other thing
very wonderful, and that is, whereas places where salt is found are barren,
and produce or bear nothing, yet this Mountain has many Pine-trees and Vines
upon it. In the Bishopric of Gerunda on the South side thereof, there is a
Hill of white small sand, which (as in Lybia) the wind carries here and
there, and makes great driftes of it, which are very perilous and dangerous
for those that travel that way. Here I cannot but mention the Mountain
called Mount Serrato, being distant toward the East seven leagues from
Barcinona, it is very rockie and cliffie, in manner of a rugged Saw, and so
high, that from thence the Pyrenaean Mountains, and the farthest Mountains of
the Island Majorica may be seen. This Mountain is full of great shining
Stones like Iaspers. There are some Fountains which spring and flow out of it:
it produces many herbs which have special and sovereign virtues: and it is
watered toward the North with the River Lubricatus, and at length like Soractus
in Italy, and Tabor in Galile, it here raises up it self, wherefore it is
very delightful to behold. The public and private works.
Now let us come to the public and private Works. There are every where many
Churches in this Country, and many famous Monasteries, especially that
memorable Church of S. Michael a Fago, (built between a Cave and an ancient
Friarie of the Benedictines) over the top whereof there runs a little
Rivulet, which the Inhabitants call TaneZ, and from thence it presently rusheth
down, so that the sound arising from the fall of the water does much delight
those which stand by it. There are besides so many fair built-houses disjoined
from the City and Towns, and so scattered through all the plains, fields,
valleys, hills, mountains, woods, and groves that are in the Country that all
Catalonia may seem to be one City. It has every where strong Castles and
Towers, which are fortified not only by Nature and the situation of the place,
but by Art. Catalonia is a Principality, The manner of government.
and contains in it the Archbishopric of Tarraconia, eight Bishoprics, to
wit, the Bishopric of Barcinona, Gerunda, Vrgell, Vicke, Ilerda, Dertosa,
Herlua, and Celsona; two Dukedomes, the one of Mont Albo, and the other of
Cardona: five Marquesates, namely of Ilerda, Dertosa, Pellearia, Camaras, and
Itoha: eighteen Counties, the County of Bareinon (which does far exceed
all other honors belonging to Catalonia) the County of Gerunda, of Vrgella,
of Ceretania, of Bisuldinum, of Rossellion, of Emporia, of Ausonia, of
Minorisa, of Prata, of Palmosium, of Petraelata, of S. Columba a Queralto, of
S. Columba a Scintilliis, of Savallanium, of Vallisfogona, of Guimeranum, and
and Mont acuto. It would be too tedious to the Reader to reckon here the
number of the Vicounties and Baronies. The Schools.
It has six Universities famous for all Arts and Sciences. It subsisteth, for
the most part, by wool-dressing, and handy-craft-trades, The Trades.
by which the Inhabitants do live, pay their debts, sustain their Families,
get that estate which they have, and keep that which they have gotten. But let
so much suffice concerning Catalonia, let us pass to other Countries.

THE DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE. To the studious and courteous READER.
SEeing we are not borne for our selves alone, but as much as every one can
do for the common good, so much the benifice^^ Framer and Maker of mankind
does require of him, I thought it meet to accommodate and fit this
Geographicall Work, put whereof we here present, as much as I could to the
utility and benefit of the Commonwealth. The use and utility of Geographie in
reading Histories and retaining them, is greater than that I need to make any
adm^^^tion or description of; but there is an other greater dignity belonging
unto it, if it be directed to its proper end, and rightly used, and that is, it
does much (...) to the knowledge of Politic Government, when the situation of
a place is in only described, but also the nature and condition thereof, which
is sometimes the office of a Geographer to do. And as that Painter does not
satisfy himself in his profession, which delineates a man according to the
proportion of (...) limbs, but does not with colors and physiognomicall
shadows express his nature and affections; so he shall but figure out an
unpleasing and, as it were, a dead Geographicall body or carcass, who having
set down places according is their symmetrie and proportion, shall not show
their Political respect which they bear one to an other. Wherefore I esteemed
it as a thing chiefly to be respected, that in every several Country the
nature and order of Government append^^ thereunto, should be prefixed before
the Tables themselves, whereby I might somewhat benefit those who are studious
of political and public affairs. (...) our writing be in many places
imperfect, defective, or erroneous, the Read^^ needs not wonder, for the
forms of things throughout all Nations are no^^^^tant, neither have I found
all that are, purposely described by any Author; (...) even as I could gather
them out of Histories, I have collected them, which thou may partly
understand the order and manner of every government, and so may supply and
correct that which is wanting in thy own Country, which if every one would
do, how profitable would Geographie be to Students? That are three heads
especially to be considered in the administration of Kingdoms, Principalities,
and Provinces, namely the Ecclesiastical State, the Political State, and the
Administration of Justice: first therefore according to the (...) of the
Country described in the Table, I will reckon up how many members (...) parts
there are of the Political State thereof, according to the order of dignity
as they are observed there. Secondly in distinguishing Noble-mens places (sit^
the whole government is in the hands of the Nobility) I will in the first
place reckon those who are Feudals to the Prince, and afterward those that are
free, descending still in order from the highest degree of Nobility, as Dukes,
Earls, Barons, and Lords. Thirdly, I will show into what Prefectures the
Country is divided: and I suppose that by these three things the Political
State will be sufficiently declared. In the administration of Justice, the
juridicall Diocesses shall be noted, and the higher Senates to which appeal
may be made. Lastly, in the Ecclesiastical State, the Archbishops, if there be
any, shall be placed first, and then the suffragan Bishops which are under
them, as also those which are suffragans to others. To reckon up all these
things requires much study, but seeing for want of matter it may be briefly
delivered, I will perform what I may, that so I may stir up lovers of their
country to emulate a greater perfection in their writings. The several places
shall be noted with numbers, that they may be straightway found out in the
following Table; the first number shall contain the degrees and minutes of
Longitude, which shall be sought out in the Northern or Southern side of the
Table, the later shall have the numbers of Latitude, which are to be sought on
the Western or Eastern side. From these bounds, here by the direction of the
Meridian, and there of the Parallel of Latitude, you shall come at last to
their intersection, and so find out the place propounded. The situation of
those places which are in the description of the general Tables ought to be
sought from thence. But if so be that some names are not found in the table
following, it was the fault of the Chorographer who delineated it, for the
right designing and placing of principalities and dominions is not to be
omitted. The rule and government of Countries is in the power of the Nobility,
and therefore it is both profitable and delightful to know and distinguish
their several degrees, and the proper conditions of them. The highest degree
is that of Emperor or King, whom in order do follow the degrees of Duke,
Earl, Baron, the military Tribune, whom the Low-country-men call Banderheer,
quasi Bendae, that is, Lord of the Troops, which he leads under his Banner.
After him is the Knight, or he that has attained to be of the Horsemans
Order, whom the Frenchmen do call Chevalier, and the Low-country-men Ridder.
In the last place is un Escuyer, who bears Arms, but has attained to no
public dignity. There are three degrees of Earls, the first whereof the
Frenchmen call Viconte, who excels the rest in dignity and privileges,
Ludovic. Guic. would have him now called a Burgrave. And though this Order of
Earls in time has remitted something of its honor, yet in the beginning it
was of more excellent dignity, as the description thereof shall by and by
declare. In the second degree is the Earl Provincial, who is called in Dutch,
Landgrave. In the third degree is the Marquess, or Marckgrave. These are the
special degrees and orders of Nobility, among which the government of every
Country is divided. There are also some differences in these degrees which
might occasion a subdivision, but such as are distinguished rather by
privileges than by form of government. Yet moreover I will deliver the
lawful differences and conditions of every order which I have mentioned, as I
have found them in a certain French Book, entitled La division du monde:
deducing their creation from the lowest degree of Nobility, whence their
proprieties and order of government do most clearly appear. A Knight, says
this author, or a Chevalier shall be thus created of one that was a Squire
before, and bore arms in his Escutcheon. If he, having long followed the
wars, exercised arms, been present at many conflicts, has sufficient
means to maintain the state of his degree, and comes of a great, noble, and
rich Family; then in any skirmish he shall make known his request to the
General of the Army, or to some valiant generous Knight, and when the battle
is ended, he shall come unto the said General or Knight, and entreat him in
the name of God and S. George, to give him the Order of Knighth^^^. Whereupon
he shall draw out his Sword and strike him thrice with it, saying: I make thee
a Knight (or Chevalier) in the name of God and S. George, faithfully to defend
the Faith, Justice, the Church, Widows, and Orphans. But (...) the
supplicant, although he be valiant, yet be poor, he shall not be admitted
unless so much yearly revenues be assigned and given unto him, as is
necess^^^ to preserve and maintain the honor and dignity of his Order. And
this (...) the first degree of Nobility arising from the lowest. A military
Tribune called even Bander-heer shall be made of a Knight, if having long
followed the wars he has lands and revenues enough to keep and maintain
fifty Gentlemen in pay, that is, one Band of horsemen which shall follow his
colors in the (...). For no man can set up a Colors or standerd of his own,
unless he can bring into the field at his own charge a Troop or Band at the
least of fifty Gentlemen, who receive pay from him. A Baron may be created
of a Knight, or (...) of a Noble Squire, which has four Castles in his
dominion, and all (...) within himself, for then the King may confer a
Baronrie upon him: yet (...) cannot give him this honor, unless he has
behaved himself valiantly in the wars. Therefore after the first conflict or
battle he is made a Knight, (...) the second a military Tribune, and after
the third a Baron. The degree of (...) Earl is the next, and first an Earl of
the Marches, whom we call a Marq^^^, that is, Marcgrave. And he may be
created one, who has two or three B^^^nies included in one Dukedom, and that
by the Duke in whose precincts they lie. He may be made a Provincial Earl,
that is, a Landgrave, who (...) four Baronies in one Dukedom, by the Duke or
the King, by the instances permission of the Duke, He may be made a Vicount,
who has five Count^^ or more within one Dukedom, or which are joined together
by vicinitie of s^tuation. And (by the Kings permission) he may be created by
the Duke and great solemnity. But if the King himself be present the
Pnincipality is more honorable. The Duke who is to be made of an Earl, must
first possess in the Kingdom wherein he is to be crowned, four principal
Counties, and (...) have in every one of them four other Counties or Baronies,
which must (...) bound to do fealty and service to them. But he must be
crowned by the King or Emperor whose subject he is, his Hatt being adorned
with pearls and p^etious Stones, in the most flourishing City of his
territories, and that in a gi^ assembly of Princes, Dukes, Earls, and Barons,
a solemn festival being (...) held, as it is the custom at the Coronation of
Kings. He that is to be King, must have four Dukedomes lying near together
subject unto him, and in (...) Dukedom four Cities, which he alone
governs, in every one of these f^^ Cities one Archbishop, and under every one
of these again ten Provincial Bishops. He being endowed and adorned with
these dominions and dignity shall come unto the Emperors Majesty as to his
superior, or shall invite l^^^ly an honorable Embassage to come unto him, and
so desire to be crowned by hi^. But this seems to be a later manner of
electing the Kings and other Princes, for as long as those wandering Nations of
the Goths, Vandals, Longobardes, and many others did bring in their Kings with
them, they did not measure the royal dignity by large possession of lands,
but by the multitude and strength^^ the people which they brought in. Neither
was there any other choice of Dukes, who first began to be instituted by
Longinus Governor of Ravenna in the year 569, and afterward by the
Longobards, than for their valor and wi^^ achievements. Add to this that
which Paulus Aemilius witnesses, namely, that Dukes and Earls were in the
beginning made Prefects by the King over Nations and Cities on this condition,
only that as often as there was occasion they should be dismissed or changed.
Now how could the before said Laws of creating Princes (which are measured by,
and do claim the hereditarie possession of Lands) be in force at that time,
seeing Dukedomes and Counties were conferred by Kings and Emperors as a
temporary bounty? Therefore though the precise time of the Institution of them
cannot be showed (for that French Book does mention nothing of it) yet it is
very likely, that under Otto the second Emperor, or about the year one
thousand, or a little after, that manner of constituting and confirming
dignities was ordained by the Monarchs. For even until Otto the second, every
Prince according to his power and ambition, did aspire to greater dignity and
royal Majesty. So out of one Kingdom of Lotharingia or Lorreine, which being
extended from the Rhene even to the River Scaldis, was bounded with the
Friesland Sea, and belonged to Lotharius the Son of Lodovicus Pius, more
Kingdoms did afterward arise, namely the transjurane Burgundy, which being
extended from the Mountain Jura even to the Alps, did contain all Helvetia,
the Rauraci, the Allobroges, and the transjurane Burgundians: and the Kingdom
of Provence which did contain some part of Burgundy and Sabaudia, and was
afterward called the Kingdom of Arelatum, of which at this day the Elector of
Trevers is called the Archchancellour. It did also contain the Kingdom of
Lotharingia, now also called Lotharingia, and other Kingdoms between the
Rhene and Scaldis, even to the Friesland Sea; and heretofore it was called the
Kingdom of It was called Austrasia, either from one Austrasius a President,
who^ Justinian the Emperor set over this country, or from the word Auster,
because it is more Eastward than any other part of France.
Austrasia. Again, this Kingdom of Lotharingia, Charles the bald, and his
Brother Lodovick did part between them, both of them preserving the title of a
King in all places. I omit the other Kingdoms which sprung up in that age by
the desire and affectation of Sovereignty. But the Emperor Otto the second did
divide Lotharingia, having took away the name of a Kingdom, into nine
Dukedomes and Earledomes, as it were, into members pulled and separated from
the body, as Cuspinian has it, and having made a division thereof Anno 981, he
first made Charles the Brother of Lotharius King of France, Duke of that
Country which is now called Lotharingia, as Richardus Wissenburgius does
speak more at large. It seems that after that time the arbitrarie erection
and raising of Kingdoms and Principalities did fail, the Monarchs now
contriving how to establish a settled Empire, which consists in the just
proportion and harmony of its parts, as in man the parts of the body to the
head. Therefore that some order might be perpetually kept in Principality and
in government; I suppose that at length about the same time which I mentioned
before, these aforesaid Laws were devised. And so, Reader, thou have the
distinct Degrees of all the Nobility, and the differences of their dignities.
Now if thou observe how Provinces in every Kingdom are divided in respect of
them, how the government and administration of the whole, and in what
proportion it is distributed among these degrees, what is every ones peculiar
office, what is the habitude or relation which they have one to an other, and
especially to their head, you shall behold either an excellent harmony tending
to the preservation of peace and tranquillity, strength and power, riches and
state, virtue and wisdom to the Majesty of a Kingdom, and the enlarging of
territories; or a confused disorder tending to instabilitie, declination,
destruction or inundation, according as there are diverse kinds of government.
If those matters which thou shall see or judge did succeed ill, thou m^^^
consider whence that ill success proceeded; but if thou find any prosperous
and successful event, search the cause thereof, so thou shall behold which is
the best policy in governing of Commonweals, and shall study Geographie
with more profit.

An Admonition concerning the use of the Tables following.
WHen it was my purpose to reduce all Geographie to the consideration of the
Heavens, that the just symmetrie of places, as they lie in the Sphericall
figure of the Ea^^, might as near as could be observed in plano or on a plain
superficies, (...) due proportion of degrees of Longitude was to be set down,
according to the degrees of Latitude. Seeing therefore the Table could co^^^^^
but a few degrees of Latitude, I have reduced the proportion th^^ (...) almost
to the middle Parallel of the Table, so that what the propo^^^ is of that
Parallel to the Meridian, the same should be the proportion of the degrees of
Longitude in the same Parallel to the degrees of La^^tude, and so all the
Meridians are Parallels one to an other. But (...); there were more degrees of
Latitude, because there is a great distere^^ of proportion in the Parallels
both in the top and the bottom unto the Meridian, lest the symmetrie of places
should not be true, I have chosen two Parallels almost equally distant from the
middle and the extremes, to the proportion whereof, I have drawn the Meridians
to design and note out the degrees of Longitude, which are not then Parallels,
b^ according to the greater or lesser distance of the assumed Parallels, th^^
do incline more or less one to an other and to the middle Meridian (...) the
Table.

Moreover thou shall find the degrees of Latitude and Longitude designed and
set forth on the sides of the Tables, and for the most (...) the degrees of
Latitude on either side of the Table, and of Longitude on the top and bottom,
seeing according to the usual manner of Geographers we place the North on the
higher part. But if the Country to be described be more extended toward the
South and North, th^^ toward the East and West, then commonly we place the
West upward. Howsoever it be made the East and West sides shall always
represent unto thee the degrees of Latitude, the other two sides the degrees of
Longitude. And all the degrees are divided into 60 parts which they call
minutes, sometimes into single parts, when the magnitude will permit, sometimes
into two, five, or ten. This foundation being laid, we have followed the best
descriptions in delineating of Countries, in which I had much help from a
famous Measurer of Countries, and a most diligent Geographer to the King of
Spain called Christi^^ Grothenius, who had viewed many Countries, and
described them more largely and exactly than any other, and also from a most
diligent Geographer to the King of Spain Abraham Ortelius, who was candor and
courtesy it self, and who, in evidence thereof, liberally communicated unto
me what Tables soever he had gotten, though he had the same purpose that I
intended. Those who besides did help me any thing at all, I will mention in
due place, so that Students may give them their deserved praise, and I may not
be found ungrateful. And whatsoever has been offerr'd me by others, and I
found out by my own diligent search, I have compared together, that as near
as may be I might set forth accurate descriptions: yet in one thing which I
chiefly desired I am defective, namely in an exact numbering and reckoning up of
Principalities and Noble-mens places, which are much sought for in Tables that
are set forth: therefore (READER) thou must pardon that defect, and vouchsafe
to help me in describing the Political Order of the Nobility, and in
showing their places, names, and qualities, which will be an honor and grace
unto thy name. Little round circles do show the true situation of every place,
from whence their distance is to be taken, and these have some marks whereby
places are distinguished one from an other. The Villages are marked only by
round circles: where we meet with a Castle, we mark it in this manner ^,
and where with Friaries with a Cross thus: Towns have two Towers at least,
and Villages of note where Noblemen reside one. These things we observed as
notes. And we have taken easy marks for distinction, that so any may supply
those things which are omitted.

If any one would find out the Longitude and Latitude of any place, How by the
Map to find out the Longitude and Latitude.
he shall do it where the Meridians are Parallels, by taking with a pair of
Compasses the distance thereof from the one side of the Table, and by applying
the Compass so opened to the other side. If you have taken the distance from
the East side, the Compass from the same side in the North side will show the
degree and minute of Longitude. But if you have the distance from the North
side, it will show you the Latitude in the East side. When the Meridians are
not Parallels, the Latitude of a place shall be found out in the same manner,
as in universal Tables, where the Parallels are circular, for the distance of
the place taken from the next Parallel will show the same in the East side. But
the Longitude is to be sought out with a thread or ruler laid upon the place,
and turned about, until on the North and South side the same minute of the
same degree be on either side designed, and whatsoever that is, is the
Longitude of the place assumed.

The miles in diverse Countries do differ much, therefore if you please to
compare them one to an other, bring them with your Compasses to the degrees of
the Meridian, and then find out how many miles are comprehended in one degree,
and you shall see how many miles of one country, and how many miles of an
other country do make up one degree; so you shall find the common German
miles (fifteen whereof are in one degree) four times larger than the Italian
miles, and double as much to the Swethish and Westphalian miles.

Sometimes you shall find a line joined to a little Circle, thus ^ ^ ^ which
shows the name pertaining to the place, being therefore added that you may
know what name belongs to every place.

An Index of the Tables in FRANCE.
1 Gallia universalis, or France in general. 2 Brittanie, Normandy, etc. 3
Lemovicium. 4 Santonia. 5 Aquitania. 6 Provincia. 7 France, Picardie, and
Campagnia. 8 Francia. 9 Picardia. 10 Campania. 11 The Country of the
Bellovacians. 12 Bolonia. 13 Aniou. 14 The Dukedom of Berry. 15 The Dukedom
of Burbon. 16 Bourdelois. 17 The Country of Perch. 18 Touraine. 19 Poictou. 20
Cardurcium. 21 Bresse. 22 Lionnois Forest. 23 Northern Langue dock. 24
Dauphine. 25 Lotharingia the Northern. 26 -- and Southern part. 27 The
Dukedom of Burgundy. 28 The County of Burgundy. 29 Sabaudia. 30 The
general Table of Helvetia. 31 Zurich. 32 Wiflispurgergou. 33 The Lake of G^ 34
Argou. 35 Rhaetia. 36 A Table of all the Low Countries. 37 Flanders. 38 The
Eastern part of Flanders. 39 Brabant. 40 Holland. 41 Zeland. 42 Gelderland. 43
Zutphania. 44 Vltrajectum. 45 Mechlinia. 46 Groeninga. 47 Transisulania. 48
Artesia. 49 Hanonia. 50 Namurcum. 51 Lutzenburg. 52 Limburg.
FRANCE.
I Have described Spain and the special Provinces thereof, The names and
whence so called.
now passing over the Pyrenaean Mountains, France offers it self, which I
will delineate as faithfully as I can. That part of Europe which is now called
France (as many do report) was heretofore called Galatia, from Gala, (...).
which in English signifies Milk, because it produces men of a white milkie
color, for that the Mountains (for this also they add) do keep off the
violent heat of the Sun. Diodorus writes, that it had that name from Galata
the Daughter of Hercules. Others do deliver Some say it was called from the
Hebrew word Galath, which signifies Rain as if the first Inhabitants had been
so ancient a people, that they were drowned with the general Deluge.
other opinions. Ptolemie in his second Book, and other Grecians do call it
Celt^galantium. Some think it was named Gallia from Some affirm that it was
so named, because it was inhabited anciently by the Gauls, which came from
Gallatia, a Country in Asia the Less.
Gallatia, which word others derive otherwise. But these things are not of so
great moment, as that they should detain the Reader with a large discourse.
It Is certain that the name of Gallia was used by the Latin Writers, as we
shall understand more fully by that which follows. Postellus and See Montanus
upon Obadiah, verse. 20.
Arias Montanus do write, that the Hebrews did call it TZarphat. It is now
called France from the Francks, a people of Germany near the Rhene, who
possessed themselves of this Country by force of Arms: it is commonly called Le
Royaalme de France. The Grecians did call the Frenchmen in general Celtae and
Galatae: and they were also (as Josephus witnesses) heretofore called
Gomeritae. And so much briefly concerning the name. The Situation and quantity
follows. I will unfold it according to the bounds, the longitude, the
latitude, and the compass thereof. Concerning the bounds of the Kingdom of
France, on the North, on which side it looks toward the Low Countries, it is
bounded by a line drawn from Callice unto Argentoratum or Strasburg, which on
the left hand leaves Artesia, Hannonia, Lutzenburg, The Situation.
and other Countries; and on the right hand Picardie and Lotharingia: but that
part which lies against England, the great British Ocean does beat on; as
likewise on the West, making a great Bay into Aquitania. On the South, where it
cleaves to Spain, it has the Pyrenaean Mountains, and that part of the
Mediterranean Sea, which is called the French Sea. Lastly, on the East it is
separated by the Alps from Italy, by Iura from the Helvetians, and by the
Rhene from the Germans. Gallia or France (for I will use these words
indifferently) is more than 300. G. French miles long from the West straight
forward unto the East: or from the South-South-West unto the South-South-East
above 330. In breadth it is almost 285 miles; the compass of it is above a
thousand and twenty; and this is the quantity of it, the quality follows. It
lies under part of the fifth Climate, all the sixth and seventh, and part of
the eigth, between the degrees of latitude forty one and fifty three, and of
longitude 20 and 38. And although in general it lie very much open ^o the
Northern winds, yet it may be reckoned with the best Countries of Europe for
the wholesomnesse and temper of the Air. Claudianus calls it a happy Soil,
Caesar lib. 3. Bell. Civ. calls it a wholesome Soil, and Strabo the fruitful
Mother of It is supposed to contain 15 millions of living souls, Heylin. p.
76. The fruitfulness of France.
Men ( lib. 2. de Bell. Gal. The Country, for the most part, is plain, and yet
having in some places pleasant hills, and between them delightful valleys,
both of ther^ wonderful fruitful. The fields are well tilled, and do bring
for great store of Especially Picardie, and Languedock. See Johnson page 59.
Wheat and other Corn. France (as Strabo witnesses) has great store of
Corn and Acornes. There is no place unoccupied but where there are Marshes or
woods. It abounds with the be^ Wine, which they transport to Brittany,
Normandy, Picardie, Germ^^ the Low Countries, England, and other Countries
where Grapes can a^taine to no maturitie or ripeness, by reason of the
coldness of the Air. Also Athenaeus and Strabo do witness, that France had
My^ of Gold and Silver, but now they are supposed to be exhausted. T^^ part of
the Country which is occupied by tillage, does feed and b^ up all kind of
Cattle, by reason whereof it abounds with Flesh, Milk, Butter, Cheese,
Wool, and other things. The Frenchmen (...) peaceably possess all France,
under the reign of King Clodoveus, wh^ first of all was made Anno 485.
Monarch of all France, and first of all professed the Christian Faith, which
the Kings of France do use even unto the day. He did bear for his Arms the
three Heylin, page 104. out of Paradine affirms, that the Arms of France in
the days of Pharamond the first King, was Gules, three Crowns Or: but Charles
the sixth altered them to Azure 3 flower de luces Or.
Lillies or Flower de (...) which some do suppose were given him from Pezelius
Mellif hist. part. 3. page 67. proves this to be fabulous.
heaven. After him, as they write, there reigned now in a right succession, now
in a collateral Childebertus, Clotarius the first, Cherebertus, Childericus the
second, Ch^rius the second, Dagobertus Magnus, Clodoveus the second, Clotarius
(...) third, Childericus the third, Theodoricus, Clodoveus the third, Childe^
the second, Dagobertus the second, Childericus the fourth, Theodo^ the second,
and Childericus the fifth. He in the eleventh year of (...) reign, and in
the year of Christ 75, by the authority and command of Pope Zachary, (to
whom Pipine in a Book sent unto him had pai^ out his opprobrious and
reproachful life) was deprived of his Kingdom, and enforced to become a
Monk. In his place his Accuser ^pine was made King, the Son of Charles
Martel, otherwise called Because he was base Son to Pipin, who was Prefect or
Controller of the Palace to Dagobert the Great. Read Heylin p 100.
^pin, surnamed the Short, being before Prefect. After him there followed
Charles the Great, Ludovicus Pius, Carolus calvus or Charles the (...)
Ludovicus Balbus, Ludovicus the third, Charles the gross, Or Eudes.
Odo, Ch^ the simple, Rudolphus, Burgundio, Lodovicus the fourth, Clotharius,
and Ludovick the fifth, being the last of the posterity of Charles the great,
who being poisoned, the Kingdom was translated to Hugh Capet, a chief man of
France, Earl of Paris, and titulary Duke of France (...) Burgundy. After
Capet there succeeded Robert surnamed Pius, Henry the first, Philip the first,
Ludovicus the sixth, Ludovicus the seventh, Philip the second, Ludovicus the
eigth, Ludovicus the ninth, Philip the third, Ph^ the Fair being the fourth,
Ludovicus Huttinus the 10, Who caused the S^l^que Law to be enacted.
Philip the (...) surnamed the Long, Charles the fourth surnamed the Fair, who
dy^ without any male Issue Or Ph. of Valoys, in whose time was sought the great
battle of Grecie.
Philip of Valoys was chosen in his place, be^ the Son of Charles the first
Earl of Valoys. After him there follow^ In whose reign was fought the battle
of Poistesres by Edward the black Prince.
John of Valoys, Charles the fifth called the Wise, Charles Bene-natu^ the
sixth, Charles the seventh, Ludovick the 11, Charles the eigth, Ludovicus the
12, Francis of Valoys the Son of Charles the first Earl of A^lime, Who drove
Charles the fifth out of Germany.
Henry of Valoys the second, Francis the second, The Author of the great
Massacre at Paris.
Charles the ninth map of France FRANCE.
Henry the third, who being slain by the hand of a Iacobine Monk, Who also
after he had driven the Spaniard out of France, and had enjoyed about ten
years time of peace, was most villanously slain by Raviliac.
Henry of Burbon the fourth, being the Son of Anthony Duke of Burbon was
proclaimed lawful Successor to him, and the most Christian King of Navarre
and France. The Frenchmen are cheerful and inclined to wars. Concerning
their valor, it will be worth our labor to hear Strabo a skillful man, by
birth a Capadocian, by learning a Grecian, in judgment ancient, and that had
traveled through many Countries. The whole Nation (says he) of those people
which are now called the French or the Galatae, delights in Martial
affairs, and is of a courageous stomach, hot at the first onset: They are of
a courteous and fair condition, and do abhor all wicked manners; so that
being provoked by any injury, they will presently fight and quarrel, without
any respect of the danger ensuing. Also no man is ignorant how great a terror
the name of the Frenchmen was once to the Romans, the Grecians, and the
Asiaticans, when heretofore they came from their own Country to spoil and
destroy the Oracle of Apollo Pythius, unto which they resorted from all parts
of the world. Also when they took Rome and set it on fire; when they besieged
the Capitol, and when they built Cities in Italy, as Mediolanum, Comum,
Brixia, Verona, Bergomum, Tridentum, and Vincentia. France now is not so large
as it was heretofore, for that part of Italy which lies between the Alps and
Ancona was called heretofore Gallia Cisalpina, but now it is called Lumbardie:
and a great part of Belgia or the Low Countries now belongs to Germany,
which by the description of Caesar, Ptolemie, and ancient Writers did once
appertain to France. For they divided Gallia Here note, that though it be
beyond the Alps, in respect of Italy, whose Inhabitants were the original of
this name, yet in respect of us it is on this side of the Alps, and therefore
Gallia Cisalpina, as on the contrary the Italians Cisalpina is our Transalpina.
Transalpina, or that part of France which is beyond the Alps, called by
Pliny Comata, and by Ptolemy Celtogallia, into three parts, Celtica, Belgica,
and Narbonensis: Ptolemie divides it into four parts, Aquitanta, Lugdunensis,
which is the same with that which Caesar calls Celtica, Belgica, and
Narbonensis. They bounded it then with the Pyrenaean Mountains, the Rhene, the
Ocean, and the Alps, when now all that which lies from Cales Eastward, is
reckoned as part of Germany not of France; and the Germans do challenge a
great deal on either side of the Rhene. The chiefest Cities are Lutetia
Parisiorum or Paris, Massils, Narben, Lions, Pictavium, Bordeaux, Naeomagus,
Iuliomagus, Orleance, Rothomagus, Rupella, and many others, of which we will
speak more largely in the particular descriptions. The Lakes.
France has many Lakes, and the chief of them all, is that which they call in
Latin Lemanus, and the most do call the Lake of France. Concerning which,
seeing it is described in a particular Table of this Volume, I will add
nothing more in this place, but refer the Reader thither. Not far from a
Town called Bessum there is a Mountain and on it a great Lake, being so deep
that it is thought to have no bottom, no water, as far as may be discerned,
does flow into it; if any one cast any thing into it, he shall straightway
hear it thunder, and see it lighten, beside much rain and hail will fall
afterward. Not far from thence is the Lake Crypta, the round mouth whereof is
commonly called Creux de Souleis, being a deep Abyss, whose depth cannot be
found out: and if a man cast a stone into it and afterward lay his ear unto
it, he shall hear a great murmuring noise, like as if it thunderd a far
off. In the Summer time, though nothing be cast into it, yet a noise is heard
in the hollow cavernes of it. And it is supposed that there are winds in them,
which do war, as it were, one against an other. Abitacum or Avitacum, being
a place in Avernia near Claromont, is so lively described by Sidonius in his
second Book, Epist. 2. as if it were delineated in these times. Concerning the
Lake Rubressus, you may read Pomponius Mela lib. 2. in the Chapter wherein
Narbon is painted forth; Pliny calls it the Rubrensian Lake, but Strabo and
Stephanus name it Limne Narbonitis. France has innumerable Rivers both great
and little. Ausonius Eidyllio 3 does reckon up many of them, where he speaks
thus of Mosella: Non tibi se Liger anteferet, non Axona praeceps, etc.
Liger shall not prefer her self before thee,
Nor yet Axona, whose swift waters be
Still running on, nor Matrona that does glide
'Twixt France and Belgia lying on each side:
Nor yet Carantonus, the which does flow,
And back to the Santonick Bay does go:
Yea France shall make her Tarnis come behind,
Though sands of gold are unto it assigned.
And her Aturnus, though it madly run
Into the purple Sea, yet will not shun,
But first adore the River Mosel, as
Its Mistress ere 'twill to the Ocean pass.
And a little after.

Both A River breaking out of the Alps, and now called Dronia.
Druna and Druentia which does flow
'Tweene crooked banks, and so does winding go,
Shall reverence and adore thee, and so shall
The Rivers that down from the Alps do fall.
And Rodanus, who as she along does glide,
Does name that Bank which lies on the right side:
Thee with blew Lakes, with streams that greatest are,
And with Sea like Garumna I Will compare.
But the chief Rivers are Sequana, Ligeris, Garumna, and Rodanus. That which
is called in Latin Sequana, Ptolemie calls Zekouana, Strabo Zekouanos,
Stephanus Zekoanos, and Benjamin Sihan; but it is commonly called Seyne. It
rises in the Dukedom of Burgundy, and having visited Paris, where it makes
a little Isle, and Rotomagum or Roan, at last with a great mouth it breaks
into the British or Norman Sea. It has a very dangerous harbor for ships to
ride in, and it requires much care to pass out of it, or come into it. The
Normans do commonly call it la Bare: for Scyne having entered into the Sea
straight way, contrary to the nature of other Rivers, does flow back again,
rising up with a horrible noise as high as any spear. Here those that are
careless and negligent do run themselves upon unexpected dangers. The Seyne
as it runs along, does receive Nine navigable streams, says Heylin. p. 84.
diverse Rivers, of which the chiefest and most noted by the Ancients, are
Matrona, commonly called Marne, Esia, Which now they also call Isara.
Yse, commonly Ayse, Axona commonly called Ayne, Aisne or Esne. Liger, which I
named in the second place, is a River famoused by Caesar and others. It is
called Ligeros (or as it is better in some copies Ligeris) by Strabo in his
fifth Book, and by Ptolemie, but now it is called Loire and On this River
stand the City Orleans, Nantes, and many others.
Leire. The head thereof is at the Town Velaunum, which is called commonly la
Font de Leiro. It is larger than the rest, so that it is worthily called the
Father of the Rivers of France. And having run with a clear stream through
diverse Countries, (for it did anciently divide the That is, the Inhabitants of
Gallia Narbonensis, which comprehends the Provinces of Languedock, Provence,
and Daulphine, and this Country was so called from Narbone a City in
Languedock.
C^ltae from the Aquitani, as Strabo notes) it does exonerate and disburthen
it self into the Western Ocean, by a mouth almost four leagues wide, but
somewhat troubled with sands. Two leagues and a half within, there are rocks,
which are called the Hogs. It receives into it many great navigable Rivers,
as Elaver commonly called Allier, Carus now called Cher, Vigenna now Vienne,
Viane, and Vignane, Meduana now called Main, and others. Garumna follows, by
which Caesar divided Gallia from Aquitania: Strabo lib. 4. calls it Gorounas,
Ptolemie G^^na, and Frontinus Garonna, which name it still retains from its
head, even to the Castle Blavia, but afterward it is called Geronde and Gi^^^.
Gulielmus Brito calls it Gerunna. It rises out of the Pyrenaean Mountains,
not far from a Town which is commonly called Gua^^^^. And so having visited
Tholous, Bordeaux, and other places, mingles it self with the Aquitanian Sea,
by a mouth of two leagues breadth at the entrance whereof there are some rocks,
which are called the Asses. The Dutch Mariners do call the Northern side
Noorder-Esel, the Southern side Suyder-Esel, having a high watchtower on it,
which is commonly called la Tour Cordan. It receives these navigable Rivers;
Tarnis commonly called Lo Tarn, in French le Tar: Egercius, which the Vascones
do call Gers; Oldus commonly called Ooldt, or with an Article le Old; D^ranius
now sometimes called la Dordogne, sometimes Dordonne, and others. I have given
the last place to Rodanus: This River was known by all Writers both the
Greek, who called it Podanos, and the Latin. The Frenchmen call it le Rosne,
but the Inhabitants le Ros: Oppianu^ (...) Halieuticis lib. 4. and Philostratus
in the lives of the Sophisters, do call it Eridanus. Pliny writes, that it
was named from Roda a Colonie of the Rhodians in that Country. It rises not
far from the Fountains of D^nubius, Rhene, Arola, Ticinus and others, near
a Mountain which is commonly called Briga; and having entered into the Lake
Lema^^, near to the Town Nova-villa, or Neuf-ville, it runs through it, so
as it preserves its color, and so proceeding to the Town of Gene^^, it
runs afterward with a violent course into the Mediterranean Se^ with seven
mouths or inlets, as Apollonius writes in his Argonanticks, with five, as
Diodorus thinks and others; with three, as Artimedorus i^ Strabo, Pliny, and
Ammianus suppose; with two, as Polybius and Ptolemy think; with many, as Livie
wisely does report, lest he might be convinced of falsehood in a particular
enumeration: at this day the Inhabitants do name five and more, as Gras Neuf,
Gras de Orgon, Gras Paul's, Gras Grant, Gras d' Enfer, and Gras de Passon,
which being toward Massilia, Pliny calls Mossaleoticum, and Polybius
Massalioticum: Rodanus does receive Arva; and This River is called by
Marcellinus Sangona or Saugonna; by Polybius Scoras; and anciently Brigulus, as
some have written.
Araris, now called Saone or Sone; also Isaris now called Isere: also Druna,
which is now called Dronia or Drosne; and Druentia now called Durance. But so
much shall suffice concerning the Rivers for the present. The British Ocean,
where it lies against England beats on France on the North, and also on the
West, as we said before; but on the South the Mediterranean Sea: toward both
these Seas there are many famous Bays; on the Ocean side is that which
Aethicus, and others call Sinus Aquitanicus, and Lucan most elegantly calls
Tarbellicus Ancon. There are also many other famous Bays in the same Sea, in
whose inward parts are seated the Towns of Diepe, Constantia, and others.
Toward the Mediterranean Sea there are two Bays called the Greater and the
Less. That part of the Mediterranean is called the Greater, where Rodanus does
power it self into it. Marcus Portius Cato calls it Angulus Gallicus, or the
French Corner, but Lib. 26. and 30
Livie, Lib. 43.
Iustine and others call it, for the excellence of it, the French Bay. Strabo
writes that the Lesser was near the Pyrenaean Promontorie, which is called
Promontorium Aphrodisium; and this Bay Mela calls Salsus. Antoninus places
also the Gamblacian Bay in Gallia Narbonensis. France had heretofore, as also
it has now, many famous Havens, of which Lucas Aurigarius has written fully
in his fifth Chart, and the four following, the chief whereof are
Staliocanus, Vindana, Brivates and others, named by the Ancients. That which
Ptolemie calls Staliocanus, some suppose to be that of S. Paul de Lion in
Britain, but others Roscon, to whom I am induced to subscribe, because the
later is more safe and convenient than the former, for though it has the
Island commonly called De Bas lying over against it, yet it affords a safe
coming in for ships of seven Else deep. Over against the formerlyeth
threatening Taurus (an Island commonly called Le Taurean) which has innumerable
rocks lying round about it, some being hidden and some standing forth, that are
very dangerous to Mariners, except they take heed. Not far from thence in
the same Britannie toward the South, behind the bending of the Promontorie
called Gobaeum, is the Bay of Vindana, which is now called Fenstiers, or
Conquest; Iovius (though erroniously) calls it Breast; for that Haven which
Ptolemy calls Briovates, is now called Breast. Pliny makes mention also of
the Haven Zetoor, which is now called Lusson or Luxo. And of the Haven which
Ptolemie calls Santonum, but now is called la Rochelle, as Villanovanus
supposes. The Mountains and Woods now follow. Concerning the Mountains,
France is more mountainous in some places than in others. The highest parts are
Daulphine, Provincia, Subaudia, and Burgundia. The Andegavensian Country has
also some Mountains, which do run out into the borders of Brittanie and
Poictou. Ancient Writers do chiefly celebrate these Mountains of France,
namely Cebenna, Vogesus, and Iura. Cebenna is a Mountain, which, as Caesar
writes, divides those of Avergne from those of Vivaretz; Pliny calls it
Gebenna, Lucan and Ausonius do name it Gebennas, and Mela Gebennicos. The true
and genuine writing of it, as Scaliger notes in his letters to Merula, is
Cebenna with a C: for they are called at this day Montaignes de Cebenes and
Cevenes: Ptolemie and Strabo call them Cemmeni, some Latins do call them
Cebenna, Venetus calls them Cevennae, and Villanovanus calls them Montaignes
d' Anvergne: part of these Mountains is now called Tarara (as Guileelmus
Bude^^ witnesses in his fourth Book de Ass) which lies in the way to Lions;
on the top whereof there is a seat cut in a rock, into which they set those
Merchants, who have not formerly used to trade at Lions. It is commonly called
la Chere de la verite, for they are enforced to swear the truth, whether they
have ever been at Lions or not, and to promise afterward to make them a feast
in honor of the City. There is also a Mountain which Caesar lib. 4. de bell.
Gall. Lucan. lib. 1. Pliny, and others do call Vogesus. Tacitus in the first
Book of his History does corruptly call it Vocetus or Vocetius, as it is
noted by learned men. S^phanus in his fourth Book calls it by the name of
the Alps, now it is called Mont de Faucilles, and it has also other names. It
does separate Burgundy and Alsatia from Lotharingia; it does send forth the
Riv^^ Mosella, as Caesar witnesses, and infinite other Rivers, the most
where^^ do run into the Rhene. That part from whence Mosella flows is
called Kratzer: which Ortelius writes, he understood out of a Bo^^ written by
Magnus Gruberus, in which he describes Rhene: add^^^ withal, that in the
Chorographicall Table of Lotharingia, accurately delineated by Johannes
Scyllius, by the Dukes command and change, th^^ Country is called in French
Estaye, and Auff der Stay: and the f^^^ Scyllius does witness, that there
grows nothing there but the he^^^ Asarum. Vogesus in the Valley Leberia does
yield pure silver, but (...) Munster notes) not very much. I know not whether
I shall call I^^^^ Mountain of France or of Germany: heretofore it was all
of it, together with Helvetia, esteemed to be in France, but now a great parts
thought to be in Germany. The beginning thereof is placed on the confines of
Basil, near the Rhene, over against Waldzhut. It is high, and raised up with
many great stones. Caesar, Pliny, and others do mention it, Ptolemie calls it
Iurassus, Strabo Iurasius and Ioras. In our times the Inhabitants in diverse
places do call it by diverse names. Not far from the Castle of Hasburg, near
Burg, (which is a little Town, so called i^ the German Language from the Bridge
which is there built on one arch over the River Arola) it is called Botzberg,
from the Village B^^^, which, together with many orhers, is seated at the foot
of the Mountain. Munster, Scudus, Lazius, and others do think, that this
port^^^ Iura was that which Cornelius Tacitus called Vocetus or Vocetius. But
O^telius thinks, that it should be read in Tacitus Vogesus. There is also by
this part of this Mountain a great Valley called Frickthal, from a certain
Village therein of the same name. And here and there are other Valleys, as
Lauffen-thal, S. Imers-thal, and the like, but none of the^ do cross the
Mountain, so that wheresoever you would pass ove^^ you must clime very high.
Moreover between Araris and Farspurg this Mountain is called Schaffmat, which
in Latin is as much to say as O^num Pratum, or the Sheep pasture. Between
the Town Olten and the Prefectureship of Humburg it is called
Nider-Hawenstein, or the Lower-Cut-Stone, for that there is a way made through
the rocks. Between Walnburg and Balstalium it is called Ober-Hawenstein, or
the Higher-Cut-stone, where laden Carts are let down with ropes from the
steep parts of the Mountain. Toward the West it is called Wasser-val, that
is, the Ruin of Water. And as you go farther it is called by the Sabaudians
Iurten. That arm thereof which extends it self toward Basil, and near to
the River Byrsa, is called Blown; and it grows higher and ruggeder until you
come to Delsperg, where again it opens into a Plain. A little farther, as
you go to the French Monastery of Bellele, it rises again in height, and
afterward not far from thence it lesseneth and grows very low: from thence
again the Mountain extends it self from the East Westward with a stone
ridge: which (as it is reported) Julius Caesar did first make passible, by
digging, as it were, a Gate through the stones: Some do name this Gate
Pierreport, others the Rock-Gate, and some do call it Pierre-pertus, and Petra
pertusa: Merula who once passed by it witnesses, that it is truly and
accurately described by Sebastian Munster. And the same Merula mentions a
fair Inscription over the Gate, but that the letters of the first word are
more worn out than the rest. This is it, N:::.. Augusti via ducta per ardua
montis
Fecit iter Petram scindens in margin fontis.
This is the way which once Augustus made
Through this Mountain which his power obeyed.
He cut a way quite through this rocky mountain,
Even near unto the brim of a fair Fountain.
By this Fountain the Poet understands the River Byrsa, which breaks there
out of a rock with a violent stream of water. From thence Iura runs
Northwestward, between the Helvetians and the Sabaudians, and then by
Burgundia, which it leaves upon the South-Southwest (whence Caesar says in
his first Book, that Iura in two places divides the Sequani from the
Helvetians) and by diverse Lakes, the chief whereof is Lemanus, where the
Mountain of S. Claudius running far and wide, at last ends near to the
River Rhodanus. Concerning other Mountains which do also belong to France,
and namely the Pyrenaean Mountains, I have spoken in the Description of
Spain: and I will discourse of the Alps when I come to entreat of Italy. I
will therefore now speak something of the Woods in France, which are many, yet
not so great or thick of trees, bushes, and briars as in other Countries: there
are many among the A people of Gallia Lugdunensis.
Cenomanni, as Les Forests de Versay, Longoulney, Persi, Sille, Charnay,
Audain, Maine, Concise: In Lower Britain there are le Forest de Bostblanc, de
Toriant, and de Guierche: Amongst the Picts in Poictou, there are le Forest de
Mouliore, Dyne, Bresse, Ligne, and others. Amongst Bituriges in Berry, the wood
Roberto may be seen with others. And amongst the A people of Gallia
Lugdanensis.
Andegavi, there are the Forests of Loursaie and Marson. The whole Country of
Bononia is, as it were, one entire wood, the parts whereof are Le Bois de
Surene, Celles, Hardelot, Dalles, and Boursin. Among the Verumandui, not far
from Perona, there are the woods Recoigne and Bouhan. In Picardia there are
Bois de Baine, de Beaulieu, de la Fere, and de Coussi. Neither does Lotharingia
want woods, as Warned-wald, le Banbois, Bois de Mondon, de Heyde, de S. Benoyt,
de la Voyge, Mortaigne, and Doseync. In Burgundy there are many woods, whose
names I cannot now rehearse. I pass by also the other woods which are
dispersed all over France. Also for the Forest of Arduenna, the chiefest part
of it is in Low-Germany, and therefore it is to be described there, though
Claudian call it the French Wood; and Caesar lib. 6. de be^ Gall. call it the
great wood of France. Not only ancient Monuments and Records, but also
Churches, and other places dedicated to Religion, of which there is a great
number in the Cities and Towns of France, do witness, that the Frenchmen
were very much addicted to Religion, and were the chief of those that embraced
the Christian Faith. The public works.
In the City of Paris alone there are 69 Churches, but the fairest of them is
the Cathedral Church, dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary, the foundation
whereof being long before laid, it began to be built in the reign of
Ludovicus, in the year 1257, and is the chief wonder of France. It is borne
up by an hundred and twenty Pillars: the length is 174 p^ces, the breadth
threescore, and the height an hundred. The Quire is built of fair Stone, on
which are engraven diverse Histories out of the Old and New Testament. It has
in the whole compass of it 45 Chapels, strengthened with Iron Grates: the
Gates are eleven in all. On the front of the Church there are three double
Gates, beautified and ado^ned with the Statues of 28 Kings. On the sides there
are Towers, or rather Steeples, which are 34 Cubits high. The greatest Bell,
which takes its name from the Virgin Mary, requires twenty men to ring i^ and
the second thereof, when the air is clear, may be easily heard seven leagues.
It were an infinite thing to describe the other Churches which are here and in
other places, or to reckon up the Abbyes, the Friaries, the Monasteries, the
Hospitals for strangers, the Hospitals for the sick, the Hospitals for the
poor, and the Hospitals for Orphans. What should I speak of the Castles, or
of the Kings fair Palaces? What of the fair houses belonging to Noblemen and
Knights? What of the other public and private buildings? Concerning these
matters I had rather be silent than speak too little. The manner of Government.
The State of France is not Monarchical: which kind of government Aristotle
thought was most ancient and divine. The King thereof is borne, not chosen by
suffrages; and none can govern but one of the Masculine Sex, as the So called
from the words Si Aliqua so often mentioned therein.
Salick Law does require. The Subjects do so love, adore, and reverence their
King, as nothing more. The arbitrating and judging of all matters is in his
power. There is in France a College of twelve Peers, instituted by Some also
say, that these Pairries were erected by Hugh Capet, but others more truly
think the^ to be instituted by Lewis le Ieune Anno 1171, to aid and assist the
King in his Council.
Charles the great, in his war against the Saracens, and they are commonly
called les Pairs de France, because they were next and, as it were, equal in
dignity to the King. They have power to consecrate the King, and put him into
possession of the Kingdom. Six of these are commonly called Laics, the rest
are called Ecclesiastics, or Clergymen: The Laics are Dukes or Earls, as
the Dukes of Burg^^die, Normandy, and Guienne: the Earls of Campania,
Flanders, and Th^louse. The Ecclesiastics also are Dukes and Earls; the Dukes
are the Archbishop of Remes, the Archbishop of Laon, and the Archbishop of
Langers: the Earls are the Bishop of Chaulons, of Noyon, and Beav^^. There are
also eight chief Senates in France, which they commonly call Parliaments; from
which it is unlawful to make any appeal, as the Parliament of Paris, of
Toulouse, of Rotamagum or Roven, of Grenoble, of Bordeaux, of Dijon, of Aix,
and of Bretaigne. As concerning the Ecclesiastic State, there are twelve
Archbishopricks in France, to wit, the Archbishop of Lions (which is the
Primate) of Aix, of Vienna, of Rhemes, of Narbone, of Toulouse, of Bordeaux, of
Aux, of Bourges, of Tours, of Roen, The Universities.
and of Seen. There are these Universities in the Kingdom, to wit, Paris,
Poictiers, Bourges, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Nantes, Lions, Orleans, Mompellier,
Cahors, Grenoble, Valens, Rhemes, Angiers, Caen, Avenion, Dol, and Massils,
which is the ancientest of them all, and founded by the Grecians. Out of these,
as it were, out of so many Trojan Horses, an innumerable sort of learned men
both Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, and others have come forth, whom if I should
endeavor to number, I should take upon my self a great task, and should be
tedious to the Reader. The Nobility of France do in general follow the
studies of good learning, with earnest diligence and continual pains, so that
they excel in all kinds of Disciplines and Arts. You may see there those that
are of great birth, and descended of noble Families, plying their Books night
and day, and busying themselves with the sacred Mysteries of the Muses. There
are those, who, to the great admiration of those that hear them, without any
premeditation, can in an admirable method, very readily discourse or speak of
any matter that shall be propounded. There are many Libraries in this Kingdom,
especially the Kings Library at Paris, and the Library of S. Victor. The
Libraries.
That I may omit other public and private Libraries, furnished with the best
and rarest printed Books, and with the choysest manuscripts. Now I come to
speak of their manners: Diodorus and Strabo do witness, that the Frenchmen
are very sharpe-witted, and reasonable good Scholars. Symmachus in many places
does commend their studies in good letters and learning. Marcus Portius Cato,
Originum lib. 2. says, that the most part do follow two things very
industriously, to wit, Warfare and Eloquence, that we may know that the ancient
French did carry away the glory of eloquence from other Nations. Strabo does
attribute to them a courteous Nature, void of malice. Iulianus an eye witness
does report of them, that they know not how to flatter, but that they live
freely and justly with all men. Their manners.
They have no more knowledge of Venus and Bacchus than serves them for
marriages for procreation, and for the moderate drinking of their own wines.
Those things which some speak on the contrary, are to be esteemed as railing
speeches, proceeding from an envious mind. For who sees not, that has read
ancient Writers concerning the disposition of the Frenchmen, and compared it
with what it is at this present, that that is false which Servius reports?
namely, that the Frenchmen are dull-witted; and that which Julius Firmicus
annexeth, to wit, that they are blockish; and that of Iulianus, who forgetting
himself, says, that they are stupid and rustic; that of Polybius, who says,
that they do not give their minds to Learning and good Arts. That which
Diodorus, Athenaeus, and Clement Alexandrinus do avouch, namely, that they are
unfaithful, given to gluttony and drunkenness; that which Livie and Polybius
report, to wit, that they are soft and effeminate; that of Mela, who affirms,
that they are desirous of gold, ambitious, proud, and superstitious; that of
Solinus, who says, that they are vain bablers: and lastly that which Plutarch
speaks is the life of Pyrrhus, namely that they are insatiably covetous of
money. Nevertheless it is confessed, that the Frenchmen may be corrupted with
many vices, by having commerce and traffic with other Nations. Florus says
lib. 3. cap. 10. that no man can say, that the French are only fierce, seeing
they deal fradulently, and by wiles. Ammianus lib. 15. shows, that they are
quarrellous: Diodorus does reprehend the Frenchmen for their intemperancie in
speech, and also notes, that they use a short and obscure kind of Language,
that they speak many things ambiguously of purpose, that they talk much in
praise of themselves, (...) in disgrace of others, and that they are detracters
and selfe-conceited or opinionated. Strabo also notes their boasting, which is
that French ostentation which Caesar speaks of lib. 7. and is exemplified in
many of his other Books: such is the boasting of Helvetius Divicon lib. 1.
while he extols and magnifies the virtue of the Helvetians, and d^^^ upbraid
the Romans with the remembrance of their overthrow. So Vecingetorix braggeth,
in his Oration, that he alone would cause a Council to be called out of all
France, which the whole world could not resist. Concerning the Religion of the
ancient Frenchmen, and the^^ manner of worship which they used, Marcus Tullius
is not to be reg^^ded, who writes thus in his Oration for M. Fonteius, The
Frenchmen are not moved with any Religion: Let us rather hear Livie, who
though in other matters he does unjustly tax this Nation, yet he affirms,
that they are not negligent in matters of Religion: and C^^^ lib. 7. de Bell.
Gall. who knew this Nation well enough, when he says, that it was very much
given to Religion. Caesar says, that they especially worshipped Mercury: Max.
Tyrius does witness, that the Cel^^ (...) Frenchmen did worship Jupiter, and
for his sake they honored the highest Oak. Strabo testifies, that Diana had
a Temple at Mass^^^^^ Polybius lib. 8 as also Plutarch do mention, that Diana
was worshipped and adored by the Gallo-Grecians. Lactantius, Lucan, and
Minuti^^ Felix do report, that the Frenchmen had Esus or Hesus, Te^tates and
T^^nes for their Gods: which most of the Learned do interpret to be Mars,
Mercury, and Jupiter. Ausonius makes Balenus to be the French-mens God, whom
Herodian calls Belis, the same perhaps with th^^ which Tertullian calls
Tibilene, whom the Greeks and others think to be Apollo. Also the Frenchmen
did worship Abellio, of which, as Joseph Scaliger, writing to Ausonius, lib. 1
cap. 9. notes, there do still rem^^^^ some monuments. And Lucian reports,
that they did worship He^^les by the name of Ogmius. Athenaeus writes, that
when the anci^^^ Gauls worshipped their Gods, they did turn themselves to the
right hand. They did offer humane sacrifices to their Gods, especially to Mo^,
as Caesar witnesses. But they never offered any sacrifice without their
Druides, as Diodorus witnesses. These Druides were Priests, heretofore much
esteemed by the Frenchmen, as also their Bards were, of wh^^ Lucan thus
writes: Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas, etc.
Then you that valiant souls and slain in war
Do celebrate with praises that still are
Immortal, so that virtue never dies,
You Bards securely sung your Elegies.
You Druides, now freed from war, maintain
Your barbarous Rites, and sacrifice again.
You what heaven is, and Gods alone can tell,
Or else alone are ignorant; you dwell
In vast and desert woods: you teach no spirit
Plutoes pale Kingdom can by death inherit.
They in an other world inform again,
Death long life's middle is (if you maintain
The truth) the Northern people happy are
In this their error, whom fear greatest far
Of all fears incures not, the fear of death;
Thence are they prone to war, nor loss of breath
Esteem, and they do think it is a shame
To spare a life that will return again.


And so much concerning the French-mens Religion, now let us add something
concerning their customs and fashions: Livie testifies, that the Frenchmen
do come to Council in Armor; Strabo writes, that it was the manner of the
French Councels, that if any one did interrupt a Suitor, a public Officer went
to him, and drawing out his sword, did threaten him, and command him to keep
silence: and if he did not then hold his peace, the Officer did in the same
manner as formerly, the second and third time; and lastly he cut off so much of
the Interrupters cloak, so that the rest was good for nothing: Caesar says,
that the French-mens Councels are rash and sudden, and that they are
unconstant in Council, and desirous of innovation. The same Caesar notes,
that the Frenchmen, when any matter of note happens, are wont by a speedy
way, to notify it unto the Countries round about, and that is by acclamations
and shouting with the voice, for from them the others receive it, and they
again by the same means make it known to their neighbors. They do not
suffer their Children (says Caesar) when they are grown to ripeness of
years, to come unto them openly, because they should not neglect the service
of the wars: and they think it an unseemely thing for the Son in his
Childehood to sit in public in the sight of his Father. The men do make their
wives a dowry according to the portion which they receive with them, both
which are put into one stock, so as that which arises from it is kept to their
use: and which soever of the parties does outlive the other, he or she has
both parts with the use and profit which has arisen from thence. The French
women are beautiful, and like men for strength and stature, as Diodorus says;
they are fruitful, and when they bring forth children, they give them good
education. Servitude was usual in France according to the manner of other
Nations. And Caesar says, lib. 6. that the most of them when they are
oppressed either with debt or by great taxes, or by the power of great men,
they betake themselves to the service of Noblemen, who have as much power over
them, as Masters have over their Servants: yet they use them with more humanity
and courtesy than the Romans did. For the French Lords had these Servants, or
(as Caesar calls them by a French word) Ambacti, who attended or them to
increase their train, and they used them in service of war. Moreover they
commonly used (as Diodorus witnesses) thick earthen Cups, and wrought with
flowers on them. They did all suppe sitting not on seats but on the ground,
upon the skins of wolves and dogs spread thereon, the younger youths serving
them at meat. And near unto them there was a fire made, and pots of flesh set
thereon, especially with Swines flesh both fresh and salt. But for the most
part, as Stra^^ writes, their meat was Milk. Athenaeus thus delivers his
mind out of Posidonius concerning this Nation: The French use to drink upon a
little hay spread under them, having little wooden Tables before them. Bre^^
(which, as Pliny notes, they make light with leaven) is there a comm^^ food.
They use much roasted and broyled flesh: and they take up whole joints (...)
both hands like Lions, tearing them in pieces with their teeth, and that wha^
they cannot pull in pieces, they cut it with a little knife. Those that live
(...) Rivers or the Seacoasts have fish as a common service at their Table,
wh^^^ they broyle on fire with salt, vinegar, and cummin, which they put also
in (...) drink. And a little afterward he says, The rich and wealthy men do
dri^^^ wine which is brought out of Italy or out of Massilia, and that either
pure by it self, or sometimes mingled with a little water. But Pliny reports
lib. 22. cap. ult. that they make a kind of drunken drink of fruit. Diodo^^^
says, that they made a drink of Barley, which they called Zythum, and an
other of water and honey. Their Habit.
Concerning their habit, they wore a kind of Cassock, as Strabo notes, woven
of thick wool, this Garment they called Laena, by which is meant, as Joseph
Scaliger does note, those garments which the Frenchmen do now call
Lansanguies, quasi Laurangis, from the figure of a Laurel or Bay-leafe, which
is like unto a Rhom^^^, The French did use loose or strait Breeches, which
Tacitus calls a barbarous covering. Strabo says, that the French in stead of
Cloakes used to wear short Coats that reached down but to the buttocks: the
shape of which Garment may be seen in that which Germans commonly call
Pallatrock, or by contraction Palt rock. Diodorus says, that they use to wear
Rings on all their fingers, and without distinction: Pliny in his natural
History lib. 33. cap. 1. says, that they wore them only on their middle
finger. But of these things enough, I come to the particular parts of France.

BRITANY, NORMANDY, and BELSIA.
BRITANNIA, commonly called Bretaigne, did receive both name, Laws, and
Inhabitants from the Britains, who being driven out of their Country by the
Saxons, seated themselves there, in the reign of Vortigerne, The Country
whence so called.
by whom they were called from thence to aid him against the Scots. It may
be, that before this time there were some Colonies of Britains in this part
of France, which being then increased by the exiles and banished men of
Britain, they used the same violence to the Aremoricans which they had
suffered at home, and expulsed them, as Scaliger says in his Description of
Cities, Vicit Aremoricas animosa Britannia Gentes,
Et dedit imposito nomina prisca jugo.
The Britains the Aremoricans orecame,
And gave unto the Country their own name.
From these Armoricans, the Country was heretofore called Armorica, especially
that part of it which lies toward the Sea, and is now called Lower-Brittany:
For, as Camden witnesses, Armor does signify, in the ancient British Speech,
that which lies near or upon the Sea. On the East it has Normandy, and the
Cenomani Inhabitants of Le Maine, and the Andegavenses Inhabitants of Aniou:
The Situation.
and on the South it has Poictou: the other sides are enclosed with the
British Sea. It runs forth into the Sea far beyond all the other
Provinces, like a Peninsula, whence it is not unfitly called the Horn of
France, and does resemble the shape of a shooe-sole, the exterior part whereof
being round looks toward the Sea, the inward part toward the Mediterranean.
The length thereof is six days journey, and the breadth thereof three. It is
a pleasant and fruitful Country. The fruitfulness of the Soil.
It has many fair meadows and Pastures for Cattle to graze in: and also
veins of Silver, Iron, and Lead. The Britains grew on a sudden so
powerful, that they opposed the Goths, and hindered them from taking
possession of all France; for their King Riothimus brought 12 thousand
Britains to aid the Romans against the Goths, as Iornandes reports.
Callimachus also witnesses, that they were at the Battle against Attila. And
a weighty argument to prove the power of the Britains is, that the Kings of
France granted this Country (of the conquest whereof they despaired) to the
Normans, as being more accustomed to war, to subdue and conquer it. The
ancient Government.
Neither did this counsel want good success: for the fierceness of the
Britains was taken off by the Normans sword, and so it became to be obedient
to them, whereas it was subject before to the Kings of France. Afterward it
had Dukes of its own; the last of them was Duke Francis, who dying in the
year 1490, left one only Daughter to be t^^ inheritrix thereof. She being
betroathed to Maximilian Archduke (...) Austria and King of the Romans, passing
through France, was taken a way by Charles the eigth, who afterward married her:
by which marriage Britain was annexed to the Crown. It is now twofold, the
Higher and the Lower, that being near to Liger, this to England; and it is
otherwise called Ripiensis. The Cities.
The Metropolis of the Higher Britain is the City commonly called This City
is by some called also Corbilum.
Nantes, Ptolemie calls it Kondiovi^^^ Nannetum, as Joseph Scaliger and others
do think. It was heretofore the Seat of the Dukes of Britain having the
title of a County, and (...) belongs to the Dukes eldest Son. It is
situated near Liger, and (...) other little Rivulets in a convenient place, not
far from the Sea, being a Bishops Seat, as also the four other Towns
following, Vrbs Red^ca or Rhenes, Condate Redonum, as Ptolemie calls it, and as
Antoninus C^^date: Dolum, now a Town, but heretofore a Castle commonly called
Dol or Doul, and Fanum Briocense commonly called S. Brien, a fa^^ Town where
there is a high rock which affords an harbor for ships, and a Castle built
thereon for the defense of the City. There is moreover the Town of Sanctus
Machlovius, called in their own language S. Malo: And Dina a very fair Town,
which the Dukes of Britt^^^ sometime much delighted in. There are also other
Towns of Highe^ Brittany as Rieulx, Chasteau-briant, Lambellum, Vitray, Iugon,
S. A^ll^^ du Cormier, Montcontour, Plerel, Iocelin, Malestroit, Pontigni, S.
Julian, and Encenis: Lastly toward Poictou, Clisson, RaiZ, and others. In the
Lower Britain there are these famous Towns and Cities: Venetia now called
Vannes, Fane de S. Paul, S. Paul de Leon, Triguier, Blavet, Morl^^^,
Quimpelray, Conquerneaux, Quimpercorentin, S. Renant des bois, and others. The
Dominions are the County of Montford, the Vicountship of R^b^^, and Grello,
The Rivers.
the principal place thereof is Chasteau Andron. Also the Country of Gueel,
Baignon, Montfort, and Vannetais. The Rivers of Britain are Liger, The Sea.
Rausa, Ella, and others. The British Sea is fit for traffic, and out of it
the Inhabitants do extract salt, which being hardened in the Sun, The Havens.
they sell to the neighbour-countries. As for the Havens, besides the
abovenamed Cities and Towns, these Towns do afford the most convenient, to
wit, Breast, Ancrayum, Hancbont, and Pontsecrot, where great plenty of Oysters
are gotten. The Archbishop of Dol has these Bishoprics under him, the
Bishopric of Nantes, of Vannes, of S Brien, in which three they speak both
the French and the British Speech: also the Bishopric of Cornovaille, S. Paul
de Leon, and Triguier; in which the British Speech, which they call Briton
Britona^^ is in use, which they suppose was the Language of the ancient
Trojanes. Also the Bishoprics of Saint Malo, Rhenes. All the Inhabitants have
not the same cheerfulness of mind, Their manners.
nor the same courtesy: the most of them are wary and desirous of gain, and
they are wont to debate of weighty matters amongst their cups.

Normandy whence so called.
NORMANDY was so called from the Northern people, for N^^ in the German Speech
signifies the Northern part of the world, and Man joined with it is as much to
say as the North-men. It is a Country of France which was given as an
habitation to men that came from the map of Britain, Normandy, and Belsia
BRITANY, NORMANDY, and BELSIA.
Northern part of the world out of Denmark and Norwey, the inc^^sions of the
Normans into Germany and France are signs hereof. Normandy is divided on the
West from Britain by the River Crenon, The Situation.
on the North it is bounded with the Ocean, on the South with the Cenoma^ that
inhabit Le Maine, and on the East it has France properly so called, from
which it is divided by the River Epta: All the Country therefore does not
belong to Gallia Lugdunensis, but some part of it does appertain to Belgia. A
good footman can scarce travel over it in six days. It is a fruitful
Country, and has abundance of Corn, besides plenty of Apples and Pears,
The fruitfulnes of the Soil.
that the Inhabitants do make their drink of them, and transport them to
foreign Lands: there are also gre^^ store of Cattle. Rollo a Norman, making
cruel inrodes and incursio^ into those parts of France which are near the He
so plagued and ransacked the Sea-Townes, that it was inserted in the Letanie,
From plague, pestilence, and the fury of the Normans good Lord deliver us.
Seacoast, and from thence into those which lie more inward, brought Charles
the Si^pe the King of France into so great a strait, that he married his
Daughte^ Gilla to Rollo, being converted to the Christian Faith, and gave him^
West-rich for her Dowry, besides a great part of Britain. He it was that
was created the first Duke of Normandy. The chief City of it is Rotomagum
commonly called Roan or Roven. It is seated by the River Sequana or Seyn on the
South, and this River brings up great ships, (...) the great increase of
traffic; on the East it has the lesser Rivers ^^^cus and Aubetta; and on the
North it has fair fields, meadows, and high mountains. The Seyne here has a
fair Bridge over it, curiously and artificially built, so that it is as great
a wonder as any in France (...) it is built of Freestone, and has strong
Pillars and fair Arches, very broad and high, to the number of thirty and one.
This City is fam^^s for the Archbishopric and Parliament held there. There
are also these Towns, Aurenches, Eureux, Bayeux, Sais, Constances, Lisieux,
Al^^^^, Aumale, Longue-ville, Eu, Harcourt, Tancarville, Maleurier, Mortam,
M^gomery, Thorigni, Gisors, Caulx, etc. Some make Normandy twofold, the
Higher and the Lower. In the higher there are three Dukedomes, Alencon, Aumale,
and Longue-ville. The Counties are Eu, Har^^^^, Eureux, Tancarville, Maleurier,
Mortaine, and Mongomme^^. This Memandie does also contain that part of the
Country which is commo^^^ called Vult, in which is Gisors or Caesortium the
Metropolis of the C^^^tie, and the Baronie le Aigle. The Lower is divided into
lesser pa^^s which are thus called, Caulx, Bession, Constantine, Hovivet,
Royau^^^ Yvetot, The Ecclesiastic State.
and Le vaulx de Vire. In Normandy is the Archbishop of (...) under whom are
these Bishops, the Bishop of Sais, of Constances, of L^eux, of Aurenches, of
Baieux, and of Eureux. All the Country is naturally hot, and subject to no
foreign Laws: They live according to their own Customs, Their Government.
which they very stiffely defend. They are very cunning and contentious, but
otherwise given to Learning and Religion.

BELSIA, commonly called La Beausse, is a very dry Country, and wants water
very much; yet it is fruitful, and has abundance of Corn: The fertility of
the Soil.
It is threefold, the Higher, the Midlemost, and the Lower; the Higher being
called Le haut Beausse, begins at a Village which is commonly called Ablys,
reaching to the Country of the Carnutes or Carnoti, and farther. There are in
it the Country of the Carnutes, The Situation
the Dukedom of Andegavium or Aniou, and the County of Perch. The Territory
of the Carnutes, commonly called the Country of Chartrain, cleaves on one
side to the County of Perch, and on the other sides to the Dukedom of
Orleance. It is inferior to no other part of France, both for fruitfulness
and pleasantness, for it abounds with all kind of Corn, Fruit, and
Cattle, and is not wanting in Wine. The chief Town is called Carnutum,
Ptolemie calls it Antricum, The Cities.
but now it is called Ch^tres. To this Territory are wont to be reckoned the
Counties of Dr^ux and Montfort, wherein are two Towns of the same names. The
Dukedom of Andegavium has an especial and peculiar Table to it self. The
County of Perch is divided into two parts, the one whereof is called the
Lower, commonly le Perch Govet, the chief Town whereof is Nogent Retrou: the
second is called the Higher, in which is the Town Mortaigne. The third is the
Middle, which lies on either side of the Banks of Liger, from Roven to
Vendomium or Vendosme; and from hence on the right hand Bank of the same River
Liger it extends it self from Castellodunum even to the Country of
Touraine. It excels the other parts of Belsia in fertility. Lower Belsia
remains. It is all Field-ground and plain, abounding with Corn, so that it
is accounted the Barn or Storehouse of France. It was anciently called
Genabum, but in these times Aurelia, for that in the year 276. The Emperor
Aurelius built it out of the ruins of old Genabum.
It lies between the Bishoprics of Orleance and Chartres, and runs out
from the Town Estampes toward the East to Sens, and on the South to the Bridge
of Orleance. In this Country is Aurelia commonly called Orleance, being
situated near the River Liger. It is honored with the title of a Dukedom,
and adorned with an Universitie. Here are also the Territories of Lorriacum
and Solonium, and the Archbishopric of Tours, which has under it the Bishop
of Le Man's and Angiers: As for the Bishops of Chartres and Orleance, they are
under the Bishop of Sens in Campania.

LEMOVICIVM
LEMOVICIVM was so called from the chief City (...) movicum; The names, and
whence so called.

The Situation.


but it is not known from whence the (...) thereof is derived. Some do
refer it to Lemovices, (...) first establisher of this Country. It is
commonly ca^ Pais ou compte de It is called Limosin, quasi in limo sita.
Limosin. On the North and North (...) side of it lies Berry; on the East
Burbon, on the South and South (...) Arvernia, on the West and West-South-West
Pericors: and lastly o^ North-West Poictou. There is a great ancient Elm
standing N^ward between the Village called La Maison Nefue (from the new (...)
that is in it) and Argentonium (a Town of Berry) toward the No^ which does
bound and limit four Countries, Berry, Burbon, Arv^ and Lemovicium, so that it
is reported, that the four Princes of (...) Countries did here talk and
confer together, and every one of the stood in his own Territory. The Soil
is not every where eq^ fruitful, The quality of the Soil.
being, for the most part, somewhat barren, yet it produces (...) kind of
fruits, especially Wheat, Barley, a kind of Grain (...) Panicum,
Chesse-nuts, and Wine, but of an inferior small kind, ye^ the lower parts of
Lemovicium they have a richer sort. Some (...) have the Lemovicians (for so
Pliny calls the ancient Inhabitants, wh^ Strabo calls Lemobikes, and
Ptolemie Lemovikoi, from the City L^vick) to be the native and ancient
Inhabitants of this Country, and (...) make Lemovices to be their Founder,
being descended from the G^ritae or Galatae, The ancient Government.
as some do think. Some do suppose, that he was (...) the blood of the
great Lybian Hercules, who when he had come thre^ Spain, and passed over the
Pyrenaean Mountains, lived a while in Fr^^ This is peculiar to this Province
only of all France, that whereas W^ters do only name other Provinces of
France, and do not ment^ from whence the people of the Cities were so called,
here the conu^ happens: for Caesar makes mention of the Lemovitians and
their ^tie, and writes, that they were the first that yielded unto him, for
the (...) were lovers of peace, and haters of discord. But after that the
Le^^^cians had made a league with Caesar, they obeyed a Prince who was jo^ned
in confederacy with the Romans, to whom they were subject u^ the Goths did
repel them, and possessed all Aquitania. They write the the Frenchmen
afterward, having driven out the Goths, did govern (...) Lemovicians, and did
set Earls and Dukes to rule over them, the one (...) manage their Battles, the
other to administer Justice. The most (...) divide Lemovicium into two parts,
the Higher and the Lower. Le fl^ and bas Limosin. The Higher (which is properly
called Limosin) is plai^ than the lower part, The Cities.
and the Metropolis thereof is Lemovicum. So man do think that A. Hirtius did
call it lib. 8. de Bello Gallico, but now it (...) called Limoges: Fulvius
Vrsinus calls it Limonum, by the authority (...) ancient Books; Ptolemie
calls it Ratiaston in Aquitania, as Joseph Sca^ writing to Merula supposes,
Villonovanus also assenting to him. (...) Bertrandus thinks that it is called
Rahastum in stead of Raiz, by the (...) map of Lemousin ^EMOVICIVM.
finitie and likeness of names. This City is seated partly in a Vale, and
partly on the top of a little Hill, being well fortified with a Castle, and
strong Walls: it has abundance of water, which springs from a clear
Fountain in the higher part of the City. This City is the Nurserie of
diligence and industry, and the prisonhouse of sloth and idleness. The women
do honor and much esteem of chastity and mercifulness. It is the Seat of
a Bishop. Here are also other Towns, which in the Language of the Inhabitants
are called La Soubsterraine, L^ Boisson, Barat, Dorat, Consolat, and others,
which for brevities sake I omit. Amongst them Chassusio is not to be forgotten,
as being famous for the yearly Faires of Cattle and horses, which are kept
there on Saint Georges day. There are also Abbeys in this hither part of the
Country, amongst the which are the Abbeys of Grandimont, and S. Leonard. The
lower part of Lemosin, being more mountainous than the higher, is properly
called La March de Limosin, limited with Avernia and Perigort. The chief
City thereof is Tutela or Tulla, commonly called Tulle, being situated in a
rugged mountainous place; and being the Seat not only of a Bailiffe, but of a
new Bishop, built out of the ruins of an old Monastery. In Latin he is
called Tutelensis Episcopus. There is also Vsarche or Vsarche, a pleasant
Town, having a sweet Air, and seated near the River Vezer. Fame boasts,
that this Town is impregnable, and that it cannot be taken; whence there is a
Proverb, Cui Vsarchae est d^mus, arcem eum possidere in Lemovicum ditione: i.
He that has an house in Vsarcha, has, as it were, a Castle in the Country
of Lemosin. Histories do speak much of the virtue of the Citizens, and do
report, that they resisted the English, even when they conquered all Aquitania,
and that they remained constant and faithful to their Prince the King of
France. There is the Town Briva, seated on the pleasant and fertile Plain,
environed with woods, and having many Vineyards: It is the Seat of a
Chancellor. Heretofore, it is thought, it belonged to the Country of
Perigort, and that Charles the sixth King of France did joyce it to Limosin.
There are also other Towns, as Treignac, Donzenac, Alessac, The Families.
Bellus-locus, Meissac, Vsset, and Bello-mon. There are many illustrious
Families in this Country; The Nobles.
in the Higher there are the Families of Pi^^re-Bussire, Chasteau-neuf, and
Carsic, which are honored with Vicountships, also Roche. Covart which is one
of the ancientest Families in Aquitania, Maygnac, and others. In the lower part
is Pampadoura, Aument, Roffignac, San-Iala, Gemma, and infinite others. The
Inhabitants of L^movicium are very sparing in their meat and drink, Their
manners.
being content with a little; they hate dainty meats, but are great eaters of
bread, so that the Proverb says, A Lemovician is a Bread-devourer. In the
Villages they do not use to drink Wine. They are industrious, ingenious, and
wary, as being very provident in all things. The Common People are covetous,
and sluttish in their houses; the Nobility are magnificent, of a high spirit,
and liberal. The most of them do live until they be very old, for there are
those which do see their Grandchildrens Children. They say, that here near
Cousins, without any dispensation from the Pope, do marry amongst themselves,
and do not part their goods Belleforestius writes, that he saw Families, in
which a hundred linkt together by the affinity of marriage did live together,
so that they seemed to be like Colleges. I will here add for conclusion that
which Johannes Puncteius writes concerning the original of the Lemovicians.

Ecce Lemoviculae seeds gratissima genti, etc.
Behold the Lemovicians pleasant Seat
In forty five degrees and half complete
Of Latitude, which does it self stretch forth
To take a view of the cold frozen North.
The Longitude even from the setting Sun,
Stretching it self toward the East, does run
As far as the Avernian Mountains, and
Touches beside the Biturigian Land.
But where that Phoebus dips his horses in
The Sea, till they to plunge therein begin,
Angolmum it does view, and does behold
Part of Pictavia: as toward the cold
North, on the Biturigians it confines;
And Southward to the Petragorians joins,
With whom in manners they do more agree
Than with the others that their neighbors be.
Fair Aquitania does contain this Land,
Which for good manners comes behind none; and
Vienna, that does from the Mountains flow,
Waters the upper grounds as it does go
With winding streams, which run out many ways,
While thousands of fair kine do by them graze:
This the Inhabitants in their speech do call
Vigana, which from thence does headlong fall
By Lemovicium's City, which does lie
Part in a Vale, part on a Hill so high,
Where Saints do glory in its Churches state,
Which unto holy Stephen's consecrate.
Fame does report, that Frenchmen of the line
Of Gomer held this Country at that time,
Nohemus off spring troops of men did lead,
Which into diverse Countries they did spread:
From thence the true original then came
Of Lemovicians, who never changed their name,
Unless you will have the Phrygians for to change
Their Seats, while they did with Alvernus range,
And Limovices for to find new land,
And ease their grief which they at home sustained.
The Soil is barren whence no fruit does grow,
And no fair swelling Rivers in it flow.
It flourishes with men that in it are,
And is enrich't with many kinds of ware.
The Land is strong in Arms, and heretofore
The valiant English could not pass it over,
But were enforced on the mountains high
The French-mens quick resisting force to try:
Yea this same City valiantly sustained
The Visigothian siege, and honor gained:
Nor could the English furious attempt
Oppress it, when to take it they were bent:
And after threescore years were past, the Town
And walls thereof decayed, there were shown
Many strange Relics which most ancient were,
For some the face of Senators did bear.
And quicksilver even by the Pensils Art,
Or by Perillus skill, did there impart
Much grace unto the halfe-consumed eyes
Of the dead statue which unmoved lies.
Moreover, for the walls on Southern side
A Lioness in shape may be espied.
Who folding two whelps with her crooked feet
Has these three Verses underneath her writ.
The Lioness does cruel Dukes bring forth, and also crown,
The mad and wily offspring does this nurse oppressing frown,
But suffers underneath the weight wherewith he is pressed down.
SANTONIA: OR LE PAIS DE XAINGTONGE. THE ECCLESIASTICAL STATE.
Santonia has a Bishopric, namely of XAINTOGNE.
SANTONIA, called commonly Le Pays de Xaintogne, or Xaintongeois, and by the
ancient Inhabitants the Santones, the Marshalship of Guienna, has on the North
Poictou, The Country whence so called.
on the East Limosin and Perigort, on the South the River Garumna, and on the
West the Ocean, The Situation.
where are the Islands commonly called Les Isles d' Oleron, in which there are
great store of Cunnies and Hares. Heretofore the bounds of Santonia were
larger, which we may collect out of the Author of the Ephemerides concerning
the French war, who writes, that it reached almost to the borders of
Tholous; and that in the geeat war against Caesar, the Council of the
Princes of France did command, that twelve thousand men should be levied out
of it, when eight thousand only were levied out of Poictou, and ten thousand
out of Lemosin. The Country of Santonia does abound with Corn and Wine, The
fruitfulness of the Soil.
and it is counted one of the best Countries in France, as sending forth many
commodities into Spain, England, and other Countries. The Santones were
formerly seated here, for Caesar with others mentions them lib. 1. de Bello
Gallic. In some of his Books they are called Xantones: In his second Book he
calls them Santoni; and lib. 3. de Bell. Civili, Santonae: Strabo calls them
Santonoi, and Ptolemie Santoones, as Stephanus writes. The chief City of
this Country is Santonum, which in the native Language is called Saints, by a
plural termination, as all the other French Towns which end in S, namely
Paris, Rheims, and others. It was built by the ancient Frenchmen; and no doubt
but that Town which was anciently called Mediclanum is this Xantonum or
Santonum: for Antoninus calls it Mediolanum Santonum: the Itinerarie Table
corruptly calls it Mediolanum Saneon, and Strabo and Ptolemie call it
Mediolanon. Besides, there are diverse things which show the antiquity thereof,
as first many pieces of ancient walls standing here and there; also famous
Amphitheaters without the walls toward the West; thirdly in the Bridge over the
River This River is called by Ptolemie Canentelum.
Caroutonum or Charente, which flows by the City, there is an old arch with
a double inscription, on one side whereof there are these words, Caesari Nep.
Di^ Iulii Pontifici Auguri; on the other are some letters which are almost
worn out, so that nothing can be gathered from them. Lastly there (...) many
ruins of an Aquaeduct in the high way from Mediolanum to A^geriacum. This
City is called Santonus by Ausonius in his 23 Epistle, (...) also by Lucan (if
I be not mistaken) lib. 1. And the same Auso^^ calls the people Santones,
Epist. 14. and 18: as also Tacitus lib. 5. (...) August. and Sidonius
Apollinaris lib. 7. Epist. 6. It was called Me^num, for that the Frenchmen (as
T. Livius does witness) did build in the Country of the Insubres or
Mediolanenses, which is very likely, t^^ I may not say certain with Causabone.
If Strabo had more diligen^ considered and beheld the Country lying round
about this City, he would not have said, that it is sandy and barren, but
that it is rich (...) fruitful. The City is situated by the fertile River
Carantonum, which rises in a place commonly called Charemac, between the
Towns ^moges and Angoulesme. It is an Episcopal City, whereof Belleforre^
numbreth 63 Prelates: S. Eutropius was the first, being sent thither (...) S.
Clement. And he, after he had converted this people to the Ecclesiastical
Faith, suffered Martyrdom under the Emperor Domi^ The last is called by
Belleforestius Tristamus Bisetus, or Tristand de (...) There is in this City
the Monastery of the Friars of the blessed Vl^ founded by Godfry Earl of
Santonia, and his wife Agnes Anno 10^ The thirtieth Bishop of Santonum, being
called Petrus Confoulanti, (...) build and reedifie the Bishops house in the
year 1102, and caused ^^wals of the Cathedral Church to be repaired. After
Mediolanum (...) as some Latin Writers do call it Santonia) follows Rupella,
called (...) their Language la Rochelle. This seems by the description of
Ptole^ to be called Zantonoon akron, or Promontorium Santonum; but it is call^
by Villanovanus This City is called by some Maluason.
Blaye, which is interpreted Santonum Portus. The City is seated in the most
fertile part of all France, near the Bay of the Sea, which has twice a day
the Sea ebbing and flowing in it. It is (...) ancient, but lately built by the
Kings of France, in regard of the comm^ditie of the Haven, and to repress the
invasions of Pirates, who (...) waste the whole coast of Armorica. The
conveniencie of the Haven (...) is so great, that the Citizens may have
commerce with all Nations (...) Europe, and wage war both by Sea and Land
against their enemies for it is capable of many ships, it has a great
conveniencie for their ^ing in and coming out, and is a safe and excellent
harbor for ther^ This City is thought to be impregnable by the strength of
man, for great Bay of the Ocean does fortify the South side thereof, the No^
side the marshes and boggie places (commonly called Salantes) (...)
strengthen: and the other parts are fortified with walls, ditches, tow^ and
strong Forts, which have several names, so that no Ordnance, (...) Cannon can
make a breach into it. It is a free City, which former Pr^ces and others have
adorned with many and great immunities and privileges, and especially those
which belong to Sea affairs, for the C^tizens choose a Mayor and Aldermen out
of their own Corporati^^ which govern the City, and they are not compelled
to admit of (...) Their freedom is now lost for they were lately compelled by
the now King of France to receive a Garrison of Soldiers in the City, and to
undergo the yoke of subjection.
foreign government, neither are they kept in awe by any Garrison^ map of
Santonia ^ANTONIA.
Soldiers. Rochelle did sustain a grievous seige, in the 1573, by Henry of
Valois Duke of Anjou, and afterward King of Poland and France, of whom all
Historiographers do make mention. In this siege, he did use the thunder and
lightning of Ordnance both by Sea and Land, as also furious assaults, storms
of shot, scaling Ladders, underminings, and all manner of engines which could
be invented or used. And on the besieged side, you might have seen men,
women, and children with great courage of mind the sustain the furious
assaults of their enemies, and with constancy and cheerfulness repair the
ruins of the walls, keep down those that would have ascended up, drive back
their enemies to their trenches, pursue them, and at last fight it out, for the
most part, with good success. Moreover you might have beheld them wearying the
besiegers with daily sallying out upon them; and lastly subsisting after nine
assaults, in which though their enemies did fight valiantly, yet they were
enforced to retire with great loss. At length the Ambassadors of Polonia
coming the 15 of June, that they might bring with them Henry Duke of Anjou,
whom the States of the Kingdom had chosen for King, God used this as a means
to free Rochelle, being now exhausted and drawn dry of Corn, and being
weakened in warlike fortifications, besides the loss of many thousand men, for
now the King by Articles of peace confirmed by his royal solemn edicts did
grant, the Rochelle, Montalban, Nemansum, and other Cities which did defend
themselves, should be free to use their own Now the Rochellers are compelled
by the now King of France, to exercise their Religion without the City.
Religion, such an eve^^ had this grievous siege, which endured almost for
seven months. In which time more than twenty thousand men perished in
conflicts, sallies, besieges, by wounds, hunger, and sickness. Rochelle is a
consta^^ Seat for presidiall Senators, and other Lawyers. The other Cities
and Towns of note in Santonia, are commonly called S. Iean d' Angely, (...) or
Pont l' Oubleze, Blaye, Taillebourg, Borbesieux, Brovage, and Iosac, S. I^^^ d'
Angely, otherwise called Angeliacum and S. Ioannes de Angeria, is a new City,
although it be one of the speciallest and greatest of all S^^nia. It renewed
its name from an Abbey, which was built in that place, to the honor of S. John
the Baptist; the foundation whereof happened to be in the reign of King Pipin,
who kept his Court in the Palace of Angeria, near the River commonly called
Boutonne, in the Country of Alnia; for hither (as they say) came certain
Monks out of the Holy Land, who brought with them the head of S. John Baptist,
by whose coming, the King obtained a famous victory over his enemies, and
therefore in remembrance thereof he built in that place where was the Palace
of Angeria, the Abbey of Saint John, there placing religions men, and endowing
them with great revenues, that they might there devote themselves to the
service of God: now by this means people flocking thither, and building round
about the Abbey, by degrees it began to be a City, as it is now at this day,
and was called by the name of S. John. All these things happened about the
year of our Lord seven hundred sixty eight, while Pipin waged war against
Gaifer King of Aquitania, whom he overcame, as it may be read in the History
of the Foundation of this Abbey. This City the Duke of Andegavium or Aniou did
besiege in the year 1569, and it was yielded to him after 50 days siege, the
King granting the Citizens these conditions: That they should march forth of
the City with their Armor, Horses, and Colors displayed. Santonia raises
great store of money by its Corn, which the Spaniards every year do
transport from thence, or Merchants which sell it unto them. And the City of
Rochelle is very rich, in regard of its neerenesse to the Sea, and especially
because of the traffic of the English and Dutch, whose shipping do often
arrive there.

AQVITANIA.
AQVITANIA, (whose Southern part is delineated (...) this Table) some would
have so called from the wa^^^^ wherewith it does abound; The Country whence so
called.
and some derive it from (...) Town Aquis, or Aqs. It was extended (according
(...) Ptolemie) from the Pyrenaean Mountains even to Lige^^^* But now (as
Ortelius witnesses) from the River Garumna to the Ocean* and the Pyrenaean
Hills. Toward the North-West it has the Ocea^ which is called the Aquitanick
Bay; on the West Spain, on the No^^^ Gallia Lugdunensis, and on the South
Gallia Narbonensis. In it (according to Mercators account) there are five
Dukedomes, Vasconia.
twenty Counties, (...) six Seigniories. The Dukedomes are Vasconia or
Guienna, Avernia, the Country of Engoulesme, The Situation.
Berrie, and Turonia. Vasconia or Guienna being situated near the Sea, The
fruitfulness of the Soil.

The Cities.


between Bayon and Bordeaux, yields g^^^^ store of wine, which is
transported from thence into other parts of ^^rope. The chief City in it is
Burdigala or Bordeaux; the other Cities (...) Nerac, Condom, Mirande, Nogerat,
Orthes, Bazes, and Dax are of no g^^^^ note: yet Dax is famous for her hot
Fountains, Salt Pits, and Ir^^ mettle. Burdigala, so called by Ptolemie, is
situated in a marsh, which the overflowing of Garumna makes, and is adorned
both with a Parliament and an University, Avernia.
in which the Professors of all Arts and Sciences do instruct Youth. Avernia,
or the Duchy of Avergne is partly (...) plain, The Situation.
and partly a mountainous Country. It has on the East F^^^^ on the South
Languedock; on the West Quercy, Perigort, and Lem^^^, and on the North Berry
and Bourbon. Avernia is twofold, the Higher and the Lower. The Higher, which
is called Le hault pays d' Averg^^ and (...) Avernia, The Cities and Towns.
has one prime City in it called This City is called by Ptolemie Rovesium
and Ru^sium, and by Mercator Rieux.
S. Flour, being seated on a high Rock: the other Towns are commonly called
Ori^^^, Carlatum, Muratum, Buillons, le Puy, etc. There is also in it the
Territor^^^ and Bayliwick of Beaucaire. The Lower is rich and very fertile,
being full of excellent Wine, Fruit, Honey, Saffron, Cattle, Wool, Me^dowes,
and Woods. The Metropolis of it is This City was anciently called Arverna and
Gergobia.
Clarimontium, commonly called Clermont: It is proud of her Castle, and is a
Bishops Seat. The other Cities or Towns are 13 in number, of which Called by
Antoninus Sirion, and by others Serion. Engoulesme. The Situation. The
fruitfulness of the Soil.

The Cities and Towns.

Turonia.


Rion, Monfe^^^^ and Isoire do excel the rest. Engoulesme on the North
joyneth to P^^ctou, on the West to Santonia, on the South to Perigort, and on
the Ea^^ to Lemosin. It has abundance of very good Wine, fruit and Hemp^^* The
Metropolis of it is Inculisma now called Engoulesme, being an ancient City. It
is seated on a hill which hangs over the River Char^^^ in a remote place from
the Kings high way. The lesser Towns are those which are commonly called
Marton, Chasteau, Neuff, Blaisac, Chaba^^^^, Confollant, Cuffec, Aigres,
Gourville, la Roche-Foucault, Marveil, La^z^^, Villebois, Momberon, and
Bouteville. Concerning the Country of Bo^^^ we will speak in a Table by it
self. Turonia commonly called T^^raine, begins somewhat beyond the City
Amboise, toward Bel^^^^* and ends at the town which is commonly called la
Chapelle Blanc^^* The Situation.
map of Aquitania ^QVITANIA.
being subject in spiritual matters to the Bishops of Anjou and Chous^^. For
they appoint and set down limits between the Turonians and A^digavians. The
sweetness of the Air does make this pleasant country more delightful, so
that it is called the Garden and Orchard of France. It is fruitful in Wine and
Corn, and has woods convenient to hu^^ in. The Cities.
The Metropolis or Mother-citie of this Dukedom is Caesarodunum Turonum,
called in French Tours. This City excels for wealth, and fair edifices or
buildings. On the East side the River Ligeris or Liger, on the South and West
sides the River Idra do flow near unto it. The lesser Towns in it are
Amboise, Langes, Chinon, and others. The Counties of Aquitaine are Toulouse,
Narbonne, Albret, Armignac, Bigorre, B^^, Estrac, Commingeois, and Foix. Also
Ventadour, Pompadour, Montign^^ i^ Poictou, The State Ecclesiastic.
Perigort, Fronssac, Esparre, Lymosin, Touraine, March, the Vicou^tie of
Aulnay, and Basque. The Signories or Lordships are Planes, Gra^^, Chaloces,
Saintonge, and Aulnis. There are moreover five Archbishops, first the
Archbishop of Narbon, under whom are these suffragans, to w^^, the Bishops of
Carcassone, Agde, of S. Pont de Tomieres, Alet, Memph^^, Elne, Besiers, Lodeut,
Nismes, and Vsetz. Secondly the Bishop of Bourges, under whom are ten Bishops,
namely the Bishop of Clermont, of R^^des, of Lymoges, of Mande, of Alby, of
Cahors, of Castres, of Tulies, of S. Fl^^^, and of le Puy. Thirdly the Bishop
of Bordeaux, under whom there are eight Bishops, namely of Poictiers, of Lucon,
of Mailezais, of Saints, of Engoulesme, of Again, of Codon, and of Sarlac.
Fourthly the Bishop of Toulouse, which has these Bishops under him, the Bishop
of Pami^s, of Mirepoys, of Montauban, of La Vour, of Rieux, of Lombes, and of
^^pons. Fifthly, the Bishop of Aux, under whom are the Bishops of A^^, of
Coming, of Tarbe, of Basas, of Lescure, of Lictoure, of Conser^^s, of Oleron,
of Bajone, and of Adure, which some call Air.

The Kingdom of Arelatum.
THe Kingdom of Arelatum is so called from the City Arelatum. It contains
those Countries which lie between the Rivers R^^danus and the Alps. Sabaudia
whence so called.
And there are in this tract Sabaudia, Delphin^t^^ or Daulphine, and
Provinciae. There are diverse conjectures concerning the name of Sabaudia or
Savoy; some derive it a Sabatiis vadis, from the S^batican Fordes; others give
it that name quasi Sabbatorum Pratum, which Volaterranus calls Sabaudiensis
Auwe, that is, the Sabaudian Land: some would have it called Savoy, quasi Saul
voje, a way through Ofiers and Willowes, or quasi Sauve Voye, that is, the safe
way; which I know not who is feined to have made by fabulous Writers, as being
before dangerous in regard it was full of thieves and robbers. Near to
Sabaudia on the North lies the Country of Burgundy, The Situation.
and Helvetia, having the Lake Lemanus lying between them: On the East it has
Valesia and Pedemontium, which have no certain bounds, but that high
Mountains do run between them; and on the South and the West is Daulphine,
with some part of Rhodanus, separating Sabaudia from the Dukedom of Burgundy.
The Air of Sabaudia is pure, The fertility of the Soil.
and the country is very mountainous. In the Valleys and Plains the Soil is
very pleasant and fruitful, especially toward the North, near the Lake
Lemanus, where it yields most excellent rich Wine, which is called Ri^^lium,
from the bank of the Lake. The pastures do bring up and feed all sorts of
Cattle, and especially there where the lesser Mountain of S. Bernard does
rise in height. The Metropolis or Mother-citie of Sa^^^dia is Chamberiacum
commonly called Chamberri, in which there is a Parliament. The City is seated
in a Vale, and encompassed round about with Mountains. The Counties of Geneva,
Morienne, and Taren^^is, the Marquesate of Susa, and some other Signiories are
described with Sabaudia as parts thereof: and lastly the Country of Bressa.
The Country of Geneva Antoninus calls Cenava. It is a very ancient This
City is in compass about two English miles, and is supposed to contain about
17000 Souls.
City, ^eated by the Lake Lemanus, and divided in two parts, which stand upon
the two banks of the River Rhodanus, but joined together by a wooden bridge,
on both sides whereof there are houses, though the greater part of houses be
toward the South, and the lesser toward the North. The Country of Morienne
does extend it self to the River Archus, where there is a fair Town called
S. Iean de Morienne. The County of Taren^^se, is almost enclosed with the
Alps, and the Rivers Archus and Ara: ^t is so named from the City Tarantais,
which the Inhabitants do now ^all Moustier, the Germans Munster in Tartaansen,
and the Latin Writers Munsterium. The Marqueship of Susa is so called from the
Town Susa, ^ot far from the head of the River Doria or Duria, Daulphine
whence so called.
which does dis^harge and exonerate it self into the River Padus, called by
the Italians ^o. There are also other Towns of Sabaudia, as Aiguebelle, Mont
Belial, Bell^y, Ni^y, Montmelian, In^illes, etc. Delphinatus follows. Some
would derive the name thereof a Castello Delphini, which is called in French
Chastean Some say it had its name from Dolphine, wife to Guigne the second
Prince of this Province.
Dolphine. Provincia cleaves unto it on the South, and ^resse on the North,
the River Rhodanus running between them: on the West side is the County of
Viennois, and on the East lies Pedemontium, The Situation.
and Sabaudia. The Archiepiscopall Cities here, are Vienna and Ebro^num.
Strabo calls Vienna the Metropolis of the Allobrogians, Ptolemie ^ls it the
Mediterranean City of the Allobrogians: The Cities.
Stephanus calls it ^^ennus, and it is commonly called Vienne. Ebrodunum
Ptolemie calls ^^orodunum, and Strabo Epebrodunum. It is a famous Town of the
Ca^^igians of the maritime Alps, which lie near the Sea. Antoninus cal^^^h it
Eburodunum, but in French it is called Ambrum. There are five ^^ties which have
Bishops, Valentia, Dia, Gratianopolis, Augusta, and ^pingum. Valentia
(according to Antoninus and Ptolemie) is common^^ called Valence, and is the
title of a Duke. Dia is called by Antoninus (...) Vocontiorum, but commonly
Dio, and is the Metropolis or chief ^^tie of the Country, which in French is
called Pays de Diois. Gratia^^lis was heretofore called Cularo, Isidorus
calls it the City of Gra^^opolis, but it is commonly called Grenoble.
Augusta, near to the ^^^er Isere, Pliny calls Augusta Tricastinorum, where the
great Senate of ^^lphine is kept, Sidonius Tricastina Vrbs, but now, as Joseph
Scaliger ^^leth, it is called S. Antony de Tricastin. That which Antoninus calls
^^ingum, or as some read it, Vapincum, and the Itinerarie Table Gap, is now
called Caput agri, and in French Gapencois. It is environed ro^^^ with
Mountains. It was formerly, and is also at this day a famo^^ Town; the
Inhabitants do call it Le col S. Digo. I pass by the lesse^ Towns. Provence
is to be described next, but before I come unto it, (...) will add something
out of Mercator concerning the State Ecclesiastic^^ Here are five Archbishops:
as first the Archbishop of Tarentais in ^^baudia, under whom are the Bishops of
Sitten and Augusta. 2ly the Archbishop of Ambrum; under whom are the Bishops
of Ligne, of Grass, (...) Lena, of Niza, of S. Glande, of Valne, of Vap, which
some call Gap: (...) Briancon, and of S. Pol. Thirdly the Archbishop of Vienne,
to whom the^^ are six suffraganes, the Bishop of Valence and Dye, the Bishop
of Viv^^ of S. Iean de Morienne, of Geneve, of Grenoble, and of Romans.
Fourthly the Archbishop of Aix, under whom there are five Bishops, the Bis^^^
of Aps, of Frejul, of Sesteron, of Eres, and of Vapinte. Fifthly the Archbishop
of Arelatum or Arles, under whom are the Bishops of M^s^^^ of Vasison, of
Tricaste, of Cavallion, of Avignon, of Orange, of Carpe^^^ and of Tollon. The
Archbishop of Lions and Primate of all France, h^^^ his residence in the City
of Lions, and has four suffragan Bishop^ under him, as the Bishop of Autun,
of Mascon, of Chalon by the Ri^^^ Saone, and of Langres.

PROVINCIA, OR PROVENCE.
HItherto we have described Aquitania and the Kingdom of Arelatum: Provincia
follows. The Country whence so called.
This most excellent part of France from beyond Rhodanus even to the River
Garumna was called Provincia, because the Romans many years before the
Nativitie of Christ did reduce it into the form of a Province, which name it
still retains in a small portion thereof (wherein is Massilia and Aquae
Sextiae) by way of excellency, to declare that it had pre-eminence both in
order and dignity above all the Provinces of the Roman Empire. Daulphine lies
near to Provincia on the North side, The Situation.
being parted from it with the Mountains commonly called the Mountains of
Velay, and by a great part of the River Druentius or Durance, running between.
It is enclosed on the East side by the Alps and the River Varus, on the left
hand bank whereof stands the Town Nicaea, where Italy begins, on the
South the French Sea beats on it, and the Western bounds of it are partly
the Principality of Arausio or Orange, and the County of Avenio or Avignon,
which did formerly belong unto it, though now they appertain to other Princes:
and partly the whole River Rhodanus, as far as Lions and Arelatum, belonging
to the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Languedock. The temper of the Air.
The Air here is gentle, mild, and very pure. The Country does produce not
only excellent Corn, but also Fruits, with little labor or tillage: The
fruitfulness of the Soil.
and here is as great plenty of Rasons and Figs, as may furnish the greatest
part of Europe. Here is such great store of Rosemarie, Juniper Berries,
Chesse-nuts, Pome-Citternes, Lemmons, Oranges, Saffron, Rice, and the like, as
if the horn of plenty were poured forth upon this Country. The Vines yield
excellent rich Wines here, and the Soil is every where very good and
fruitful. Concerning the ancient Earls of Provincia some things are to be
noted: We read in ancient Annals, that in the time of Ludovicus the eigth
King of France, The ancient Government.
Raymundus Berengarius was Earl of Provence, and that Charles Earl of Anjou,
and Son to the afterward King Ludovicus did marry Beatrice his only
Daughter and Heir, and by that means got this Country. After him succeeded
Charles surnamed the Lame, being Prince of Salernum, and King of Naples. After
him his Son Robert succeeded, being Duke of Calabria, and King of Naples; and
after him his Grandchild Ioane (whose Father Charles Duke of Calabria was
dead before) for by the last Will of this Robert she was made Queen of Naples,
and Countess of Provence. This woman, that she might be revenged on her
Adversaries, did adopt Ludovicus of Anjou, Son to John King of France, and
left him her successor both in other Principalities, and also in this County.
After this Ludovicus, his Son Ludovicus the second was made Earl; and next
after him his Son Ludovicus the third, who was also adopted by Ioane the second
Que^^^ of Naples, to be King of Sicily, and Duke of Calabria; This Ludovicus
^^ving no issue, by the consent of the aforesaid Ioane, instituted his b^^ther
Renatus to be successor in those Principalities. And he being (...) willing to
resign his right in the Kingdom of Naples, and the Coun^^^^ of Provence, to
Renatus Duke of Lotharingia, his Nephew did pass (...) over unto his brother
Charles, Earl of Maine, who made (his so^^ Charles dying) Ludovicus the
eleventh King of France his heir. So^^ would have it that Renatus made him
heir after Charles, by his last w^^^ although Renatus Duke of Lotharingia did
justly expostulate with (...) concerning the same. Here dwelled heretofore the
Salyi, the Aq^^ses, the Arelatenses, the Sextani, the Sentij, the Ebroduntij,
the Di^^^^^ the Vesdiantij, the Sanicienses, the Nerucij, the Vencienses, the
Vulgi^^^^ the Aptenses, the Reienses, the Ostaviani, the Commoni, the
Foro-Iuli^^^^ the Segestorij, the Albici, the Oxubij, the Deciates, and others.
There (...) in Provence under the Aquensian Parliament, besides many Town^
(...) no small note, two Cities which have Archbishops, and eleven (...) have
Bishops in them. The Archiepiscopall Cities are Aquae Sextiae (...) Arelatum.
The Latins, Paterculus, Solinus, and others, do call the (...) Aquae Sextiae
Colonia. Plutarch, (in the life of C. Marius) Sextilia, the ^^^^nerarie tables,
Aquae Sestiae. The inscription of a stone at Lions, (...) to S. Benedicts
Church, Colonia Iulia Aquae. Lastly a certain ancient ^^scription, and
Vespasians coin, Colonia Iulia, Aquae Sexiae, Legio 25. was called Aquae,
because there are bathes of hot water, whence als^ is now called Aix; and it
was called Sextiae, from C. Sextius, who (...) Consul in the year from the
building of the City of Rome, 630. (...) he having subdued the Nation of the
Salyi, built this City, to the (...) that he might place a Roman garrison
therein, and that he might d^^^^ the Barbarians from those coasts, which open
a way from Massilia (...) Italy: seeing the Massilians were not able to
suppress them, (you (...) read Livy lib. 61. from the 10. cap.) But
concerning the same, it (...) called Iulia Augusta, from C. Julius Caesar
Augustus, who did enl^^^^ it with colonies, bringing thither the old Soldiers
of the 25 Legi^^^ The Parliament of Provence is held here, which therefore is
called P^^liamentum Aquense. Partly at this City, and partly in Italy did C.
^^rius overcome the Cimbrians a people of Germany, and the Tiguri^^, (...)
Abrones, French Nations that banded themselves with them: of whi^^ History
elsewhere. The second City Orosius and Ausonius (Lib. ^^urbibus in Epigraphe
and ipso carmine 7o) do call In this town was called a Council by Constantine.
An. 313. for the quiet establishing of the Church.
Arelas, the same ^^^nius, elsewhere does call it Arelatus: Caesar calls it
Arelate; as also S^^^nius (in the life of Tiberius) Mela, and others. Strabo
calls it Areleta, P^^lemie Arelaton, Salyorum Colonia, and Pliny, Arelate
Sextanorum; but (...) by a word of the plural number it is called Arles.
Festus Avienus (...) report that the Graecians heretofore inhabiting it, did
call it Thelinis. ^^lius Scaliger witnesses that in a fair inscription on a
pillar which (...) had seen, it is called Mamiliaria, but the reason why is
unknown. (...) Constantinus the Emperor, did enact and ordain that it should
be c^^led Constantia, and that the assemblies and conventions of seven
P^^vinces, namely of Vienne, of both the Narbons, of both the Aquitan^^, (...)
map of Provence PROVENCE.
Novem-Populana, and the Maritime Alps, should be held and kept there; and
Ausonius calls it Gallula Roma, in those verses which I mentioned before. It
is a City seated near Rhodanus, on the left hand ban^e thereof. The
Itinerarie table places it on the right hand, where now stands Languedocke.
Ausonius affirms that Arelatum is divided with the River Rhodanus flowing
between. Whence he makes it twofold in his book of Cities; because Rhodanus
divides and cutteth it into two parts. But now, the form and face thereof
being changed, it stands wholly upon that bank of Rhodanus which lies
toward Italy, and is environed on all sides with Marshes, in which fierce
Oxen are bred. Hence it is thought that it was once far greater, and some
believe the the other part of the City, which flourished heretofore was wasted
by the Goths. It appears in Ausonius that it was a Town of traffic. And
we read that the Kings of Burgundy did formerly keep their residence
therein, and afterward the Earls of Provence. D. Trophi^^ was the first Bishop
thereof, who was the Apostle Paul's Disciple; and in the second year of Neroes
reign came into France. From this man as from a Fountain, as Sosimus writes,
the Christian faith was diffused and dispersed through all France. It has now
a strong Castle, and is famous for its two Prelates heretofore, Honoratus and
Hilarious. So much concerning the Archiepiscopall Cities of Provence; the
Episcopal are eleven, amongst the which the chief is Massiliae: the Latins,
and also some of the Graecians do call it Masilia, Strabo, Stephanus, and
ancient coins do call it Massalia, Ptol. Masalia: but now it is commonly
called Marseille. It was once a Colonie of the Grecian Phocoeans, and was
built in the 45 Olympiad, as Solinus witnesses in the days of King Turquine,
as Iustine notes ( Lib. 43.) Plutarch in the life of Solon writes that it was
built by Protus, otherwise Protis. Strabo shows that it is seated on a rockie
place, near the mouth of the River Rhodanus, and it a remote part of the Bay,
as it were in the corner of the Sea, as Iust^^^ says out of Trogus. Moreover
M. Tullius does so praise the Commonwealth of the Massilians, that speaking in
defense of Fontejus before the people of Rome, he durst say, that their City
did exceed not only Greece, but almost all other Nations for discipline and
gravitie. They reckon and begin the number of their Bishops from Lazarus, whom
Christ raised from death. So much concerning Massilia, the other Episcopal
Cities are Dine, which Ptolemy calls Dinia: Grass, Gland^^^, or Glan^te, which
learned Latin Writers do call the City of Glana^^ca, and some Authors
Glamnatena: They are deceived who make Plyn^^^, Mela's, and Antoninus his
Glanum, to be the same with Glannate. For Antoninus places Glanum between
Cabellio and Arles, from which Glanata is far distant: so that this Glanum is
not now known. Also Sanas or Sanitium, a Town in the Maritime Alps. This
Town is now called Venza.
Vintium a Town not far from Senas, called by Dion, Ventiar, Apta Iulia,
which Ant^nnus calls corruptly Avia Iulia, and Abte-julia for in the
Itinerarie table it is called Apta Iulia, and is now called Apt: Ries, or
Reius, which in the Itinerarie table is written Reis Apolinaris: Feriuls, which
Plar^^^ writing to Cicero, calls Forum Iulij; Ptolemy, Forum Iulium; Augustus
coin, Col. Iul. Octav. It is now a Sea or Haven Town, Ciste^^ which Antoninus
and the Itinerarie table calls Segustero. Josephus Scaliger (in his Letters
to Merula) Gestro; and Pliny, Cessero: But Merula thinks that Plinyes Cessero
is the same with Ptolemies Cessero, now called Castres. Lastly Tolon, which the
learned Latin Writers do call Telonium, and Antoninus, Telo Martius, being a
Town seated within a Bay of the Sea; nine leagues from Massilia: so much
concerning the Episcopal Towns. There are also other Towns no less famous
and ancient, as Antibe, which Ptolemy calls Antipolis, a Town of Deciati;
Pliny calls it Oppidum Latinum, and it is called a Colonie in the coin of the
Emperor Titus. Olbia, which is now thought to be that which is called Years,
or Hieres, near the Sea, almost three leagues from Telon. Over against the
Town lie those famous Islands, which Ptolemy calls Staechedes; and Stephanus
Ligustidae. They are now called the Isles of Years, or Hieres, and the best sort
of Coral is gathered there; even as good as that in the Ligustick Sea. Also S.
Maximin, which Antoninus in his Itinerarie thinks to be Tecolata, being six
leagues from Massilia toward the North. Tarascon, which Ptolemy calls Taruscon,
being seated on the left bank of Rhodanus; and over against it on the right
hand bank Belloquadra, commonly called Beaucarie. The Towns which have the
dignity of a County, are Sault, S. Gilles, and others.

PICARDIE AND CAMPANIA.
ALthough the name of Picardie is not very ancient, yet no certain reason can
be rendered for it: The Country whence so called.
some conjecturing one thing, some another. Cenalis professes that he knows
not whether the Picardians borrowed this name from the Bigardian Heretics:
however, it is manifest says he, that they were of greater antiquity than the
Inhabitants of this Country. Some suppose that they were called Picardians,
because they were the first that used those Lances, which are commonly called
Pikes. The Situation.
On the West that I may make a plain description of the bounds thereof) is the
British Ocean, with some part of Normandy: on the North lie those Countries
of ancient Belgia, which are now called Artesia, or Artois, and Hannonia, or
Henegou: on the East lies Luxenburg or Lorraine: and lastly, on the South
Campania, and that Country which by a more special name is called France. The
fertility of the Soil.
It is a most fruitful Country, and the Storehouse or Granarie of Paris, and
most parts of France. It has but little wine, which proceeds rather from the
sloathfull idleness of the Inhabitants, than from any defect of the Soil or
Climate. True Picardie.
Picardie is divided into three parts: the true Picardie, the Lower, and the
Higher. I will only speak here of the True Picardie, (called it French, La
vraye Picardie). It does contain in it the jurisdictions of Anbiana, Corbia,
and Pequignya, the Counties of Veramandois, and Reteli^, and the Dukedom of
Tirascha. Ambiana (or Visdamie d' Amiens) was so named from the City Ambianum,
commonly called Amiens. Heretofore, as the Learned do think, it was named
Samarobrina; and by Ptolemie, Samarobriga. Antoninus in some of his books
calls it Samar^^riva, and in others Samarabriga. Briga in the ancient Spanish
language, and Bria in the Thracian speech, The Cities.
do signify a City; yet some do write that it was called Somonobriga from
its bridge, (in Dutch called Brag) which stands on the River Somona. Ambianum
is situated at Sem^^^s, which divides it into several parts: (whence some
suppose that the Emperor Gratian did name it Ambianum, quod aquis ambiatur,
because it is encompassed with water). It is thought to be one of the stronged
Towns in all France, both for the natural situation, and artificial
fortification thereof: it is entrenched with deep broad ditches, and is the
key of that part of the Kingdom. There is a fair In this Church Edward the 3.
King of England, did homage to Philip de Valeys, for the Duchy of Guienna.
Church in it. The Inhabitants are reputed to be very honest and faithful. The
Country of Corduba is so called from Corduba, which is a Town near Som^^^,
and is seated by a River which runs there into it. Peguignya is so called
from a Town commonly called Peguigny: which received its name map of Picardie
and Campania PICARDIE AND CAMPANIA.
(if we shall believe the common report) from one Pignon, a Soldier of
Alexander the great. It is famous in Histories, because William Duke of
Normandy, surnamed Long-sword, was slain by an ambushment laid by Baldwin
Earl of Cambray, who drew him thither under a color of making a peace, as the
Norman Annals do testify. The County of Veromandois (as Geographers that
describe France do note) contains under it the Counties of the Suessons, and
Laudunenses, the Territory of the Tartenians, and the Cities of Noviomagus,
and Fane de S. Quint^^. The Suessones are commonly called Suessons, or
Soissonois, whose City is now called Soisson, having in it a strong Castle.
Antoninus calls it Suessones by the name of the Inhabitants; and Ptolemie,
Augusta Su^^^num. The Country of the Laudunenses, now called Laonno^s, has
it^ name from Laudunum, (mentioned in the life of Charles the great) which is
now called Laon, being seated on a hill. The Country of the Tart^ans is called
in French Tartenois, the Metropolis whereof is Fera, commonly called La Fere.
It is a City strongly fortified, and commodiously seated, near the confluence
and meeting of the Rivers, Oysa, and Serva, having also a strong Castle. The
City Noviomagus, which A^toninus places between Soisson and Amiens, and
makes the seat of the eighteenth Roman Legion, is now called Noion: Ptolemy
calls it ^viomagos Vadicassimum, and others Ortelius thinks it probable that
this is that City which Caesar in his Commentaries calls Noviodunum.
Noviomus. It is a City which seems to be very ancient, and is a Bishops
Seat, the Prelates whereof style themselves Earls of Noion, and Peers of
France. Fane de S. Q^^^tin, which was sometime the head Town of the Country,
and feate of the Earls of Vermandois was so called from Quintin, who suffered
Martyrdom there: whereas before it was called Augusta Veromanduc^^^ so much
concerning Veromandois. The Territory of the Retelians (commonly called
Retelois, is situate between Hannonia, Lotharingia, and ^^rois: The Metropolis
thereof is Retelium. The chief City of Tiras^^, (called La Tirasche) is
Guisa, having a stately Castle to defend it against the Luxenburgians.

Campania.
CAMPANIA, called in French Comte de Champagne, was so called, f^^^ the broad
and long fields thereof, The Country whence so called.
as Gregory Turonensis notes. F^r it is a very plain and champion Country,
and fit for tillage. The Teritories of Brye, The Situation.
Burgundy, Carolois, and Lotharingia, do encompasse i^ on every side. The
temper of the air.

The fertility of the Soil.


The sky thereof is very clear, and the air temperate. The fields do yield
abundance of Corn, Wine, and all sorts of Cattle and there are woods which do
yield great store of game both for ha^^ing and hunting. Campania is described
both by it self, and also with the Principalities adjacent, and lying near
unto it. If it be considered properly by it self, it is twofold; the Lower,
and the Higher. In the Lower is Tricassium, and the Territories which are
commonly called Ivigny, Bassigny, and Vallage. Modern Writers do call that
Tricass^^, which is now called Troyes: The Cities.
It is a City near the River Seyn. Ante^^nus calls it This City is also
called by Gregorius Turonensis, Trecas.
Tracasis, and places the two and twentieth Legion there: Ammianus names it
Tricassa; Bid, Trecassa; Nithardus, Tricassinum: and anciently it was called
Augustobana Trecasium, as Joseph Scaliger notes. It is now a Bishops Seat, and
has a strong Castle for its defense. The County of Ivigny does separate
Campania from Burgundy. The chief Town thereof is Ivigny, which is under the
jurisdiction of the Baylywicke of Troyes. Bassigny is so called, because it is
the better part of the Lower Campania, for Bas signifies in French beneath. It
is encompassed with the Rivers Matrona, or Marne, Mosa, and a little part of
Mosella, and it is watered with more Rivers than the other parts of this
Country. The Metropolis thereof is commonly called Chaumont en Bassigny, which
has the title of a Baylywicke, and a stately ancient Castle feated on a Rock
which is well fortified. These Towns are reckoned in it, besides Langres, of
which I shall speak hereafter: namely Montigny, Goeffy, Nogent le Roy,
Monteclar, Andelot, Bisnay, Choiseul, Visnory, and Clesmont; being all strong
Towns, and the most of them fortified with Castles. The Territory of Vallage
is thought to be so called from the fair and fruitful Valleys which are in
it. The Towns of chief note are Vassy, near Bloisa, in the Country of
Guise; Fanum S. Desiderij, or S. Desire: and Ianivilla, or Ianville, the
inheritance of the Family of the Guises; some write it Iont-ville. There are
also in the Territory of Vallage Montirandel, Dontlerant, Le Chasteau aux
forges, Esclaren, and others. The Higher Campania is called Le Pays de Partoys,
having its appellation from a Town commonly called Perte. It is a most
fruitful Country, abounding with Fruits, Wood, and Hemp. The Metropolis
thereof is Vitriacum or Vitry, seated near the confluence and meeting of the
Rivers Saltus and Matrona: And there are also contained in it Argilliers,
Lasaincourt, Louvemen, and other Towns. Thus we have taken a view of Campania
by it self, now we are to describe the adjacent places, as the Dukedom of
Rhemes, and Langres, and the Counties of Catalaune, Ligny, and Motte, which are
free within themselves, and not subject to Campania. The Dukedom of Rhemes (or
the Duche Parrie, and Archivesche de Reims) is so named from a City which was
anciently called Durocortorum, but now This City was called Rhemes from the
Rhemi, once a potent Nation of these parts.
Rhemis. Ptolemy calls it Durocottorum: Strabo, Duricortora: Stephanus,
Dorocotteros: and Caesar Durocortum Remorum. It is a free City of Campania:
the Archbishop thereof is a Duke, and the first Peer of France; under whom are
these Bishops in this Country: the Bishop of Soisson, of Chaalon, of Amiens, of
Noyon, of Senlis, of Beaurois, and of Laon: In this City the Kings of France
are inaugurated and See Heylin. page 120.
anointed with oil. The Dukedom of Langres (or the Duche, Pairie and Evesche
de Langres) has a City which was heretofore called Andomatunum Lingonum, but
is now commonly called Langres: Ptolemie calls it Andumatonon, and Antoninus
vitiously Antematunum; Pentingerus his Itinerarie table, Andematunum; Tacitus
Lingonum urbs: and Gregory of Tours, urbs Lingonica. It is a Bishops See, the
Prelates whereof are Dukes and Peers of France. The County of Catalaune (or
Euesche, Conte and Pairie de Chaalon) was so named from the City Catalaune:
the later Writers do call it Cathelaunum, but now it is called Chaalon en
Champaigne: It is a Bishops See, situated on a plain near to the River
Matrona, and adorned with high Towers, which stand up like aspiring Pyramides.
In the County of Lignie is the Town Lignium, venerable for antiquity, near
the River Saltus. Concerning the County of Motte, (or Conte de la Motte) we
find nothing but the name thereof. The Country of the Briensians (whom
Nithardus calls Brionenses) is usually described with Campania, being an
ancient Country, and now called la Brye. It begins at a Village called
Cretelium, not far from the bridge of Charanton, where Matrona mingleth with
the River Sey^, the former whereof does almost part Campania, and the latter
Gastinois from the Briensians: for all that lies between these two Rivers,
even to the Dukedom of Burgundy, is esteemed to be in the County of Brye. It
was so called from a Town, commonly called Brye or Bray, Conte Robert, which
appellation it received from Robert, Earl of Brye, who had a mansion house
there. The Cities of Brye are Castellum Theodorici, or Chasteau Thierry.
Iatinum Medorum, or Meldarum urbs, which Ptolemy places by the River Matrona,
and is now called Meaulx, and Prov^^sium or Provence, a Town famous for sweet
smelling Roses: the Archbishopricke of Sens, with the Town of Pontium are
reckoned and accounted a part of this Country. Under this Archbishop are these
Bishops, the Bishop of Paris, of Meaulx, of Troyes, of Chartres, of Ne^^, of
Orleans, and of Ausoire or Auxerce. Senonum urbs, formerly called Agendicum,
but now commonly Sens, is seated near the the River Icauna, which in French is
called Yonne. Besides these aforesaid Countries, which we have mentioned,
Mercator reckons these following, namely, Barsur Seine, Auxerre, Viconte de
Tonnerre, Poursuivent, Brain, Grandpre, Mailly, Vertus, Roussy, Retel, Ivigny,
and the Baronie of ^^^ville.

FRANCE.
THis Country, of which we do entreat does comprehend under it the
Prefectureship and Country (or as some would have it the Viecountship) of
Paris, the Dukedom of Valois, and the Territories of Heurepois, and Gastinois.
The Praefectureship of Paris, or la Proveste and Conte de Paris, is divided
into Territories, Paris, Goella, the I Will of France, and Vexinum Francicum. We
call that Parisium which is commonly called le Parisis. It contained heretofore
whatsoever is beyond the Gate of Paris, even to the Bridge called Pontoyse, and
from thence even to Claya, toward Prye. The name thereof is almost worn out,
but that some Villages, as Louvres, Cormeille, Escova, and others, which the
Parisians call en Parisis, and some taxations of the Parisian Parliament, as
also a certain Coin commonly called Sols and Deniers Parisis, do keep it in
memory. Some think that the Parisian Gate was so called, because it was in the
way to Parisium. The chief City of this Parisium, and the Metropolis of all
France is Lutetia, so called by Caesar. The Cities.
Ptolemy calls it Leucotetia: Iulianus Lutetia: Marcellinus, Castellum
Parisiorum: Zosimus Parisium, and latter Writers Lutetia Parisius. But it is
now commonly called Paris. Some derive the name of Lutetia a Luto, from Mudde
in regard of the Marshes near unto it, and some from the Plaister-pits near
adjoining, quasi Leukoteichia, for it is built for the most part with
Plaister-worke. Paris was heretofore far less than it is now, standing only
on the Island which the River Seyne encompasseth, so that this great City was
very small at the beginning. But so small an Island could not at last receive
such a multitude of men as daily repaired thither. So that Colonies as it were
being drawn thither, and placed on either side of the Continent, Suburbs were
added thereunto, whence it was so enlarged by degrees, that now it is the
greatest City of all France. It is divided into three parts, the greatest
whereof lying North-East on the right hand Bank of the River, is the lowest,
and is commonly called la Ville: the lesser part on the left hand toward the
South-west is raised somewhat higher by little Hills whereon it is seated, and
it is called l'Vniversite; the middle is in the Island, which they call la Cite:
It is encompassed round with the River, being joined with two Bridges to the
lesser part, and with three to the greater part. Architremus an English Poet
has formerly celebrated the praise thereof in these Verses: At length a place
does come within your sight, The University here is accounted the chiefest in
Europe, as containing 55. Colleges.

Which is another Court of Phoebus bright,
For men it has Cyrrhaea may compare,
Chrysaea it is for Mettalls that there are.
It Is Greece for Books, for Students Inda, by
Athens it self judge its Philosophy.
It Is Rome for Poets which have there been found,
It is the sweet Balm of the world so round,
And its sweet fragrant Rose you would it think,
A Sidonis for Clothes, for meat and drink.
The Soil is rich and yields much Wine, yea more,
It Is fit for Tillage, and has Corn great store.
It Is very strong, and good Laws it can show,
The air is sweet, their site is pleasant too.
It has all goods, and is in all things neat,
If fortune only made these goods complete.


Not far from Paris is a pretty Town commonly called le Po^^ Charenton where
the River Matrona mingleth it self with the Sc^^^. Here is an Echo that will
answer thirteen times one after another, (and which is more wonderful) it
will retort a word of four syllables plainly and perfectly, four or five
times. So much concerning Paris: Goella follows, or la Goelle. The ancient
bounds thereof are worn out of knowledge, and only some places named from
Goella do keep it yet in memory. There is in it la Conte de dam-Mar^i^, so
named from a famous Town heretofore called Dam-Marti^, though now it is become
a small Village, seated on a little Hill. L^^^e de France as the Frenchmen do
limit it, does comprehend all the Country from S. Denis to Passiacum and
Mommorantium, which lies between the corners and windings of Seyne, on the
one side toward Pica die, and on the other side toward N^^mandy. Others do give
it other bounds. S. Denis in France is a pleasant pretty Town, which the
ignorant of Antiquity and those that are credulous to believe Monks dreams,
do suppose was so called from Dionysius Areopagit^, Possia^um or ^oissy is a
fair Town; Aimonius called this Town Pistas.
where there is a Castle which the Kings of France heretofore much delighted
in. In this Castle before the Castle of S. Germane was built, the Queens of
France were brought to Bed and delivered, and the Kings Children educated and
brought up. Between Possiacum and Paris there is a Town consecrated to D.
Germane, commonly called S. Germane en Lay. The ancient Town Mommorantium is
called in French Mommoran^y. Next to the Island is Vexinum Francicum, Vexin, or
(as others call it) Vulxin le Francois. It contains all the Country from the
River Aesia or Oyse, even to Claromont, toward Picardy. The memory thereof had
been quite extinguished, but that it is preserved in certain ancient Charters
and Records. So much concerning the Praefectureship of Paris, and the four
Territories thereof. The other part commonly called le Pais de Valois was so
called from the pleasant Valleys, which are the pride of this Country. Others
derive the name otherwise. It was heretofore a County, but is now a Dukedom.
The first Earl of Valois was Charles the Son of Philip the third, King of
France, and brother to Philip the Fair: and afterward Philip the sixth being
the Kings Son did by propagation add many branches to the Stock of the
Valesian Earls. The Dukedom of Valois does extend it self even to Picardy.
The chief Town (besides Crespy) is Sentis, called by the map of France FRANCE.
Latins as some suppose Silvanectum, because it is joined to a Wood. It is an
ancient Town having besides a Bishop, a Provost, and a Baily in it. The
Praefectureship of Silvanectum has enriched the Dukedom of Valois, with the
Lordships which are commonly called Pierrefons, Bethisi and Verberie, and the
Towns Angy, le Pont. S. Maxence, (which is encompast with Marshes, and is the
bounds between France and ^icardie) Pongoing, Brenonville, etc. The same
Praefectureship does also contain Compeigne, once a Princes Seat; some call
it Carolopolis, from Carolus Calvus, who enlarged the Praecincts thereof and
fortified it. Under Compiegne are the Towns Magry, Thorette, and Creil.
Silv^ce^t^^ does also contain the Bayliwicke, Praefectureship, and Vicounts of
Pons Aesiae (commonly called Pontois, and by some Pontesiumy under which are
Ville-Neuve le Roy, and l'Isle Adam. Beside, la Conte de B^^^mont sur Oyse, is
under Silvanectum, being an ancient Provo^^ship under which are Persang and
Metu. Lastly under Silvan^ctum and the Dukedom of Valois, there is the County
of Bellova^^^ which the French call La Corte de Beauvais, or Beauv^^sin. The
Metropolis thereof of is Bellovacum, commonly called Beauvais. Caesar (as
Joseph ^ca^^ writes to Merula) calls it Bratuspantium, and the same Sco^^g^
says that the Caesar's did nominate and call it Caesaromag^um. But ^tium to
speak the truth, Carolus Bovillus thinks to be ^^e so^^e which is now
called Graviller, or G^attepance: some call it Cle^m^^^ Beauvoisin, and
Vigenereus, Beaumont en Oyse. The City of Bella^^m has a pleasant situation,
and fruitful Mountains adjoining to it, which are not very high, but fit for
Tillage. It has also good store of Wines. Ludovicus the 11. King of France in
the year 1472. granted great privileges to the Inhabitants thereof,
especially to the Women, because they enforced Charles Duke of Burgundy to
raise his Siege, and go away without doing any thing. Not far from
B^llovacum is the Town Clermont, fortified with a Castle. So much concerning
Valo^; the third part of France follows called Heurepois. It begins at
Seyne, and so from the little Bridge of Paris runnethly the same River to
Corbeil, Melodunum, and Morer, where the River Verina does separate it from
Gastinois. It cleaves to Bry^ toward ^^lumier, and contains the
Melodunensian Viccounty, and Bayli^^^. The Metropolis thereof is Melodunum,
called by all the anci^^ Books of the Commentaries of the French war
Metios^d^m, but now Melun. This Town is seated on an Island in Seyn, like
^aris, and has a strong Castle. The Town now commonly called Corb^^^^ (...)
in the life of S. Petrus Tarantasius, Corbelium a place famous for Fish, but
especially for sweet Crabs, and has a strong Castle. There is in He^repois a
Town called Fons Bellae-Aquae, in French Fountain Belle^^^ where the King
has a pleasant Palace. Heretofore it was the Mansion Seat of S. Ludovicus,
afterward of Philip, and lastly of Francis of Valois, and there are many
rarities in it. I have given the fourth place in France to the Country of the
Gastinensians, commonly called ^^stencis, which is separated from Heurepois by
the River Verin^. It contains under it the Dukedomes of Estampes and Nemours,
the County of Rupes-Fortis, and others. The Town of Stampae commonly called
Estampes, is in the midway between Paris and Aurelianensium, or Orleans,
near the River Iunna or Iuine, which as Corbolium discharges it self into
Seyne. It was heretofore a County, but now a Dukedom: The Town Nemours is
seated near the River Lonius which runs into Seyne little below Moretum. It
is one of the chief Dukedomes of France. Rupes-Fortis, called by the French
Roche-fort, has the Title of a County. In the Territory of Gastinois, besides
Milly and Morer (which is the bounds between Gastinois and Heurepois) there is
Montargium, so called, quasi Mons agri, that is, the Mountain of the Field, as
some do argue, because it has a fair prospect round about it. It was wasted
by fire 1518. and afterward was re-edified. There are Castles in the two former
Towns, and there is also in this, in which there is painted a Story concerning
a Hound that revenged his Masters death, by killing him that had slain him.

PICARDIE. THE ECCLESIASTICAL STATE.
That part of Picardie which is subject to the King (...) France has 7.
Bishoprics under the Archbish^^prick of Rhemes: the Bishops of Suesson,
Silv^nectum, Beavais, (which is in France) Noy^^^ Laon, Amiens, and the
Bishopric of Bouloyg^^ This Bishopric was formerly at Ternaen, but being
suppressed it was agreed that the Bishops S^^ should be translated to
Bouloygne, Anno 1559.

PICARDIE.
The Country whence so called.
PICARDIE (as I said before) some think to be so called, because the
Inhabitants thereof were the first th^^ used Lances, which is not probable.
Some say Picar^ was so called from the Town Pequigny, or from a fam^ Soldier
called Pignon, the first Founder of the Peq^^nians and Ambianians, who after
the death of Alexander being (...) Captain of the War, after he had conquered
many Nations, arrival with a Fleet of Ships at Neustria, now called
Normandies; and ha^^sing those places he gave them afterward his own name. On
th^^ West lies the British Ocean with some part of Normandy, The Situation.
on the North lie the Countries of ancient Belgia, Artesia, and Hannonis, o^
the East Luxenburg and Lotharingia, and on the South Campania, and that Country
which is called by a more special name France. Picar^ as I have said also
before is divided into three parts. The true Picard^ the lower, and the higher.
The true Picardy does contain Vidama^^ of Ambianum, Corbie, and Pequigny, the
County of Veromandois, and t^ Dukedomes of Tirasche, and Retelois. Ambianum
has its name from a Town so called, situate at the River Samona. This Town
has (...) very fair Church, built with great Art, graced and adorned with
Images far exceeding all the curious pieces of Europe, and in it (...) they
fabulously report S. John Baptists head is kept whole. It has (...) map of
Picardie PICARDIE.
title of a Bayliwick, but yet the Civil government, as the ordering of the
municipall Court, and the power to appoint watches which are to be chosen out
of the Citizens. belongs to a Consul appointed for that purpose, The first
Bishop thereof was Firminus the Martyr, after whom 69. Bishops succeeded
orderly, the last of which was John Crequius, of the Canaplensian Family. The
Inh^bitants are reputed to be very honest and faithful, and therefore have
many pri^^ledges and immunities, as being exempted from serving ^n Forr^^^g^^
wars, and from paying of Subsidies. Here the most lea^ned ^^^cians Silvius
and Fernelius were borne, and also the excellent Orates Silvius, who with great
commendations imitated many Books of Ciceroes. This City (as we have said
before) was built by Pignon a Soldier of Alexanders the great, if we will
believe many Writers. (...) the year r597. the Spaniards treacherously
invading it, made it their own, but Henry the 4. King of France by siege and
force of Ar^^^ compelled them to render it up again. The Vidamante of Cor^^^
so called from Corbia, which is a Town situated at the River (...) or Some.
The Vidamate of Pequigny is so called from Piquigny built as I have before
expressed by one Pignon a Soldier of Alexander the great French Writers do
testify that those of the English which furti^'d after a certain victory
obtaind against them were all slain (...) Town, who could not pronounce the
name thereof, for they pronounced it Pequeny in stead of Pequigny. The
Geographers that describe France do note that Veromandois does contain under
it (...) Territories of Soissonois, Laonnois, and Tartenois: and the Cities
N^^, and S. Quintins. The City of Soissons is subject ^o ^hemes the chief City
of Gallia Belgica, and was honored by Caesar with the title of a Royal City.
It was in the power of the Romans, but was taken from them by Clodoveus, after
whose decease, his Sons restored it to that former honor which it enjoyed in
Caesar's time. The Inhabitants are a warlike people. In this City, in the reign
of Philip A^^^stus, there was a Counsel held by the Clergy of England and
France (...) that the King of England having thrust the Bishops out of their
Seats, had kept the Churches goods in his own hands for 6. years, and
afterward had banished the Bishops into France. In this Counsel he had
excommunication, and wars denounced against him as an enemy to the Church,
upon which he was overcome in Battle, and all his auxiliary Forces which he
had out of Flanders were overthrown the Suessones among the rest behaving
themselves very valiantly aga^^^^ him. The Temple and Monastery of the blessed
Virgin in the Ci^^ Soissons was built by Ebroynus the Tyrant who was Master of
the Palace of France. The Bishops of Soissons from Sixtus to Math^^ (...) were
79.. The Country of Laonois so called from the City Law which is situated
between the Rivers Ayne, and Oysa on a Hill, and ^igi^^^^us says that
Clodoveus in the year 500. did honor this City with a Dukedom and a
Bishopric. He constituted Genchaldus to be the first Bishop thereof, and
after him unto Johannes Burserius, there are reckoned 72. Bishops. It is also a
Bayliwick, under which are th^^ Cities, Soissons. Noviomagus, or Noyon, S.
Quintins, Ribueria, or Ribe^^^, Cu^y, Chau^y, Guise, Perona, Mondidier, and
Rola. Next adjacent unto L^on is Compendium, called by the French, Compiegne,
and by others Pa^opo^is, from Carolus Calvus, who in the year 896. did enlarge
and fortify it like Constantinople, erecting there also a Monastery to Saint
Cornelius. The Church of Compiegne, and the Monastery of the Dominicans and
Franciscans were built by S. Ludovicus King of France. The Metropolis of
Tartenois is Fera, commonly called La Fere, being (...) City well fortified and
commodiously seated, at the confluence and meeting of the Rivers Oysa, and
Serva, and having a strong Castle. Concerning the Cities Noyon and S. Quintins
there is enough spoken ^n the Description of a former Table. So much therefore
concerning ^rue Picardie. There are diverse parts of the lower Picardie called
(Le B^sse.) As Sancterra, Pontium, Bolonesium, Guinaeum, and Oyum. Sancterra,
or Santerre lies between Mons S. Desiderij, Perona, Roye, and Nesla. Mons S.
Desiderij, or Mondidier is a strong Place or Hold. Perona is situated at the
River Somona: here Herebert Earl of Veromandois kept Charles the Simple King
of France Captive, where he died and left the Kingdom much troubled. Roye is a
fair Town, fortified with a Castle. Antoninus calls it Caesaromagnus, as
also the Itinerary Tables. Nessa is a strong Fortress as many other places are
in this part of the Kingdom. In Sancterra have many famous men been borne,
and the ancient Lords thereof being Marquesses, formerly joined in affinity and
allied to the Family of the Courtneys, which descended from the Kings of
France. Pontium or in French Le Conte Ponthieu is so named, from the great
company of Bridges and Marshes which discharge and empty themselves into the
Sea, near to S. Valeri. The chief Town of the County is Abatisvilla,
commonly called Abbeville near the River Oyse, being a Bailiwick, and the
Seat of a President, from whence Causes and Suites in Law are brought to
Paris. The other Towns are Cretoy, Rua, Treport, and S. Richeri, besides
Cressiacum, or the little Town of Cressi famous for the slaughter of 36000.
Frenchmen, under the conduct of Philip of Valois, in the year 1346. This
Country also does contain two other under it, to wit, the Counties of
Monstreul, and S. Paul, some think the former was so called quasi Mons Regius,
that is, the Royal Mountain, but others imagine it to be so named from a
Monster which had his dwelling house here. Lower Picardie contains the County
of Bononia, The lower Picardy.
commanly called Corte de Boleigne, and the County of Guisne, of which we will
speak in the Description of Bononia. The chief Rivers of Picardie are Somona,
near to which lie the Town Ambianum, or Amiens and Abbe-Villa, The River is
called by Ptolemy Phrudis, and by Caenalis, Sambre.

This River Caesar calls Axona, and Caenalis Disne.


Oyse, or Esia, Scaldis, Escault, or Sceldt, and those which are commonly
called Ayne and Scarpe. I come to their manners. The Picardians are of a good
disposition, well set, courteous, Officious, valiant, and prone to anger,
whence they are called hot heads: they are so soon assuredly given and
addicted to wine, so that a man can hardly obtain any thing of them, unless
he will bear them company in drinking. Yet they agree so well among
themselves, that if you offend one of them, all the rest will be your enemies.
The Nobles are war like, and do most of all delight in military affairs. So
much concerning Picardy.

CAMPANIA, THE STATE ECCLESIASTIC*
Here is the Archbishop of Rhemes, under whom are eight s^ fragan Bishops: as
the Bishop of Laon, a Duke and Peer France: the Bishop of Chalon an Earl and
Peer of France the Bishop of Suesson, the Bishop of Terwaen, whose Seat (...)
translated to Boulogne, the Bishop of Amiens, the Bishop Noviomagum, or Noion,
an Earl and Peer of Fran^^ the Bishop of Senlis, and the Bishop of Beauvais;
an Earl (...) Peer of France.

Here is also the Archbishop of Sens, under whom are seven ^^shops, to wit, the
Bishop of Paris, of Chartres, of Orleans Nivers, of Auxerre, of Trois en
Champaigne, and of Me^^^

CAMPANIA.
The Country whence so called.
CAMPANIA called in French Comte de Champaign derived as I have said before, if
we shall believe ^^rius Turonensis, from the great and spacious Field (...) of
it consists. For it is a very plain and Champaign Country. The Situation.
The Territories of Brie, Burgundy, Co^^ and Lotharingia do encompasse it on
every side. The Tricasses, Li^^^ the Remi, the Catalaunians, the Meldae, the
Senones, and others, wh^ now worn out of memory, were heretofore seated in
this Co^ The Tricasses nominated in Plinies chiefest Books, Ptolemy calls
^kassioi, and Ammianus Tricassini, as also in certain Panegyricks (...) in the
Inscription of an ancient Stone. Hericus calls the Trees (...) the life of S.
Germane, and others call them by contraction Tres^^^ Their City is called
Tricassium, and commonly Trois en Champaign Those which Caesar, Pliny, and
others do call Lingones, Ptolemy c^ Dongones, and the same Pliny, Faederati.
That Province which contai^ their City which is Langres, is now called La
Duche, Pair and Eu^ de Langres. Those which Caesar calls Remi, Ptolemy
calls Rhe^ Pliny Faederati, and the Country in which is their City of Rhemes
is called Duche Pairie, and Archenesche de Reims, as we have before mentioned.
The Learned do think that the Cathelauni mentioned in A^^anus Marcellinus
should be written Catalauni. And so they are no^^nated map of Campania
CAMPANIA.
in Eutropius his Books. Their City is now called la Eves^^^^ Challon. In the
Catalaunian Fields. Attila King of the ^unnes the year from the building of
the City of Rome 1203. and after (...) birth of Christ 450.) was overcome by
the Romans, Goths (...) Frenchmen, under the conduct of their Captains
Actius Pat^^ Theodoricus and Merovaeus, there being slain on both sides 1620^^
^cept 90000. Gepidaans and Frenchmen, who were slain b^^ Iornandes cap. 36.
does delmeate and set forth these Fields, and (...) place of the Battle. The
Melde Pliny calls Lib^^^-Strabo Me^^^ Ptolemie Meldai: and an Inscription
engraven on an ancient Sto^^^ Meldi. Strabo precisely makes them and the
Leuxovians to bee^ Parokeanitae, which are in the middle of the Country where
there now the Town Meaulx near the River Matrona. The Seno^es (...) are
celebrated by Caesar, Pliny, and others. Ptolemy calls by the (...) name, and
places them in Gallia Lugdunensis. St^^ah^ thinks th^^ there are other
Senones near to the Nerviais, toward the West. The former of them did make
those horrible incursions into Italy so (...) spoke of, and they did moreover
wage a most fierce war against the Romans in the year from the building of
the City (...) which they called The Senonick French war. Their Captain was
Bra^ (...) Nobleman of France. After the Fight or Battle, they entered the City
of Allta, and there having slain all they met, and wasted all with fire, they
besieged for many months the Capital, unto which the Roman youth had fled
for their safeguard: but at last having made a peace with them for a certain
sum of money, contrary to faith and promise they were partly slain, and
partly put to slight by M^^rius Camillus the Dictator, who entered the City with
an Army. All these things Livie Lib. 5. Florus Lib. 1. cap. 13. and many other
Writer do delineate in their proper colors. Campania is honored with the
title of a County, and was once the Inheritance of Eudo Nephew to Gerlo the
Norman by his Son Theobaldus: The ancient government.
This Gerlo was he that accompanied into France Rudulphus or Rollo the Norman,
to whom Charles the Simple granted Neustria which was afterward called
N^^mandie. After Eudo there succeeded in a right Line, Stephen, T^^^^dus the 2.
whose son Theobaldus the third dying without issue, there succeeded him his
Cousin germane Henry surnamed the large, the son of Stephen King of England,
who was Brother to Theobaldus the second Henry had a son who was Earl of
Campania, and the other Territories, but he dying without issue, his Brother
Theobaldus invaded the County, and writ himself Count Palatine of Campania.
This Theobaldus being afterward made King of Navarre upon the death of
Grandfather by the Mothers side, brought the County to belong to the Crown,
and left Henry his Successor both in Campania, and in the Kingdom. Lastly,
Ioane Daughter and Heir to this Henry being married to Philip the Fair King of
France, Campania and the other Provinces were united to the Crown of France,
from which they were never after separated. Campania as I have already spoken,
is usually not described both by it self, and with the Principalities adjacent
and lying round about it. As it is considered properly and by it self it is
twofold, the Lower, and the Higher. In the Lower is Tricassium, and the
Territories which are commonly called Ivigny, Bass^g^y, and Val^ge. Modern
Writers do call that Tricassium, which is now called ^rots. Those who were
heretofore Earls of Campania, from this City were called Earls of Tricassium.
It is one of the greatest and fairest Cities in this Kingdom. The Latitude
thereof is 47. degrees, and some few minutes, toward the North. It is a
Bishops Seat, and Bel^esorrestius reckons 83. Bishops thereof. Among these was
that famous Lupus, whom Sidonius Apollinaris praises for his virtues, ( Lib.
6. Ep. 1.4. and 9.) as also Paulus Diaconus (in Marciano) Bid (Lib. 1. Histor.
cap. 17.) and others. This City has a large Jurisdiction, and it is the seat
of a President, of Counselors, of Judges, and others of the Kings Officers.
The Towns have reference to it, namely, Bar Sur Seine, The Cities.
Mussil Evesque, La ferte Sur Auge, Nogent, Pont Sur Seine, Fruille, Chastel,
and S. Florentin, being all Towns of Campania. The Territory of Ivigny
separateth Campania from Burgundy. The chief Town thereof is Ivigny, which
is under the Jurisdiction of the Bayliwick of Tricassium. Bassigny is so named
because it is the better part of Lower Campania, as we have before declared.
The Metropolis thereof is named from the bald Mountain, which Ivonus
mentions ( Ep. 105) commonly called Chaumonten Bassigny. It has an ancient
Castle seated on a Rock and well fortified, the Tower on the West side whereof
is called in French Dony^n and La haulte fueille. This Castle the Earls of
Campania did heretofore make their Palace. No River runs by it, nor
affords water unto it, but that which Cesternes do yield, and a Fountain at
the foot of the Tower. There are also in Bassigny the Towns of Montigny,
Goeffy, Nogent le Roy, Monteclar, Andelot, Bisnay, Choiseul, Visnorty, and
Clesmont, being all strong Towns, and the most of them well fortified with
Castles, besides Andomatunum Lingonum, commonly called Langres, of which we
shall speak in an other place. The Territory of Vallage, is supposed to be so
called from the Valleys in it which are both fair and fruitful. The Towns of
chiefest note in Vallage are first Vasseium, or Vassy, near Blois, in the
Country of Guise. Francis Duke of Guise coming hither in the year 1562. was
the Author of that Vasseian Massacre, mentioned by the French
Historia-graphers, wherein many that professed the reformed Religion were
slain on the Kalends of March. Not far from thence there is a kind of earth
found, of which Bole Armenack is made. The second Town of not is S. Desire or
Dedier, which was taken by the Emperor Charles the fifth, and afterward a
peace being concluded was restored again to the French. It has a strong
Castle. The third is the Town of Ian-ville, (or as some write is Joint ville)
which some do fabulously report was so called from Ianus. It belongs to the
Families of the Guises. Brye, so called from a Town commonly named Brye, or
Bray Comte Robert, is reckoned by some with Campania. The Country of Brye
although it were heretofore and also now is very woody, yet in fertility and
fruitfulness it is not inferior to any part of Campania. For it has a clear
sky, and a sweet and temperate air. It is watered with great, wholesome, and
fruitful Rivers. The Cities of Brye are Castellum Theodorici, Iatinum, Medorum
or Meldarum, now called Meaulx, Provinse, and others. Castellum Theoderick,
commonly called Chasteau Thierry is the Metropolis of the Country of Brye,
having Baily and President in it. It has also a Bishops Seat, of which
B^^forrestius reckons 101. Bishops, the last of which number was ^^dovicus
Bresius. Provinsij a Town famous for the sweet red Ro^^ that are in it, and
for the Rose-cakes, and Rose Water which (...) made of them in the Summer time.
Here are some ruinous Mo^^ments of Antiquity. And so much shall suffice
concerning Camp^^^^

THE COUNTRY OF BELLOV ACVM. COMMONLY CALLED BEAVVAIS, OR BEAVVOISIN. The State
Ecclesiastic.
THE BISHOP OF BELLOVACVM IS A SPIRITVAL and temporal Lord, an Earl, and
Peer of FRANCE.
The Country of BELLOVACUM.
THE Country or County of Bellovacum, The Country whence so called.
called in French Comte de Beauvais, or Beauvoisin, did receive that
appellation by name from the Metropolis or chief City Bellovacum. It is a
pleasant Country, having Hills and Mountains round about it not very high, The
fertility.
planted with Vines: here also Meddowes, and there Pastures and Fields fit for
tillage. Beauvois has a thin subtle kind of earth found in it, of which
diverse kinds of vessels are made, and transported into many Countries, and it
is famous for the Flax which grows at a little Town commonly called Bale.
For those of Flanders and Hannonia, or Henegon, do buy it, and do make fine
webs of cloth of it, which they sell at home and transporte abroad both by Sea
and Land. The ancient Inhabitants of this part of France were the Bellovaci
(whom Caesar and Pliny do often mention) called by Strabo Bellolakoi, and by
Ptolemy Belluakoi. Caesar witnesses that these Bellovacians where the chiefest
of the Belgians, both for prowess, authority, and number of men, as being able
to bring 100000. men into the Field. The Author of the 8. Book de Bello
Gallico writes, that the Bellovacians did exceed all Frenchmen and Belgians
for matters of war. And Strabo in his 4. Book says, that the Bellovacians
are the best of the Belgians, and after them the Suessones. Caesar does in some
manner paint out the Commonwealth of the Bellovacians, when he shows, that
they were wont to elect their Princes out of themselves as amongst the rest
they did that Corbeus, who albeit his Army of Citizens was overcome, yet no
calamity could make him leave the Field, retire to the Woods, or yield himself
upon any conditions offered to him by the Romans, but fighting valiantly and
wounding many, he did enforce the enraged conquerers to cast their Darts at
him. Caesar also dot^ mention the Senate of the Bellovacians and the authority
of (...) common people: whence that excuse of the Bellovacian Senate (...)
Caesar: That while Corbaeus lived, the Senate could not do so much (...) the
City, as the unskilful multitude. But although the Bellovacia^ in Caesar's time
had a great opinion for their courage and fortitud^ yet at length being
overcome they yielded to the Romans, a^^ were subject to them until the
Frenchmen passing over the B^^ possessed France. The Husbandmen of this Country
in King (...) time did stir up a sedition, which was commonly called laqu^^^
And they especially aimed at the Nobles, of whom they slew ma^^ and pulled
down their Houses. At length Charles the Dolphin (...) France (who was
afterward King, and surnamed the Wise.) The Ki^^ of Navarre, the Duke of
Bourbon, and other Princes and Nobles of t^^ blood Royal did quiet this
sedition, as knowing what would be (...) event of it, and what troubles would
spring there from, if it we^^ not extinguished in time. The Metropolis or Mother
City of th^^ Country is Bellovacum, The Cities.
commonly called Beauvois. Guicciardine endeavoreth to prove by many reasons
that this Bellovacum is that Belg^^^ which Caesar mentions in his
Commentaries, wben he says that h^ wintered part of his Army in Belgium, and
adds withal that it is the Seat of the most valiant Bellovacians: for he
says that C^^^ meant by this name Belgium, not a whole Province, but a City,
or (...) other particular place. They faboulously report that Belgius a (...)
of France the Son of Lugdus did lay the foundation of this City, (...) of the
City Lugdunum, a long time before the building of Troy, and called it Belgians
whence Gallia Belgica has its denomination. It is (...) ancient famous City,
as having besides a Bishopric, an Earl, who (...) one of the twelve Peers of
France, and there are also diverse Mo^^ments found in it, which do witness
that it was once a great, (...) and populous City. It has an excellent
situation, and is fortif^^^ with Walls and Towers entrenched with broad deep
Ditches, (...) furnished with Ordnance, as also adorned with fair Churches.
(...) chief Church whereof is the Cathedral Church, consecrated (...) S.
Peter, which is one of the fairest Churches in France, and in which they report
that the bones of Justin Martyr, Eurotus, and Germerus (...) kept. The Bishops
of Bellovacum do write themselves Earls and Peers of France. The first of
them was S. Lucian, after whom succeeded 84. Bishops, whom Belleforrestius does
reckon up, and makes Charles of Bourbon the last of them. Bellovacum is
governed by a Malo^^ (in like manner as the Merchants of Paris by a Proefect)
and also b^ twelve Peers, who are as so many Consuls being annual
Ma^^strates, and elected by the people, as the Magistrates of Rome we^^ usually
chosen. This City is rich by clothing, and gains this honor to itself, that
the fairest and best Carpets in all France are ma^^ therein. A Nation Counsel
was here held and kept in the yee^^ 1114. Here was borne the great Historian
Vincentius a Doctor and Governor of the Monastery of the Dominicans, who lived
in the year 840. In this City was also borne Guilielmus Durandus, who wa^ map
of Bellovacum THE COUNTRY OF BELLOVACVM
first here a Canon, afterward Deane of Chartes, and last of all Bishop of
Mande. He lived in the year 1286. There was the place of Johannes Choletus his
nativity, who founded a College at Paris commonly called le College des
Cholets, and was a Cardinal though of mean birth: and lastly, here was borne
Iohann^s Michael Bishop of Angiers, whom i^ Anjou they esteem as a Saint. This
is an argument of the riches of this Territory of Beavais, that 11. or 12 miles
round about this City, there are so many Towns and Villages, and those so
near one to another, that none of them are above a mile distant. This City was
exchanged for the County of Sancerrane, which Roger Bishop of ^^^vacum
surrenderd up to Eudon Earl of Campania, for the Country of Bellovacum, the
Goods, Lands, and Dominion whereof he joined to his Bishopric. The Country of
Bellovacum contains Clerm^nt, not far from Bellovacum, which is a County,
and appertains to the Royal house of Burbon. Charles Duke of Burbon had by
his wife (...) Daughter to John Duke of Burgundy, two Sons John and Peter.
(...) the second of this name married Ione the Daughter of Charles the^ and
dying without issue left his Dukedom to his younger Brother Peter. Peter the
second Duke of Burbon of this name had by Anne the Daughter of Ludovick the
eleventh Susan, the Inheritrix of Bu^^en, who was wife to the aforesaid Charles
the younger Son of G^^^^, who also was the younger Son of the abovenamed
Ludovick Earl of Montpenser, and Brother to Charles Duke of Burbon. But he
having no issue, the Line of the eldest Son of Ludovick, who was the first
Duke of Burbon, was extinguished. James of Ponthium the younger Son of Ludovick
the first Duke of Borton aforesaid, had John Earl of Me^^h by Ioane the
Daughter of the Earl S. Paul. After him succeeded Ludovick, John Vendomensis
the second of this name, Francis, Charles created Duke of Vendomium by King
Francis the first: and also Antonius who was afterward King of Navarre. He had
by Ioane Albretane Queen of Navarre (the Daughter of Henry the second King of
Navane and Margaret Valesia Cosin-germane to Francis the first King of Fran^^
Henry the first of this name, King of France by his Fathers right, and the
third King of Navarre of that name by the right of his Mother, the Father of
Ludovick the 13. Let us return to Claramont which is a Town fortified with a
Castle, and here the Lord de la Rocque a famous French Poet was borne. There is
also the Town Belmontium, or Bellus Mons, that is, the fair Mount, commonly
called Beaumont which lies near the River Aesia, commonly called Oyse. The
County is commonly called la C^mte de Beaumont sur Oyse, being an ancient
Praefectureship, under which are Persang and Metu. The County of Belmontius
has Princes of the Royal Stock of Vendomium which are Lords thereof. Near to
this Town beyond the River Aesia or Oyse, the Country of Bellovacum begins.
P. Merula supposes that Beaumont was the same with that which Antonius calls
Augustomagum, and Ptolemy corruptly moves Ratomagus. Some think it to be that
Town which Caesar describes, Lib. 2. Belli. Gal. being well fortified by
nature, as having high Rocks round about it, and on one side away into it,
somewhat steep. And so much concerning the Country of Bellovacum, I pass to
Bolonia.

THE COVNTIE OF BOVLONGNE.
Wherein are these Countries: Guines, Ardres, and the Baronry of Fiennes. Also
the Bishopric of Tarvania, and Morinea, by which the other Countries in
spiritual matters are subject.
The Meridians thereof are placed at the Parallels 50. and 45.
THE Country of Bolonia, or as some call it, of Bononia, in French Conte de
Boulogne, is very large. The Country whence so called.
All this Country is Sandy, having a kind of Sand which they call burning
Sand: whence some do judicially think that it was called Bolonia from
Boullir, whereas indeed it was so named from the Town of Bulloigne, which is
now divided into the Higher and the Lower. The County of Bononia begins at
the Mountains of S. Ingelbert: The Situation.
and runs forth to the River Cancha, which is the length thereof, and to the
Wood Tournoth, which is the breadth thereof. Bolonia was made a County in the
time of Carolus Calvus King of France, at what time S. Paul, Oye, Guines, and
Artesia were honored with the same Title. It has many Towns and Villages, and
amongst the rest there is Bulloigne, which is twofold, The Cities.
the Higher and the Lower. The former is seated on a high ground, on which was
only a Borough Town, before the English besieged it. The latter being seated
in a plainer soil is washed with the Sea, and they are distant from each other
an hundred paces, or thereabouts. And a certain Panegyric written by an
unknown Author, and spoken before the Emperor Constantine calls it
Bononiense opidum, or the Town of Bononia. Now it is commonly called Boulogne:
and the Low-Countrymen coming nearer to the ancient appella, tion do call it
Beunen. Joseph Scaliger in his Letters to Merula, Papirius, Masserius, Leland,
Ortelius, and others do think that it was anciently called Gessoriacum. Also
Peutingers Table does confirm the same in which Gessoriacum is put for
Bononia. Antoninus calls it Gessoriacum, and does place there the 15. Legion,
and otherwheres he calls it Gessoriacensis Portus, or the Haven of
Gessoriacum, or Gessoriagum: Ptolemy calls it Gessoriacum a Haven of the
Moriakans: John Talbot thinks it should be named Galesium, and others that
it should be called Saint Aud^mar: Turnebus calls it the Town of Soacum:
and Boethius Slusa: Hermolaus Barbarus calls it Brugas, and Bilibaldus
Gandavum. Robert Caenalis distinguishes Gessoriacum Portum, and Gessoriacum
Navale, and thinks the one to be Benonia, and the other Cassell. Hence came
that Godfrey of Boulogne, the Son of Eusta^^^ Earl of Boulogne, who was Duke
of Lotharingia, and the first King of the Christian Solonians. Near to
Boulogne was the Haven Itius, which some thought to be the Town of Calis, whom
Ptolemy easily confuteth, who first places the Promontory of Itius behind the
mouth (...) the River Seyn, and afterward Gesoriacum a Haven of the Morinnian^
from which the Town of Calis is above tweenty Miles distant. (...) Velserus is
persuaded that Gessoriacum is the same with Itium. So^ think the Haven Itius
to be S. Andomar, enduced thereunto bo^ because this City was in ancient times
called Sitieu, as it were the B^ of Itium, and also by the situation thereof,
which being very low, y^^ by the high shores which lie round about the City, it
seems it was (...) great Bay of the Sea. Camden in his Brittannia shows that
the Have^ Itius was long accounted to be in that place which they now ca^
Withsan: near Blanestum. But we leave these things to be decided by others.
Next to the County of Bononia is Guisnes which is parted from the County of
Oye, by a great Channel; which making the Territo^^^ impregnable, The County
of Guisnes. The Towns.
and glideth by the chief Town called Guisnes, bei^^ divided into two parts,
one whereof is seated in the Marish gro^ the other on the Continent, and is
naturally strong and well for^^fied. King Henry the second took it, Francis
Lotharingeus Duke (...) Guise being sent thither in the year 1558. Concerning
the Da^^ right heretofore, to the Country of Guise, Meyerus writes much (...)
the Annals of Flanders, and concerning this Country other Historiographers do
write other things which are not now to be mentioned There are also other
Towns, as Hartincourt, Peuplinge, Conquelle, the Nievelletian Haven. This
Country has under it the Baronies of Ardres and Courtembrone, which are so
called from these two Towns Ardres and Courtembrone, and also the Barony of
Fiennes.

Two miles from Ardres toward the Ocean is Calis, a Town well fortified both
by nature and Art, esteemed always to be the Key and Gate of France, which
Philip of Boulogne Uncle to S. Ludovick as the report, first walled about, it
having a Castle with a strong Tow^^ which commands the entrance into the Haven.
Edward the fifth, King of England took it the day before the Nones of August,
11. months after that cruel Battle fought against Philip the sixth, King of
France, near to Cressy in the year 1347. which Paulus Aemilius, (...) 9.
lively delineateth. The English did possess it 211. years, (for Philippus
Bonus a Burgundian did in vain besiege it in the year 1431, his Flandrians
forsaking him) and did keep it (as the English were wont to say) as the Key of
France, the Duke of Guises afterward took it, and the Frenchmen regained it in
the year 1558. in the month of February. In the midway between Calis and
Bononia toward the Mediterranean Sea is Teroane: which still retains that
name, although Charles the fifth passed it, and call it Terrennerberch,
Antonius names it Tervanna or Tarvenna, the Itinerary Tables Tervanna, and
Ptolemy Tarvanna. Bovillus affirms that some do call it Tarubanum,
Trithemius in his History of France mentions the Terrubanians. map of Bologna
BOVLONGNE.
Some call it Tervana as it were Terra-vana, in regard of the meanenes^ of the
Territory. In the Register of the Provinces; where the Cities of Belgia are
reckoned up, it is called the City of the Morinneans, that is, l'Evesche de
Teroane. In the Inscription of an ancient Store, which in former time was found
in Gilderland it is called the Mori^^ans Colony. The Territory of Oyana or
Terre de Oye, does reach ever to Dunkerk, a Town of Flanders. There are also
beside Oya, some other small Towns. The Rivers.
I return now to Boulogne which is watered with stre^es and Rivulets, which
running by the Town Arque, and S. Audoma^^ do come to Graveling. Not far
from thence is the Bay of Scale^, flowing even to the Castle of Ardera. There
are also two other Rivulets, namely, one in Marquisia, the other in Bolonia.
There is also the River Hantia or Hesdin, which does impart his name to the
Town Hesdin. There is also in this Country the Moorish streams of the
Pontinians, and the River Cauchia. Some of these Rivers do make Lakes and
Fish-pits, which are full of Fish, and are denominated from the neighboring
Towns: as those which they call in French le Vivier, d'Hames, d'Andre,
d'Arbres. All this Country toward the Sea is environd with sundry Hills, and in
the inner part thereof there are those Hills which they call in French les Mons
de S. Ingelvert, and les Mons de neuf Castle, and Dannes. All the Country is
interlaced with many Woods, as the Woods les Bois de Surene, Celles, etc. The
Inhabitants are accounted to be froward, and too much conceited of themselves.

ANIOV THE DVKEDOME OF ANDEGAVIA.
The Dukedom of Anjou contains Counties, Baronnies, and Seigniories, as
Craon 1856. 4743, etc. which I have not yet found out, nor can distinguish;
these four Counties, Maine, Vendosme, Beaufort, and La Val do hold of it by
Homage and Fealty.

THE IVRISDICTION.

The Praesidiall Seat of the whole Kingdom is Angiers, under which are these
particular Juridicall Seats, Angiers, Samur; Bauge, 1945. 4725. and Beaufort
en Vallee, 1940. 4716.

The State Ecclesiastic.

Angiers has one Bishop of Andegauja, who is subject to the Archbishop of
Turone.

The Meridians are placed according to the Proportion of the 47. and 15.
Parallels to the greatest Circle.

The Dukedom of ANIOU.
THE Dukedom of Anjou follows in our Method, or la Duche d'Anjou. C. Caesar
calls the people of this Province Andes, and Pliny names them Andegavi. It
begins at the Village Town Chousay; and ends between Moncontour and
Herrant, The Situation.
where the Territory of the Picts begins, lying South of it on the East; the
Turonians and Vindocinians do border on it: on the North the County commonly
called Maine, and la Val: and lastly, on the West it joyneth to Britain. The
Country is more fruitful and pleasant than large, having every where Hills
planted with Vines, and Valleies crowned with green Woods, flourishing
Meddowes, and excellent Pastures for Cattle. Here are good white Wines,
commonly called Vins d' Aniou. In brief, this Country does afford all things
necessary for life. In some parts also of this Province they dig forth those
blue kind of Stones, with which being cleft in pieces they do slate their
Churches and Houses to keep off the weather; and in French they call them
Ardoises. King of ^^^ticus, after the Earl Paul was slain, got the City of
(...) and left it to his Posterity, who were Kings of France: among whom (...)
Calvus gave the higher part of the Province to Torquatus, (...) still the
Royalty thereof to himself: and the lower part to (...) Earl of Paris, whose
Nephew Hugo magnus by his Brother Rupert Earl of Andegavia, and Duke of
Celtica, gave it to Fulco, the Nephew of Terquatus. After Fulco there succeeded
in order Fulco the 2. and Gotefridus commonly called Grisgonella, Fulco the 3.
Gotefridus the 2. Fulco the 4. Fulco the 5. who was King of Jerusalem, after
Baldwin, whose Daughter, he being a Widdower had married: and lastly Godfridus
Barvatus the 6. who was married to Machtildis, the Daughter of Henry the first,
King of England. His Sons were Henry, who was the second King of England of
that name, and Gotefridus the sixth and William were Earls of Anjou: whom when
their Brother the King had overcome by war, and droven them out of their
Country, his eldest Sons did succeed him in the Kingdom of England, and
Gotefridus the 8. in the County of Anjou. The Uncle John King of England did
wage war against the Earl Arthur the Son of Gotefrid, and Duke of
Britain by the Mothers side. Arthur had now done Homage and Fealty to Philip
Ang^^ King of France, for his Principality which he had of him: by what
instigation leaving to take away Picardy from his Uncle the King and having
passed his Army over the River and Ligeris, the King coming upon him on a
sudden took him prisoner, and brought him to Rotomagum, where not long after
he was put to death. The Mother of Arthur Constantia by name, the Daughter and
Heir of ^^nan Prince of Britain, did accuse King John of Parricide, before
the King of France aforesaid: who being summoned and not appearing the Pears
of France did condemn him of parricide, and those Provinces which he had in
France they confiscated to the King: which sentence the King executing, he
took Anjon into his own hands, and left it to his Son Ludovick the 8, King
of France. After whom succeeded his Son Ludovick the 9. surnamed the Holy, who
granted this Province to his Brother Charles by right. After him followed
Charles the 2. who marrying his Daughter Clementia to Charles Valesius, he gave
this Province with her for her Dowry. After whom succeeded Philip Valesius the
Son, and after him his Nephew John, who gave the greatest part of this
Country, which was honored with the Title of a Dukedom in the year 1350. to
his Son Ludovick. After him there followed in a direct Line Ludovick the 2.
and Ludovick the 3. who dying without a^ Heir the Principality came to his
Brother Renatus. He having to issue living, made Charles his Brothers Son
his Heir, and he made King Ludovick the 11. his Heir. And thus it was annexed
to the Crown of France, and continued so united, until Francis the first gave
the revenue thereof to his Mother Aloisia Sabandae. King Charles the 9. gave it
to his Brother Henry, who was afterward King of Pele^^^ and France. The
Metropolis or Mother City of the Dukedom is Andegavum, Paulus Diaconus calls
it the City of Audegavia; it is commonly called Angiers. Ptolemy calls it
Iultomagus Andicavarum. It is seated map of Anjou THE DVKEDOME OF JANIOV.
on both the banks of the River Maine, which has a Stone bridge over it. It
is well governed, having a Bishop, a Marshall, and a Baily, and a President. It
has a famous University, instituted by Ludovi^^ the second Duke of Anjou in
the year 1389. Francis Baldwine being called thither, who professed the Law
there. This Dukedom has many fair Towns, some whereof are bigger than
others. I will reckon some Towns according as they are called in French, as
namely Samur near Liguris with a Castle; also Montreneau, Bauge, Beaufort,
B^ssac, Monstreul-Belay, Maleuvrior, Ghantoceau, Viliers, Duretail, la Ples^^e,
Chasteau-Gontier, Segre. In this Province there are many Lakes at a Rivolets,
and above 40. Rivers. There are also great Fish-pits, and an infinite number of
Fountains. The chief Rivers are Ligures, Lo^^^ Vigenna, called la Vienne,
Viane and Vignane: Meduana now called May^ Sarta commonly called Sartra and
Lorius. Beyond the City of Andegavum there are some ancient ruins, which are
commonly called Gr^han. Here they say that the Romans did heretofore build a
The^^^^, and some of the Walls do yet remain. And great store of old coin is
dug forth. Besides other Counties, Baronnies, and Signiori^s, these four
Counties do Homage and Fealty to this Dukedom, The Country of Maire.
Maine, Vendosme, Beaufort, and la Val, of which we will entreat in order. The
County of Maine, commonly called Conte de Maine is the first. In Ptolemies time
the Cenomanians did inhabit this Country. And the Province of the Cenomanians
was inhabited as soon as any other part of France. The bounds thereof were
heretofore longer than they are now, which may be gathered by that which Livie,
Polybius, and Iustine have deliverd concerning the irruption of the Cemonians
into Italy. The nature of the Soil.
One part of the Country is fruitful, the other barren, and the Inhabitants
live more by hunted flesh than by bread or wine, which yet they do not
altogether want, for some parts of this Province are so fruitful, that neither
Andegavia, nor Tutonia can excel it for good wine, or fruits. The Soil is
full of Herbage, and it for Pasturing of Cattle. The ancient government.
But we read that this Province being unprehended under Aquitania, was
sometime subject to the Duke of Aquitania, until the King of France Ludovick
the 9. and Henry the 3. King of England, did agree that, that which belonged to
the King of England in Aquitania, which was bounded on the North with the River
Caranton, and on the South with the Pyrenaean Mountains, should for ever
belong to Normandy, and to the Countries of the Cenomanians and Andegavians, in
consideration whereof 1500. Crowns were to be paid unto him. John King of
France gave Andium and the County of the Cenomanians to his second Son
Ludovick. The Letters Patents of this Donation or Gift dated 1360. may be
seen in the Kings Rolls. After Ludovick there succeeded Ludovick the second,
his Son, and Ludovick the third his Nephew. These three were Kings of Naples.
Ludovick the third dying without issue, his Brother Renatus succeeded after
him, whom Ioane Queen of Naples, the second of that name, did make her Heir
both of the Kingdom of Naples, and of the County of Province. Renatus had by
Isabell the daughter of Charles the Bold his Son. John Duke of Calabria, who
dyed before his Father Renatus. This John had by Mary the Daughter of Charles
Duke of Burbon, Nicolas Duke of Calabria, and Marquess of Pontum, who dyed
without issue, his Grandfather Renatus yet living. Renatus would not resign
his right to the Kingdom of Naples, and the County of Province to his Nephew
Renatus, but left it to his Brother Charles Earl of the Cenomanians: who dying
a little after, did institute and make Ludovick the 11. his Heir. In former
times the whole Country was divided into two parts. The City of the Cenomanians
belongs to the King of France, but the City Maena or Maine with the
Marquiship, being now made a Dukedom acknowledges the Guises to be Lords
thereof. The chief Town is by the River Sartra, commonly called le M^ns. At
the first it was a Bayliwick, and after Henry the seconds time it had a
President, and diverse Towns did bring their appeals and suites hither. The
Dukedom of Vendosme or the Dutche de Vendosme begins at Baugencia^um, which
is the bounds between the two Belsia, which are called Solonia and Vindocina,
which stretches out far and wide even to the Sautones. It is so called from
the Town Vindocinum, commonly called Vendosme. That which Ptolemy calls
Ovindikon (for so it is read) is a City of the Aulercian Cenomanians in Gallia
Lugdunensis We do affirm nothing. For that Ovinaiken, is perhaps the Town
which is now called le Ma^s, which is Scaligers opinion also. The Earls of
Vendosme are descended from from the Stock of the Burbons. We read that the
first Earl hereof was Ludovick Barbonius, the Son of John Earl of Marc and
Clermont, after whom there succeeded Lineally John his Son, and Francis and
Charles his Nephews, whom Francis the first, King of France did create the
first Duke of Vendosme. Charles was succeeded by his Son Antony, who was Duke
of Vendosme a Peer of France, and in the right of his wife Ioane Albreta, King
of Navarre, of whom came Henry Burbon, the fourth King of France of that name,
and the most potent King of Navarre, Prince of Bearne, Duke of Vendosme, etc.
There are also Beaufort and la Val.

THE DVKEDOME OF BITVRICVM.
THE Dukedom of Bituricum, or le Duche de Berry, which follows in our
Method, on the North looks toward Solonia the lower part of Belsia, from
which it is parted by the flowing streams of Caris, The Situation.
on the East is looks toward the Hurepensians, Nivernensians, and Bubonians,
being bounderd here with a little Rivalet called la Fay: on the South is
Lemovicum, where the River Croure flows; on the West are the Picts and
Turonians, from whom it is parted by a little River, commonly called Clery. The
(...)
It is fruitful in Corn, Wine, and other things necessary for man's life. It
chiefly abounds with Cattle, which the Inhabitants do disperse through all
France. Here the Biturigians were seated formerly, who as Strabo, Ptolemie, and
others do write were called Cubi. For the Biturigians a people of France we^
heretofore twofold, distinguished by their surnames, as the Bit^^ig^^ Cubi,
whose Metropolis was Avaricum in the first Aquitania, and the Vibiscian or
Viviscian Bituriges, whose chief City was Burdigala, in the second Aquitania.
Both of them were free Cities under the Romans, as Pliny witnesses. The
Register of the Provinces calls it the City of the Bituricians or
Berotigians in the first Aquitania or Sen^ Viennensis. John Calamaeus writes
much concerning the appellation and name of this Country, who contains the
lustorie of the Bi^rigians in six Books.

When Hugo Capetus governed France, Gotefridus was Praesident so^ the King over
the Biturigians. The ancient government.
From whom that Harpin was descended, who bought of King Henry the first the
County of the Biturigians. He not long after preparing to go to the wars of
Palestine, or the holy land with other Princes, sold it to Philip the first,
who united it again to the Crown. Some years afterward John Valesi^^ did
obtain this County, now made a Dukedom, of his Father John Valesius King of
France: who dying without any issue Male, the Dukedom returned to the
Kingdom. It was afterward assigned to John the son of Charles the 6. who had
a plentiful offspring and Progeny. He dying at Apais, left his brother Charles
to be his successor, who being inaugurated King of France, and despising the
marirage of Henry King of England, with Katherine his Cousin German, when the
English had took away the greatest part of his Kingdom, he was called in
scorn King of the Biturigians. After Charles the Father the son Charles the
7. succeeded, Brother to Ludorick the 11. King of map of Bituricum ^HE DVKEDOME
OF BITVRICVM.
France. After him Margaret, Sister to King Francis being first married to
Charles Duke of Alencon, afterward to Henry Albretanus King of Navarre,
received the Dukedom of the Biturigians of her Brother to her own use. And
lastly Margaret, the Daughter of the same King Francis, did receave the
Dukedom of Biturigum from her Brother Henry the second, when he married
Emanuel Philibert, Prince of the Allobrogians. Caesar Antonius, and others do
call the chief City thereof Avaricum, which now in French is called Bourges,
Ammianus and others call it Bituriga. It is also called Biturica, Bituri^ae,
The City Bit^rig^, and the City Biturica. Some would have it called Avaricum
from the River Eura, which washes it. It is seated in a very pleasant soil,
abounding not only with all kind of Corn and Grain, but also with excellent
Wine, Cattle, Foul, and all sorts of fruits. It is enamold with four Rivers,
Anfron and Aurette flowing on one side, Yure and Molon on the other side. It is
uncertain who built it, as it also of other Towns. The ancient City was
otherwise seated than it is now. For it lay toward the Marshes, the Walls
whereof may be yet seen, being still whole, and sollidly built, as all the
works of the ancient Romans were. They begin at the great Tower, and so run
along by S. Stephens Church, S. John's street, and the Got^i^a Gate, even to
the New Gate called heretofore S. Andrews Gate, from thence by the Street of
the Amphitheater, commonly called des A^^nes, they stretch themselves to the
Gate Turonensis, and from thence fetching a compass toward S. Paul's Gate,
they come by degrees back again to the aforesaid Tower. After Charles the
Great and others did so amplify and enlarge the Territories of this City, that
now it may compare with the greatest and strongest Cities of France: being
long, fair, and spacious. It is fortified with 80. high strong Towers. The
chief of them is that which I said was called the great Tower, in French la
Gross Tour, in regard of the unusual thickness thereof, which Philip the
second, King of France, Anno 1190. did streng^hen with lesser Towers, and with
a Wall, and deep Ditches. It is ^o^^d, and very high. They say there was
another Tower like it which is now ruinated, and that from these two Towers the
Biturigians were so called Bituris. And Calamaus does commend this Verse
written by an ancient Grammarian: Turribus a binis, inde vocor Bituris.
From two Towers which the Wall do fence,
A Biturian I am called from thence.


Here are seventeene Collegiat Churches as they call them, and seventeene
Parish Churches; This City has an Archbishopric, and a flourishing
University, to which there is none equal in France, being Mother and Nurse of
most learned men. The study of the Law is in greatest estimation there, of
which there are excellent Professors. As Avaricum is the chief Tribunal of
the whole Dukedom, where the Monarch of the Biturigians sits as President,
and is commonly called le Bailly de Berry. Hither are all appeals brought both
from the City Praetor, and from all Magistrates of other places in the
Territory of Bituricum. But the Prefect of Bituricum has under him the
Metropolis it self Avaricum. and 5. Dioeceses Yssoudum, Dum le Roy, Vierson,
Mehun, Concressault. There are reckoned with the Metropolis, the County of
Sancerre, and S. Aignan, the Barony of Mountfaulcon, and almost. Some suppose
that Sancerra was so called from Ceres, who was there reverenced and worshipped:
as it were the Chapel of Ceres. The more learned Latin Writers leaving this
Etymology do call it Xantodorum. It has the Title of a County, which in the
year 1015. it exchanged with Bellovacum, and in the year 1573. it endured a
hard Siege, that they were enforced to eat Dogs, Cats, Horses, Dormice,
Mice, Moles, and after they had eaten Horns, skins, and the like, they were
compelled to eat their own excrements, and man's flesh These Castellania are
subject to it Sanceges, Beaufeu, Chapelle d'Anguillon, le Chastel de Boncard,
lalonges, Tarenay, Verdigny, Menesme, Charentomry, Brie and others. S. Aignan
is so called from the Bishop S. Anianus. The Barony of Mountfaulcon, which
signifies in Latin Montem Faulconis, or the Mountain of the Faulcon, does
contain the Signiories of Baugy and Gion, also la Fane, Lyvran, ^ony,
Villabon, Seury, Marcilly, Marnay, Farges, Avor, Saligny, Percigny, Cru,
Lassax, Boisboson, Nuissement, Villiers, Compoy. Lastly, the Castellania are
Ays d'Anguillon, Sury en Vaux S. Soulange, S. Palais, la Salle du Roy, Bueil,
Quantilly, Pomorigny, Francheville, la Chapelle, Nancay, Dry, Levreux,
Beaulieu, Brecy, Beugy. S. Fleurant, Neufvisur, Baranion, Morthonnier.
Maymaignes, Maubranches, S. Vrsin, Tillay, Brilliers, Vatan, S. Satur, Lury,
Estrechies, Maulpas, Villeneusve, S. Crapaix. Ascilly, lussy le Chauldrier, la
Corn, les Chaizes, Vaulvrilles, les Cloyes, Bouge. So much concerning the
Metropolis and the large Jurisdiction thereof, the other Dioeceses are
Yssouldun a Royal City and a Bayliwick, which has under it the Baronies of
Chasteauroux, Gracay, Ceracoy, S. Severe, Lynieres, to which is joined the
Castelania of Rizay: also Argenton, in which are the Marshalship of Ravennes,
and the Praefectureship of Servignet. The Castelania are Bourssac, Chasteau
Meillant, Marcul, Neffi S. Sepulcher, Rully, Puuldy: Massy, Cahors, Peronse,
Chastellet, Messeuvre, Augurandae, S. Chartier, le Palleteau, Bommieres, Much,
Fully, Voullon, la Ferte, Nohant, Ville Dieu, Chastre, and Charroux. There is
also Dunum Regium, or Dun le Roy, under which are these Castelaniae, besides
others, Pradict Callaut a Baronnie: Chasteauneuf, near the River Caris, S.
Julian. Vierzon, a royal City and a Dioecese having these Signiories under it,
Champre, Motte d'Aisy, Saragosse, Brivay, Merry. Mehun has under it the
Castellania Love and Foici. Concourfault or Concressault has under it Vailly,
Argeny, Clemon, Beaujeu. This Country is watered with the Rivers Ligert,
Souldra, Aurrena, Cherre, Theone, Iudro, Creusa, The Rivers.
and some other smaller Rivulets. Here are no Mountains of any note. The
Country is interlaced here and there with Woods, The Woods,
the chief whereof are Silva Roberti, and Lacenna Sylva, or Roberts Wood, and
the Wood Lacenna. I come to the public and private works. At Avaricum besides
the 34. Churches aforesaid. The public works.
There are four Monasteries of Menditant Friars: two Abbeys for men, the one
dedicated to S. Sulpitius, being strong, rich, and standing without the Walls,
the other within the City, dedicated to D. Ambrosius, and well endowed: and
three Nunneries. Not long since a godly Magistrate thereof did build in
Hospital for the relief of poor and decreped people. Of all the fair
Aedifices here, which are many, the chief is the stately and sumptuous House
of James Cordus, who lived in Charles the 7. time. There are also the Almanes
Houses, who were formerly the Kings Treasurers, before the Faires, to which a
great concourse of Strangers were wont to resort. were kept at Lions. Here are
infinite ruins both within and without the Walls of old Aedifices which were
built with curious workmanship: and many are daily dug forth especially out
of the Sand-pits, as they call them, where sometime stood the Amphitheater. The
Archbishop of Bourges, has these Suffragan Bishops under him: the Bishop of
Clermont: of Rhodes: of Lymege^^ of Mende: of Alby: of Cahors: of Castres: of
Tulles: and of S. Flour: but the Bishop of Puy is exempted.

THE DVKEDOME OF BVRBON.
THE Country and Dukedom of Burbon, or le Pays and Duche de Burbonneis, was so
called from the Dukes of Burbon, The Situation
who were Governors thereof. On the West it is neighboured with the
Biturigians, and Lemonicians, on the North with the Nivernianis: On the East
lies Burgundy, on the South are the Lugdunians. The fertility.
The Soil for the most part is all pasture ground, and has no Corn but in
some few places. But there are very good Wines, and great plenty of Corn.
Those people whom Caesar Lib. 1. de Bello Gallico calls Boij, were supposed
to have dwelt here formerly, and he calls their Town Lib. 7. Gergovia,
where he also mentions Boia, which doubtless was the Boians Town. Their
strength was so great that joining themselves with the Cenomanians and
Insubrians, they plucked down the pride and arrogance of the Thuscians, possessed
their dominions, and seated themselves in that part of Italy which is now
called Romania. The Romans did call it Gallia Togata, because the Frenchmen who
were subject to the Romans, dwelt there. The Sugusians also did inhabit all
that part which is called le Bays de Fores. All this Territory, as many other
bordering Countries, was heretofore subject to the Kings of Aquitaine.
Afterward it had Dukes; The ancient government.
who from a Town of no mean note were called Dukes of Burbon. The last of
them was Arcibaldus, who had one only daughter and heir, called Agnes. She
marrying John Duke of Bugundie, gave her daughter Beatrix, which she had by
him, the Dukedom of Burbon for her dowry, having married her to Robert the Son
of Ludovick the ninth, yet with this caution, that it should be called after
his wives name, and the house of the Burbons, that so the title thereof might
remain to posterity. Which being done. Robert the son of Ludorick the
ninth, who was canonized for a Saint, did propagate and enlarge the name of the
Borbons. For his sons were Ludorick surnamed the great, who succeeded his
Father, John Claromont Lord of the Town of the Fane of Iustine in Campania:
Peter Archdeacon of Paris, and two daughters. This Ludorick Philip Valesius the
sixth created the first Duke of Burbon, in the year 1339. or thereabout, who
had by his wife Mary the daughter of John Earl of Hannonia, Peter the first
who succeeded him, and James the Father of the Earls of March and Vendosme^,
Philip Lord of Belloium, Ma^y, and Beatrix. This Peter was created the second
Duke of Burbon, and Lord of Molin. He was slain in a Battle fought between
the Picts, and the English. He had by Isabell, the daughter of Charles, Earl
of Valence. Ludorick the 2. who succeeded his Father: James the Lord of March,
and seven daughters. Ludorick surnamed the good married Anna, the daughter of
Beraldus the Dolphine of Avernia, who was called Duke Simus, and of Ione
Forrestaria, who brought him (...) who succeeded his Father, Ludovick, and
James Lord of Prausium. Io^ the first of that name marrying Mary the daughter
of John, Duke of the Biturigians, was Duke of Burbon and Avernia, Earl of
Clarom^^ Mompensper, Forest, and Lord of Bellijocum and the Castle of China^
From him issued Charles, who succeeded his Father, Ludorick Earl of Montpenser
(from whom the Dukes came of Montpenser) and Ia^^ Charles took the part of
King Charles the 7. and Philip the good, Duke of Burgundy, with whom at last
by the meditation and persuasion his wife Agnes a Burgundian, sister to Philip,
he made a peace with hi^ Agnes brought him John who succeeded after him,
Ludovick, Peter, (...) was afterward a Duke, Charles a Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Li^^ Ludorick Bishop of Leodium, James and five daughters. John
the second was Duke of Borbon and Avernia, Earl of Clarom^nt, of Forest, the
Island and March, Lord of Belliocum and of the Castle of Chin^^, (...) Peer
and Constable of the Kingdom of France. He married thrice, but dyed without
issue. Peter the 2. succeeded his brother John, (...) was high Chamberlain of
the Kingdom of France, and he had (...) Anne daughter of King Ludorick the
11. one only daughter called Susan, who succeeded her Father. She marrying
Charles B^^ Earl of Montpenser (the son of Gilbert Burbon, Nephew to John
^dorick the first aforesaid, Duke of Burbon, Earl of Montpenser, (...)
Dolphine of Avernia) by her marriage made her Husband Duke of Burbon. This was
that Charles who being Constable of France, (...) volting from his Prince
Francis King of France, took part and side with the Emperor Charles the
fifth, and besieged Rome where bei^ shot with a bullet in the year 1527. the
day before the Nones (...) May, he dyed, having obtaind no victory nor left no
children. As^ the death of his wife Susan, the King getting Burbon to himself,
(...) Dukes of Vendosme kept only their arms, and their bare title by the
right of affinity. The Earls of Flanders did first lineally desc^^^ from the
family of the Burbons: and many great Kings and Prince have sought to be
linkt in affinity with this royal and Prince^ house. Moreover the French
Geogrophars do make two parts (...) the Dukedom of Burbon, the lower and the
higher. The lower contains diverse Cities, and two Countries. Concerning the
Citie^ The Metropolis of the whole Dukedom is Molinum (or Melius) Town by the
River which Caesar calls Elaver, now Allier: it was (...) ancient Seat of
Dukes: afterward it was a house of pleasure, and pleasant retyring place for
the Kings of France. Some think th^^ that which Caesar calls Gergobina was a
Town among the Celta, wh^^ Caesar in the Helvetian War placed there. The
Marshall of Bur^^^ has his Presidiall Seat here, which was erected by King
Francis the first of that name. Molins has a very fair Castle, and a curious
G^^den adjoining to it, in which there are great store of Oranges and Citernes.
In the Castle Xystum you may see the lively Pictures of the Dukes of Burbon,
and their Genealogies. Here is also a fair Fo^^taine. map of Bourbon THE
DVKEDOME OF BVRBON.
The other Cities and Towns are Burbon, famous for antiquity, and which
heretofore did name the whole Province. Caesar in his ^. Book calls it Boia.
This City is situated between the Rivers Elaveres and Caris, commonly called
Cher, well known and famous in the time of Charles the great. It has a strong
Castle and Baths: also L'Archimont, Montmerant. And Cosne surnamed en
Burbonnois near the River Loire, having a Castle, and in regard that the
Territory is f^^^ for Pasturage it exceeds other parts: also Montlusson, and
S. Por^is, whose Fields do bring forth excellent Wines, (yet some do ascribe
it to Avernia) also Cusset; Chancelle; Charroux; Vernueil, famous foe Wines:
also Varennes a famous Town by the River Elaveres; Ga^^ confining upon
Avernia; also Le Mont aux Moines; Souvigni le Comte, (...) aux Moines; la
Palisse, having a stately Castle: also Erisson, Sancoing^, the Fane of S.
Peter, commonly called S. Pierre le Monstier, which is not very ancient. It
has a President, under whom are the Baylies of the same Town; and the Towns
which are commonly called Deuzi^^, Xaincois, Cusset, and others, one part
whereof are seated in Averni^, and another in Nervernesium: there is also Ainay
la Chasteau so named from the Castle S. Amand, and others. So much concerning
the Cities and Towns. The Counties are two, which are commonly called
Beaujolois and Forest. The former Bello Iolesius contains all that lies
between the River Ligeris and Araris, being situated toward the East between
the Forestians and Burgundians: being the Patrimony of the ancient Burbons. The
chief City is called in French Be^jea. The other is named not from the Woods
and Forests as the word does seem to intimate, but from the Forensians, for
so I name those people: on the North lies Burbon, on the West Avernia, on the
South the Lugdunians confine upon it: on the East the Bello-Jolesians.
Heretofore it had Earls, from whose Stock did arise the noble of
Bello-Iolesius. A certain Earl of Forest and Bello-Iolesius is celebrated by
French Historians, who had three Sons, Arthauldus Earl of Lugdunum, Stephen
Earl of Forest, and Emfrid Earl of Bello-I^^s^^. When thus the Counties of
Forest and Bello-Iolesius had been in a long time distracted, they were
united again by the death of G^^^d, Earl of Bello-Iolesius, who was Master of
the horse in the time of Philip the 2. King of France, for his Sister Isabel,
Countess of Bello-Iolesius was married to Reginaldus, Earl of Fortest, who
was descended of the stock of Arthauld aforesaid, as she from the offspring of
Stepha^, who was brother to Arthauld as is mentioned before. From this marriage
there proceeded Guido, who was heir to the County of Forest, and Lugovick,
who was Lord of Bello-Iolesius. After whom there is (...) certainety
delivered. Henry the third King of France, before he came to the Monarchy of
France, possessed the Dukedomes of B^^bon and Avernia, the County of Forest
together with the Dukedom of Andigavia.

It contains forty walled Towns, and about as many fair Villages. The
chief Town of the Forrensians Roana, or Roanne, near the River Ligeris,
which has a Bridge over it, which stands in the way to Lions, and also a
Castle. The second Town of note is (...) Segusian^rum, for so it was
heretofore called which is now commonly called Feurs: Ptolomy calls it Phoros of
the Segusians: and the Itinerary Tables corruptly call it Forum Segustivarum.
And from this Fotum, the Country corruptly is commonly called Le Layis de
Forest, when it should be rather called, de Fores. This is now a Town of
commerce and traffic for the whole Province. The other Towns are
Mombrisonium, or Montbrison, being a Bayliwicke and subject to the Lugdunians,
also the Fane of S. Stephan, and S. Estierne de Furan, where armor and Iron
bars are made, which are transported from thence into all parts of France.
The artificers Art is much furthered by nature of the water, which does give
an excellent temper to Iron, and also the coals which are dug there: there
is also the Fane of S. Galmarus, or S. Galmier, or Guermier, in the Suburbs
whereof, there is an Alome Fountain, which is commonly called Font-Foule: also
the Fane of S. Germane, or S. Germain Laval, which has abundance of wine
growing about it: also the Fane of D. Bovet, or S. Bovetle Castle, in which
the best tongs are made: also the Fane of D. Rembertus, or S. Rembert, having
the first Bridge that is over Ligeris. The Country of Burbon is watered with
two great Rivers, namely Ligeris and Elavera, being a River of Arvernia.
Ligeris commonly called Loire rises up in Avernia, in a place which in French
is called La Font de Loire. Elever, commonly called Allier, rises four Miles
above the Town Clarumont, beneath Brionda near Gergovia, and flows not
far from a place which in French is called Vsco, where there is a famous mine
of gold, and of the stone Lazulus. It is as big as the River Ligeris, and by
so much more full of fish. Concerning the Manners of the Burbons, those which
border on Avernia are of the same disposition with them, namely witty and
crafty, very laborious, careful to get, and for the most part they are
litigious, and violent men, and ill to be dealt withal. Those that dwell
farther off are courteous and affable, subtle and well experienced, frugall
and careful housekeepers, greedy of gain, and yet very bountiful and kind
toward strangers. The Forensians also are subtle, acute, and witty, wisely
provident and careful in their own affairs, loving gain, and to that end
they travel into remote and far distant Countries to Merchandise and
traffic with them. But they are merciful and kind to their own Countrymen
if they come to necessity and want in foreign Countries. Much wariness and
wisdom is to be used, in despatching any business with a Forensian. Forest
does send her works in Iron and Brass through the whole world, especially the
Fane of S. Stephen, where there are very many Artificers, and as good as any in
France. And there are many Merchants of this Country very rich, having great
estates in other parts out of France.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ARCHBISHOPRIC AND COUNTY OF BVRDEGALIA.
BURDIGALIA having an Archbishopric and Coun^ belonging to it, and the head
and Metropolis of Guien^ is an ancient and famous City, which Strabo and Pliny
ha^ mentioned, and Strabo Lib. 4. Geogr. writes thus: Gar^ being enlarged with
the receipt of three Rivers does (...) by the Biturigians, whom they call the
Viviscians and Santones, being both Countries of France. It has Burdigalia a
Town of Traffic seated by a certain great Lake, which is made by the
eruptions (...) breaking out of the River. Concerning the name there are (...)
opinions. For some say it was called Aquita from the abundance (...) waters,
whence also others do derive the name of the Province (...) Aquitane, from
Bourda and Iala, two Rivulets, the one whereof is ne^ to Burdigala, the other
4000. miles off, others bring other dertvati^ But I believe that the name was
derived from Burgo, and Isiderus ^ginum lib. 15. cap. 1. seems to be of the
same opinion: when he (...) That Burdigala was so called, because it contained
a Colony of (...) French Burgians, others read it the French Biturigians. And
S^ is of the same mind in his Burdigala. And these people, as it is aforesaid,
were called Viviscians, to distinguish them from the Cubian (...) turigians
near the River Ligeris, which Ausonius a Poet of Bu^ testifies in his Verses,
wherein he sings thus:

Haec ego Vivisca ducens ab origin gentem.
These things I, who by my Country am
Descended from the old Viviscian.
And this ancient Inscription does confirm it.

AVGUSTO SACRUM BIT. VIV. Which besides famous Joseph Scaliger, Elias Vinetus
in his most lear^ Annotations to Ausonius, and Indocus Syncerus in his
Itinerarie ad^ to his Book of Burdigala, do mention. This City when it came
in^ the hands, was not only freely permitted to use their own Law as Strabo
and Pliny affirm; but they adorned it also with fair Ae^fices map of
Burdigala THE ARCHBISHOPRIC AND COUNTY OF BVRDIGALA.
and magnificent Monuments and pieces of Building, of which there do yet
remain some vast ruins For in the year 1557. when it was strengthened with
some new Fortifications, some ruins of Baths were found near to Jupiters Gate
were found and discovered There are also two fair Aedifices which for the most
part are in repair and whole: namely, one which they call the Palace of
Safety, and another which is commonly named the Palace of Galienus. The former
stood heretofore our of the City near Garumna, by the D^^^ which fortified the
North side of the City (as Lurbeus writes in his Chronicle, whose words I do
here set down) but at length it was included within the City when the City was
enlarged on that side There is a Quadrangular strait sided Standard, being 8^.
foot lo^ and 63. broad, having 8. Pillars in length, and 6. in breadth, so the
it had in the whole compass of it 24. Pillars, of which there are (...) yet
standing adorned with some Images and Statues. There is a Va^^ under it built
after an old fashion, in which Wine is laid. It is doubtful how it was used
heretofore, and some believe that it was a Temple consecrated to the Turelary
God, which appears by the (...) thereof, concerning which see Merula in his
Cosmographie. The common people do call it Pilas from the Pillars thereof.
(...) there are some small ruins of a magnificent Amphitheater, w^^ were and
are without the City. It was encompassed (as Vinctus says with 6. walls. And
between the outermost which was higher than the rest, and the innermost which
was lower than all the rest the was 68. feet distance. The length of the Yard,
which had Doo^^ on every side was 224. foot, and the breadth 140. foot: for
it is their custom to build such Aedifices in an Ovall Figure. Also the
^^cient Walls are worthy of consideration, which are in the middle if the City,
and were in good repair in Ausonius time, which he (...) mentions.

The Walls are square having Towers thereon so high,
That the tops thereof do reach unto the sky.
After those times it suffered many calamities, being first washed (...) the
Goths, and then burnt by the Sarazens and Normans. But afterward it was
re-edified and enlarged, so that now it contains 45. Acres of ground, so that
it is as big as a third part of (...). For the Roman Empire declining, the
Goths obtained it in the 400. year from the building of the City, who being
expelled, and Mari^us being slain in Picaady, and those which remained, cut
off in the Ar^^ Fields which were so named from that slaughter near to Burdgi.
it returned again to the Frenchmen. But when the Frenchmen g^^^ slothful and
careless, the Aquitanians about the year 727. shaking off their subjection to
the French did create Eudo Duke thereof. T^^ Son of this Eudo was Caifrus,
who being forsaken by his own m^^, was slain in the year 767. and was buried
without the City in a Moorish place, near the Castle Farus, where now the
Capuchi^s have built themselves a Religious house. Afterward Hunold whom the
Aquitanians had made Duke, being vanquished and droven out by Charles the
Great, this Province was restored to the French, and to keep it the better in
obedience, there were Earls placed in diverse parts of Aquitaine, and
especially at Bourdoaus there was left Sigumus the Father of Huon of Bourdeaus,
and after these other Earls and Dukes did govern the people under the King of
France. D. Marttalis was the first that converted those of Bourdeaus to the
Christian faith, who as it is reported built a Temple there, and dedicated it
to S. Andrew the Apostle, afterward it became the Seat of an Archbishop, on
which these Bishoprics do depend, Santonensis, Pictaviensis, Lussonensis,
Mallacensis, Petragoricensis, Serlacensit, Condomiensis, Agimensis. And as this
City is large, so it is beautified with diverse Churches, for there are two
Collegiate Churches, one of which is Metropolitan, 12. Parish Churches, 8.
Frieries, one Nunnery, and a College of Jesuits. There is a fair Churchyard
of S. Severine without Jupiters Gate near the Amphitheater which is worthy to
be seen, both because it is more ancient then the rest, in which S. Amandus,
and S. Severinus were buried, and diverse other Monuments are showed, and also
because there hollow stones laid on Sepulchers, which are full of water or
empty, according to the increase or decrease of the Moon. Many Knights are
here interred who were slain in the time of Charles the great by the treachery
of Ganelen. The University is an Ornament unto it, the Professors whereof do
instruct Youth in all Arts and Sciences. In which both heretofore and of late
Tiberius Victor and Minervius a Rhetorician whom D. Ieromimus mentions in his
Chronicle, and makes another Quintilian. And Attius Celphidius, whom Ammianus
Marcellinus calls a vehement Orator, were Latin and Greek Professors. And
also Pomponius Maximus Hirculanus, and many others, of whom Ausonius makes a
Catalogue with several Eulogies. The most noted in our age were, Andr.
Goveanus, Ioannes Gelida, M. Ant. Muretus, Ioannes, Costanus, Georg. Buchanan,
Nicolaus Grachius, Withelmus Guerentaeus, and of late Elias Vinetus, a learned
man, and a light to his Country. This University had many privileges, honors,
and liberties granted unto it by the Princes of Aquitaine, the Kings of France,
and the Popes of Rome: and at last was beautified by the Aquitaine College,
from whence many learned men as Lights of France have successively come forth.
But let us speak somewhat of the Parliament, which is the ancientest seat of
Justice in France, whither the Burdigalians, the Valatensians, the
Aginnensians, the Condomiensians, the Armeniacensians, the Cardurcians, the
Leniovicensians, the Petrocorensians, the Augelismensians, the Santons, and
Ruxellensians, have recourse by way of suite. But afterward the Provinces of
Armenium, of Santome, of Ruxelles, and the greatest part of Cadurcium did
withdraw themselves and came to the Parliament of Paris and Tolouse. But when
King Ludovick had granted Aquitania (which was now circumscribed with new
bounds) to his Brother Charles to hold of him by Fealty, the Parliament was
translated to the Picts, but after Charles his decease in the year 1472. and
all Aquitaine returning to Ludovick, it was brought back again, and not long
after Charles the 8. by his Edict dated in the year 1483. made it to consist
of three Presidents, and 18. Counselors. Francis the first is the year 1519.
in the month of of May added to them a Decurie of new Counselors, to judge of
criminal matters, which they call Tonell. But when by sedition the Parliament
in the year 1540. wa^ changed again. King Henry the 2. restored the former
ample dignity of the Senate to Burdigala, and received the Citizens into
favor. Here the Prefect of the Province of Aquitaine has his Seat, who is
called the Marshall and also the Admiral. There is also in the same City a
College of Questors or Auditors of accounts. The government of the
Commonwealth of Bordeaux as it is at this day began is the reign of Henry
King of England who in the year 1173. granted that the Citizens should freely
decree a Prince of the Senate whom they call the Mayor of the City, but at
first the Majors held their office continually, and did yearly choose a
Substitute out of the sworn men, whom in his absence was to be Governor of
the College of sworn men. Henry the 2. did change this custom, so that the
Majors office should not be perpetual, but for two years. After him the
sworn men as they call them should succeed: Who being fifty at the beginning
were reduced to 24. and in the year 1378. they were contracted to 12.
according to the number of the parts of the City. But at last they came to be
six, and those to rule two years: so the three were changed every year, and
they continued in their Mairoalty for two whole years. To this College of the
Mayor and the sworn men, there were added 30. chosened Citizens to assist them
in counsel and above three hundred more were added, if a matter of consequence
were handled. It has a fruitful Soil for Wines, which is transported from
thence into other parrs of Europe, the praise whereof is celebrated by the
ancients, as also Pliny and Columella, and it has abundane of all other
necessaries. Besides it has convenient Rivers, the greatest whereof are
Garumna, and Dordona. There are many Towns subject to Burdeaus, as these near
to the Sea Esparus or Caput S. Mariae, in which place Ptolemy seateth
Novioparrum, which is now not to be known: also the Fane of Macarium, Larmont,
Connaria, also Liburnium, which is a pretty small Town, seated at the mouth of
Dardona, and others. But it is most famous, because Ausonius was borne here,
who celebrateth the praise of his Country in these verses.

My too long silence I do now condemn,
That thee O Country famed for witty men,
And for thy pleasant Rivers, and thy Wine,
And Senate, art not here amongst the prime
Mentiond by me, as if thou were a small
City, and did deserve no praise at all.
Burdigala is my native Country where
The mild air makes the earth much fruit to bear,
The Spring is long, the Winter short below,
The leavy Mountains shadowed Rivers flow,
Whose hasty course do imitate the Seas.
Then the ways within and houses you may please
To admire, and that the streets do still retain,
Though they are large, and broad their former name.
And yet through the City a fresh stream does glide,
Which when the Ocean fills with his tide,
You shall behold when as the Sea does come,
How by the Ships which ride there it does run.
THE COUNTY OF PERTICA.
THE Country of Pertica confineth on the Carnuten (...) and depends also on
their diocese, and has bee^ long time a famous County. First it came by man
age to the family of the Druides, and afterward to Alenconians. For Robert a
Frensh man Earl of the D^ides, married the widow of Rotrocus Earl of
Pertica, who was sla^ at the seige of the Castle of Rotomagum. After him Robert
le^^^ the son of Charles, and brother to Phillip Valesius, who died with
issue, being slain in the Battle of Cressy in the year 1346. was (...) of
Pertica. It is divided into two parts, the lower which is ca^^ Pertica Goveti,
is as it were inserted into Carnutum, the head T^^ whereof is Nogentum of
Rotrocus, which in the year 1428. was (...) by the Earl if Salisbury an
Englsh man, and all that were found were hanged. But afterward in the year
1449. Charles the 7. i^verd it again. This Town is called Nogentum of Rotroc
from Earl thereof above mentioned, who marched in the year (...) with his
English troops into Syria, against Fulco Earl of the A^ans, and King of
Jerusalem, and Yvo Carnutensis does name it (...) Epistle to Pope Pascall,
thereby to difference it from the oth^^ ^entum. Sigebert about the year 1170.
does mention Godefrid^ of Pertica, who by rebellion lost his Earldom. There
are also (...) Towns besides Nogentum: as Basochium, Govetum, Alugium, mons
^lij, ^rovium, Anthovium, Maulbesium, the Town of red Maill^^^, Condatum
seated by the River Huisne. The higher part of P^ called the County, and it
has the Town Mortenium, with a (...) seated on a Hill, in which the Prefect
whom they call the Bailey his residence, also the Towns Pentletum, and
Belesmia, a Town (...) a Castle. Whence the ancient and famous families of the
B^ is descended, out of which came Robert ^elemy, who sided with B^tus,
intending to make war against his brother, King of England ^^^cerning whom
see Thomas Walsingam in his description or patterne^ Neustriae: on the
frontiers thereof toward Normandy are Vernolium, (...) Memertium toward
Cenomania. Some would seat the Vnelly here people once of France, whom Caesar
mentions Lib. 3. de bello Galli^^ these words. While these things were done
at Venice, Q. T^^ Sapinus came with his army which Caesar had given him, into
the Co^try of thf Vnelly, Viridovix was Captain thereof, and did govern those
Cities which had revolted, out of which he levied a great ^my. And a little
before at the end of the second Book: at the (...) time came P. Crassus, whom
he had sent with one Legion to the ^^netians, the Vnelli, the Osismi, the
Curiosilitae, the Sesuriij, the (...) map of Pertica ^HE COVNTIE OF PERTICA
Rhedones, which are maritine Cities near to the Ocean etc. Bla^^ Vignerius in
his Frensh translation for Vnelli does put, du parche and (...) parche, and
Renat Chopinus. Concerning the Municipiall Laws of the Audians does in like
manner calling them ceux de perch, which he ranslateth the Vncli. But when
Caesar makes them to be near unto the Armorican Cities (which is a Maritaine
Nation) some think that this name belongs to the Lavallij, but I leave these
things to more curious inquisiters. In this Country the learned and Noble Poet
Anocre^^ was borne, who was worthily called the Remigium Bellaq^^^ of his age,
who in his Pastoralls did lively express and paint forth that elegant fiction
of the Arcadia of Zamazius, which exceeds all the rest. His Poem concerning
Gemmes and precious stones, d^^ deserve the lawreth wreath, to which Ronsard
the Prince of French Poets has alluded, in an Epitaph which he made on him,
which is to be read at Paris, which I have rudely here translated into Latin.

BELLAQUIO artifices quid splendida saxa paratis?
En gemmis tutulum condidit ipse sibi.

Artificers why do you now provide?
Fair shining stones that may Anacreon hide,
For he a Tomb of precious stones composed.
Wherein his precious body is enclosed.
THE DVKEDOME OF TVRONE.
THE Province of Turone in regard of the incomparable pleasantness of the
place, and the abundance of all kind of fruits, is worthily called the Garden
of France. Which the Princes thereof have always much delighted in and
honored it, both as I said for the convenience of the ^mation, and for the
overflowing plenty of all things necessary. The Country is large, and has
round about it the Bellovacians, the An^egavians, the Pictavians, and the
Biturigians: it has many fair Cities and Towns, it makes also a part of the
Parliament of Paris ^s they call it, and it is honored with a Seat of
Judgment. The Metropolis and Mother City thereof is Turon, commonly called
To^s, being seated at the confluence and meeting of the Rivers Ligeris and
Carus. Ptolemy calls it Caesarodunum, concerning the name and antiquity whereof
there are many reports, but not credible, and therefore we omit them. Let it
suffice that the great Roman Emperor Julius Caesar does reckon the Turones
among the chief people of France, who joined themselves to the Romans, and in
his 2. Book de bello Gallico, about the end thereof are these words; He having
brought his Legions to Winter at Carnutes, Andes, and Turones, which were
Cities near unto these places, where he waged war, went into Italy, as also
Lib. 7. He speedily joyneth to himself the Senons, the Parisians, the
Pictones, the Cadurcians, the Turones, the Aulercians, and others which dwell
near the Sea. Also Lucan mentions them in this Verse.

Instabiles Turones circumsita castra coercent.
Round pitched Tents do keep in there,
The Turones who unconstant were.
It is a neat City, having long clean streets, and very fair houses. It had
heretofore diverse Bishops famous for Sanctity and Learning, as Martinus,
Bricius, Perpetuus, Volusianas, and others, and almost all the Bishops of
Britain, of the Andians, and Cemonians noted by others, are Suffragans unto
him. The chief Seat of Justice when the Parisians rebelled, was translated
hither by King Henry the third. Traffic in Silks, and also Cloth is much
used in Toures, both which do enrich the Merchants. And the Inhabitants have
revenues out of their Lands, on which they live gallantly. The City is adorned
w^ fair magnificent Temples, among which is that which was dedica^ to D.
Gratian, built by the English with a Clock-dyall on it. And (...) other
consecrated to D. Martinus, in which his bones and ashes (...) rest, which the
By-dwellers do honor with religious worship. (...) Gregory who from his
Country was called Turonensis was borne (...) flourished about the year of
Christ 600. whose Writings for the (...) story of those times are much esteemed
by posterity. It containe^ the ashes of that great Poet P. Ronsard, who they
call the French ^mer, and Pindar. It was sometimes governed by Earls,
afterward (...) the Dukes of Britain, but when John his Nephew Arthur being
sla^ possessed the County, the Province was confiscate to the King by (...)
sentence of the highest Senate of France. After which the King (...) France did
make it a Dukedom, and gave it for a time to the M^rite Friars. Here four
chief French Counsels were kept. H^^ also a Money Mint famous for the
antiquity thereof. It is gover^ by an ordinary Magistrate, and has two
Prefects, besides a M^^ and Auditors, to maintain the rights, privildges, and
liberties of (...) Inhabitants. There is also a Court of the Quaestors,
Auditon, (...) Receivers of the public customs and impositions. But to
conc^^^ we will set down an elegant description of this place, being (...) out
of Brittons Philipeides.

Thence to the City of Turone they go,
Round about which two shining streams do flow,
Here the River Ligaris, there Caurus, and
It in the middle between both does stand:
Well seated, and fair streams do it adorn
Being full of Trees, and having store of Corn,
Proud of her Citizens, and Clergy, who
Are very powerful, besides she can show
Great store of people, and much wealth beside,
And is with Groves and Vines much beautified.
map of Turone THE DVKEDOME OF TVRONE.


THE COUNTY OF PICTAVIA.
PICTONIUM, or Pictavia, which follows, commonly called Poictou, The Situation
looks Southward toward (...) Engolismes and Santonians, on the West it has
(...) Ocean: on the North it points toward the Brittain^ and the Andegavians,
The fertility.
the rest is enclosed with the ^ronions, Bituricians, and Lemovicians. It is a
very fertile Count^ both for Fruit, Cattle, Wool, and Hemp, having abundance
(...) Wine and Corn: The variety of Creatures. The ancient government.
and great plenty of Foul and wild beasts so the here is much Hawking and
Hunting. The Goths did honor t^^ Province with the title of a Kingdom, whom
Clodovaeus King (...) France drove hence, and also out of all Aquitaine. The
Emperor ^dovicus Pius gave the Kingdom of Aquitaine to his Son Pipin; wh^
Sons Pipin and Charles when Charles the Bold their Uncle, had (...) out of
Aquitaine, and shut them up in Monasteries, he himself inva^^ the
Principality, and gave it to his Cousin Arnulph, and having ab^^gated the title
of a Kingdom, he made it a Dukedom. After ^nulph there succeeded in order
William Bonus; Eblo the first and seco^^ William 2. and 3. Guido, William 4.
and 5. his only Daughter and He^^ El^onor was married to Ludovick the 7. King
of France, who repudiati^^ her for the suspicion of adultery and treason, Henry
Duke of Norm^^ married her, who was Successor to Stephen King of England. His
Son Richard and John did succeed after Henry as heirs to the Kingdom (...)
England and their Fathers possessions in France. But when Arthur (...) Son of
Godfry (who was elder Brother to King John) did stand competition with John,
preferring his own Title before him, be^^ persuaded by Philip Augustus King of
France, to take away Picardy from his Uncle John, and having attempted it by
force, his Army w^^ overthrown and scattered by John who came suddenly upon
hi^ and he himself was taken prisoner and brought to Rotomagum, where he was
punished for his temerite and rashness. Hereupon King Io^^ was accused of
parricide by Constance the Mother of Arthur before King Philip, and by him
condemned: and his goods and also Picar^^ were adjudged to Philip as the Lord
in Feefarme: which afterwar^ his Successor Ludovick gave to his Son
Alphonsius the 8. who dyle^^ without issue, it came to King Philip the third,
and continued in the hands of his Posterity, until in the reign of Philip
Valessus, it was recovered by Edward the third King of England, and wholly
possessed by him with all Aquitaine, by a peace established between him and
John King of France. Afterward King Edward made the Dukedom of Aquitania a
principality, and gave it to his Son, who by imposing to a map of Pictavia
^HE COVNTIE OF PICTAVIA.
heavy a tax on the Aquitanians lost a great part thereof by their revolting
from him to Charles the fifth King of France, whose Nephea Charles the 7. did
drive the English out of Aquitaine in the year 1453 and left it to his Son
King Ludovick the 11. He bestowed it on his Brother Charles, after whose
decease, King Ludovick did pass it over unto his Son King Charles the 8. and
from that time, Aquitaine, (...) of which Pictavia is a great part, did remain
in the King of Fa^^^^ power. Caesar, Pliny, and Strabo do report that the
ancient inhabitants thereof were the Pictones: Ptolemy calls them the Pictones,
and A^mianus Marcellinus the Pictavi. Ausonius calls it Pictonicam Regione^,
or the Country of the Picts. In the Register Book of Provinces it in the
Aquitaine, cap. 11. or Vienna, cap. 7. it is called Civitatem Pict^rum vel
Pictavo^um, the City of the Pictavians or Pictanonians, now it is called le
Pays de Poicteu. I join with Pliny the people Agasi^ates with the Pictones. It
is likely that some memory does remain of them in the Town Aigounois, not
far from the Temple of S. Maxentius, which is a Town near the River
Severus. They are far wide, who do confound the Aginnates with the
Agesinates, seeing they are 5. days journey distant one from another. I will
write something concerning the diverse Principalities which are reckoned with
Pictonia, The City Pictavia.
but first I will speak something of the Metropolis and royal City thereof.
And that is Pictavia. For so the Latins enstile it, which Ptolemy called
Angustoriton, and Autonius Augustoritum. Gi^rius Turonensis calls it the City
Pictavia. It is seated in a pleas^^^ place, somewhat steep with Hills, except
in one part, which they call in their Country speech Tranchaea, which is seated
on plain ground: it is the fairest City of all France except Paris. The River
Clauius does encompasse and intile the most part of it. Here is an Unirersitie
famous for the studdie of the Civil Law, and is second unto that at Paris.
Charles the seventh King of France did iustit^^ it in the year 1421. Of which
Scaliger thus in his description of Cities If study from the mind, strength
from the body come
In both which kinds France has much honor won^^
Then let this Country studies only love,
While others warlike matters do approve.
So while other Countries like the body are,
Pictavium is like to the soul most rare.


The Theaters, Galienes Palace, and the Aquae ducts of Cond^^ which are now
called les ducts, do show the antiquity thereof being certain tokens of the
Roman Empire in these parts. Some think it was built by the Agathirsians and
Gelonians, the Successors of the Sons of Hercules (whom the Poets do call
Picti) for they being expelled their Country for stirring up Domestic
sedition, came it to England, and from thence being increased in number and
multitude they passed over again into France, where they were called Picts and
built this City. Others write differently, when it is evident both in
Pomponius, Mela, and Pliny, that there were Pictones long before the^ came out
of England. This City is famoused by a Bishops Seat, which D. Hilarious was
sometime Bishop of a Prelate of singular learning and piety, and one that was
an invincible Antagonist against the Arrian faction, and did write those 12.
famous Books of the Holy Trinity, wherein he showed much wit and eloquence.

The Court of Pictavia is governd by a President and two Substitutes, the one
whereof does judge of civil matters, the other of criminal. Many Towns of
this Province have recourse to this Court: The Towns.
as besides Pictavia it self aforesaid, there are also Niort which has a
Castle: here the Pictones do keep great Faires thrice in a year: also
Fontenay le Conte, it has also a Castle: the Rivulet Vendaeus (or Veudie) does
flow by the walls of this Town, which grows afterward so big, that it
does overflowe the whole Territory of Fontenaus, and the neighboring parts
thereunto: also the Town Lusig^an, where there is an ancient Castle which is
commonly called Mulustre etc. Also Montmorillon, Chastelleraud, la Basse March,
Dorat, S. Maxent, and others: to which is added Sirray a Marshalship, and
having a strong Castle. There is also in the Principality of Pictonia, that I
may come now to that part (besides Talmont, so called as it were Talon du
Monde, Calcanus Mundi, or the heel of the world as some would have it) Rupes
super Ioanna, or Roche sur-Iohn, who was of the Royal family of Burbon. Our
Grandfathers did know Ludovick Burbon, the Son of John Earl of Vendosme,
when he was Prince of Roche sur^^h, Earl of Montpenser, and also his son
Charles Castellum Heraldi, or Castelherault near Vigenna; is dignified with a
Dukedom. The Viecountships are Tovers. By the River Tovius, also Brosse,
Bridieres, Ro^be-Cho^art. There are many Towns which are Baronies and
Signiorles, which I will deliver as they come in view: first Manlers, where
there is good fishing for Salmones, and a little King of fish, which is an
enemy to the Tuny, but especially there is good fishing for Whales and Codfish,
which being dried and hardened in the wind, and cold are usually transported
into other Countries: also the Towns Partenay, S. Maxent, Melle, Chizay,
Chauvigny, Lussac, Bressuyre, Charrou, Chasteneraye, S. Mesnin, S. Gillis,
Chasteaumur, les Sables d' Anlonne, S. Hermine, Montaigu, a Town with a Castle
famous for Salt Pits: Also Mireban, l'a Motte, S. Beraye, Vouvant, S. Hilaire,
Mortemer, Luzaz, S. Savin, l' Istle Iourdain, S. Benoist du Sault, Bourg-neuff,
Moloil, Merxant, Brige, Vouver, Villefaignax, and others. And it is gathered
out of Antonius his Itinerary that Limonum was in Pictavia, because B^rdigala
is called Augustodunum. Some think it to be the same with Augustorito, or
Poicters. We dare affirm nothing. In the third Comentarie of A. Hirtius there
is mention of Limonum. The Rivers that water this Country are Clanius,
Vigenna, now Vienne, The Rivers.
or Venda^^ and others, which are very full of fish. Here we needs must
speak of the Amphitheater, in Pictavia, The public works.
standing near to the Town Doneum, in the workmanship whereof Art does strive
to immitate nature: for it is made hollow and cut out in the Mountain, having
no external matter, as lime, stone, or wood in it. In Iustus Lipsius in his
Book of the Amphitheaters which out of Rome cap. 6. there is a large
description of this Mountain and Amphitheater, according to the relation of
Levinus Kesmakerus, sometime Consul of Zirickza^^, and governor of Zeland at
the first beginning of this war, who adds that the Village Town Lonaeus
was heretofore far larger, as may be seen by the workmanship thereof, not
like to Village Towns, and by the ruins of the public ways and streets,
which lay toward the Bridge, commonly called Pon^du Sey, part of which way may
be seen yet in diverse places. But the greatest part is r^inated, and the
stones of the aedifices are consumed and carried away. About half a Mile from
the City Pictavia, in the high way to B^^rigum, there is a great fouresquare
stone, underproped with five other stones, and from thence called la Pierre
Leurce. Of which there is this Distich.

Hic lapis ingentum superat gravitate Colossum
Ponderis, and grandi Sydera mole petit.
This stone exceeds a great Colossus weight,
And even to the stars does penetrate.
The State Ecclesiastic has three Bishoprics, which are under the
Archbishop of Tolouse: as the Bishopric of Poi^tie^s, in which there are 27,
Abbeys: the Bishopric of Lucon or Lusson, in which are 10. Abbeys: and the
Bishop of Maillezay, in which (...) 4. Abbeys I come now to their manners. The
Husband men have a peculiar speech of their own: and he is held wise that
does not trust the^. A kind of men who because they are prohibited to hunt wild
be^^s, do pursue contentions: Their manners.
They are litigious and cunning in stir^^^ debate and strife. The Citizens are
unlike them in nature and disposition, being courteous, bountiful, liberal,
candide, and ha^ing impostures and deceits, lovers of learning, and learned
men, of which there are many here. The Nobility are provident, and more bold
and c^ring then strong.

CADVRCIVM, LE PAYS DE QVERCI.
The Ecclesiastic State.

Cadurcium does contain two Bishoprics, namely, of Cahors, and Montalban,
which are subject to the Archbishop of Tolouse.

CADVRICVM, commonly called le Pays de Querci, or as others pronounce it Crecy,
The Situation.
is encompassed with the Petrocorians, the Nitiobrigians, the Rutenians, the
Avernians and Lemovicians. The fertility.
The Country of Cadurcium though it be indented with Mountains, yet it
excels both for beauty, richness, and fertility, and it wants nothing
necessary for the sustenance of life. The Cardurcians did formerly inhabit it:
whom, besides Pliny Lib. 4. Cap. 19. Caesar does mention with many other
people of France, who calls them the Elcutheri, or Eluteori, that is Freemen.
For so the word is to be taken, and we are not to assent to them, who would
from thence deduce a new kind of people. Cadurcium has two Diocaesses, Doveona
Cadurccerum, and Mortalbanum Doveoona, well known to Ptolemie, The Cities.
which some badly interpret Ducona. It is commonly called Cahors, near the
River Lothus. Some learned men do call it Divona. Truly howsoever it is
written Joseph Scaliger in his letters to Merula thinks it to be the
Metropolis of the Cadurcians, and also Vinetus writing to Ausionius and others.
Iustus Lipsius in his golden Book concerning Amphitheaters, supposes that
Doveona is a Town, commonly called Dowe, about half a days journey distant
from Ligeris, on that side where the way lies from Andegavia to Pictavia. And
so the name does intimate, but then Doveona according to the opinion of
Ptolomie, cannot be the Metropolis or mother City of the Cadurcians, which is
60. leagues from that place. Besides that which Antonius calls Annedonacum,
and Peutingers Tables Avedonacum, in the way between Burdigala and
Augustodunum, cannot be the same with Ptolomies Doveona, which is commonly
called Cahors. For Aunedonacum and Mediolanium of the Santonians, are 16. Miles
asunder: but between Doveona and Mediolanium, called in the Country speech
Cahors and Sanites, there are about 40. leagues, which make almost an hundred
Miles. Besides the Metropolis of the Cadurcians stands so far Eastward,
that it cannot be in the way to Burdigala. Let us therefore conjecture with
Merula, that Aunedonacum is that Town commonly called Aulnay, being distant
Northward from the Mediolanum of the Santones, somewhat more than six leagues.
Ausonius does design and show the Metropolis of the Cadurcians, Lib.
Professorum, at the 18. verse, concerning Exsuperius a Rhetorician of Tolouse.

Decedens placidos mores tranquillaque vitae
Tempora praedives fimsti sede Cadurca.
Thou dying rich, at Cadurcum did end
Thy life, which thou so quietly did spend.
In this City there is a University and a Marshalship. The Cathedral Church
is dedicated to S. Stephen. The Bishop hereof are Earls, so that the Bishop is
both a spiritual and secular Lord, so that while he solemnly celebrateth the
Mass, he has sword, gloves, and other ornaments of that kind by him upon
the Altar, and boots o^ his legs, which he wears in a Pontifical manner
by special privilege. Pope John the two and twentieth of that name was born^
here, who held that seat 19. years and 4. Months. Also Cleme^ Mar^tus one of
the chief modern french Poets was borne at Dor^^* The other diocaesse is Mont
Ibanum, now called Montalban, or Si^^odard de Montalban. The City is situate
and built on the bending side of a hill, having a Castle near the River
Tarnis, commonly called Tarn, having a Bridge over it, the middle part whereof
is in the Co^^try of Langedock. Near the Bridge of this City, there are are
arch^vaults under the Earth. The Churches are wasted by wars. M^^taulban was
a common receptacle of the fugitives of the reformed ^eligion, so that it
endurd greater miseries in the first civil war, th^^ other Towns of
Aquitame: insomuch that it was besieged three times in eleaven Months space,
and that which was worst of all, the^ did not only contend with the enemy
without, but also they had sedious mutinies within their walls. And it was so
hotly assaulted (...) the enemies, that after the King had granted them peace,
for m^^ then a Month it was still closely straitely besieiged. And tho^^ it
were violently assailed by the neighbors round about it, yet (...) valiantly
resisted their force, and did frustrate and shun all the^^ deceitful
stratagemes, to the great admiration of all men that (...) unfortified City,
and unfurnished of Soldiers, should delude the a^tempts of their enemies. The
first siege was laid against it by Mo^^^cius 23. May in the year 1563, who
came with a thousand horse and five thousand foot, to besiege the City: but
after some light sk^mishes, having destroyed the Corn he departed. For a
suddain^ fear without any cause did so invade the besiegers, that withal
spee^^ and much perplexednesse of mind, they raised the siege and went away.
And this was the event of the first siege, in which thirty only of the
besiegers were slain. Three months afterward Mon^^cius returned again, and
having joined Buria in confaederacy wit^ him, he laid siege to it the second
time. They had 9. troops of common Soldiers, and a great company of Gentlemen
Voluntaries, and of Muskatiers, horsemen and footmen, they had 9. Stewards.
Ni^^ map of Cadurcium CADVRCIVM.
bands of Spanish Soldiers, in which there were twelve hundred Soldiers:
five battering pieces of ordinance, three greater and five lesser culueringes,
which they planted against the wall. At the first meeting they had a little
skirmish, in which Monluccius lost many men, and on the Towns side there were
12. slain, and many wounded on both sides. The two next days following there
were in like manner some light skirmishes, in which the besiegers had still the
worst. In the mean while Durassius going to Aurelias with a strong army, by
chance marched that way, and sent to Monluvius, to desire him to appointe the
day and place to join battle in. But then Monluccius had no mind to fight,
who looked for a better opportunity, which he afterward obtained, and gave the
Durassians a great overthrowe. But lying there in vain, the City being
defended with such strong forces, he raised his siege, in which he lost 60.
Soldiers, and the Town thirty. Then Durassius proceeded in his former
journey, but when he departed, the garrison of the City was much leaned and
diminisht, so that by his coming, the City received more loss then good. For
two foreine Cohorts followed Durassius, so that the Citizens were left
destitute of all help. But as the favor and aid of men did decrease, so the
Citizens courage did increase. For they took an oath altogether, that they
wo^^d suffer all extremities in the defense of their Country, rather than open
the gates of their City, to their malicious enemies. Monluccius being
certified by one of the Captains of the army, called Fontgravius, both of
their want of munition, and the small number of the besieged, marches thither
in all have, and the enemies in the third watch of the night did assault the
Walls in three places with Scaling ladders, and Musket shot. In the mean time
while the Citizens ran to defend that part of the Wall, a strong band of
Soldiers well armed without making any noise, came to the Fortress of the
Ialobites, thinking so to come upon the watch unawares, because the Citizens
were busy in fight elsewhere. But they in the watch Tower having discovered
them before they could approach to the Wal^^, cried out that they were
discovered, they clapped sealing ladders to the Walls, and made a breach in them
with an iron Ram, which 12. men drove against the Walls, and set up two
Colors or Bonnets on the Bulwark, with the sound of Drum, Trumpets, crying
out to their companions that followed, that the City was taken, but yet the
Townsmen encountered them so bravely, that they were enforced to found a
retreat with the loss 200. men, and to leave their Ram and scaling Ladder,
there being but one slain of the besieged. But seeing that cunning stratagems
did not prevail, they determined to besiege the City the third time. First
Terrida came and brought 21. Cohorts with him two wall pieces of Ordnance, and
7 Colveri^s: which being planted against diverse parts of the Wall did batter it
shroudly, but all in vain, seeing that men, women and children ran cheerfully
to repair the breaches, and brought earth and other Materials to mend them,
which succeeded so well, that although the enemy had made 500. shot against the
walls, yet there were but 5. men slain. But when the Besiegers saw that their
Ordnance did no good, and the Citizens diligence did frustrate their attempts,
they turned their assault into a Siege, and so built Towers and Fortresses
round about the City, and placed a Garrison in them, that no man might go out
of the City, or come in, and so to cut off all aid or succor from them, that
so either famine or length of the siege might enforce them to yield. After this
they had many other light skirmishes, in which the besieged had always the
better. The siege ends with conditions of peace, which yet were not declared
to the Citizens until the 15. of April, although they were published at
Orleance and Paris the 26. of March. In all the Sieges there were slain on the
besiegers side 2000. men, and 60. of the besieged. But of this enough. The
other Towns of Cadurcium are Castel-Sarrazin, near the River Tarnis, the
water whereof is of a red color because it passes through a clayie earth:
there is also Monhec where M. Arnald Sorbinus was borne, a great ^an and
Chaplain to the King: also Moissac situated in a fair, pleasant, and
delightful soil, having great store of Vineyards. It is a Town of traffic
and commerce, especially for Corn, Wine, Oil, Saffron, Wool, Salt, Fish, and
other commodities. King Clodoveus did here found and build the Church of S.
Peter and S. Paul. There is also the Monastery of S. Benedict, in which the
body of S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was buried. Not far from Moissac is
Lausette situate on a Rock, where there are the fairest and best Cellers or
Storehouses in all Guienna. There are also the Towns which are commonly
called Burelle, Nazareth, Sovillac, Gourdon, and Martel. Near the Town Martel
on the Frontiers of Cadurcium, as our Author notes Lib. 8. de bello Gallico,
is Vxellodunum; which is also called Vssoldun and la Pu^^ha' Vseldum, that is,
Podium Vxelloduni, or the Gallerie of Vxellodunum, because it is situate on a
very high steep place. And so much concerning Cadurcium, let us pass to
Lotharingia.

BRESSIA, OF THE SEGVSIANS.
BRESSIA is a Country lying under the Alps in S^^dia, where Caesar heretofore
placed the Segusians acco^ding to Villonovanus; although Ptolomy does make
(...) a City of the Segusians. At the least these people (...) next to the
Aedus, which he affirms lib. 7. de bello G^^ in these words. His constitutis
rebus, or Aeduis, Segusian^^ qui sunt finitimi ei Provincioe x. millia perditum
imperat. These things ^^ing thus settled he levieth 10000. Foot out of the
Aeduans and ^gusians, which are Provinces near unto him. Also Pentingers C^
does hereabouts place Segusione in the Alps. Ammianus, who li^^ in the time of
Julian the Apostate, in the 15. Chapter of his His^^^^ makes mention of the
Town Segovium, situated at the foot of (...) Alps. Bressia therefore is
situate between the Rivers Rhoda^^^ (...) Araris, now called Saona, and
Marcellinus Sacona, at the beginning (...) the Alps in a fruitful place, so
that it may compare with any Co^^try of France, for plenty of Wine, Corn, and
all kinds of fruits, (...) for Rivers, Cattle, and Woods. It is neighboured
with the Bu^^^dians, and was sometime subject to the Princes thereof, afterward
(...) was a part of the Kingdom of Arelatum, which being divided (...) diverse
parts, was afterward governed by Earls, one of which (...) Earl of Bresse and
Baugenciak lived about the year 1300. who (...) enlarged his Territories, and
left one only Daughter and Heir ^byll of Bressia who was married to Amades
the fourth, the 8. Earl Sabaudia, who brought her Husband beside a large
Inheritance, (...) County of Bressia, which being afterward united to Subaudia,
re^^^ned in that Family 300. years even until our age, when Henry t^^ fourth,
King of France for his virtue surnamed the Great, under^^^^ding that the
Saluffians a people of France were possessed and overcome by Sabaudus by
treachery and deceit, and that Henry the third was almost oppressed by his
rebelling Subjects, and was engaged in (...) dangerous War, he thought it
fit to recover that part of France a^^ seeing the Duke of Sabaudia did delay
the restitution thereof by m^king many exceptions and deceiving promises, which
by reason he could not do, he thought it meet by force of Arms to regaine
th^^ which was lost, and having levied an Army he took Bressia, by the help
and assistance of the Marshall Byroone, and brought the Duke (...) that
strait, and was content to end the matter by exchange, and th^^ the King for
the Salussians taken from him, should have the Breff^^^ the Brengeans, the
Virroneans, and generally all that belonged (...) France on the other side of
Rhodanus, so that all that Country which looked toward France from the issuing
of that River out of the Le^nick Lake, should be afterward united to the
Kingdom of France* And so the Duke should wholly deliver into the Kings hands
t^^ map of Brescia BRESSIA.
strong Castle of the Town, with all the Warlike furniture thereof, by which
Bressia and all that Province were as it were fetterd and manacled, so that
France was secured from any future attempt from those parts. And so Sabaudus
learnt with his own loss how dangerous a thing it is, to use violence with
those that are stronger than our selves, since such rashness redounds to his
harm that attempts it, and most commonly he is compelled to restore again
unto them with interest that which he had so gotten.

THE PROVINCE AND CITY OF LIONS.
THE Court of Lions is the last and remotest of all the Presidiall Courts which
depend on the chief Senate of Paris. But Lions is the chief and principal
City of Gallia Celtica, which from thence is called Lions, being a strong
Fortress of France, being the Primate Seat of all France in spiritual
matters, and being the Shop for Trading and commerce for the whole World. The
Bressians confine on it on the North, on the East the Sabaudians, on the South
the Allobrogians and the Narbonians along the River Rhodanus; and on the West
the Avernians. It is situate in the most beautiful and convenientest soil of
al Europ, for there is no place which has two riches fruitfuller Nurses, than
the Rivers Rhodanus and Arar are unto this Country, in whose bosom the horn
of plenty, filled with the Goda bounty does rest, and is largely powered forth
upon it, so that it always enjoys a continual plenty. The ancients called
it Lugdunum, as if you should say the happy or blessed Mountain. Titus Livius
calls it an Island, Lib. Hist. 21. In these words the next day Amiball
marching on the contrary bank of Rodanus, went up into the Mediterranean
parts of France: not because it was a straiter way to the Alps, but the more
he went from the Sea, the more he should be sure not to meet with the
Romans: with whom he did not purpose to fight before he came into Italy. He
came with the fourth part of his Camp to the Island, where the Rivers Arar and
Rhodanus running out of diverse parts of the Alps, and having encompassed some
part of the Country, do meet together, from whence the Country in the middle
is called the Island; which words may seem to be translated out of a credible
Writer who lived about the same time, and was familiarly acquainted with
Scipio, but that he adds that this Island being populous, and abounding with
all things necessary, was (...), that is, abounding with people, and well
stored with food. Plutarch in the life of Ainnbal does deliver the like, but
more plainly, and calls it Lions, whose words according to the Translation
of Acciarolus. He removed his Tents, and marching by the bank of Rhodanus up
against the stream, in few days he came to that place which the French men
call the Island, which the Rivers Rhodanus and Arar flowing out of diver
Mountains do encircle, where there is the City of Lions the most famous City
of all France, which long time afterward was built by Plancus Muratius. Some
call it the City of Sequanians, and Maxima Sequanorum, which appears by an
ancient. In se^tion on S. Peter's Church, which is this.

JOVI OPT. MAX. And Seneca does celebrate the praise of this place in his (...)
concerning the death of Claudian.

I saw a Hill that hangs over two streams,
Which Phoebus rising glideth with his beams.
Where the great River Rhodanus does flow,
And Arar doubtful whether he should go.
Through quiet Foords his course along does guide,
Washing the Banks as he along does glide.
But when the Romans had subjected all France, in the ra^ Augustus. L. Mun.
Plancus, who in the year V. C. 765. had been ^^^ful with C. Silius, and after
he had obtained the dignity of a cen^ triumphed over the Rhetians, did reedifie
it, and built it al^ new, and removed it to a hill, and so bringing colonies
from ^tie of Rome, he enlarged it, and then it was called Colonia Lugd^^^^ the
Colonie of Lions, which Pliny also shows Lib. 4. Cap. 18. (...) be says:
Segusiani liberi, in quorum agro Colonia Lugdunorum. The ^tians are free, whose
Country is the Colonie of Lions. In this (...) as Suetonius witnesses was
Claudius the Roman Emperor (...) who as also the succeeding Roman emperors
did much e^^^ and beautify this City, which at this day infinite monuments
^tiquitie do sufficiently declare. Besides they made the Inhabi^ Citizens of
Rome, and did give them many honors, privileges (...) liberties. And here
they established the first Money Minte (...) France, and erected and built many
famous Schools, which ^shed for a long time by the frequent coming of the
French and ^talian youth thither, and were famous for elojuent men, eve^ S.
Ieremes time. This City first received the Christian Religion, (...) it, and
observed it, and had many Martyrs, among which were ^nus, Iereneus, and other
Doctors and Bishops of Lions, so that (...) Church was the primate of all
France. The Cathedral Church ^tofore consecrated to S. Stephan the first
Martyr, was afterward ^cated to S. John Baptist, so that it is inferior unto
none, eith^ (...) dignity or antiquity, nay it may compare with any other Ch^
Europe, for the fairness and beauty thereof, it has also stately ^tious
Pillars, which were brought out of S. Augustines Church, a (...) map of Lion
^HE PROVINCE AND CITY OF LIONS.
Walls are hanged with tapestrie wrought with curious Art. But one of the
chiefest ornaments thereof, is the Clock wrought with cunning workmanship,
which shows in a wonderful manner the hours, days, months, and several
seasons of the year, and also the course of the Sun and the Moon. The
Archbishop has infinite privileges above others, which if any one desire to
know i^ particular, he shall find it in Paridines the French writers Book,
concerning Lions. But it is worthy of observation, that the Deane of this
College is a Duke, and every one of the Cannons is an Earl, and some believe
that a certain King of Burgundi did grant the^ these titles, some with more
likely hood do think that they ob^^^ned them themselves, by purchasing some
part of the County of Forest, which is now a County. Many Princes have
desired to be Cannons thereof, as the Kings of France, the Dukes of Sabaudia,
and ^^gundie, the Princes of Barrens and Vienna. There are many other Churches,
Colleges, Monasteries, and Chappells in the City, which (...) brevitie sake I
omit. In this City both Provincial, National, and General counsels have
been kept, in which heretofore the holy Bishops Nicetius Priseus and others
were Presidents, as also (...) the 4. Pope of Rome, in the time of the Emperor
Frederi^^ the ^^venth. But that we may not be more prolixe and tedious in
(...) things than the present brevitie of the matter requires (...) w^^^^
hasten to the secular government, but first by the way we will (...), that
heretofore the Rulers of Provinces and Cities did give judgment in the Princes
name by whom they were instituted, and did take upon them and resign the
government acording as they pleased: and lastly the Posterity of Chares the
great clothed the ^^ked dignities with the titles of Dukes and Earls, and
made them hereditarie. Such as were the Earls of Lions, before the City and
Province were governed by Prelates, namely as they are found in (...) writings,
Odo, in the time of Charles the bald; Gerard in the time of Remigius the
Archbishop, William, under Charles the Simp^can: (...) and a little before
lived Artaldus Earl of Lions, whose houses (...) supposed, remains yet in
the City. After this the County was translated to the Church, by whom it was
governed until the^ (...) of C. 1292. at what time Philip surnamed the fair
King of France did hands on it, and took it into his protection, until
Ludovick (...) did at length unite it to the Kingdom of France, which history
^^^dine does largely prosecute Lib. 2. Cap. 64. For those of Lions
disconstantly defend their liberty, which they had enjoyed from the time of
the Romans, which Pliny mentions, and also Paul^s ^. C. in his Books of
Distributions, which the Praelates endeavored to take from them. But albeit
this City and Province does enjoy so many and so great commodities and
privileges as aforesaid, yet sometime it endured much misery. For after it
was reedified by Numatius one of the Plancian family, in the reign of Nero,
the most part of it was burnt, and Verus being Emperor, much Christian blood
was shed in the City. Afterward it felt the fury of Sep. Severus, who exposed
it as a booty to his Soldiers, and in King Phillips time it was burnt through
a dangerous sedition which arose in the City, and thereupon it lost that
liberty which it had preserved so many ages, and having endurd many miseries,
it lay dead a while buried as it were in the ruin thereof. But at last by the
liberality and favor of the Kings, and vigilancie and industry of the
Inhabitants, Lions grew to be as famous in our age as it was formerly. The
Magistracy of the City does consist of twelve Consuls, as Campegius relates,
who do govern the Commonwealth, six of them are yearly chosen before
Christmas, and six of those formerly chosen are in office, for the year
following, and they are confirmed by name in S. Nicetius Church, on the 12. of
the Kalends of January. And in the Town Hall which was formerly the
Archpraesident house, they meet together to consult of public affairs. But
the Roans house is designed to be the Court or Praesidiall seat of Justice,
on which depends the Court of Justice at Lions, also the Merchants Court in
the same place. The Praetors Court of Matisconia, Forest, Bellijocum. Here
besides the Kings Judges substitutes, Henry the second King of France did
establish 8. Senators with a Clarke or Notarie. In this City bes^de, the
ancient Schools which I have mentioned, there is an Universitie which has
flourished from the year of C. 1328. famous for the Professors of the Common
Law. There are great Faires kept here, to which at certain times of the year
a great company of people do resort. It has strong Fortresses to resist the
assaults of the enemy, for S. John's Bulwark is the chifest in all Europe, so
that on the top thereof 3000. Soldiers may be trained and set in Battle array.
King Charles the 11. Anno 1564. built a Castle there which was thought
impregnable, to suppress the assaults of enemies, and the attempts of the
seditious Citizens. And this is worthy of observation, that as often as you
dig there somewhat deep into the Earth, some Relics and Monuments of
antiquity, as Stones, Marbles, Coins, Lamps, Vines, and ruins of Aquaducts or
Conduits, Bathes, Theaters, and such like Aedifices are found there, so that it
is credible that many of such kind of Relics are found and discoverd here,
than in all the rest of France.

LANGVEDOC A PART OF AQVITAINE.
THE Occitane Country of France, commonly called L^guedoc, is a part of
Aquitane, and is so named as some conceive from the Goths the Possessions
thereof, as if yo^ should say Land-Got. That is, the Goths Province: Some
derive it from the word Lingua a tongue and the word (...) I suppose that these
conjectures are more vain than Sicilian toye^ and are but mere vulgar
trifles. The ancients took it for the Province of Narbon, near the Pyrenaean
Mountains. Strabo calls (...) Tectosages, the Metropolis whereof Tolouse is
accounted one of the chief Cities of France, having an Archprelate, a Senate,
and a U^^versity. Some derive the name thereof from those which fled from Troy.
Caesa mentions it in his first Book of Commentaries, where he speaks thus:
It was told Caesar, that the Helvetians purposed (...) travel through the
Sequans and Aeduans Country, unto the bor^^^ of the Santones, which are not
far from Tolouse, which is a City (...) Province: and also Lib. 3. concerning
P. Crassus: Moreover valiant (...) being levied out of Tolouse, Carcasson, and
Narbon, which are Cities (...) France near to Province, etc. Ammianus
Marcellinus gives it the ^^rogative above all the neighbor Cities. Neither
can we omit the worthy El^g^e of the ancient magnificence and power thereof,
written by Aus^mus a most famous Poet, and a Consul of Romans in prais^ of his
Nurse and Foster-mother in these Verses: Non unquam altricem nostri reticebo
TOLOSAM,
Coctilibus muris quam circuit ambitus ingens.
Perque latus pulero perlabitur amne Garumna
In^umeris cultam populis, confinia propter
Nirgida Pyrenes, and Pinea Gabennarum,
Inter AQUITANAS gentes, and nomen Iberum
Quae modo quadruplices ex se cum effuderit urbes,
Non ulla exhaustae sentit dispendia plebis:
Qu^s genuit cunctos gremio complexa colonas.
My Nurse Tolosaes praises I will found,
Which with a Brick wall is encompas'd round,
And fair Garumna runs by her side,
And many people do in her reside.
Cause the Pyrenean Ningidae confines
Upon it, and the Pinean Gabinines,
Between the Country of fair AQUITAINE,
And Iberus which now is called SPAIN:


map of Aquitaine LANGVEDOC A PART OF AQVITAINE.


And having yielded people unto four
Large Cities out of her abundant store.
Yet in her no want of people does appear,
Which done within her bosom nourisht were.
Whence the Visi-Gothi, having droven out the Romans from thence, did make
this City the royal Seat of the Kingdom, until they were quite expulsed by
the French, in the reign of Clodoveus the first Christian King, at what time
all that Province was subjected to France. Concerning the State Ecclesiastic,
the Tolousians were instructed in the Christian faith by Martial, who was
their first Prelate, after whom succeeded Saturninus, Honoratus, Silvius,
Hilarious, Exuperius, and many others, even to Ludovick Siculus the Son of
Charles the 11. King of Sicily, in whose time this Bishopric was translated
into an Archbishopric: under whom are these Suffragan Bishops; the Bishop of
Montalban, Mirapicensis, Lan^rius, Lombesius, of S. Papoulus, newly created by
Pope John the 22. And as this City is large and populous, so it has many fair
built Churches, and also Colleges and Monasteries. The chief Church belonging
to the Bishop is consecrated to S. Stephen: It has also an University famous
for Learning and for the great number of Students which study there. Here
formerly Plays in honor of Flora the Goddess of Flowers were celebrated, of
which there do yet remain some tokens. But the Family of the Earls mingling
with the Royal Stock, this Country was united to the Kingdom of France. It
will be here convenient to nominate some of them: as namely Corsonius, William
^eringerus, Berna^d and others, Capetus reckons the Earls of Tolosa among
the Peers of France, who enjoyed that dignity unto King Ludovicks time,
surnamed The Holy; who after the decease of his Brother Alphonsus, did unite
the County unto his Kingdom. There are also among others these Towns in
Languedoc, Narbon, Mons Pessulanus, Carcassona, Nemausus, V^^s.

THE DELPHINATE OF FRANCE.
ON the South Province is near to the Delphinate, and on the North it has the
Bressians, who are parted from it by the River Rhodanus flowing between them,
on the West is the County of Venusinum: and lastly on the East the Pedemontian
and Sabaudians do encompasse it. Caesar by one common name calls those of
the Delphinate, and the Sabaudians, Allobrogians, who were then confederate
with the Romans: The Country is now divided into the higher part, the chief
City whereof is Ebrodunum; and the lower part in which the prime Cities are
Gratianopolis and Vienna. Those of the Delphinate who dwelt beyond Rhodanus,
were hertofore a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy, and then of Orleans, and
afterward of Burgundy, the head City whereof was then Arelate, which afterward
from that City was called the Kingdom of Arelatum, but when that Kingdom came
to the Emperor Conradus the 2. after the decease of Rodolfus the first, the
last King thereof, there arose one Guigno, a man of base birth, who was called
afterward the fat Earl Grinmand, he through his own industry and the
confusion of the times obtained most of the chiefest Cities of this Country, so
that at last he possessed Gratianopolis and made himself Lord of the whole
Province, which to honor his Son who had married Delphina the Daughter of
the Earl of Albon and Vienna, he called it the Delphinate. After this the
Province of the Delphinate became subject to Provinces who ruled it, until the
time of Philip Valerius King of France, who annexed it to his Crown about the
year of Christ 1348. which was the cause that Humbert Delphine of Vienna
having lost his eldest Son in the Battle of Cressey, and his younger Son
dying by sickness, when he was provoked to war and set upon by Amades the
6. of that name, he determined to put himself into the Kings protection, and
to leave him Heir to his Dominions, on this condition, that from thenceforth
the eldest Sons of the Kings of France, during their Fathers life time,
should bear the Arms and Title of the Delphinate. And so this Country came
into the Kings hands, who thought fit to annex so noble a Prince neighboring
on Italy for ever to his Kingdom. The Delphinate therefore being one of the
chief Countries of France, is divided as I said before into the higher and
lower part and has many fair Cities and Towns in it. In the higher there are
Ebrodunum, which has a Prelate, also Valence, Dium, and S. Paul's Church: In
the lower is Vienna, which was formerly the Metropolis and Mother City of the
who^^ Delphinate, which is now Gratianopolis, there are also Romanium,
Bri^^conium, Mons-Limartium upon Rhodanus, a Town much frequented (...)
Merchants, where there are also many Monuments of Antiquity, (...) so S.
Antonies Church, Valerians Church, and the Monastery. Gr^nopolis was so called
from the Emperor Gratian, who reedified it, a^ beautified it with many
Buildings, now it has a Parliament, and President, with Senators, and other
Officers belonging thereun^^ and it has a Prelate, who is one of the chief
men of the Provinc^ under the Metropolitan of Vienna. But Vienna venerable for
An^^quity has a long time had a Metropolitan Bishop. Valence is c^^verted and
raised to a Dukedom, and has a Bishop and a Unive^^^ty, in which the Roman
Laws are read and declared, in (...) James Cujacius taught, who was the Prince
of all those Lawyers w^ flourished in former times, whose name shall live as
long as La^ continue in the world. Here are found Roman Inscriptions, another
ancient Roman Monuments. King Francis intended to (...) newly fortified
Gratianopolis against the invasion of enemies, but h^ left it undone.

map of the Delphinate of France ^HE DELPHINATE OF FRANCE.


THE DVKEDOME OF LOTHARINGIA.
THE SOVTHERNE PART whereof is painted forth in this Table.
The Country whence so called.
AFter Pictavia according to my method the Dukedom of Lothari^gia, follows,
Lothoringia according to the Latins was so called from Lotarius the Son o^
Nephe^ of the Emperor Ludovick King of France. Truly ^^^^vick Pius had four
Son who warring like Par^acid^^ against their Father, and having shut him up
into a Monastery among^^ Suessons they divided his Principalities amongst
themselves (...) it a Tetrarchie. Afterward by the meditation of the Nobles of
the Empire, the matter came to that pass, that Lotar^us the eldest Son
should enjoy the Title of the Empire, with Italy, Gallia Nar^^^us, and those
Territories, which were called by the name of (...) and that Ludovick should
possess Germany; Charles should (...) from the River Mosa to the Ocean: and
lastly Pip^^, or his So^^ should have Aquitaine. Lotarius had besides Lud^vick
who succeeded him in the Empire, a Son named L^tarius, King of Lo^^^ing^a.
And as the Germans as first called it Lotar^ri^^k, or Lot-rey^^, that is the
Kingdom of Lotarius, so the Latins afterward called it L^th^^^g. The
Inhabitants, and the other French do call it L^ra^ne as it (...) Lotregne. The
Germans call it Lottring.
The French Writers do report, that the bound of ^^ringta were heretofore
larger, and that it was heretofore called ^strasia, or Austria, or O^st-ey^h
(having Westrasia or Westria (...) West-reych, and corruptly Neustria, a
Western Kingdom) lying (...) against it, and that being divided into the
higher and the lower and contained between the Rivers Rhene, Scaldis, and
Mos^; the lowe^ part has diverse names, and is subject to diverse Princes: and
that (...) higher part which is called M^ssellanica and ^ulling^^ is all except
some parts thereof under ones command: so that o^ the East of ^taringia there
lies Alsatia, The Situation
and West^asia: on the South Burgund^^ the West Campania, on the North it is
bounded with the Wood ^^enna (the Leuceburgians, Treverians, and other people
borderi^^ thereon) which were heretofore the chiefest parts of ^^tha i^gis,
i^taringia, although it be full of high Mountains and thick Woods^^^ it
needs not the supplies of foreign Countries, The fruitfulness.
for it has good store of Corn and Wine. It has diverse kind of Mettalls as
Silver, Brass, Iron, Tin, and Lead: It has also Pearls for which th^^ map
of Lotharingia THE DVKEDOME OF LOTHORINGIA.
is excellent fishing at the foot of Vogesus. There are also certain Stones
found, which the Inhabitants in regard of their blue col^^^ do call Lazuli,
and do make great benefit of them. There is also certain substance, of which
they make Looking-glasses, the like when of is not found in other Provinees of
Europe. Here are also Calcidones great bigness, so that great cups are made of
small pieces thereof. ^ produces diverse kinds of living Creatures: The
variety of living creatures. The ancient government.
especially excelle^^ Horses, like to Neapolitan and Turkish Horses. Lotaringia
was heretofore a Kingdom, as appears in the French Writers. But th^^ are not
mentioned above two or three Kings thereof. For Charles (...) Bald presently
after the decease of his Uncle Lotarius, invaded ^^ Territories, and joined
them to his Principalities. And not long ^^ter it was made a Dukedom. The
first Dukes are scattringly men^^^ned by Historians and diverse Writers. In the
reign of Henry the Gotefridus held Lotaringia, he, who afterward having sold
his Dukedom Boulogne, together with his Brothers Baldwin and Eustathius (...)
a memorable expedition to the Holy Land, and carried his con^^ring Army through
Asia and Syria even to the City of Jerusalem, (...) was created King of
Jerusalem. After him succeeded Baldwin, and after Baldwin Eustathius.
Afterward King Henry the fifth gave (...) Dukedom to William Earl of Lovania,
after whom Theodore, The^^ Frederick, and others were created Princes of
Lotaringia, whom from Earldom was passed to Frederick Earl of Vadimontium,
from whom the Dukes of Lotaringia are descended. Mercator does plaine^ describe
it in two Tables, in one whereof he painteth out the ^^therne part, in the
other the Southern part. Heretofore the ^^^diomatrices and Leuci did inhabit
Lotaringia. Lib. 4. Tacitus, (...) Strabo, and Ptolemy do call them
Mediomatrices: and Caesar also L^^ calls them Mediomatrici, whose Metropolis
is called Divoduran, now Metz. In the Register Book of the Provinces of Belgia
it is called Civitas Mediomatricum, or le Evesche de Metz, le Pays Messin. C^^
lib. 1. Lucan lib. 1. and Pliny do call the Leuci Liberi: Ptolemy also ^^ them
Leuci, and makes their Metropolis to be Tullum. And so^^ called in the
Register Book of the Provinces of Belgia, Civitas L^^rum, that is Tullum, or
l'Evesche de Toul: also Antoninus his Itiner^^ does acknowledge Tullum or
Leucor. Some also do refer the which Caesar calls Tulinges to Lotaringia.
The Metropolis of La^^gia is Nancejum, commonly called Nancy: it is no great
Town, but y^^ it has a fair and commodious Seat, in a plain place, the
form it being fouresquare, in the which there is the magnificent Palace^ the
Dukes of Lotharingia. The River Murtu flows by the walls ^ Nancy, which three
miles of, a little beyond the Castle of Candens enters into Mosella. Peter
Divaeus and others do think that that which is now called Nanceum, was that
which was called Nasion, and which Ptolomy calls Nasium. Antoninus in his
Itinerarie places it between D^vodurum which is in the way from Durocortorum.
But he that conside^ that journey more nearly, he shall easily find that
Antoninus (...) Naesium cannot be seated in that place, where Nanceum is now:
so that that Nasium is not that which we call now Nanceium, but a Town i^
^^^stant from it not far from the River Mosa in the Barrodu^^^ince, which is
commonly called Nas, as appears by the ^^ion of stone dug up there. It is
manifest by the rubbidge ^^es thereof that this Nasium was sometime a very large
City: also Elemens Trelaeus Mosellanus witnesses in Ortelius. The next of note
to Nanceium is Fanum St. Nicholai, commonly called ^^, being two miles distant
from thence near the River M^rta, ^^ plain and fertile place. This Town by
the recourse of (...) unto it, is so much enlarged, and is grown so big,
that ^ were Walled, it would not seem a Village Town, but ra^^^ of the
fairest Cities of all Lotharingia* for it has such neat (...) well contrived
Streets, and such a multitude of Inhabi^^^^ it is complete in all things: but
it is especially commen^^e trade of Merchandise, and manufactures of all
kinds. It ^^ wealthy Merchants who are richer than their neigh^^ ^^mit other
Towns of lesser note, lest I should be tedious to ^^r. A mile distant from
Nancium is Fruat: three miles off is (...) a little more than three miles off
is Bayon and Luneville: (...) off is le Pont a Monson, and Gerbevillar: five
miles off is Char^^^ ^iles off is Castenoy, Morhanges and Vaucoleur; a little
more ^^iles is Maxen soubs Bresse: seven miles off is Dompaire, De^don
Chasteau. eight miles off is Ramberville, Raon, Bellemont, ^ean, Mugstat,
Marchain-Ville: nine miles off is Espinal, Bruyeres, a miles off is Ormont,
Walderfing, Beaurams: thirteen miles (...) fourteen miles off is l'Estray.
The Town called in ^^^dement, is five miles from Nancy. Chaligny on the right
side (...) half a league from Nancy. Also Amance seven miles ^^ty
Mediomatricum toward the South: which the Latin (...) Almentia: It was the
ancient Chancery of Lotharingia, as ^olls do witness, which Rosierus
produces. Also Riche^^ ^^re from the Lake, which is commonly called la Guard
lac, ^^^n a River flows, which between S. Nicolas Church and (...) Rosieres
does mingle it self with the River Murta. Also (...) the left side of Mosella,
making an Island there, is seated on Southern part of Lotahringia: Aimoinus the
Monk places ^astle Rumaricum: in Regino it is corruptly read Adromarici,
^^trici, the word being divided. Spigelius calls it in the speech Rimelsberg.
Not far from thence are Valleys which ^^monly called l'Estraye, and Vagny. La
Mothe is seated by the which by and by does discharge it self into Mosa. There
is ^^itory called le Sanctay. There ore also the Towns Kirchingan ^^kenburg.
Blankenburg, which the French call B^anc-mont, is a ^aire, and pleasant Town.
There is an ancient, spacious, and ^ent Castle, unto which the Dukes new
Palace, being a curi^cture is joined. The Inhabitants give themselves to Hus^^^
The Barony of Nomenium is on the right side of the River ^ee miles from the
City Mediomatricum, Southward. The ^^^s or Signiories in it are Marsal on the
left side of the River far from the Lake Linderus, in which there is an Island
having a Town in it called Techemful. Remereville is three miles from Nancy.
S. Bellemont is as far from Mota. Rambert-Ville is on the right side of the
River Morton, not far from the Springhead, where there is the wood Morton.
Rosieres is by the River Murta, near St. Ni^^^ Church, two miles from Nancy.
Homburg is more than a league dista^e from the Town Sarbruch, by the River,
which presently afterward runs into Saravus. Mariem^nt so called from the
Mount on which the Town is seated, is a mile off from the Lake Lindo,
Southward, Sandacourt being in the midway between Vandimont and Motta, in a
Country commonly called Sanctoy, being a City of the Medioma^^cans, and
heretofore together with Tullus and others an Imperial City, Henry the second,
King of France did reduce it into his power. It is now commonly called Metz,
and modern Writers do call it Me and Gregorius ^ur^^ensis and others do call
it Vrbs Me^ensis. The A^cients did call it Divodurum Mediomatricum. And in the
Itinerarie Table Divo Durimedio Matricorum: Ptolemy calls it Divodu^^^n: and
Tacitus lib. 4. and Antoninus do call it Dividorum. I purpose not to insert
diverse trifling conjectures concerning the new name. It was heretofore the
Seat of the Kingdom of Lotharingia. Concerning which Peter Divaeus has
written elegantly in his Itinerarie. The City (...) is situated on a large
Plain, which the River Mosella deviding itself into diverse Channels does
water, and part of it flows gently by the walls on the left hand, and part of
it goes under the walls serve the Cities use, and so it runs generally,
even to the nether side of the walls, where having received the River Sel^a,
which ^^eth the right side of the City, it runs again in one Channel (...)
the City is very pleasantly and delightfully situated, for having plain level
lying round about it, yet the plot of ground where it stands rises up a
little, whereby we may observe in what manner the ancients did build their
Cities. For they go up many f^e^ before they can come into the Cathedral
Church, near which there is a Market place on the highest part of the ground,
which by degrees bends down toward the Walls, yet one part of the descent
thereof is took away, by two streets paved with stones, which do cross by
one another. The Citizens are called Mediomatretes i^ at inscription which is
at Moguntio near S. Alban. That Town which is called in French Toul, was
heretofore called Tullum: Ptoleme calls it Tullon a Town of the Lucians:
Antonius, Tullus: The Itinerarie Tables do now call it Tullium. That which is
called Verdan, the Latins do now call Virdunum and Verdunum: Antonius calls
it Verodunum And in the Register Book of the Provinces, it is called Civitas
Verdunensium, or l'Euesche de Verdun. And the three Cities foresaid have
Counties belonging to them.

THE DVKEDOME OF LOTARINGIA.
The Southern part.
OUR order and Method does now require, that we should reckon up the chief
Rivers of Lotaringia, but first we will speak concerning the Lakes. It has
many Pooles and Lakes which are full of fish: Among which there is one that is
14. Miles in compass, in which there are great Carpes of three foot long,
which are so pleasant in taste, that they far exceed the Carpes in other
Countries for sweetness. The Duke of Lotaringia receaveth 16000. Franks every
third year, for fish taken in this Lake. It is watered with these famous
Rivers, Mosa, Mosella, Saravo, Voloia, Mortana, Murta, Sella, Hidia, and
others. Concerning Mosa it appertains to lower Germany. The other Rivers do
properly belong to this Dukedom: the better part of Mosella and Saravus, the
rest wholly. Mosella rises in the Mountain Vog^sus, not far from the
Springhead of Araris, a little above the Town which is commonly called Bussan,
and so gliding down from Vulturnum to the West, having viewed those Towns
which are called in French l' Estrate, Remiremont, Espinal, Charms, Baton, it
bends his course from the East west ward, and runs strait forward to
Tullum, an Episcopal City, whence running again Eastward, it bends
Northward even to Fruardum, and having visited the Mediomatricians, the
Treverians, and other people it runs into the River of Rhene. That which the
Germans call Mosel: the French call Moselle. It is thought that Rhenanus,
^tolemie Lib. 11. Cap. 9. and others did call it Ob^i^gos. But John Herold
notes that Chringen so called by Ptolemie is not a River, but a part of Land
near the River ^heme which is now called Ober Rhingham: also Clemens Tr^len
Mosellanus witnesses as Abraham Ortelius writes, that a certain Country of
Land near Mosella is yet called Obrincum. Ausoniu^ E^dyll 3. does celebrate
the praise of Mosella in learned verses, both for the clearenesse of the water,
and easy sailing thereon: and for the Towns and Palaces which beautified the
banks thereof: and also for the fish therein, as the Mullet, the Trout, the
Barbell, the Salmon, the Lamprey, the Perch, the Tench, the Bleake, and the
Gudgeon, of which i^ has great store; and lastly for the Rivers which run
into it, as Pronea, N^mesa, Sura, Gelbi, Erubra, Desura, Drahona, Salmon^,
Saranus, and Misontia. D. Vetus in the Reign of Domitius Nero the Emperor,
attempted to join Mosella and Araris, by making a channel between them, that
the armies being conveyed out of Italy by Sea, and afterward on the Rivers
Rhodanus and Arar by that channel, and so passing by the River Mosella into
the Rhene, might at last be brought again to the Ocean: that so the jouney
might be more easy, and the western and northern shoares between them
might be made navigable, as Cornelius Tacitus writes Lib. 18. Of which
A^sonius: Te foutes vivique lacus, te caerula noscent
Flumina: te veteres pagorum gloria, luci:
Te Druna, te spar sis incerta Druentia ripis,
Alpinique colent Fluvij, dupitemque per Vrbem
Qui meat, and dextrae Rhodanus dat nomina ripa,
Te stagnis ego caeruleis, magnumque sonoris
Amnibus, aequorea te commendabo Garumnae.
The Fountains, Lakes, and blew streams shall know thee,
And woods which of Villages the glory be.
Thee, Druna, thee Druentia that does glide
With winding course between his bancks so wide
And all the Rivers on the Alpine hill
Shall thee adore and reverence thee still.
And Rhodanus that does through the City flow,
Naming the right hand banck as it does go,
With the blew Lakes, and streams that greatest are,
And Sea-like Garumne I will thee compare.


Saravus rising not far from the Salmensians, is the greatest of all those
Rivers which run into Mosella, it is navigable, and famous for the receipt of
other Rivers, and after it has viewed the Cities and Towns, which are
commonly called Sar-Burg, Fenestrange, Sar-Vieden, Sar-Abben, Guemund,
Sar-Pruck, Waldersing, Sar-Brug, and others, at length it meets with Mosella
near the walls of Augusta of the Treverians, not far from Kontherbruck,
Ausonius mentions it is praising Mosella. It retains that name still. For
the Inhabitants call it Sar. And the ancients did call it Sarta, as appears
by and inscription which was brought to Trevers from a Town seated by the
River, which is now called Sarpruck, that is Sarrae Pous, or Sarra Brigd^

CAES TO. EXER. IMP. P.P.
S.C.A u. TREVE. INGR.
ES SUM. H. CASTRA. SARRA
FLU. PRO. MIL. CUSTODIA
BIENN. POTITUS. EST.
Veloia is a River that has pearls in it, which near the Town Charmeni
runs into Mosella. Mortana near a Town of the same name mingleth it self
with the River Murta. Murta or Meurta having received many Rivers into it,
comes to Mosella in a plain place among the Meadows, and accompanies him
for a long way together, keeping an equal course with him, having but a little
map of Lotharingia THE DVKEDOME OF LOTHORINGIA.
ground between their channells, until at length a little above the Castle
Candejus, which on the right hand is seated on a Rock, by a Town of the same
name, it makes a sharp angle with the Channel of Mosella, and mingleth his
waters therewith. The River Sella also joyneth it self with it, near to the
City Mediomatricum, which rises out of the Lake Linder, which is rich in
Salt, and fishing. And the two Nigidas meeting together at the Town
Northenium, does discharge it self into Saravus, 2. Miles below
Bosnois-Villa, an Abbey so called. There is in the Vale of Deodatum a Fountain,
which has a sovereign quality given it by nature to heal many diseases.
There are also saltpits, in which there is very fine Salt, being sweet in
taste, and whiter then Scythian Snow, out of which saltpits the Duke of
Lotaringia receaveth yearly an 100000. Francks. The Mountains.
This Province is environd with very high Mountains, which do far excel
the Pyrenaea^ Mountains for their abundance of all sorts of Metals, but
especially Silver Mines, which yield so much Silver, that he receives a great
revenneue out of it. Also the Mountain V^gesus in the Valley Leberia does
yield pure silver, but not so great a quantity. Moreover Lotaringia has many
thick woods, The Woods.
some of which we will set down according as they are called in French, as
Warned-W^^, de Bennoit, le bois de Mortaigne, Boseyne, Bois de Mordon, le B^n
b^is, le B^^ de la Voyge, de Heyde, and others. Concerning the public works,
there is at the Town S. Nicolas 2. Miles distant from Nam^^y, near the River
Mu^ta, The Public works.
a great Church not very ancient, but curiously built, and very light. The
Pillars which bear up the roof of it are very great, and yet their height
make them appear to be so slender, as if they were unfit to sustain so great
a work. It has two Towers, on one of which Charles Cardinal of Lotaringia,
Bishop of Metz's, and Prior of this Church, has set on the top thereof an
Emblematicall divise, which is a Spire of a Steeple wrapped about with Ivy, with
this Motto or Inscription, Te stante virebo: Thee standing, I shall flourish.
Near the Town Wasserbillich where the River Suras mingleth his waters with
Mosella, there is another Town commonly called (...), where on a high place
stands that venerable Monumet of Antiquity, which is more famous than any
beyond the Alps, and which the Italians themselves may admire: it is a pile of
stone, which is built or a square Baisis or foundation of 22. foot over, and
so rises by degrees until it be about 74. foot high, being engraven round
about with diverse Images, on the top thereof there is a piece of an Eagle,
sitting on a Globe, with his wing spread abroad, and it seeme^ that there was
a Veil before his breast. There is at Nancy S. Georges Church, in which there
is the Monument of Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, being slain in a
battle by the Helvetians and Lotaringians on the Nones of January, Anno 1477.
whose ashes and bones, Bots^tus, the Crier of the order of the golden Fleece,
by the command of the Emperor Charles the fifth, his Nephews son, did
solemnly carry from thence to Luceburg 1550: and afterward by the command of
Mary Queen of Hungari, they were carried to Bruges. There are also in the same
Georges Church, the Tombs of diverse ^kes of Lotaringia, which have no
inscriptions: as also in other ^^urches. The most of the late Dukes do lie in
S. Francises Church. ^ere is the stately Monument of Renatus, who obtained a
Victory ^inst Charles Duke of Burgundy. There do lie also in the same ^^ce
Duke Antony, and his son Francis, and Claudea Valesia, wife to ^^ke Catolus,
and Daughter to Henry the second King of France. There ^an Armory in Naucy,
furnished with all kind of warlike Engines* ^here is also a Church in the City
of Metzs consecrated to S. Stephen, ^^d others, concerning which Dinaeus says.
The Church is named ^om S. Stephen, the Patron of the City, being a most fair
and re^^wned work, as any which we saw in all our journey, and which ^a
^ariety, it was compleately finished in all parts. It is said that ^^ere was in
it a wooden Crucifixe, covered all over with golden ^nes, we saw a red
colored Cesterne of Porphyry of a great capa^^le, being above 10. foot long,
in which they keep their holy wa^^, There are also many other sumptuous
Temples in this City, and ^^re were many in the Suburbs thereof, as the S.
A^ulphis Church, which is famous in regard that the Emperor Ludovick Pius, and
his ^^one Charles, and some of King Pipins daughters were buried here. ^^t the
wars have wasted these things, so that now there is no part ^f Suburbs
remaining, so that beyond the Walls there is nothing but ^eld-ground. Not far
from Metz, near the Town Iovy, there are some ^okens in the River Mosella of
an ancient Aquaeduct or Watercourse. Concerning which Dinaeus thus in his
Itinerarie. In this journey there ^ a Town commonly called Iovy, between the
foot of the Moun^aines and Mosella, where it seems that there was an
Aquaeduct or ^onveyance of water all the way between both the Mountains, as
^ppeares by the ruins yet remaining. There are yet many of the ^^rches, which
are of white stone cut like unto brikes: and there are ^ome a^ches of the same
work on the other bank. The Inhabi^ants do affirm that there is in this
place a Fountain ignorantly ^hinking that these Arches did serve for the
Bridge, and they said that there were other lesser arches on the top of this
Mountain, which did run out toward the City Metz, which is a Mile off. It
^s about 60. foot high, near the bank, whence we may conjecture that a great
work it was, and how high the Arches were, which ^tood in the Channel of the
River, of which there is nothing now ^emaining. The Inhabitants do report that
the upper part of the Arches is plain being daubed over with red colored
Mortar, and that in the middle of it not many years since there was a little
house, open on both sides, which we suppose was that part of the house, which
should have covered the Conduit Pipe. Hen^y the second, King of France (as we
said before) did subject the City of Medriomati^^m to him, which was sometime
an Imperial City. A Magistrate ^ent from the King sits as President in the
Senate of the City. The Tribunal in the City of Mediomatricum has three
Bishops belonging to it, who are under the Metropolitian of Trevers, as the
Bishop ^^ Metz, of Tullum, of Verdunum, so called from their several S^^^e*

THE DVKEDOM OF BVRGVNDIE.
The Country whence so called.
LET so much according to our Method suffice co^ning Lotharingia. The Dukedom
of Burgundy foll^^ or lower Burgundy. The name of Burgundy com^ from the
Burgundians, who being a people of Ger^^ descended of the Vandalls, and so
called from the (...) Burgis, that is from the Towns of Garrison, being
disturbed by Almaines (who violently seated themselves in their Country w^^ is
now called the Palatinate) under the conduct of Theodesius the (...) of Arcadius
the younger, they drove out the Sequeans and Aedius, a possessed themselves of
this part of ancient France, The Dukedom of Burgundy.
with the N^^^ whom Tacitus mentions. Peter Sancto-Iulianus deriveth the
Ex^^logie of Burgundy from a certain place commonly called Burg^^ in the
Country of Langrenid. It was heretofore a Kingdom a^^ the year 1034. and
afterward it was divided into a Dukedom County: the former toward the East
called the lower and (...) Burgundy, the latter toward the East called the
higher and Imper^^ Burgundy. We will entreat of the Dukedom in this
Descripti^^ and of the County in the next. The Situation
The Dukedom is encompas do^^ East side, with the Counties of Saba^dia and
Burgundy, having the ^ver Rhodanus flowing between them: on the South is the
Territo^ of Lions; on the West the fair fields of the Nevernians and Borb^ans,
on the North lies Campania. It is a Champion Country, and ^feriour unto none
for fertility and fruitfullnesse, The Fertility.
for here is pl^^^ous stoare of Wine and Corn, so that Bacchus and Ceres seem
to contend, who should exceed the other in bestowing their guif^^ liberally
upon this Country. The ancient government.
Richard Earl of Augustodunum a (...) man, and well experienced in warlike
matters, was created Duke all Burgundy beyond Araris, by Odon King of France,
who was afterward Duke of Burgundy 32. years. He left Burgundy to his So^^
Rudolphus, who was afterward chosen King of France, and Hugo N^^ his Brother
succeeded him in his Dukedom. After him succee^^ Odo his Brother, or his
Son, (for I find Authors of both opinion After whom followed Henry his
Brother, who dying without I^^ Robert King of France, got the Dukedom of
Burgundy, Henry having ^ it him (as they say) by his last Will and Testament.
After him suceeded his Son Robert, and after Robert, Hugo his Nephew. After
h^^ followed Otho; and after Otho, Hugo the third. And after Hugo the Odo the
Son. After whom there followed in order Odo the thi^^ Hugo the fourth, Robert
the third, Hugo the fifth, Endo, and Philip, w^ map of Burgundy THE DVKEDOME OF
BVRGVNDIE.
dying without Issue John King of France followed after him, after whom
succeeded Philip his Son surnamed the Bold to whom his Father gave the
Dukedom of Burgundy. John surnamed the Stout succeeded his Father Philip, and
after him Philip the Good or Gentle, his Son. And after succeeded Charles who
in regard of his service in diverse Wars, was surnamed The Warrior. After
whose decease Ludovick the 11. possessed all this Country. The Metropolis or
chief City of the Dukedom is Divionum which Gregory Turonensis calls
Divionum, The Cities.
and the French Dijon. Divionis is thought to be the Builder there, but we
rather suppose that Aurelianus the Emperor was the re-edifier thereof, and the
enlarger of the Precincts. Some think it was so called ab Divis, or from the
Gods who were much reverenced there. It is the fairest City in Burgundy. It is
situate on a most pleasant Plain, and the two Rivers Suzione and Oscara
(called in French Suson and l'Ouche) do wash the walls on either side: the
former does usually overflow the City making dangerous exundations; the latter
is very full of fish, and flows in a quieter Channel, and yields many
commodities. The walls are built as high as is convenient for defense: being
lately fortified with Towers and Bulwarks. There is a Seat of Justice there,
and a Parliament: out of whose bosom, the Laws of the Country are as it were
fetched. He that is chose^ to be Mayor of this Town, is compeld though
against his will to take a burden on him rather than an honor, and to take his
oath it the Temple of the blessed Virgin, which the Kings Proctor repeateth
unto him, namely that he will be faithful unto the King, and that ^ee will
defend the Laws, Liberties, and Privileges of the City, against the King
himself, and all others, as often as occasion shall require. On the Mountains
near the City there do grow excellent Vines. Moreover the Episcopal Cities
are Augustodunum and Cabill^us, both venerable for antiquity. The former was
called Augustod^^^, from Augustus, (whether Octavianus or some other it is not
greatly to be stood upon: for those that derive it from Auge the wife of Aph
do but relate Fables) who re-edified it when it was ruinated by the wars
which Caesar maintained against France. It is now called A^s^^. It was
heretofore a very fair City, but now it is not so beautiful Here are many
ruins of Theaters, Aqueducts, Pillars, and Pyrami^es to be seen: and there
are daily old Coins, and other ancient Monuments dug up, it has also now
many fair Churches and public Structures in it. It is seated at the foot of
those Mountains, which are commonly called les Monts de Civis, near the River
Arrasius. So much concerning Augustodunum,: there follows Cabinum, or
Caballionum, Aeduorum: commonly called Challon sur Saone. It is not known who
built it. This City is situate on the right had bank of Araris: the Fields are
fruitful, and the air wholesome. It is very commodious for transporting
Merchandise down the River Araris, whence Caesar chose this place to make
provisionin, and to convey it from hence to his Army which lay in diverse parts.
This sometime was the royal Seat of Guntchrannus. Afterward Lotarius the
Son of Ludovicus Pius did burn it all down, so that there remained no
appearance of a City. But in regard of the convenience of the place it was
afterward reedified, and at this time it is a rich Town of trading. So much
concerning the Metropolis, and the Episcopal Cities: there follows now some
Towns of lesser noate which are in this Dukedom. In the midde way between
Caballinum and Matiscon, there is a Town commonly called Tornus; Spartianus
and Antoninus call it Tinurtium. It is situate in a fertile soil, being every
where encompas'd with the River Araris. The Hills in the Country of
Suburbicaria do bring forth excellent Wine. And in the midway between the
City Matiscon, and Carballon, is the Town Cuysellum, which belongs to the
King as Parad^ne thinks, which Ammianus calls Secusium. Being situate at
the foot of the Mountain Iura, and though it be now very ruinous, yet it is
venerable for antiquity. On the East it has high Mountains, and clear
Rivers, whose waters are very sweet to drink, from whence a wholesome
Fountain, springing out of the high sandy Rock is conveyed into the Town by
wooden Pipes. On the West a Plain spreads forth it self. Three leagues
from the City Cabellon Northward is Belna, commonly called Beaulne, near the
River which the Inhabitants call Beur-soize. Some would have it to be that
which Caesar and Strabo call Bibracten. Others are of another opinion. This
Town is situated in a Fennish place, which as Paradine writes can easily make
a Lake about the City, for a mile round about, to keep of^ the enemies. All
the City is encompassed with strong walls, and has Bulwarks, which can resist
the force of Ordnance. The Country of Belnia is rich, and of a good soil. It
has the best Vines in all the world, which make the best Wine. In the same
Country is Cistertium called so from the Cisternes, built at Duke Odoes charge
in a great Wood, under the Priory whereof there are above a thousand and eighty
Frieries, and as many Nunneries, of the same Order, which from hence is called
the Cistertian Order. Semurium, commonly called in French Semur, is situate in
the middle of the Territory, which is commonly called Auxois, a fair Town. In
the midway between Divion and Belni is Nuithonium, commonly called Nuys. This
Town was always famous for making of good Swords. That Town which is now
called Avalon, Antoninus calls Aballon, where he calls it also the 16.
Legion. That which in French is called Sanlieu, Antoninus calls Sidolucum,
who places there the 18. Legion. That which is called Flavigus, half a league
Eastward from Semurio, it is thought was formerly called Flavia Eduorum. There
are also other Towns of Burgundy, which for brevity sake I omit to describe:
as are Ausone, having a Castle, which is the Eastern Key of the Dukedom, the
River A^^^is gliding by the walls thereof, also the Towns Noiers, Ravieres,
^eigne, Mombard, Chastillon, S. Seigne, Seloigne, Crevant, Viteau, Verdun,
Ar^n, Seure, Tonnerre, which Antoninus calls Tronoderun. There are three ^ther
Episcopal Cities accounted to be in the Dukedom of Burgun^^e, Nevers,
Ausserre, and Mascon. The first whereof is a Dukedom, ^he Territory thereof
(called Duche de Navernois) is very large, and is ^atered with three Navigable
Rivers, I^auna, Elavere, L^geris. There are 12. walled Towns therein, the
Metropolis whereof is Nivers^^^, having Jurisdiction over thirty Castelships as
they call them. That which Caesar calls Noviodunum, is a Town strongly walled,
and well fortified with Towers and deep Ditches. Among the chief Towns of
the Dukedom of Nevers are Dezisa, which Antoninus calls Decise and Decetia:
also Clamecyum, Dousyum, Milinium, Angilbertsum, Corbigri^m, St. Leonards
Church, Luyzium, Premecyum, and others. Anserre follows: which Antoninus calls
Antissiodorum, and places here the 22. Legion Ammianus calls it Antosiodorum,
or l'Evesche d'Auxerre. The Territory of this City, commonly called le Pays
d'Auxerrois, is famous for wire, called after the name thereof. The City which
is now called M^s^^, Caesar calls Matiscona: and the Itinerarie Tables
Matis^^, and the Register Books of the Province of France, and Anton^^us do
call it Matisconense Castrum, who places there the 10. Legio^^, and it ^^
ancient Roll it is called Mastico, as Philip Bugnonius notes, who writs
History of this City. Paul Diaconus calls it Machaon (...) Turonensis, and
others do call it Matissana, being like or Calali^^, both for situation,
manners, and Arts. It lies by the River (...), which has a fair Bridge over
it, lying strait forward (...) the other side are like unto a Bow. In Burgundy
and the (...) thereof are these Counties, Dijon, Austun, Tonnerre, Cha^on (...)
Mascon, S. Martin, Nevers, Langres, Ausserre, S. Iangou, Charo^^, (...) or
Chagni; Monliet or Montit, Auxone, Rogemont, Mussy, strestem^e^, Mombys,
Senegnon, Gilly, Valenion, Tirecourt, Chevigni, Ain^-v^^le, Esp^^i Epiryen,
Tarvant, Brasey or Brass, Rochefort, Aincourt, or Agin^^our^, V^^ To which
also are added Arley, Ragny, haligny, Mommariu^, Laugey, ^^^champ, Couches.
There are the Bishoprics of Augustodunum, or ^^^ensis, of Austum, of Mascon,
of Chalon, and of Langres, which are sub^e^ to the Archbishop of Lions. This
Dukedom has these Rivers S^^on, Oscarus, Araris, Icauna, Ligeris, Elaveres,
and others.

THE COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDIE.
THE County of Burgundy follows, or Burgundy the higher, in French it is
called Franche Conte, that is the free County, for the Province is governed by
the Earl thereof, and is free as they say from all tributes and exactions. It
belongs to the Emperor, The (...)
and is under the protection of the Burnensian Heluetians. On the North
Lotaringia and high Germany do confine upon it, on the West the Dukedom of
L^^gundie, on the East the Helvetians, on the South the Allobrogians and
Segusians. The length is 90. Miles, the breadth 60. The (...)
It is a very fruitful Country, replenished with all things necessary for
man's life, and the soil is fit for tillage, for planting of Trees, and
Vineyards, and for feeding of Cattle. There is every where great store of
Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Beans, and other Pulse. And no less abundance of
Trees. The Contrie especially the middle part has hills which do bring forth
and yield most excellent Wines. The Arbosians, and the Vadamians have
Winevessells so great that they seem to be as big as a house. Near the
Palace of the ancient Kings of Burgundy, which the Inhabitants call now
Chambrette au Roy, they dig out of the earth a kind of plaster, like Lime.
There is also in the Country of Dolania Marble dug forth, The variety of
livi^^ Creatures
which the Greeks did call Alablaster, of which they made Tombs and Monuments
for great men: and another black kind of Marble enameld with purple spots.
There are also diverse kinds of living creatures, and great store of Oxen and
Cattle. All do approve of the traveling Horses of Graunell, and the fierce
Dogs that are in this Country. Many things are delivered concerning the ancient
Earls of Burgundy. Eudo was the first Earl and Palatine of Burgundy, The
(...) Government
after whom succeeded his Nephew Philip; who dying without issue, John King of
France gave the Dukedom of Burgundy to his son Philip, who was surnamed the
bold, but Margaret his Nephew succeeding after Philip, got the Dukedom of
Burgundy, after whom succeeded Ludovick Malanus her Son, and after him
Margaret Malana her Daughter, whom Philip Duke of Burgundy surnamed the bold
married. After him there succeeded in order John his son surnamed the stout,
Philip Bonus, or the good, Charles the Warrior, and Mary married to Maximilian
of Austria, Philip of Austria, the Emperor Charles the 5. etc. Philip King of
Spain. This Coun^tie is divided into 3. Diaeceses or Praefectureships, which
are commonly called Bayliwicks: the higher and the lower, and Dolins. The first
is Vesulium, the second Polichum, the third Dola. But D^^a has a strong
Castle, and is the Metropolis or chief City of the whole County, and the
fairest of all the other Cities, it is situated by the River Dubis, which
devideth it self here into two arme^ Some suppose it to be that which
Ptolemie calls Didattion Lib. 11. Chap 9. a City of the Sequanes, very fair
and beautiful. Here is a ne^^ spacious Market place, almost four square, but
that it is a little longer than broad. On the West side is the Court, and the
Prison. The chief Church which is very fair and admirably carved, is
consecrated to the Virgin Mary. There are also many other Cities as Ves^^^
commonly called Besancon, an Imperial City, called heretofore Chrysopolis: it
is seated in a commodious and fertile Territory. T^^ River Alduasdabis does
run through most part of it, and do^^^ circle most of it, but the River does
not wash the other part, (...) the Gate in the way to Dola. There is also
Nozerethum, or N^^^ which was formerly called Nuccillum from the Nut trees
grow^^^ there, but Ludovick Cabillonensis returning from the wars of
Jerusalem did wall it about and called it Nazarethum. This Earl has a C^^
which is called the leaden Castle, because it is covered with (...) There is
also Salina, a fair City, and famous through the which world, denominated and
so called from the salt Fountains, and (...) salt which is usually made there,
which being very white is tran^^ted ted into other Countries, and the County
has a great revelation out of it. We omit for brevitie sake the description of
other Co^^tries: The Lakes.
Burgundy has great and wonderful Lakes: One of the chief whereof is that
which is called the Wherlepoole: which is a ^^^derfull work of nature. For
there is mud above the water which so hardened, that it seems firm land: yet
Horses and Cart^u^^ not pass over it, but only footmen. In raynie cloudy
wea^^^ does not rise, except it be against fair Weather, and then is ^^^leth
up presently, and waters the Columban Plain. Moreover ^^tween Nozerethum and
Riparia there is another Lake in Bonualli, (...) is full of Pikes, Pearches,
and other fish, which every 7. year some weeks hides it self, and after
rises up again, which i^ ^^^ry miraculous, and most incredible. The Southern
part of (...) County has many Lakes. There is the Lake called in Freach^^
leteux, both the greater and the lesser, also Narlay of an inc^^^ depth: The
Rivers.
also Vernoy, the two Chamblici, Frogeay, Ronchault, and (...) Many Rivers do
divide it, as Dubis, Longnonius, Danus, Lpuus: all ^^^bis does appertain to
this County, Ptolomie calls it Doubis, and (...) Alduabis, if Fulvius Vrsinus
conjecture rightly: in other Books ^^ corruptly read Alduasalubis and
Alduasdolis, commonly Doux. It is (...) out of the Mountain Iura, a little
above the pleasant Villag^ (...) Moreover Dubis taking his course from the
South Northward, gli^^^ by the Lake Pontium, and so with many windings runs
by Palum, Mortua, and Vasrum, and so to the Church of S. Hyppolitus, (...) from
thence bending Westward, it goes to the Town Chas^da, so flowing by Vesuncio,
and making an Island near Dola, after (...) winding turnings and having
received many Rivers, it mingleth waters with Araris near Virdunum. Longnonius
also wholly beleueeth to the higher Burgundy, commonly called Lougnon. Davum
sp^^^eth out of the high Mountain, which hangs over a great and map of
Burgundy ^HE COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDIE.
Town called Syrodus: there are also Lupus or Lupa, commonly called Love, The
ancient government.
Ararus, and others. Concerning the Politic state of this free Country, when
the Provincial assemblies are held, the three states do mere, being summoned
in the Earls name by the Prince of the Arausians, and the Lords of Nozereth
and Arbe. The three States do consist of the Nobles, the Clergy, and the
Citizens. The Earls of the higher Diaecese are the Earl of Montbelliart, the
Earl of Roche and Varax, of Montrivel, or Thalamey and Vaulgrenans, of Vergey,
of Rey, Listoneis. The Abbates are of Croissant, of Charity, of Bitaine, of
Corneul, of Tulley, of Clarfont, of Luxeul, of Bellevoulx, of Grace-Dieu, of
Charleu, of three Kings, or Trium Regum. The Priors are of Vaueluse, of
Lantenans, of Cusance, of Marteret, of Iussey, of Portsus Saosne, of Montreul
near Sagona, of S. Marcelli. The Canonici are of Calem^stier, and others of
other places. The Cities are Gray, Vesoul, Month^^son, Iussey, Palma, Portsus,
Saone, Cromary, Mont-Iustin, Faulcogney. The Lords are: of Montmorot, and S.
Loup. of S. Martin, of Taulens, of Villeneufve, of Rupt, of Montgevelle
Chastillon and Belvoye, of Constandey, of Monb^illon, of Velleson, of Dicey, of
Vgny and Chemylly, of O^zelet* of Cicon, of Trasves, of Raincounieres, of
Costebrune, of Sombern^m, of Villefault, of Bermont, of Avilley, of Mugnay, of
Vereur, of Tourai^^, of Ci^^^, of Provanchieres, of Grand-mont, of Velle
Chevrelous, of Voser, of Damparre, of Frotey, of Breutal, of Matey, of
Noironde, of Tromarey, of Milles^ of Mailler^ncourt, of Myon, of Benaenge, of
Vellerot le boz, of Clear, of Betoncourt, of Mortaillotte, of Amondans, of
Fraisne, of Chav^rey, of Mon^^ of Mons S. Legier, of Cuvry, of Montereul, of
Sorans and Lambry: and many others. The Earls of lower Burgundy, are of
Ruffer, of S. ^^bin: and the Barron of Chevreaulx: The Abbots are of S.
Engends, of Beaume, of Balerne, of Mont S. Marie, of Mont-Benoist, of Baylien,
of Ra^^^res: the Priors are, of Mainnaul, of Vaucluse, of Bonlieu, of Mente, of
L^^slesaulnier, of Arbois, of Mote, of Syredus, of Vallis supra Polichinum, of
Mortau. The Canons are, of S. Mauritius, of S. Anatolius, of S. Mi^^ael all in
Salina: also of Arbosium, of Polichnium, of Nozere^ and of other Cities. The
Cities are Salina, Arbois, Poligny, Pontarlien, Nezre, Castrum Caroli,
Monmoroti, Orgelot. The Lords are of Co^longuired Andelest, of Courla^u and le
Pin, of S. Amor, of Argento, of (...) of Poupet, of S. Sorlin, of Darna and
Tramelay, of Borsia, of Cressia, of F^tigny, of Chambery, of Montena, of
Vecles, of Rosait, of Marigna, of Be^fort, of Nasey, of Aigle, of Courboson, of
Vertamboz, of Largi^^a, of Main^, of Estoille, of Chasnet, of Aresche, of
Coges, of Bar and Iousseaul, of A^ges, of Muy^e, of Charrin, of Charlin, of
Chaumes, of Bretterieres, of (...) of Cogna, of Chaulx, of Montnet, of Vadans
Villette, of Arb^is, of Aig^^erre, of Chastelvillaine, of S. Julian, of
Descrilles, of Verges, of Cham^^ag^, of Beaulchemin, of Villeneufve les
Orgellet, of Chastres, of Ioulx, of V^n^e^, of Vismeaulx, and many others. In
the Diecesse of Dola there are the Lords of Givrey, of Longepierre and Rahon,
and of Clervaulx. The Abbots of Billon, of S. Vincius, of S. Paulus Bisantius,
of Acey. The Priors, are of Loye, of Leval, of Damparis, of Iouhe, of Monterot,
of M^te, of Faye, of Mostier in Se^usia. The Cannons are, of Dola, of
Bisantinum, and others in other places. The Cities are Dola, Quingejum,
Orn^^^, Lya, Rocheford, Vercelle. The Lords are of Vauldrey: of Rainnes, of Rye
of Mentfort, of Mont-Richard, of Fertans, of Maillot, of Bermont, of Cleren, of
Verchamps, of Dossans, of Port, of Chasteau, of Roillault, of Abbaus, and
Marchault, of Reculet, of Chantrans, of Mont-gros-pain, of Mutigney, of
Chassey, of Paressey, of Choisey, of S. Iley, of Faye, of Parrel, of Chemin, of
^abus, of Champdivers and Rastonnieres, of Rainche-court, of Paintre, of
Mentrambart, of Salans, of Goussans, of Chavirey, of Ancier, and others. There
is great store of Nobility (as we see) in this Country. And there are four
families which are either descended from the Kings and Princes of Burgundy, or
are allied to them by affinity, namely the Noble Lord of Vienna: of Vergy, who
is called the stout; of Chalon who is called the rich, and Prince of the
Arausians, and of Neuf Chased, who has a great estate of Lands. But all
appeals are brought out of the three Dieceses, or Bayliwicks, to Dola, to the
high Parliament of this County. Concerning the state Ecclesiasticke, the
Archbishop of Bisuntine, under whom are three Bishops, the Bishop of Bas^ in
Germany, of Lausanum in Helvetia, and of Bellicensis in Sabaudia, is the
chief for Ecclesiastical government, and the Prince of the Empire. The
Archbishop of Bisuntium, and the City Besoncon, which is a free imperial
City, and heretofore the greatest Town of the Province of the Sequans, and
the Presidents seat, are parts of the Empire of the fifth circle. The thenth
Circle of the Empire is the Burgandian, because it consists of the house of
Burgundy, and does contain the chief Princes of the Low Countries, which
are the Duke of Burgundy, H. Bergen and Waelhem, Count Egmond and Iselstien,
Count Nassau in Breda, and Count Bergen.

THE DVKEDOME OF SABAVDIA.
MAny do make great inquisition concerning the name o^ Sabaudia. whence so
called.
Some do derive it a Sabatijs Vadis, or the Sab^tian Fords. Pliny calls it
Sabatium Vadum, a City of U^guria, which Pomponius Mela calls Sabbatta,
Ptolemy Sabata, and Strabo Zabbatoon Ouada. Others call it Saba^^^a as it were
Sabbaterum Auwe, that is the Field, or Meddow of the Sabatians, whom
Volaterranus calls Sabbaudians. Some call it Sa^voie, as it were a way through
Flints, Briars, and rugged places. Some call it Saulve-Voie, that is, the Safe
way, which was once very dangerous and full of Thieves as fabulous Writers do
report. Saba^di^ (...) often named in the Register Book among the Provinces of
Ga^^ Narbonensis. And former Writers do mention it, sometimes calle^ it
Sabaudia, The ancient
and sometimes Sapaudia. On the North and West it bounded with the County of
Brssanium (which the Duke of Saba^^^ passed over to the King of France in
Exchange, for the Marquishing ^ Salutium) and with Helvetia, and the Lake
Lemane, which lies between them: on the East with Valesia and Piemont, and
the Mountains which run between them: and on the South is the De^^nate. In
the Valleys and Champion places, the soil is pleasant and fruitful,
especially toward the Nouth, by the Lake Leman, where it brings forth
excellent Wine, which is called Ripalium, from the bank of the Lake. There are
excellent Pastures for feeding all so^^ of Cattle, especially near S.
Bernards Mount. All this tract of gro^^d which contains Sabaudia, the
Delphinate, and other confining Provinces, were heretofore a Kingdom, as it
appear in Livie, lib. 2^. where we read that two Brothers who contended for
the Kingdom of the Allobrogum did choose Hanniball to Arbitrate between them
That part of the Kingdom of which we entreat, namely, Sabandis had afterward
diverse Lords and Princes, it is now governed by Dukes: whose bounds were
shorter formerly. For then they were only called Earls of Mauriemia: the
first whereof was Berthold^^ who being enforced to change his own Country,
went into that part of Burgundy, which the Allobrogians call the County of
Mar^enna: which County he obtained for some service done to the Empire, which
his Son Humbert the first, having more fully received o^ the Emperor Henry
the third did pass over to his Son Amades the first, and Humbert the second,
his Nephew, who by the successive right of Adelheida, the Wife of Humbert the
first, were also Marquesses o^ Segusium, and had Tarantasia joined to their
Territories. The Son map of Sabaudia THE DVKEDOME OF SABAVDIA.
of Humbert the second, was Amades the second, the first Earl of Saba^dia, and
Marquess of the Taurinians and Segusians. After him there followed in a right
line Humbert the third, Thomas, who got by war the Principality of Piemont,
also Amedes the third, who got into his own possession the Country of
Chablasium and Vallis Augustae Petra, having no Heir Males to inherit them,
and also Boniface, who dying without issue, his Unckles succeeded after him,
Peter, who much enlarged his Principality, having taken all the Towns near to
the Lake Leman, and Philip, formerly Archbishop of Lions, who for want of issue
did pass over the better part of his Inheritance to Amedes the fifth, his
Brother Thomases Son, who was surnamed the Great. After him succeeded his
Sons Edward who had no Heir Male, and Amedes the fifth. After whom succeeded
Amedes the 6. who founded the Order of the Knights of the Post: also Amedes the
7. and Amedes the 8, whom the Emperor iSgismund did create the first Duke of
Sabaudia, in the year 1416. whom after a voluntary resignation of h^s
Principalities unto his Son Ludovick, became a Monk, and the Fathers of the
Counsel of Basil, made him Pope after Eugenius the 4. and called him Pope
Felix the fifth. Nine years afterward he yielded up that dignity to Nicolas
the fifth, being content to be a Cardinal only. He dyed in the year 1452. at
Ripalis, near the Lake Lenu. Moreover there were 8. more Amadesses.

The Metropolis of Sabaudia is Chamberiacum, commonly called Chamberi, which
the Ancients did call Camerinum, as Paradine notes in his Sabaudia. Pinetus
thinks that the Ancients did call it ^^^ Voconij, which Pliny mentions,
lib. 3. cap. 4. and Antoninus in his Itinerarie. So that it cannot be that they
should count Forum Vo^^^vs among those Towns, which are in the Province near
unto the Mediterranian Sea. Also Peutingers Itinerarie Table does place there
Forum Voconij, not far from the French shore, between Forum his, now called
Frieul, and Mataron. Varerius vainly trifleth in his Chorographie of Portugal,
who makes Forum Voconij, to be Forum Voceris, as if it were the Metropolis of
the Vocontians, when the chief City of that Country is Augusta Dia
Vocentiorum, now called Die. Canalis also and Castilion do think that
Chamberry is Cinarum, which Cicero mentions in his Epistles. Moreover
Chamberry has a Castle, and the Dukes of Sabaudia have a House there, who have
established here a Seat of Justice for the whole Country, and a Parliament.
The parts of Sabaudia are the Counties following. I will add something
concerning the Lordships. Fossigni is near the Lake Leman. In it they say is
Ripalia, allusively Ripam Alos, or the Sea-banke, (for some of the Inhabitants
do call the Leman Lake the Sea, and truly it rages oftentimes like the Sea)
it is commonly called Ripaille. It is a pleasant place, and famous because
Amedes the 8. the first Duke of Sabaudis, did there live a Monk, having
formerly resigned up his Principalities, and was chosen and consecrated Pope by
the Fathers of the Counsel of Basil after Eugenius the fourth, the 9. before
the Kalends of September, in the year 1440. and was called Faelix the 5. he
lived a while, and built some small Aedifices, which I saw in the year 1585. He
dyed there in the year 1452. in the month of January, having three years
before for quiet sake passed over the Papal dignity to Nicolas, he being
content to be a Cardinal only. Elenor Daughter to the Lord of Fossignij
married Peter the sixth Earl of Sabaudia. And also Mary the Daughter of Amedes
the fourth, the 8. Earl of Sabaudia, of the Brabantine family, was married to
the Duke of this Country. Amedes the third got the Principality of Chablasius,
which is near to Fossigni Eastward, commonly called Chablois, and joined them
to his Dominions, seeing there were no lawful Heirs Male to inherit it. Some
do reckon the Towns of Tononium, Evianum, Guingaunum, and others, which I am
afraid to write, as having no warrant for it. Concerning the Lordship commonly
called Val d'Osta, we will speak in a more convenient place in the Description
of Italy, where we will entreat of Piemont.

The chief Mountains are the Alps, which now as it were a wall do separate
Italy from France, and Germany. Festus thinks that the Alps were so called
from their whiteness, and the most do affirm that the Alps are the highest
Mountains in Europe. And many names of the Alps are found in ancient
Monuments, which do show that there were many parts of the Alps, but we will
by the way touch only those parts, which for the most part do lie in and
about Sabaudia, as the Sabbatian Alps, from whence it is thought that Sabaudia
is denominated, which begin near to Samona, near a place called V^y, which
the ancients call Vada Sablatia, from whence they bend like a Bow toward
Monegne, which was heretofore called Portus Herculis Monaeci, and from thence
they do stretch out toward the River Var or Varo, which parts France from
Italy. There are also the Sea Alps, but these we pass over as we go toward
Province, as also the Sea Penine Alps. The Cottian Alps follow, which begin
at a place called Saulteron, where there are two ways, both which do incline
toward the Marquiship of Salutium. In these Alps there is the Mountain Agno,
and the Mountain Viso, which the ancients did call the Mountain Vesulus,
through which there is a hollow passage from France into Italy, after this
passage there are two ways, the one whereof leads toward Verguel, the other
toward Rauel, which are Fortresses to the Marquiship of Salutium. And between
this Mountain and the hollow-way three Fountains do spring up, and flow-into
one Channel do make the famous River of Po. In this Country is the Hill of
the Cross, and the Mountain Genebre or Genevre, there Mountains end near
Luze, where the River Doria separateth them from the Grecian Alps. The
Grecian Alps do follow, the name whereof is derived from Hercules the Son
of Amphytrio a Grecian, who travaild over these Mountains out of Italy into
France. In that part of these Mountains which is toward France the
Ceentronians were seated, who are now called Tarantasy, by whom the way to
Chamberry lies. There are also between these Mountains the Veragri, who
contain the lower Valesians, and the Countries Gauot and Focigny: and the way
of these Mountains is called, the Mountain of S. Bernard. There are many
others besides, which for brevity sake we omit. The nature and quality of these
Mountains is miraculous; for he that passes over them meets still with new
variety of ways, because now the way is wide, and by and by it grows strai^
now the Mountains seem to touch the air, and by and by do descend again,
there is a Plain, and here a Vale enclosed with high Hills: nevertheless the
Valleys in many places do bring forth good Corn, on the Mountains also
there is much Grass for Pastoring of Cattle: and in some places there is
Wine. There are also diverse Mines, and some kinds of living Creatures, which
are not found any where else, and many other rarities, which for brevity sake
we omit. Besides Rhodanus these Rivers do water Sabaudis, Aravis, Isura,
Doria, Arva, Danius, and others. There are also the Lake Leman, de Nicy, de
Bourget, etc.

HELVETIA WITH THE NEIGHBOVRING CONFEDERATE COUNTRIES.
NEXT to Lions Mereator places that Country, which the Romans called
Helvetia. Now it is called, The N^mes. Whence derived.
or the greatest part of it, Sutcia or Suitia, from the Vitians a people of
Saxony, who being thrown out of their habitations for their often violating
of the faith, Charles the great seated them on the Alps, as in like manner he
convay'd some thousands of the Nordalbingians into Flanders and Brabont. Or
else it was so called from the Suecians, who in the reign of King Sigebert did
re^ove out of Suecia into Helvetia, being compelled to leave their former
Habitations, either by the inundations of waters, or by populousness of the
Inhabitants, o^ lastly it is so called from the Town Su^tium: it is commonly
Switscherland. It is called the Land of Confederates, and in their own speech
Eydignoschaft, from the League and confederacy, which is between the
Helvetians. These Eu^^opius did sometime call Quadians. Moreover Helvetia is
situate between the Mountain Iura, the Lake Leman, Italy, and the Rhene, and
it has on the East the County of Tirolum: on the South the Cottian Alps,
Lombardie, the Dukedom of Mediolanum, and Piemont: on the lowest Sabaudia and
Bu^g^gie: on the North the River Rhene. Helvetia is 240. Miles long, as Caesar
says Lib. 1. de bello Gallico: and 80. Miles broad, which Casar makes
somewhat larger. The Country has a whole ^^me air, The fertility.
and though it have many high rugged Mountains, yet it is so well husbanded by
the Inhabitants, that it is no where barren: but that it produces not only
things necessary to sustain life, but also many del^cacies. It brings forth
abundance of Corn, although in many places, unless the gleabe land be burnt,
it is in vain to sow it, but the labor and industry of the Husbandman does
help this inconvenience. It produces in many places exellent wine, which does
far exceed Rhenish wine, both in state and quantity. Besides there are fat
Meddowes, in which many flocks and herds do graze, to the great commodity
of the Inhabitants. This Country also does breed great store of wild Beasts,
as Bears, Hearts, Does, Goats, The variety of living creatures.
Leopards, Boares, and others, so that the Inhabitants have great store of game
to Hunt, there are also Foul which they take in great abundance. Helvetia is a
free Anarchie, and subject to no Prince, since that time that the Helvetians
being encited and stirred up by the unmercifull and unjust government of the
Rulers there, did enter into confederacy with the Vlrian Nobility, and so
shaked off the yoke of ^bjection, and got their own liberty. The first that
began this confederacy were the Urians, the Silvanians, and the Suitensians,
(...) their own Towns. By whose example nor long after, the other Cities
being still provoked by the great men, their neighbors (...) the like, and
entering into League with them, they grew as strong (...) their neighbor, and
being strengthened with auxilian forces th^^ became a terror to their enemies.
The Country of Helvetia is div^ded into four parts, which by a German word
they call Gow, whi^^ signifies a Country or Village, and they are these
Zurichgow, Wif^purgerg^w, Argow and Turgow, but the Commonwealth of Helvetia
do^ consist of thee parts. In the first part there are 13. Villages, whi^^ the
Italians call Cantones, and the Germans Ort. These Ca^ have this privilege
above the other confederates, that they in (...) like meetings do deliberate
and consult of all matters appertain^^ to the Commonwealth of Helvetia, and do
give their voices, and (...) sharers in all commodities or losses belonging to
the City, and (...) equally govern the Prefectureships which they have
gotten, a^^ have an equal part in any public booty: namely Tigurum joined
^^^selfe with the 3. confederate Towns, Anno 1351. And Bernei^^ year 1355.
Lucerna was joined to the 3. first Towns by a perpe^^all league in the year
1322. Vria, Vren: Sultia, Swit^ Vnder-W^^ did first enter into confederacy
among themselves Anno 1308. T^^ and Zug were added to the 6. Towns, in the
year 1363. Glarius so and Tugturo entered into the same league. Basilea, Anno
1301. ^^ter'd into confederacy with the 10 Towns. Also Fritburgum and
^^^loau^um, by common consent were received into the number of Cantones, in the
year 1481. and so the City of Helvetia did consist 10. Vilages or Contones.
Schaffhusen in the year 1600. was received into the number of the Cantones or
Villages. And Abbatificall the year 150^. The Country belonging to this Town
is divi^e unto 12. par^s which they call there Roden, 6. whereof are joined the
Canton, which are called the innermost parts, and 6. are called the outward
parts. And there are 12 Senators chosen out of e^^ one of these several parts,
who are to consult of all affairs of ^^^ Country, and they are in all 144.
Senators. The second part of the confederates, are Abbas and the Town S.
Galli, which was joined league with the 4. Towns of the Helvetians in the
year 1455. A^^ afterward Anno 1455. they were joined in pepetuall league with
the 6. Towns, Tigurum, Berna, Lucerna, Suitia, Tugio, and Glorona. The People
Granb^ndier of the Rhetorians made a perpetual league with the 7. old Towns,
in the year 1497. And the Curiensians, whose society was called the house of
God, did join in confederacy with them Anno 1418. The 3. Society, which was
called the Society of the 10. Judgments, did not join themselves with the
Helvetians but because it is confederate with the 11. former Cantons, therefore
it continues in amity and faithful society wi^h the Helvetians. Sodunum and
Valetes did enter into perpetual league with the Bernadans, (...) 1475. And
afterward when there arose a controversy concerning Religion, Hadrian Bishop
of Sedunum and 70. Towns of the (...) into confederacy Anno 15^3. at Friburg,
with map of Helvetia HELVETIA.
these 7. Towns of Friburg, Vria, Lucerna, Suitia, Vnderwaldia, Tugium
Filburgum, Saladorum, all adhering to the Church of Rome Rotweil first entered
into confederacy with the Helvetians Anno 1463. for 15. years, which being
many times renewed, at last in the year 1519. it was perpetually established
between them. Mulhusen was joined in confederacy with the Helvetians Anno
1468. Bienna Biel joined it self in confederacy with the Bernatians, in the
years, 1303. 1306. 1352. and 1367. Geneva did bargain for the right of a
City, with the Bernatians Anno 1536. but yet it was joined to the Common City
of the Cantons. The 3. are the Prefectureships gotten by force of arms or
voluntary yielding. Turgea or Turgow was subjected to the Helvetians in the
year 1460. which is governed by 7. ancient Towns. Aquensis Baden was subdued
in the year 1415. and is governed by 8. of the chief Towns. Rhegusti which
was gotten Anno 1491. was governed by 20. of the chief Towns. Sa^unetum or
Sarung^ns Anno 1483. was sold by George Earl of Werenberg to the 7. chief
Towns, by which it is also governed. The free Provinces taken Anno 1415. are
governed by these 5. ancient Cantons or Towns, Luganum, Lucarnum, Mendrestum,
and Vallis Madia, these 4. Prefectureships were given by Maxamilian Sforza,
Duke of Mediolanum to the Helvetians Anno 1513. and are governed by all the
Cantones except Abbatisella, Biltionum and Bellizona: the government hereof was
afterward granted unto 3. chief Cantons, Anno 1513. Valesia which is contained
also in this Chart, does contain 3. people, and 3. confederacies. The two
former are the Viberians and Sedunians, who are called by one general name,
the free higher Valesians, and they are divided into 10. tythings which they
call Decimas or Desena^ the Veragrians who are called the lower Valesians are
governed by the higher, yet the chief of them all is the Bishop of Sedunum,
who has the chief authority both in Ecclesiastical and civil matters, and
is called the Earl or Prefect of Valesia. Here is the County of Werdube^g and
the Barrony of Saxony. This Province has many great Lakes: the chief whereof
are the Lakes of Lucernerze: of Zuriche^^e of Walenzee: of Nuwenburgerzee: and
the greatest of al is the Lake of ^^denzee, which Solinus and Pliny call
Brigantium, Ammianus Marcell^^^ calls it Brigantium, from Brigeontium a
little ancient Town. The length thereof is 24. Miles, and the breadth at least
12. Miles. We have here set down Ammianus his words, because they contain a
lively description of this Lake, and of the Cataracts of Rhene. The River Rhene
runs with a violent course through the windings of the high Mountains,
which nere the ^lep^ntius does fall down like the Cataracts of Nilus, the
torrent at his first arising does rush down, and keep his course with the
supply only of his own proper waters, but now being strengthened with the
melted snow, it wears his banks wider, it runs into the round great Lake,
which the Inhabitants of Rhene do call Brigantium, it is inaccessible by
reason of the thick Woods, except where the Almaine has made it Habitable,
contrary to the nature of the place, and the intemperatenesse of the Climate.
So that the River breaking into this Lake with a foaming entrance, and passing
through the still waters thereof, does run through the middle of it, as it
were a contrary element unto it, without augmenting or diminishing his own
waters, it comes forth again retayning the same name and strength which it
had before. And which is a wonder, the Lake is not moved with the violent
course of the water, nor the hasty River is not stayed with the muddy filth of
the Lake, as if they could not be mingled together: and if it were not seen to
run through the Lake, it could not be discerned by the forcible course
thereof. The Rivers.
Moreover the Rivers which water Helvetia, are Rhene, Rhodanus, Adua, Ticinus,
Limagus, Byrsa, Langarus, Sara, Taurus commonly called Dur, Aenus, Arola, and
many others. It were needless to reckon the Mountains, seeing the names of
the Thetian Mountains are known to all men. But least I should seem too
defective herein, I will mention some of them. The Mountain of Gothardus is
now called the high Alps, after which the Penine Alps do follow: near to
the Salassians there are the Cottian Alps and the Mountain Silvius. Also the
greater and lessers Mountains of S. Bernard. The Graectan Alps belong to the
Lepontians: the Mountain Adulas which the Germans call the Mountain der
Vogel, touches the Misacians. The Julian Alps, and the Mountain Permurna are
in the Engadinians Country. From hence are the Mountains Valerius and
Brantius, near the Vendanians: Rhetico is a Mountain among the Rhucantians.
The Mountain Iurassus hangs over the Lake Leman. The Mountains called
Abnobae are in the confines of the Tulingians. And these are the most famous
Mountains of this Country. But we will speak more largely concerning the
Alps in the description of Italy. There are innumerable Woods, which are but
parts of the Wood Hiercynta, which begins here, although they are called by
several names, as the Brigantine Wood, the Wood Ryhnwalds, Bonwaldt, and
others. The Helvetian Commonwealth is a mixed government of the Nobles and the
people. For some of these People, of whom the whole City does consist, do use
a Democraticall government, where all things are managed by the council of the
Commons, as in those Cantons which have no Towns, as the Uranians, the
Suitians, the ^uderwaldians, the Glarovensians, and the Abbatiscellanians: and
in the same manner are the Tuginians, although they have a Town; the other
Cantons are governed by the Nobles, as all the other Cities of Helvetia, as
Tigurum, Berna, Lucerna, etc. But seeing the people have the chief power, and
do choose the Magistrates, these Common wealths are mixed, and some parts are
more Aristocraticall, and some parts more popular.

ZVRICHGOVV, AND THE PROVINC^ OF BASIL.
I Have spoken in general concerning Helvetia; the pa^^ do follow. Which
Mercator in the three followi^^ Chartes does lively describe. In the first are
those t^ Provinces which are called in their speech Zurichgow (...) Basil; in
the second Wiflispurgergow; and in the third Argow is delin^^ted, of all which
I will make a Chorographicall Description, together with the Lake Leman. As
concerning the former Provin^^ which is painted forth in the first Charte, it
is called in their ow^ speech Zurichgow, The fertility.
and Caesar calls it Tigurinus Pagus. The soil of the Country, and
especially by the chief City Tigurum is very fruitful, and brings forth
great store of Wine and Corn; yet the Wi^ the most part is tart and sharp,
neither can it come to perfest ^^^nesse and maturity, because the Alps are so
nigh unto it. But t^^ Wine ripeneth and grows more pleasant after it has
been k^^ some years in the Vessel. The chief City of this Province is call
in Latin Tigrum, and of late Thurogum, and in their own speech ^^rich. The
City Zurich.
It is an ancient City and pleasantly seated, at the end of the great Lake,
which sends forth the River Lindmagum, commonly c^^led Limmat, which not
far from Glarona it receives again, a^^ devideth the City into two Cities,
the greater and the lesser, which are joined together with three fair Bridges,
on which the Citizen^ do often walk. It hach a very great Corne-market, in
which great store of Corn is sold weekly. The Lake Tigurine does furnish the
City with great store of Fish. There is also a Market for all kinde^ Provision
and the Lake is convenienter for carrying it to diverse p^^ces. But albeit
Tigurum was the fifth that joined it self to the Helvetian confederacy, yet
nevertheless it is held to be the chief City both for beauty and strength,
and still it has the pre-eminence given it in public Assemblies, in
Embassages, and other public actions: it has had many brave famous men: as
Conradus Pelican, who was very skillful in the Hebrew, Chaldean, and Arabic
tongues: also Theodore Bibliandrus: Conradus G^sner, that most excellent
Historian, an^ many other excellent men. The Canton Tigurum has without the
City greater and lesser Prefectureships. The greater are nine, Ky^^^ a County:
the Prefectureship of Groeningia: also Regensperg, Vadis^^^na, Wadischwyl:
Lauffa near the Catracts of Rheneor, Laussen: Andelsig^^^ Grifensee, and
Eglisow a free Province, the lesser are 22. the Towns Vitodurum, Winterhur,
and Steina, do belong to the Tigurinians, yet they have Magistrates of their
own, but they are governed by the Tigurinian Edicts, and do serve them in
their wars, but they bear their own Colors in the Field. The Canton
^ugium, commonly map of Zurichgow ZVRICHGOVV.
called Zugis reckoned to be in this Province, The Town Turgium. The Situation.
a Town with a Country of the same name, lying Northward near Suitia, it is
situate between a Middow, and a Hill planted with Vines, near the fishfull
Lake, which is called from the City, the Tugine Lake, which streatcheth
Southward toward the Town Artense. It has a soil fit for Basturage, and it
yields great store of Wine and Corn. The first Inhabitants thereof are said
to be the Tuginians, but Strabo Lib 7. calls them the Toygenians, who entering
into a league with the Tigurians and Cimbrians, did oppose themselves against
the Romans. See Plutarch in the life of Marius and Eutropius, Lib. 5. Tugium
was sometime governed by the Nobles, but afterward it came to be under the
power of the Austrians: Those, in the Helvetian war did keep a continual
Garrison there, unto the great molestation of the Suitians and Tig^rians. So
that in the year 1352. the Tigurinians with four other Cantons, made an
expedition against Tugium. But the Garrison, not trusting to the Fortification
of the Town, forsook it before the Helyetians coming, but yet the Citizens
to show their fidelity to the Austrians, did hold out the Siege for 15. days.
At last they yielded it to the Helvetians, and took an oath of them on this
condition, that if the Duke of Austria within such a limited time brought to
Army to free them from this Siege, they should be free from the oath which they
had taken to the Helvetians, and might yield themselves up unto him. But when
they saw there was no hope of the Duke of Austria's coming, they joined
themselves in confederacy with the Helvetians. The Canton of Tugium has two
parts, and four hundreds in them, out of every hundred, eleaven Senators are
chose^ to govern the Country. The Town it self stands for two hundreds,
the Country next unto it has three, as Montanus, Vallis Eg^^, or Aquae
Regiae, and the Parish of Bara. But the Towns of Tugi^^ by Prefects resident
in the City does govern these places: the Town Cham, Andrews Village,
Hunelbergo, Waccheville, Steinhuse, S. Wolfa^g^. So much concerning the first
Province of this Card, the other follows, namely Basil, so called from the
famous City Basilea. It is called also Sungonia, which name we may easily
conjecture was derived from the Seqnanes, which Rhenanus also approves in his
third Book of Germany. The Country is fruitful, and brings forth good Wine
and Corn, so that it supplieth the Neighbor Countries that want Corn. There
are also fair Pastures for Cattle. Those whom Ptolemy calls Rauricians and
Caesar Rauracians (as Scudus witnesses) did heretofore inhabit this Country,
who as he reports taking example by the Helvetians, did burn up all their
Towns, Villages, and Houses. Basil is now the chief City of the Country. Some
would have it so called from a Basilisk found here, but their opinion is
absurd. Others from Basi^eona the Mother of Julian the Emperor. ^heranus would
have it called Basilea because it was a royal passage. And he adds, it is
likely that there was a passage in this place, while Augusta was yet standing,
because here in regard of the Valley through which the Torrent flows out of
the Lake Byrsa, the bank is lower, and thereby more easily to pass, but near
Augusta it is more steep. But Munsterus does reject this conjecture, by the
authority of Marcellinus, who calls that City by a Greek word Basileian,
that is a Kingdom, as it were Regnopolis, or the Royal City. This City is
watered with the River Rhene, which devides it about the middle of it, where it
is united and joined together again with a Bridge. The River Rhene is very
commodious to the City, because it is Navigable, and brings up many great
Vessels to it. Two hundred years since it was much shaken with Earthquakes,
but it was afterward re-edified, and Pope Pius in the year 1460. did adorn it
with an University, which he endowed with all the Privileges, Statutes, and
Immunities which the Universities of Bononia, Coline, Heidelberg, Erdford,
Lipsick, and Vienna do enjoy. Basil has these Prefectureships, Faren-Sperg
Castles; ^infeld seated on a high Mountain: the Town Wallenburg: Homburg,
Munchenstein, Ramstein, the County of Toggius, where I suppose is Togryl, which
is subject to the Abbot of S. Gallus, when the Citizens of Teggius belong to
Suitia and Glaronia: also the County of Rapperswijl, which I suppose should be
the County of Straesberg: and the Barony of Rilehberg. The other Towns of
Tuginum and Tigurinum are in the Table of Argow. The Towns in the Country of
Abbatium, which are neither mentioned in Suevia, nor in all Germany, are these,
Reicheno^w, Schaffusen, Kreutslinge, Pfeffers, or as I suppose Pfefficon. This
Country is watered with many Rivers and little streams, all which the River
Rhene at last receives. Among which are the Rivers Rhene, Byrsa, and Wiesa.
Byrsa flows out of the Mountain Iura through many Valleys even to Basilea,
carrying down with it many Boat-loads of Wood. On the other side the River
Wiesa does part it from the Black wood, and much Timber for Building is brought
down this River, and afterward it fills many Cisternes, and serves many
Houses in the lesser Basil with water. For it drives a Mill which saweth Trees
into Bards and square Studdes, it grindeth Corn, and Grindstones to sharpen
Carpenters tools, it serves to draw Iron into thin Plates, and for many other
uses, besides it has excellent fish, especially Trouts. And though it be less
than the River Byrsa over against it, yet it is fuller of Fish than it, and
serves for more uses, although Byrsa does drive many Mills and is very
commodious for Paper-men, who have Houses by this River, or rather near the
little Rivulet which parts from it, and runs even to the walls of the
greater Basil. There are also here Tolderus, Largus, and other Rivers. But of
this enough. It remains that we should add something concerning the
government of the Commonwealth in these Provinces. All that are admitted to
public Counsel, are chosen equally out of the several Cantons, as well out
of the Tugurians, as Basilians. But there are two public Counsels which have
chiefest authority in these Cities. The greater when many meet together in
behalf of the Commons, and this for the most part is called when there are
some serious weighty affairs, which appertain to the Commonwealth. The less
is that which looks daily to the government of the Commonwealth, and
determines matters of controversy between the Citizens. The greater Counsel
of Tigurum does consist of 200. men, that of Basil of 244. The less Counsel
of Tigurum has 50. men chosen out of every Tribe, and Basil it has 60. For
12. are elected out of every Tribe to make up the greater Counsel, besides at
Tigurum there are 18. chosen out of the Nobles. To the lesser Counsel of
Tiguri the several Tribes do send three men, at Basil four men, and to these
are added two Counsels in every City, who are the chief Heads of the City; and
moreover at Basil there are so many Tribunes, whom they call the Heads of the
Counsel in like manner as they do the Consuls: besides at Tigurum there are
6. chosen out of the Nobility to make up the lesser Counsel, when there are
but 3. chosen out of the other Tribes, and moreover 6. others are chosen by
free Suffrages, out of any Tribe which the Magistrate shall think fit. The
lesser Counsel is divided into the old and the new: they call those the old
Senate who have borne office half a year: the other although they are called
when the Senate is held, yet they are not always called, and there are some
matters which the new Senate does only dispatch. The greater Counsel also at
Basil is divided in the same manner, and of 12. men chosen out of the Tribes,
6. are joined or added to the new Senate, and so many to the old. The lesser
Counsel does meet for the most part thrice, and sometimes 4. times every
week. There is one Consul belonging to the Senates, whom in their speech they
call Burgermeister, that is, the Master of the Citizens, and the greater
Counsel does choose him. The Tribunes are next to the Consuls in power, whom
the Tigurinians call Oberistemeister, and those of Basil call Zunffrmeister,
there are 3. of them at Tigurum, and two only at Basil, who together with the
two Consuls are called the four Heads of the City. But thus much shall
suffice. He that desires to know more let him have recourse to Josias Sim^er,
who discourses copiously and learnedly concerning these matters, out of whom
we have taken that which we have written here.

VVIFLISPVRGERGOVV.
THERE follows in our Author the Aventian Cantons commonly called
Wiflispurgergow. It is so named from the Town Wiflispurg, which heretofore in
Julius Caesar's time was the head City of Helvetia, and was called Aventicum.
The Country is contained within the bounds of ^abaudia, although it be subject
to the Bernatians and Friburgensians, as also the Country seated over against
it, and beyond the Lake of Biel or Neoburg. It is sufficiently stored with Wine
and Corn. But in this Table the whole Cantons of Berne and Friburg are
contained. In the former the chief City is Berna. It is not very ancient,
but if you consider the excellent Situation, the manners and civilitie, the
Laws and Statutes, and the power and virtue thereof, it is not inferior unto
any City. Concerning the building whereof we read thus. Berchtaldus Duke of
Zeringia the 4. of that name, built in his time 2. Friburgis, that is free
Castells, namely one in Brisgoia, and the other in Vehtlandia. And to the end
that his subjects might dwell more safely in Vchtland, he purposed to build
another City near his Castle, which was called Nideck, in a Peninsula which
was called Saccus, which was at that time a Wood of Oaks. And upon a certain
time when the same Berchtoldus was Hunting, he said to his fellows; we will
call this City, which we purpose to build in this convenient place, after the
name of that beast which we shall first meet and after take. And so it
happened that they took a Bear, which the Germans call Bern. And where (as
we said) there grew many Oaks in that place, in which the City was to be
builded, yet all the trees were cut down to build houses: whence the workmen
would commonly say when they cut down the trees: Holtz lassdich hauwen gone:
die stat muss heissen Bern: i. e Arbores sinite ut secemini libenter: Quoni^m
Civitas ista vocabitur Bern: that is, ye Trees suffer your selves to be cut
down willingly; Because this City shall be called Bern. This City is
situated as it were in a Peninsula, which the navigable River Arola makes. For
on the South side of the City, this River flows in a low place, from the
West Eastward, and then winding back again it runs Westward, as far a as
Cannon can shoot, which is the whole length of the City, so that the River is
to the City as it were a ditch flowing with fresh water, but that on the West
for the length of a Crosse-Bow shot, the foundation of the City joyneth to the
Continent, which Isthmus if it were dug through, the City Bern would be an
Island. On the South and North it has the water running beneath it for a
prospect; on the East there is a gentle ascene unto the highest part of the
City. The adjacent soil lying round about it is very fruitful, but has no
Wine, yet not far of the Bernatians do make very good Wine out of their own
Vineyards. The do grow also Vines on one side of the City, but they are of no
a^count, and do yield but little Wine. But Berchtoldus the 4. the b^^der of
this City yed, before he had finished it, leaving the perfecti^^ of this work
to his son Berchtoldus the 5. and the last Duke of ^^ringia. He had by his
wife the daughter of the Earl of Kiburg (...) sons, whom the Nobles of the
Country made away by poison, this cause chiefly, because they supposed that
Berchteldus out of tred and emulation toward them, had finished the building
of the ^^ty, that so he might keep them under the yoke of servitude. Ber^^
(...) under it both Germane and French Prefectureships, among which Lausanna an
Episcopal City. It has a strange situation, being (...) on two opposite
Hills, and a Vale lying between them. The Cat^^drall Church, and the Canons
houses do stand on the North Hill (...) from the Southern Hill over against
it, there is a great descent (...) to the Lake. The Court of Judgment is in
the Vale. After the (...) of Charles Duke of Burgundy, Lansanna being redeemed
by the Pri^^^ of Sabaudia, the Citizens of Lausanna in the mean time did enter
i^ great familiarity with the Bernatians, even to the year one thousa^^ five
hundred 36. at what time Lausanna came to be under the Do^^nion of the
Bernatians. But yet the Citizens do enjoy all their (...) Rights and
Privileges. There are 31. Germane Towns, 4. wh^^^ belong to the City, which
as many Standard-bearers of the City (...) govern, and under their Colors all
the Prefectureships do (...) to Battle in the wars. Namely Haselis Vallis,
Hasti: the Town dersen or Vindersenwen: Simmia Vallis superior: Simia vallis
inferio^^ ^tingen, Sana, Aelen, Thun, Louppen, Signow, Drachselwald, the Vale
of (...) River Emm, Siconiswald, Burgdorff, Biereneck, Landshuot, Arberg,
Nid^^, ^lach, Bippiurn, Wangen, Arwangen, Arburg, Baberstein, Schenckenbergh,
Li^^burg. Also three free Towns in the Verbigenian Canton are full^ to the
Bermans: Zoffingen, Araw, and Bruck: Also there are 9. M^nasteries endowed with
Lands, 6. whereof are under a civil Ju^^^diction. There are also 8. French
Cantons and Towns, as Ave^^^ Wiflispurg: Minnidunum, Mouilden: Yuerden,
Morges, Novidanum, (...) Oron, Zilia with Vibiscum or Vivey: also Mercator
reckons up the Monasteries belonging to the Bernatians: which are M^^^
Schwartzenburg, Granson, Chalan or Cherlin, over which the Bernati^^^ and
Friburgians in their several courses do appoint and constitu^^ Governors for
5. year, so that if the Governor be chosen out (...) one City, they may
appeal to the other, which may examine (...) take account of their government.
Friburg is a Town of the N^^tonians situate in Vchtland by the River Sana, it
was built by Ber^^^dus the fourth, Duke of Zeringia some years before Berne.
For in the reign of Lotharius, in the year 1527. William Earl of Vchtland
dy^ as Nauclerus writes, at what time the Emperor gave Vchtland to (...)
Prince of Zeringia: who dying in the year 1552. his Son Ber^^^dus Duke of
Zeringia, the fifth of that name succeeded after him. (...) founded and built
both the Friburgs, Brisgoia, and Vchtland, (as we (...) before) in the year
after Christ's birth 1252. and endowed the^ map of Wiflispurgergow
VVIFLISPVRGERGOVV.
with large Privileges. As also the succeeding Emperors did show no less
favor to both those Towns, than if they had been Parts and Members of their
Empire. Afterward in the year of our Lord 1218. Berchtoldus Duke of Zeringia
dying, Fribu^g in V^htland with all the privileges thereof, came into the
hands of the Earls of Kibu^g, in the year of Christ 1260. Eburhardus Earl of
Hasburg, governed this City. He in the year 1270. sold his right to this City
for a great sum of money to King Rudolphus. Hence Aeneas Sylvius calls
Friburg the noble House of Austria. At last the Inhabitants being wearied with
these frequent changes, for a great sum of money bought their liberty of the
House of Austria. So that it is now under the Jurisdiction of Helvetia. And on
the wall of Friburg there is such an Epitaph found: Dum, bis sexcentis ter
senis jungitur annus,
In Friburg moritur, Berchtoldus Dux Alemanus.
Unto six hundred and eighteen
If thou do add a year,
Then Berchtold Duke of Almaine
In Friburg dyed here.


The Town it self is wonderfully well seated, for part of it s^^^deth on a
Mountain, and part of it in a Vale, and the River (...) does flow about the
Mountain at the bottom of the City. The Judgment Hall is situated on a high
Rock, where there was formerly a Castle, from which in process of time the
City grew large, ^oth above and beneath. Two opposite Mountains do bear the
Walls, although on the Eastern Mountain there are almost no houses, but
Munition and fortifications. Wheresoever you go in the City, you must either
ascend or descend. The Country round about it brings forth all things
necessary, except Wine, of which they have none b^^ that which is imported and
brought in. And so much concerning the Cities of this tract, now we will add
something concerning the Civil government of these Cities. The manner of the
Common wealth in these Cities, is the same with that which is in the Cities of
Helve^ta which are not divided into certain Tribes, out of which the
Magistrates are equally chosen. But in these Cities they call the chief
Magistrate and Head of the public Counsel, Ein Schuld^hessen. This Germane
word is used in the Laws of the Longobardians, and it is written Schuldahis,
but the Etymology of the word seems to be derived from Debito a debt, for so
Schuld signifies, and from commanding, because the Schuldahis does command the
Debtors to satisfy his Creditors. This Schuldahis has great authority and
power in these Cities. Here are also two public Counsels, the greater and the
less. The greater Counsel of Berne and Tigurum, is called the Counsel of two
hundred men, although there are more than two hundred in it. But the lesser
Counsel of Berne consists of six and twenty men. The manner of choosing the
Senate at Berne is thus: The four Standard Bearer of the City do choose out of
the Citizens sixteen honest sufficient men to join with themselves: and those
twenty men, together with the Consul do choose the greater Senate: and
afterward also the less: But the Consuls who have the chief dignity, are
chosen out of either Counsel by common Suffrages and voices. In like manner
the greater Counsel at Friburg consists of two hundred men, and the less of
four and twenty. The lesser Senate does look to the affairs of the City, and
does hear the Subjects appeals, except it be those Sabaudian Countries which
were last taken in war, but those matters which appertain to the whole
Commonwealth, and are of greatest moment, are referred to the two hundred men,
or the greater Counsel. The Consul who is President in both Counsels, is
chosen by the people. The Earls in this part are Nuenberg, Nicdow, Arberg, and
the Barony of Balm.

THE CHOROGRAPHICALL DEscription of the Lake Lemann, and the adjacent places.
By James Goulart.
IN this Table you may at the first view behold the Lake Lemann, in the
confines of the Dukedom of Sabaudia, the County of Burgundy, the Baronnie or
Lordship of Helvetia, and the Bishopric of Valesia. About the Lake there are
many Regions, Praefectureships, Baronnies, Jurisdictions, Highways, Rivers,
Mountains, Cities, Towns, Castells, and Fortresses. The People on this side
the Alps, which inhabit Sabaudia, do speak French, who heretofore, as
Julius Caesar witnesses, in the beginning of his Commentaries, were called
Allobrogians, from Allobroges, a King of France, who flourished about the year,
2433. And afterward, as the most famous Prelate Fauchetis witnesses, they were
called Baganda, and at length Sabaudians, in French Savoysiens, and in the
Sabaudian speech Savoyarde. Earls have hitherto governed this Country, from
the year of our Lord 1126. and from the year 1420, to this time it has bin
under the government of Dukes. It is reported that this Country was at first a
long time inhabited by a company of thieves. But now in times of peace, the
ways there are safe and secure. The inhabitants do complain of the temper of
the air, sometimes for cold, and sometimes for heat. And yet the Lake, and
the River Rhodanus, are almost never frozen over. Moreover the heat is not so
violent, as in the Delphinate, nor the cold so sharp as in the low Countries,
where Rivers are usually frozen over. The soil is fit for tillage and
fruitful; for it has abundance of Grapes, Wheat, Pease, Rapes,
Cauly-flowres, French-beanes, Melons, Leekes, Onions, Lentills: Also Barley,
Hay, Oats, and other grains. These fruits are common here, Nuttes, Apples,
Pears, of diverse sorts, sweet and sour cherries, black and white
Mulberries, Chestnuts, Almonds, but Figs are more rare. There is also great
variety of Foul, Fish, and Beasts: The Vvandalian Helvetians, who inhabit
Lausanna and other places nere unto, are under the government of the most
illustrious Lords of Berne: Under whom certain praefects for five years
space, do hold the Helm of the Commonwealth. According to ancient Chronicles,
Arpentinus, Hercules Centenarius, laid the foundation of Lausanna in the year
of the world 2790, from whom Carprentres the ancient name thereof was derived,
which was changed when the City was translated unto the Mountain, in the
time of Martin Bishop of Lausanna, in the year of our Lord 593. The City of
Nevidunum, heretofore commonly called Ben^vis, being desolate and ruinate
before the coming of Julius Caesar, was restored and reedified in the time of
the Emperor Flavius Vespasian, by a Centurion of his, dwelling in it, called
Nyon. Cassonex was built in the year of our Lord 442. And Abona was built in
the year 456, and some years afterward. Geneva a free Imperial City, in
which white and black money is coined; was at first called Gen^^^a, as some
suppose, because it is seated on a hill, amongst Juniper trees, which seat
Lemannus gave it (the Father of the Almania or Germans) the Nephew of Priam,
the son of Paris, in the year of the world 2994. Afterward it was called
Aurelia, by Aurelianus the Emperor, because he was the repairer of this
City, which in the time of Heliogabalus, was burnt down to the ground.
Julius Caesar and the Latins call it Geneva, and the Poets for their verse
sake call it Geneva, and also by the Registers. The Germans call it (...) the
Frenchmen Geneve, to which Vengee is a fit Anagram, for it has been
oftentimes miraculously preserved from enemies and Traitors, and especially on
the 12, or 22 of December in the year 1602. ^he Castle Morgtarum was built,
by the Emperor Clottartu^ ^n the year of our Lord 1135. Aquianum, commonly
called (...) by Peter brother and Deputy, to Amades Earl of (...) year 1237.
But this Lake of Geneva on that side which lies to (...) Helvetia, is sixteen
miles long, and on that side which lies toward Sabaudia, it is 12 miles long,
and it is four miles broad. It (...) at least sixteen Ports or Havens. The
Ports.
Out of the Port Morgtens^s and ^^slensis, commonly called Roll, the best wine
is brought to Gen^^^ and out of the Port of the Promontory, commonly called
Par^^^, and the Port of Nero, commonly called Nerny, great store of ward and
coal is brought to Geneva. Rivers.
The River Rhodanus, ^lowing into Lemann, from the first rising thereof, even
to his entrance into the Lake, is not navigable for ships, neither from the
Helvetian bridge in the Suburbs of Geneva, even to the next town called
Se^sel, which is seven miles distant from the City. The same River in a
certain place, five miles distant from the City, falls into a deep pit
under ground. Iurassus is such a long Mountain, that the Geneva, did
heretofore call the inhabitants thereof Long^mans. The Mountains.
For from the top of them you may behold the Churches of Geneva and Basil,
being four or five days journey distant one from another: Also there is a
wonderful rock full of holes, which Sebastian Munster describes in his
Cosmographie. Also the virgins Castles built by Julius Caesar. Also the Town
of Saint Claudus, because lame people came thither from remote parts for
religion sake. Also a snowie fountain in Summer time: also a natural Pit,
that is as broad as any Theater, and as deep as a Church, and as dark as a
Cave, being continually full of snow, Ice and Crystal. Not far from the Lake
Lemann, on the part which lies toward Sabaudia, there are Mountains which in
the midst of Summer, are covered with snow. There is a certain Mountain a
mile distant, from the City Geneva, upon which some, map of Lake Lemann THE
LAKE LEMANN.
not without horror ascend by steps cut out of the rock, which are very
narrow, and almost innumerable: And some setting their foot upon the last
step, when they beheld the deep praecipice beneath them, have gone back
again. There is also another Mountain not far from Aquila, a town toward
Valesia, of whose wonderful effects, we may read the whole story in the
memorable Histories of our time, in the Chapter of Earthquakes, lately set
forth in French at Paris. The Mountain of S. Sergius, is the most fruitful
of all the Chablacian Mountains, among which there is one other very
fruitful. The other do bear nothing but wood and shrubbes, and pasturage
for Kine, which in the Summertime do fatt themselves on the plains of the
Mountains, and do give good store of milk. But who can reckon the memorable
chances or events happening there in the time of Wars? Or how great and
fearful is the Pr^cipice of the Mountain Mustracensis, from which every
year many horses laden, and Merchants do fall headlong. Concerning the
rocks, which are sharp like teeth or swords, we must write in a more accurate
style, or else be silent: Concerning the foot of the Mountains of Aquiane, it
is known that they are unknown by reason of the depth of the Lake, from the
bottom whereof they do arise. The Woods.
The most of the woods they do yield Chestnuts, both to the poor and rich, and
Acornes for Hogs and Swine, also firewood, and cart-timber, and
plough-timber, for husbandmen. I^ these places there are few or no Churches,
The public works.
which have relics of Saints in them, because Idolatry is banished from
hence. But there are many sumptuous and magnificent Temples, especially that at
Lausanna, being built within of black Marble; and the ancient Temple at Geneva
being full of Iron work, being twice or thrice endangered by thunder, so that
the leaden cross of it was burnt, and the high Tower fell down; which was
built before the coming of Charles the great. Add to these the Temple of
Viviacum, seated among the Vineyards, out of the walls of the City, and the
Temple of Magium, lately beutified. But all the Images are defaced. Geneva has
an hospital for Orphans, and for the sick, but both of them are included in
the Hospital for strangers, in which there dwells a Catechizer and a
Schoolmasters, who do take pains in comforting the sick, and reading
prayers to them; it has also a Physician and an Apothecary belonging thereto.
The Municipall Court in Geneva in which every day five and twenty wife and
pious Senators do meet together to consult of affairs, The Court. The
Senators
belonging to the Common wealth, and in which also the written records and
books are kept, is watched every night by the Citizens. On one side of the
Gate there is placed a magnificent seat of judgment, commonly called the
Tribunal. On the other side of the Gate there is a notable monument of time,
occasion, and the means of the renovation of this state. And near the Court
there is an Armory well furnished. There are also in and about this City many
high bulwarks fortified with shot. There have been and are many Castles in
this Country, one of which is called S. Catherines Castle, in which those
warlike engines or instruments were laid up, which were provided for the seige
of Geneva, and brought thither in the year 1590. It was taken by King Henry
the fourth, who commanded it to be rac'd Anno. Dom. 1601. The other Castle,
which the Genevians built over against it, for peace sake and for sparing of
charges, they suffered to fall to ruin. The third Castle commonly called
Ripaille, by the aid of the French Cohorts came to be under the power of the
Genevians, Anno 1589, and is now desolate, as also the fourth, which belonged
to Versouius, when the Genevians took it. There are some Towers cunningly and
ingeniously raised, one of which is called Turris Magistra, or the Mistress
Tower, which defends Geneva, on that side which is next the Lake and Sabaudia;
the other is called the Tower of the Island, or Caesar's Tower, which is seated
on a high Island for the defense of the Bridge, which heretofore appertained to
the Heluetians, and as it is reported it was built by the same Emperor. The
Laws and Statutes.
The Statutes and Laws of the Common wealth, and College of Geneva, may be
read in a printed book. Here is a great number of noble families. The noble
familes.
As concerning men famous for wit, and the profession of Arts, and sciences;
there have been many who have gotten much fame by their divine, and
Philosophical works. As Peter Viretus Verbigenensis, Gulielmus Farellus, The
learned men.
Ioannes Calvinus, Antonius Sadeel, Petrus Cevalerius, Nicolas Colladonus,
Cornelius Bertramus, Alberius, Alizetus, Sequierius, Bucanus, all of which in
the former age were a long time diligent Preachers and professors, at Geneva,
Lausanna, Morgium, and Albona: after whom there succeeded these famous writers,
Theodorus Beza Veselius, Simon Goulartius Silvanectinus, Antonius Faius,
Ioannes Lacomotus, James Lectius a Senator; Ioannes Deodatis of Geneva,
professor of Divinity, and the Hebrew tongue, Isaac Casaabon, the Kings
Professor for the Greek tongue, and Gasparus Laurentius, professor of the same
Language. Moreover the public Library at Geneva is adorned with many
excellent manuscripts. The Libraries.
And that at Lausanna, is furnished with many excellent works of the Fathers,
and other Divines. Concerning the common people, they are full of Civilitie,
and they receive and entertain strangers, very lovingly and honorably: Their
manners.
and it transporteth and sends into other Countries, great Troutes, fat Capons,
good Cheese, gold, wire, and fishing lines, Their trading.
besides other commodities.

ARGOW.
ARgouia, commonly called Argow, was a part of the Kingdom of Transiura, which
comprehended all the Countries lying from the Mountain Iura, even to the
Alps; of which heretofore the Heluetians, the Rauracians, and part of the
Allobrogians, and now the Dukedom of Sabaudia, Vehtlandia, Brisgovia,
Suntgovia, Cremerlandia, and the Praefectureship of Tigurinum, or the Cantons
of Heluetia, do now hold. But in this Table, the Towns Lucerna, Vren, Switz,
Vnderwald, and Glarona, are contained: Lucerna is a City of Helvetia which
Meyerus calls Lacocerna, it is situated upon the River Rusa, where it
breaks out of a great Lake, by which there is a passage by boat to three
Towns, unto the foot of the high Mountain which they commonly call Fractum
and Pilati Montem, that is, the broken Mountain or Pilats Mountain. The Lake
is very convenient for the City, because there is a way by it into Italy, by
the Leponius Alps; which they call now the Mountain of Saint Gothards from
hence commodities are carried to the Alps, and from thence by Packe-horses
into Italy; and again, Italian commodities are brought down the Lake, and the
River Rusa to the Rhene, and so unto the Ocean. Besides, the Lucernatians do
make more profit by the Lake, than of the adjacent soil lying about it,
although they have excellent Meddowes for the pasturing and feeding of Cattle.
It is a very pleasant City, and rich, being the common Mart Town of the
Suitensians, the Vranians, and the Transiluanians. The original of this City
is uncertain: it is reported that there were Castles on both sides of the
River, which were built by the Almaines, but there are Citizens houses in
their places. It was so called from a Lamp or light which was hung out there,
as a Sea mark for the direction of Mariners, and it is credible and likely
that the ancient Tower served for this purpose, which at the higher bridge is
now named from the waters; The like is at Tigurum, which is called from the Sea
waves Wellenberga: the ancients did call these kind of Towers Watch-towers.
Their own Annalls do report, that the Lucernatians did go to war with
Charles the Great, against the Sarazins, and that he gave them some
privileges, and taught them the use of Horns, with which in these times, they
do sound a retreat in the wars. The College of the Cannonists, had
heretofore the greatest power, which afterward came to be under the authority
of the Abbot of Murbaoum by the donation and grant of King Pipin. Afterward
Abertus, Emperor of Austria, bought Lucerna of the Abbot of Murbaoum. But not
long after the Lucernatians oppressed by the heavy burdens laid upon them by
the Austrian governors, being desirous of peace and liberty, made a league
with them Anno 1323. There were two Praefectureships of Lucerna, which Mercator
reckons, in map of Argow ARGOW.
which the Praefects dwell in one place, which are as I suppose Wiken, Sempach.
But the latter Prefect has no power over the town, but is only overseeer of
the Lake and the fishing therein: the Senators in the City do govern the
other Towns, which are: Willisew, Entlibuchia Vallis, Rotenburg or Rott, or
some place near unto it: also Habspurg, Berona, with the neighbor Country
called Chelamt, that is, the Praefectureship of Michael; also Merischwanden,
Waggis, Ebicena, Krientz: also the two Cities, Surseium and Sempachium, which
are under the Lucernatians protection, yet they have a Counsel of their own,
which does judge both civil, and criminal causes: but the chief man of the
Surseian Counsel is called Sculthes, who gives an oath to the Lucernatians:
but the chief of the Sempachian Counsel is chosen out of the Senate of
Lucerna, but yet out of the number of the Citizens of Semphachium. The next is
the Town of the Vrians or Urania. In Julius Caesar's time, the Romans did call
the inhabitants thereof Taurisci, and the name of Vrians, by which they are now
called, is thought to be derived from the Vranians, whom the ancients did call
Tauriscians, as also they now call the Stebentalensi^^s, Taurians, after the
German manner. Moreover, the arms of this Country is a black Bulls heads in
a yellow field. The Vrians Car^e is divided into ten parts, which they call
Gnossaminem, that is, to sha^^, or participations, because those Senators
only, which are elected out of them, are capable of public offices, and are
called to the (...) all meetings. The Town Suitia.
The next is the Canton of the Suitians: Suitia or Suttia, is a Town which
communicates his name to all Helvetia, for they first built it, who fled
hither out of the Kingdom of Suecia to seek themselves new habitations. There
is one of the three Cantons, who joined themselves in confederacy against the
insolency of the nobility, and it brought forth many stout and able men for
service, who were often a terror to their enemies. All the Country does live
upon the fruits which the earth brings forth. From this Town or Canton,
strangers and forrainers do call the Helvetians Suitzers, because they fought
first for liberty in their Country, or because they contended long with the
Eremitans, and were the first of the 3 Towns of the Austrians, that was
enforced to break into the Country, and was the chiefest in power of all the
three Cantons; and the other Cartres were comprehended under their name, as
being of most noate, and from the name was afterward communicated, to all the
confederates: or lastly because the Vrians, Silvanians, and Suitensians, begin
the confederacy in their Town. The Country of the Suetzers is divided into
five parts, which they call Quartas, retaining still the name of the new
division, The town Vnderwaldia.
in this new and sixtfold division. There is also the Canton of lower Silvania,
which is commonly called Vnderw^ldia. This is a free Canton, being mutually
joined in confederacy with Suitia and Urania, in the year of our Lord 1315. It
is environd round about with the Alps; it has pleasant pastures, for breeding
and feeding of Cattle, by which the inhabitants of Syluania do reap much
profit. But the Vrians, the Suitensians, the Silvanians or Vnderwaldians,
although by some covenants they were subject to the Abbeys of certain
Monasteries, yet they had liberties of their own, and received Praefects from
the Empire, which they call Vortos, by a Greek word, as heretofore the
Praefects of the Romans. For their office was the same with the Burgraues in
these Countries. For they had power to give judgment of life and death. I
conjecture that the other form of government remained from the ancient
Monarchy of the Romans, in which the Paefects did not live as they listed,
neither did create magistrates out of their own number, but they received them
from the Senare or the Emperor. But the Canton of Vnderwaldra, is divided by
the wood Kernwald into two parts, namely the higher and the lower, yet all the
Country nevertheless is comprehended, under the name of Vnderwaldia. Glarona.
There remains Glarona, commonly called Glaris, a Country of the Helvetian
confederacy, near the River Limagus, not very large, being three Germane miles
long, and takes its name from the special Town in this Country, being three
parts of it encompassed with the high Alps; on the South and North it joyneth
to the Rhetians, on the West to the Vrians, and Suitians, on the North to a
Country called Castra Rhetica or the Rhetian Tents, where the River Limagus
enters into the Vale. The ancient government.
The jurisdiction of this Country, and the revennewes thereof, was given in
the time of S. Fridoline by a certain Earl to the Monastery of Seekingense,
namely in the time of Clodovius the first Christian King of France, in the
year of our Lord 500, who was the first King of France, that reigned and
governed Rhetia, Almania, and Helvetia. This Land afterward obtained her
liberty, and her own jurisdiction, and did join it self in confederacy with
the Helvetians, in the year of our Lord 1252. The Inhabitants do now live
upon milk, Cheese, butter, and flesh. Among the straites of the Mountains
there is little ground sowed, and few Vines are planted. They have Orchards
full of fruit, and flourishing Meddowes. Wine and corn are brought in from
other parts. The Lakes afford fish; The Lakes.
and the woody Mountains do furnish them with foul and flesh, of wild
beasts. Henry Glareanus, and Aegidius Yscudus, two learned men were borne in
this Country. To these is joined the County of Hamburg, and the Baronie of
Humbert and Ringenbereg. But Glarona is distributed into 15. parts, which they
call Tagwan. Werdenbergen does command the Country, which they bought, Anno
1517. They and the Suitians do by turns send praefects to Vzenacum, or
V^snac, and into the Rhetian Tents at Wesome. But so much hitherto, let us now
add something in general concerning this part of Helvetia, and here the Lakes
are first to be considered, among which is the miraculous Lake, called Pilates
Lake, which is situated on the broken Mountain as they call it, not far from
Lucerna, almost on the top of the Mountain it stands solitarily, being
encompassed on every side with Woods, so that none can stir or provoke it.
For they report, that if any thing be purposely cast into it, it will stir up
a great tempest, and make it overflow, as many have found by experience: but
those things that fall in by accident, do occasion no danger at all. It is a
place fearful to behold, and the water stands still in the channel of it,
neither has it any vent, neither does it receive any River into it, neither is
it increased by snow or rain water. It is scarsely moved with the wind, but
the waters thereof are always black, and strangers are not permitted to come
unto it, least they should rashly cast any thing thereinto, whereby the
neighboring Country may be endangered. Among the other Rivers which do water
this Country, The Rivers.
there is one called Limagus, which rises in Glarina, and in the middle of the
Country, it receives Serniphius another River which runs out of another
Valley. Afterward beneath Vrna (which is the name of two Towns) above the
Laterician bridge (for so they call it) having borrowed some water out of the
Lake Vesenius, it parts and divides Marcha (which was heretofore the bounds
between the Helvetians, and the Rhetians, for so the Helvetians call a bound)
and the Tents of the Rhetians. Afterward entering into the Lake Tigurinum, at
the mouth thereof it divides Tigurum a large City of the Helvetians: and from
thence it slideth to those waters which the Graecians, call Bathes, which are
so famous for their hot waters. And not far from thence it mingleth it self
with the two Rivers, Vrsa and Arola. The River Vrsa, which by transposition of
the two former letters, they commonly call ^ass, arises on the top of the
Alps, which are now called Saint Gorberis Alps, and so runs strait
Northward, when on the other side Ticinus, arising out of the same Mountain
runs by the Lepo^^s Southward, first through Vrsula or Vrsella a Rhetian
Valley, and afterward it comes to Vria of the Tauriscians, the remainder of
the French Nation, where it mingleth it self with the Lake, where it waters
the Vrians, the Suizians, the Silvanians, and Lucer^^^, four Cities of the
Wood, for so they call them now. Afterward having received the Rivers of
Tuginum, it glideth by Bremgarte, and Mellige, (which are Towns of Helvetia)
and so beneath Bruges m^^gleth it self with Arola. And at their confluence, or
meeting together, three Rivers of Helvetia, Limagus, Vrsa, and Arola, do
discharge themselves into the Rhene. But let so much suffice concerning
Helvetia, and the parts thereof, we pass to the Low Countries, or lower
Germany.

THE RHETIANS now called the GRISONES.
THe Rhetians are accounted an ancient people by the consent of all men. For
some ages before Christ's birth the Tuscians being beaten by the French out of
their own habitations, under the conduct of their Captain Rhetus, seated
themselves in an Alpine Country, which was called from their Captain, Rhetia,
and they themselves Rhetians. But whereas this Country was heretofore very
large, and that the name of the Rhetians, for warlike matters grew famous
amongst their neighbors, so that they were a terror unto many which Ovid
declares in this verse: Rhaetica nunc praebent Thraciaque arma metum.
The Thracian arms, now every where,
And the Rhaetian do put us in fear.


At length being conquered by the Romans, they made two Provinces of it,
namely the first, and the second Rhetia: which did not only contain the
Alpine Countries, but a great part of Suevia and Bavaria. Now by this name we
understand those people, whom they call Grisones, for their grisely habit which
was made of their own Country cloth; but the Germains at this day do call
them Grauwbuntner, who do inhabit the ancient Alpine Rhaetia, near to the
Spring-heads of the River Rhene and Oenus, who are perpetually joy^ed together
by a threefold tie of amity, and confaederacie. The first confaederacie, which
is called the higher, has eighteen assemblies in it, among which the chief
heretofore were, Disentinus the Abbot, the Barons of Rhetia, and the Earls of
Misaucium; but those families are long since worn out and extinguished.
Although they that now possess the Castle of Rhaetia, do challenge that
title, from the Plantinian family. The several conventions or assemblies,
have one chief annual Magistrate, whom they call Ammanus; hetogether with the
Judges chosen by the same assembly, judges of controversies, does lay mulcts
and fines upon offenders. The second confaederacy is called the house of God,
or der Gotthuss bunt, in regard of the Bishopric and College of Curiense; it
has 21. conventions or partnerships in it, which are sometimes contracted into
eleaven greater. The City Curia is the head of this confaederacie, and has a
special Commonwealth; not unlike unto Tigurinum. After them the chief
partnerships, are Ingadinus, and Bregalianus, in whose Territories are the
heads of the Rivers Athesis and Oenus. The third confaederacie has 10
Jurisdictions, the first whereof is Dav^sian, so called from the Town
Davosium, in which is the Court for this confaederacie, and the Assizes for all
the jurisdictions are held. The second is the Belfortian jurisdiction, the
third the Barponensian, the fourth the Praelonganian, the fifth of S. Peter,
the sixth the Caenobiensian in the Rhetian Valley, the seventh the
Castellanean, the eighth the Aceriensian, the ninth the Malantiensian, the 10
the Maievillensian. But these 3 confaederacies have 50 jurisdictions, of which
one Commonwealth is framed: For albeit the most of them have meetings of their
own, and also Magistrates, Laws or rather customs, and power to judge of
civil and criminal matters, yet the Senate of (...) three confaederacies has
the greatest power and authority. A^^ sometimes they have entered into other
confaederacies, notwithstanding this perpetual confaederacie. In the year
1419. the Bishop and the Curiensian College made a league with the Tigurinians
(...) 51. years, having formerly entered into society with the Glar^ui^^. The
Rhaetians also of the higher confaederacie, did a long time joy^ themselves
with the Vrians; and the confaederates of the house of God, did join
themselves in perpetual league, with the 7 Can^^ (as they call them) of the
Helvetians. He that desires to know more concerning these matters, let him
have recourse to Sprecheras his Rhaetia, and Egidius Scudius his Rhaetia, and
Simlers Helvetia. I will only add, that the length of Rhaetia at this day, if
it be taken from the South, unto the North, is about 15 Rhaetian or German
miles, accounting 8000 paces to every mile; the breadth of it from the (...) to
the West, is thirteen miles, or there abouts.

map of Grisons THE ^HETIANS Now called the GRISONES.


A DESCRIPTION of the Low COUNTRIES.
BEing now to describe that part of France which belongs to the King of
Spain, I will follow that order which I have observed in the description of
France.

The Index of the Tables of the Low Countries.
1. The Low Countries in general. 2. Flanders. 3. -- The Eastern part. 4.
Brabant. 5. Holland. 6. Zeland. 7. Gelderland. 8. Zutphania. 9. Vltrajectum.
10. Mechlinia. 11. Groeninga. 12. Transisulania. 13. Artesia. 14. Hannonia. 15.
Namurcium. 16. Lutzenburg 17. Limburgh.
I Have hitherto faithfully described the Kingdom of France, now I come to the
Low Countries, being my dearest and Nati^e Country. And first to begin with the
name. Some would have this part of Europe, the which is now called the Lower
Germany, to be called Belgium by Caesar, in which he writes that he billited
three Legions, and Hircius four. But Martianus and Glaro^nus do take it for a
City not for a Country. But Vegetius will hardly believe that one City can
contain five Legions. And Caesar himself shows in his fourth book, that
many Cities were comprehended within Belgium, where he says that they did
inhabit the Sea cost of Br^^taine, who passed over out of Belgium, to get some
prey and boo^ie, who were all called after the names of those Cities, from
where they came. But yet he does not undestand by Belgium all Gallia Belgica.
For in the same book, he does distinguish the Nervians, the Morimans, and
Essuans, who are people of Belgica, from Belgica. Therefore it seems by
Ortelius that he calls a part of Belgica Belgium, and that part most likely
which is toward the North, which does contain Holland, Zeland, Flanders,
Gelderland, and Cleve^^^ Some call that Belgica which Caesar makes the third
part of Fra^^^ which name some do derive from a famous City in this
Country, others from Belgius, a certain Captain of the Belgians, and other
from other occasions. Hadrian Iunius, supposes that it was called map of low
countries THE DESCRIPTION OF THE LOVV COVNTERIES.
Belgium from the fierceness of the Nation, being named Belgae as it were
Velgae, that is, fierce and violent; or else they were called Belgae by
changing of the second vowell into the first, as it were Balgas, from their
hotnesse and pronenesse to fight: for Balgen signifies to fight. But the
Country which we now entreat of, is but the half part of Belgia. It is called
now Lower Germany; Germany, because it differs little in speech, manners,
laws, and customs, from the Almaines, and the other Germans. It is called
the lower, because it is nearer the Sea than the other part of Germany, and in
respect of the higher Germany, the fields and grounds do lie lower. It is
commonly called the Netherland, the French call it Le Pais Bas. It is called
also almost throughout all Europe by the figure Synecdoche, that is, by taking
a part of the whole, Flanders, either in regard of the power and beauty of that
Country above the rest, or for the chief and famous Mart Towns, or the
ancient Faires kept at Bruges; or lastly because it is better known, and is
nearer to France, England, Spain, and Italy. And so much concerning the name,
the situation and quantity follows. The bounds of Lower Germany or Belgians
(for these words I will use promiscuously) are on the North the O^an: on the
South Lotaring^a, Campania, and Piccardie: on the East the Rivers Rhene and
Mosa; on the West the Sea. These Princes are neighbors unto it, the Earl of
East Friseland, the Bishop of Mun^^r, the Duke of Cleveland, the Bishop of
Colen and Trevers, and the King of France. This is the situation: the quality
of the soil follows, which arises from the Climate. Low Germany is under
the middle of the seventh and all the eight climate, between the degrees of
longitude 22 and an half, and 30, and between the degrees of Latitude 48, and
a half, and fifty three and a half. The longest day in Summer toward the
middle of the Climate is 16 hours long, and at the beginning of the ninth
climate, it is 16, hours long, and three quarters. It contains all the
Parallels, which are between 16 and 21, the Air in the Low Countries is
moist, yet wholesome to the inhabitants. The summers are delightful, pleasant,
and temperatly hot: they have not too much heat, nor no great store of flies
and gnatts, nor sildome any thunder, or earthquakes. The winters are long and
windy, and when it is a North or East wind, it occasions sudden frosts: but
when the wind is in the South or West, the air is more mild, and the cold is
turned into rain. The soil for the most part is sandy and gravelly, as a
great part of Flanders, and almost all Brabant, it is reasonable fertile in
producing corn, and other fruits, and some places are very fertile, as
Zeland, Flanders, Hannania, Artesia, Gelderland. And it has abundance of
Corn, Baile^, Rye, Hemp, and Cotton. It produces also all kinds of fruits
in great plenty, as Apples, Pears, Prunes, Cherries, Mulberies. Peaches,
Apricockes, Filberts, Medlars, and in some places Chestnuts. And here is
abundance of Madder gathered for Dyers, and a great gain is made of it, by
transporting it into other Countries. There are no metal Mines of any great
note: As concerning the trees; they do yield a pleasant prospect, standing
thick and very orderly, and being laden with fruit, and besides they serve
for firewood and timber for building of houses, being very high and wondrous
thick, and there are great store of them here. There are few Bay-trees, and
Cypress trees. There are also great store of Teile trees commonly called
Linden, which are like to Elmes in shape, and leaves, but they be bigger and
do sooner come forward. For in 16, or 18, years they will be as big as a man's
middle. They use them also in building: and they make coals of them which are
better to make gunpowder than Willow coals. Between the Bark and the wood
there is a kind of down like Cotton, of which they make roapes and cordage.
But many beasts will not eat the leaves thereof though they be new budded
forth. As Virgill shows in this verse: Nec Tiliae leves, nec torno rasile
Bruxum;
Neither the light teale Tree
Nor Box that cannot turned be.
And Ovid.
Nec Tiliae leves, nec Fagus, and innuba Quercus,
Not the light Tealetree, nor Beech which spreads,
Nor the Oak that never weddes.


It has also great plenty of Ew trees which is a poisonous tree, but excellent
Bows are made of them. Of the juice thereof a poison is made, with which
Caesar reports that Cattivalcus king of the Ebure^ians did make away
himself. There is also another kind of tree which is not found any where else,
which is like a white Poplar, the inhabitants do call it in the plural number
Abeelen. There is great store of them in Brabant, which serve for diverse uses,
especially at Bruxels. The Low Countriemen may praise the goodness of their
soil for bringing up of Cattle. For Oxen, horses, sheep, and great herds of
cattle are bred there. And especially great, strong horses fit for service in
the wars. There are also the best Oxen, especially in Holland and Friesland,
where an Ox often waigheth a thousand and two hundred pound weight. Ludovicke
Guicciardine an Italian, unto whom our Country is much beholding for making an
accurate and true description thereof, says that the Earl of Mechlin had an
Ox given him which weighed two thousand, five hundred, and eight and twenty
pound, which he caused afterward to be painted in his Palace. The Kine have
loose great Vdders, and full of milk. For in some parts of Holland in Summer
time, they will give four and forty Pints of milk. I pass by many other
things, least should be tedious. For hunting they have abundance of Does,
Hearts, Goats, Boares, Badgers, Hares, and Conies, and other games besides. And
for Hawking they have Hernes, Kites, Vultures, Partridges, Phesants, Turtle
Doves, Starlings, Thrushes, Storkes, Duckes, Geese, Woodcockes, or Snipes,
which Nemesianus describes thus.

Praeda est facilis and amaena Scolopax
Corpore non Paphijs avibus majore videbis,
Illa sub aggeribus primis, qua proluit humor
Pascitur, exiguos sectans obsonia vermes:
At non illa oculis, quibus est obtusior, et si
Sint nimium grandes, sed acutus naribus instat
Impresso in terram rostri mucrone, sequaces
Vermiculos trahit, atque gulae dat praemia vili.
The Woodcocke is easy to ensnare,
Their bodies no bigger than Doves are;
And by some watery ditches side
Feeding on worms he does abide:
Not by his eyes though they be great,
But by his bill he finds his meat,
Thrusting his bill into the ground,
Where when he a worm has found,
He draws him forth, and so does live
By that food which the earth does give.
They have also Affricke Hens, and great plenty of other He^^. But enough of
these things, let us now proceed to other matters; It is worth your knowledge
to know how the Provinces of the low Countries were united, and grew to be one
body, and how it fell to Charles the fifth and his son Philip. Ludovicke
Malanas Earl and Lord of Flanders, Nivernia, Rastella, Salina, Antuerp, and
Mechlin, and after his Mothers death, Earl of Burgundy and Artesia, married
Margaret, daughter to John Duke of Brabant, by which marriage he came to be
Duke of Brabant, Limburg, and Letaringit. By his wife he had one only
daughter, who was the inheriti^^ to her fathers Lands, who in the year 1369.
at Gandave married Philip Valesius Duke of Burgundy, who for his singular
Valor, was s^mamed the Bold. He lived 70 years, and dyed at Halla near to
Braxells, in the year of Christ, 1404. He left these children behind him,
John, Antony, and Philip Valesius: Catharine, Mary, and Margaret. All of them
did increase their Patrimony by marriage. Catharin^ married Lupoldus Duke of
Austria: Mary married Amedees Duke of Sabaudia: Margaret married the Earl of
Holland, and Han^^t, Antonius Vaselius was made by his father Duke of Brabant,
L^taringia, and Limburg, he married Elizabeth Duchess of Lutze^berg, by whom
he had these sons, John who married Iacoba Countess of Holland, and Philip,
both Dukes of Brabant. Antonius, and his younger brother Philip Valesius, were
slain in the French wars near Teroana in the year 1415. Antonius his
sons, dying afterward without issue, left their Uncle John Valesius, their
heir, and John Valesius, who was called the Undaunted, being the elder brother,
succeeded his father in the year 1404, and obtaining by his brothers and
Nephews death many large possessions, was miserably and unjustly put to death,
in the year 1419, by Charles the Dolphin, for the Duke of Orleance, with whom
he always lived in continual enmity and hostility. He left these children,
Philip, Margaret, Isabell, and Catharine. Philip surnamed the good or godly
succeeded his Father, in the three and twentyeth year of his age, in the
Dukedom of Burgundy, the County of Flanders, Burgundy, Artesia, in the
Marquiship of the Empire, of Salina, and Mechlin. He at Atrebatum made a league
with Charles the 7 and with the Duke of Orleance, and freed him out of prison,
having been five and twenty years prisoner in England, and paid his ransom,
and gave him his sister Mary to wife. He after the death of Theodericke, Earl
of Murcium was made heir of this County: and after the death of Philip, he
had the Dukedom of Brabant, Lotaringia, and Limburg: and after the death of
Iacoba, he had the Counties of Hannonia, Holland, Zeland, and Friesland: And
also the Dukedom of Lutzenburg, came to him by his wife Elizabeth, the widow
of his Uncle Antonius: so that it came to pass, that the large and rich
Provinces of both Burgundies, of Brabant, of Limburg, of Lutzenburg, of
Flanders, of Artesia, of Hannonia, of Holland, of Zeland, of Namurcium, of
Friesland, of Mechlin, and the Marquiship of the Empire were all subject to
Phillip the good. He had to wife Isabell, daughter to the King of Portugal:
he lived seaventy two years, and dyed in the year 1457, leaving one son
called Charles the Bold, to be heir unto so many Provinces, who did not only
keep his fathers Empire, but also enlarged it, by joining unto it Gelderland,
Zutphania, and the Iuliacensian Dukedom. And this is that Charles who was the
Grandfather of Charles the fifth, who was borne in the year 1500 of Ioane the
daughter of Ferdinand King of Arragon, the wife of Philip of Austria: which
Phillip was the son of Maximilian of Austria, by his mother Mary the daughter
of Charles the bold; under whom, these Provinces which before had many Lords,
being united, grew to be one body, and now they are commonly called the Low
Countries. Long since the Low Countrymen were accounted brave soldiers. And
Caesar Lib. 1. Commentaries, concerning the French war, does call them the
valiantest of all the Gaulls. For he writes thus. The valiantest of all the
Gauls are the Low Countriemen, because they care not for trimnesse of attire,
and merchants have not frequent recourse unto them, and therefore those
commodities are not brought to them which do effeminate the mind; and they
are near to the Germans, who live beyond the Rhene, with whom they wage
continual war; by which reason also the Helvetians do exceed the other
Frenchmen for valor, because they have daily skirmishes and fights with the
Germans, when either they drive them forth out of their borders, or they do
make inroades into their Territories. And hence we may collect their strength
and courage in defending their liberties, that in the time of C. Caesar, they
endeavored to shake off the Roman yoke of subjection. And so they mustred
and joined armies to contend with them. The Bellovacians set forth 6000
soldiers, the Suessones 5000, and the Nervians (who were then so wild and
uncivil, that they would not suffer Merchants at that time to bring them wine
or other commodities) did set forth 5000. The Atrebatians and Ambianians did
set forth 10000, the Morineans five and twenty thousand. The Menapians 60,
thousand. The Caletians 10 thousand; the Velocassians and Veromanduans, did set
forth 10 thousand a piece: the Ad^aticians 18, thousand: the Condrusians,
Eburonians, and Caemanians, 40 thousand. So that the whole sum of choice
Soldiers was 273 thousand, as Orosius witnesses: or as Caesar himself
delivers, their number was 368 thousand, whereby it appears that the Low
Country men were always noble Soldiers. And Caesar in the second of his
Commentaries says, that it was they alone who in our fathers time did vex all
France, and did keep out the Tentomanes and Cimbrians, out of their
Territories; whereby it came to pass, that the memory of their atchiuements,
did make them valiant and full of courage in Military affairs. And foreign
armies have found it in our age, who being fresh soldiers and joining battle
with the old soldiers, they found that the Citizens, Countrymen, and Seamen,
were al stout of courage. There are 17 Provinces in the low Countries, all of
which the Emperor Charles the fifth did possess: in which there are 4
Dukedomes, the Dukedom of Brabant and Limburg, which together with the County
of Dale and the Lordships of Valckenburg, and Rode le Due, is joined to
Brabant, and it depends on the Chancerie of Brabant: also the Dukedomes of
Lutzenburg and Gelderland. There are 7 Counties, Flanders, Artesia, Hannonia,
Holland, Zeland, Namurcium and Zutphania: also the Marquiship of the holy
empire, which has four principal Cities, Nivella, Lovanium, Braxells, and
the Metropolis Antwerpe; it is now a part of Brabant. There are five Lordships,
or Signiories, of West-Friesland, of Mechlin, of Vltrajectum, of
Trans-Isaliana, and Groneland. There are many Cities, in the Low Countries,
which are well fortified, the number whereof as also of the Towns and villages
you may find in Mercator. But the chief Cities are Lovaine, Bruxells,
Antwerpe, Silva Ducis, Gandavum, Bruges, Hipra, Mechlinia, Cameracum,
Atrebatum, Tornacum, Valencena, Insulae, Dort, Harlem, Amsterdam, Lugdunum
Battavorum, Namurcum, Neomagum, Trajectum and others. There is a great company
of Lakes, Pooles, and Marshies, in the Low Countries, which do not only hold
great store of fish, but do also fortify those Countries, against the
invasion of enemies. Few Rivers do rise in this Country, but many Rivers,
which have their spring head farther off, do glide through it, and do much
enrich it. The chiefest are Rhene, Mosa, Scaldis, Am^sis: the lesser are
Mosella, Lisa, Aa, Sambra, Dela, and many others. We will speak of Rhene and
Amasis in Germany, and we have spoken of Mosella in Germany, now we will
describe the rest. Mos^ does flow out of the Mountain Vogesus, which is
situate on the borders of the Lingonians, not far from the Fountains of
Araris and Matrona, and so running Northward it glideth by the Church of Saint
Theobald, or Saint Tibaut, where it begins to be navigable: from thence it
slideth to Virdunum, and from thence bending toward Caecia, it runs strait
forward to Mosa and Maser^acum. From thence turning Northward, it visits
Carolomont, Boviniacum, Dinantum, and Namurcum; and there growing wider by the
receipt of the River Sabis, it turns it self Westward, and so having viewed
Hoium, and Leodium, and glided by Trajectum, and Stochemum, it passes by
Ruremunda and Venloium: where turning Westward it watreth Cuicka, Ravestienum
and Megena: afterward being received into the Rhene, near the Town of
Herwerd, and so afterward mingleth it self with Vahalus, and strait way they
part again, yet still keeping their own names: and so they fall in two
divided streams, into the River Lovesteinum: where they do encircle the
Bomelian Island, and so join together again, and losing their ancient name
they are called by the name of Merova: and so gliding by Worcomium and
Gorcomium, they come at last unto Dort, and there making the Island of
Iselmond, it is called Mosa, and so retayning still the same name, having
glided by Roterdame and Vlaerdinga, it enters into the Sea, about the Brill
with such a violent current, that for a long way together it preserves his
water fresh and sweet. And Sturgions delighting in this sweet fresh water are
allured to come up the River, and so are easily taken; which does not happen to
other Rivers, because they entering the Sea with a quiet gentle stream, these
water presently becomes salt, as Seyne, Iberus Thames, and many other great
Rivers. On the contrary, Eridanus, Tiber, Rhodanus, Garumna, and other Rivers
which run into the Sea with greater violence, do in like manner as Mosa
allure and entice the Sturgeons to come up into them, but not in so great
Plenty. Besides, the Sturgions which are taken in the Rivers Mosa and Rhene,
are greater and more pleasant in taste than those in the Mediterranean Sea.
They are of a silver shining color, of a great bigness. There are some taken
which do weigh above 400 pound. Guicciardine does report, that be saw in the
Market at Antwerp a Sturgeon of 420 pound weight, and that it was above 12
feet of Antwerp long: and on another day in the morning he saw 70. Sturgeons
together, the least of which was above five foot long. This fish is first
seen in Holland, Zeland, and Friesland, in the Month of April, and it is
found three months together or longer, during which time great store of them
are taken. And from hence transported into other Countries, especially into
England, being salted up, and so kept from putrefying; and also at other times,
all the year through, they take lesser sturgeon, which are delicate in taste.
Out of this, being enticed by the freshwater, they come up into the mouth of
the River Mosa, in which there are very fat Salmones, Trouts, which are taken
here all the year long, also Lampreys, Mulletts, Congers, and other kinds of
excellent fish, which here for brevitie sake I omit. But this is wonderful,
that those fish are bad if they betaken in the Sea, but very good and fat, when
they enter into fresh water. Besides, this River does naturally breed besides
other fish, Trouts, Lampries, some greater and some les, but more delicate in
taste. Schaldis which Ptolemie calls Thahuda, the Low countriemen Schelt, the
French Escault, does rise in Veromanduum; near Saint Martines Abbey, as they
call it, where it gently slideth between Castellet, and Beau-revior, two
French Fortifications, and so runs to Cameracum: thence going toward the
Country of Hannonia, it watreth the noble City of Valence: and afterward
growing navigable, having received the River Hania, it glideth by the Condatum;
and afterward being enlarged by the receipt of the River Scarpa, it vieweth S.
Amandum, and so bending Northward toward Tornacum, it glideth by Aldenarda, and
the famous City Gandauum, where it receives the Rivers Lisa, and Livia, and
other streams. From thence with many windings and Maeander-like turnings it
runs forward to Teneremunds: and there having received the River Tenera,
flowing on the right hand, it goes toward Rupelmunda: and there it receives
Rupels, and a little after Dela: and being now grown bigger, it by and by
washes the walls of Antwerp, and makes a fair Haven or Harbor for ships
before the Town: afterward having run a little further, it parts it self
into two channells, and so divides Brabant and Flanders from Zeland: for on
the left hand, it windeth and bends Southward, and so runs by the shores
and borders of Flanders, and is called by another name de Hont, from the
barking noise thereof; from whence it passes by Zuytbeveland and Walachria
into the Western Ocean: on the right hand leaving Brabant, it keeps one
continual course in his old channel, by the Island of Scaldis, and so with a
violent current runs into the Sea. Moreover the tide follows up into this
River, even to Gandauum, which is thirty miles from the mouth of it, if you
count them by the winding course of the banks. There do come up into this
River Sturgeons, Salmones, Troutes, great Lampreys, Turbotts, Congers, Cuckoo
fishes Mullets, Crabs, Lobsters, Sardins, and many most delicate fish, which
come up out of the Sea into Scaldis, and do there feed, and cast their
spawne; so that for two or three months, between the Spring and the Summer,
besides the greater fish, there is taken so great a number of small Fry, that
many men do live by them. Also many Sea Dogfishes, and Porpoises do come up
this River, which two kind of fishes do not cast forth any spawne, but do
bring forth their young ones perfectly formed. The Dogfishes do bring forth
their young on the Land, and do suckle them with their dugges, until they are
grown to a good bigness. Moreover, this River without the help of the Sea,
does yield diverse kinds of fish all the year long, of which these are the
chief: Pikes, Barbells, Tenches, Carpes and Breames of an unusual bigness,
so that they do sometimes, weigh 20 pound; also Gudgeons, and many other
kinds of fish both great and small. Also diverse kinds of Eeles, and Crabbes,
and in the mouth of the River, there are some Oysters, which come thither out
of the Sea. And therefore this River for multitude of fish and variety, is not
inferior not only to any River of France, but also of all Europe. Aa rises
near Teroana, and so bending toward Caesia, it slideth by the Church of Saint
Audomare, and so coming to Griveling (near which in the year 1558 that
famous battle was fought between the Burgundians and the French) it does
discharge it self into the British Sea. Lisa commonly called de Leye, rises
in Artesia, in the Town Lisburg, which takes his name from this River, near
Teroana: and having viewed Aria, Armenteris, Wervicum, and Meenen, and from
thence cutting through the middle of Cortracum and Gandauum, it mingleth it
self with Scaldis: it has abundance of very good fish. Sambra commonly called
Sambre, which Caesar calls Sabris, does rise in Hannonia, near the Town
Novion; and so having viewed the Towns, which are commonly called Landrecy,
Sassene, Barlaymont, Mabeuge, Merne, and Cassele: at last it glideth by
Namarcum, and so discharges it self into Mosa, and is full of delicate fish.
Dela rises in Brabant, near the Village Town Tila, and so bending Northward
it runs to Waveta; and afterward it flows by Louanium which is three miles
distant from thence, and so keeping on his course for three miles, and
afterward bending Westward, it embraces Mechlinia with many spreading arms,
and afterward four miles from Rupelimunda, being now grown very big it
falls into Scaldis. The River La Seine, as it seems, was so named from the
Senones a people of Britain, when they came into these Countries to vex and
disturb the French. It rises near the Town Soigni in Hannonia, and so
runs to Halla, and having glided by Bruxells, it flows by Viluorda: and
afterward bending toward Caecia, it leaves Mechlin on the right hand, and
having gone a little further it powers it self into the River Dela, Diza
rises near the little Town called Per: and so turning Northward it waters
Eindovia, and so keeping his former course it comes to Silva Ducis, beneath
which it powers it self into Mosa. Demera does flow forth near the
Tungrians, in the Dioecese of the Leodiensians, and so running Westward it
waters Bilsenum, Hasselt, and Die, and from thence gliding by Sichenum and
Arschot^m, it powers it self into Dela. Netha rises near the Town Rhetum,
and flows by the Town Herentalls, and from thence keeping a direct course,
it runs to the Signiorie of Grobendoncke, and having received the little
River Aade, it passes by Lira, and so watreth Dusten and Walem, and a little
further it mingleth it self with Dela. Rucur, or Rhoer, which Tacitus calls
Adrana, as Ritheimerus writes, does rise near the Town Bullinge, and cutting
through Caesia it glideth by Dura and Iuliacum, and at length near Ruremunda
which it names, it falls into Mosa. There are also other lesser Rivers,
which for brevitie sake I forbear to describe. And I pass over also the
Torrents, and greater Rivers, least I should be tedious to the Reader; which
do not only yield great store of fish, but are also an ornament and
fortification to the Country, and are very convenient for the passing of
commodities to and fro. And the Country people by the help of these Rivers
making Sluices and Dams to stay the water, do afterward dig channells for
some miles together, and after letting the water into them do make them
navigable: so that there is no City which has not great Barks, which come
up unto it. But this Country has but few fountains, or Springs of water,
except in the Mountainous places. And thus having showed the Rivers that are in
the Low Countries, it remains that we should speak somewhat concerning the
Ocean: seeing in regard it is so near unto it, it may be counted not only a
member of this Province, but the chief head thereof. I say therefore that the
Ocean is wide and large, and in rough weather, it is fearful and terribly
furious: for sometimes when tempests happen, the waves go so high, that it
does overflow and drown whole Countries: and especially it breaks oftentimes
in about the coast of Zeland: but the inhabitants do cast up trenches and
banks, which do prevent the danger which might ensue thereby: unless when a
western wind does contend and blow against the spring tide. The winds which
do most trouble the sea, and thereby do endanger the Country, are the
Northwest, the West and the South winds. Also it is much troubled at the
New-Moone or Full-moone, and the two Aequinoctialls, at which time (as
Cornelius Tacitus witnesses) the Sea does swell very much. For every new
Moon, and full Moon, we see that there are still the greatest tides and
greatest tempests. These tides do produce some good, and some evil effects.
As for the former, it purges the water (as common experience does teach us)
and will not suffer it to corrupt: and also it makes ships say le more
speedily. For as Vegesius says, Lib. 4. concerning Military matters, Cap. 42.
Haereciprocantis meatus ambiguitas cursum Navium secunda adjuvat, retardat
adversa: that is, Those tides if they be with a ship, do hasten her course;
but being against her do foreslow and stay her course. The other evil
effects, are the inundations, and violent irruptions of the Sea: For the Ocean
does sometimes come up into the land with such violence, that it drives back
great Rivers, and does overflow spacious fields, as we said before. Pomponius
Mela does write as much, and the miserable experience of many ages does consume
it. But so much concerning these things. And now having spoken of the Detriment
and loss, which some Countries of this Province do receive by the Ocean, when
it is rough and troubled, we must speak somewhat of the commodities, which the
whole Province does reap by it, when it is quiet and peaceable, which
commodities are so many and so great, that if they should want them, the
Country could not sustain the half part of the inhabitants. And hence it
comes to pass, that this Province is as it were the Haven and Mart of all
Europe, so that there is an infinite multitude of Merchants and Factors, and as
it were a confused Chaos of inhabitants and forreiners. Besides, the Ocean
brings many commodities to this Country, as Herring fishing, and other
fishings, which serve not only to satisfy the voluptuous desires of the rich,
but also to sustain the poor: and the inhabitants do not only get their
food, but all their wealth by it. For the overplus of that which they take,
does furnish a great part of France, Spain, Germany, England, and other
Countries: yea great store of barreld salt-fish is sent even into Italy,
especially Salmones and Herrings. Now there are three kinds of fish which they
salt, namely Herrings, Codfish, and Salmones. But first we will speak of their
Herring fishing of which they make a great commodity. Herrings are found in no
River, nor in the Mediterranean Sea, nor the Spanish nor any other Sea, but
only in this Northern Ocean: their bigness, form, and goodness is
sufficiently known. And when they go out of the Northern Sea, which is
always in the Spring time, as if they fleeted from their own native quarters,
and went to seek shady places, they come in such great shoales, that no Nets
can hold them, but that they break through them, and do even darken the face
of the Sea. And many broad bottomed vessels, which they call Busses, are set
out from Holland, Friesland, France, Britain, and Scotland; and do all to
avoid contention, fish in several parts, and quarters, either about England,
or the Coasts of Scotland, and the Orcades. These fishes are unbowelled alive
if it may be (for as soon as they are out of the Sea waters they are dead) by
one who has good wages for doing it; and then another salts them, and so they
are presently barrelled up, and afterward sold; afterward the Herring men and
Coupers do salt them anew, and take out the Pilchers which have no Milts nor
Rows, they are barrell'd up again with new pickle: afterward they are
surveyed by men sworn for that purpose, and so sealed up, in like manner as
Diana's Priest did seal up red Vermilion, as Galen witnesses. And these are
the first kind of Herrings which with Plautus we may call salt or pickled
Herrings: the other sort are those which are lightly salted; and so dried in
the smoke, being as yellow as gold, whence they call them Soretum, because
they call a red color in their language Sorus. This Herrng fishing is very
commodious and advantageous to the Commonwealth of Holland and Zeland, seeing
not only one City, but many Cities do wholly depend and live on it, and the
City and Country get their food by it, pay their debts, maintain families,
and do get wealth by it. There is another special kind of fish which they use
to salt, called in Latin Ascllus Major, or Cod-fish, thereby to difference it
from that which is commonly ealled Caballian. It is a great fish, so that some
of them are threescore pound weight. It is taken at many times of the year,
but especially in Lent time, and chiefly in the Friesland Sea, and great store
of it is usually salted up, whereby the whole country reapeth yearly great
profit. The third kind of salt fish is Salmon: being very good when it is fresh
as well as salted. Holland and Zeland have store of this kind of fish, in all
months, but most plenty in April, May, and June: of which there is such
great store salted up, that the gain which is made of them amounts to 200000
crowns. But of these things enough, let us proceed to the rest. The Low
Countries are plain and level: there are few Hills in it, and fewer
Mountains, unless it be in Lutzenburg, Namurcum, and some parts of Hannonia,
where they are very thick, and there are many also in Leodium. It is every
where beautified with Forests and Woods, which both grace the Country, and
afford much pleasure in hunting. The Forest of Arden, in Julius Caesar's time,
as he himself writes, was the greatest of all France, running between the
Treverians, from the River Rhene to the Nervians, and the Rhenicans, being
above fifty miles long. And now at this time no wood in all France can be
compared with it: but now there is a great part of it converted into arrable
ground, so that it is far lesser than it was: and that part which remains
has many glades made in it, which the husband men do till, and call it by
another name, but the greatest part of it is from Theonis Villa even to
Leodium, which is thirty miles in length. In the middle of it is the City of
S. Hubert, which as Gemma Frisius witnesses, lies under 26 degrees of
Longitude and forty minutes: and 50 degrees of Latitude, and 4. minutes. This
Wood has all kinds of pleasant trees, which are very high, and
broad-spreading, which afford both pleasure and profit. Strabo calls it
Arduenna, the Inhabitants Arddenna; Rhenanus, Luitticherwald, which signifies
the Leodiensian Wood. Mormavia, or Mormau, is a fair wood in Hannonia, which
begins near to Quesnoy, and so runs out Southward toward the
Veromanduans: and has many Towns in it, and Villages, and many clear springs
and pleasant Fountains. Here is great store of Charecoale made: whence some
supposed that it is a Part of the wood Carbonaria, but some affirm that the
wood Carbo^na did lie more Eastward between the Rivers Mosa, and Sabis; and
that the pleasant wood Archta is a part of it, in which there is a Town of the
same name, fortified with a strong Castle, and there the Lords of Berlaymont,
were wont to reside: There is also in Hannont^ the pleasant wood of Saint
Amand, which is also called the Ramensian wood, because it is near unto it. It
begins on the edge of Flanders near the town of Saint Amand, whence it
receives his name, and so runs forth Eastward toward the Valesians, with a
great breadth. The Ramensian wood belongs to the Lord of En^^^e, who is the
chief ranger of Hannonia, which title belongs unto him only. Silva
Faignensis, or le bois de Faigne, begins in (...) near Avenna, and reaches
even to Masieris, which is sixteen miles, though heretofore it were far
larger. It seems that it was so called from the Fawnes and Satires, whom
perhaps the Poets did therefore feign to have horns, and Goats feet, because
the first inhabitants of this Wood were so rude and savage, that they were like
beasts. The Soniensian wood is three or four flight shots off from Bruxells,
and it runs Southward toward Brenna, even to Alle^da, and the Castle of
Brenna, for three miles in length. It is a great spacious Wood, so that it is
seven miles compass round about^ and there are very may Cities, Towes,
Abbeys, and Monasteries in it, so that in Summer time many of the Nobles, and
wealthier Citizens do go thither with their whole families for recreation
sake, and carry three or four weeks. Saventerloo is enclosed with Lovanium,
Bruxells, and Vilvordia. It is a pleasant wood, and receives his name from
Saventria, a Town lying near unto it. Also Grootenheat is a Wood in Brabant,
which stands not far from Turneholt, in which the River Ada rises, which
does afterward discharge itself into the River Natha. It is a great Wood, in
which Queen Mary, to whom Turnholt did belong, was wont to hunt much. There is
also Marlaigne, a Wood in Namurcum, which begins near the City Namurcum.
and runs Southward toward Phillipolis: and so reaches even to Mosa. Niepa
is a chief Wood in Flanders, not far from the confines of Artesia, it is two
miles distant from the River Lisa, from the Castle of the Morineans and
Baliolum: it is a pleasant, spacious and ancient Wood, having a strong Castle
in it. Also Nonnen is situate in Flanders, and extending it self Northward in
a great breadth, it does contain many Villages and some Abbeys. Poodsbergia is
a great wood, between Flanders and Hannonia, not far from Gerardimontium and
Lessina, and is pleasant in regard of the roundnes of it. Gulielmi Silva, or
Williams Wood is situate in Artesia, nere Rentiacum where the Emperor joined
battle with the King of France, in the year 1554. Engelerwallia, is a pleasant
wood in Gelderland nere Arnhemum. The 7 woods, are 7 great woods, which are
nere unto the Transilanians, from whence one part of Fiesland is denominated,
which is now called Sevenwolden, that is to say, 7 Woods: every one of them is
very spacious and has many fair towns in them. But so much concerning the
woods. I come now to the public works. There are in these Countries
innumerable magnificent Temples, and Churches, many Abbeys, infinite numbers of
Monasteries, and Friaries, many Hospitalls for strangers, for the sick, for the
poor and for Orphans. Truly in Antwerp only there are 42 such like buildings:
the chief of which is the Cathedral Church of S. Mary, which is very spacious,
having a Tower Steeple, which is 400 and 20 foot high, being built of white
Marble, from the top whereof you may view the City, the River covered with
ships, and the Country round about which is full of Towns and Cities. What
should I describe the other Temples, Monasteries, and such like places, of
which there are great store both here and in other Cities and Towns? What
should I reckon up the sumptuous Palaces belonging to Dukes, Earls, and
Noblemen? Or what should I mention the other public or private buildings? for
if I should endeavor to reckon them up, I should sooner want time than matter;
wherefore it is better to be silent, than to speak too sparingly. The politic
state of these Countries both in general and special is threefold: the first
is the Ecclesiastic state, in which the Abbots are the chief, the second is
of the Nobility, as the Duks, Earls, Marcgraves, Princes, Barrons, and great
Lords. The third is of the Cities, which the chief Cities of every Country
do represent. These states the Prince calls together, when they are to
consult concerning matters appertaining to the Prince, or to the Principality,
or to the preservation or utility of the Country. The Ecclesiasticke state is
thus; there are four Bishops in the Low Countries, the Camaracensian, the
Tornaycensian, and the Atrebate^sian: these three are under the Archbishop of
Rhemes, and the Vltrajectine who is under the Archbishop of Colen. I proceed
to the Universities, which are 4, the University of Lovaine, and Doway, of
Leyden, and Flankford. Lovaine is famous for the many Colleges, Students, and
learned men; the chief Colleges are Lilium, Castrense, the College of Porus
and Falcon, in which Philosophy is read. The Buslidian College has three
languages taught in it, namely, Greek, Latin, and Hebrew. This University,
at the request of the Nobles of Brabant, was first instituted and adorned with
Privileges by John the 4, Duke of Brabant, in the year 1426. Martinus the
fifth being Pope. The other were erected in our memory. Out of which as it were
out of the Trojan horse innumerable learned men have proceeded, and do daily
come from thence. For in the Low Countries there are learned men, skillful in
all faculties and sciences: and as heretofore, so now it produces famous
Scholars; whom it would be too tedious to reckon up. Here are diverse Libraries
in sundry places, which are replenished with excellent rare Books. Among which
that at Leyden is the chief. The inhabitants are fair, quiet, not choleric,
nor ambitious, nor proud: not much given to venerie; civil, plain, courteous,
affable, ingenious and ready, witty, and sometimes talkative: laborious,
industrious, faithful, grateful toward those that have done them a courtesy,
capable of all Arts and Sciences, stout in defending their liberties, and
Privileges even to death. And this may truly be spoken in the general praise
of them, that the Low Country men are frugall house keepers and thrifty
husbands: who following the example of the Ant, do lay up before winter, that
which cannot then be gotten; and do buy fish and flesh, which they either
pickle up, or do dry it in the smoke. For every house, according to the
number of their family, does kill in Autumn an whole Ox, or provideth half
an one, beside a Hog, which they salt up, and then it will serve them to
spend a good part of the year, until the Spring return again. Yet many of
them are very covetous, and desirous of wealth. The Women are beautiful, well
behaved and courteous. For according to their Country fashion, they are used
from their childhood to converse familiarly with every one: and therefore they
are very ready both in action or speech or any matter: neither does this
freedom or liberty make them less honest. Neither do they only walk alone
through the City, but they will go for fellowship to the next Towns,
without any the least suspicion of dishonestie. They are very continent, and
apt and ready in their affairs And they are not only careful of household
matters, of which their husbands take no care, but they also use Merchandise,
and dispatch and confer of businesses belonging unto men: and that with so
great dexterity and diligence, that in many of the Provinces, as in Holland and
Zeland, the men do commit all their affairs unto them. And by this manner of
living, joined with the innate desire which women have to rule, they become for
the most part too Imperious and proud. It is the fashion both among Princes,
and men of inferior rank, as also among other Nations, on this side the Alps,
to give the first born their Parents names, although they be yet living. And the
Noble of what quality and condition soever they are, do more esteem of their
eldest daughter, than the rest of the younger, although they have all an equal
dowry: so that they marry the rest to those unto whom they denied her in
marriage, reserving her for a better husband. And they are to be praised,
because they easily contract marriages with forrainers, if occasion so require,
and are not bound to match them in their own Country, which is a matter very
profitable and commodious: for these alliances by marriage are very
advantageous to themselves and the Commonwealth. Moreover it is accounted
undecent and absurd, for young men to marry old women, or on the contrary for
old men to marry young maids: as also for a noble personage to marry an
ignoble person, or a master to marry his Maid, and a Mistress her servant.
But the Low Country men are chiefly given to Mechanicke Arts, but not of the
base and servile sort, but the more nobler, as weaving, clothing, and making of
hangings, and tapestry, which serve not only for the use of their own country:
but are also transported into France, Spain, Germany, and other parts of
Europe, and also into Asia and Affricke. For Pictures, there is no Nation that
does excel it, nor none does excel in Music, or for variety of Languages.
John Eickius a Low countryman, did first show the way how to mingle colors
with oil. And every one in Flanders, Brabant, or Zeland, can speak not only
their own Country speech which is Low Dutch, but also French. The Sea men,
Merchants, and Scholars, can speak also Italian, Spanish, and Greek for the
most part: and some can understand Hebrew, the Chaldean, and Arabicke language.
The Lowcountrie men are also skillful Seamen. I come to their food, the
Lowcountry men do use Wheat, Rye, Oats, and Barley: they esteem of no pulse
but Beans, and Pease: they have few Vetches and no Millet at all. For the
great strong winds do lay it, and spoil it. The Common people maintain
their families soberly and frugally. Their drink is for the most part Beer,
which is made of Malt, into which they afterward put some ground Barley, and
Hops. And this is a very good and wholesome drink for those that are used to
it; they do also drink much milk. The rich have wine. They eat commonly Rye
bread. They are wont also upon Festival days, especially those which bear
their own name, to make great feasts, and to invite their Parents, Kinsemen,
and friends unto them, and to banquet sumptuously with them, and to show
themselves generous and magnificent. They keep their houses very neat and
clean, being furnished with all kinds of necessary household stuff. And truly
it is a fair sight to see what store of housholdstuffe they have, and how well
ordered it is, and how clean it is kept; in which, without doubt it does
excel all the Nations of the World. But the Low Countriemen are too much given
to the Vice of drinking, in which they take great delight, so that oftentimes
they never give over drinking day nor night; and thereby besides other
inconveniences, they do much wrong their bodies and wits: and without doubt it
is oftentimes the cause of their untimely death, according to that of
Propertius: Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas.
Wine makes beauty fade,
And strength by Wine is decayed.


And they themselves do know it, and confess it, and condemn themselves for
it: but in vain; for the evil custom does prevail over them. Albeit they
may be partly excused. For seeing the air is always moist and melancholy:
they have no other means whereby to cure their hateful, and unwholesome
Melancholy: which Horace seems to intimate, saying: Vino pellite curas, that
is; With wine drive cares away,
Which haunt us every day.


But it were to be wished that they would observe that noble saying of Terence:
Ne quid nimis: Do nothing too much, which now the civiller sort do begin to
observe. The inhabitants do go in good apparel, and are well complexioned.
Lastly, they use much trading and traffic, in which they are very skillful.
And all the Low Countries for the most part does subsist by Merchandising and
Maechanicke Arts.

THE COVNTIE OF FLANDERS.
FLanders although it be not of any great antiquity, yet no reason can be
given for the name of it. The Country whence so called.
Some derive it from a City of that name situated there where Ardenburg is
now; Others derive it from Flandbertus, the son of Blesinda, who was sister
to Clodion King of France: Flandbertus lived in the year of Christ 445. Some
suppose that this Country was so named from Flandrina the wife of Lydericke
the first Earl thereof. Some derive it a flatu and fluctibus, that is, from
the wind and waves, which in regard of the near Vicinitie of the Ocean do
beat upon this Country. So that even to the year 1340. it was a caution used
in selling or conveying of land, that if the Sea broake into it within ten
years afterward, the contract and bargain should be then void and of none
effect: The bounds of it now are on the South Artesia, with Hannonia, and part
of Picardie: on the East Hannonia and Brabant: on the North the Ocean, The
Situation:
with Honta or the mouth of Scaldis, which parts Flanders from Zeland: on the
West the British Ocean or German Sea. It is three days journey in length,
namely from Scaldis on the other side of Antwerp, even to the new ditch, which
is 30 miles. The breadth of it is twenty miles. The air of the Country is
temperate: the soil fertile, The temper of the air.
especially that part which is near the Ocean, and France. There are fair
Meddowes, which may appear from hence, in regard that Horse-riders do yearly
bring Colts out of other neghbour Countries into Franders: which through the
goodness of the pasture, The fruitfulness of the soil.
and sweetness of the air, being lean before, do quickly grow fat and
plumpe. It breeds also diverse sorts of tame Cattle; very pleasant and
delicate in taste, The variety of living creatures.
and also an incredible sort of wild beasts. There are also diverse kinds of
fowls, as Pheasants, Partridges, Peacockes, Hernes, and Storkes. The
inhabitants of this Country were heretofore so addicted to war, that they
never scarsely lived quietly or peaceably: so that their armies have invaded
Syria, and the holy Land, and Jerusalem. There are 30 walled Cities in
Flanders. Gandauum, Bruges, Ypra, Insula, Duacum, Tornacum, The names of the
Cities.
Cortracum, Aldenarda, Alostum, Hulsta, Teneramunda, Birsletam, Newporte,
Sluse, Dunkerck, Graveling, Burburg, Dammum, Dixmuda, Furna, Ardenburgum,
Ninova, Berga, Gerardmontium, Castellum, Donza, Orchianum, Lanoyum, Axella, and
Ostend. Besides these, there are also free Towns, which are not inferior unto
Cities neither for nobility, or Privileges, nor magnificent structures, or
populousness: as Bella, Poperinga, Hondtscota, Eecloa, Gistella,
Middleburrough, and twenty others. There are in all 1556 villages so that it is
a usual Proverb, that Flanders does exceed all the Countries in the world,
and when the Spaniards came into this province with King Phillip, they thought
that all Flanders was but one City. It is now divided into three parts, the
Dutch, the French, and the Imperial part. The chief is Gandavum which was
built by C. Julius Caesar, when he stayed in Morinium: it is called in Dutch
Gendt, the Italians call it Guanto, the French Gand. It is situate four miles
from the Sea, and is watered with four pleasant Rivers. For Scaldis comes to
it out of Hannonia, Lisa out of Artesia, Livia out of the Haven or Sluice, and
Moero from the Ambactae. It is ten miles distant from Antwerpe, and as many
from Bruxells, Mechlin, and Middleburrough. The compass of it within the walls
is, 45640 Roman feet, that is seven Italian miles. It has 26. Islands, and
two hundred and eight Bridges, and four water mills. And an infinite number of
hand-mills. And an hundred wind mills. It has five and fifty Churches, and
five Abbeys. The Citizens of this City are famous for Nobility, wealth, and
courage. Here the Emperor Charles the fifth was borne. It also brought forth
these learned men, Iudocus Bad^^^, Johannes Cornarius, Laevinus Brechtus, and
the other, Laevinus T^rrentius, Baldvinus Ronsaeus, Vtenhovious, and many
others. There are two and fifty kinds of trades in this City. And seven
and twenty sorts of Weavers, which were first instituted by the Earl Baldwin,
the son of Arnold the Great, in the year 865. Brugae, or Brugges, takes its
name either from the many bridges belonging to it, or from the bridge
Brug-stocke, near Oldenburg, and Arde^burg; out of the ruins of which City
eight hundred years before, the Castle of Brugges was first built; it is
situated three miles from the Sea, in a plain place. The compass of it within
the wall 26620 Romane-feete, that is, four Italian Miles and an half. It is
the pleasantest City not only in all Flanders, but also in all the Low
Countries: it has threescore Churches, the chief and fairest whereof, is
Saint Domatians Church, which was heretofore consecrated to the blessed Virgin;
it was built by Lidericke the first, Earl of Flanders, in the year 621. There
are threescore and eight kinds of trades in it. Ypra is so called from the
little River Ypra that flows by it, commonly called Yperen; it was built in
the year 1060. The foundation of this City is said to be of Lead, and that in
regard of the many leaden pipes, which do convey water through the whole
City. And these are the chief Cities. The Havens follow: Sluice is named
from the Catarracts or falling of waters, which the Flandrians do call Sluys,
it is a Sea Town: it has a great Haven, wherein fifty ships may conveniently
ride. Over against it is the Isle Cadsant, where George Gassander was borne.
Ostend is situated near the Ocean, being famous for that grievous seige, which
the Arch Duke Albert laid against it, which it valiantly sustained and held out
three years, and some months, with great loss of men on both sides.
Nieuport is three miles from Ostend, being a Sea City, where Iodocus
Clichtoveus map of Flanders THE COVNTRIE OF FLANDERS.
was borne, near unto which is the Abbey of S. Bernard, in which heretofore
there was the most famous, and best furnished Library in all the Low Countries.
Dunkerke was built it the year 1166. by Baldwin the son of Arnold, and Earl
of Flanders. It has a very short Haven, which troubles all the neighboring
Seas. This City belongs to the King of Navarre. I pass over the other
Cities of Dutch Flanders. In French Flanders there is the Isle so called from
the ancient seat thereof; it was once environed with Lakes and Marshes: it is
a famous City, both for populousness, wealth, and good laws, and strongest
except Antwerpe, and Amsterdam. Do^ay is situated by the River Scarpia, here
Robert Gaguinus was borne: It has an University, which was built not many
years ago by Philip the second King of Spain. Also Orchies is in this tract
of ground, and Lannoyum famous for the Lords thereof, and by ^rancis
Raph^lengius Citizen thereof; there is also Espinoyum, Armentiers and
Tornacum, or Tournay. In the Imperial part of Flanders there is Alostum, which
is a fair City and well fortified by the River Te^^ra, and adorned with the
title of a County. It has 170 Villages under it: 2 Principalities, the
Steenhusensian and the Gava^ensian, and many Baronies: there is also the
Territory of Wassia, in which there are four Towns: Hulsta, Axela, Bochout^
and Assenede, Rupelm^^d^ is a Castle by the River Rupella, which we cannot
omit in this place, in memory of our Gerard Mercator, a most famous
Mathematician, and Cosmographer, The Rivers.
and the Ptolemie of our age. The Rivers are Scaldis, Lisa, Tenera, Livia,
Ypra, Aa, Scarpa, Rupela, and others* there are few Mountains, Mountains.
Woods.
but there are many Woods and those every profitable, the chief whereof are
Niepensian, and the Nonnensian. The Politic state of Flanders consists of
three members. The Government.
The first are the Ecclesiastical Prelates, as namely seven Abbots of the
order of Saint Benedict: as the Abbots of Saint Peter, and Saint Ba^s^, S.
Winnocke in Bergen, Saint Andries, Saint Peter, of Ename, of M^rchiemie. Five
Abbots of the order of Saint Bernard: of Dun^s, of Boudeloo, of Do, of
Ciammerez, of Marchiemie: and the Prior of Waerchot. Three Abbots of the order
of the Praemonstratensian^: S. Nicolas in Vuerne, of Drogon, of S. Cornelis in
Nienove. Seven Abbots of regular Cannons: the Abbots of Eechoute, of
Soetendale, Warneston, Sunnebecke, Cisoing, Falempium. Seven Provosts of the
same order of S. Marten in Ipera, Wormesele, of Watene, of Loo, of Eversa, and
Petendale. The second member is of the Nobility, in which are five Viccounts.
The Viecount Gendt, of Yperen, of Vuer^a, of Bergen, of Haerlebecke. Three
Principalities: of Steenhuse, of Gavere, of Eshinoy. Four Barons, 2 in the
Counties of Cysoing and Heyne: 2 in the Lordship of Pamaele and Boelare. The
Military Tribunes are of Banderheereen, in the Teutonicke County, also the
Lord of Nevele, of Dixmunde, of Beneren, of Praet near Brugges: of Haerskerke,
of Watene, of Hevergem, of Wasteine, of Caecten, of Ingelmunster, of Pouke, of
Gruithuse, of Male, of Maldegem, of Ostcamp, of Winendale, of Colscamp, of
Ghistele, of Sevecote, of Rousselare, of Waestene, of Hondscote, and also of
Cassel, of Norturie, of Haveskerck, of Halewyn. In the French County are the
Lords of Lille, of Waurin, and of Comene. In the Lordshippe of Flanders there
are the Lords of Rhode, of Gavere, of Sotteghem, of Gontero, of Scorisse, of
Poitz, of Liekerck, of Lumbeke, of Rotselar in Meerbeke: Also of Wedergraet in
Neyghem, and of Steenehuse. The third member does consist of the special
Cities. In the Dutch Flanders, four special Cities do make up this member,
Gandavum, after which Burgraviatus Gandensis, Oudenarde and Biervliet. In the
Signiorie there are some certain Fee Farms of the Empire, as Ambachten, dat
Landt van Waes, 't Graefschap van Aelst, and other free Lordships, as Bornhem,
Dendermonde, Geerdsberge. Bruges by whom are censt both for arms and
Subsidies, namely the whole Franconate ('t Vrie) and the walled and not walled
Towns, therein contained. Ypra, under which both for matters of arm and
subsidies, are Yperen-Ambacht, Bellen-Ambacht, and Cassel-Ambacht: the Champion
Franconate (Het platte Vrie) under which Vuern-Ambacht, Bergen-Ambacht and
Brouchorg-Ambacht. In the French part are three principal Cities, Lille,
(Ryssel) Douay, Orchies. The Lordship of Tournay and the state adjoined to
Flanders, does consist of three members: the Clergy, the Nobility, and six
supreme Justices. Flanders has one Bishop of Tournay, who is subject to the
Archbishop of Rhemes, which is nevertheless divided into 4 Episcopal
Dioecesses. Under the Bishop of Trajectum, there are five towns that do
homage thereunto, Hulst, The Ecclesiasticke state.
Axele, Assenede, Bochoute. Under the Bishop of Tournay, are Gandavan,
Cortracum, Aldenarda, with their Castells: the territories of Waes, Bruges, the
Franconate and the Island, with their Castells. The Atrebatensian Bishopric
does comprehend Ducacum, and Orchianum. Under the Bishop of Cameracum, is the
Lordship of Flanders beyond Scaldis Southward. The Tarvanensian Bishopric
has these Castelships under it; Ypra, Cassel, Vverne, Bergen, Brouchorg,
Belle. In Dutch Flanders there are 14 principal Courts, Viesburg, Gandaui,
Burgus Brugis, Sala Yprae, Castellum Cortraci, Curia in Harlebeck, in Tielt,
Domus in Diense, Curia in Bergen, in Bruchorg, in Cassel and in Celle. In
French Flanders there are three Court Leetes, Sala in Lille, Castellum in
Douay, Curia in Orchies. In the Lordship of Flanders there are five Court
Leetes, Tribunal in Aelst, Dominus in Vendermonde, Praetorium Wasiae, and
Castrum Beneren. All these Courts and Jurisdictions aforesaid to appeal do the
Princes Provincial Council, which is at Gandavum, and from thence to the
Parliament at Mechlin. But of this enough, I pass to Brabant.

THE EASTERN part of FLANDERS.
BEfore I come to Brabant, I will briefly describe that which this table does
exhibit, which the Printer pleased to insert, for the benefit of the Reader.
In it that part of Flanders is described, in which in our memory many worthy
acts have been achieved, as it shall appear by that which follows, But that
we may orderly describe this Tract, Wassia, with the 4 official Towns.
in the first place we meet with Wassia, commonly called 't Landt van Waes,
which is a rich fertile territory, having four Towns which do homage unto
it, two whereof are walled, as Hulsta, and Axella: two unwalled, as Bouchouten
and Assenetum. Hulsta, or Hulustum, is the chiefest of them, being a neat
City, and well fortified. It endured a grievous seige for some months in the
year 1596. But at length after many assaults, and underminings, and the loss
of many thousand men, it was yielded up to the Archduke Albertus. Axela is a
pretty town, being four miles and half from Hulsta, and four from Ga^davum.
In the third place is Bouchouten, which is two miles distant from Axela. The
fourth is Assenede which is two miles distant from the aforesaid Axela. And
these four Cities have many towns under them, as Watervliet and Bouchoute,
in which two armies were sometime Billited; the states army under the conduct
of Grave Morris in the former: in the other the King of Spaines General, M.
Ambrosius Spinola. Moreover there are in this tract many Castells and
Fortresses, which may be seen in this table, among which are those which are
commonly called Philippinen, Patientie, Ysendisc^e S. Philip, S. Cateline,
Coxie, and others, the chiefest whereof and the best fortified is Ysendijcke.
This with the three other following Castells Duke Mauritius in the year 1604
enforced to surrender themselves. In the Country of Ysendijcka, is Birsletum
or Bieruliet situate^ in an Island of the same name. Birslet.
There lived in this City William Beuckelens, who they report did first
pickle and barrel up salt Herrings, and did transport them to foreign parts,
which was a happy invention, whereby the Low Countriemen got much wealth, in
regard that foreign Nations did greatly esteem of salt Herrings both for
use, and delicacy. It was hereto a Town of Note, having a convenient Haven.
But as all mortal things are frail and transitory, an^ map of Eastern
Flanders THE EASTERN PART OF FLANDERS.
subject to corruption; so we see that flourishing Towns do decay, so that
nothing remains as it were but their bare Carcasses: and now it is only a
Fortress. There follows Sluice with the Island of Cadsanto. Sluice is a neat
Town in Dutch Flanders, which was heretofore called Lammerzuliet, as it
appears by public letters: which was heretofore very rich, it is five miles
from Middleburrough, and three from Bruges; where by an artificial Aquaeduct,
or great channel, all the water in the Country, is collected and gathered
into one place, and so brought to the City by navigable ^hannells: and so
gathering it together again into one pond as it were, at the Town called
Damme, they bring it from thence to the cataracts or fall thereof which they
call the Sluyse: at the mouth or issue whereof, there is a famous Haven which
sometime did enrich Sluice, when the Hanse-merchants dwelled there as well as at
Bruges. It is able to receive an hundred ships, as also the Annalls of
Flanders do testify, that in the year 1468. a little before Christmas, there
arrived in this Harbor at one time an hundred and fifty ships of great
burden, which was a joyful sight to the Townsmen. On the side of the Town
there is an ancient Castle. In which the Duke of Bouillon, and the Admiral of
the Seas, (the first being taken at Hisdinum, the latter at Saint Quintins
City,) were both kept prisoners. This Castle although it be now disjoined
from the Town, yet it was formerly joined thereunto, by many edifices, which
the Brugians did purposely pull down. For the Town of Sluice wearied with
their own dissentions and their wars against the Brugians, and lastly the
Prince having sold it unto them, they came to be under their jurisdiction.
Sluice is now a strong fortified City, being entrenched with walls, and a
double ditch. Grave Maurice, in the year 1604. did beseige it the Month of
May, and 3 months after his coming thither he compelled them to yield for
want of food. Nere the Haven of Sluice on the six and twentieth of May in the
year 1603 there was a Sea fight of 8 Galleys of Frederick Spinolaes, with
three ships and eleaven Galleys belonging to the States of the confaederate
Provinces, which lay at the mouth of the Haven of Sluice. In which fight the
Admiral Spinola was slain, and a thousand and 400 men were killed and
drowned. The Zelanders lost James the master of a ship, the son of Michael,
and his Mate. There were in the Haven of Sluice 2 Block-houses, the one in the
very mouth of the Haven commonly called (...) Hase schantse, the other is
seated not far from the Town commonly called Beck-of: the former whereof was
yielded to Grave Maurice, and the latter taken by force. Over against this
City is a small Island which the inhabitants call Cadsant, in which there is
a Town of the same name. It was heretofore much larger, having a City in it,
and many pleasant and rich towns. Near unto which at several times there
have been many sea fights: when either the Britains, the Batavians, or any
other enemies to Flanders did arrive here. But this Island is more than half
worn away by the tempestuous Seas, and by the tides and ebs thereof. In this
Island there are two Fortresses the one whereof Grave Maurice took being
unprovided, the other commonly called ter Hofstede yielded unto him. A mile
hence from Sluice is Ardenburg, which was heretofore called Rodenburg, Ardenbug.
and was heretofore the Metropolis of Flanders, containing Tourout and Ostburg,
and Bruges, (which were not then walled,) and all the Sea coast even to
Bononia. But now it is all wasted. It has a Church consecrated to the Virgin
Mary, which is the fairest and most sumptuous in all Flanders. There is also
Middleburrough, Middleburrough.
being two miles and an half distant from Bruges, being now walled and ditched
about. Mauritius in the same year took these Towns. There is also Damme two
miles from Sluice, which is a very rich Town, being very populous, and full of
Merchants, and a great Haven for wines, Damme.
being a key of the Sea, in regard that it did shut and open the Ocean, both to
those of Bruges, and to all Merchants. But now by the incursions of the French,
and the civil dissentions of the Gandavians and Brugians, and having lost the
recourse of Merchants, it is now but like a Town or Village, and the Haven is
a dug Channel, being only navigable at a full tide, three Flanders miles,
even to Sluice. Bruges follows, which we described before, with the Territory
of the Francones or Freemen, because they did shake off the Brugians Yoke, and
freed themselves from it: and contains all that ground which lies eight
miles round about Bruges, and is commonly called 't Landt Vanden Vryen; it has
jurisdiction over many free Towns. And these do make the fourth member of
Flanders. Lastly this Table contains Ostend, which was formerly a poor
fisher Town, wanting munition, but in the year 1572 it was walled about.
Ostend.
It has a convenient Haven. There came hither eight great Whales in the year
1404, every one of them being 74 foot long. Also in the year 1426, there was
a great Sea Hog taken, being like unto a Land-Hogge but that it was greater.
But in the year 1099. and in the year 1200, in the Archduke Alberts time, the
Flandrians to restrain the incursions of the enemy, did ditch it round about,
and yet they could not hinder their inroades, although it were entrenched with
17 Baracadoes and Bulwarks, as the Bulwark or Fort of S. Catherine, of
Isabell, of Albert, of Clara; wherefore the Flandrians were very desirous to
beseige this City, which they attempted on the 5 of July the year 1601. The
beginning of the seige was very terrible, and continued so to the end thereof,
as it is well known; yea it was such a long and grievous seige as there was
never the like in the memory of man, so that during the time of this seige,
there were slain on both sides about 110000 men. There was a Table book found
about a certain commissary of Spain being dead, in which the number of men
that were slain, were set down, and the number of women and children by
themselves: of which this was the total sum: Tribunes or Praefects of the
Soldiers, commonly called Marshalls of the field 9. of Colonells 15. of
Sergeants 29. Captains 165. Ancients 322. Lieutenants 200 and 1^, masters of
the Horse 101. Common-souldier 54663. Mariners 611, children and Women 119. The
total sum of all was 72126. It would be tedious to mention all their
trenches and Fortresses, all their engines and warlike Instruments, and other
matters. Moreover, there was a battle fought between Ostend and Newport, on
the second of July in the year 1600, between the Archduke Albert, and Grave
Maurice, in which there were slain on both sides seven thousand foot and
horsemen. The battle continued doubtful for three hours together. But at
length Grave Maurice got the victory, and overthrew the Spaniard. The Archduke
Albert lost in that fight 6000 men; there were taken besides a great number of
common Soldiers, the Admiral of Arragon, and with him many of the Nobles, and
there were 105 Banners taken from the enemies foot troops, and four from his
horse troops. Yet it was a bloody victory to Grave Maurice, for there were a
thousand slain on his side. A mile distant from Ostend is Aldenburg. It has
only one gate, Aldenburg.
being an ancient City, and heretofore a famous Mart town. The other
matters which are contained in this table are unfolded in the next description.
And therefore I pass to Brabant.

THE DVKEDOME OF BRABANT.
BRabant for the most part does contain the Country of the Advatians,
Ambivaritians, and Tungrians: The Country whence so called.
but it is uncertain at what time this Country was called Brabant, some
deriving it from Brennus a Frenchman; some from a City of that name, of which
there is no mention neither in the Country nor in histories: some derive it
from Bratuspandium a town of the Bellovacians, which Caesar mentions Lib. 2.
Some do mention a Captain called Salvius Brabon, an Arcadian, who came with
Caesar into the Low Countries, whose wife Suana was Caesar's Nephew. Some also
think that it was called Barbantia, from G^tefridus Barbatus Earl of Lovaine,
and afterward Brabant. I had this name of late, which is manifest, but the
original thereof is unknown. The length of Brabant from Gemblours, The
Situation.
even to the holy Mountain of S. Gertrud, is about 22 miles. The breadth from
Helm^ntium to Bergae, is 20 Miles. And the compass of it is 80 miles. It has
on the North the River Mosa, which parts Gelderland, from Holland. On the
South Hannonia, the County of Namurcum, and the Leodiensian Bishopric, which
confineth on it on the East. On the West is the River Scaldis, with the
country Alost. The temper of the air. The fruitfulness of the soil.
It has a wholesome air, and a fertile soil, abounding with all sorts of
fruits, but yet the country of Kempen, is barren by reason of the sands;
which part yet is not altogether unfruitful. There are 26 Cities in this
Dukedom. As Lovanium, or Loven, which is an ancient City, and the first
seat of the Grudians, in which the Duke does bind himself by taking the
Sacrament. It is a pleasant City, and now somewhat enlarged, the compass of
it within the walls is four miles. It is watered with the River Dela^
Brussells is a fair great City, fortified with a double wall, and situate in
a fertile soil, abounding with all things. It is a wonderful thing that this
City could yield plenty of provision to serve the Dukes Court, the strangers,
and foreign Princes which lay there with their whole train. There is also
Antwerpe which they commonly call Antwerpen, the French call it Anvers, the
Italians Anversa, the Germans Antorff. Peter Appian thinks that it is the
same with that which Ptolemie and Caesar, do call Atuacutum. It is supposed
that this City was so called from the casting forth of hands. For a certain
Giant called Druo who dwelt in these parts before C. Caesar's coming, when any
travelers came by, if they did not pay him the half of their commodities, he
caused their right hands to be cut off, and to be cast into the River: which
appears by the arms of this Ci^^ and certain great bones of this Giant
Druo, which are kept until day; some say he was called Antigonus. But these
things are fabul^ But it is more likely that the inhabitants called it so from
the heap^ rising of Earth near Scaldis, which the Low countrymen do (...)
Antwerpen; for by making banckes on both sides they straightened (...) River, and
made the channel deeper. It is situate by the deep part of the River, under
the 26 degrees of Longitude, and 42 minu^^ And 51 of Latitude and fifty eight
minutes. It is 4 miles distant from the Sea, and as many from Mechlin, 7 miles
from Lovaine: to (...) from Gandavum, 15 miles from Bruges, 8 miles from
Brussell^ (...) score miles from London: 29 from the Agrippine Colome, (...)
from Franckford. It was thrice walled. First with a narrower (...) Anno 1221:
afterward with a larger wall Anno 1314, which (...) there was a great famine,
and the next a great pestilence. Lastly, (...) suburbs were enlarged toward the
North, Anno 1543. The (...) pass of it without the walls is 4 miles, and eight
hundred and twe^^ paces. There are eight ditches which are brought into the
City (...) of the River, and are able to receive many great ships. It is a
great City for traffic. Guicciardine gives an estimate, that the (...)
trading, in this City does amount to above twelve thousand Crowns, which was
less than it came to when the City of Antwerpe flourished. And therefore
Julius Scaliger does worthily (...) it thus: Oppida quot spectant oculo me
torva sinistro,
Tot nos invidiae pallida tela petunt.
Lagdunum omnigenum est, operosa Lutetia, Roma
Ingens, res Venetum vasta, Tolosa potens.
Omnimodae merces, arts priscaeque novaeque,
Quorum insunt alijs singula, cuncta mihi.
Look how many Towns do lie on our left side,
Even by so many Towns we are envide.
Leyden and Paris painful are, Rome great,
Venice is rich, Tolouse in power complete.
All wares, and strange inventions that there be,
In several Cities, are all found in me.


There are two and forty religious houses in Antwerp, also Churches,
Monasteries, and Hospitalls. The chief Cathedral Church is dedicated to the
blessed Virgin Marie. It is a fair and sumptuous work, and has a famous
Tower steeple, which is all built of free stone curiously carved, and is four
hundred and twenty Antwerp feet, that is, two hundred Florentine Else in
height, so that it is very beautiful to behold, and yields a fair prospect:
for from it you may behold not only all the City, and the pleasant fields
and gardens lying round about it, but also you may clearly discern some
Cities that are afar off, as Mechlin, Bruxells, Lovaine, Gandavum, and
moreover map of Brabant ^HE DVKDOME OF BRABANT.
over you may see to the end of the River, and discover the Sea, and the Zeland
Islands. In this Tower there are threescore and eight Bells, some greater some
lesser, some of which like musical Instruments will yield an harmonious sound
of four or five parts. The greatest of them, which is of a wonderful great
weight, was named by the Emperor Charles the fifth, which is not rung but upon
some extraordinary occasion. There are four and twenty Cannons bebelonging to
that Church, over whom there is a Deane, and a Bishop, who was first instituted
in the year 1567. This Church is keptvery bravely, and the revenues belonging
to it are great, and the Privileges and immunities belonging to the Priests.
Buscoducum or Silva Ducis, which is called in Dutch's Hertogenbosch, and in
French Boldue, is so called from the Woods: it is a fair pleasant City,
strongly fortified, being seated by the River Disa, being a mile from Mosa, and
twelve from Antwerpe. And these are the four chief Cities, the first three
whereof together with Nivella, do make the Marquiship of the sacred Empire.
Some reckon Mechlin to be in Brabant, yet indeed it is parted from it, being a
fair, and near City: having an Archbishopricke, and a fair Council, unto
which the last appeal in Belgia, may be made. Moreover there are these Cities
in Brabant, Trajectum near Mosa, commonly called Maestricht, Lira, Vilvorde,
Gemblacum, or Gemblours, Ioudoigne, Hannut, Landen, Halen, Lee^wen, Schienen,
Herentals, Eindoven, Helmont, Grave. There are also many free Towns unwalled,
as Oostenrijc, Oorschot, Turnhont, Duffel, Waelem, Merchtem, Asche, Vveren,
Duisburch, Hulpen, Wa^re, Breine, Genape, Gheele, Arendonc, Dormal and Isca.
There are also 700 Villages. There are refered to Brabant the Lordship of
Revestein, the Dukedom of Limburg, with the Lordship of Dale and Vacklenburg.
The Lakes and Rivers are very commodious and profitable to Brabant. The chief
Rivers are Mosa and Scaldis, and there are also other lesser Rivers. This
Country has many Woods, the chief whereofare five, Somensis, Saventerleo,
Gro^te^hout, Grootenheist and Meerdal. Here are many public works both
sacred and profane. The chief whereof is the Church at Lovaine, consecrated
to Saint Peter, being very fair and sumptuous. The Churches at Bruxells are
very sumptuous, being beautified with fair and rich ornaments. Also Antwerpe,
has many Churches, of which S. Mary's Church is the fairest and largest. I
pass by other Churches, which are innumerable in other places. There are also
many profane works: as Palaces, noblemens houses, Castells, Towers, and the
like. Moreover the Politic state of Brabant has three members: the Clergy,
which are the Abbots, Affighemensis, Grimbergensis, Tongerloo, Grunendalensis,
of S. Gertrud at Levaine, of Saint Bernard, of Vileer, of Dielegem, Parckensis
near Levanium, Vlierbikensis near Lovanium. The great Prior of the order of
S. Augustine in Leeuwee, the Prior of Gemblours. The Nobles, which are, the
Abbot of Gemblacum an Earl, the Duke Arsc^tensis, the Marquess of Bergen
near the little River Some: The Barons, Diestensis, of Brada, Boxtelensis,
Gaesbeeckensis, of Wesemael,, Petersem, Perweys, Hoochstratensis now an Earl,
of Renes: the Lords Aschensis, Merchtensis, Vuerne, Gheel, Lummen, Thurnout,
Oosterwijc, S. Oedenroy, Walem, Duffel. The four principal Cities are
Lovaine, Bruxells, Antwerpe, Buscoducum. Concerning the state Ecclesiasticke it
is partly under the Leodiensian Bishop, and partly under the Camaracensian
Bishop: the Leodiensian keeps his Ecclesiastical Court at Lovaine. The
Camaracensian at Bruxells: Lovaine has a famous Academie or University: of
which we will speak more largely in the general description of the Low
Countries. The Babanters, are merry, jesting, and full of comicall conceits, as
Lemnius witnesses. Besides Brabant, there are contained in this Table, the
Dukedom of Iuliacum and Cliveland. The Politic state whereof we will
describe out of Mercator. The politic state of Iuliacum does consist likewise
of three members, which are the Clergy, as namely the Abbots, the Colleges
and Monasteries: the Nobility, the Citizens. There are 24 Lordships in this
Country Caster, Brugge, Born, Boisseler, Euskirchen, Munstereyfell, Moniou,
Eschwiler, Grevenbroich, Wassinberg, Geilenkirchen, Hensbergh, Durem, Thonberg,
Berchem, Heimbach, Wilhemstein, Gladbach, Millen, Rangenrayd, Nervenich, the
Counties of Nuenar, Iuliacum, and Nideken. In like manner Cliveland does
contain three orders, the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Cities. But the
governor of the Province of Cleveland has these eight Cittties under him.
Cliva the Metropolis, Calcaris, Sonsbeke, where he has his residence, also
Santen, Buric, Vdem, Griet, Griethusen. Here are 14 Lordships, Cranenburg,
Duffel, Gennep, Goch, Orsoy, Huessen, near Arnhem, Lymers, Emmeric, Hetter,
Aspel, Ringenburg, Bisselic, Dinslaken, in which are five Cities, Dinstaken,
Wesel, Duysburg, Schermbeke, Holte. The Lordship of Ravesteyn is joined and
annexed to the Court of Cliveland.

THE COVNTIE OF HOLLAND.
The Country whence so called.
SOme derive the name of Holland from the many Wood and Forests therein, for we
call a Wood Holt or H^nt, and Hollant signifies a woody Country, for they
report tha^ heretofore all Holland was full of woods and bus^^ Some suppose it
was so called from the hollownesse thereof, as if ^^ were Hol-landt. For the
whole Country is Moorish, and loose ^^der foot. Some suppose it was called
from the Hay made the^ in Hollandia, as it were Hoylandia. But learned Iunius
is of another opinion, that Holland and Zeland, are Colonies of the Gothish,
and Danish Nations; and that the Danes and Normanes forsaking the Island of
Oland and Zeland, did transmigrate into these places, and (...) them after
their own Country Holland and Zeland, as Virgill repo^teth of Hellenus, the
son of Priame, who built a little Town (...) Epire called Troy, with a
Castle, and made the resemblance of the gate, Scaea, and called the River
Zanthus by a Troyan name: as the Europaeans did erect and make a new Spain and
new France in the Indies. The Situation.
The British Sea does encompasse it on the West, on the North the Cimbrian Sea
beats on the shoares thereof, on the East side i^ opens a large Bay toward
Friesland, on the North-East lies Trans-Isalana and Velavia, on the South is
Trajectum. The compass of it is nine miles, it is very narrow, so that a man
may travel over i^ from one side to another in four hours space, and in some
places i^ is not above a mile over. This Country has fruitful fields, which
do yield excellent good Corn, The fruitfulness of the soil.
but in regard the Country is very small and populous, therefore it cannot
maintain so great a multitude of inhabitants. But there are very fertile
meddowes, in which infinite herds of Oxen do graze: and very fair milch
Kine. It is certain that in some parts of Holland the Kine in Summer time, do
yield unto the Paile four and forty quartes of milk. The variety of living
creatures.
Also John B^ningus a counselor of the Court of Holland, as Guicciardine
reported does find by certain observation and computation, that Assendelp
only and four neighboring Towns have as much milk from the Kine, as there
is Rhenish wine sent out of high Germany to Dordre^^ Out of this great plenty
of milk they make butter, which is an e^cellent dainty dish, not only for
barbarous Nations, as Pliny wou^^ have it, but also for Kings and Princes. They
make Cheeses al^^ which are not inferior unto those of Parma and Placentia.
The chie^ are the Tessalican, and Gravesandican Cheeses, the next to them a^
the Edammensian, which are best when they are old: It breede^ map of Holland
^HE COVNTIE OF HOLLAND.
also excellent horses. On the sandy hills there are an infinite number of
Conies. Also great store of Hearts, Does, Hares; and in the Hagiensian wood
there are herds of Goats, and great store of foul especially Duckes. Also
Geese, and in harvest time Woodcockes which we call Snipes. There are excellent
turfes, which being dug out of the earth, and drawn out of the water, and
so dried in the wind and sun, do make very good fuel. There were heretofore
Kings of Holland, The ancient Government.
of which Suetonius makes mention in Caligula, cap. 44. But in the year of
Christ 868 Charles the bald, King of France, reduced it into a County, and
Theodore being descended of the royal stock, was governor thereof. After
Theodore the father there succeeded Theodore, the son, and after him Arnold,
and after Arnold Theodoricke, and others after him, of whom you may have a
Catalogue, in Munster and others. Their ancient valor.
They were heretofore very famous for matters of war, so that the Batavians
were joined in fraternity and amity with the Roman Empire. And hereby they
got the goodwill of other Princes. Now we are to describe the Cities: which
are Dordretch, Harlem, Delpth, Leyden, Amsterdam, G^^ds, Naerdenum, The names
of the Cities.
Muda, Wesopum, Edamam, Monachodamum, Purna^^^da, Almeria, Euchuysa, Horna,
etc. Dordretch is the chief City of Holland. The figure of it is long like a
Gallie, it is very rich and plentiful, and a Granarie or Storehouse for corn
and all other provision. It has outlandish commodities brought up the River
unto it, and there laid in ware houses until they be sold: and are carried
from thence again in Hoyes. This Privilege of storing of goods they call a
staple. Harlem is a noble Town, both for the largeness of the City, the
fairness of the houses, and the pleasantness of the situation. It has the
fairest Church in all Holland, being built on strong Pillars by the market
place. The River Sparnus glideth by the City. It is thought it was built by
the Frisians, about the year 506. In this City the Art of Printing was
invented. Another honor of this City was the taking of Pelusium by a new
device, which they call Damiata, and in remembrance thereof, they have two
sacring bells of brass, which they call aerae Damiatae. Next follows Delpth
which is famous not for Apolloes Tripos or Trevet, but for plenty of wine and
corn. For the best beer is brewed in this City except it be English beer.
It is so called from a Ditch, which the Bat^^ians call Delph, which is brought
from Mosa even to the City. In the year a thousand five hundred 36, on the
Nones of May, the beauty of it was much blemished by fire, and the better part
of the City was burnt down; but afterward it was built up again more fair
than before. Leyden which Ptolomie calls Lugdunum Batavorum, is a City
situate at the middle of the mouth of the River Rhene. It sustained and held
out in the year 1574 a grievous seige, but at last it was freed, and the
enemies were enforced by the overflowing of the waters to raise their seige.
Amsterdam is the noblest Mart Town in all the world, it is so named from the
River Amstela, as the learned Poet Nicolas Cannius has noted, being a Citizen
of Amsterdam, in these verses.

Haec illa est Batavae non ultima gloria gentis,
Amnis cui nomen, cui cataracta dedit.
Dicta prius Damum, rarisque habitata colonis,
Cum contenta casis rustica vita fuit.
Hinc Amsterdamum jam facta celebrior, atque
Fortunae crevit tempore nomen item.
Vrbs been nota prope, atque procul distantibus oris,
Dotibus innumeris suspicienda bonis.
Dives agri, dives pretiosae vestis and auri,
Vt pleno cornu copia larga beet.
Quod Tagus atque Hermus vehit and Pactolus, in unum
Vere huc congestum dixeris esse locum.
This City Hollands glory, whose name
From the River, and the falling waters came.
It was called Damum first, and inhabited
With Rural Cottages, which here were spread.
But growing famous, it was called Amsterdam,
And so increased in fortune and in name.
It is a City known both far and near
And is admired for many gifts are here.
It Is rich in soil, in garments, and in gold,
Plenty does bless her with gifts manifold.
What Pagus, Hermus, Pactolus does bear,
You may truly say, that it is stoard up here.
It consisted at the first of a few fishermens houses, and was under the
jurisdiction of the Lords of Amstelium. After Gilbert Amstelius, about two
hundred fourscore years since, fortified this City with Bulwarks, gates
and Towers; which being burnt by the envious neighbors, it was walled about in
the year 2482. And afterward, it was still enlarged, and belonged unto
Holland. But now it is a place of refuge not only for Holland but all the
neighbor countries, even to the Sarmatians, and Goths, and Cimbrians. For
there are in this City not only Italians, Spaniards, Portugalls, Britains,
Scots, French, Sarmatians, Cimbrians, Suevians, Norwegians, Livonians, and
Germains, but also East-Indians, Americans, Moors, and others out of all parts
of the world. Gouda is so named from the Cimbricke word G^w, which signifies a
Ditch, and a Trench against it: it is situate near Isela, being a plentiful
City, and abounding with all things. There are also some free Towns, the
chief whereof is the Hage, in which the Council of the States, and Princes
do sit, and there is Court for deciding of suites, and controversies.
Concerning the Politic state of this Country, it does consist of three
orders, the first are the Knights called Ridderheren, the chief whereof are
the Earls Egmond and Ligne, under whom are these Dominions, Wassenar,
Val^enborch, and the Viecountship of the City of Leyden. I find also these
Counties in Holland, Maestant, Texel, Goylandt, Kennemerlant, Steenberge. The
Lords and Barons, are Brederode, under whom is the Lordship of Vianen, and the
Barony of Lijfelt. I find also in the Chronicle of Holland, that these
Lordships are reckoned among the Baronies, Lecke, Sevenbergen, Voorn,
Isselstein, Stryen, Teylingen, Puttem, Harlem, Leerdam, Asperen, Arckel,
Altena, Bottersloet. The second order is the Lords, the chief whereof that are
wont to appear at Hage, are these, the Lords of Poelgeest, of Polanen, of
Lochorst, of Assendelft, Warmont, Sparwoude, Matnes, Schooten, Noortwisc.
Verdoes, or Does, Mine van Amstel, Spangen, Alkemade, Benthuysen, Keneborch,
Raaphorst, Sweten, Heemskericke, Ruven, Duyn, and Sprangen. Moreover there are
these Lordships in Holland, Htesden, Outhoesden, Papendrecht, Wijngarden,
Ghissenborch, Ameyde, Woerden, Waterlant, Schagen, Purmerende, Goude,
Naeldwijc, Risswijc, Schoonhoven, Wateringen, Soetermeer, Heemstede,
Heuhtwoude, Merwen, Haestrecht, Dalen, Spijc, Hardischsvelt, Bardtwisck, Wijck.
The third order are the six great Cities, which are called and summoned to
appear at the Hage, for all the rest: as Dordretch; this City has a Praetor
and a Magistrate, whom the Citizens obey, and a Bailey that governs the whole
Country round about, both in civil and criminal matters. Harlem has a
Praetor and a Magistrate within it self: and a Bailey for the Country, who has
jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters. Amsterdam has also with it self
a Prator and a magistrate, and a Bailey for the Country to judge of civil and
criminal causes. Gouda has a Praetor and Major for the Citizens, and a
Baytiffe and a Governor of the Castle.

THE COVNTIE OF ZELAND.
ZEland signifies nothing else but a Sea-land, the name thereof being
compounded from Sea and Land. The Country whence so called.
For it is encompassed on every side with the Sea. Lemnius does collect out of
Tacitus, that it was not unknown unto the ancients, but not by that name by
which it is now called, but the people and inhabitants thereof, did vulgarly
call it Maet. For he names them Mattiacans when he says: Est in eodem
obsequio Mattiacorum gens Battavis similis, nisi quod ipso terrae suae solo ac
coelo acrius a^imantur: that is; The Nation of the Mattiacans, is also subject
unto them, and are like the Battavians, but that their soil and climate does
make them more courageous and lively. It was called Zeland from the Danes and
Normanes, who coming out of the Ci^brian Island in Denmark, which is called
Zeland, to seek new Countries; being pestered with multitudes of inhabitants,
they invaded the Coasts of Britain and France, and they called Walachria, and
the neighbor Islands Zeland, after the name of their own Island. These Islands
are situate between the mouths or outlets of the Rivers Mosa and Scaldis; on
the North they have Holland, The Situation.
on the East Brabant, on the South Flanders, on the West the German Ocean.
Zeland has somewhat an intemperate air, The temper of the air.
for in some parts it is very cold and sharp, and not so wholesome as the
neighbor Countries, especially in Summer, in regard of the Vapors arising
from the ditches and standing Pooles, and also because the Country is not
planted with trees. But yet it has this blessing, that it is not often
troubled with plagues or pestilent diseases, but when it has a plague it is
most violent, and it is long before the cessation of it. But it has a very
fat, and fruitful soil, The fruitfulness of the soil.
and fields which yield abundance of wheat, so that no Country has the like
for whiteness, and waightinesse, and many other fruits: also Coriander feed,
and Madder, which is good to dye cloth in grain, and make it hold color: and
also great store of fair Baytrees laden with Berryes: and also many wholesome
herbs both to eat, and to cure disseases withal. Here are also excellent
Meddow Pastures for fatting of Cattle, not only enclosed within hedges and
ditches, but also upon the very shore by the Sea side, in which many thousand
head of Cattle do graze, The variety of living creatures.
to the great gain and commodity of the owners, being not only of an
unusual bigness, but of a delicate and excellent taste, by reason of the
sweetness and goodness of the soil and grass, so that they are much
esteemed by forreiners. In the year 863, The ancient Government.
in the year of Charles the Balde; a principality was first erected among the
Battavians and Zelanders, and then they were called Counties, and the first
Earl thereof was Theodoricke the son of Sigisbert, Prince of Aquitania, who
having been Earl thereof eight and thirty years, left his second son
Theodoricke, successor thereof; after whom these Countries by a long succession
of Earls, came and was devolved over to Phillip King of Spain. The Islands of
Zeland are seven, three beyond the mouth of Scaldis, toward Battavia and the
East, which are therefore called the East Islands, as Scaldia, Duvelandia and
Tolen. And 4 on this side toward the West, Walachria, Zuythevelandia,
Northevelandia, and Wolferdije. The greatest and chiefest I Will of them all
beyond Scaldis is Scaldia, the inhabitants do call it Landt van Schouwen: the
compass whereof is 7 miles, yet heretofore it was greater, and was divided
only by a little strait of the Sea from Northevelandia. The chief Cities in
it are Zirizaea, and Brouwershavia. Zirizaea is supposed to be the auncientest
City in Zeland, being built by one Siringues, about the year 869. It was a
long time a famous town of traffic, in regard of the commodiousnesse of the
Haven, and the resort of strangers unto it; but when the Haven was filled up
with sand, it grew out of esteem: yet there is hope that if a new Haven were
dug, it would be as famous as ever it was. In this City Levinus Lemnius, a
learned and famous Physician was borne and lived. Fishermen do inhabit
Brouwershavia, who live by the Sea. The second Island to Scaldia is Dwelandia,
so called from the great store of Doves, that are therein; and it is four
miles in compass. There are in it some Towns only and Villages, but no
City. In the year 1130 it was overflowed with the Sea, to the loss of many
people, but afterward the banckes being repaired, and the Sea kept out, that
loss was soon recompensed. The third Island is Tollen, which is near unto
Brabant, being only parted and divided from it by a strait narrow sea, in
which is Toletum; which the Low countriemen in regard of the custom and
tribute which is paid there, do call Tolle^, being an ancient little Town:
and not far from thence is the Martinian bancke, commonly called S. Martines
Dijck, being a pleasant place, and planted round about with trees, in which
great store of foul, especially Hernes do breed. The chief Island on this
side Scaldis toward the West is Walachria, which the inhabitants call Bewester
Schelt, being so called from the first inhabitour, or from the Welsh or
Frenchmen. This Island lies on the East over against Brabant, on the South
against Flanders, on the North against Batavia, on the West against Britain,
This is the chief Island of all Zeland, being famous both for the situation
thereof, the wealth, populousness, and for the beauty of the towns and
traffic, being 10. miles in compass. The Cities in it are Middlebrough,
Veria, Flushing, Arnemuda. There are also many towns in it. Middlebrough is so
called from the situation thereof, for it is a town in the middle of the
Island. It is a fair City having many private and public edifices, being
excellently adorned with Bridges, Towers, and Fortresses, both for use and
beauty: and it is the chief City in all Zeland, being also a famous Town
of traffic. Here Paul of Middleburrough, map of Zeland THE COVNTIE OF ZELAND.
was borne, who was the chief Mathematician of his time: And also Nicolas
Everhard, who was first Praesident of the Court of Holland, and afterward of
Mechlin, in which office he dyed, in the year 1532. He had sons that were
singular learned men, Peter Everhard Doctor of Divinity, Nicolas Everhard
Praesident of the Court of Friesland, and afterward of Mechlin, Adrian, Marius,
and John a Poet. Veria or Campoveria, is so called from the passage over which
the Zelanders call Veer; It was first walled about in the year 1357. Afterward
it began to be a Mart town, for Scotch merchandise. Flushing has his name and
arms, from a Flaggon, which the Countrymen call even Flessche. It is a new
City, but powerful and commands the Sea, and it is full of excellent
shipmasters, and Pilots. Arnemuda is a free Town belonging to Middleburrough,
and a safe road for ships. The second Isle to Wallachria is Zuidbevelandia,
which some suppose was so called from the trembling and shaking of it; we
suppose that it was so called from the Bavarians, whose arms may be yet seen
in the Scutchions of the Island. It extends it self in a large and pleasant
tract toward the coast of Flanders and Brabant, albeit some few yers ago, a
great part of it being lost, it is now lesser by half than it was. There is a
pretty City that stands off the Land, called Romerswalia, that has no tilled
fields round about it, not no garden places, but the sea does wash it on every
side, so it subsisteth only by trading in salt. In this City the Earls of
Zeland take a solemn oath: which when Philip King of Spain, was to do
according to the usual custom, in the year 1549. Nicolas de Const^lte, in
whose house the Prince was entertained, caused these verses to be written over
his gate: Vidimus adsueto privatum lumine Solemn:
Pallida turbato vidimus astra die.
Vidimus undantis horrendos aequoris aestus,
Nos miseros Belgas quum obruit Oceanus.
Vidimus ast post quam te Gloria nostra Philippe,
Caesarea proles, Semideumque decus:
Cuncta refutamus transacti tristia saecli,
Quod praesens nostrum testificatur opus.
Sit licet exiguum, sit pro ratione voluntas,
Nil facit ad nostrum parva carina fretum.
We have seen when as the suns clear light did fail,
And in the day time seen the stars look pale.
We have seen the fearful sea tides rising so,
Till the Oceans did us Belgians overflow.
But Philip when thee, our glory, we espied,
Of Caesar's stock, and half a god beside,
We made up all our former rents again,
And this present work does testify the same:
Though it be small, yet to accept it please,
For no small ship can sail upon our Seas.


Moreover in the Western part of this Island the City Goesa is situated at
one of the mouths of Scaldis which they call Schenge. It is a City not very
large, but pleasant, and rich, being the only City in the Island: It has
very civil and courteous Citizens, and a prudent Senate. The third Island of
Zeland on this side Scaldis toward the West is, Northevelandia, in which is the
City Cortgreene, and very many Towns; but this City was all drowned with
water in the year 1532, but now it is a little reedified. The fourth Island is
Wolferdijc, as if you should say Wolfords ditch, it is very small having only
two Towns in it. There are ten Cities in Zeland, and more towns, they
being about an hundred and more. The inhabitants are witty, crafty, and
provident, and of a middle stature. But the Annalls do report that Withelme
Bonus, Earl of Holland, at the solemnity of the marriage of Charles the fair
King of France, did bring a woman of an unusual great stature, borne in
Zeland, in comparison of whom the greatest men did seem but boys: for she was
so strong that she would carry two hoggsheads full of wine in both hands, and
drink of them, which hogsheads did weigh four hundred Italian pounds; and she
would carry a beam or piece of timber up and down, which eight men could not
lift. They are very skifull in the Art of Navigation: Their Arts.
They boil black course salt which is brought out of the Western Countries,
in great large cauldrons, until they have made it as white as snow. They power
salt water on the rude Spanish and Armorican salt, and so boil it, and do
make of a hundred weight of Spanish salt, an hundred and five and forty weight
of pure salt. And they sell this salt, in France, England, Denmark, and other
parts of Eurpe. Their Trafique.
Besides they reap much profit by their corn and choice wheat, also by their
Madder, Saltfish, and great plenty of cattle, and especially sheep. They
keep their houses very neat and well furnished: they are provident and very
painful in merchandising, and also bountiful, and liberal to the poor. The
politic state of Zeland was wont to consist of three members, the one whereof
was the Prelate, who stood for the whole Clergy, which was the Abbot of S.
Nicolas, in Middleburrough: and one noble man, who was the Marquess Veria: and
also of the generality of the Cities, the chief whereof were those above
mentioned, namely Middleburrough, Zirizea, Veria, Flushing, Tela, Martinsdijk,
Romerswalia and Goesa. But let so much suffice concerning Zeland.

THE DVKEDOME OF GELDERLAND, Containing the County of ZVTPHANIA, and the
Lordship of TRANSISILANIA.
The Country whence so called.
GElderland was so called from the Castle of Gelrt, which Wichard of Ponthe
together with his brother are reported to have built: though many do suppose
that it was so called from the Town Gelduba, which Tacitus mentions. Others
do bring other reasons for this name. The Situation:
It has on the North Friesland, and a Bay of the German Sea commonly called
Z^yderzee; on the East the Dukedom of Cleveland, on the South Iuliacans: and
on the West Brabant and Holland. The air of this Country, is pure and
wholesome: the soil fruitful and fit for tillage, and especially it has
abundance of Corn; it has fruitful meddowes which do breed up all sorts of
Cattle; and great droves of Cattle are brought out of the farthest part of
Denmark to be fatted here; for there are many fair and flourishing meddowes,
especially about the banks of Rhene, Vahalis, and Mosa. At the first
Gelderland was ruled and governed by Praefects: and afterward by Princes. For
Leopold, Nephew to Martin governor of Austria, or Guidus as some report, was
governor of these parts. After the time of Charles the Great, the Lords of
Ponthe governed it. Afterward Otto Nassovius was Prince thereof in the year
1079. if we may credit Labius. After whom followed Gerard, Henry, Otto,
Reinald, who was in such great favor with the Emperor, that at Frankfort, in
the year 1339 on the foureteenth day of April Ludovicke Caesar Augustus, did
make him Duke of Gelderland. Edvard after many battles took his brother
Reinald, and kept him ten years in prison: William succeeded after him, and
after him his brother Reinald, and after Reinald William Arculanus, he dyed
without issue at Gorichem. His Sister married John Egmundan, and after many
changes the matter came to that pass, that in the year 1412. Charles the son
of Adolphus, being called by the States of Gelderland out of Holland, did make
William the son of John Duke of Cleveland his heir, who against the will of
the Emperor Charles the fifth, was for a time governor of Gelderland, until
map of Gelderland GELDERLAND.
in the year 1543. being put out of a great part of Iuliacum, he came as a
suppliant, and yielded himself to the Emperor, being then in his tent at
Venloe; on this condition, that he should resign up the possession of all
Gelderland, and release his subjects of their oath: yet notwithstanding Caesar
did give him back all the Territory of Iuliacum, excepting only two Towns,
Hensberg and Sittartum. And thus the Gelderlanders who were free at the first,
lived afterward under Princes, yet keeping their own laws and ordinances. But
now they are governed by the States, and do valiantly for their liberty
against the Spaniards. This Dukedom does contain two and twenty Cities, The
names of the Cities.
the chief whereof are Noviomagum, Ruremunda, Zutphania, and Arenacum, which
they call now Arnheimum. Noviomagum, or Nymegen, is an ancient City,
situated on the left hand bank of the River Vahalis, which is very deep in
that place: it seems that it was heretofore the Country of Batto, having the
Castle of Battenburg near it, and within the City the Mountain Hessus,
which some suppose was so called from Hessus the son of Batto. The City is
fortified by Art and Nature, bing very rich, and abounding with all things: on
that side which looks toward Cleveland, it is seated on a hills side, with an
old Castle, which some suppose was built by Julian; on which side the Country
opens and lays forth her beauty being full of woods, and springing
Fountains: the lower part of the City lies toward the Marshes, and the
other part of the soil is on continued hill. Ruremunda is seated by the mouth
of the River Rura, where it discharges it self into Mosa; it is a pleasant,
rich, and potent City, in the old Country of the Menapians. Zutphania on the
right hand bank of Isala, has a County belonging to it, of which we will
speak hereafter. That which Tacitus calls Arenacum, Posterity did call
Arnhe^mum, of the Eagles house: it is the chief City of Gelderland, where
the Counsel is kept, being neat, plentiful, and well fortified* and situated
near the right hand mouth or outlet of the River Rhene. There are also these
lesser Cities Hattem, Elburg, Harderuic, Wagen^ga, which Tacitus calls Vada;
Tiela, Bomelium, Bronchorstum, Doesburg, Doetecomium, and many others.
Gelderland is watered with three famous Rivers, The Rivers.
namely Rhene, Mosa, and Vahalis. And besides the^e, there are some lesser
Rivers that glide through it, as Worm, Roer, Sualm, old Isala, Berckel, Niers,
Regge, Aa, and Vidrus. On the North it looks toward a Bay of the Sea, which
they call now Z^^derzee: As we call that the Southern Bay which looks
Southward, where Holland lays forth her self, as having sufficient store to
trade with all the world. The ground is plain and low, and there are few
Mountains, and those are full of Woods and Forests. Concerning the politic
state of this Dukedom, it has 3 members, the Baronies of Veluwe, of Beture,
of Bomielweert, and Trielweert. Also the County of Zutphania, under which are
the Counties of Bronshorst, and Herebergensis. Also the higher Gelderland in
which are Ruremunda and Gelder. The Nobles are the Earls of Bronchorst and
Herenburg. The Lords are of Batenborch, of Groesbeeck, Mountfort, Well,
Watchtendonck, Grol, Anholt, Keppel, Bredefort. Buren is a County by it self
within Gelderland. There are also four chief Cities, as Neomagum, which is a
free City and the Metropolis of the whole Dukedom of Gelderland, which has
under it Batavians, or de Beteuwe, the Lower, and the higher; also Bomnerweert,
Tielweert, and Maeswael, being a Territory between Vahalis, and Mosa. Also
Ruremunda, which is the chief City of higher Gelderland, which has under it
Venlo, Gelder, Vagedie, Strale, Wachtendo^ck, Erckelens, Moutfort, Echt,
Nieustat, Kessel, Midler, Grieckenbecke. Also Zutphania, under which are
Donsburg, etc. Arnheime, under which are, Wagheninge, Hattem, Harderwijck,
Elborch, and all Velavia. At Arnheime there is a Council kept, and the
Praesident of all Gelderland resideth there, before whom all trials are
brought, of the four aforesaid Cities, without any further appeal to be
made; and to them the trials are brought from other towns, and places which
are subject unto them. The Ecclesiastic state in this manner: Geldria was
subject to four Bishops, Neomagum, with the Territory belonging thereunto, was
subject to the Bishop of Colen; Ruremunda to the Bishop of Leodium, Zutphania
and the Territories thereof to the Bishop of Munster, and Arnheimum to the
Bishop of Trajectum. The inhabitants were warlike, and wonderfully given to
martial affairs: but now they are more addicted to studdies. Their manners
The most part do busy themselves in Merchandising and trading, the rest do
partly give themselves to Maechanick Arts and trades, Their Trasique.
and partly to husbandry, and in regard of the fruitfulness of the soil, they
do reap much profit thereby. This Dukedom does contain besides many other
Counties and Barronies, the County of Zutphania. Zutphania. The Etymology of
the name.
It was so named, if we many credit Goropius Becanus, from the condition of the
soil, namely from the Marshes which they commonly call Venen. The inhabitants
of these Countries as likewise their neighbors do still retain their
ancestors manners and disposition, for they are valiant and very ready in
war. Moreover many are of opinion, that the Sicambrians did heretofore
possess Gelderland, and the chiefest part of the County of Zutphania, Their
ancient valor.
who were more fierce and desirous of war, than any other of the Germans,
Their ancient valor.
whence it came to pass that they vexed France, with continual incursions.
For which cause when there was peace throughout all the world, yet Octauian
Augustus, could not for a long time shut up the gates of Ianus his Temple,
which they used to do in times of peace, because he understood that the
Sicambrians did still molest the Frenchmen. But Otho Nassovius, Duke of
Gelderland, beside his son Gerard, The ancient Government.
who succeeded him in the Dukedom of Gelderland, had by Sophia Daughter to the
Earl of Zutphania, a son called Gerlacum, who succeeded him in the County
of Zutphania. Who dying without issue, the County of Zutphania, was annexed to
Gelderland, and never afterward disjoined from it. It has a City of the same
name, which Iunius supposes to be the City Visepetum, being populous,
plentiful, well fortified with water, and seated on the right hand bank of
the River Isala. Also the River Berckel flows by it, and there mingles it
self with Isala. Moreover these Cities and Praefectureships following are in
the County of Zutphania: the Cities are, Dousburg, Docte^mium, Lochemum,
Grolla, Bredevorda, Broinkhorst, and the Praefectureships are those which are
named from the Cities. And ove^ these there is one chief prefect, whom in
their own language they call the Drossart of the County of Zutphania. Here is
also the City Herebergensis, having a County belonging to it.

Trans-Isalania whence so called.
It remains now that we should add somewhat concerning Trans-Isalania, being
so called in regard it is situate on the other side of Isala. It looks on the
North toward West Friesland, on the South toward Gelderland: The Situation.
on the East is Westphalia: on the West it has a large bay (which is now
called Zuyderzee) and the River Isala. It is a plain low Country, the soil
being very fruitful, especially for corn, The fruitfulness of the soil.
and also it has pleasant meddowes. The Province of Trans-Isalania for many
ages was subject to the bishop of Vltrajectum, until in the year 1528, by the
advice of Henry Palatine Bishop of Vltrajectum, it did submit her self to
Charles the 5. and his successors. In this Province there are 8 walled City,
namely Daventria, Campen, Swolla, Steenwijckum, Vollenhova, Hassela, Oetmarsia,
Oldese^la, Daventria, or Deventer abounds with all things, which is a rich
and well fortified City: being seated on the right hand bancke of Isala. I
pass by the rest. The Rivers.
It has also beside the River Isala, the Rivelet Vidrum and other lesser
Rivers also: And many pleasant woods, although they be small and of no noate.
The politic State of Trans-Isalania does consist of two orders, the Princes
offices, and the Nobility, as Alhemo, Ghoer, etc. and that in three parts of
the Country, Iselland, Twent, and Drent. The chief Parliament is in
Vollenhove, from whence there is no appeal.

THE COVNTIE OF ZVTPHANIA.
SOme suppose that the Zutphanians were herefore called by the Romans
Vsipetes, which Iunius conjectureth in his Batavia. But Bertius thinks that
the posterity of the Tencterians did possess that Countery: but Cluverius does
al^ayes join these two people, the Tencterians and Vsipetians, as Cae^^r
witnesses: who being driven out of their Country by the Catti, after they had
wandered three years together through many parts (...) Sermanie, afterward
passing over the Rhene, received a great overthrough by the Romans: the
remainder of them being by Sigamber, admitted within the confines of the
Country, they afterward lived there continually, as he delivers, Lib. 3. cap.
10. of his learned commentaries of ancient Germany. And also Becanus
Francicor does affirm, that the Tencterians did obtain the seat of the
ancient Syg^^^rians. But it is likely that the limits thereof were heretofore
far larger, seeing they write that it reached unto Friesland, and to the sea.
But now they do possess more Towns and Villages, from the Drusian ditch, that
is, Yssela, even to the Westphalians. The chief City thereof is Zutphanium,
whence the Province is named, which seems to be so called from the Marshes,
as if it were Zuitveen, that is the Southern Marsh; being situate at the mouth
of the River Bere^el, and on the right hand bancke of Yssela. It has been a
County from the year of Christ, 1107, at what time the Counties of
Gelderland, and Zutphania were united, by the marriage of Otto Nassovius, with
S^phia of Zutphania, the daughter of Wichmann. But now Zutphania with the
Territory thereof, is one of the 17 Provinces of the Low Countries; and
albeit, as Sandenus says, they were united together 500. years before, yet
they used their own laws, and rights different and distinct from Gelderland.
This City is populous, and plentiful, being seated on a Low ground, and
fortified with waters. It was always governed by a learned Senate, skillful
both in the Common law, and their Country Law, to which the Judges of the
neighbor Towns, when they doubted of any matter which was brought before
them, were wont to refer the hearing, and to desire their opinion of it:
which when they had received, they esteemed as (...) Oracle, so that the
ordinary could not reverse or change any thing. There are four lesser walled
towns in this Country, which have voices in the public assemblies,
Doesburg, Doeticum, Loche^um, Grolla. But the free Territory is distinguished
into four Praefectureships, and as many Baronies. The Praefectureships are:
Her Drosten Ampt Van Zutphen, het Schotten Ampt Van Z^^p Richter Amp Van
Doesborch, Drosten Ampt van Bredefort, Baronies are Bergha (which is also a
County) Bronckhorst, Bea^ And there is at this day a controversy between
those of M^^ as Sandenus witnesses, and the Lords of Anholt, whether Anho^
belong to this Province. But that I may come to a conclusion, City endured
much misery in the last wars; for it was taken sacked by the Spaniards, in
the year of Christ 1572; and afterwa^^ was taken by John Bapt. Taxius, in the
year 1583. At ^^ng^ the year of Christ 1591. Grave Maurice beseiged it forth
(...) of the Low Countries, and freed it from Spanish servitude, and ^^ it to
the united Provinces.

map of Zutphania ^HE COVNTIE OF ZVTPHANIA.


THE BISHOPRIC O^ VLTRAIECTVM
OLd Batavia was governed by Kings of their o^ the royal line being extinct,
it was divided in^ The inhabitants of the River Isala, the Bishop trajectum,
the Earls of Holland, and the Duke ^derland, did every one challenge a part to
the (...) That part which belonged to the Bishop of Vltrajectum, (...) the
Bishopric. The first Archbishop hereof was D. W^^ a Saxon-Brittaine, who came
to these coasts about the y^^ Lord 690, being sent into Friesland to convert
Ratbod^^ ^^jects to the Christian faith: who stubbornly resisting hi^ ^pious
purpose, he returned to Vltrajectum, where he bro^^^ ^^habitants to the
Christian religion, and reedified a Church Dagobert King of France. From thence
he went to Roma, a^^ created Archbishop of Vltrajectum, by Pope Sergius: a^^
returned to Vltrajectum, he caused a Church to be built (...) S. Martine
Archbishop of Turone, and made it an Arch^^ both for himself and his
posterity. After him the^ ^^ded in the Archbishopricke Divus Bonifacius, who
toge^^ 52 more suffered Martyrdom at Doccomum in Friesland. ^^gard of the
grievous Norman persecution, the Archbishop translated to the Agrippine
Colonie. But afterward it was by King Pipin, and his son Charles the Great,
who did a^ dignifie the City with the ancient honor of the Bishopri^ gave
the Bishop temporary power and means to defend (...) against his enemies;
which temporary power was so large, the almost contain all Batavia. Truly it
is manifest that the C^^^ of Trans-Isalana, and Groninga, were subject to this
Bishopri^ven until the year 1527, when Henry Bavarus, being much ^^ did
commit himself to the Protection of the Emperor Charl^ fifth; and that he
might recover his Ecclesiastical state, did pass^ all his temporal power unto
him: of which when he had ce^^ Margaret, who was Governesse of the Low
Countries at that t^ it was agreed that the Earl of Hoogstrat should come to
Traje^^ on the 15 of November, where the Bishop of Vltrajectum, di^lingly and
freely resign up to the Emperor Charles the fifth Duke of Brabant, and Earl
of Holland, and also to his lawful P^^ritie, all his temporal state and
jurisdiction in Vltrajectum a^ Trans-Isalania: which being done, the Bishop did
free his su^^ from their oathe of alleagiance which they had taken a little be
map of Ultrajectum ^HE BISHOPRIC (...) VLTRAIECTVM.
but on this condition, that they should take the same oath to be faithful
subjects to the Emperor, and his lawful heirs being Dukes of Brabant, and
Earls of Holland; reserving to himself and his successor the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and revennewes only, with the Bishops Palace. Afterward the
Cities and Country of Vltrajectum, were united with the other Provinces, and
it was agreed, that the Country of Vltrajectum, should be so firmly united to
Holland, that they should be afterward ruled by one Governor, and that the
States of either Provinces, should be called together; and that it should be in
the Praefects power to change yearly the Magistrates of all the Cities in
either Province. And also that those who had been banished in Holland, should
not be received into Vltrajectum. And that all Tenures should run in these
words: That they should hold in Fee of the County of Holland and Vltrajectum.
But in the year 1580. after the decease of Frederick Bishop of Tantenburg, the
States did assume unto themselves the government of the City of Vltrajectum,
and afterward the Vltrajectensians as confederates with the other States of the
united Provinces, did acknowledge no other Lord but the States. These things
being unfolded, let us come now to the City. This country is encompassed on
the North, West, and the South almost on every side with the County of
Holland: on the East it is bounded with the Dukedom of Gelderland. It has a
good fertile soil. Which as it is higher and dryer, so is it much more fit for
tillage. Here are five walled Cities, namely Vltrajectum, Batavadurum, Rhena,
Amersford, and Montfort. Vltrajectum which is the Metropolis of the Province
was so named, as Iunius Hadrian witnesses, from the Roman armies which lay
by Rhene. For in that place where the City now stands, the five and
thirtieth Legion was quartered, which was thus written by abbreviation, V.
Trig. Leg. Stat. that is, the station or quarter of the five and thirtieth
Legion: but those which were ignorant of the Latin tongue, reading those words
together which should have been divided, did pronounce it Vtricstat; for the
middle letters Leg. were left out. Afterward this word Vtricstat was changed
into Vtrecht. Neither is it a strange matter, seeing the City Cantstat in
Southland, did take his name from these words, Leg. Ant. Stat. that is, the
Station of the Antonian Legion. It is thought also that it was called Antonia
from Antoninus a Roman Senator, who having left Rome, in regard of Neroes
Tyranny; came into those coasts and built this City. And afterward the
Wiltians did depopulate and waste it, and built there a fair Castle, which
they called after their name Wiltenburg, which Castle Dagebert the son of
Clotarius did take by force of arms, and having fortified it more strongly
than it was before, called it Trajectum, because it is a passage for those that
travel that way, and there is a certain Toll paid there: Which appears by
these verses which are to be seen in S. Martines Church: Circumquaque fluens
Hollandia gurgite Rheni,
Cingitur, Oceani fluminibusque maris.
In qua cum muris urbs Antonina novellis
Tempore Neronis aedificata fuit.
Hanc devastavit fera flammea gens, and ibidem
Castrum Wiltorum conditur inde novum.
Turribus excelsis quod adhuc plebs Abroditorum,
Funditus evertens diruit usque solum.
Hinc Trajectense castrum cum moenibus altis
Conditur a Francis Christicolis: sed idem
Vulgus Danorum confregit humo tenus, omnes
Cum Clero cives insimul ense necans.
Denique Baldricus Praesul nova moenia struxit,
Quae modo subsistunt auxiliante Deo.
Sic Hollandensi terrae veraciter omni
Trajectum constat urbs capitalis adhuc.
Holland is compassed in on every side
By the Rhene, and by the Ocean Sea so wide.
In which that City which they Antonia call
Was built in Neroes time with a new wall;
Which a fierce Nation did with fire soon wast,
And the Wiltian Castle was built there at last
With high built Towers; which the Abroditan
People did raze even to the ground again.
Then the Castle of Trajectum with a wall,
The Frenchmen builded, who were Christians all.
The Danes did cast it to the ground again,
When they the Clergy and Citizens had slain.
At last the Bishop Baldricke did command,
That new walls should be built, which yet do stand.
So that it seems, that still Trajectum is
Hollands chief City and Metropolis.


This Bishop Balderick, who (as these verss do mention) walled this City,
was surnamed Clivensis, and Charles the Bald, King of France, and Emperor of
Germany, gave him the Cities of Daventria, and Tiela, with all the Territories
thereunto adjoining, both for repairing the Cathedral Church, and for his
government in his Bishopric. It appears that this City was heretofore
called Ant^nia, not only by the aforesaid verses, but also by the testimony of
diverse writings, and by inscriptions upon coin and ancient stones, and
monuments found heretofore. Yet it is doubtful whether this name were derived
from Antoninus, the Roman Senator: for some do report that it was so called
from Marcus Antonius, who was at that time Caesar's ambassador in France, who
afterward together with Octavianus Augustus, and Marcus Lepidus, did assume
unto themselves the whole government of the Roman Commonwealth. Lastly, others
do allege, that it was so called from the Emperor Marcus Antoninus Pius, who
did reedifie it when it was decayed. Vltrajectum is situate by the old channel
of Rhene, which River before that it broke into Lecca, did run that way, and
from thence did hasten onward to the Ocean. And now the inhabitants by trenches
and ditches have brought the two Rivers, Wo^rda, and Leyda, unto the City,
that way which the River Rhene came heretofore. Moreover it is observeable,
that this City is so seated, that in one day you may go on foot to which
you please of fifty Towns which stand round about it, being no farther
distant from it than we said before (as appears also by the Geographicall
Table,) all of which before these troublesome times of war, did belong to the
King of Spain. Moreover any one that sets forth in the morning, from
Vltrajectum, may walk softly to any of those six and twenty Cities
aforesaid, and there refresh themselves and make merry, and at evening come
home. This is a great City, pleasant, and powerful, having many stately
public and private aedifices; it has a fair strong Castle, built by the
Emperor Charles the fifth, and called in their speech Vredenburch. The
Churches thereof are very magnificent, and especially these five which belonged
heretofore to so many ancient Colleges of Cannons: Namely our Saviors
Church, S. Martines Church, S. Peter's, S. John's, and S. Mary's. But the
sumptuous and fair Church of Saint Martine, does exceed all the rest, which
is a Bishops seat. The Bishop Adelboldus, caused this Church to be pulled
down, and afterward to be built up again more fairly; it was reedified in
the year 1023, and twelve Bishops did consecrate it in the presence of the
Emperor Henry the first, as these verses do declare: Tempore Francorum
Dagoberti Regis in isto
Praesenti fundo conditur ecce decens.
Primitus Ecclesia Sancti Thomae, prope Castrum
Trajectum, quam gens Frisica fregit atrox.
Sed prior Antistes Dominus Clemens, ob honorem
Sancti Martini, post renovavit came
Desidis Henrici sub tempore Regis: at illam
Praesul Adelboldus fregit, ab inde novam
Ecclesiam fundans, Henrici tempore primi
Caesaris electi, quem duodena cohors
Pontificum pariter benedixit: denique Praesul
Henricus coepit hanc renovare suam
Ecclesiam, Regis Gulielmi tempore, qvi tum
Hollandensis erat inlytus ecce Comes.
When Dagobert was King of France, they did found
Saint Thomas Church upon this present ground:
Even by the Castle of Trajectum placed,
But by the Friesland Nation it was raced.
Then the reverend Praelate Clemens called by name,
In honor of S. Martine built it up again,
Even in the time of Henry's slothful reign.
But Adelbolde pulled it down unto the ground
And afterward a new Church he did found
In the first Henry's time; which with great state,
Twelve Bishops solemnly did consecrate.
Lastly the Bishop Henery began
For to reedifie this Church again,
Even when King William this same land did guide,
Who was then Earl of Holland too beside.


This Saint Mary's Church is very fair and beautiful, and was built by the
Emperor Frederick, as a mulct and charge imposed on him by the Pope of Rome,
for wasting the famous City of Mediolanum, and destroying the Churches
therein. It was strange that at the laying of the foundation of this Church,
there was a quicksand found, on which they could not build, but that it would
still sincke; at length they cast Ox hides into it, which made the ground
sollid and firm, so that they built this Church on it, in remembrance whereof
these verses are extant in Vltrajectum: Accipe Posteritas quod post tua secula
narres;
Taurinis Cutibus fundo solidata columna est.


THE CITY AND PROVINCE OF MACHLIN.
MAchlin is situated almost in the middle of Brabant, and is as it were
enclosed within it, near the River Dilia, which cutteth through the middle of
it, being equally distant from Antwerp, Bruxells, and Lovanium, in a Champion
Country and fertile soil, having a light and sandy ground; the City is
very fair and conspicuous, both in regard of the pleasantness of the
situation, the cleanenesse and breadth of the streets, the largeness and
curiousness of the houses: some reckon it as a part of Brabant, but yet truly
it is a distinct country from it. There are diverse uncertain conjectures
concerning the original thereof; but this is manifest, that in one of the
letters Pattents of Pepin King of France, dated in the year 753, there is
mention made of it, and that it is there called Mastinas, as it were the line
of the Sea, because the Sea does flow and ebb before it; which Etymology
pleases some better, than to call it Machel from one Michael who possessed
these parts, as Ortelius does deliver in his Itinerarie of the Low Countries.
Others do deduce the name from other derivations. But as we said, Machlin,
after the year 753, had Adon to be Earl thereof, which he held by fealty and
service. But who were his Praedecessors, or successors is not yet known. Long
time afterward there followed the Sertoldi, who denied fealty and homage to
Godfrey Barbatus, Duke of Brabant, which occasioned wars between them. After
the Berltoldi, Machlin had various fortunes, and diverse Lords; at length it
recovered liberty, and was not subject unto any in the year 1336. And
afterward it came to the Burgundian family in the year 1383. And lastly, unto
the Austrian family, in the year 1477. And it is now one of the 17 Provinces
of the Low countries, where the chief Counsel does sit, whither the last
appeal in the Low Countries is made; and instituted by Charles of Burgundy,
Prince of the Low Countries, and at length in our time it was made an
Archbishopricke, the chief Metropolitan seat, whereof is Saint Rumolds
Church. Besides, there is an Armorie in it, which in the year of Christ, 1546.
in the month of August, the Gunpowder being set on fire by lightning, was
burnt down, and the City much defaced thereby.

Here Nicasius of Woerden, a most learned Lawyer, although he map of Machlin
THE CITY AND Province of MACHLIN.
were blind, was borne; also Christopher Longolius, Rombert Dodonaeus, the
Emperors Physician, and professor of Physic at Leyden: and also Philibert of
Bruxells an excellent Lawyer. It does also produce many excellent artificers
and workmen; especial stone-cutters, and carvers of Images. He that desires
to know more concerning this City, and the antiquity of this Province, let
him have recourse to John Bapt. Gremajus his large description of Machlin, and
he shall find very good satisfaction therein.

THE LORDSHIP OF GRONINGA.
GRoninga is the head City of the Province of Groninga, and the fairest
City in Friesland. Some think it to be that which Ptolemie calls Phileum.
They derive the name from Grano a certain Trojan or Friesland Prince, but Vbbo
Emmius, rejecting other opinions which are grounded on fabulous reports,
supposes that it was so called from the green Meddowes, and tufts of trees
therein. It is distinguished from the other parts of Friesland, in the middle
whereof this Province is seated, by the River Amasus, and the Lavician Bay; and
now since the year 1536, it is counted one of the seventeene Provinces, at
what time the Groningians did put themselves into the protection of Charles the
fifth. Heretofore this Lordship did do homage and fealty to the Bishop of
Vltrajectum, being given him by the Emperor Henry the third, and afterward by
the Emperor Maximilian the first, in the year 1494. And also he gave the
Government of Groninga, and all Friesland, to Albert Duke of Saxo^ie: the
Groningians refusing the government of the Saxons, who having made many
treaties of peace but in vain; they committed themselves in the year 1506,
into the Protection of Edzard Earl of East Friesland, and afterward dismissing
Edzard, because he was not able to resist the Saxon, and the Emperor, they
took the oath of alleagiance to Charles Duke of Gelderland; so at length
George, the son of Albert Saxon, did surrender and yield up all Groninga and
West Friesland to the Emperor G^^les the fifth, as to the chief Lord thereof.
This occasioned wars between the Austrians and the Gelderlanders, whereby it
came to pass, that the Groningians being wearied with continual wars, did
yield themselves in the year 1515 unto Caesar, as Prince of Brabant and
Holland. It is a pleasant Country and (...) of fair pasture grounds, except
toward Druenttum, where it is ^^cotish. The City is strongly fortified with
ditches and trenches, being very wide and spacious, adorned with many
magnificent public and private buildings. The suburbs whereof some ^ew years
ago was much enlarged, and the new City was joined to the old, and so the
City was more strongly fortified against the ^^^sion of enemies than before.
There are twelve Churches in it, ^^ which there are three Parish Curches, as
they call them, five be^^ging to Monasteries, and four belonging to
Guesthouses. The ^^^est and auncientest of all the Parish Churches is S.
Martines, having a high steeple, although the top thereof be somewhat decayed
and heretofore it was devoted to heathen superstition. It was made a Bishops
seat in the year 1569, by Pope Paul the third, which John Carifius of
Vltrajectum, was the first and last that possessed it. This City is populous
and rich, and it has a large jurisdiction. Here Rodolphus Agricola the
learnedest man in those times was borne, whose books are still approved by the
learned. He dyed at Heidelberg in the year 1485, on whom Hermolaus Barbarus a
noble man of Venice bestowed this Epitaph: Invida clauserunt hoc marmore fata
Rudolphum,
Agricolam Frisij spemque decusque soli;
Scilicet, hoc vivo meruit Germania laudis,
Quic quid habet Latium, Graecia quic quid habet.
The envious fates here have shut,
Within this Marble Tomb,
Rudolphus Agricola, by whose worth
Friesland much honor won.
For while he lived, Germany did inherrit
All praise which Greece and Italy could merit


Also this City was the birth place of Wesselus Bassilius, a most excellent
Philosopher, who dyed in the year 1584; also Reinerus Predinius, Hieron.
Verutius, and many others were borne here. There is a great Free Town in this
Province called Damme which is but two miles distant from Groninga, and it has
145 villages; some whereof are fairer and greater than the rest. Concerning
other matters you shall find them accurately described by Vbbo Emmius.

map of Groninga THE LORDSHIP OF GRONINGA.


THE LORDSHIP OF TRANS-ISSELANIA.
THe Trans-Issilanians do inhabit that part which was the Seat of the
ancient Frenchmen; which the most learned Hardrian Iunius, does largely and
accurately declare. And the name of Frenchmen signifies as much, for the Low
country men being weary of servitude when they increased in wealth, would
needs be called Franci, because they had gotten their liberty and enfranchised
themselves; who^^ Agathias a Greek writer, did place about Rhene, in the
words: The Frenchmen do dwell about Rhene, and do inhabit^^^ the adjacent
Countries round about, and they were next unto the Sicambrians; which
Claudianus and Sidonius Apollinaris do expressly show, as also Gregory
Turonensis, and Venantius Fortunatus. It is now called Trans-Issulana, because
it is situate beyond the River Isela^^ was also the seat of the ancient
Salians, and also of the Tencterian which are now thought to be the
Drentinians, and the Tubantum, which, as Iunius writes in his Batavia, were
the Tuentenians, This Country is now divided into three parts, that which is
near to Isala is called Salandia, that which is beyond Vetchta is called
Druenta, that which is next to Westphalia, is called Twenta. But Druenta and
Twenta were conferred on the Bishop o^ old Trajectum, after the year of Christ
1046. Also Amelandia, Gora, Daventria, and also all Trans-Issulana, by the
donation and gift of the Emperor, and so it continued for many years under
his governmen, even until the year 1528; when being wearied with war they
yielded themselves to the Emperor Charles the fifth, on certain conditions,
as Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Holland, Trans-Issula, has on the North West
Friesland; on the South the Countie^ of Zutphania, on the East Westphalia, and
on the West the River Isela. The Country is plain and fruitful, and full of
Corn. It contains eight walled Cities, which have their own privileges
and immunities, as Meppela, Geelmuda, Coevordia, Hardenberga, Ow^^ Almeloa,
Gora, Diepenhemium, Delda, and Enscheda. The Sta^^ do consist of two members,
the first whereof are the officers a^^ nobles, the latter are the Magistrates
of the three capital Cities Daventria is seated by the River Issela, which is
the Metropolis the Country, which is a large City, and beautified with many
p^^ like and private buildings, and fortified with walls, Towers, and
Bulwarks: heretofore it was a famous place of studdie, from whe^^ came
Gerardus surnamed the Great, whose works are much este^med by Divines; also
Alexander Heggius, who first revived the Greek tongue in Belgia, and may
worthily boast of his scholl^^ Erasmus. In this City also there were borne
James of Daventri^ map of Trans-issalania ^HE LORDSHIP OF TRANS-ISSALANIA.
an excellent Geographer, Everard Bronckorst a Lawyer and Professor at Leiden;
also Ortuinus Gracius, Ioannes Dorrius, John Sinthemius, and Rodolphus
Pythopaeus, and others. It is now the chief City of the Ansuarians, whom
they commonly call Anse steden. Campi is on the left hand bancke of the River
Isela, not far from the mouth thereof, being four miles distant from
Daventria. This City is also very large, lying lengthwayes, and has fair
houses in it here Albertus Pighius was bone, also John Campensis a Divine,
Harmanus Cruserus a Physician, and Theodore Peter were borne here. Heretofore
it was more famous for merchandising in regard of the depth of the Haven than
it is now. Swolla is a pleasant City, and fortified with a double ditch. It
has on one side the River Isela, on the other Vetchta, which are not far
from it. There are also other lesser walled towns: as Volenhovia by the Lake
Flevum, Steenvicum by the River Aa, and Hasseletum by the River Vidrum or
Vechta. Also Oetmersia and Oldensalia, the last of which is an ancient Town
of the Salians, which Baldericke of Vltrajectum walled about, and did found
there a College of Cannons.

THE COVNTIE OF ARTESIA.
ARtesia, contains a great part of those people which Caesar calls the
Atrebatians, from the chief City which he calls Atrebatum. But Marius
Niger does place here the Ambianians. And Ptolomie also does place Atrebatium
between the river Seane, and Phrudium, which is now called la Sum. But the
new name of Artesia, is derived from the Metropolis called Arras, as it were
Aratesia by the figure Syncope, and it is commonly called Artois. The bounds
thereof are on the North Flanders, from which it is parted by the River Lisa,
and the New ditch: on the South and West it is bounded with Picardie, on the
East with Flanders and Cameracum. The air is clear and sweet, the Country
fruitful, and especially of corn, of which it has not only sufficient
plenty for it self, but also it furnishes Flanders, Brabant and other
Countries. It is the barn and Granarie for Antwerp and Mechlin. It has no
wine, rather by slothfulness of the inhabitants than the unfruitfulnesse of
the soil or climate. This Country heretofore belonged to Flanders: for
Charles the Bald gave it to Baldwin Arduennatus for a Dowry with his wife
Judith. Afterward Philip Alsasius when he married his Nephew Isabella, to
Philip son of Ludovicke the seventh, King of France, he gave her all West
Flanders for her dowry, that is, all that tract of ground, which lies from the
new Ditch even to Picardie. Afterward Philip in the year 1195 made it a
County, and gave it to his son Ludovicke, who was first Earl of Artesia,
afterward King of France, and the father of Ludovicke the holy. But in the
year 1382 Ludovicke Malanus, Earl of Flanders, after the decease of his
Mother, was made Earl of Artesia, and so both the Counties were united again.
But after the decease of Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, Ludovick the
eleventh King of France, did regaine Artesia, which afterward by an agreement
and covenant made between Charles the eighth King, and Maximilian the
Emperor, was passed over Anno 1492, to Philip of Austria the son of Maximilian
the father of Charles the fifth. The chief Cities are Atrebatum, the Church
of S. Audomare, Bethunia, Aria, and Bapalma, the others are less. Atrebatum
commonly called Arras, or Atrecht, is situated near the River Scarpa: it is a
great Town well fortified with ditches, and Bulwarks; it does resemble two
Cities, one of which they call la Cite, which belongs to the Bishop, and the
other la Ville which belongs to the Prince. The former part is lesser, but
very pleasant, and has a Cathedral Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Here
a certain kind of Manna was religiously kept as a relic which Saint Hierome
i^ his Epistles does report, did rain down in his time in the Country. This
part is larger and has fair houses and streets, an^ a great Market place:
besides, it has a Library in which are all kin^ of written manuscripts,
especially of Divine. Here Francis Baldvin a famous Lawyer was borne, upon
whose Monument at Paris there is this inscription: Cujaci, Balduinus hic jacet.
Hoc tecum reputa and vale. Mortuis nobis juris prudentiam gravis corripi and
sopor. Franc. Bald, Iurise. ob. anno aet. 54. November 11. a partu Virgiuis
1563. Papirius Massonus Balduini auditor P; that is, Whose monument is this?
Baulduine lies here. Think on that and so farewell: Franc. Bald. a Lawyer,
dyed in the year of his age 54. on the 11. of November, and after the birth of
Christ 1563. Papirius Massonus an hearer o^ Baldvini did place this monument.
In this City the most learne^ and eloquent Charles Clusius was borne, who
after he had traveled through many Countries, he spent his old years in this
Athens and Batavia, and there he finished those his famous works, which
deserve immortal fame. The City is populous enough, because there are some
merchants, and some trades men. The Church of S. Audomare was heretofore called
Sithin, as Meyerus witnesses, afterward it was called S. Omer, from S.
Audomar. This Audomar, was bishop of the Morineans about the year 1570, and
built a Monastery there near the River Aa. This City excels both for
beauty, and populousness of the Citizens. Some think it to be Itius Portus,
as we have said in the description of Bononia. Three miles hence near the
River Lisa there was also the ancient Metropolis of the Morineans called
Teroana, concerning which I have spoken in the same description. Bethunia also
is a fair Town in Atri^^tum, being a Granarie for wheat. It flourishes with
all kind of commodities, as corn and other things which are necessary to
sustain man's life, and fit to be transported. Aria is seated by the River
Lisa, which runs through the middle of it, it is two miles distant from
Teroana, being a fair Town and well fortified. It has an ancient Castle,
and neat buldings. There is also Hesdinum, which is a strong fortress against
France, which Caesar after he had raced the Town which was of the same name,
builded by occasion of the war that was between the most powerful Princes
o^ Europe. It is conveniently seated on the bank of the River Canch^^ one mile
nearer toward France, being four miles distant from Monstrolium, and 5 from
S. Paul. It is watered also with another R^ver, commonly called Blangis, from
the place where it springs So that in regard of the convenient situation
thereof, it is accounte^ a strong Fortress, and in regard of the laws and
Privileges which ancient Hesdinum did enjoy, it was soon replenished with
inhab^tants. Near to S. Omers there is a Lake, full of fish, in which ther^
are floating Islands, which with a rope tide to the trees growin^ thereon, or
with long poles may be should and drawn up and down like those which Pliny
mentions to be in Lycia, called the Cal^minae. Neither are there small pieces
of Land; for Oxen and other Ca^te^ map of Artesia THE COVNTIE OF ARTESIA.
may feed and graze upon them. Under these Islands in the Winter and Summer
time great store of fish do hide themselves, to avoyde both the cold and
heat. The chief Rivers are Lisa, Scarpa, Aa, Canchia, and Authia, besides
other navigable Rivers. There is also not far from Teroana a great Channel,
which they call the new ditch: some think it was digd in the time of the Earl
Baldwin, either to hinder the enemies excursions, or to distinguish, and set
limits between the confines of Flanders and Artesia: others think it to be a
bay of the Sea. Virgill truly does acknowledge that the Morians were near
unto the Sea, when he calls them the farthest inhabitants. But now Teroana is
eight miles from the Sea. Besides, out of the bottom of the new ditch, there
are oftentimes pieces of Anchors drawn up, which is a certain argument that
the Sea was near unto it. It has also some woods, especially Westward and
Southward. The Politic state of Artesia does consist of three orders: the
Clergy, the Nobles, and the special Cities: the first member is the clergy,
in which there are 2 Bishops, the Bishop of Atrebatum and S. Omers; 2 Provosts,
Bethunienj^s and Ariensis. 20 Abbots to whom belong these Monasteries: of the
order of S. Benedict, 8, namely, Atrebatense, Aquicinctense A^se^n, S. Omers,
Blangtacense, Montense, Hamense or Hames, and Ass^acense^ Of the order of S.
Augustine 7, as Auriacense, S. Eloy, of Ch^pnes, of Hennin, of Lietard, of
Raselli villa, of Mareul, Aque^^tense in Eaucourt. Of the Cistertian order
there are the Abbots of the Monasteries of Cherchamp, and Clommeres. Of the
Pra^^^^^ densian order, Damartin, Santandreanum, Auguatianum. There are 10
Colleges of Cannons: Atrebatense, Audomarense, Bethumense, Arience,
Hesdinense, Lensiense, Sanpaulitanum, Lilleriense, Fal^e ^rgense, Douriense.
The second member is the Nobles, among whom there is one Prince of Espinoy: one
Marquess of Rentinium, 7 Earls, S. Pol, Falquenberch, Harliensis,
Busq^^etensis, Henniensis, Arquensis, and lastly Blangiacensis. But these two
last Earledomes did fall of late to the Abbey of Saint Bertin; and four chief
Earls are not called or summoned to this meeting, as Atrebaten^is,
Audomarensis, Bapalmensis, and Lensiensis. The families of the Gentry counting
them by an Alphabeticall order are these: Aussi, Averdam, Aubigni, Aix,
Annequin, Anvezin, Aneroult, Avion, Allenes, Anvin, Bailleul, Beaufort,
Beaumez, Beauraines, Beausart, Bellone, Berles, Billy, Bofles, Boisleux,
Bonnieres, Boncourt, Boubert, Bours, Brias, Buissi, Caumont, Conroy, Contes,
Coupiguy, Croisilles, Cunchy, Divion, Douvrin, Enne, Erin, Esquerdes, Estree,
Fosseux. Frevin, Fleshin, Gomiecount, Gouy, Greboval, Geulesin, Habar^que,
Hachicourt, Hamelaincourt, Helfault, Houchin, Houdin, la Viesville, la
Plancque, Liguereul, Licques, Longastre, Malanoy, Maisuit, Mammez, Marles, Mes
en Contire, Mingoual; Moiry, Nedoncelles, Neufville, Nojelle, Noircarmes,
Ococh, Olham, Oignies, Ores^naux, Plancques, Plovicke, Pronville, Querecques,
Ranchicourt, Ransart, Recouet, Rebecque, Regnauville, Rely, Rolancourt,
Rumenghien, Sains, S. Aldegonde, S. Venant, Sombrein, Sovastre, Tieuloie,
Tramerie, Vaulx, Villers, Vrolant, Wancourt, Warluzelle, Waurans, Willerval.
The third member is the especial Cities: 7 Royal Cities, as Atrebatum,
Saint Omers, Bethunia, Aria, Hesdinum, Lens, and Bapalina: private Lordships as
S. Pol, Perne, Lillers: and also these Towns which have the praerogative of
Cities, and called to the assembly of the States, and there be 28 of them,
Arques, Aubigny, Avesnes, Aussi, Benurains, Blangij, en Ternois, Busquoy,
Carwin, Caumont, Choques, Dourier, Franquenberghe, Fressin, Fleurbay, Frevene,
Frages, Gorgue, Hennin, Lietard, Huchin, Hosdaine, Labroy, Libourg, Oisy, Pas,
Richebourg, Tornehem, Ventie, Vitry. The Provincial Counsel is held at
Atrebatum, from whence all appeals are brought to the Parliament at Mechlin.
But the Bishop of Atrebatum has all power in spiritual matters, and is
subject to the Bishop of Rhemes.

This Table also contains true Picardie, and the Dukedom of Cambresi, which
is a Principallitie of the Empire, and is governed both in temporal and
spiritual matters by the Bishop of Cambresi. But yet sometimes in spiritual
matters it is subject to the Bishop of Rhemes, and in temporal matters it is
under the protection of the King of Spain. And so much may suffice concerning
Artesia: Let us proceed to Hannonia.

THE COVNTIE OF HANNONIA, unto which is joined the County of NAMVRCIVM.
The Country whence so called.
HAnnonia was heretofore the seat of the Nervians, the chief City whereof
is now called Tornacum, which Ptolemie, calls Baganon. This Country has
o^^^ changed her name: for at first it was called Pannonia, (...) Lessabaeus
witnesses, from the worship of Pan: afterward Soc^^^ Carbonarius, and
afterward Lower Piccardie: and last of all Hann^^^ from the River Hania, which
runs through the middle of the Country, which they call in their own
language Hanauls or He^^gow, from the same River which the Frenchmed call Hanie
or Hea^ and the ancient German word Gouw, which signifies a Country o^
Village. The Situation.
It has on the North Brabant and Flanders, on the South Campania and
Piccardie, on the East Namurcium, and Leodium, with the aforesaid Brabant, on
the West Flanders and Artesia. The whole Country is 20 miles long, The temper
of the air.
and 16 broad. The air is temperate sweet, and clear: the soil is fertile,
abounding with all kind of fruits, but especially has great store of
excellent good Corn. It has many fair meddowes, The fruitfulness of the
soil.
pastures, and Orchards in it. It has the best Iron and Lead: besides, Mines
of diverse kinds of Marble, an^ also of hard flints, which Ovid calls
Touchstone, and Lithanthracon, the Leodians, call it in their speech Houlles.
They take fire, and will burn like coals, and they are used to make fires of
them with some little wood amongst them. Here also those cleeres sheets of
glass^^ are made, with which they glaze their Churches and houses to keep out
the weather, and these are better than those which are made in other places.
Also all kind of Glasse-ware is made here. This Province has had many Lords,
The ancient Government.
and at length it came from the family of the Montensians to the Earls of
Flanders, and at last it ca^^ to the Batavian family, afterward to the
Bavarian, and from thence to the Burgundian, and last of all to the Austrian
family. The^ are four and twenty Cities in Hannonia fortified with rampires
a^^ ditches. The chief whereof are Montes, and Valencenae Monte^ commonly
called Mons, is a City by the little River Tralla, which is yet capable of
great ships, being a fair City, well seated and fortified with walls, and
Rampires. There are many fountains in it and it is wealthy by merchandise,
Manufactures, and husbandry. Valencenae, or Valencena, or as some would have
it, Valentiniani or Valencienne, from an Emperor of that name, is situate by
the River Sca^dis; map of Hannonia ^HE COVNTIE OF HANNONIA.
in a pleasant plain, and safe from the enemy. There is in (...) Armory well
furnished for war. Two Churches, one consecra^ to the blessed Virgin, of
ancient building, the Pillars whereof of marble and Porphyrie: the other
consecrated to Saint John, ^^latelier by Pepin, the father of Charles the
Great. There are m^^ monasteries, especially the Monastery of Franciscans,
which is in famous than the rest, in which the Earls of Hannonia and Lords
Valencena are buried. The Court thereof is large, having a fam^^^ Dial, which
was set up by William Bonus, Earl of Hannonia, H^land and Zeland. There are
also Condatum or Conde on the rig^^^ hand bancke of Scaldis, being two miles
distant from Valencena; (...) a fair Town: also Landresium or Landresi, by
the River Scamb^^ being famous for the seige which Charles the fifth laid
against it the year 1543, which yet he could not take by force. Also Ave^^
which is a City and Bulwark on the frontiers of France, by t^^ River Hepra:
Chimacum or Chimay is a City by the River blan^^ in the middle of a wood; in
the late wars it was often set on fire a^^ rac'd, yet at length it was
reedified again, so that it is now me^ beautiful than before. It has a
Palace with a garden, and an arti^^ciall and curious Labyrinth therein. Halla
is near unto the c^^fines of Brabant: Bouchaine is a free town, situate on
the bancke the River Scaldis, between Cameracum and Valencena, it is fame for
traffic and merchandising. Bellus Mons, or Beaumont, is a ^^^tle neat Town.
Philippolis, or Philippe ville, was so named from King Philip, and Mariae-Burg
from Mary Queen of Hungary; the are strong places built to suppress the
inroads of the French. Ba^cum in French Bavis, which some suppose to be that
which Ptole^^ calls Baganum or Bagacum; some say that Caesar calls it Belgium
his Commentaries, but they are refuted by those, who bring mo^^ stronger
arguments, to prove that it was placed in Bellevacum, some part of Picardie.
There are also Maubeuge, Bins, R^ux, Se^ga^^ Brain le Conte, Engien, Lessine,
Chevre, At, S. Cutllein, and Leu^^ Moreover there are 250 Villages, the most of
which are fair, ple^sant and rich. The Country is watered every where with
Lak^ standing Pooles, Fountains, and Rivers, with Rivers; as Scal^ Sambra,
Tenera, Hania, and others. It has pleasant woods and F^rests; the chief
whereof are Morman, and S. Amandi. Moreover t^ Commonwealth of Valence is
governed by such wise and go^^ laws, that the Norimbergians would institute
and frame their Comon-wealth according thereunto, and sent some wise and
prudent (...) thither for this purpose, which the Romans also did in framing
the Commonwealth after Athens. And therefore it is no marvel if in excellent
a politic government, there have been Citizens (...) have been famous
through the whole world for virtue; the chi^ whereof were the Emperor Henry
the 7. the Duke of Lutzen^^^ Mary the only Daughter and heir of Charles the
Bold, the Gra^^mother of Charles the fifth; also John Froissard, a famous
Histori^ who declares as much in the beginning of his work.

The Politic state of Hannonia does consist of five member which are, first
the 12 Peers, namely Longueville, Lens, Filly, Chievre, Auesne, Chimay,
Levreux, Barbanson, Baudour, Rebaux, Walecourt. 2. Ecclesiastical Praelates,
namely the Abbot and Earl of S. Waldrut. 26 Abbots, S. Guislaine, Marchennes,
Cambron, Hasnon, Marville, Ancin, Haultmot, Liessy, S. Denis, Vicogne,
Feullien, Crespin, Bonne Esperance, S. Iean, S. Aldegonde, Geilenghien,
Spinleu, Ath, Fontenelle, Beaumont, Denain, Quesnoy, Watiebraine, Lolive,
Billiay, Leture; besides the Colleges of Cannons. Thirdly Noble men, and one
principality of Chimay; 10 Counties, as Lalain, Beaunant, Ostervant, the chief
City whereof is Bouchin, also Barbansin, Auesne, Barlaymont, Bossu, Montigni,
Reux, Terrache. 22 Baronies, as Enghien, Leuze, Havre, Ligne, Anjoing,
Vuerchin, Fontaine, Havaide, Kinrain, Barlaymont, Ville, Gomegnie, S.
Aldegonde, Senzelle, Condet, Haurdain, Belleule, Fagneille, Bousie, Roesin,
Frusne, Harchies. One Marshall, one Steward, one great Ranger, one
Chamberlain. And four ordinary Officers.

The County of Namurcum remains. It is seated between Brabant, Hannonia,
and the Dioecesse of Leodium: it is a small mountainous Territory, but
pleasant, having a sweet and temperate air. The soil is fruitful yielding
all things, which are necessary for the sustentation of man's life. It has also
Mines of Iron and Lead, The fruitfulness of the soil.
and stone Quarries, out of which diverse kinds of stones are cut, and
especially black Marble, and stones like Jasper. And not long since those
stones were dug forth which were good to burn, we may call them
Lithantracas, of which we spoke in the aforesaid description. Moreover this
Country at first was governed by a Marquess: The ancient Government.
and afterward it changed often her Lord. Philip the brother of Balduin, Earl
of Flanders, was Marquess hereof in the year 1200. And Theodorus was Earl of
it: after whose decease, the whole Country came to Philip Bonus Duke of
Burgundy, as we have declared in the description of the Low Countries. There
are four walled Cities in this County, Namurcum, Bovina, Carlomontium, and
Valencourcium. And 182 Villages. Namurcum or Namur is the chief City; whence
the name thereof is derived, is uncertain: some suppose from Nanus a God of
the Heathens, who being used formerly to deliver Oracles, yet at Christ's
coming grew dombe, and spoke no more. And therefore from this dumb and mute
god Nanus, it was called Namurcium: some think it was so called from a new wall
which was built there by the Romans. The City is situate between two
Mountains, on the left hand bancke of the River Mosa, where it receives
Sambra. It is eight miles distant from Lovanium, ^^ from Leodium, and as many
from Bruxells. It is rich and has many fair public and private buildings,
and it is fortified with a strong Castle. Four miles from Namurcium is
Bouvinae, a small town, which was often wasted by the wars, and last of all
it was for the most part ruinated by Henry the second, King of France, in the
year 1555. Afterward the Citizens did reedifie it. Charlemont was built by
Charles the fifth in the year 1555, against the Frenchmen who then possessed
Marienburg. Valencourtium is a town of good noate, being distant from Namurcium
7 miles. This Country has many Rivers which are full of fish: The Rivers.
the chief whereof are Mosa and Sambra: The Woods.
it has also fair fresh springs. It has also woods for pleasure and hunting,
which are full of wild beasts. There are many Churches in this Country, The
public works.
and famous Monasteries, which were built heretofore at the costs and charges
of the Earls of Namurcium, and endowed with great revennewes. Three miles from
Namurcium there is the rich Town Audennas, in which there is an ancient
Nunnerie for noble women, built by Begga daughter of Pepin, from whom they were
first called Baggine Vestalls. The politic state of the County of Namurcium,
does consist of three members, which are the Clergy, the Nobility, and the
chief Cities. The Clergy are the Abbots of Floref, Granpre, Anden, Bonef,
Wassore, Hastitis. The Nobility are the Vicount Done, etc. The chief Cities
are Nemur, Bovinae, Charlemont, Valencourt, or Walencourt. In the City of
Namurcum there is a Royal Counsel, from whence appeals are brought to the
Court of Mechlin. There is also a Bishops seat, whose Cathedral Church is
consecrate to S. Albine. The Citizens are used to arms and martial
discipline, they speak French, but corruptly. There are few merchants and
Tradesmen: but a great company of Nobles, but such as be either the Princes
Bastards, or coming of a base stock.

THE COVNTIE OF NAMVRCIVM.
POntus Huterus Lib. 2. cap. 3. concerning Belgia, writes that the County of
Namurcium was heretofore inhabited partly by the Advaticans, and partly by the
Eburonians. It is situate between Brabant, Hannonia, and the Dioecesse of
Leodium: being a small mountainous Territory, but very pleasant. It is populous
in inhabitants who are very much addicted to warfare: it has a sweet and
temperate air, and rivers full of fish, the chief whereof are Mosa and
Sambra: it has also clear Springs, and woods for delight of hunting, which
are full of wild beasts. It has also Mines of Iron and Lead, and stone
Quarries, in which diverse kinds of Stones are cut forth, and especially black
marble, and stones like Jasper: and of late they dug forth those stones
which are good to burn, which as soon as they have taken fire do kindle by
degrees, and are quenched with oil, but water makes them burn more hotter;
they are commonly called Leodian coals, the learned do call them
Lithanthracus. It is not manifest, when this Country was made a County. We
read of Marquesses and Earls, of Namurcium, from the year of Christ 277, but
in broken and interrupted succession; but concerning the Princes of this
Country, Gramiatus, well best inform us in his history of Namurcium. Namurcium
is 10 miles broad, and 12 miles long. There are four walled Cities in this
County, and 182 Villages. And many Noblemens Castells. Also many Abbeys. The
government of the Commonwealth belongs to three orders, namely the Clergy,
the Nobility; and the Burgesses of Cities. Namurcum, or Namucum, is the chief
City, but it is not known from whence the name thereof is derived; some
derive Namurcum from Nanus a Heathen god, famous for delivering of Oracles;
others from a new wall which the Nermanes built. Huterus supposes it to be
that which Caesar calls Nemetoenna. This City is situated between two
Mountains, on the left hand bank of Mosa, where it receives the River
Sambra; being fortified both by Art and Nature. It is rich, and has many
fair, public, and private aedifices and buildings. In this City there is a
royal Counsel, from whence appeals are brought to the high Court at Mechlin.
It is also a Bishops seat, whose Cathedral Church is consecrated to S.
Albine. The Citizens speak French, but corruptly: there are a few Merchants
and Tradesmen in this City, but a great company of Nobles. Three miles from
Namurcum there is the rich town Audennas, in which there is an ancient
N^^nery of Noble women, built by Begga the daughter of Pipin, from whom they
were first called Baggine Vestalls. Also between N^murcum and Dinantum on the
mountain Palvagius, there are so^^ ruins of the ancient City Caprimont,
which was wasted in (...) Leodiensian wars. Four miles from Namurcum is
Bovina, a lit^^ Town by the River Mosella, which the Earl Henry walled an^
1176. In the year 1554, in the time of the French war it was raze^ down to
ground. But afterward the Citizens did reedifie it. Walcuria, which the
Dutchmen call Waelhovan is situated 7 miles from Namurcum, on the banck of the
river Aurca, it was first a Castle, and afterward about the year 910 it was
walled about. Carlomon (...) built by Charles the fifth; Anno 1555 against the
Frenchmen, (...) then possessed Marieburg, it has an impregnable Castle, it
is s^^ted on the left hand bancke of the River Mosa, three miles fr^^ Marieburg.

map of Mamurcium ^HE COVNTIE OF MAMVRCIVM.


THE DVKEDOME OF LVTZENBVRG.
The Country whence so called.
THe Dukedom of Lutzenburg is so named from the chief City, which (as some
suppose) was so called from the River Elza, which Antoninus calls Alesontia.
From Elza came Elzenburch, and from thence Lutzenburg Peter Dinaeus does give
another opinion concerning Lutzenburg in these words: It is not to be doubted
(says he) b^ that the Leutians did dwell next to the Treverians,
Mediomatricians, and Lingonians: their Towns Tullus and Nasium celebrated by
Ptolemie, do keep the names of Toul and Nancy; in their own language I
believe they were called, de Lutzen, and had a large command, so that the name
of the famous Town of Lutzenburg was derived from them, The Situation:
as if you should say der Lutzenburg. The Leodian and Namurcians do bounder
this Duchy on the North, on the East Mosella with the Bishopric of Trevers;
on the West Mosa with the wood Arden. The compass or circuit of the whole
Country is 70 miles. Although this Country be mountainous and woody, yet it
has a plenteous, and fruitful soil. It is divided into two parts, the one
whereof is called Famenna, and the other Arduenna, Fa^menna is more fruitful,
and has greater store of corn and coin. Arduenna is more rugged, The
fruitfulness of the soil.
but affords good hunting, and is full of diver excellent kinds of wild
beasts. There is Iron Oar not far from Manderscheid, in the Lordships of
Keyla, Cronenberch, and Sled^ near to a vale called Hellenthal. In this place
there are made Anvills, Fornaces and Vices, which are sold through all parts of
Germany. The ancient Government.
It was but a County at the first, and so the Emperor Henry the seventh was
Earl of Lutzenburg, but not Duke. Afterward ^^ was made a Dukedom, at it
continues at this day; which some do^ attribute to Wenceslaus, a King of the
Romans, and others to Charle^ the fourth. Conradus Vercetius does ascribe it
to Henry the seventh, who was the first Roman Emperor of that house*
Ortelius writes that he found in ancient Manuscript, that Sigifrid^ was the
first Earl of this County: and that he was the son of Pacuinus Duke of
Mosella. For heretofore Lutzenburg did belong to the Treverians. It has 20
Cities fortified with walls and Rampires the names whereof are; Lutzenburg,
Arlunum, Rodemachera, Theonis villa, The names of the Cities.
Gravemacherum, Vianda, Bastonacum, Mommedium, Novum Castrum, Danvillerium,
Marvilla, Roccha, Durbis, S. Vit^urbs, Marza and Sala. There are also some
Cities whose Wall^ map of Lutzenburg ^HE DVKEDOME OF LVTZENBVRG.
are levelled with the ground: There are also the Castells o^ S. John and
Manderscheid, which are as big as small Cities, and have Counties belonging
to them. The chief City is Lutzenburg, some call it Lucemburg, and Luceburg;
Ptolomie calls it Augusta Romandiorum. Guicciardine would have it called
Lutzenburg as it were Lucisburg, that is, the Castle of the Sun: as also
many other places in this tract may seem to have been named from the gods of
the Gentiles: as Arlun from the Altar of the Moon, Iuois from Jupiter, March
from Mars; but whether the name be rightly derived from hence, let another
judge. The City is situate most pleasantly, part of it on the side of a
Mountain, and part of it on plain ground: The River Elza does water, and
divides the higher and lower mountainous part of the City, from the lower
part. There are many fair aedifices and houses in it, which yet the wars
have somewhat defaced: and also a Church consecrate to S. Nicolas: and a
Monastery to S. Francis, in which John of Lutzenburg, King of Bohemia, the
son of the Emperor Henry the seventh, and father of Charles the fourth, was
buried. This City has been often defaced by the fury of Mars, who has no
agreement with the Muses, who love peace and tranquillity; yet it has bred many
famous learned men. And among many others, Nicolas Navis a man so learned and
skillful in the civil law, that he was Praesident of the Court at Lutzenburg
until he dyed: but he left a son of his own name, who being equal to his
father in virtue, was in such favor with the Emperor Charles the fifth, that
he made him Vicechancellour of the whole Empire, in which office he continued
until his death. Arlunum which is called in their language, is situate on the
top of a hill, being a very neat town, where the Moon was worshipped after
the manner of the heathens, and from thence it is supposed to have been so
named. Here many Monuments of antiquity are found, which the Earl Peter
Ernest caused to be brought home to his own house, which is in the suburbs of
the City of Lutzenburg. Bartholmew Latomus a very learned man, was borne in
this country: Which is watered with many rivers, The Rivers.
the chiefest of which is Mosella, of which I have spoke in Lotaringia: the
others are Chier, Mosa, Be moy, Houl, Lech, Alsatus, Atardus, Sourus, Prumeus,
Mineus, Ghomeus, Ort^, Albis, and besides many little Rivuletts. The Country is
raised on every side with Mountains, Mountains.
and interlaced with thick woods. But all of them are but boughs in respect
of the Forest of Arden in France. The politic state as inthe other
Countries, Woods.
does consist of three members; The Government.
first, the Clergy; secondly, the Nobles, in which are the Counts of Vianden,
of la Roch en Ardenne, Salme, Durby, March, S. Vit. S. Iansberg. There are
also many Baronies and Lordships. The third member is the principal Cities,
as Lutzenburg, Arlunum, Theonis villa, otherwise called Dietenhove, and
Rodemachera: The Court for the whole Province is kept in the City of
Lutzenburg, and the pleadings are in French or Dutch, according as the
Plantiffes are of several Countries. For Lutzenburg, Arlunum, Theenis Villa,
and Rodemachera, do speak Dutch, but Ivoys, Mammedy, Marville, and
Danvilliers do speak French, in regard whereof it is necessary that the
Judges and Advocates and the officers of the Court, should understand both
languages. From this Court appeals may be brought to Mechlin, where those
things which are written in Dutch are faithfully translated into French.

This Dukedom has two Marquiships under it, seven Counties, many Baronies,
and Lordships, and great store of Noble men, so that to Province does produce
so many. All of them do live magnificently, and are courteous, virtuous,
constant, and faithful to their Prince. Their exercise is Arms and hunting.
They live civilly and courteously together, visiting one another in mutual
kindnesses. They contract marriages with their neighbors, and in their matches
they do more respect honor and dignity than portion. If any one do commit an
enormity, he loses his credit, and is not admittted to converse with the
Nobles, and is thought to be unworthy of any public office, and his oath is
not esteemed in public trialls. If any controversy do arise amongst them,
they refer it to certain Arbitrators, who are to compound and end the
matter, so that they have no great use of Lawyers and Proctors: yet they are
too much given to wine. And the Country people do complain very much of their
hard usage and servitude, so that if a Countryman intend to put forth his
children, he cannot do it without his Lords leave, which is far different
from the liberty of the Low Countries. Arlunum, which we mentioned before, is
situate on the top of a Mountain, and is four miles distant from Lutzenburg,
and six from Mommedy. It was sometime a fair Town, but somewhat defaced by
the violence of wars. Rodemachera is three miles distant from Lutzenburg,
which though it be no great town, yet is very beautiful, and fortified with a
strong Castle. Theodonis-villa, which in Dutch is called Dietenh^n^, is very
conveniently situated on the left hand bancke of the River Mosella: it is four
miles from Lutzenburg, having a fair bridge; it is a pleasant strong Town and
well fortified against the invasions of enemies. Regino affirms that Charles
the Great was used to hunt very much near unto this City. Gravemakerum and
Koninck^akerum are small little Towns near Mosella, being a mile distant one
from another, and 5 miles from Lutzenburg. Dieterichum is seated near the
little River Sure, and is five miles distant from Lutzenburg. Viretonum and
Echternatum are little small towns, and are both five miles distant from
Lutzenburg. Vianda stands by the side of a little Riuulet, seven miles from
Lutzenburg; it has a County belonging to it, and is subject to the Prince of
Orange. Bas^nacum is near unto the Forest of Arden, being three miles from
the new Castle, and 17 from Lutzenburg. It is a little Town, but so famous
heretofore that it was called Paris en Ardenne, in regard of the markets for
Cattle and Corn, which were usually kept there, whither the Country round
about did bring all sorts of commodities to the great enriching of the Town.
Between this City and Arlunum, and S. Huberts Church, there are some
Villages in the middle of the wood, in which the women after the Spanish
fashion, when their husbands are carried forth to be buried and interred, do
run crying and weeping through the streets, tearing their hair and
scratching their faces; with their nails, in a mad and furious manner, which
custom does rather savor of Heatheanisme than Christianity. Mommedium is
conveniently situated on a high mountain, at the foot whereof the River
Chirsus glideth along; it is nine miles distant from Lutzenburg, and four from
Danvillieres, being a fair fortified town. New-Castell is in Ardenne; it is 5
Miles distant from Ivosium, and nine from Lutzenburg; it is now a small Town,
and much decayed. Danvillieres is twelve miles distant from Lutzenburg; and
four from Verdunum, being in Lothariagia. Marville is divided into two parts,
the one whereof is subject to the Duke of Lutzenburg, and the other to the Duke
of Lotharingia; and therefore it is called the common Town; it stands by the
River Chirsus, and is 12 miles distant from Lutzenburg. Roch^en Ardenne, or the
Rock in Ardenne, and Durbium are twelve miles distant from Lutzenburg, being
both pleasantly seated. S. Vitt. is a very pleasant small town, and is 12
miles distant from the Metropolis, and belongs to the Prince of Orange, Salma
is a rich and populous City, having a County appendant unto it. Marcha is a
very ancient Town, and is 14 miles from Lutzenburg. We will not mention for
brevitie sake the Castells and famous Villages, in this Province, but will
only name three unwalled Cities. First Ivosium which is 12 miles from
Lutzenburg, and four from Mommedy, being heretofore a good strong Town, but at
last Henry the second, King of France, begirt it round with an Army in the
year 1552. and took it; but afterward a peace being made, it was restored
back again to Philip the second, King of Spain, but the walls were ruinated
as at Teroana, and a law was made that it should not be walled in again.
Chinium is 12. miles from Lutzenburg, which is unwalled, but by degrees it is
reedified. It has a County belonging to it, although it be subject to the
Archdukes, and has a large jurisdiction over some towns and Villages, neither
is it subject to the Dukedom of Lutzenburg, but is joined unto it. Twelve
miles from Lutzenburg, stands the Town la Ferte near the River Chirsus,
being heretofore a pleasant City, and now also it flourishes although it be
unwalled, and a great part of the Castle be fallen down, but so much
concerning these things. Let us pass to Limburg.

THE DVKEDOME OF LIMBVRG, with the Appendances thereunto.
THe Dukedom of Limburg which this Table does exhibit and present, The Country
whence so called.
being so called from Limburg the Metropolis thereof, is bounded on the West,
with Leodium and Trajectum, The Situation
which are two famous Cities by the River Mosa; on the North with the Dukedom
of Iuliacum: on the East with the Imperial City Aquisgranum, and the
Monastery of S. Cornelius: on the South with the Countries of Francimont and
Aqua Spadana. The temper of the air.
All this tract as it is pleasant in Summer, so in winter it is unpleasant, in
regard it is covered all that time with snow, which is so deep that it lies
in many places, a great part of Summer. The soil is fruitful, and has
abundant stoare, The fruitfulness of the soil.
of all things, except wine. For it bears excellent Barley and wheat, of
which they make very white bread. There are good pastures for feeding of
Cattle, and for making of Cheese. And it yields many wholesome Harbes both
for Sallets, and Physic. There is also great stoare of Sulphur, through the
hollow crannyes whereof it is likely that the hot fountains at Aqua Spadana
(so famous for many ages) do run. As of late there is found in those parts a
Mine of Lead and Tin; and it is probable that a Vein of gold and silver may
be found hereafter in those places. Moreover between Walhormus and Montzius,
there is a Mine found of that ash color stone, of which brass is made, which
is also medicinal, which Plinye calls Cadmia, and the brazen stone, being not
much unlike the stone Pyritos. The words of Pliny, Lib. 34. cap. 1. are these.
Fit and (...) e Lapide aeroso, quem vocant Cadmiam. That is, And there is
brass made of a brazen stone, which they call Cadmia. The Germans call it
Covaltum: and the Shops call it Climia and Cathimia. It seems that the like
stone was found in the I Will of Cyprus: but on this side the Alps there is none
found but this in Limburg. The ancient Government.
The Country of Limburg was heretofore a County, but it was made a Dukedom
in the year 1172, by the Emperor Frederick surnamed Barbarossa: and the
Princes of this Country were heretofore also Duks of Lotaringia. At length
Henry the last Duke of Limburg dying without issue, John the first of that name
Duke of Brabant, did succeed him in the year 1293. He albeit he had lawfully
before bought this Dukedom, yet he got and purchased it by the sword, and
overthrew Raymund Earl of Gelderland who then possessed it: in which battle
the Earl of Gelderland, and the Bishop of Gelderland were taken: There were
slain Henry Prince of Luxenburg, and his three brothers who did join
themselves with the Earl of Gelderland. Duke John having gotten this Victory,
did race and demolish the Castle commonly called Worone, and leveld it with
the ground: and so from that tim^ the Dukedom of Limburg came to be governed
by the Dukes o^ Brabant. Out of this Dukedom and from the Prince thereof which
came of the Lotharingian family, the first King of Portugal was descended,
namely Henry Duke of Lotharingia, and Earl of Iamburg a man of a great
courage, and ready in matter of arms, as the A^^nall of Spain, do more fully
and plainly deliver, and we our selves have mentioned it before in the
description of Portugal. The Mess^^^^ or mother City of the whole Dukedom
is Limburg, being (...) on a high rock, and fortified with a rugged deep
valley: it is ^^cessible rather by the natural situation of the place than by
hu^^^ industry: unless it be on the South, where the ground rising for what
higher, descends by degrees from the City, until it opened into a fair
plain. In the lower part of this City on the North^^^ there is a Castle
built of pure Marble being a kind of Common ^^^per, of which this Country
yields great store; both near the Town of Hevermont and also in other
places. It is no wonder (...) the City was seated on so high a rock,
especially if you behold the suburbs thereof, which were heretofore twice as
big as the C^^^ Whereby it came to pass that the Castle was built in the
mi^^^ that so it might command the City and the suburbs, But Gasto^^ Spinola,
Earl of Bruacum, is now governor of this Dukedom (...) of all the Country
beyond Mosa; and to prevent all violent attempt has made two new Gates in this
City to repress the violent (...) treachery of enemies. The City is
watered with the (...) which is full of excellent Trouts, that are as big as
any (...) and great store of Crab-fishes, which the aforesaid River or (...)
(for sometimes the Channel is very small) does feed fat, while (...) live
between stones and clefts of rocks. John Fleming a Christ (...) Antwerpe, a
learned man and a famous Poet, was borne in this (...) and Remaclius Fuschius a
great Scholar, who published many both (...) and diverse works, was borne here
also. The Townsemen for the (...) part do follow clothing, and do make every
year great store (...) cloth, and do transport it into diverse parts of the
Low C^^^^^ Near the City there is much Iron made, in a furnace and (...)
house ordained for the same purpose, so that 6000 Caroli do ^^ defray the
yearly charge thereof. But the City has no be (...) buildings in it. For it
is but small, and has only two Gates, and ascent unto it is very steep. It
has one Church consecrated to George, which has a provost. This City was
yielded to John Austria, when he brought his army thither, a certain Capt^^
having betrayed the Castle of Hende unto him before. He that governor of the
place, desired the States to furnish him with pre^^^sion and munition, as soon
as he heard that John of Austria was coming with an army to beseige the
City: and promised the Sta^^ that if he were furnished with the aforesaid
munition, he would sily suppress the enemies violence. All things were sent
which desired, but he did not perform that which he boasted he wo^^^ map of
Limburg ^HE DVKEDOME OF LIMBVRG.
do: for at the enemies first approach he came to a parley, and yielded it up
unto him without any resistance. Not far from Limburg, yet out of the
Territory thereof, Northward the Spaw Fountains do break forth, which are
so famous and well known. Moreover between Walhormus, and Montzius there are
certain hills commonly called Kelmbergen, in regard of the great store of that
metal and stone above mentioned; which is dug out of them in defense
whereof, the aforesaid Earl has built a Castle. But some few years since
the Batavians burnt it, through the Soldiers negligence. The great wood
commonly called Fangne, lies near unto the City of Limburg, in which there
is excellent hunting. And so much concerning the City itself, and the
Dukedom of Limburg: There are three other Cities which have counties
belonging to them, which are reckoned as appendances to the Dukedom of
Limburg: which are these, Valkenburg, Dalthemium, and Rolducum, of which we
will now speak in order. Valkenburg, in French Fauquemont, is a neat Town,
having jurisdiction over a large Territory, and some Towns, being three long
miles from Aquisgrave, and two little miles from Vltrajectum. It is a fruitful
Country, both for corn, and pasturage: not far from which is the Monastery of
S. Ge^^ae being a fair ancient building. Moreover the County of Valden. was
in the possession of John the third of that name Duke of ^^bant; who took it
by force of arms from Raynout, Lord of ^^^burg: who being a troublesome man,
and having injured the Trajectenses at the River Mosa, was overcome and taken
prisoner by the aforesaid Duke. Dalthemium is a little Town, with a small
Castle belonging to it. It is three long miles from Aquisgranum, and two from
Leodium. It is honored with the title of a County, and has some Villages and
lands beyond Mosa, which are within the jurisdiction thereof. Henry the second,
Duke of Brabant, did possess it, and did join it to his own Territories. The
famous Abbey of the Valley of God belongs to Dalthemium, the Abbot whereof is
the chief man of that Country, and besides this, there is the Abbey of the
holy Cross. Rolducum is an old Town with an ancient Castle. It is a mile
distant from Valkenburg, and it is the fourth Lordship beyond Mosa, and it has
a Tribunal or Court of Justice, but the Senate of Brabant have the oversight
of it. Here I cannot pass by the village commonly called Carpen, between
Iuliacum and the Colonie, being two long miles from the Rhene. It is as big as
a little Town, and has a Collegiate Church as they call it, and has Faires
and Markets, whither all sorts of commodities are brought, and a great
confluence of people do resort unto it: it has also a Castle well fortified.
William Nassavius Prince of Orange, passing over the Rhene took it in the
year 1568, and fortified it with a Garrison. All these parts being gathered
together do make a great Lordship, which was used to be governed by a peculiar
Lord, but the Dukes of Limburg have now subjected it to themselves, although it
have a Prefect beside, who lies there with a strong Garrison. This Country
has three other Rivulets besides Mosa, which at length become Rivers; namely
Beruinum which waters Dalthemium, Geuda which runs by Valckenburg, and
Worma which glideth by Rodulcum. Moreover as well the Dukedom of Limburg, as
the other States and Lordships aforesaid, do consist of three members, namely
the Clergy, the Nobles, and the Judges. The Dukedom of Limburg does contain
five members or divisions, which they call Bancas, Hervium, Spremontium,
Balenium, Walhornum, and Montzium: the two former whereof are governed by
Majors, and the three latter by magistrates called Drossards. And so much
concerning the Dukedom of Limburg, and the appendances thereunto, I pass to
the rest.

A PROFITABLE instruction concerning the Tables of GERMANY.
FOrasmuch as the Roman Empire is in the power of the Germans, and very
politickely divided into parts, I think it a matter worth my labor to set
before your eyes the order and disposition of those parts, as they are
described in a writing called Matricula Imperij: and afterward to show you in
Tables the several members of this Empire, that the studious Reader may find
in what Country they are situated. But I have gotten two Coppies of this
Matricula, the one written; the other printed at Venice in Italian, being both
much corrupted. And I know that the Empire is now divided in another manner.
Therefore let no man blame me, or be offended, if he find some parts that are
reckoned as belonging to the Empire, do not belong thereunto, for it is not my
intention to speak expressly of all the several parts of this Empire,
neither was it possible for me to do, out of such corrupt Coppies; especially
seeing that I know that a great part of the Empire, came into the hands of
private Princes, either by Exchange, or Morgage, or gifts, for their good
service in defense of the Empire, or for some other causes. Neither is it my
part to prosecute those things which belong to Politicians, and not
Geographers, but only I sought that out of this Coppie of Matricula, I might
show the elegant disposition and division of the Empire of Germany, and might
declare how the studdies of Geographie, and Policy do mutually illustrate one
another. This is therefore the order of the Empire.

The Emperor is the head of the Empire.
And he has three States under him, who meet together to consult and conclude
of all the affairs of the Empire, namely the seven Electors, who were first
instituted about the year of our Lord 1273 by Pope Gregory the tenth, and
were confirmed by the Emperor Charles the fifth, as Onuphrius shows in
Comitijs Imperatorijs, and John Aventine Lib. 5. of his history of Bavaria.
These have power to elect and choose the Emperor. The second State is the
Ecclesiastical and saecular Princes. The third is the free Cities.

map of Germany GERMANY.


The first member therefore of the Empire is the seven Electors.
THe Archbishop of Moguntinum, Arch-chancellor of the Roman Empire through
Germany. The Archbishop of Trevers, Arch-chancellor of the Roman Empire
through France, and the Kingdom of Arelatum. The Archbishop of Collen,
Archchancellor of the Roman Empire through Italy. The King of Bohemia chief^
pantler of the Roman Empire. The Count Palatine of Rhene, the chief
cupbearer of the Roman Empire. The Duke of Saxony, chief Marshall of the
Roman Empire. The Marquess of Brandenburg, chief Chamberlain of the
Roman Empire.
The second member is the Princes and Nobles.
I will set down the common names of places as they are in the Tables, and the
number of the Circles in which they are afterward mentioned, that so they may
be more easily found in the Tables.

The Biships of Magdeburg 9 Saltzburg 2 Besancon 5 Bremon 9 Halberstat in the
ninth Circle. Ferden 7 Munster 7 Osenbrug 7 Passaw 2 Frisingen 2 Kempse Gurck
or Goritz 3 Seckaw 3 Havandt 5 Basel 5 Sitten or Wallis 5 Regensburg 2 Maissen
8 Naumburg 8 Minden 7 Lubeck 8.9 Vtricht 7 Camin 8 Swerin 9 Gen^^^ 5 Can^^k 7
Verdun 5 Losan 5 Metz 5 Toul 5 Luyck 5 Trent 7 Brixen 3 Merspurg 3 Labach 8
Vienna 3 Brandenburg 8 Ratzenburg 9 Schleswick 9 Havelburg 8
The secular Princes and Nobles are
The Duke of Bavaria 2 The Arch Duke of Austria 3 The Duke of Saxony 8 The
Duke of Burgundy 10 The Palatine of Bavaria 2 The Duke of Cleveland 7 The
Marquess of Brandenburg 8.1 The Duke of Lunenburg 9 The Duke of Pomeren 9
(...) Duke of Mekelenburg 9 (...) Lawenburg 9 (...) Holsten 9 (...) Lotringen.
5 (...) Landgrave of Hessen 5 (...) Wirtenberg 5 (...) Zweibrug 4 ^. Sp^nheym 5
The Marquess of Baden 4. 5. 7 The Landgrave of Lutchtenburg. 2 The Prince of
Anhalt 8 The Earl of Hennenberg 1 The Burgrave of Meissen.
The French Princes are.
Duke Meiss or Massa D. Savoy D. Chalon
The Clergy are
The Prior and Abbot of Fuld. 5 It. Ab. Hiersfeldt 5 It. Ab. Kemten 4 Ab.
^eichenaw 4 Pr. Prapos. Wissenburg 5 Pr. Ab. S. Galli 4 Pr. Ab. Salfeldt 8 Pr.
Prapos. Elwangen Teutschordens Master 3 Iohans ordens Master 5 Ab. Waingarten
4 Ab. Salmanswercher 4 Ab. Krutzlingen. 4 P. Ab. Murpach. 5 Ab. Walkenriedt 8
Ab. Schuttem. 4 Ab Weissenow or Minderaw. 4 Ab. S. Blasi. 4 Ab. Maulprun. 4 It.
Ab. Corbey 7 Ab Schussenriedt 4 Ab. Rittershausen 8 Ab. Stein am Reyn 4 Pr. Ab.
Scarfhauson. 4 Ab. Kempeseck 2 Ab. Waldsachsen 2 Ab. Finsidoln 4 Ab, Rokenburg*
4 Ab. Ochsenhausen 4 Praepos, Seltz. 6 Ab. S. Gilgen 1 Ab. Nuenburch Ab. S.
Maximinus near Triers 6 Ab. Heneldshansen Ab. S. Iohans zu Curtel Ab.
Gengenbach 4 Ab. Koningsbrun 4 Ab. Rodt, otherwise Roden 2 Ab. Markthal 4 Ab.
Rockerhausen Ab. S. Peter in Schworztwald. 4 Praepos. Odenheim 5 Pr. Ab.
Stablo. 7 Ab. Disidiense 4 Ab. Berkenhausen Ab. Elchingen 4 Ab. Hentzlingen Ab.
Vrssevis Ab. Planckenburg Ab. Yssin Ab. Pfessers 4 Ab. S. John in Thurtal. 4
Ab. Peterhausen 4 Ab. Pruim. 5 Praepos. Camberg. 1 Ab. Reishaim 2 Ab. S.
Heimeram at Ratisbon 2 Praepos. Berchtolsgadon 2 Ab. S. Gegory at Munster 5 A.
Muncherode 4 Ab. S. Cornelis at Munster 7 Ab. Werden. 7 Ab. Aursperg. 4 Ab.
Yrse. 4 Ab. Brun. 4 Ab. Echtermaken 7 Ab. Hervorden 7
The Abbatesses.
Of Quedelnburch 8 Essen. 7 Alt Munster to Regensburg 2 Pr. Ober Munster to
Regensb^ Kauffingen ^ Lindaw. 4 Pr. Gernrode. 8 Buchaw. 4 Rotenmunster 4
Hippach. 4 Gutenzel 4 Beundt. 4 Baley Coblentz. 6 Elsas 4 Osterich 3 In der
Etsch. 3

The Earls Barons and Lords.
The Earl of Helfenstein 4 Earl Kirchberg 4 H. Tussen 4 Ea: Wisenstaig 4 E.
Lauffen. 4 E. Montfort. 4 E. Furstenberg 4 E. Zimmeren 4 B. Gundelfingen 4 H.
Stutgart 4 H. Iustiugen 4 H. Schenstingen Marckg. Eberstein 4 B. Gerolt Zeck 4
B. Ober Hewn 4 E. Otingen 4 B. Rapoltstain 5 H. Rapoltzkircken 5 B. Stauffen
2.4 H. Hohen Rechperg 5 H. Berletzicke H. Hohen Konigsperg H. Hohenfeldt and
Tipoltzkirch E. Sultz. 4 E. Hogen Zollem 4 H. Braides. B. Sonnenberg. 4 E.
Castle 1 E. Vertheim 1 E. Rheineck. 1 E. Hohenloe. 1 H. Reichelsperg 1 H.
Limburg. 1 E. Erpach 1 E. Leiningen 5 E. Falckstein 5 E. Hanaw ^ E. Luchtenberg
^ E. Nassaw, Breda, and Dillen 1 E. Wisbaden and Iltzstain ^ E. Sarbrucken. ^
E. Waldipurg. ^ E. Nassaw in W^^tpurg ^ E. Belstein ^ E. Koningstein and
Epstein ^ E. Eisenberg the higher ^ E. Eisenberg the lower. ^ E. Mersen ^ E.
Budinghen ^ E. Wirnenburg ^ E. Solms ^ B. Vinnenburg or Vanenberg ^ E.
Arnsberg. ^ E. Of Rhene ^ H. Falckenstein ^ H. Kunseck. ^ H. Kunseckerberg ^
Count Horn ^ Count Seyn ^ Co. Vintzlingen ^ Co. Reyen. ^ Co. Bitsch. ^ Co.
Salm ^ Co. Veldentz. ^ Co. Dengen ^ Co. Rappin ^ Co. Hardech. 3 Co. Hohenstein
^ Co. Wolkenstein 3 Co. Schaumburg and ^lergen. 7. 3 Co. Dierenberg, and
Semeraw. 7 Co. Mansfeilt 8 Co. Stolberg 8 Co. Buchlingen 8 Co. Barbey and
Mus^ingen 8 Co. Gleichen. 1.8 Co. Schwart^^enburg ^ Co. Suenberg, or schonberg.
^ Co. Jude H. ^^m Ritech. ^ H. Geraw. ^ Co. Ples. 5 Co. Plawen 8 Co. Weda and
Ringelberg 7 H. Reichenstein. ^ ^. Olnbrug. ^. Lebenstain 4 ^. Regenstain ^.
Westfrieslandt. ^. Ostfrieslandt 7 ^^, Vander Lip 7 ^, Oldenburg 7 ^^.
Delmenhorst 9 ^^. Hoya. 7 ^^. Westenburg 5 ^. Muntzenburg 5 ^^. Lemgow ^o.
Waldeck 5 ^. Lostenstein. Co. D^epholt. 7 Co. Steinfort 7 Co. Benthem. 7 Co.
Brunchorst 7 Co. Witgenstein Co. Spagelberg Co. B^versdorff H. ^^dberg. 7 Co.
Teckelnborg 7 H. L^nge. Co. Dortmund 7 Co. Winsdorff Co. Ortenberg. 2 Co.
Rippershoden Co. Hagen 2 Co. Heonfels 2 Co. Lecseneck 8 ^^. Bergen. 10 C.
Degenburg 2 ^. Obersultzberg E. Somiriss Co. Manderscheid 7 Co. Reiferscheidt 6
Co. Egmont and Isselstein 10 H. Bergen and Waelhelm 10 E. Haber, alias Havere.
5 E. Wildenfelfs, or Widerfels. 8 E. Tautenberg. 8 Co. Tubingen. 4 Co.
Blanckenberg or Blammont 5 Co. Kirchingen, Krehanges 5 H. Senster 3 H.
Roggendorff 3 H. Alendorff. H. Kunigfuckerbeg H. Morspurg and Befort 5 H.
Brandenstein and Rans^ ^ H. Wolfsteine H. Permont H. Fronsbek H. Flackenstein
H. Witten Ritt. Fridberg Ritt. Gleichausen.
In this second member, some do want numbers, because they are not mentioned
afterward in the Circles. Pr. signifies Princes, Ghe. Fursten, a Praelate, D.
Dukes, Co. Countes. H. Heerschafften, Lords, B. Barons.

The third member of the Empire is of the free Cities.
Rheinische Banck, Coln 6. 8 Aken 7 Worms 5 Spier 5 Turckheim 5 Hagenaw 5
Weissenberg 5 Straesburg 5 Ober Ebenhaim 5 Roshaim 5 Schletstat 5 Colmar 5
Altach 5 Basel 5 Kaisersberg 5 Mulhausen in Suntgow 5 S. Gregoris Munster 5
Metz 5 Toul 5 Verdun 5 Landaw 5 Kaufmans Sarbruck 5 Besancon 5 Camerick 7
Franckfort 5 Fridberg in Wederaw 5 Gelnhausen 6 Wetzlar. 5 Aleu. 4 Lubeck 9
Hamborg 9 Dortmund 7 Mulhusen in Duringon 9 Northansen. 9 Goster 9 Gottingen 9
Brakel 7 Wartburg 7 Lemgow 7 Duysburg 7 Dantzick 8 Elbinghen Schwabishche
Banck.
Regensburg 2 Nurenberg 1 Rottenburg ander Tauber 1 Weissenburg an Nortgaw 2
Donawerd 4 Washaim 1 Schweinfurt 1 Wimpfen 4 Hailbrun 4 Hal in Schwaben 4
Norlingen 4 Dinkelspuel 4 Vim Ausptrg Gengen Bopfingen Gemunt in Schwaben
Eslingen Reutlingen Weyl Pfullendorff Kauffbeurum Northausen Vberlingen Wagen
Ysni Lewkirch Memmingen Kempten Buchorn Ravenrsburg Bibrach Lindaw Costintz 4
Rotweil 4 Offenburgk 4 Gengenbach 4 Zel in Hamesbach 4 Schaffhausen 4 S. Gal 4
Buchaw am Federsee 4
Besides these several members, for the avoiding of schisms i^ the Empire,
and for the mutual defense, and common preservatio^ of peace among the Princes
of Germany, the Province or the Empire are divided into certain Countries,
which they all ^ircuite and in them there are particular Counsels appointed,
which belong to several Circuits. First, 6 were instituted in the year 1500
(...) Augusta, and afterward 10 in the year 1522 at Norimberg. But (...) very
Circuit chooses out of themselves a secular P^eafect, who either a Prince, a
Count, a Baron, or one of the chief of the Noble to whom four Counselors
chosen out of the same body, being honest, and wise men, are joined as
assistants. I will here only reckon up the Circuits, but in the Tables I will
describe their Prince and their parts.

The first Circle is of Franconia, and it shall be described in the Table of
Franconia.

The second is of Bavaria, and it shall be unfolded in the Table thereof.

The third is of Austria, and it shall be declared in the Table o^ Austria.

The fourth is of Suevia, in the table of Wirtenberg.

The fifth is in the Circuit of Rhene, and it shall be unfolded in the Table
of the lower Alsatia.

The sixth is of the four Electors of Rhene, in the Table of the Paletinate.

The seventh is of Lower Germany, in the first Table of Westphalia.

The eight is of lower Saxony, in the same table.

The ninth of lower Saxony in the same table.

The tenth of Burgundy, in the table of higher Burgundy.

The Imperial Chamber.
Besides these Counsels in the Circuits, for the deciding of more weighty
business which happen in the Empire, there is an Imperial chamber instituted
at Spires, in which there is a Prince for the Praesident, or at least an Earl,
or some secular man that is thought ^^ for this office. He has also two
Barons or Earls to be his assistants, two Lawyers, and two Noble men, which
have haereditary Lands, and Manors in the Empire; so that in all he has six
assistants. Moreover he has one of the Electors, and two out of every Circ^^e,
the one half whereof is chosen out of the Lawyers, and the other half out of
the Gentry.

A Catalogue of the Tables in Germany.
1. Germany in general. 2. West Friesland. 3. The County of Embden. 4. The
first Table of Westphaelia. 5. The second Table. 6. The Bishopric of Munster.
7. The third Table of Westphalia. 8. The Archbishopricke of Colen 9. the fourth
Table of Westphalia. 10. The Diocaese of Leodium. 11. The County of Muers and
Cleveland. 12. Waldecke. 13. The Palatinate of Rhene. 14. Wirtenberg. 15.
Alsatia the Lower. 16. Alsatia the higher. 17. Saxony the Lower. 18.
Brunswijck. 19. Hassia. 20. Nassovia. 21. Thieringia. 22. Franconia. 23. The
Dukedom of Bavaria. 24. The Palatinate of Bavaria, the bounds whereof
Northward, See in the Table of Franconia. 25. Saxony the higher. 26.
Brandenburg. 27. Pomerania. 28. The Islands of Rugia. 29. Bohemia. 30. Moravia.
31. Austria. 32. Saltzburg. 33. Polonia and Silesia. 34. Polonia. 35. Hungary.
GERMANY.
THus you have seen the description of the Low coutrie both in general and
special: now passing over the Rhene high Germany, which Ptolemie calls great
Germany, offers it self, which is the largest Country of Europe, and the
glory of the Roman Empire. This Country I will ^^nne over in the same method
as I did the other, describing it first in general, and then in particular.
But that I may begin with the name thereof, diverse do diversely derive the name
of Germany or the Germans. One says, that the Germans were so called as
it were Germanie^, that is, stout men, in regard of their Martial manly
strength another supposes that they were so named, from their mutual
fidelity, and faithfulness; neither did he guess much amiss, who deriveth
the Etymology of their name from their honorable warfare, as if the people
were called Geertmans, and so by contraction of the word Germans. Another
thinks that they were so determinated from the Latin word genuini, that is,
genuine or native because no nation does retain more of their ancient
integrity, and justic^e simplicity: but it seems that the author of this
dream did speak this to gain the favor of the people: albeit the Geographer
(...) and Livy do both erroniously suppose that the Roma^^^ people did give
this name to this country, because they were Cosen Germans to the Celtae,
both in regard of their manners, and fashions, and also in respect of their
great stature, and red have John G^ropius Becanus does probably derive the name
thereof from their gathering and mustering of soldiers, from Geren, which
signifies to gather or muster. Which opinion Tacitus seems to fortitie and
confirm, who professes in his commentary of the Germanies manners, that
Germany is a new fresh name, because they who first passed over Rhene (that I
may use his own words) having droven on the Frenchmen, were sometime called
Tungrians, and sometimes Germanies, which name afterward grew so frequent, that
first the Conqueror, and afterward they themselves, did call themselves
Germanies. Some do interpret the word German to signify a scattered people,
collected out of other nations, from the word Geren which signifies to collect
or gather together. Some do suppose their denomination does intimate that they
were a warlike people desirous of war, from Gerra, or Guerra, which signifies
war. A learned Saxon does derive the name thereof from the Carmanians a
people of Asia, whom Lucan mentions, as the Saxons were so called from the
Sacians: and in other places he deduces the Etymology of their namely from an
Hebrew word, as it were Ger^mani, which in that language signifies strangers or
poor and needy people. But Pencerus delighting in the studious searching out
the original of his Countries name, thinks that they were called Germans,
as it were Hermenner; that is, military men. The most learned Iunius does
derive the name of it from the great Deluge, which drowned all the world: when
Noah parted the world among his three children: at what time (that I may speak
nothing of Sem and Cham) Europe fell to Iaphets share. He, as it appears in
Moses, had a son, called Gomer, who had three sons, Aschenaz, Rephat, and
Thogarma. And they affirm that the Germans descended from Thogarma: although
the Rabines do hold that the Germans came from Aschenazin. For the original
of the Germans name does clearly shine forth in the word Thogarma, or
Thegerma, by taking the second vowell for the first, as if we should pronounce
it in our language by the article the, The Germans: also there is a fit
Etymology answerable to the word and nation, which is from Gara or Gera, which
signifies a bone, and metaphorically strength, because it is a stout and
strongbon'd Nation. Some also do call this part of Europe Alemaine, and the
inhabitants thereof Alemans, by which name they were first called, when the
Empire began to decline. Berosus does fabulously report, it was so called from
Hercules an Alemaine, who was governor over these people. Some suppose that it
was called Alemaine, from Mannus who was esteemed as a god in their Country,
the son of Tuiscon. Asinius Quadrus a faithful historian, does affirm that
the Almaines, were so called as it were a people collected and gathered from
all Nations, which spread themselves all over this Country; who did not, as it
seems, look exactly into the signification of the word, for he should have
called them Almaines because they were all men, and warriors. They that derive
Alemanie from the Lake Lemann, would have Germany so called from a Lake without
the limits thereof in Saban^^^ unless some do take the Aeronian Lake for the
Lake Leman, on either bank whereof the Almaines did inhabit, as Ammianus
reports Lib. 15. And though some do promiscuously make Germany and Almany al
one, yet it is observed that they were two distinct Countries. Spartianus in
the life of Marius says: Omnis Alemannia, omnisque Germania, cum caeteris quae
adjacent gentibus; that is, All Almany, and Germany with the other adjacent
countries. Flavius Vopiscus says in the lif of Probus: Testes sunt Franci,
inuijs strati paludibus, testes Germani and Alemanni, long a Rheni semoti
littoribus, that is, The Frenchmen are witnesses, who dwell in the Low grounds,
the Germans are witnesses, and the Almaines who are far off from the
shoares of Rhene. I omit other testimonies, least I should be tedious. Some
also do call it Teutonia, from Teuto a certain Captain thereof some think
that the Teutons, who are called in their own Country speech Teutche, and by
the Italians Tedaschi, and by others Teute^s, were so called from Thuista,
otherwise Thursco, whom they believe was the Son of Noah. Tacitus makes
mention hereof: Celebrant carminibus antiquis (quod unum apud illos memoriae
and Annalium genus est) Thuistonem deum terra editum and filium Mannum,
originem gentis, conditoresque; that is, they celebrate in ancient verses
(which kind of Annalls they do only use) That Thuisto an earthy God and his
son Mannus, were the first founders of this Nation. ^^rabo places them in
Noricum: some suppose that they were the Agrippine Colonie, and that the place
was therefore called Teutsch. The inhabitants do now call it Teutschlandt, and
strangers Almany. The Sclavonians do call it Nimiecha: and the Graecians do
now call it Elamags, and the Turks Alaman. But enough concerning the
Etymology and various appellations of Germany, now I come to the situation or
quantity thereof. Besides, authors do not agree in designing and setting
down the limits of Germany. The ancients do bounder Germany with the Rhene,
Danubius, the Ocean, the River Tanais and the Euxine Sea. The latter writers,
as Strab^, Ptolemie, Mela, Plinnie, and many other Greek and Latin writers,
do bounder it with the River Rhene and Vestula. Tacitus writes that the
mountains, or a mutual distrust one of another, does rather separate the
Germans from the Sarmatians and Dacians, than Vistula. All those Countries
which use the German speech or dialect are reckoned now as parts of Germany.
And therefore it stretches beyond those bounds which Ptolemie gives it, and
beyond Danubius, containing Rhetia, Vindelicia, the higher Pannonia, and beyond
Illyra, even to the Tridentine bounds. Also beyond the Rhene, Germatie did
contain these Roman Colonies, and garrisons, Constantia, Augusta Rauracorum,
Argentina, Nemetes, Vangiones, Mag^^ciacum, Confluentia, Bonna, the Agrippine
Colonie, and other places even unto the Sea. For as Ambrosius witnesses, 11
Hexamer, Rhene was heretofore the limmit of the Roman Empire: and that o^the^
French bancke thereof the Roman Praesidents did always lie in garrison
against the Germans, partly that they might restrain their excursions, and
partly that they might make inroads upon them, and partly that they might
receive those Germans that revolted to them. And this is the Reason, that on
one of the banckes of Rhene, there are many old Cities, but none on the other:
which may also be observed on the bancke of Danubius. Helvetia, also is
reckoned now as a part of Germany: and the Prutenians beyond Vistula: so that
the bounds thereof are now much larger than those which Ptolemie attributes to
it: for on the West it stretches beyond the Rhene, even to Pice^rate and
Burgundy, which are parts of France: on the South toward Danubius even to the
Alps: On the East beyond even to Sprasland: the Northern limit is the Ocean.
There are many chief parts of Germany, which shall be here described, with
the lesser subject o^ adjacent countries. The Kingdoms are, Bohemia, the
Palatinate, and the Kingdom of Poland, though it has a different language,
and is not contained in the Register of the Empire, yet because it is situate
within the bounds of ancient Germany, which is the River Vistula, therefore
we place it among the tables of Germany. Also we join the Kingdom of
Hungary to Germany, which is situate without the limmits of ancient
Germany, and in regard it has yielded many famous Emperors, and has
dominion over many Countries situate within the Empire. There are also the
Dukedom of Saxony, the Arch dukedom of Austria. Also the Dukedomes of Holst,
of Mechlenburg, Pomeren, Lunenburg, Lawenburg, Brunswijck, Metssen, Schlesen,
Moravia, Cleve, Berge, Franconia, or Eastern France, Bavar^a, Wirtenberg, and
the County of Suevia: the Palatinate of Bavaria, the Landgraviats of Hessen,
Duringen, and of the higher and lower Alsatia. The Marckgraniate Electorship of
Brandenburg, and of Baden, the Counties of Embdem, Oldenburg, Benthem, Lip,
Diepholt, Huy, Mansfelt, Anholt, Stolberg, Tirol, and Livonia which is reckoned
among the Provinces of Germany, but because it lies within Sarmatia, it is
there described. The situation being declared, the quality of the soil
follows, which arises chiefly from the climate and position thereof in
respect of the heavens. Germany is under the sixth, seventh, and eighth
climates, between the forty seventh and fifty five degrees of Latitude,
and the twenty fourth and forty sixth degrees of Longitude. The longest day in
summer in the Southern parallel is fifteen hours long and an half: in the
Northern Parallel, it is seaventeene hours long and a quarter; and albeit
Cornelius Tacitus says, that Germany is in a cold sharp climate, and Seneca
reports that it is always winter in Germany: yet it has a temperate air,
which though it be somewhat cold, yet it is healthful and wholesome.

The soil yields Barley, Wheat, Rye, Mill, Oats, and other kinds of corn
and pulse. The fields and Meddowes are fruitful, and the soil is every where
very fertile, and yields great four of Corn. Germany also has rich Mines
of Silver, Brass, Iron, Lead, and other metals, and in some places of gold:
so that for mettalls it is inferior to no Country. There are also many
excellent Salt pitts. Plinnie also says, the Cadmian stones, the Callais, the
Crystal, the Onyx, the Topaz, and the Adamant; are found in Germany. Also the
herbs. Here are a thousand delightful gardens, and Villages, and Orchards
full of Apples.

What, should I mention the wines? which are of an excellent taste and color?
Truly there are excellent wines every where, but yet in some places better
than in others. Here is also great variety of living creatures, and great
stoare of Cattle and wild beasts, which I will not spend time to reckon up.
C. Julius Caesar writes, that many kinds of wild beasts are bred in the Wood
Hercynia, which are not seen in any other place; of which (says he) those
that differ most from the rest, and are most worthy of remembrance are these:
there is a kind of Ox which is like a Heart, which has in the middle of his
forehead one high horn, and more strait than usual, from the top whereof
large Antletts or Tines do spread forth; the male and femall are of one shape,
and have one as big horns as the other. There is also a beast called Alcis,
which is like unto a Goat, but it is somewhat bigger, and having no horns at
all, and their legs are without joints, so that they cannot by any means lie
down to their rest, or if they fall down by chance, they cannot rise up
again; therefore they lean against trees, and so they take their rest: and
when the hunters have found by their footing where they usually haunt, they
either stub up all the trees, or else they cut them half down, and so leave
them standing: So that when the beasts rest against them according to their
usual manner, they overthrow the trees with their weight, and so fall down
with them. The third kind of beasts are those which are called Vri, which are
almost as big as Elephants, and like Bulls in shape and color* they are very
strong, and swift, and will prey on men and beasts: these they usually take in
trappes, and so kill them. But now I come to the ancient government. The
sacred Roman Empire, which being divided into the West and Eastern part, was
much weakened by the excursions of diverse Nations, and rent by civil
dissentions, was ready to be ruined by its own weight; having forsook Italy
did seek defense and strength in no other Country but Germany, and chose
Charles the Great King of France to be Emperor, who as they report, was borne
at Ingelheimij, which is a village Tower two miles from Moguntiacum, and built
there a famous Palace, whose ruins may be yet seen. The Empire remained in
Charles his line an hundred years, and above: which afterward failing, it was
translated to Conrade Duke of Franconia: after whom followed Henry Fowler:
after him the three Ottoes: the last whereof when he understood that the
Romans, Crescentius being consul, did affect and desire the title of the
Empire, he raised an army and took Rome, and obtained of Pope Gregory, that
the Germans should have ^ight and power to elect the Roman Emperors. But
they obtained it on this condition, that he which was elected should be called
Caesar and King of the Romans: and afterward having received ^ Crown from
the Pope, he has the title of Emperor Augustus. There are 7 Electors
ordained: of which three are Archbishops, and soul are saecular Princes as
they call them: where after the decease of Otto, the first, that was chosen
Emperor was Henry surnamed the holy. Afterward in process of time, there were
diverse officers constituted and ordained in Germany, for the honor of the
Empire concerning which see Mercator. Tacitus who was governor of the Belgians
under Vespasian, does commend the Germans in this short Elogie thus: Nemo
bellum Germanis (inquit) intulit impune. None made war upon the Germans but
they came by the loss. Which, three of Augustus Legions found, being overcome
and beaten by them: Also Carbo, Cassius, Scaurus, Aurelius, Servilius, Coepie,
Manlius, all great Commanders, who were slain and put to flight. And there are
these ancient verses: Welcher im Krieg will ungluck han,
Der fang es mit den Deutschen an.


Josephus calls them valiant, Dionysius Martial, Arrianus warlike. The
Germane is courageous, fierce at an onser, and desirous of wars, as Seneca
witnesses in his book de Ira. Moreover the Country of Germany is now so
pleasant, and so adorned with fair Cities, Castells, and Villages, that it is
not inferior to Italy France and Spain. There are 84 free Cities in it, as
Colonia Agrippina, Wirtemberg, Lubek, Luneburg, Franckfort, Breme, Lipsick,
Spires, Argentine, Friburg, Augusta Vindelicorum, Tubinga, Heidelburg,
Ratisbone, Vienna, Prague, Buda, etc. of which hereafter. Germany also is
watered with so many great Rivers, beside Lakes and Marshes of which it has
great stoare, that in this respect, also it may compare with the chiefest
Countries. Seneca in his third book of natural questions shows the cause
why it has so many Rivers: At contra, ait, constat Germaniam Galliamque, and
proxime ab his Italiam abundare Rivis, and fluminibus; quia coelo humido
utuntur, and ne aestate quidem, imbribus carent: That is, But on the contrary
(says he) it is manifest that Germany and France, and Italy which is next unto
them, have great stoare of Rivers, because they have a moystaye, and have often
rain in Summer. But these Rivers of Germany are more famous, as Danubius,
Rhene, Amasis, Moenus, Necarus, Albis, Suevus, Visurgis, and Vistula. That
which Ptolomie and others do call Danubius, Plinny and Strabo do call Ister;
the one says that it changes his name near the Cataracts thereof; the other,
where it washes Illyrium. Ptolemie says, that it changes his name ^eere the
City Axipolis: Appian near the confluence and meeting of the River Savus: so
that the higher part is called Danubius, and the lower part Ister. Stephanus
heretofore called it Matoas: also Danu^is and Danusis: Festus calls it
Addubanus. Ancient coins do ^^me it Daunvius: it is now called Done and
Donaw, from the noise and sound of the waters, as Althamerus says. Salust
writes that this is the greatest River next to Nile which flows into the
Mediterranian Sea; and Arrianus, lib. 1. of the acts of Alexander, calls it
the greatest River. It rises in the wood Hercynia, in the village Den
Eschingen, where it springs out of the bowels of the Earth. The ancients
do call the Mountain out of which it rises Abnoba, although as Munster an
eyewitness writes, there is no mountain nere it: but it falls with a
continual running stream, from a little hill which is scarce 15 or 16 foot
high. He adds that Tiberius had a desire to see the spring head thereof.
Herodotus believed that it rose out of the Pyrenaean Mountains, whose opinion
Aristotle also followed, 2. Meteorologicor. Maginus places those Pyrenaean
hills in Germany, thereby to excuse the error of grave writers. As soon as it
glideth from the fountain, it runs abroad through Moarish places, and
afterward it gathers it self into a Channel, and so being increased by
receiving other Rivers, it runs through many countries, as Sucuia, Pannonia,
Dacia, Bulgaria, until at last having received 6 navigable Rivers, it rowleth
into the Sea with five streams or mouths, as Dionysius, Strabo, and Herodotus
do mention: Plinny says with six, and Amianus, and Solinus with seven: and
with such violence, so that it runs with fresh water 40 miles into the sea.
And as Amian says: Et constat ab ultimis nostri finibus maris, agmina ^m
pariendi gratia petere Pisces, ut aquarum suavitate salubrius faetum educant,
nec intercipiantur, That is, it is manifest that the fish from the farthest
part of our seas do come hither in shoales, that they may spawne here in
safety. Tajanus Nerva built a curious bridge over this River in Moesia, which
afterward Adrian did demolish, as Dio Cassius relates. Concerning Danubius,
George Fabritius in a certain Itinerarie of his writes thus: -- Ister,
Qui centum populos and magnas alluit urbes,
Euxinum irrumpit bis terno flumine Pontum.
Ister that does through an hundred Countries glide,
And waters them, with Cities too beside,
Both fair and great, with six streams last of all,
Into the Euxine Sea at length does fall.


For at length all the most famous Rivers in the world do^ run into the Sea,
as Ovid also Lib. 8. Metamorph. does mention in this verse: In quo desinimus,
sacri, in quo currimus amnes.
We sacred Rivers to the Sea do come,
And into it we all of us do run.


The next is the Rhene, which Caesar and other do commend ^^is now called
Rhijn. Caesar would have it rise out of Leopa^^^, and Strabo and Ptolomie,
affirm that it arises out of the Mountain Ad^la, which is commonly called
Etzel, which is an arm of the Alps, and Claudian says, that it rises out of
Rhetia. But Strabo and (...) do think that Rhene begins on the Eastside of
the Alps where they are joined to the Mountain Adula, and where the Lepo^tans
do inhabit, and so springs out of two fountains, which are at least a days
journey distant one from another. The one being more to the Northwest which is
commonly called the foremost Rhene the other lying more Southeast, which the
inhabitants call the latter Rhene. These two at length meet together, and so
do make the River Rhene, which near unto the head do make two Lakes, the
A^^^nian and Constantian, from the City Constantia which is situated by it;
concerning which we will entreat in the description of Helvena: the other is
called Venetum, and now the Cellensian Lake, from the little Town Cella, which
Lake has abundance of all sorts of fish. From hence turning Westward it
waters Rhinfelden, and follows the same tract even to Basilea. And there it
runs Northward, until it come to Argentoratum: and so waters many
Countries, and having viewed many Cities, and having received many great and
small Rivers, it grows very deep, and comes swelling even to Sp^res,
Worms, and Moguntiam. Hence turning Westward it waters Bragium. And from
thence winding toward Caecia, having left behind it Bonna and Colonia, at last
near the edge of Batavia (which is now under the jurisdiction of Cleveland,
and is graced with the ancient Castle Lobecum) it does divide it self, and
with a double stream runs diverse ways. Which division Mamertinus elegantly
calls the Divorce, and Frontinus the turning of the River. Near therefore to
Lobecum it does divide his course, so that the one part thereof called Rhene
does run strait forward to Arenacum a chief City of Gelderland. And from
thence with many winding Maeanders, it glideth toward Vada; and so bends
from thence to Rhena, which Tantus calls Rinnes: from thence it runs to
Bavodurum, Afterward the Rhene changes his name, and begins to be called
Lecca, being heretofore a little Rivulet, but now it is become a River. Having
glided by Culenburg and Viana, and having viewed Schoonhovia, it powers it
self into the River Merova, before it is called Mosa. The other part of Rhene
does bend toward the left hand, and flows by the ancient City Neomagum,
and runs by the walls of the City, it is now called Vahalis: not long
afterward it goes toward Tiela: and from thence with a winding course it
leaves Bomelius on the left hand: afterward not far from Woricomium it
receives the River Mosa, and by and by near Goricomium, being increased with
the slow smooth running River Linga, and it is called Merova, from the Castle
of the Merovaeans; by which having passed it glideth by Dordretch a Noble
Island out of the City; afterward having received the Rivers Lecca and Isela
which are arms of the Eheu, and gliding by Iselmonda, it begins to be
called Mosa near to Potterdam, where it leaves on the right side Sciedamum
and Vla^^ga, and from thence it glideth by the Town Gerviletum, and the Brill
on the left hand, and there it mingleth it self, with the Ocean. That which
Ptolemie calls Amasius, Strabo Amasias, Tacitus Amasia, Plinny and Pomponius
Amisius, and now Ems. The head of this River is a little beneath Paderbona a
City of Westphalia, and so bending toward Caecia it glideth by Varendorp,
Greva, Rhena, and Lingha: and from thence it goes forward unto Meppenum and
Nebu^sum: and from thence discharging it self into the Northern Ocean, near
to Embda Market Town, whence it borrows his name and is called Eems. The
fourth River is that which Plinny calls Manus, and Pomponius Maenis, and
Ammianus Menus: now it is called Meyn. Regino the historian and the writers of
that time do call it Mogonum. Velleius Patercules calls it the River Iulia.
Unless in ^eed of Iulia, it should be Lupia, as some learned men do suppose.
It arises out of a Mountain which is called der Fichtelberg, and so gliding
by Franckford, which from thence is called upon Maene, and Wet^^mia,
Herbipolis, and Papeberg; it mingleth it self with the Rhene near to
Moguntiacum, and does part the Low Countries from Germany. The letters thereof
do make by the Greek computation 565, equal to the number of days which are
in a year. The fifth River is Necarus, whence come the best Necarian wines, it
was anciently called Nicer, as Rhenumus witnesses, the spring head
therethereof is two hours journey distant from Danubius, and so having glided
through the fields of Wirtemberg, it runs into the Rhene a s^le above
Heidelburg. Albis follows which is a fair River of Germany, and divides the
Swevians from the Cherusians. Velletus witnesses that it does flow by the
confines of the Semnonians and Hermundurians. Tacitus writes that the famous
River Albis does arise among the Hermundurians, but Conradus Celtes says that
it does arise out of Hercinia in Bohemia, And so having glided by many fair
Cities, at length it empties it self into the Ocean between the Chaucians,
and the Cimbrians. The ancient Latin writers do call it Albia, and the
Germans Elbe. And the Bohemians from whence it takes his original, do call
it Labe. Fabritius in his book of the Misnian affairs says, that it received
that name from 11, Fountains, or as the Saxons say, from so many flowing
River. For it arises as he delivers, in the Hercynian wood, which from the
Giants is commonly called Risenberg, from 11 Fountains, whose streams meeting
together do make the River Albis: for Elve and Elbe do signify in the
German language, eleven. The seventh River is Suevus, which some do call
Viadrum, and corruptly it is called Oder^, the spring head whereof is in the
Mountain Oderberg, and so being increased by the addition of many Rivers, it
glideth by Frankford, a famous University, and from thence it runs by
Stetinum the seat of the Sidinonians, which is a Sea town of Traffiques, and
from thence it windeth to the Episcopal Cities of Carminum, and there making
a great Lake it emptieth it self into the German Ocean. For they are in an
error who suppose that Sprea (or de Spr^e) is the River Suevus, although the
aforesaid Sprea is accounted a famous River, which flowing by Brandenburg does
run into Alb^ near to Haneloburg: of which opinion is Bilibaldus, who
writes that the River Sprea, runs into the Ocean near to the City Sund^.
The River Visurgis follows, commonly called de Weser, D^onysius Lib. 55.
calls it Ousiourgos. Ovid calls it Iturgum in that verse, Decolor infesta
testis Iturgus aqua.

Ptolemie calls it Visurigis, and Strabo Bisurgis, and Ad^^^ in his
Ecclesiastical history Visuris, and Sidonius Vesatis. It arises out of
Hassia, and having watered the Cities, Werdensis, M^n^^sis, Gotingensis, and
Bremensis, it rowleth it self into the Ocean, and is there called Vesera. The
last river is Vistula, or Istula, which Bal^baldus calls Vandalum. This River
bounders Germany, because Ptolemie does place the European Sarmatia beyond it.
Iornandes calls it Scyth^s, which running by the Sarmatian rocks, does water
Cracovia which is the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Poland, and being grown
greater by the receipt of Rivers, it does discharge it self into the Sea with
three inletts or mouths: from hence it flows by Dantzu^ and afterward by
Elbinga, an University of the Borussians: and thirdly by the Town Loctetum,
and so does pour it self into the Venedician Bay. There are also many other
famous Rivers, which do either run into the Sea or into some greater River,
which I pass^ over least I should be tedious. Now I come to the German Sea
For seeing we purpose to describe al Germany, we must add something concerning
the Sea, which washes the shore thereof: But in regar^ we have entreated
otherwhere more largely concerning the Sea, an^ especially in the general
description of Belgia: we will speak first concerning the tide of the Sea, and
afterward we will reckon up the properties of the German Sea. It is manifest
that the Moon is the cause of the tides of the Ocean. But as the Moon has
diverse changes in her motion, so the tides do also change. For they following
the Moon, do flow twice between the rising thereof, and do ebb twice in
four and twenty hours: so that the Seas do flow twice, and ebb twice every
day: they flow when the Moon ascends above the Eastern Horizon, and do ebb
when it declineth from the Meridian westward; and it flows again when the
Moon goes down under the earth, and comes to the contrary part of the
Meridian, and so likewise it ebbeth until it rise again. But as the Moon
does not always rise at one time, and in one place, but every day rises in
another place than it did before: so the tides do not flow at certain hours,
but at that time when the Moon passes through the Poles of the heavens.
Moreover it is to be noted, that the full Moon does move the Sea in another
manner than the half Moon. For this Luminarie has greater force when it is
at the full, than when it is weak, and in the waine. We use to call those
tides which are a^ the full of the Moon Sprinckuloedt, that is, a Springtide.
Which Agel Lib. 14. concerning the Ocean, does elegantly call the Moons
companion, seeing it follows the age and increase thereof; and also he notes
some aspects, and configurations: As for example sake, if the Moon have a fit
aspect unto Venus, and do run through moist houses, it does wonderfully
increase the tides of the sea: but if it be aspected with Mars, or dry Planets,
it does lessen the tides. Here also the ascension of the signs is to be noted.
But if the Moon be in signs of a right ascension, it makes the tides longer
than if it were in signs of oblique ascension: for it is observed that the
tides are never equal to the ebbes in continuance of time; but when the Moon
is in the Equinoctial signs and has no Latitude. Besides, some parts of the
water do find a greater influence proceeding from the beams of the body of
the Moon, either in regard of the rectitude and straightness of the beams,
or some other hidden quality. But the Moon has a different influence when it
is Northward, and another when it is Southward; for when it is here it
increases the tides on the Southern shoares, and when it is there, on the
Northern shoa^es. Moreover the Tides of the Sea are greater in some places,
and in other places very small or none at all. For as concerning this our
German Sea, it is certain that there are scarce any tides which can be
perceived, but as the Sea is carried with the winds, it sows now here and
now there: for when it is an East wind, the Sea goes very high, and drives
back Rivers, neither does it flow only ^^ the Sea side, but it overflowes the
Land. And whereas the Spa^^^h and Atlanticke Ocean is of an unsearchable
deapth, so that a line of three hundred or four hundred fathom cannot sound
the bottom of it, yet the German Sea, in the most parts is but 60. Cubits
deep and never above an hundred Cubits, except on some shoares of Nor^^, which
are thought to be of an insearchable depth. Moreover it is worthy to be
mentioned, that whereas all other Seas are bitter and salt, our Sea has sweet
waters and not unpleasant to drink, and that in regard that many great fresh
Rivers do run into it out of the Sarmatian Mountains, and because the Sun
is too weak in those places to exhale and draw up the lighter and thinner
parts of the water, which some make to be the chief cause of the saltness of
the Sea. Which reason if it were good and probable, then the Amalchian Sea
also, and the Chronian Sea should not be salt, which is otherwise. Wherefore it
is rather to be held that the melted snow, and the aforesaid Rivers flowing
down out of the Sarmatian Mountains, do make this Sea clear and sweet.
Whereby it comes to pass, that other Seas do more easily carry vessels of
great burden, than this. And the reason is because the water of the salt Sea is
of a thicker substance, while the thinner waters do yield to the least weight.
It is easier also to swim in this Sea than in others. Yet it makes Sea men
more sick, in regard the waves got very high, so that sometimes they seem to
touch the Clouds, and then fall again and break into deep valleys. This Sea
in diverse places, has diverse appellations, or names; For sometimes it is
called the German Ocean, from Germany which is near unto it, and it
reaches from the French, and British Sea, which lies Westward, even to
Sarmatia in the East. It is also called the Northern Sea, the Cimbrian Sea,
the Balthick, the Codanian, the Suevian Sea, etc. And so much concerning the
Sea. There are diverse Mountains in Germany, the chief whereof are, Rolberg,
Mons Isidis, Melibocus, Pinifer, Hessus, Ostbergus, Senus, Suevus, Pavonis,
Rheticus, Sprulius, Vicetius, and Vosagus. There are also many other Woods, but
the greatest of all is Hercynia. The best Latin and Greek Authors do mention
the Wood Hercynia, as Pomponius Mela, Strabo lib. 7. and Plinny in many places:
which although it be very large and wide, yet all the West and Southern parts
of it lies within Germany. And therefore Glareanus says, that he never
accounted the Wood Ardenna to be a part thereof, which some in our time have
rashly done Caesar Lib. 6. Com. de bell. Gal. writes that it is 60 days journey
long, and nine days journey broad. It has now gotten diverse names: for in
some places it is called the black Wood, from the great stoare of Pines in it,
or Der Schwarts Wald, and otherwhere Ottoes Wood from the Emperor Ottoes
frequent hunting in that part of the Wood: Sometimes it borrows his name from
the people unto which it reaches, whence it is called the Thuringian and
Bohemian Wood. But among the Cheruscians, it does still retain the ancient
name o^ the Hercynian Wood, so famous by ancient Greek and Latin writers; in
Dutch Der Hartz Wald. For the French and the German do call Resina Hartz.
Also Pandulphus Collenutins Pisaurienstis i^ his description of Germany, does
make mention of this wood in these words: the Wood Hyrcinia assuming diverse
names, runs out t^ the Dacians and ^etes, until at length it comes to the
Tartarians where it is called the dark Wood, and is impassable, both in regar^
of the unknown ways and wild beasts, and the monstrous Fawne^ But of these
things enough, I pass to other matters: The public and private works do
follow, among which (to pass by others) is the Church at Argentoratum, famous
for the neat structure and building, having a very high Tower. So that it is
the eighth miracle of the world. This Church was founded in the year of Christ
1015. But in the year of our Lord 1277, in the time of the Bishop Conrade of
Liechtenberg, Erkuinus of Steinbach an Architect began to build the Tower,
being a famous work; so that there is not the like, either in Germany, Italy,
or France; it was built up to the top in seven and twenty years. It is
built even from the foundation to the top, of free square stone; it has many
open places to receive the air and the wind, and the ascent and going up unto
it is by four stairs; but when the breadth of it begins to lessen, and grow
sharp toward the top, there are eight stairs. The very top of it which
below does scarsely seem as big as a Bushel, is so great, that five or six
men might stand upon it. The height of it is 574 Geometrical feet; there is
also a curious and artificial Clock. And as concerning the Ecclesiasticke
state of Germany, there are 7 Archbishops in the Empire of Germany. These
are, the Archbishop of Mentz, under whom are 12 Suffragan Bishops, as the
Bishop of Chur, the Bishop of Cost^^tz, of Strasburg, of Spires, of Worms, of
Wurtzburg, of Ausburg, of Arstett, of Hildeshaim, of Paderborn, of Halbert
statt, of Ferden. The Archbishop of ^olen, who has 5 Suffragan Bishops the
Bishop of Munster, the Bishop of Vtretcht, of Leodium, of Minden, and of
Osenburg. Also the Archbishop of Triers, under whom are 3 Suffragan bishops;
the Bishop of Metz, of Toul in Lotharingia, and the Bishop of Verdun. Also the
Archbishop of Meydmurg Primate of Germany, under whom are four Bishops; the
Bishop of Morsburg, the Bishop of Naumburg, of Brandeburg, and Havelburg. The
Archbishop of Saltzburg, has 9 Suffragan Bishops under him; as the Bishop of
^rent, Brixiensis, of Passaw, Frisingensis, of Vienna, of Seckaw; of Cur^x, of
Lavenmund, and of Chiemse. The Archbishop of Bremes, under whom there are six
Suffragan Bishops, as the Bishop of Lu^^ke, Suerinensis, of Lebus, of
Schleswicke, of Ratzenburg, and of Hamburg, heretofore an Archbishopricke. The
Archbishop of Riga, has six Suffragan Bishops under him, as the Bishop of
Revel, Curiens^s, the Bishop of Oesel, of Derpt. The free Bishops are,
M^snensis, the Bishops of Bamberg, and Ratispon. Mercator reckons up these
Universities: The University of Basil, of Colen, of Dillingensis, of
Mogantinum, of Marpurg, of Lipswicke, of Ingo^stade, of Heidelburg, of
Gripswald, of Friburg, of Frankford near Odera, of Erpherd, of Prague, of
Rostoch, of Coningsberg, of Trevers, of Tubingium, of Vienna, of Brestavia, of
Wirtemberg, and Wurtzburg; ou^ of which as out of many Trojan horses, an
innumerable sort of learned men have issued. Which many, furnished with all
kinds of Arts, do witness* here are very skillful in the Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew tongues; here are eloquent Orators, subtle disputants, absolute
Arithmeticians, and exact Astronomers: and no Country of Europe ^^th better
Geometricians. I omit their accurate skill in Physic. Now I come to their
manners. All Authors do report that the Germans are strong, and of a great
stature. Tacitus says they are gray eyde, red haird, large bodyed, and very
strong. Hegesippus and Plinny do call them great men: Sidonius calls them
cruel and fierce, Pausanias and C^ssiodorus calls them proud: Appianus,
ungentle, Caesar calls them barbarous, treacherous, and dissemblers:
Paterculus says that they are very crafty, and are naturally given to lie. But
Tacitus who lived amongst them says, that the soldiers are very courageous,
and that it is a warlike Nation, but are neither cunning nor crafty, but do
discover their own minds and secrets, and very faithful in keeping secrets
committed to them. Also the Emperor Iulianus in his Misopogne says, that he
knows by experience that this Nation cannot flatter, but that they deal
freely and plainly with all men. Ptolemy, 11. Quadrip. says, that they must
needs be of a quiet and peaceable disposition, in regard of the quality of
the Country which they inhabit. Concerning their religion, whereby the minds
of men are held and bound together by the tie and fear of some Deity, the
Germans (as Caesar writes) do use no sacrifices, they account them only to
be gods whom they see, and from whom they receive some benefit: as the Sun,
and Vulcan, and the Moon. But afterward, as it appears in Tacitus, who lived
under the reign of the Emperor Nerva; they had many other gods: as Mercury,
Hercules, Mars, Isis, and Berecinthia: also a certain god called Alcis. The
same Tacitus does report also that Velleda and Aurinia were accounted as Gods.
And the aforesaid Tacitus makes mention of the Temple of Tanfana, who says
that the Suevians do reverence the mother Earth, which they call (as L^psius
says) Aertha. But Plutarch and Clemens Alexandrinus do affirm that they had
no Images in their Temples, but certain holy women, which Tacitus calls
Soothsayers, and Agathias, and Polyoenus do call them Prophetesses, who did
foretell future events, by the sound, and courses of Rivers. Amilianus does
note, that they do foretell things to come, by the flight of birds, by the
inspection of entralls, and all other signs. But they did chiefly reverence
Mercury or Teutates, and offered human sacrifices thereunto, as Tacitus
witnesses. In the time of peace there was no common Magistrate, but in the
time of war they did choose Governors. They spent all their life time in
military affairs: and to rob was accounted no disgrace, as we may read in
Caesar. Seneca says, that their chief delight was the wars in which they
were both borne and bread. If (as Tacitus witnesses) they have peace any long
time together at home in their own Country, then they go to the wars in
other Nations. They carry about with them their mothers, wives, and children,
who do carry their knapsackes, and provision: neither are they afraid of
plagues. They join battle with songs and warlike sounds. They count it a
great disgrace to lose their buckler in the field, so that many after the
battle for grief thereof have hanged themselves. Dion and Herodotus do report;
that they will march over Rivers in regard they are lightly armed, and of an
high stature. We read in Appian that ^hey do contemn death, being persuaded
that they shall live again hereafter. They observe the rites of matrimony, and
are con^ent with their own wives; so that few adulteries are committed; for
which they have this present punishment: the woman that is taken in adultery
has her hair cut off, and then her husband thrusts her out of doors before
her kindred, and beats her along the Town. Thus Tacitus reports. The
Mothers do nurse their own childen, and do not put them forth to Nurses.
Caesar says, that they account it unlawful to wrong a stranger, which comes
unto them upon any occasion, so that they are ready to protect them from all
injuries: their houses stand open, and they eat one with another. And here
good manners prevail more, than good laws in other places. The greatest part
of their food, as Caesar mentions, does consist in milk, cheese, and flesh.
Plinny witnesses that they live by no other grain but Oats; and Mela adds
that in times of want they will eat raw flesh. At dinners as Athenaeus
witnesses, they have pieces of meat roasted, and they drink milk and wine.
Their fare is homely, as the flesh of wild beasts, Crabbes, or sour milk:
their drink is made of Barley and wheat, neither is there any Nation more
magnificent in entertainment or in feasting. But as to man or Nation is without
some vice, so they count it no shame to drink night and day. Concerning their
habit, Tacitus says that they all wear a kind of Cloak buttoned before,
which loosely hangs over their shoulders: the same Tacitus says, that the
Germans did not wear a loose garment but a strait bodyed garment, such as
Sidonius says the French did use. The women do go in apparel like the men.
Heretofore the Germans were strong of body, but rude, and ignorant of Arts.
But now they do make all kind of excellent manufactures and works, and most
especially they are skillful in casting of brass, and in the knowledge of
mettalls. In this Country brass Ordinance and Printing were first invented,
and the making of Clockes was found out: and lastly, Germany is such a Nursery
of all Arts, that it does perfect some, and finds out other Inventions. Also
it transporteth into Countries both near and remote, the best Wines, Gold,
Silver, Coppresse, Tin, Lead, Quicksilver, Alume, and diverse painting
colors, also Corn, and diverse other commodities.

WEST-FRIESLAND.
SOme do write that Frisia or Friesland was so called fr^^ Phrygia; other do
derive the name thereof from the extreme coldness of the Country. Abbas
Spanheim^^ the authority of Hunibald, a great corrupter of Hist^^^call truth,
does fabulously report, that it was so named from (...) the son of Clodio the
hairy, King of France. Hadrian Iunius t^keth that it was so called from the
freedom and liberty, which (...) people always desired. Moreover Friesland
is an ancient Co^^ of Germany, well known to the Romans for their warlike
(...) and Valor, which never changed its name. Tacitus makes the^^ twofold,
namely the greater and lesser Frieslanders. The (...) (says he) and lesser
Frieslanders are so called in regard o^ the strength. The greater; Tacitus
properly calls Oostfrieslander (...) those Embdames who do now usurp that
name, for those are ^ lesser Chaucians; but the Staverians, Succians,
Franicians, (...) Towns of Harling and Leovardia. Also the West-Frieslanders
which being in the farthest part of Holland are called Northollanders, (...)
they do confine on the Caninifatians, as Plinny describes the^^ for these two
Countries of Friesland do stretch from the Rhene (...) to the Ocean. Now the
River Amisis divides it into West and Ea^^ Friesland. West-Friesland which is
now so called from the fir^^ (...) whose description we do here exhibit and
set forth to view is most properly and anciently called Friesland, and was
always accounted the better part. On the West, and the North the Sea does
compass it: on the South it has a large Bay commonly call Zuyder-Zee, and
the Province of Trans-Isalana: on the East it is encompassed with the River
Amisis, which divides it from the Busactorians, and Westphalia. The air is
every where wholesome, except where it is infected with the foggie exhalations
of the Marshes, which are purified again by the winds. The Country of
West-Friesland is no^ for the most part Moorish, being low, and overflowed in
many places with water, which lie upon it not only in the Spring, but also ^^
Summer time: and in regard hereof, it has little stoare of corp^ For these
yearly inundations which come betimes and go away slowly, do either kill the
seed, or drive it up and down. Yet here are excellent pastures for fatting
of Cattle, of which the Frieslanders may boast, for they reap commodity and
profit by them: so that the inhabitants do every year make an incredible
gain of Butter, and Cheese, which they transport abroad, besides that which
they daily spend at home, for it has great herds of Oxen, and breeds also
excellent horses. It has some woods, but those so thin of map of West
Friesland WEST-FRIESLAND.
trees, that they do not yield wood enough to make a good great fire, such as
Martial and Horace do desire.

Dissolve frigus, lignum super focum large reponens. But provident nature has
given the Frieslanders, and Hollanders instead of wood, a certain kind of
turffe, which being dug out of the earth, and dried in the wind and Sun,
does burn very well, which is a better fuel than that which the Scythians
used, who wanting wood did burn bones, and kept fire with them. And there is
so great plenty of this turffe, as that it does not only serve the
inhabitants, but also other neighbor Countries. There are diverse kinds of
it, which do differ in color, lightness, and the whiteness of their ashes.
There is one bad, light, and spongie kind of turffe, of a Moss color, which
is of no esteem for use: which in burning makes those that stand by, as pale
as Lead, and to look like Ghosts, the smell whereof does cause many to swound;
but a little salt sprinkled on it takes it away. The other is thicker, and
fuller of seggs, and waightier, and serves for diverse uses. The third kind is
as hard as a brick, and whereas the other swim in the water this sinketh; it
is hard to take fire, but being once kindled it keeps fire a long time; it is
of an ash color, and is dug on a Moorish ground. In Zeland also there is a
kind of turffe made of Moorish earth, which they call Daria. Also the Country
people of Friesland, have a certain kind of turffe made of mud, tempered and
mingled with straw, reeds, and hay, and afterward dried in the Sun; but the
smoke thereof is very troublesome for the eyes. This Country of Friesland was
heretofore a Kingdom, even to the time of Charles the Great, after whose
decease it was troubled, although before it was subject to the government of
Denmark and Norway. But at length it enjoyed some Halcyon days of quiet,
under the reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who was a peaceable prince.
There are 12 Cities in Friesland. Leuwarden is the Metropolis of all
Friesland, and a rich City, which as it is adorned and beautified with many
private houses, so it is strongly fortified with a Castle and rampires against
the assaults of enemies. The Court of Judgment, and the Chancery for all
Friesland is kept here, from whence there is no appeal. Near unto it is
Zuichemum, in the Country of Vichlijm^ Doccum is 2 mile distant, having a
fertile soil and fair Meddowes. It is distant from the Bay of the sea, 1
mile, and was heretofore subject to Gelderland, Sneca, in the Country of
Westergoyum, is situated three miles from Leovardia in a low waterish soil, so
that it bears no corn, but has fair Meddowes. It was a City about 200
years ago, but in process of time it grew so great, so that it is now equal
to any City in Friesland. It has produced many good wits: Ioachim Hopper
was borne and bred in it, who was not only a light and Ornament to this
City, but also to all Friesland, and the Low Countries. Also Peter of Fritema
a Lawyer, and Albertus Hero, a Philosopher and Divine were borne here, and many
other learned men. Staveren is situate on the shore of the South Sea: The
Country near unto it is plain; being full of ditches and Marshes. This City
has no magnificent building in it, but a strong Castle which stands over
the haven, which was founded by George Schencke, Governor of Friesland, in
Charles the fifth's name, in the year 1522, that so the Burgundians, might
conveniently send thither souldies, and provision for the war, out of the
neighbor Cities of Holland. Plinny Lib. 4. cap. 15. calls the inhabitants
Sturians. Harlinga is situated by the jaws of the South Sea, a mile distant
from Franicum, it has a fertile soil, and a Castle well fortified against the
invasions of Enemies, and a convenient Haven: for it affords a fit and
necessary habitation for those which come out of North Friesland and East
Germany: whereupon great stoare of people did flock thither, being allured
with the convenience of the place, so that by this confluence of people the
City was much enlarged. Franicum is denominated from the Frenchmen, here
John Vlpius was borne, who was most skillful in the three languages. It has a
public University. There are also these Cities, Damna, B^lswardum, Ilsta,
Sloten, Worchum, and Hindelopen. There are many Islands in Friesland, the
chief whereof is Schellingana, which is famous for the taking of Dogfish with
Netts. Groening is usually joined with West-Friesland, which makes a province
together with the Territory belonging to it, called, Ommelanden. Here
Rodolphus Agricola, the most learned man of his time was borne. Also Wesselus
or Basilius, and Reinerus Perdinius, famous Divines and Philosophers were borne
here. Friesland has abundance of Lakes and Marshes, as we said before, and it
is watered with the Rivers Laubacum, (which some call Lavica, and Labola, now
Lauwers) and Amisis. It has on the South a very large Bay, which is now called
Zuyderzee, as it were the Southern strait. The Politic state of Friseland
does consist of three principal parts, which are: The County of Oestergow, the
Metropolis whereof is Leovardia, and is divided into these Praefectureships,
Lewarderadeel, in which is Leovardia; Tietz ericksterdeel in which is
Tiettzarcke; Ydardacel, in which is Ydaert; Rauwerdeahem, in which is Rauwart:
Ferwerderadeel, in which is Ferwert: Dongerdeel in which is Wetzens;
Dantummedeel, in which is Dantumna Wolt: Acht Kerspelen in which is Suyrhusum:
Colmerlandt, in which is Collum: Vesterlant, in which is Beetz: Smalingerlandt,
in which was Smalingerlee an Abbey of the order of Saint Benedict. The County
of Westergow, in which are Grieteneyen; Wonseradeel, in which is Witmarssum;
Franickeradeel, in which is Franiker: Banadeel in which is Mimersgae:
Meynaldummadeel, in which is Mizaldum: Baerderadeel in which is Baerdt:
Hennarderadeel, in which is Hennaert: Weynbritzeradeel, in which is Gawe:
Gheesterlandt, in which is Wickel. The County of Sevenwolden, in which are
Grieteneyen; Donyewerstal, in which is Donigae: Leemster Vijsgae, in which is
Lemmer: Aenghevaert, in which is Cathrybandt: Schottorelandt, in which are Nigh
and Old Schotten; Wittingerdeel, in which is Oldehorn: Hasscher Vijfgae, in
which is Hasscherhorn. But all Friesland and Groeningland is subject to the
Bishop of Trajectum.

THE COVNTIE OF EMBDANVM AND OLDENBVRG.
The Country whence so called.
HItherto we have described Germany in general, our Method now requires that
we should entreat of the several parts. This Table contains two Counties,
the County of Embden and Oldenburg; the County of Embdane is so called from
the chief City thereof; and now it is called East Friesland because it
confineth on Friseland. For the Frieslanders did not heretofore possess it,
but the Ch^^^s, of which Plinny and Ptolomie make two sorts, the greater and
the lesser. The greater are those that do inhabit the Bishopric of Bremes:
the lesser are the Embdanians and Oldenburgians. Forasmuch as Ptolomie seateth
them between the River Amisis, and Visurgie his words are these: They saw also
in the North, the Nation of the Chaucians, who are called the greater, and the
lesser, where the Sea flows up every day and night, so that it is doubtful
whether it be Land or Sea. Where the miserable people do get upon high hills,
and their cottages do flote when the Sea comes in, and do seem like
shipwrackes, when it ebbeth back again. They have no Cattle nor milk as
their neighbors have, nor can they kill any wildebeasts because there is no
shrubbes, nor harbor for them. They make thread of Bulrushes and reeds, to
weave fishing Netts, and so making a fire with a little dried mud, they boil
their meat, and warm themselves. Their drink is rain water which they keep
in trenches before their houses. In this manner the Chaucians lived heretofore.
But now they are much changed, for now the Country does afford food not only
for the inhabitants, but also for the neighbor Countries. But heretofore it
was a rude unhabited place, so that Plinnie never mentions that Corn or any
other fruits did grow here; but now where is there greater plenty? The
fruitfulness of the soil.
It had heretofore no fruittrees, but now it bears all kinds of trees. They
had heretofore no Cattle nor Milk, but where is greater plenty now? For
nature has given them a champion Country, full of fair Meddowes, being of a
fat soil, and having many pleasant pastures, which are well replenished and
stoared with innumerable flocks, and herds of Cattle. Which appears by
that wonderful great plenty of excellent good Butter and Cheese, which is made
here, which to the great gain and benefit of the inhabitants is transported to
diverse Countries, and through all Germany. Also the fertility of this
Country appears by the fat and great Oxen, which many thousands do graze
within the Meddowes, and do grow so fat, that foreign Nations do much
esteem of them. Besides here is excellent hunting. So that this Country is
now of so rich a soil, that it needs no supply from neighbor Countries; for
it has such stoare of horses, Oxen, Cattle, Hogs, Wool, Better, Cheese,
Barley, Oats, Wheat, Beans, Pease, and Salt, so that it does yearly
transport great plenty thereof to the Countries round about it, and those
which are more remote. Moreover the Emperor Frederick the third, Anno 1465,
when this province was governed by diverse Praefects, did make it a County, and
gave it to one Vdalrich. Afterward it had Earls continually even until our
time. There are two walled Cities in that County, Embda and Arichum. Embda or
Embdena, commonly called Embden, is the chief City of this Country, and a
famous Mart Town, seated by the mouth of the River Amisis, having a convenient
Haven, the Channel whereof is so deep, that great ships may come in under
sail: so that for wealth, for the public and private building, and for the
multitude of Citizens, it is known not only in Germany but also in all parts
of Europe One of the chiefest Ornaments is the Earls sumptuous palace, the
great Church, and the Praetors house. Here is wonderful plenty of all things,
both for necessity and pleasure, which the Haven, and the conveniencie of
importation of goods, and also the natural fertility of Friesland does yield.
The City is so called from the River Ems, which Tacitus calls Amisia. The
other City is Aurichum, which is a pleasant retiring place for the Nobility,
in regard of Woods and Forests, in which they do freely recreate themselves,
with Hawking and hunting. The Citizens are rich, and do give themselves
either to merchandise or some mechanicke trade. There are an infinite many of
Castells and Towns in this County. And such a number of Villages, that one
does even join upon another. The most whereof both for fair houses, large
streets, and populousness, may compare with some Cities of Germany. Neither
do rusticke people or husbandmen only live in them, but also Merchants, and
diverse kinds of artificers and some of the Nobility: There are also two other
Counties which are subject to the Earl of Embda, Esensis, and Ieverensis, so
called from their chief towns: the Country Ieverensis is situated beyond the
River Iada Westward, and does contain eighteen Villages. On the North, where
the River Visurgis does discharge it self into the Sea, these two Islands do
lie against it, Wangeroga, and Sp^keroga, which are for the most part
unhabited. The County Esensis lies near the Sea shore, and does confine on
Ieveria: on the West it is bounded with Berumna and Auriacum: on the North with
the Sea. The Lord thereof Hajo ab Husecke, in the year 1380, when he had vexed
his neighbors, and took the ships of the Bremensians in the River Visurgis,
and had filled the Sea with Pirates, and the Land with thieves and robbers, at
length after some light skirmishes with the Bremensians, in which he had the
worst, he fled to Elsena, and being there taken by the Bremensians he was
delivered to Edo Wimmcke Captain of Ieveria; who (...) rackt him, and
afterward cut him in pieces, because he had with out any just cause repudiated
his Sister, whom he had married before. There is also in this table the County
of Delmenhorst, and the Lordships Ezes, Norden, Auricke, Iever, Vredeburg,
Ouelgunne and Rheyde. The Rivers here are Amisis, Visurgis, Iada, and others.
The inhabitants of this Country do speak the German Language: but in
secret matters they use a peculiar speech of their own which strangers do not
understand. They either give themselves to trades, or husbandry, or
merchandise: their apparel is very decent, so that the Countrymen go habited
like Citizens. The women have a far different habit from others. For they
put all the hair into a Call or Huicke, which being full of silver buttons an^
knots, they let it hang down upon their backs. In Summer time they wear
their hair in a red silk Call or Net, which is adorned and wrought with
silver. And in winter they put on a hood of green cloth, which covers all
their head, so that you can see nothing but their eyes: and they call this kind
of vestment (...) Their gown or outward garment, is gathered and quilted in
(...) foldes, even from the head to the Anckles, and is so stiffened ^^siver,
and gold plates, that when it is put off it will stand an end. It sometimes
made of red Cloth, and sometimes of green.

The County of Oldenburg.
SO much concerning the County of Embda: the Countle of Oldenburg follows,
which was so called from the chief City Oldenburg. This Tract heretofore the
lesser Caucians did inhabit, as also the County Embda, as we said before. But
the county of Oldenburg which this Table here presents unto your view, from the
East to the bank of the River Visurgis, contains the Provinces of Stegingia
which is subject to the Castle of Delmenhorst, and Stadland, which is divided
into five Parishes, and Butidia into seven, and Ieveria which is subject to
it, being a part of Friesland, which has four and twenty parishes: on the
West it has Amerlangia, which stretches toward the River Amisis, in the
middle of the Morineans. On the North it is bounded with Friesland and the
Ocean: on the South with the Diocese of Munster. Albertus Crantzius, Lib. 3.
cap. 15. writes, that this is the auncientest Country of them all. For he
reokneth Lib. 2. cap. 30. Windekindus Duke of Saxony (who lived in the time of
Charles the Great) among the Earls of this Country. Ierenicus delivers that
the City of Oldenburg, was reedified by Charles the Great, and that the
Bishop Agalgargus, did there dedicate and consecrate a Church to Saint John
Baptist. But I think in this matte^ Ortelius and he are both in one error,
because he reckons thi^ City to be in Wandalia, and does place it near the
Sea. For this is not the same City, with that which is in the Country of
Holsatia. map of Embdanum and Oldenburg THE COVNTIE OF EMBDANVM and OLDENBVRG.
The Wandalians call it Stargard, the Danes Brannesia, as the same Crantzius
does witness. Laurentius Michaelis does think that the Ambronians had their
original from hence, who as Plutarch reports, did heretofore go into Italy
with the Cymbrians, and were slain by Catus Marius; whose name does yet
continue in that Nation which they call Amerlander. And he is of the same
opinion, concerning the Alanian Saxones, who (he supposes) did inhabit near
the Lake Alanum in this tract, and on either side of the River Alania even to
the Castle Ororia, and that they are now called Lengener, that is, the
Alamans, and Avergenlar, that is to say, the Vltralanians. The Castle of
Delmenhorst was built by the River Delme in the year 1247, which belonged 65
years to the bishop of Munster; and Antonius Earl of Oldenburg, on Palm
Sunday in the year 1547. early in the morning scaled the walls with a band of
men, and so took it, and Hermann of Oer the governor of the Castle, was kept
in custody. Concerning the Earls of this Country Andreas Hoppenrodius, does
relate something; but David Chitreus, more excellently in his history of
Saxony. But now by way of conclusion we will add something concerning the
manners of the Chancians. Tacitus a grave writer does write thus of them: There
is a Noble people among the Germans, who are very just, not covetous but
quiet and secret, and not apt to stir uproares, neither do they live by
rapine or Robbery. And this is a chief argument of then virtue, that the great
men do not injure their inferiors; yet they are expert in arms, so that arms
of footmen and horsemen is presently raised, before there be any rumor or
report of it.

THE FIRST TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
WEstphalia follows in our method, concerning the name whereof there are
diverse opinions. Some suppose it was so called from the goddess Vesta, as it
were Vestalia, because heretofore she was reverenced here: The Country whence
so called.
and so they would have the Westphalians to be so called as it were
Vestalians, for they say that those which dwell Eastward beyond the River
Visurgis are called Oostvalian Saxones, from Oost the Eastwinde, and Vadem
which in the Saxon Language signifies a Coult, which they bore in their
military ensigns, and Colors. But now that name is worn out, and it is
generally called Saxony. So the Westphalians, that dwell Eastward on this side
Visurgis, are so called from the Western wind. Lastly, others suppose that
the Westphalians were so denominated from Veldt that is a field, rather this
from Valen. It has on the East Visurgis, on the South the Mountains of
Hassia, which Ptolemie calls the Abnobij: The Situation
on the West the River Rhene: on the North it looks toward Friesland,
Holland, Trajectum, and Trans-Isalana. The air is cold and sharp, The temper
of the air.
but wholesome. The Country is fruitful, but has more pasturage than come. It
has diverse kinds of fruits, as Apples, Nutts, and Akornes, The fruitfulness
of the soil.
with which Hogs are fatted. It is more fruitful about Susatum and Hammonia:
and most fertile near Paderborne and Lippia, but it is barren and desert
ground in some places about Amisis. The Dioecese of Munster confineth on it,
and that tract of land which lies near the River Visurgis. It is woody
through all Surland, and the County Bergensis: it has store of Metal in the
Country of Colen, and and the County of March: and in some parts there are
many Salt ^as. It breeds an innumerable sort of Cattle, and especially, The
variety of living creatures.
abundance of Hogs flesh, which is esteemed a great dainty, and is served up
to Princes Tables. There are also many wild beasts in the Wood. Charles the
Great did first conquer the Westphalians, and converted them to the Christian
religion. He instituted these Bishoprics, the Bishopric of Munster, of
Osnaburg, of Paderborne, The ancient Government.
and Minden. But it is not found in the Annalls, how Westphalia was governed
after Charles the great, or whether it was subject to the Pope. Truly in East
Saxony there were secular Lords, who did govern the Country: at the first,
Kings that were descended from Charles the great, under whom the Dukes of
Saxony did grow up by degrees ^^en until Henry the first, King of the Romans,
after whom there were three Ottoes, who were afterward Marquesses of Saxony,
being sons ^^ Henry Duke of Bavaria, brother to the first Otto. But we do not
^^ede what Princes, Westphalia which is West Saxony, had at that time joined
in government with the Bishops. But afterward Duke Leo, and his grandfather
before him, Luder Duke of Saxony, and afterward Emperor, did govern
Westphalia. For after the aforesaid Henry was displaced by the decree of the
Emperor Frederick the first, the Dukedom of Westphalia did assume the title
of the Archbishopric of Colen; and the Dukes of lower Saxony, being descended
from the Earls of Anholt, did hold and possess it. And now the aforesaid
Bishop does hold a great part of this Country, and especially Angria: and the
Westphalians are subject unto him, and his Nobles, being as it were slaves unto
them. Here formerly the Teutonians, the Busasterians, the Chamavians, the
Angrivarians, the Longobardians, the Dulhumnijans, the Angilians, the
Chaucians, and Cheruscians were seated. Those whom Mela and other call the
Teutonians, Ptolomie calls Teutones: they coming from the Balthicke shore,
where Ptolomie places their ancient seat, did give that appellation to
Teutoburg, which Tacitus places in Westphalia. Those whom Ptolomie calls the
lesser and the greater Bufacterians; Tacitus calls them Bructerians,
Willichius writes that they did inhabit Munster. Those whom Tacitus calls
Ch^mavians, Ptolomie does name Camanians, as Villenovanus thinks. From whom
David Chitreus supposes that the Town Chamen in the County of March does
derive his name. The Angr^narians were seated Eastward near Visurgis: The
Longobarians or rather the Langobardians, Ptolomie places on the Frontires of
this Province, on the farthest part whereof was Bardewick: so also those whom
Ptolomie calls the Dulguminians, Tacitus names the Dulgibinians, from whom
the Town Dulmen in the Dioecese of Munster was denominated; here are also the
Angilians, who about the year 444 went over into Britain, and gave their
own name to England, as it appears by many histories, as also by Saint Bede
an^ English writer. But the Chaucians, whom Ptolomie calls the Cauchians, and
Suetonius, Lampridius, and Strabo the Cauciam, Deo the Chaucians, and Claudian
the Chaycians, as Tacitus writes, do spread themselves from Friesland, even
to the Catti. The same Tacitus does place the Cheruscians hard by them: whence
the Situation of their Country may be easily gathered: for Dion the historian
does witness that they dwelt beyond Visurgis, which may be also collected out
of Tacitus. But this first Table or Chart of Westphalia, does contain the
Counties of Oldenburg, Hoya, Diepholt, and the neighboring Lordships. The
Politic state of Westphalia does consist o^ three orders, 1. The Clergy, 2.
the Nobles, 3. the free City In the first order are the Bishops of
Paderborne, Leodium, Vltrajctum, Munster, Cameracum, Osnaburg, Ferdensis, and
Mindensis. The Abbots Werdensis, Strablonensis, S. Cornelius, Munster,
Echternakensis, Corbei, and Hervordensis; and the Abbatesse Essensis. In the
second order are the Princes, Earls, and Barons: as the Duke of Cle^land and
the County of March, the Duke of Iulia and Bergen. The Marquess of Baden, the
Earl of East Friesland or Em^i^ the Earl of Sein: the Earl of Dillenburg^
the Earl of Ver^^derg map of Westphalia THE FIRST TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
the Earl of Manderscheid: the Earl of Weida and Ringelberg: the Earl
Meursensis: the Lord of Brunchorst: the Earls of Steinford, Benthem, Dortmund,
Oldenburg, the Lord of Ridburg: the Earls of Hoya and Diepholt, and Scaumburg:
the Lords of Spregelberg, and Vanenberg: the Earls of Arenberg, of Lip, and
the Lord of Somerauss. In the third order which is of the free Cities, there
are Colen, Aquisgranum, under Wesel, Durun, Cameracum, Dortmund, Susatum,
Duysburg, Hervord, Brukel, Wartburg, Lemgow, and Werden. But so much of this,
now our order requires that we should unfold the Cities and towns of
Westphalia. But seeing we are to speak of the Dioecese of Bremes, we will
leave off for a while the description of Westphalia, and return to it again
in the following Table, and so will pass to the Bishopric of Bremes.

THE BISHOPRIC OF BREMES.
THe Bishopric of Rhemes, commonly called Stift Bremen, so called from the
City, The Country whence so called.
has the shape and figure of a triangled Isosceles, whose almost equal sides
are the Rivers Visurgis and Albis, which do meet at the hightest corner, nere
the Peninsula, which is named after a Tower built there for the defense of
ships that pass that way. The Base of it is a line drawn from the river Esta,
through the bordes of the Country of Luneburg, and Verdensis, a little beneath
the (...) of the River Allera, which does there discharge it self into
V^sargis. For the River Esta is the limmit of the Country of Bremes and
Hamburg, which the River Sevena, (which is small at first, but afterward
emptyeth it self into Albis with three Channells,) does divide from the
Dukedom of Luneburg. This Country is not every where of one soil. For the
two farthest parts of the Dioecese of Iremes, near the banks of the River
Albis and Visurgis, are very fat and fruitful. But the middle tract between
Stada and Bremes, over which the Merchants do usually travel, is full of
barren sands, Marthes, and Briars. So that the Dioecese of Bremes is commonly
compared to a Cloak or Mantle, the two former parts whereof begin from the
confluence and meeting of the River Albis and Visurgis, and so falling down to
the banckes of both those Rivers, are embrode^ed ^s it were with fruitful
fields and Meddowes: but the other part is woven of a courser thread. Here the
ancient Chaucians ^ere formerly seated, who held all that tract of ground from
Visurga even to Albis, and Hamburg. The Metropolis is Brema, The Cities.
which Ptolomie, Plinnie, Appianus, Peucerus, and Irenicus, do call
Phabira^^^, it is commonly called Bremen. It is a Hanse City near the River
Visugis, well fortified both by Art and natural situation, having
firestreetes, and being full of Citizens, and rich by merchandising and
traffic. It has a fair Market place, where there are markets kept weekly
for all kind of provision. On one side of the Market place the Cathedral
Church stands, and on the other side the Senate house, which has a public
Wine Cellar under it, in which the Senate does keep their wine, and sell it
for a reasonable price. Which is a common custom in many Cities of Wandalia,
and Westphalia, that the Senate makes that which is got by wine charges,
defray public charges. Brema was at first a poor Town, but as the Christian
religion did increase, so it did increase also; for which it is beholding to
the Bishops thereof, who made it a Metropolitan City, and graced it with the
title of the mother Church of all the North, and walled it about. See the
Catalogue of Bishops in M. Adams his ecclesiastical history. There is the
City Stada or Stadum, which is i^ the Archbishopric of Breams, being situate
nere Zu^nga, on the Southern banck of the River Albis, and it is the greatest
City is Saxome* There is also the Town Buxtchuda. This Country is watered
with these Rivers, Visurge, Albi, Esta, which are full of fish, as Ecles,
Lampryes, and Salmons, which those of Breames do salt up and dry in the
smoke, so that the Citizens do fell them for rarities, and make a great
gain of them. The Bremensians are by nature warlike, industrious; and somewhat
inclined to sedition. They love learning and liberal Arts, especially when
they have gotten them abroad by studying in foreign Countries: but otherwise
they are more addicted to merchandising than learning, for they get their
wealth by traffic and trading, and by making long voyages. So that almost all
the Citizens are either skillful Merchants, or Tradesmen, or Shipwrights.

THE SECOND TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
IN our description of Westphalia, the Cities are, among which the first is
Munster the Metropolis, The Cities.
or Mother City, of all Westphalia. Ptolemie calls it Mediolanum, as
Pyrchaimerus thinks, it is commonly called Munster. It is a very fair strong
City, in which both learning and the Roman Language did flourish 60 year
since. The City of Munster names the whole Bishopric, which was so called
of a fat^^s monastery built there. See Munster Lib. 3. of his Cosmographa.
Here began the faction of the Anabaptists, in the year of our Lord 1533, so
that all of that sect did repair hither, where they chose one John Buckholdus
a Cobbler to be the head and ringleader of this sedition, a Vulgar fellow, fit,
for any attempt, and far excelling all the rest, both for wit, boldness,
eloquence, and cunning. He did not fear to style himself King of Munster.
Whereupon the Bishop thought it meet to suppress this sect, and so being
aided and helped by the Archbishop of Colen and also the Duke of Cleveland,
after fourteen m^^eths seige he obtained his City. And then he commanded
that the King should have some of his flesh pulled off with hot Pincers, and
then he should be hung out of the Tower in Iron chains.

Susatum or Soest is the richest and fairest City next to Munster, having
ten great Parishes. They report themselves, that it whas but a Castle at the
first, but afterward by degrees it became a very great City. And from thence
it was there called Susatum, because in regard of the convenient situation,
houses were built by the Castle, so that from the daily increase thereof it
was called Sutatum, as it were ein Zusatz. It has also many neighboring
Villages which are subject to it, which they commonly call Die Burden. This
City is now under the Duke of Clevelands protection, but before it was
subject to the Bishop of Colen. Wesel is a fair rich City, famous for
traffic and Merchandising. It is called the lower Wesell to difference and
distinguish it from the higher, which is situate also on the left side of the
Rhene. The River Lppia brings up many Commodities unto it, which running by
the left side thereof, does straightway associate and join it self with the
Rhene. There is at Wesell a memorable Altar of mercy, which the ancestors of
the most illustrious Lord Henry Oliserius, surnamed Baers, Lord Chancellor of
Cleueland, etc. did place here and consecrate: being an hospital for aged
people; where they have all things necessary provided for them, and the son
following his fathers example, has enlarged the yearly revennewes of it.
Osnaburg, or Ossenburg is a famous City built by the Earls of Engerne, as
Hermanus testifies. Others do suppose that this City was begun by Julius
Caesar, as the Saxons Annalls do mention. They report that it was so named
from the Oxehides, with which this City was encompassed. It is situated in a
pleasant Valley, and it is watered with the River Hasa; they brew good fat
drink in it, which they call Buse. Charles the Great when after 30 years
wars he had conquered the Saxons; and had took the Castle of Widekind
which was near unto this City, and had put a strong garrison in it, he
instituted twelve Bishoprics in Saxony, and made the Bishopric of Osnaburg
the chiefest. For he esteemed this City above all the rest, and granted them
the privilege of a free School, for the teaching of the Greek and Latin
tongues; as Munster, Hamelmann, and the Chronicles of Argentine do also
mention. Minda commonly called Minden, is a pleasant strong City, and the
River Visurgis yields it great store of fish, and brings up many
commodities unto it: it breweth good drink, which is much esteemed, and
venteth great store of commodities by way of traffic. Concerning the
beginning hereof Munster writes thus: When Wildekindus, the first Duke of
Saxony, was converted to the Christian faith; he gave the Emperor Charles
his Castle near the River Wesera, on condition that the Bishop should have
part of it, for it was able to receive them both, so that the Bishop might say,
This Castle shall be mine and thine for both of us have right unto it; and
from hence it was so called in the Saxon Language Myndyn. But in the process
of time the letty y was changed into an e, and now that same City is called
Mynden.

Arnspergum commonly called Arnsperg, is the Metropolis of the County of the
same name. It is situated near the River Rura, and has a Castle adjoining to
it seated on a high Mountain, where the Bishops of Colen have their residence,
being a pleasant seat both for hunting, and for plenty of fish which the
River Rura does yield. Warburg is a fair Town in Westphalia, being built on
an unequal foundation, by the Dimula; it had heretofore a County belonging to
it as Hamelmann reports, who commends it for excellent good drink, and
cheap. Tremonia, or Dortmont is in the middle of the County of Tremonium, it
is an Imperial City. The City Trotmania, which was heretofore so called
from the Trotmans a people of Suevia, the same was afterward called Tremonia,
and now Dortmundt. Ancient Chronicles and Monuments do declare that in that
place, where the City Tremonia map of Westphalia ^HE SECOND TABLE OF
WESTPHALIA.
was afterward builded, there were heretofore two Villages; namely the old and
new. But when Charles the Great had subdued all these Provinces of Saxony, it
became a free Town. For he having considered the fruitfulness of the soil,
and the excellency of the Situation, brought his Colonies hither, and kept his
Court here. Whereupon all those fertile grounds which lie round about it were
called Conings-Hofts-Landt, and all those fair Villages which are near unto
it are called Reichshofen, and are bound to bring in rent-corne yearly to
serve the Kings Court. There are also Dusseldorp, and Hervordia. And the lesser
Towns of Widenbrug and Coesvelt. There are also in this Table the Counties of
Lemgow, Benthem, Lingen, Tecklenboreh, Diepholt, Schouwenberg, Ravensberg, in
which are 5 Praefectures, Sporenberg, Ravensberg, Vlothem, Lymberg, and Lip.
Also the Bishopric of Munster, in which are these Praefectures, Walbecke,
Sassenburg, and Stromberg. And these Burgraviates, Werne, Bocholt, Ahus,
Horstmar, Bevegern, Rheine, Meppen, Nienhuys, Cloppenburg, Wilhusen, Vecht: and
these Counties, Steenverdt, Gemen and Erfmarschalck, Nortkereken,
Osnaburgensis, Mindensis, and Paderbornensis. But of these things enough, we
pass to the rest. Westphalia is watered with many Lakes, Marshes, and Rivers:
The Rivers are Visurgis, Amasis, Glea, Neth, Hasia, Honta, Sala, Lippia,
Stevera, Aa, Vidrus: to Amasis, these tributarie streams belong, Dewera,
Dextra, Galaa, and Berckel, whose spring heads are in this Country. There are
also many hills and Mountains in Westphalia, as Baemberg, and others. And
there are many Woods among which are: dat Hensterholt, and de Avert and
Holt-marckt, and the Forest of Teuteburg, near the head of the River Lippia.
I come to the public works. Charles the Great builded up many Churches in
Westphalia, but the first was the Cathedral Church in honor of Saint Peter,
Crispine and Crispianus. There is at Susatum, a wonderful great Church, with a
very high Steeple, consecrate to Saint Patroclus, which is the tutelary god of
this City. I pass by the other Churches, Monasteries, Hospitalls for the
sick, and the guest-houses which are in Munster and in other Cities. Charles
the Great, as we said before, did enforce the Westphalians to receive the
Christian Religion. But seeing that after they had been many times subdued,
they were yet stubborn and refractory, and did violate the oath which they had
taken, he thought it meet to chastise their insolency, by punishing some, to
the fear and terror of others. Therefore he constituted certain Judges, and
gave them power to examine and punish perjured persons or rash swea^es, or
those that were guilty of any fact, without hearing them, or admitting any plea
in their own defense. This sharp severitie made the Westphalians both
fruitful and obedient, when they saw that Noblemen, and men of great estates,
were hanged up in the Woods by Martial law, without any trial. Aeneas Pius
writes, that this kind of Judgment did continue even until his time, and
that the secret rites, were observed, by which they judge delinquents, and
offenders, and do punish the guilty wheresoever they are found, before they
know that they are condemned, and the Judges are called Scabini: but so much
hitherto. John Lewenclavius a learned man and skillful in the Latin and Greek
tongues, was borne in Westphalia, who most happily translated all Xenophon, all
Nazianzenus works, and some Greek historians, and other Greek books, to his
everlasting fame and renown. The people of this Country are comely and
handsome, of a large stature, strong limmed, Their manners
and very hardy and courageous. It has plenty of Soldiers, so that they can
presently raise an army. The Inhabitants also are witty, and it is a proverb,
that there are more crafty knaves in Westphalia than fools. They punish
adultery with much severitie, Their Diet.
Their food is black bread and cheese: their flesh meat is Porke, hung Beef,
and Bacon, of which they have great store: Especially the Gammons which the
inhabitants do eat raw. Their drink is a kind of Beer: the rich drink
Renish wine, although it be very dear. Their Arts.
But seeing the Country in most places is unfit for tillage, therefore the
inhabitants do give themselves to Mechanic Arts and merchandising. Their
Traffic.
Their commodities, are free stone for carving, and building, and also
Milstones and Whetstones; and especially they have delicate gammons which are
accounted great dainties even at Princes tables. Concerning this country are
these verses in Meeter: Hospitum vile,
Cranckbroot, dunbier, langhe mile,
Sunt in Westphalia:
Qui non vult credere, loop da.


THE BISHOPRIC OF MUNSTER.
THe Bishopric of Munster is situated in a fertile soil abounding with all
kinds of fruits: on the North it has the County Benthemium: on the East the
Bishopric o^ Padelbrum; on the South the Counties of Zutphan and Marcan.
Charles the Great, Emperor of Rome, and King of France which conquered lower
Saxony, which is now called Westphalia, d^^ institute this Bishopric, and
called it Mimingerodensis, or Mimingardevorensis. Afterward he called it
Munster from a Monaster which he built there, in the honor of the blessed
Virgin Mary Hermannus was the first Bishop thereof. The City is strongly
fortified both by nature and Art, especially since the faction of the
Anabaptists ceased: it is situated on a plain having five fair Canonical
Colleges, and a school famous for learning and Arts. The inhabitants are
laborious and industrious, and do transport their commodities into foreign
Countries. But after that the Spaniards had wars with the Low Countries, they
were prohibited and forbidden to trade and traffic with the united Provinces.
And after the reign of Ferdinand the first, all that were not of the Roman
religion were enforced to leave the City, to their great loss and damage.
It was governed formerly and now also by Bishops, their Catalogue follows.
The first Bishop was Ludgerus Frisius, brother to Hildegrine Bishop of
Halberstadt, who dyed in the year of Christ 809. after whom there followed
Godfry, Alfrid, Lubbertus, and Bertoldus, in the reign of the Emperor
Arnulph: and in the year 895, and afterward, William Richard, Reinolds,
Hildebald, Dodo, Suederus, Theodore, Sigefride, and Hermann the first, who
built a Monastery beyond the water, whence the Town was called Munster, in the
year 1025, whose successors were called the Bishops of Munster: namely Robert,
Frederick, the brother of the Marquess of M^snia, Erpo, Theodoricke of
Wintzenhurg, Henry, Egbert, Wernerus, Henry, Ludovicke, Godescal, a Saxon, who
dyed in the year 1200. Hermann the second, Count of Catznelbogen, Otto Count
of Benthem, Theodoricke, Ludolphus Count of Holte, Otto the second Count of
Lip, William the second Baron of Holte; Gerard Court of Marca; Everhard Count
of Deest, Otto the third Count of Retberge; Conradus, Ludovicke Count of
Hassia, Adolphus Co^^t of Marca, in the year 1365. John Count of Virnenburch,
translated to Vltrajectum; Florentius Count of Vevelichoven, Paro Bohemus, map
of Munster THE BISHOPRIC OF MUNSTER.
Henry Wulf, Otto the fourth Count of Hoya, Henry Count of Mursium, Walramus
brother to Henry, John Bavarus, Henry Bishop of Bremes, Conrade Count of
Retberg, Eric elected Duke of Saxony in the year 1508. Frederick Count of
Weda; Eric Count of Grubenhager, Franciscus Count of Waldeck, in whose reign,
the Anabaptists, did make a great tumult or faction, having one John of Leiden
for their Captain, who would needs be called King of Israel. After Waldeck
there were William Ketler, Bernard Raefvelt, and John Comes of Hoya, who dyed
in the year 1574. John William Duke of Cleveland, who resigned to Ernest Duke
of Bavaria and Bishop of Colen, after whose decease his Nephew Ferdinand
succeeded.

THE THIRD TABLE OF WESTPHALIA
THe third Table of Westphalia as the Title shows, does lively delineate and
describe three parts. The Dukdome of Bergen, the County of March, and the
Dioecese of Colen. The Dukedom of Bergen whence so called. The Situation
Which we will run over in the same order as they are propounded. The first
is the Dukedom Berges, which is so called from the Town Bergen, it begins
at low Wesel, and so runs up a great way toward Rhene. But concerning the
original of this Dukedom, Munster writes thus. The Government.
In the time of Henry Auceps King of the Romans, namely in the year 724,
there were two brothers, unto whom for their former service, King Henry gave a
certain part of Westphalia, in which the elder, namely Adolphus, built a
Castle near the County of Arnsperg, and called it V^lvesheg; and afterward
he brought all the Country to Civilitie, and adorned it with many Towns and
Villages. The other brother called Eberhard, did also build a Castle, and
called it Aldenburg. But these brothers increasing both in power and wealth,
the King made Adolphus a Count, and the Country a County, which was called
the County of Altenna. Also he made Eberhards land the County of Bergen. A
little after Eberhard being made a Monk, passed over his territories to his
brother, and builded a monastery ^eere the River Dune, and was made Abbot
thereof. After Adolphus and his posterity, there succeeded these Counts,
Engelbert, Adolphus, Engelprechtus, and Adolphus. But Adolphus dying without
issue, the County of Bergen came to his Sisters son, namely Gerard Earl of
Iuliacum. After whom his son Wilhelmus governed both Countries, and after him
succeeded his son Wilhelmus, the first Duke of Iuliacum, and Duke of Bergen
and Gelderland. After him, there succeeded in these Dukedomes, his brother
Rainold, who dyed in the year of Christ 1433. some say, that the County
Montensis was errected and established at that time, when Henry the proud was
deposed by Frederick the first. But yet in the year of Christ 1336. Charles
the fourth made this County a Marquiship, and made his son Wentceslaus Duke
thereof. Here is the Imperial Town Essendia, in which Alfrid the fourth
Bishop Hildesheymen builded a Nunnery, for 52 Virgins, and an Abbatesse, and
likewise a College for twenty Cannonists and a Deane. The Country yields
great stoare of wheat and corn, so that the white bread Essendia is much
esteemed. The Townsmen are Merchants, or W^vers or Smiths, so that there is
much armor made here. It has ma^wels and a black kind of stone coals,
which the Country nee^ unto it yields, but chiefly by Steltium a Town by
the Riv^^ Rura. There is also Dusseldorp, the Metropolis of this Dukdome, so
^^^med from the river Dussela, which runs through the middle of ^^

The County of Marck.
The County of Marck follows. It seems that the Vbians d^ heretofore inhabit
this Country, and the Dukedom of Bergen. B the Counts of Altena were formerly
contented with this title, The ancient Government.
until Count Frederickes son, having gotten Marck, writ himself Earl of
Marck and Altena, The Towns.
and boar the arms of it, about the year 1004. in the time of Wichman the
thirteenth Earl of Cleveland Marck is a large County of Westphalia, having
many flourishing Towns on the bancke of the River Lippia, as Hammon, Vnna,
(...) Tremonia, Werdena and others. We have formerly spoke ^^^cerning Susatum
and Tremonia. Werdena in the entrance to W^^lia, is a Town near the River
Rura, it was built by William ^denburg, the 42 Abbot of the Monastery built by
S. Lutgerus, in (...) year 1317, and Engelbert Earl of Marck did give it many
pri^^ledges, which it still enjoyes. The Townsmen live for the most (...) by
feeding and grazing of cattle. They have pleasant fields and p^stures, and
very high woody Mountains, in which there are gre^^ stoare of hogs, and
little Rivulets with a murmuring sound to ru^ down the mountains. Besides,
the river Rura, yields them (...) commodities, besides great stoare of fish,
and fat Eeles: there is a (...) bridge over the River Rura, for passengers to
go over. There is a so the Town Chamen which David Chytraeus supposes that
it (...) so called from the Chamavians, who came hither in Trajans time.

The Dioecese of Colen.
The next County in this Chart is the Dioecese of Colen, commonly called Stift
Coln, so called from the chief City thereof The Vbians did heretofore
inhabit it, who were first seated beyon^ the River Rhene, in the County of
Marck, and which belonged to the Prince of Cleueland, so that it is a wonder
that Volateranus was no ashamed to place the Vbians in Marchia Badensis, which
is near Helvetia. Tacitus Lib. 4. Hist. does call them Agrippinnians. Iuniu
says that it is likely, that the Vbians derived their name from a Tow^^
commonly called Tuysch, and heretofore Te vbisch, and by contraction Tubisch,
and from thence Tuysch, where there is a fair ancient Monastery built.
Neither is it unlikely that the great Alta^ which Tacitus often mentions was
built here, near which Segmund (whom Strabo corruptly calls Semiguntus) the
son of S^gest Prince of the Sicambrians was created Priest, who afterward a^
the revolt and defection of Germany fled to the rebels, and brok^ his fillets
which were the ensigns of his Priesthood. Puceru^^ t^ think that the Vbians
were the inhabitants of Eij faliae, which a^^ farther off, and some do rather
think that they were those Tarbellia^ which Caesar mentions. The Metropolis
is Agrippina, which Tacitus calls Colonia, or COL. CLAVD. AVG. And
Agrippinensi^^^ map of Westphalia ^HE THIRD TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
in an ancient writing: and in Claudius coin it is called Col. Agrippin^
Vbior. In Vitellius coin it is called the 19 legion: and Ptolomy calls it the
Agrippin legion: Plinny and Suetonius, do name it the Agrippine Colonie The
inhabitants do now call it Colln, and the Frenchmen Coloigne. Some do
fabulouslly suppose that it was called Colonia from Colonus a Trojan: and some
would have it so called because it was a Roman Colonie: Cornelius Tacitus
writes thus concerning it: But Agrippina that she might show her power to the
neighbor Nations, commanded that the old Soldiers and the Colonie called by
her name, should be brought into the Town of the Vbians, in which she was
borne. And by chance it came to pass, that her Uncle Agrippa received those
people into his protection, after they had passed ove^ the Rhene. So that this
City had both those names of Agrippin^ and Colonia from Agrippina: and from
that time it was called the Agrippine Colonie, and the Citizens were called
Agrippinensians. But afterward when the Roman Empire began to decay: the
Frenchmen under the conduct of their King Childericke in the year of our Lord
452, did drive them all forth, and by force got the possession of the Colonie,
and did govern ^t until the time of Otto the first. But in the year 749 Otto
the Roman Emperor took this Colonie from the Frenchmen, and restord it to
the Roman Empire. Since which time it has always been a free Imperial
City. It is situate on the left hand bancke of the River Rhene, being great
in compass. I^ was at first four square, but now the form of it is like an
half Moon, having many fair houses, and streets, pleasant Gardens and
Orchards, being well fortified with a strong wall and a double ditch; besides,
it is populous, and rich: it is famous for Mechanicke Arts, and for the
University, and for wealth it excels the most Cities of Germany. In this
City about the year of Christ 1340 Taulerus a famous Doctor of the Church
did preach.

Bonna is seated on a pleasant plain, where the Mountains of Rhene do
descend and become level ground. There is also Sontina a fair Town, and the
Village Brula. Also on the Coasts of the Vbians there was Tolbiacum, The
public works.
as Tacitus reports, Lib. 5. Histor. I cannot omit the public works. Here
is the great Church of Colonia, built with free stone curiously wrought and
carved, which is consecrated to Saint Peter; which if it had been finished, it
would have exceeded all the Churches in Germany, for building and largeness;
and it might worthily have been counted one of the wonders of Europe. What,
should I mention the fair Church of the Machabees? Or what should I speak of
the other Churches and Monasteries? What should I mention the Guesthouses, the
Hospitalls for the sick, the Hospitalls for the poor, The Government.
and for Orphans? Besides, the Praetors house does much beautify this City.
I pass by other things.

Moreover the Politic government of this City does represent the
flourishing government of the Roman Commonwealth. For if you consider the
dignity of the Consuls, Proconsuls, Censors, Tribunes, Quaestors, and the
Praefects of the Corn, or the inflexible staff of Justice, which is carried
instead of the knitch or bundle of rods: or if you observe the order of the
companies, or the civil authority of the Senators, you shall see that this
Commonwealth of Agrippina is as 'twere the Effigies, and lively Picture of
Rome, so that it deserves to be called the Roman Colonie. But so much
hitherto let us pass to other matters.

THE ARCHBISHOPRIC OF COLEN by RHENE.
THe Vbians in Caesar's time were seated on that bank of t^^ river Rhene which
is toward Germany, and had a flou^^shing City; but they being vexed by the
Suevians w^ were the most potent people of Germany, sent Emba^sadors unto
Caesar and made a league with him, leav^ pledges and desiring aid of him
against their enemies; who bei^^ then suppressed, yet afterward the Suevians
assailed them again Whereupon that they might live in more security hereafter,
M Agri^pa son in law to the Emperor Augustus, brought them over the (...) to a
place which they now call Vpen. And also Agrippina, (...) to Agrippa, N.
Claudius, afterward Emperor, the son of Ger^^nicus; brought thither in the
reign of Tiberius, a Colonie beca^ she was borne there, and so as Tacitus
says, it was called after (...) name: so that afterward they would not be
called Vbians b^ Agrippinians. This City grew so big, that Z^st^ calls it
the greatest City, and Ammianus calls it well fortified City: and it is
manifest that it was the head City and Metropolis of Germany, and a Dukes
seat, so that Vitellius, a^ Suetonius witnesses, sent the Dagger hither, with
which Otto stab^ himself: and in the same City Trajan received the ensigns
o^ the Empire, being sent unto him from Nerva. It continued faithful unto the
Romans, until in the year 462, their strength bei^^ weakened and spent, the
Frenchmen under the conduct of Ki^^ Childericke, by force got possession of it,
and held it until Ottoes time For he having took it from the Frenchmen,
restored it to the Roman Empire, and set it at liberty. But before Frederick
the seconds time, about the year of Christ 1201, it was associated and joined
to Hansa. It is now fortified with 38 Towers, and with ^ double ditch and a
wall, on both sides whereof there are rows o^ trees. It has in many things
some affinity with Rome; in the Magistracy there are Consuls, Proconsuls,
Praetors, Censors, Tribune Questors, and Aediles: As for sacred buildings, it
has man fair Churches, and for civil buildings, it has a Court, a Mark
place, a Porch or an Exchange. The Court has a high Tower o^ curious
workmanship, of free square stone, which is every were adorned with curious
artificial statues. The River Rhene glideth b^ the City, on the opposite
bancke whereof the Divitensian Caste^ was built with a bridge by Constantine
the son of Constantius, wh^ placed a garrison therein for defense of the
Frenchmen, which together map of Colen by Rhene ^^E ARCHBISHOPRICKE of COLEN by
RHENE.

COLONIENSIS Archicpiscopatus Milka^^ G^^manica communica

with the bridge was destroyed by the Bishop Bruno, who bui^^ an Abbey with the
stones thereof, which in the year 1124. was governed by Rubert a famous
divine. There were 78 Bishops of Cole^ from Beatus Maternus Saint Peter's
Scholar, as some would have i^ even to Ferdinand Bavarus. Their territory is
very large, and the^ have many Towns subject unto them, the chief whereof are
Bo^na, Nussia, and Ardernacum near the Rhene. It is a fruitful Country
abounding with corn and wine. Their sacred jurisdiction is extended far and
near; and in saecular matters they are Poten^ Princes, and they have the
second place among the Electors of the Roman Empire.

THE ^OVRTH TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
NOw we do add this fourth Table of Westphalia, that so we may have the
better knowledge of this large wide Country: it contains that part of the
Country which is bounded on the North, with the River Rura, and it has ^he
East the Bishopric of Padleborn, and the County of Walde^^ on the South
Hassia, on the West it is joined with the County (...) Marcan. It is full of
Mountains and Hills, especially toward the (...) where it joyneth to
Padleborne, and Waldecia, in which tract (...) are many Towns, as upon the
banck of the River Mommius: (...), Osbern, Hullinehoven, Arensberg, Nienhus,
Gunne, Stoc^^, F^^^in^k, Berchem, Molhem: and many others as Bergen, ^le^ede,
Langstraten, Mensel, Hemerde, Heddingchasen, Overs^^n, which are watered with
other little Rivulets. But the Ri^^^ Mommius arises out of the aforesaid
Mountains, and has al^ besides the aforenamed, these Towns, Hilbrichusen,
Brilon, and ^^en, which are known through the neigbouring Valleys, for the
^ommodities which that River yields. The River Hime is also no ^sse famous,
which rises in the middle of this Province, out of a ^^all Fountain near
Frederick Burg, and waters the little Towns, Meiler, Eiselpe,
Helmerinchuse, and Meschede, where it neereth with another little Rivulet. The
River Win begins at ^^ede or a little above, and glideth by Berentrup,
Passert, Dorler, ^q^^ck, and beyond Grevenstein after many windings and
turnings, it c^meth to Freinhol, and so runs among the Mountains, and at
length mingleth it self with Mommius near to Neijm. The River (...),
begins in the Mountains near Nodarem, and comes ^word Overkirchen on the
South, and Smalenborg on the North, and from thence it runs by Meygen,
Grevenburge, Habbeke, and so ^aving received another Rivulet near
Plettenberch, it goes for^ard to Ebrichusen, and Werdecke, and at length about
Limburg, it ^^th cast it self into the River Mommius. Moreover the River Ru^,
runs and rises from hence, which glideth by Oldenda; and so near the River
Sunderen receives Borchou, and so being much en^arged, it runs into the
Rhene. The Country toward Hassia is Mountanous, and therefore unfruitefull.
The inhabitants are of a ^reat stature, and strong, but very rude, and eat
course fare, as Ba^^n, Beef, Beans, Pease, and Lettice. The great labor
which is bestowed in tilling the earth, and the small profit which arises from
^^ence, makes them less diligent. For in winter time they Banquet, and drink
great store of a thick kind of drink; and they ta^^ care but of their
Cattle, which they keep with their own ^^ling houses. The Rivers do afford
them fish, but not (...) tasted as those which are taken in the Rhene. They are
not v^pert or ready in matters of war, and therefore they shun^ doubtful
chance of war, as much as they can: and albeit the ^ons were accounted
heretofore a warlike Nation, yet now the despised and contemned of their
neighbors, and now for wa^ use they are not esteemed for matters of war.

map of Westphalia ^^E FOVRTH TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.


THE DIOECESE OF LEDEN.
THe Dioecese of Leden is so called from the chief C^^tie Leden Hubert. Thomas
of Leden does affirm the was called Leden, The Country whence so called.
from a Roman Legion that ^ slain in that Valley, and the inhabitants do
(...) Liege, as it were a Legion. Some think it was fo^med from a little small
River called Legia, which rising (...) miles from the City, does within the
City mingle it self (...) the River Mosa. The Situation
It is commonly called l' Euesche de Liege. O^ North West it has Brabant, on
the East partly Mosa, and (...) the Dukedom of Limburg. On the South the
County of N^^cium. The length of it is 31 Leden Miles, and the breadth (...)
has a clear, The temper of the air. The fruitfulness of the soil.
temperate, and wholesome air: the soil is plea^^^ and fruitful, especially
Northward where it confineth on Br^^^^ where it yields great store of Corn,
and other fruits, a^^ some places wine. But toward the South where it joyneth
to ^zenburg and France, it is somewhat barren, and Mountanous. (...) Woody; for
here is some part of the Forest of Arden, which the greatest, as Caesar
witnesses, in all France. This is the (...) face of the soil: but within it
has Mines of Iron and Lead, a^^ also some of Gold. There are also Quarries,
out of which to m^^ great men's Tombs, white Marble which the Graecians call
(...) blaster, is dug. There are also a kind of pit-coale dug ou^ them,
which are gotten with great pains, and with hazard of li^ and some times they
are dug out under the Channel of Mosa, and (...) brought into our Country by
ships, and there is yearly raised (...) of them, an hundred thousand
Duckers. This stone they commonly call Leden coal, or Charbon de Liege: which
as soon as it h^^ took fire, it kindles by degrees, it is quenched with oil,
and ^^ter makes it burn: The heat of it is very vehement,: whenc^ comes to
pass that Leden does boast of three thrings above o^ Nations: Bread better
than bread: Iron harder than Iron: and (...) hotter than fire. They report that
a certain stranger in the y^^ 1198 did first find out the use of this stone,
who showed it t^^^ smith. Moreover this Country abounds with all kind of
Ca^^ and it has Woods which afford great store of Game for hawk^ and hunting.
They report that Saint Maternus Patavinus, the (...) Bishop of the Tungrians,
about the year of our Lord 101, did c^vert this Country to the Christian
faith. For the Bishops (...) map of Leden ^HE DIOECESE OF LEDEN.
which is now at Leden, was then at Tunguris, and it continewed t^ the year
488, at what time Trajectum was translated by S. Servatius to Mosa, when the
Hunnians under the conduct of Attila, the broke into Germany, and did wast
that City together with other towns and it continewed there even to Bishop
Huberts time who i^ the year 713, did translate it to Leodium, where it now
remains* Moreover from Hubert the first Bishop of Leiden, even until ou^
times, Guicciardine reckons 62 Bishops. Neither is this Praelat^ a Bishop
only but also a Prince of the Empire, Duke of Bouillion^ Marquess of
Francimont, Count of Loten and Hasbania. The ancient inhabitants of this
Bishopric were the Eburonians, the Tungrians, Centronians, and Ceraesians.
Now it takes up a great part of the ancient Lotharingta for the Dioecese of
Leden contains the Dukedom of Bouillion: the Marquiship of Francimont, the
County o^ Hasbania or Haspengaw, and Loten, and many Baronies. And ther^ are
in this tract besides Trajectura, the middle part whereof is subjec^ to the
Duke of Brabant, 24 walled Cities, and a thousand 700 Villages, with spire
Steepled Churches, and many Abbyes and Lordships. The names of the Cities are
these: Leden, Bolonium, Francimontium, Loots, Borchworm, Tungri, Hojum,
Hasselt, Dinantum, Masacum, Stochum, Bilsenum, Saint Trudonis, Vtsetum, Tumum,
Varem, Beringum, Herck, Bree, Pera, Harmontium, Sine^um, Fossa, and Covinum, as
Guicciardine reckons them. The Metropolis of them all is Leden, which some
call, Augusta Eburonum, the inhabitants do call it Liege, and the Teutonians,
Luyck and Luttich. It is an ancient City, and Hubert Thomas, a Ledener does
refer the original thereof to Ambioriges a courageous King of the
Eburonians, under whose conduct the inhabitants by an Ambushment, slew Cotta,
and Sabinus, having cut off one Roman Legion, with 5 Cohorts, as C^ Caesar,
Lib. 5. of his Commentaries concerning the French war does relate. Others
suppose that it is a new City, which was buil^ by Hubert of Aquitaine, but
their opinion is manifestly proved to be erroneous, by some ancient Monuments,
and buildings. There do flow into the City some other Rivers besides Mosa
and Legia, as Vtes, Veses, and Ambluarus, which arise out of the Wood Arden.
There are also very many clear fountains, so that many private houses, have
two or three. The City is wide built, and does contain some Mountains and
Vallyes, the compass of it is four Italian miles. There are fair Aedifices
and buildings, and the Bishops Palace for stateliness, and magnificence
exceeds all the rest, which was built by cardinal Erard of Leiden. But for
fair Churches, whether you consider their number, or their curious building,
or their richness; it does far exceed all the Cities not only of France,
but of both Germanies. There are eight Collegiate Churches in it, in which
there are very rich Cannons, but the chief and fairest is Saint Lamberts
Church. It is a Cathedral Church: and the Bishop thereof is Prince of the
whole Dioecese, and Country; but none are chosen to be Cannons, unless he be
descended of a Noble stock, or else a Doctor or Licentiate: and it is lawful
^^^ any Cannon (unless he be chosen into the number of the Priests) ^o resign
his benefice, to marry a wife, and to take upon him another calling. In this
Church there are very many precious vessels, and ^any ornaments of Gold and
Silver: among the rest, there is Saint ^^^ges statue of pure Gold, which
Charles Duke of Burgundy, con^^^ed. There are also four very rich Abbyes,
adorned with well ^^^ed Libraries. There are 32 Parishes within the City, and
as many Churches. Whereby it appears, that that which Petrarck writ was ^ot
undeserved, Vidi Leodium, insignem Clero locum, that is, I saw Leden famous for
the Clergy men. The Bishop has the right and ^^de of a Prince: yet the City
has so many privileges and liberties, that it may be counted a free City.
For it has Consuls: it was heretofore a great place of studdy, so that it is
observed, that at one time ^ Kings sons, four and twenty Dukes sons, and
29 Earls sons, were students at Leden: Besides many Barons sons, and
great men's children, who were all for the most part Cannons of S. Lamberts
Church. Bolonium, or Bouillon, is a Castle four mile from (...) and sixteen
from Leden, being built with rare workmanship, ^^ the top of a Mountain: it
is the seat of the Dukes of Bouillon. (...) Duke of Lotharingia, was borne
here, who in the year 1016, at the general council held at Claremont in
Avernia, together with his brothers, Eustatius and Balduine went to war
against the Infidels, to recover the holy Land. At what time this Noble Hero,
to furnish himself for this war, sold this Dukedom to Spertus Bishop of
Leden, which was a greater glory to the seller than the buyer. By his valor
the Christians took Jerusalem in the year 1020: When the Army offered him for
his brave achievements the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and a golden Crown, this
Noble Christian Prince refused them, saying that he would not be made a King,
nor wear a golden Crown, there where his Savior had worn a Crown of taxes.
Francimontium was heretofore a walled Town, but now the walls are fallen
down: Cardinal Erard whom I formerly mentioned built a Fort here. It is 4
Miles from Leden, and it is honored with the title of a Marquiship. At Tuini
(which is a Village Town near Francimont) there is the best Lead, and in the
Mountains near unto it, there are Marble Quarries. The Tungrians are three
miles from Mosa, and as many from Leden: their City is now called Tongeren,
being situated near the River Iecher; it was so called from the Tungrians a
people of Germany, who leaving their Country passed over the Rhene, and seated
themselves here. It is the Auncientest City in all Brabant. It is two
hundred miles from this City to Paris, and all the way was once paved with
stones, as it is yet manifest by some part thereof. Hercules his Church within
the City, shows the antiquity of it, whose statue does yet stand over the
gate. Hojum or Hoy, is so called from a little swift running Rivulet which here
casts it self headlong into Mosa, it is five miles distant from Leden. Four
miles from Leden near the little Town Dener is Eilsen, and beyond that the
Village Munster hilsten; three miles from the Tungrians, is the City of Saint
Truden, which as some suppose, was the seat of the Centronians, whom Julius
Caesar does often mention. A mile from Leden, is the Village Ebure, which as it
is supposed, also was the seat of the Eburonians. Placencius writes (that I
may add this by the way) that a part of Trajectum, joyne^ to this Dioecese by
the donation or gift of Porus, Count of Lovania. We omit the other Towns for
brevitie sake. This Country i^ every where watered with Rivers, the most of
which do run in to Mosa: The Rivers
as Legia, or Legio, Vtes, Veses, Ambluarus, Ieckel, Hoy, Vesera, Vl, Voer,
Vrt; the others run into Demera, and so to Scaldis as Ratheck, Stimmer,
Herck, and Hespe, which are all fair clear Rivers, abounding with all kinds
of fish. Here was a Fountain concerning which learned men do not agree. Some
do affirm that it is yet within the City, Guicciardine and others do
contend that it was out of the City, half a mile from Limburg, 5 mile from
Leden, 8 miles from the Tungrians, near the Town Spa, in a pleasant and
delightful Wood, being a part of the Wood Arden This Fountain has a great
virtue in curing desperate diseases, as the Gout, Dropsy, Fevers, and the
like. And here the Country begins to be full of Mountains, Mountains.
Woods.
in which there are rich Mines. I^ has also many shadie Woods, which are parts
of the Forest of Arden, which is so celebrated by Julius Caesar. One small
part of it which is near unto the County of Namurcium, is called the Forest
Marlignia. And so much concerning the Dioecese of Leden: now we proceeed to the
rest.

THE COVNTIE OF MVERS, with the adjacent Countries.
IN this Table, in which the County of Muers is lively described and
delineated, together with the Countries, Cities, and Rivers which do
encompasse this County: we will only describe those Countries which we have
not described otherwheres: namely these. First be County of Muers, afterward
the Dukedom of Cleveland, The County of Muers.
and ^^ly the Dukedom of Iuliacum. The County of Muers commonly called
Graefschaft Muers, was so called from a Town of the f^re Name. On the East it
has the Dukedom of Bergen, and the County of Marck: on the West Gelderland:
The Situation
on the South the Dio^cese of Colen and the Dukedom of Iuliacum: on the North
Cleve^^land. The Country yields great store of corn, and has many pleasant
Meddowes. The chief Town is Muers, which does name, the Country, it stands
over against Duisburg, The chief Town.
not far from the left banck of the Rhene. And so much concerning the County
of Muers. I come to the Dukedom of Cleveland, The Dukedom whence so called.
which was ^^alled from the Cliffes: and there is a small Town of that ^^^e,
near the bancke of the Rhene, which is built of three Cliffy (...). It is
boundered on the East with the Dukedom of Bergen, The Situation
the County of Marck and Westphalia; on the North with the County of
Zutphania, Trans-Isalania, and Batavia; on the West with Gellerland, and Leden;
on the East with Colen and Aquisgranum. The temper of the air. The
fruitfulness of the soil. The variety of living creatures. The ancient
Government.
The Country has a good and wholesome air, it yields great store of Corn,
and pleasant Meddowes. Here are diverse kinds of living creatures: and in some
parts diverse wild beasts, as oars, Foxes, Hares, Connies, Hearts, wild ^ats,
and wild horses: they have ^^at store of Partridges, Thrushes, and Stares. An
innumerable sort of Duckes, and great plenty of all kinds of provision. They
report also that Pipin, and Charles Martell, did give Aelius Gracilis when he
flourished in wealth and power, that part of Batavia, which is now called
Cleueland. There succeeded after him Theodoricke, Rheinhold, Rudolphus, John,
Robert, Balduine, and others even to John who was the 27 from Aelius, and here
the line was extinct. Yet Adolphus was adopted by the Emperor and the
provinces into this family, and in the Council at Constantia, the Emperor
Sigismund, created him Duke of Cleveland. This Dukedom has these Towns on
the confines of France: The Towns.
Xantum, or Santen, a Town on the left bancke of the Rhene, which Pighius
heretofore called Trajana Colonia, and Pyranius, and many others Vetera: it
seems to be very ancient and of great antiquity, by those stones which are
called Duynsteen, of which great stoare are gathered out of the ruins.
Burichum, or Burich is a small Town, situate over against Wesel, hahaving
pleasant fields and Meddowes round about it. Clivia, or Cleve is the head Town
of the Province, not far from the bancke of Rhene, not far from that place
where it spreads forth his arms, and begins to Inile Batavia. It was
heretofore a very great City, as we may collect by the ruins thereof. It was
called Cleve because it is situate on three cliffie rocks, near the Rhene. On
the highest part of the three hills, there is seated a high, broad,
foure-square Tower, with a fair Castle, which they report was builded by Caius
Julius Caesar, in his French wars, as a Fort of defense against the
Germans: which may be seen in these words written in the great Court of the
Palace by the Princes commandment. Anno ab. vrbe. DCXCIIX.C. Julius.
Dictator. His. Partibus. Subactis Arcem. Clivensem fundavit. That is, in the
year from the building of the City DCXCIIX.C. Julius, the Dictator, in these
parts, having subdued Arcem, founded Cleve. Now it is memorable because it is
the seat of the most illustrious Dukes of Iuliacum, Cleveland, and also for
the Collegiate Church, and the courtesy of the inhabitants. It is very
conveniently situated, and has a fair prospect into a fair plain, which is
clothed with green grass and herbage: but especially from a high Tower,
which from the weather cock is called the Swanne Tower. Calcaria is a Town in
the Island of Rhene, which was built first by the Earls of Cleveland, as a
Fort and Tower of Garrison to prevent the incursions and inroades of these of
Colen and Gelria, with whom they had often wars. It was so named from the
ancient Castle Calcer, from whence there was passage from this Island to the
farther bancke of the Rhene; it grew rich and powerful by clothing, and
brewing of drink, which was transported from thence to other places. Above
Calcaria in that place which is called Aufden Baern, it is thought that Caesar
Germanieu did build a bridge over the Rhene, when he marched from his old tents
unto the Martians, who are now called Twentanians, but yet the little Town
Otmaersen retains its ancient name. Griet is situate on the left bancke of
the River Rhene, and below it on the same side is Griethusium on the confines
of Batavia, near the ancient Castle Lobecum, which signifies the corner of
the course, for Loop signifies a course, and Eck a corner: for Rhene divides
his course and runs diverse ways. On the bancke toward Germany, there are
Vesalia, of which we have spoken in the descripion of Westphalia; also
Duisburg, or Teutoburg, a Town of ancient Germany, situated heretofore on
the bancke of the River Rhene, between the Rivers Rura and Angra. Both
histories, and the fair buildings do declare and demonstrate that it was
always a famous Town. And the writers concerning the affairs of Flanders do
show, that it was frequented map of Muers THE COVNTIE OF MVERS.
by Merchants for trading and famous Marts which were kept there. Embrica is a
very neat Town, well peopled, having fair streets, and a well governed
school; the Commentators on Tacitus do call it Asciburg, but it is commonly
called Emmericke. And so much concerning Cleveland: the Dukedom of Iuliacum
remains, commonly called Iuliers or Gulick. It was so named from the Town
Iuliacum. It is situated between the River Rhene and Mosa, in the same manner
as Cleveland is, but that the latter lies Northward, and the other Southward.
For otherwise they have the same Countries confining on them. The temper of the
air.
It has a good wholesome air: and the soil yields abundance of Corn, which
is very weighty. It brings forth also good Woad, which is very gainefull to
the inhabitants: and it has many flourishing Meddowes, The variety of living
creatures. The ancient Government.
but no Wine. Here are variety of living creatures, and especially excellent
horses. The Princes of Iuliacum are thought to be descend from Eustathius
brother to Godfrey Bilioneus. But the Country of Iuliacum, was heretofore a
County, and the Emperor Ludovicke, made it a Marquiship in the year 1329,
and 30 years afterward the Emperor Charles the fourth, made it a Dukedom.
But William the fourth was the Marquess and Duke thereof. His son William
succeeded after him in the Dukedom of Iuliacum and Gelria: he dying without
issue, left Raynold his brother to succeed him. And he dying without an heir,
his wife married his kinsman Adolphus of Bergen, who was created Duke of
Iuliacum, and Bergen. They dying without issue, William was made Duke of
Iuliacum and Bergen, and had a son named Gerard, who succeeded his father:
William was son to Gerald, who married his only daughter to the only son
of John Duke of Cleveland: and so the three Dukedomes of Bergen, Iuliacum, and
Cleveland, were made one Country. But this John had a son named William, who
joined the fourth Dukedom, namely of Gelria, to the three Dukedomes of
Cleveland, Iuliacum, and Bergen; but in the year 1543, he was conquered and
subdued by Charles the fifth, and spoiled of his Country, and afterward upon
new conditions he received it again, with all Gelria, by marrying the
daughter of Ferdinand King of the Romans. The chief City which names the
Dukedom is Iuliacum commonly called Gulich, The Cities and Towns.
which Antoninus mentions in his Itinerary; it is situated near the River
Rura. The other Towns besides Iuliacum are Marcodurum, commonly called Duren,
a Town famous for holding out against that fiery seige, which Charles the
fifth laid against it. The Monastery of Eyphalia is a pleasant town: lying in
a vale between two Mountains, not far from the fountains of the River
Ervatis: also Euskirchia, Birchemum, commonly called Caster from the
magnificent Castle wherewith it is fortified; also Grevenbroeck, Sladbach,
Dalen, and Wassenberch. It has many Castles belonging to Noble families as
Palant, Meroden, Rensschenberg, Nesselroden, and Wachtendoncke. There is also
the Baronie of Wickraden having a strong Castle, which was sometime the seat
of the Quadians. In this tract the City Aquisgranum is situated, which
Ptolomie calls Vetera, in which the thirtieth Legion was billited.
Lhuithprandus calls it the Palatine Granum, and Rheginus T^ermas Grani, and
Aquis Palatium. And the writers of those times do often call Aquae Aken, the
Germans call it Ach, and the French, Aix. It is a fair City and has an
wholesome air, and a pleasant soil, although the buildings are not so
beautiful as they have been formerly. It has many hot bathes both within the
walls, and without, which are sovereign to cure many diseases. This City is
famous, in regard Charles the great made his residence here, who both dyed and
was buried here. These Countries have besides the Rhene the River Rura, or Rora
which near a little Town of the Vbians, called Roeroort, which signifies the
end of Rora, is mingled with the Rhene, where we may see a great difference
between the two confluent Rivers, the one whereof is green, the other white.
Moreover Rora has many winding turnings, and yet it runs with so violent a
stream, that sometimes it breaks into the Meddowes, so that in a short time
it will overflow three or four Acres of ground, and sometimes it fills the
ground full of shelles: here are also Nersa, Lupia, Angria, Duselium, Erfatt,
Nirsi, Vorni^^ and others. It has also woods, one of which is that which
Tacitu^ calls Saltus Teutoburgensis, which is a very large Wood near to
D^isburg, in which there are an innumerable sort of wild beasts. It has many
clear Rivulets. The Mountains are steep and clothed every where with high
trees. But enough of these things.

THE COVNTIE OF WALDECK.
Iodocus Moers of Corbach, who first describe and set forth this Table, does
reckon two degre^ of Nobles under the Earl of Waldeck, one fr^^ who always
resideth in the County, the (...) holding of the County; therefore seeing I
have nothing else to insert, I will here reckon up (...) orders, and what
houses are contained in (...) Table.

The stock of the free Nobility within the County, are Virmundt, Meissenburg,
Gogrebe^^ Zertzen, Tolmerichausen, Dalwig, Eppe, Rodehausen, Reen, Sconstat,
Hertzinghausen, Twist Hanxtelden, Greismar, Roman, Dorfelt.

The stock of those that hold of the County, as well without as within the
County: are Witstein Reiteel, Spiegal, Calenberg, Westfal, Canstein, Ma^spurg,
Lebenstein, Mengersen, Mescheden, Be^nenhurg, Papenheim, Wulfft, Volckenbergb,
Vrf.

map of Waldeck ^HE COVNTIE OF VVALDECK.


The County whence so called.
I Return to Mercator in whom the County of Walde^ follows, commonly called
De Graffe have Waldeche. ^ is so called from the City Waldeck: and it is a
great pa^^ of Hassia. It has on the East Hassia: on the North t^^ Bishopric
of Paderborne: The Situation
on the West the Dioecese ^ Colen. The length and breadth of this Country is
six miles. It ha^^ a fertile soil, The fruitfulness of the soil.
fair spreading Hills, and pleasant Rives. It bring forth great store of
Corn and Wine: it produces diverse kinds ^ mettalls, as Gold, Silver, Brass,
Iron, Lead: Quicksilver, Al^^ and Salt, which are all dug forth of the
bowels of the Earth, nee^ the City Wildunga, and the Castle Eisenburg. There
are also Coal^ stones dug forth, as in the Bishopric of Leden: which the
Ge^manes call Steicolen, which they burn in steed of coals. It prod^ceth
diverse kinds of living creatures, and great store of wild beast which the
inhabitants do often hunt. The variety of living creatures.
The County of Waldeck originally derived from Widichindus Earl of
S^alenburg, who Charles the Great made governor of Paderborne, which right o^
Widichindus Earl of Waldeck being to go with Frederick Bar^rossa into Asia,
did pass over to the College, in consideration three hundred Marks of silver
paid unto him. The ancient Government.
Neither is there a continewed catalogue of the former Earls. Therefore we must
reck^ from Henry Ferreus, who first added Corbachia to the Earldom. Henry
Ferreus, who built the castle of Laudoria, did bring Corbachis und^^ his
obedience in the year 1366, on the 11 day of March. This Henry the year 1400
slew Frederick Duke of Brunswicke, being chosen E^perour, near to Frissaria,
his wife was Elizabeth of Bergen. Welr^ yields himself into the protection
of the Bishop of Meguntu^ Philip the second was his son, whose wife was Ann^
the daughter of John Duke of Cleveland. Wolradus Pius the second was a learned
man: and Praesident of the College of Ratisb^rn, in the year 1556, he dyed in
the year 1478. Josias was borne in the year 1578 and dyed in the year 1558.
Christian and Wolrad were the sons of the Earl Josias. But as concerning the
Imperial offices, th^s County is the chief, among the four, namely
Wal^^^ke, Hart^ Fulchen, Arnsperg, and Rabnaw. The chief City is Waldecia,
commonly called Waldeck, which names the Country, having a Cas^^ which the
River Eidera waters. There are also the Towns As^^chausa, and Dudinschausa:
and the City Landavia with a Castle a^joyning threunto: also the City
Mengerhusa with a Castle, when the Earls keep their residence, being two
miles distant from W^decia: Rodenum is an ancient City with a Castle, in the
Territor^ whereof there is good hunting. The Castle of Wetterberg has pleasant
seat and prospect, being situated between the Rivers T^^sta and Ahra: there
is also the City Wildunga: near to which the are Metal Mines, from whence
great store of gold, Brass, and Iro^ is daily dug forth. Here are also
certain fountains, unto which the sick persons did heretofore come out of
diverse Countries. A^^ here the best drink is brewed: There are also the Towns
of Friag^^ Saxenhusen, Saxenberga, and Furstenberga: also the Castle of
Isenburg, near unto which there are Mines of Gold and Iron, as near Wildunga:
Eilhusia a well seated Castle, and divided from the City by a River:
Corbachia, is a fortified City: Albertus Magnus makes mention of gold Mines
which were found near unto it, and he affirms that there is less waste of
that gold in refining and purifying of it, than of that in Bohemia or any
other. Neither are the veins thereof yet altogether exhausted, for not far
from Cor^^chia, there is gold found among the sands. Newburg is a Town with a
Castle. There are also the Castle Ither, and the Monastery Werba. This Country
is watered with many Rivers, the chief whereof is Edera, which may compare
with Tagus of Spain, Hebrus, of Thrace, and Pactolus of Asia; and it has
golden sands, being very full of fish, and it cutteth through the middle of the
Province of Waldecke, and it flows out of the Mountains of Nassaw, through
the County of Witgenstein to Francoburg, and waters the Castle of Waldecke,
which is built on an high rock; standing in a low valley, environed on every
side with Mountains, and so gliding by Frislara, a Town of Hassia, and having
received the River Sualma, it discharges it self into Fulda, a little above
Cassella, and afterward into Visurgis. The other River are Dimila, Twista,
Vrba, Abra and ^^ber. There are also diverse Mountains, as Grunebeckerbeg,
Winterberg, and Den Astenberg, and others which are described in Mercatus
Table. There are also many woods in this tract, as Aldewaldt, W^terholt,
Geppenhage, Plat. I omit the rest which are every where dispensed through this
County. And so much concerning the County of Waldecke, I pass to the
Palatinate of Rhene.

THE PALATINATE OF RHENE.
The County whence so called.
AFter Waldecia there follows in my method the Palat^nate of Rhene, commonly
called die Pfal^Z. Some suppose that this Noble part of Germany was so called
from the Palace of Rhene; some would have it so named from Charles the Great,
and others from the Palace of Tr^vers. Beatus Rhenanus endeavors to prove
out of Ammiaum M^^cellinus; that the Palatinate was so denominated from the
Country Pa^las. For Ammianus writes in this manner. A Bridge being built neer^
Moguntiacum, the legions passed over the Rhene, and pitched the^ Tents in the
Country of Capel^atium, which was so called from Pa^las. And in another place,
When they came to the Country whi^^ is called Cappellatium or Palas, they
pitched their Tents ther^ where the bounder stone does distinguish the confines
of the Romans Burgundians. Moreover Rhenanus adds: Here we may obser^ that
the Prince Palatine was not so called from the Palace of Caesar, ^ from that
little aedifice or building which is near the Rhene, but tha^ he receives
that appellation from the Country. But seeing there a^^ many Count Palatines of
other places mentioned in Histories, fo^^ do reject this opinion concerning
the Etymology of a Palatine. B^ most do think that the title of Count
Palatine is derived from a Palace; which was and is a title of great dignity
in the Roman Empir^* So that those who did serve the Prince in the County of
the Palla^^ were called Palatines. The Situation
This Country has on the West the Dukedom^ of Zweibruck, on the East
Franconia, and the Dukedom of Wirtemberg on the North it is bounded partly
with the River Moenu^, and part^^ with the Wood, which they call Ottonia: on
the South it has Alsati^* All this tract is not inferior to any part of
Germany, both for pleasantness, fruitfulness, and plenty of all things. The
Mountains for t^^ most part do bear Vines, The fruitfulness of the soil.
which do yield most excellent Wi^^ which other Coun^ries do fetch from
thence: and these Mountain^ on the Northside are full of Chestnuts. The fields
do yield abundan^^ of Corn, as Wheat, Pulse, and Barley. There are also many
fai^^ Gardens, and Orchards, which are planted with all kind of tree^ which
bear great store of apples.

There are excellent Vines between Wormacia, Heydelberg Ne^stadi^^ Crucenacum,
and Oppenheimum: and especially at Pfettershemiu^ which may compare for
goodness with the Setian, Falernian, an^ Caecubian Vines. There are also Woods
and Mountains full ^ wild beasts, especially Hearts. And also the inhabitants
do bri^^ map of Palatine of Rhine THE PALATINATE OF RHENE.
up many Goats and Kiddes in these woods, in regard that they delight more in
woody Forests than in Meddowes. For Caprae or Goats are so called a
Carpendo, that is, from cropping of trees, and therefore it was wont to be a
clause of exception in letting of ground, that no Farmer should keep Goats in
his ground. Near Heydelburg there is great storne of Hearnes, which breed
there in the Woods: there is also a kind of water Foul, which lives in the
water, and yet cannot endure any rain or tempests, which she avoydeth by
flying high in the air, according to that of Virgill: Atque altam supra volat
Ardea nubem,
And the long-wing'd Herne does fly
Above the clouds that are so hie.


It is called also Ardea, quod ardua suo volatu petat, that is, because it
flies high. She builds her nest in the highest trees, and does naturally
hate the Hawke, as likewise the Hawke seeks continually her destruction. But
when they fight in the air, they both strive which should get uppermost; if
the Hawke be above her, he comes down upon her with great violence, and kills
her. But to the matter. There were always Praefects of the Palace, especially
in the Emperors Court, which the Frenchmen did heretofore call the Majors, of
the house or Palace. But at what time the County Palatine of Rhene was
instituted, and where the Palatines of Rhene did keep their residence four
hundred or five hundred years ago, I cannot determine, seeing there are
diverse different conjectures. Some say the first Palatines, were only Noble
men until the time of Otto the third, at what time they were made Princes
Electors: for they had more dignity. The first Elector Palatine was Henry, who
with the other Electors in the year 1003 did choose the Emperor Henry. But
Munster says that he does not find it mentioned in any writings, either where
he kept his Court, or what Country he governed, or what people were subject
unto him; but some do suppose, but without any certain ground, that the
Princes Palatine did heretofore keep their residence at Wormacia, and had
great power in that City. It is manifest, that Conradus Duke of Franconiae in
the year 742 did reside at Worms, but not the Prince Palatine. This was the
seat heretofore of the Intuergians, the Nemetians, and the Vangionians, as
some do suppose. The Intrergians were a people of Germany, which Peucerus
does place in the Palatinate near to Heydelberg, which Country was also called
Capellatium and Pallas as we said before. Those whom Ptolomie and others call
the Nemetians, were a people in Germany near the Rhene, confining on the
Metensians, Argentimentians, and Wormacensians; Rhenanus calls it now the
Episcopal City of Spires, and Aethicus calls it Augusta Nemetum. Also
those whom Ptolomie calls Vangiones, are a people of Germany, near the
Rhene: Rhenanus and Lichtenavius do call them Wormbser-Bisthumbs. But
Pirchaymerus on the contrary affirms that the Vangionians are those of
Spires, and the Nemetians those of Worms; and Irenicus adds this reason,
namely because Ptolemie, who in description of Rhene, did usually proceed from
the South Northward, does first mention the Vangians, and afterward the
Numetians. But Sig. Gemblacensis, who writ about five hundred years ago,
calls Worms the City of the Vangionians. Also John Herald does gather, out
of an inscription, that the City Worms, was heretofore called the Watch
Tower of the Vangionians. There are 48 Cities in the Palatinate, the chief
whereof is Heidelberg, where the Prince Palatine keeps his residence. It was
so called either from the people, whom the Germans call Heyden; or from the
Mirtle-tree, which they call Heydelbeer, and hereupon the most learned
Melissus does call this City Myrtilletum. That which Pyramius calls
Durlacum, others more rightly do call Durlach. John Herald does call it
Capellatium, others do call Capellatium the Palatinate, as we said before.
Munster calls it Bergstras, which stands in the way from Franckford to
Heydelburg. Some do suppose that the City which Ptolemie calls Beudoris, was
seated here, but this is but conjecturall. For Ptolemie placed Beudoris; in the
51 degres of Latitude; when as Heidelberg, is in the 49 degree, and 35 minutes
of Latitude. Some suppose that it should be read and written Edelberg, which
signifies the noble Mountain: and others Eidleberg, which signifies the near
Mountain. It is situate by the River Nicrus or Neicarus, in the entrance of
the Mountains, it has been a famous University for learning and Arts from
the year 1356, being then instituted by Rupert the elder, Prince Palatine, who
sent for one Marsilus from Paris to be governor thereof. And from that time it
was well replenished with learned men, and students. The most famous Doctors
were Rodolphus Agricola, John Dalburgius, John Virdungus, William Xilander,
Thomas Erastus, Zach^ry Vrsin, and many others. Moreover, the whole Palatinate
is divided into four Praefectureships, as Heydlebergensian, the Alzaeens^^,
the Neostadiensian, and the Mosbachensian, which are so called from the Cities
of Hedelberg, Alzea, Neostadium, and Mosbacum. There is also Bretta, which is a
small Town near the River Salza, in which Phillip Melanchton was borne, who
writ much concerning the liberal Arts: also Ladeburg, so called from the
Roman Tents, half of which was pawned to Duke Rupert the elder, the other
part came to the Bishop of Worms. Sifrid of Stralnberg sold unto the aforesaid
Prince in the year 1357, the Town Schriessen, and the Castle of Stralnberg.
And in the year 1344, the Town Weinheim, was given to the Prince by awardment
of Arbitrators, which heretofore the Bishop of Moguntinum did possess. There
are also the Towns Cauba, Gelhusen, Sintzon, Luden by the River Tuberus,
Oppenheim, Caesarea Latra, Ingelheim, Lowenstein: and in Brureinia there is
Bruxells and others, as may be seen in the Table, and also many Castles and
Villages. The chief Rivers are Rhene and Neccarus. The latter does water and
cut through the middle of the Palatinate, and does discharge it self into the
Rhene, near Ladeburg; the ancients did call it Nicer, it has great store of
Mullets, which are commonly called Barbells. Also there continually comes
down this River great pieces of timber, from the wood Otto, which the River
Necarus brings into the Rhene. The lesser Rivers, are Tuberus, Lutherus,
Iaxtus, and others. The Country is both Mountainous and field ground. It has
high Mountains, which do bear excellent Vines, of which the Rhenish Wine is
made. And there are Woods which yield stoare of game for hunting. The chiefest
whereof is the Wood Otto, which is a part of the Hercynian Wood: the breadth
thereof is from the River Necarus even to Moenus, and the length from the
Mountainous way called Bergstras, even to the River Tuberus. But so much
hitherto. There were many Churches, in the Palatinate, and many Monasteries; as
the Monastery of Lorsch, which was built by Charles the Great, or as some
suppose by Pepin. Concerning the Library, thereof Munster writes thus: There
is not a place in all Germany, where there is a more ancient Library than in
this Monastery. I saw there a Manuscript written with Virgills own hand: and
in it Ammianus Marcellinus his last book was found, which is now published,
being written before in great capital letters. John Dalberg Bishop of Worms a
learned man, did take the best books from thence, and put them in the Library
at Ladenburg. There are four Electors in Germany; the Palatine of Rhene, the
Archbishops of Mentz, of Triers, and Colen. The free Cities are Mentz, Colen,
Trier, and Gelenhausen. The Princes and Lords are the Count Palatine: Count
Nassaw: and Beilstaine: H. Reifferscherdt, and Rheineck: Teutsch Ordens Hern in
Coblentz: the Abbey of S. Maximinus near Triers, the Provost Seltz H. Nider
Eisenburg. But so much hitherto, I come to the Dukedom of Wirtemberg.

THE DVKEDOME OF VVIRTEMBERG.
THe Dukedom of Wirtemberg, commonly called Wurtembergerlant, The Country
whence so called
was so called from the ancient Castle Wirtemberg, which stands in the
middle thereof, on a high hill not far from the Imperial City Essing. This
Country of Wirtemberg, does lie by the River Nicrus. It has on the East the
Swevians, Vindelicians, and Noricians: on the West the Palatinate, and the
Marquiship of Baden; The Situation
on the South it has the Mountains of Arbon, and the Swevian Alps, for so
the Inhabitants do call the higher Mountains of this Country: on the North
^^^umia, and not far off the wood Otto. The Climate*
The air of this Country is very wholesome and temperate both in Winter and
Summer. It is as fruitful also as any part of Germany: both for Wheat,
Pulse, Wine, and other fruits. But yet all the Country is not of one soil,
The fertility.
for that part where the River Neccarus arises, and confineth on Her^^s, and
that which lies by the Swevian Alps, between Danubius and Ni^rus, is rugged,
and unfit for tillage or planting of Vines. On the A^pes it is a stony soil,
but very fruitful, and also by the black Wood, it has a sandy red colored
earth, which yields great store of Corn. But there where the River Neccarus
flows through the C^^^pion ground, it is very fertile and fruitful: for it
has every where hills crowned with Vines, green Meddowes, fruitful fields,
(...) great store of Wine, Corn, and Apples. This Dukedom also has Mines of
Silver, not far from Wiltberg, and it is said that the Town ^^lachium is
built on Mines of Brass: it has also Iron and Brass. ^^ere are diverse
colored stones found, which for the most part are ^ameld and streakt with
blew. So that it seems that Nature did endeavor to enrich this place with
precious stones. There are diverse kinds of living Creatures, and in the Woods
there are an inumerable sort to be seen. It was made a Dukedom in the year
1495, by the Emperor Maximilian, in a meeting or Parliament held ^ Worms, and
he made Eberhard Earl of Wirtemberg a Duke. Duke Eberhard the second continued
but two years in his Dukedom, but having melted his gold and silver plate, he
fled first to Vlma, and afterward to the Prince Palatine, and dyed without
issue. After that the Emperor Maximilian created Eberhard the Nephew of
Eberhard, Duke of Wirtemberg But he was droven out of his Country in the year
1519, by the Swedlanders. Christopher succeeded his father Vl^icke: and
Ludovicke his son succeeded after Christopher. And Ludovicke was succeeded by
Frederick, the son of George Earl of Mount ^ellicard. The Inteurgians were
formerly seated here, but Rhenanus called them the Vuithungians. This Dukedom
is as it were circular a round, The Cities.
and does contain many Cities and Towns. The chief Citt^^ are Tubinga and
Stutgardia. Tubinga is commonly called Tubingen, whi^^ is situate near the
River Neccarus, being a very neat City, havi^^ store of bread and Wine,
which is transported to Swethland; and has a stone Bridge over the River
Neccarus. It has also a Castle, a^ a hill planted with Vines, a College of
Cannons, and an Vniversit^ In this City, besides John Stoffler, and others,
Leonard Fuchsius (...) profess Physic. And the most famous and learned
Martin Crusi^ was the Rhetoric professor, in the same Academy. It was
institut^ by Eberhard Earl of Wirtemberg, whom Maximilian, (as we said before)
created a Duke, in the year 1477. John H^rold in his book the German
antiquities, shows by an inscription engraven the that Augustus had a Mansion
house at Tubinga. Which Peter Applia^ in his book of ancient inscriptions
does set down thus.

MAX. IN AVG. EM. GER. MAX. DAC. MAX. ARM. MAX. TRIB. P. COS. ET. But Heroldus
sets down the whole inscription, as the Empero^ was usually enstiled at
Rome. Imp. Caes. Divi. L. Sept. Sever. Pert. (...) Parth. Tarah. Adiab. F. M.
Aurel. Antonin. Aug. Sarmat. Max. G^ Max. Dac. Max. Armen. Max. Britan. Max.
Arab. Max. Alema^ Max. Parth. Max. P. E. Pont. Max. Trib. Pote vi. Cos. Procos.
Perp^ Leg. 8. Ant. Aug. P. E. Ejus. Number. Devot. Prin. Opt. Fortis.

Stutgardia, which is the Metropolis, and Dukes seat, is situate nee^ the
River Neccarus. The County of Stutgard was named from the City: which was
built by the Vandalls, and afterward reedified (...) the Elector John Marquess
of Brandenburg, and Otto the third. (...) in the year 1290, Albert the fourth,
Marquess of Brandenburg, a^ Prince of Anholt, the son of Otto the fourth,
gave it as a Dowry wi^^ his Daughter Beatrice, who married Henry Leon
Wandalus. This City is environed with a fruitful soil. And great store of
Wine is man every year in this Town. John Rheulius was borne here, a learn
man, skillful in the Law, a great Linguist, and one that taught Hebr^ There is
also Reutlinga, being seated near the River Neccarus wh^ was made a City in
the year 1240 by the Emperor Frederick, (...) second. This City is famous
for paper Mills. The other Town^ are very pleasant, and most of them fortified
with strong Castells, namely Vrachum, by the River Amerus, also Nirtingum,
Kircheda, Ho^bronna, Lauffena, Pinigtheim. The Castle of Asperga, Greininga,
Mar^chum, Canstadium, Waiblinga, Schorendorffum, Geppinga, Fiesen, fo^merly
called Aludtacum, Heidenheim, and Wilipergium, where the m^ diligent
Cosmographer Daniel Cellarius was borne, being situate ne^^ the River Nagolta;
also the Towns Herrenberg, Rotenberg, and Hech^gum, Belingum, and diverse
others that you may behold in the Ta^^ map of Wurttemberg THE COVNTIE OF
WIRTEMBERG.
or Map. This Dukedom is a chief part of the Imperial circle of Swethland,
which because George Gardnerus, and David Seltxlis have described it alone more
accurately than the rest, I will here set down the whole circle of Swethland.
The circle of Swethland does contain three orders, the first is the Clergy,
the second the Princes: the third the free Cities. In the first order are the
Bishops of Chur, Costentz, and Auspurg. The Abbots of Kempten, of Reichienow,
of S. Gal. in Helvetia, of Salmanswerler, of We^garten, of Weissenow, of S.
Blasius, S. Peter, of Maulborn, of Chaffhausen, Stain^am Rhein, Kreutzlingen,
Petershusen, which lies by the Rhene Northward, also the Bishop of Einsideln,
Pfeffers, Pfefficon, of S. Joan in Thurthal, of Schussenriedt, of Sockenburg,
of Ochsenhausen of Cunigsbron, of Marchial, of Elchingen, of Ysue, of Munchrod
of Aurspurg, of Yrsee, of Gengenbach, of Schuttern, of Disidisen. The
Abbatesses of Lindaw, of Rottenmunster, of Bucchaw, of Guttenzell, of Beund, of
Heppach, of Teutsch, of und Burgund. In the second order which is of the
Princes; there is the Duke of Wirtemberg, the Marquess of Baden. The Earls of
Helfenstein, Wetsenstag, Oringen, Lauffen, Mountfort, Furstenberg, and the
Marquess of Eberstain. Also the Earls of Tollern, Bultz, Laebenstain,
Tubingen, Kirchberg, Tengen alas Dongen, Gundelfingen. The Lords of Stutgart,
of Tussen, of Waldeburg, of Sonneburg, of Valckenslain, of Kunseck, o^
Kunseczerperg: also the Barons of Geroltzek, and Ober Helwen. I^ the third
rank there are the Cities of Ausburg, of Kauffheurn, o^ Vlm, of Memmingen,
Kempton, of Bibrach, of Leukirch, of Ysne, of Wangen, of Lindow, of Ravenspurg,
also Bucborn, Vberlingen, Costentz, Pfullendorff, S. Gal, Schafhausen,
Reutlingen, Estingen; Gmind, Weil, Heilbron, Wimpfu. Hal in Schawben,
Dinckelspuel, Bopsingen, Gengen, Alen, Nordlingen, Donawerd, Buchaw, Offenburg,
Gengenbach, Zelin^ Hamesparch, Rotweil. I return to the Dukedom. This
Country is watered with many pleasant Lakes, and Rivers very full of fish, the
chief whereof is the River Brentius, which is never frozen in the coldest and
hardest time of all winter. The River Nicer runs through the middle of it,
and having received many Rivers, of which the chief are Nagolta, Entius,
Remisus, Kocherus, Iagusta, Filizius, but Brentius mingleth it self with
Danubius. The Alpine Mountains are in this Dukedom, which are called Alps ab
albedine from their whiteness, for the white stones thereof are seen a far
off, and they have many several names, as Schera, Albuchus, Hanecamphus, and
Hertfeldius. Also part of the Wood Hercynia and Martiana, does spread into this
Country, which have several names, as the Wood Albuchius, the Wood Stubenthal,
the black Wood commonly called Schwartzwalt, the Wood Odenwelt, etc. The
people of this Dukedom, are valiant, courteous, constant and religious.

THE LOWER ALSATIA.
ALsatia commonly called Elsasz, The Country whence so called.
was so called as some suppose, as it were Edelsalz, that is, a Noble and
famous seat: others think it was so named from the River Illa by changing a
into i, as it were a seat by the River Illa; whence ^ome do affirm that it
was called the Country of Illesass, and not (...). It is as fruitful a Country
as any that lies by the side of the (...); on the East it has Helvetia, which
parts it from Rhene; on (...) West Lotharingia, where the Mountain Vosagus
is the bordering his between Lotharingia and Germany: on the South it has
part of (...) and Burgundy: on the North it is boundred with the Dukedom
^^umberg. It is nine German miles long, and from Rhene to the ^^^^aines it is
three German miles broad, but toward Haganoa it ^^eth broader, between the
Mountains. But this Country is so fruitful and there is such great plenty of
all things, especially of Wine (...) Corn, in this little tract of Land: that
it does not only serve the ^^^iants, but other people also of Germany, both
far and near. Therefore James Wimphelingus in his Epitomy of Germany, does
call (...) the Score house and Nurse of Germany. For, excellent Wines are
^^tinually brought out of this Country in Carts, and sometimes are (...) aid by
shipping into Helvetia, Swethland, Bavaria, Lotharingia, and the Low Countries,
and sometimes into England. In Sungoja ^^e is great store of corn, and all
over the plain ground of Alsatia (...) to Argentina, there is every where
great store of corn, so that the ^^tants of the Mountains of Lotharingia, the
Burgundians, and a and part of Helvetia, are sustained by it. It has
Mountains which ^^ld excellent good Wines, and in the plain ground, it has
Corn, and diverse kinds of fruit trees. It has also on the Mountains Woods
of Chestnuts; and Mines of Silver, Brass, and Lead, especially in the vale
Leberthal It has also fair pastures both upon the Mountains and valleys, as
appears by those excellent fat cheeses which (...) made in Munsterthall, so
that there are great store of Kine and ^^e bred in this Country. And it has in
some parts many wild ^^^ses, also Leopards, Bears, Martines, and Hearts, and
innumera^^ other wild beasts. Alsatia was heretofore under the Dominion the
Kings of France, as also a part of the Kingdom of Austria. Al^^ was held to be
the chiefest Dukedom, which Hildericke King of France, did honor with that
title, and gave it to his Cosen Etico in the ^^^re 684. After Etico there
succeeded his son Adelprechtus, who being slain with an arrow, left two
sons, Linfrid and Eberhard who ^^^e governors of Alsatia. Afterward their
family was expelled forth of Alsatia by Charles Martell, Palatine and Master
of the C^^^ in the Kingdom of France. But in the time of Otto the first, the
Ea^^ of Ryburg, who where allied by consanguinitie to the Emperor govern
Alsatia. Some say that they were made Landgrave Alsatia, others say that Otto
the third did divide it into Landgr^^ships, and that the higher Landgraveship
which contains the To^^ Einsheim, and the adjacent Towns did fall to the
Earls of Habsb^^ The other to the Earls of Ottingen to whom it descended from
(...) Landgrave of Lower Alsatia, who dying without issue, did sell it to
Bishop of Argentine. But this small Country is so fruitful and i^sant, that it
has 46 Cities and Towns in it, which are walled an^ Fifty Castles which are
situated on Mountains and Plains, (...) innumerable sort of Villages. Alsatia
is two fold, the Lower wh^^ described in this present Chart, and the higher
which is painted (...) in the Table following: the Tribocians did possess them
both. (...) chief City is called by modern writers, Argentina. Sextu^ A^^
and Ptolomie do call it Argentoratum, Reginus names it S^^burg, who writ five
hundred years before and more; Rob. Cust^^^ supposes it to be the same with
that which Aurelius Victor, and ^^nus, do call Angentaria. It is commonly
called Strasburg from number and capacity of the streets. This City is
situated in a soil, and has great store of Wine and Corn. And Munster
^^^teth that there are in this City above an hundred Gardiners, make a great
gain out of Turnips, Onions, Radishes, Cabigge (...) the like. An arm of the
River Rhene and three other Rivers d^ through this City, and the several
Channells do glide through streets as at Venice. It is well governed, and it
has a famous sch^^^ and a Church. On the West there are the Tabernae
celebrated by ^^toninus: Simler calls them Zabern: Frodoard names it
Za^rentelius calls them tres Tabernae, Concerning which Antoniu^ thus: --
Riguasque perenni
Font Tabernas --


But the Tabernae were a Fortress of the Romans, placed the restrain the
incursions and inroades of the Almaines, into France, (...) now the Bishop of
Argentoratum has a Palace. This Fortress w^zed by the Alemanes, but Ammianus
writes that Julius Caesar did re^^ it. This place abounds with Wine, Corn,
and al other things ^^^^sary for man's use. Not far from the Tabernae, there
is the (...) Maursmunster, with a monastery adjoining to it; there is also an^
Monastery a little distant from Brocomagum, which is called St^^^^ Campus, or
Stephens field, and corruptly Stetchfeldt. Hence N^ward is Hagenoa. This City
was walled about in the year 116 Frederick Barbarossa. The soil round about
the walls is sandy the fields that lie somewhat farther from the City are
very (...) and fruitful. The next is Wissenburgum, commonly called W^^burg,
as it were the white Castle, being a very fair town, at the map of lower
Alsatia THE LOWER ALSATIA.
of the Mountain Vogesus, being pleasantly seated, and environed o^^ every
side with little hills, and on the West it has Woods, and diver^ kinds of
trees: the soil is very fruitful, and the Town is fortifie^ both by Nature
and Art. The River Lutra, whose Fountains do rise i^ the Mountains somewhat
more than seven Miles from the Town^ does run through the middle of it, and
so having glided by the wal^ of the Town, it runs in a narrow Channel, and
with a hast^ stream two miles, and so discharges it self into the Rhene. It
is (...) so great antiquity, that the original cannot be found out. There is
a^^ so the Town Hasla near the River Bruschus: which Dagobert Kin^^ of
France, gave unto Florentius a Scot, with the adjacent field^ in which place
Florentius built a Monastery. There are many River^ which water this Country,
besides Rhene, and many other R^vulets (...) Kintsgus, Illa, Brusschus, Sorn,
Matter, and Lauter. But the chief River of Alsatia is Illa, which runs
through all Alsatia, which rise^^ in Sungovia, above the Town Altkirck, and so
fl^wing by t^^ Towns, Mulnhausen, Einsheim, Colmar, Selestadium, and B^nfelde
it runs strait forward to Argentina, where it enters into (...) Rhene,
having first received all the Rivulets which do flow (...) of the Mountain
Vosagus, and it is very full of Salmons a^^ other fish.

The Country is partly Mountainous, and partly plain, and is every where
adorned with Woods and Forests, some (...) which are full of Chestnuts,
Almonds, and Nutts. The Country people lives very miserably; for they spend
their provisi^^ every year, and do keep nothing for the future time, so t^^
in times of war, or when unseasonable weather does kill (...) fruits of the
earth, they live very penuriously. Yet the poor (...) releeved out of public
granaries.

This Country has not many native inhabitants, for the great part consists of
strangers, as Swethlanders, Bavarians, Burgundia^ Sabaudians and Lotharingians,
who having once entered into a Country, do not soon remove from thence. The
Swethlanders (...) chiefly reside in it. Moreover the fifth circle of the
Empire that of the Rhene. It consists of three orders, first the Clergy,
secon^ly the Princes, and thirdly the free Cities. In the first there (...)
the Bishop of Worms, of Spier, Straesburg, Basel, and Besancon; (...) the
County of Burgundy, in the Province of Wallis, whose Met^^polis is Selton;
there are the Bishops of Geneve, Losanna, Metz, T^^ and Verdun. The Abbots of
Hiersfeid, Morbach, S. Gregoris Munst^^^^ In the second order are Princes,
Earls, and secular Lords, as (...) Dukes of Lotharingia, and Saveye, the Count
of Span^ein: the M^^quesse of Baden, the Duke of Sweibru^ke, the Count of
VeldentZ, (...) Landgrave of Hessen, the Prince of Calim, the Count of Nass^^
in Sarbrucke, the Earls of Rhene; the Lords of Rapoltzkirc^^ near
Rapoltslain, the Earls of Bitsch, Salm, Hanaw, Lichtenbe^^ Lemingen, and
Falkenslain, the Lords of Morspurg, and B^se^ of Rapolslain, of Hoen, Rechpurg,
Blakenberg, and Blammont in Lotringia: the Earls of Wetbaden, and I^stain, and
Cuningstaine, t^ Lord Van Eppenstam: the Earls of Isenburg in higher Alsatia,
of Solms, of Nassaw in Weilburg, of Sienvigen, of Havare, the Lord of
Munt^^burg: the Earls of Westenburg, of Witgenstam, of Waldeck, of Pl^sse. The
third order is of the free Cities, which are Mulhusen in S^^dtgow of higher
Alfatia, also Basel, Colmar, Kaisersperg, Turckke^, Saint Gregoris Munster,
Ober Ebenhaim, Straesburg, Rosenhaim, Schletstat, Hagenaw, Weissenburg, Landow,
Spier, Worms, Francfort, Fridberg in Wederaw, Wetzlar, Metz, Toul, Verdtn,
Kaufmans Sarbrack, the Castle Besano, Fridberg, and the Castle Gleichhause^.

THE LANTGRAVIATE of the higher ALSATIA, with SVNTGOVIA and GRISGOIA.
IN this Table or Chart, Alsatia the higher with Suntgo^ and Brisgoia are
delineated. The Country
The higher Alsatia commonly called Ober Elsaz is first placed, the Metropo^^
whereof is Einshemum. The Towns
The chief Senate is held the whither they appeal from the Lower Courts of
Su^goia, Brisgoia, and the four Towns near the Rhene a little above ^^sill,
which are subject to the Archduke of Austria. It came in (...) year 1000, to
belong to the Territories of Albert Earl of Harsp^ Father of King Rudolphus.
Rubeacum or Ruffatum commonly ca^^ Ruffach, is an ancient Town in Alsatia,
which was built by the ^^manes, and was so named from a Rivulet, which in
regard of her (...) water was called Rotbatch, now the inhabitants call it
Ombach, w^^ rises in a Valley not far from Lutsmach, and sliding through
(...) fields and Vineyards, with a red colored Channel, does serve (...)
City for many uses. This City had at first many magnificent b^^dings, and a
double Suburbs, the Roman Nobility did a long ti^^ keep their residence
here, in regard of the fruitfulness thereof, a^^ plenty of all things
necessary for man's use: here were excellent law made against thieves, which
were so severely executed, that it is Proverb in Germany: Der alt Galghen Zu
Rufach, hatt gut Eichen ^^lt that is, The old Gibbet of Rubeacum was made of
strong Oak Woo^ Colmar was built out of the ruins of Argentuaria, it is a
neat Imper^all City situated on a fertile Plain, being an hours journey
dista^^ from the Mountains; it stands in the middle of Als^tia, and it
watered with many Rivers, especially these, Louc^e, Duro, Fetchto, I^^ and
others of less note, some whereof do run by the field, so^ of which do
run by the houses, and do fertilize the soil a^ make it fruitful.
Selestadium is walled about as Colmar, in the year Christ 1216, or about that
time, in the reign of Frederick the second. But before that, namely about the
year 1404, in the reign (...) Henry the fourth, Hildegard Duchess of
Suevia, built a Temple the according to the figure and form of the Temple of
Jerusalem, whi^^ not long after her son Otto Bishop of Argentine, did
dedicate (...) the blessed Virgin, and made it a Monastery, which in short
ti^^ grew so rich, that of a Monastery it became a Provostship, concerni^^
which see Rhenanus who was borne at Selestade. Selestadium is firm situated,
having on the one side namely toward the Rhene unpassab^ Moors: and on the
other side toward the West, even to the Mountains map of higher Alsatia THE
HIGHER ALSATIA.
of Lotharingia, it has a fruitful soil, there are Vines and Chestnuts
growing on these Mountains; and great store of Corn is reaped on the plain.
Gebwiler is a Town situated in the jaws of the Mountains, it is thought that
it was founded in the year 1124. It has abundance of Vines round about it,
and is subject to the Abbot o^ Murbacum, who keeps his residence there. There
is also another Town called Watveil situated near the Mountains, which is
governed by the aforesaid Abbot. Mercator reckons these Countries in higher
Alsatia, of Horburg, which is a pleasant Country belonging to the Earl of
Wirtemberg, under whose Dominion is the Town Reyche^wyer, where excellent
Wines are made: there is also the County of Egisheim, and de Sultz: the
Lordships of Bolwiller, of Londsperg, o^ Hohen, of Hatstat, of Hobenack, of
Rapdstain, under whose dominion are Rapoltzwil, Gemer, the Town and Castle of
Cellenberg. And the Imperial Cities, of the fifth circle. Also Munster, in the
S. Greg^rin Vale, called Gregoris Munster, also Durkheim, Colmar, Milbauye^
famous for good Wine, and Keisersperg. Sungovia or Sunggoja, commonly called
Sungow, on the North cleaves to Alsatia: on the Ea^^ it has the Rhene, on the
West the borders of France: on the Sou^^ it confineth on Helvetia. It has
Vines in many places, and eve^ where great store of Corn, which is transported
into Neighbouri^^ Countries, namely into Helvetia, the black Wood, Lotharingi^
and sometimes into more remote Countries. Sungoja does conta^^ the County of
Psirten, the last Earl whereof Vlrick, dyed at Basil (...) the year of
Christ 1024; leaving two Daughters behind him, the o^ whereof called Ioane,
Albert Duke of Austria married, and gave (...) Vrsula his wives sister, for her
Portion eight thousand marks of silve^* The Lordships are Befort, and Mospurg.
These places also belong (...) the County, Altkirch, Dattenriet, Befort,
Rosenfels, Mas^munst^ Thanu, and Senheim: which now the Princes of Austria have
divid^ into Praefectureships. In Befort there is a Collegiate Church whi^^ the
Earls of Psirt founded, together with the Nunnery Velapacht^ where thirty
Earls, and as many Countesses have been interred. (...) Maszmunster there is
a famous Nunnery of Vestall Virgins, and Canons, which was founded by Mason
Duke of Alemaine, from who that Vale was called Vallis Masonis, otherwise
called Wast. Thann^ is a neat town, and is joined to the County of Pfirt.
There is Castle that hangs over the Town which is called Engelberg, a^
near unto it is the Mountain called Rang, in which there growe^ excellent
good wine, which is called Rang-wine, well known at ^^fill. Here the River
Thuris glideth by out of the Mountains, and ^^parateth Sungovia from Alsatia
Morsmunster, which is a Monaster^ in the County of Pfirt, being founded by the
Earls of Pfirt. T^ Church of Amarinus, and the Castle of Fridberg, are one
mile dista^^ from Thannus, and are subject to the Abbot of Murbacum: not fa^
from thence the River Mosella rises. There is also Mulnhausen Segovia which is
an imperial City, and it was under the protecti^^ of the Bishop of
Argentine; as also the Towns Colmar, a^^ Keisersperg, in the year 1261, but a
little after Rudolph the E^^ Habsburg, when he he had took Colmar he got the
Town Muln^^sen, and razed the Castle thereof, and those that were in it he
took ^^isoners. But Rudolphus was elected King of the Romans, and those Towns
returned again to the Roman Empire. The Townsmen (...) chiefly give
themselves to planting of Vines and sowing of C^^e: so that there is very good
wine made here. The Town ^^n^rson has a Nunnery, which was built in Henry
the fourths ^^re, by Rudolph Earl of Habspurg. His brother Wernher was Bi^^op
of Argentine, who dyed at Constantinople. On the West ^^e County of Mount
Belegard joyneth to Sungoja. ^t has the fa^ous City of Montis-Beligard, with
a fair Castle. Besides, this Country has many other Towns and Castles: as the
Town Grans and the Castle; the Town and Castle of Clarwang, the Town
Passewangum with a Castle, all which belong to the Duke of Wirtemberg: the
inhabitants do speak the Burgundian Language. The Town Bruntant near to the
County of Mont Beligard, where the Bishop of Ba^ has a royal Palace. And so
much concerning Sungovia.

I^sgo^a remains, The Country whence so called.
which is to be unfolded and described in this able: Brisgovja or Brisgoja, is
commonly called Brisgow, which ^a^es in the German Language a fair Town.
And truly this Country does deserve that title in regard of the fertility and
fruitful^se thereof, in which it is not inferior to Alsatia, which we have
(...) now described. But if we have recourse to ancient writers, ye shall
find that this Country was so named from the Metropolis ^^^sacum, of which we
shall speak by and by. Brisgoja is ten miles ^^ng, and eleven broad: for it
begins at Nortnaw, The Situation
and runs out almost to Basil. The fruitfulness of the soil.
It is a fruitful Country both for tillage and Vines. And here is great store
and plenty of Corn and Wine, and of all things necessary for the sustenance of
man's life. The Archdukes of Austria, and the Marquesses of Baden, do jointly
go^^^e this Country. The Metropolis of Brisgoja was heretofore ^^suum, whence
the Country is denominated, and Antonius mentineth it in his Itinerarie of the
Mountain Brisacum, when as he ma^eh mention of no other Cities beyond the
Rhene, but those Pro^^ciall Cities which are seated by the Rhene: Luitprandus
Ti^^esis, who lived in the time of Otto the first, does make the Mountain
Brisacum to be in Alsatia, and shows that it was an ^^^d of Rhene. This
City is situated on a round Mountain like a Castle, and it has the Rhene on
the West. It is a neat Town, well fortified and populous, but in process of
time it exceeded Friburg ^^elfe, for magnificence and riches. This City
increased presently, and grew famous in regard of the Mineral Mines, which are
^^^e unto it. In Brisacum there is an ancient Castle, which has ^^ng been
ruinate, yet now at length it has been reedified. It has ^ strong well
fortified Tower, which Bertholdus Ziringensis the third built, as appears by
these following verses, graven on the stone ^alls: Hanc Dux Bertholdus portam
struxisse notatur
A quo pro fraud Burgundia gens populatur.
The Duke Bertholdus builded up this gate,
Which the Burgundians did ruinate.


This City has but one fountain, over which there is a Condu^^ built, in
which there is a wheel, in which they go and draw up water a great depth, and
the Citizens do yearly pay for the drawing u^ of the water. For it has on
every side a great steep descent to the Rhene and the plain, from whence it
is very hard to drew up wate^ into the Mountain. Half a mile beneath Friburg,
there is a ruina^^ Castle situated on a high Mountain, which is called
Z^ringhen, from which the Dukes of Zaringa had their title. Fr^burg is a famous
Town in Brisgoja, and now the Metropolis thereon it was built by Duke Berthold
the fourth, the son of Conradus the first, in the reign of the Emperor
Henry the fifth, being former^^ but a Village. It is a City pleasantly seated
among the Mountains; being adorned with many magnificent houses, Churche^ and
Monasteries. There was an University erected there in the year 1459, wherein
Vdalrick Zasius, a famour Lawyer did tea^^ and read publicly. It had
heretofore a rich Vein of silver, ami^^ distant from the City. There also is
in Brisgoja Zer^ng, heeretofo^^ a Dukedom) the County of Friburg, the
Marquiship of Ho^berg, and the Lordships of Badenwille, Staussen, and Bur^en.

THE LOWER SAXONY.
Saxony was so called from the Saxons. The County whence so called.
Their original as also of other Nations, not only the Monks ignorant in
Antiquities, but modern judicious writers, have wrapped up in fabulous
inventions: some suppose that they were so called from Saxo the son of Negno,
and the brother of Vandalus; others a Saxea natura from their stony nature,
others from the remainder of the Macedonian Army, some from their skeines or
short swords, it appears by these verses in Engelhusius: Quippe brevis
gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur,
Vnde sibi Saxo nomen traxisse putatur.
A cuttell or a short-sword they Saxon call,
Whence the name of Saxon takes original.


But the learned Capino does derive it from the Phrygians: Let every one take
which of these conjectures he pleases, for I do not purpose to refute their
opinions. But I embrace their opinion, who suppose that the Saxons did descend
from the Sacians, a people of Germany, and that they were so called as it were
Sacasones; that is, the sons of the S^curians; and that coming out of
Scythia or Sarmatia, together with Getes, Sueuians, Dacians, and others, they
spread themselves by degrees over Europe, which opinion is probable, which
brings the Saxons out of Asia. For Strabo writes that these Sacians, as the
C^mmerians before, did make many invasions, and called part of ^^^^ia after
their own name Saracena; and Ptolomie also places the ^^^aians, the Suevians,
the Massagetians, and the Dasians, in that part of Scythia; and Cisnerus
observes, that these Nations did still keep the same vicinitie, which was
between them. Moreover albeit Saxony is the greatest Country in all
Germany, yet it is not now so large as it was heretofore. For ancient Saxony
was extended between the Rivers Albis and Rhene, the German Sea, and the
River E^dera, even to Hassia and the confines of Turingia, and Brunswick was
the Center of it: and so also Westphalia, Marchia Vetus, Misnia, Lusa^a,
Mansfield, and many other Countries were called Saxony. Now it is not bounded
with such natural limits, as Rivers and Mountains, ^^at with the consining
dominion of others Principalities. The air of this Country is dry, pure, and
wholesome, except the marshes do moysten it too much. Saxony has abundance
of all things, except Wine. It has great store of Barley and Wheat of which
they make ^ery white Bread, and very brown drink. It has diverse kinds of
mettalls, especially in the Mountain Melibocus, which reaches from the Catti
to the Saxones. There is found also in the same Mounta^^ a black kind of
stone, which has much pitch and brass in it, an^ shines with Veins of Gold
and Copresse. They dig out great st^ of this Oar, which they melt and refine
into metal. In this st^^^ there are diverse lineaments and proportions of
living creatures, (...) especially of these that do live in the neighboring
Lake, as Eel^ Carpes, Frogs, and sometimes also cocks, who have strange the
double Combs. Also Goslaria has Mines of brass, gold, and ^ver, and rich
Fountains of salt, like those at Halla and La^^^ And in other places the
Mountains do yield plenty of Marble. I said that Otto the first found Mines
of silver, near Goslaria, w^ yielded him a great revennew. But the Citizens
abusing it, (...) suffered the pit to fall down, which killed an hundred men
that w^ working in it. And since that time, there was never found any (...) or
gold, but black Lead. First they make a kind of shooemakers (...) or
blacking, and afterward they boil Lead and silver out of it. But (...) report
that the metal in Goslaria was thus found out. A certain No man tied his
horse, called Ramelus, to a bough of a tree, on the ^^taine; who beating and
striking the ground with his hoofes that shod with iron, did at last beat and
wear away the earth, so that veins of black Lead did appear; like the
winged Pegasus, wh^ Poets feign, with a stroke of his hoof, on the Mountain,
did o^ the spring of Helicon on Parnassus. And as the fountain was from the
named Hippocrene, that is, the horse-fountaine; so the Saxons do the mountain
Ramelus, which does now yield great store of (...) The chief City of this
Country is Halla, which is derived from Greek word. But Goropius would have it
derived not from the Gree^ but from the great store of salt which comes from
thence; as if in Suevia and in other Cities. For as the River Halis in Arme^
(as Strabo says) was so named from the Greek word, because i^ salt. So Halla
seated by the River Sala, a fair River in Saxons, ^^ so called from the great
store of salt that came from thence. Wh^ salt Fountains were first found out
by the Wendians before Christ birth, whom we may call Hermandurians; and when
the neigbouring nations did perceive what benefit might arise by them, the
began to labor about them as if they had been gold Mines. N^ the Marquess of
Brandeburg, resideth at Halla. There belongs a^ to Lower Saxony the
Dukedomes of Lanwenburg, Luneburg, Bruwick, and the Dukedom of Meckelburg. In
the Dukedom of Lune^ there is the famous City of Luneburg, which was so
called, from Idol of the Moon, which was heretofore set up upon the Mounta^^
Calcis: or else from the River gliding by it, which is now called El^na, or die
Almenow, as it were Elven Ow, from the eleven Rivers wh^ do flow into it, and
heretofore it was called Luno, or Lunow, by (...) as they feign, who travailed
this way to her kinsman Granbrivius. (...) is a City well fortified with
Trenches and Rampires, being al^ foure-square: It has a rich Fountain of
salt. For salt is the ch^ commodity of these Cities, which they transport by
Land and S^^ into far remote Countries; yet the Merchants of Hamburg do
(...) map of lower Saxony THE LOWER SAXONY.
up the most part of it, and do get much by it. It has six Churches for
confession: and also an Hospital for the sick. The Inhabitants of this City
are divided after the Roman manner, into Citizens, Patricians or Senators,
and Plebeians. It flourishes for Politic government, learning, justice,
peace, and concord between the Clergy, and the Governors of the
commonwealth, amongst whom the Patricians have the chiefest power. I pass by
the other Towns for brevitie sake, because I intend to speak something
concerning the Dukedom of Meckelburg.

The Dukedom of Meckelburg, was heretofore a part of a Province belonging to
the King of Vandalia, lying near unto the Baltic Sea, but now it is one of
the chief Dukedomes of Germany and a member of the Empire: it has on the
East Pomerania: on the West the River commonly called de Elve: on the South it
has the ancient Marca: on the North, the Balticke Sea. It is a very fruitful
Country, abounding with Wheat, Apples, Wood, and Fish. There are also diverse
sorts of living creatures, and great store of Oxen and Cattle, and wild
beasts. Moreover Aritbert being descended of the royal stock, and having
lived some while in Charles the Greats Court, married the Emperors sister, by
whom he had Billingus, a man powerful yet mild and merciful, whom the
Sarmatians and Vandalls, even from Vistula to Visurgis, and from Odera to
Holsatia did obey; he had his Palace at Meckelburg. But his two sons
Mizilaus and Mislevus degenerating from their fathers piety and goodness,
began to persecute the Christians. But concerning these and other Princes of
Meckelburg you may read Munster. The first inhabitants of this Country,
Authors do call Herulians or Obotritians, and by a general word Vandalians.
It is a Country well replenished with cities, towns, castles, and villages.
In this Dukedom there is the ancient city Surinum, which was built before
Lubecke, Sundius, and Wismaria. The figure thereof is fouresquare, and so as if
it were four cities, it has four names. The first is called Senerinus, the
second Neapolis, the third is named from the Cataract, the fourth from the
Marshes. The Village Fichela which stands by the Lake Suerinus, is but 5
miles distant from the Balticke Sea: the vicinitie whereof made them bestow
much labor in vain to make a ditch out of the Lake into the Balticke se^, as
in like manner there was an attempt made, to cut through the Pelopennesian
Isthmus. Rostochium commonly called Rostocke, and heretofore Lacinium, and
corruptly Rhodopholis and Laciburg, is a sea city: it was first a castle,
after, Godscall the son of Endo did change it into a city; and afterward it
was enlarged by Prim^slaus the second the son of Nicolottus. It has now a
flourishing University, which the Princes of Meckelburg did erect and
constitute in the year 1415. The air here is wholesome, and there is great
plenty of provision for food, and very cheap. There is also Wismaria, which
some imagine was so called from Wismarus King of the Vandalls, in the
flourishing reign of Constantine the Great: some do affirm, that a Colonie
of the Goths was brought thither out of Visbina, the Metropolis of Gothland.
But Crantzius Antiquities, and Charters of the commonwealth, dated ^^ter the
year 1250, do show that it was built before the year ^^40, out of the ruins
of the great ancient City Mecklenburg, which gave the name to the whole
Country, by Gunzelinus, Earl of Suerinus. But in a short time, this City
did wonderfully increase by the traffike and trading of other Nations, having a
convenient Haven on the Balticke shore, to receive ships of great bur^^a,
where they may lie safely without letting fall any anchors: whence it is likely
that the City was named, from the safety and conve^ance of the Haven. It is
compassed round about with small ^^nes; who do bring plenty of provision
thither, and do furnish themselves again from thence: Moreover this ninth
circle of ^^e Empire called Nider Saxon, does consist of three orders, the
(...) whereof is the Clergy, the second are the Princes and Secular Lords, the
third are the free Cities. In the first there are the Archbishops of Bremes
and Magdeburg: the Bishops of Hildesheim, of Lubeck, of Suerinus, of
Ratzenburg, and Schleswick: the second contains the Princes and saecular
Lords: as the Dukes of Lauwenburg, of Brunswicke, of Luneburg, of Mecklenburg,
and of Holstein: the ^^les of Roffain, and Delmenhorst. In the third there are
the free Cities: as Lubeck, Hamburg, Mulhausen in Duringen, and North^^sen,
Goslaria and Gottinga.

THE DVKEDOME OF BRVNSWICK.
The Country whence so called.
THe Dukedom of Brunswick was so called from the chief^ City Brunswick. And
the City it self was denominated from Bruno the Son of Ludolphus Duke of
Saxony For he left his name to the Town which he had begun and so from him it
was called Brunons Town, which in the Saxo^ Language they call Wyc; but now it
is called Brunsvicum, or Brunsweich. The Country of Brunswicke is very large,
for it reaches from the boarders of the Dioeceses of Magdeburg^ and Halberstad,
The Situation
an^ from the wood Hercynia even to the River Albis. The ancient Government.
But about the year of Christ 1230, the Emperor Frederick did change the
Earl^ dome of Brunswick into a Dukedom, and made Otte Duke o^ Brunswicke and
Luneburg, who succeeded Henry Leon, wh^ was Lord of all Saxony. Frederick the
second made Otto Nephew to Leon, Duke of Brunswick, and Luneburg, and gave him
those Arms which his Uncle had brought out of England, namely two Lions Or for
the Country of Brunswick, and another Lion Azure, with Ermines for the County
of Luneburg; which arms did heretofore be long to Duke Herman, and his
posterity, with the Dukedom o^ Saxony. Concerning the other Dukes, see
Munster Lib. 3. of his Cosmographie. Brunswick is now not only the Metropolis
and mother City of this Dukedom, but also of all Saxony, which heretofore
from the builder thereof was called Brunopolis. Ptolomie calls it Tubisurgium
according to the opinion of Francis Irenicus. It is a large City being four
square, and adorned with many fair and beautiful buildings; very populous and
well fortified with double rampires and ditches, by which there are diverse
sorts of trees planted: it has five Praetorian Halls, and as many Magistrates.
It was built by two brothers Bruno and Theodore, otherwise called Theomar, the
sons of Ludolphus Duke of Saxony, in the year 961, as Hermann their own
Historian does witness. The River Onacra glideth by this city, which rising
in the Hartonican wood, does divide the City into two parts, and carries
away all the filth of the City with it, having many bridges built over it,
and at last it joyneth with Visurgis. This City has no good water to drink,
and therefore they have a kind of made drink, but they have little or no wine.
This City rising from small beginnings, yet in process of time increased
very much, both in strength and wealth, so that the Princes thereof were styled
Dukes of Brunswick. I will here briefly make mention of those words which are
praefixt and written upon the Court of this City, in regard of the frequent
suites in law which are commenced in this contentious age. In controversijs
causarum, capitales inimicitiae oriuntur: fit amissio expensarum: corpus map of
Brunswick THE DVKEDOME OF BRVNSWICKE.
quotidie defatigatur, labor animi exercetur: Multa inhonesta crimina
consequuntur: Bona and utilia opera postponuntur: and qui saepe credunt
obtinere, frequenter succumbunt. Et si obtinent, computatis laboribus and
expensis, nihil acquirunt. That is, suits in Law are the occasion of much
enmity, they put men to much charges: they weary the body, and trouble the
mind: they learn craft by following them, they neglect their own callings
and more profitable employments, and those who are confident that they shall
have the better, are oftentimes overthrown by oppression. And if they get the
better, yet labor and charges being reckoned, they get nothing. Among other
Cities of this Dukedom, Goslaria is not the last, being an Imperial City,
which Henry the first, the father of Otto the great, did build and found in the
year 1051, and the Emperor Henry the third did wonderfully adorn this
City, which the aforesaid Henry did build, and augment, until of a Keepers
lodge it became a great City as it is now at this day, in which the Emperor
builded a royal and magnificent Palace. The Town Helmstad is in the middle
way between Branswicke and Magdeburg: which William Duke of Brunswicke,
redeemed from the Abbot of Werden, with a certain sum of money, paid unto
the said Abbot, and so reduced it into his own power. Halberstad is an
Episcopal City, by which glideth the River Oltemia. In the middle of this
City there is a hill, which is two furlongs in length, and on the top of it
there is a large plain, at the two farthest Corners whereof, there are two
Churches. In the middle there is a Market place which is encompassed round with
Religious houses: but that part which is situate on the Mountain is called the
City, and that part which lies at the foot of the hill, is called the
Suburbs. The soil round about this City is very good, having standing Corn,
which is higher than a man on horseback. Quedelimberg is an ancient City
and not far distant from Magdeburg, which was built by the Emperor Henry
Auceps. There is also the Town Hannovera by the bancke of the River Leine,
over against an ancient Castle belonging to the Earls of Lauwenrod, but now
in the time of Henry Leon, about the year of Christ 1056, it was subject to
this Castle, which because it stood on the other side of the River, the
Courtiers called it Hannover. It is now a flourishing City in Saxony. For it
is well fortified with ditches, and very populous. Hildesheimum, or Hildesium,
which Ptolomie and Irenicus call Ascalingium, is an ancient City, being at
first divided into two parts, but afterward it was united. It has a very fair
Church, and the steeple is gilded. It is a pleasant City, and Ludolphus of
Colen an excellent Mathematician was borne here, being a Bishops seat,
Irenicus does reckon up the bishops thereof, which Crantzius also does in his
Metropolis, and Antonius Monchiacinus more accurately, Lib 2. of the first
beginning of Christian religion. But the Bishopric of Hildesheim was first
founded and instituted in Saxony by Charles the Great, King of France, and
Empeperour of Germany. Northausen is an Imperial City. There are also
contained in this Table the Dukedom of Grubenhagen, which is a member of the
Empire, and also the Principality of Anhalt: also Mansfielde an ancient
County of ancient Saxony, by the river Sala; so that Hegenus, who lived in
the time of King Arthur of Britain, was Earl of Mansfeld in the year 542;
it was so called from Mannus the son of Thuiscon. The chief Cities are
Mansfeld, near the River Wiperus, also Eislebia and Wypra. Eislebia is the
Metropolis, between the Rivers Sala and Wiperus: which was so called from
Isis, who (as Tacitus reports) did wander after her husbands death through
the coasts of Suevia. Near unto it there are metal Mines in the Mountains
Melliboci. It is supposed that the Tubantians did inhabit these parts. This
County has under it these four Counties, ^ippra, Arnstein, Wetin, and
Quernfurt. Also the Counties of Barby, Stelberg, Hohenstein, Regenstein, and
Please. There are also these Ecclesiastical principalities: Meydburg, the
Archbishopric of Germany, and primate of Germany; the Bishopric of
Hildesheim, and Halberstat: Also the Bishopric of Quedelborg, and Gernroade,
and Stiften, which are in the eight circle of the Empire.

There remains in this Table the Bishopric of Magdeburg. The Bishopric of
Magdeburg commonly called Meydburg, is so called from the chief City.
Charles the Great, having reformed all Saxony, ^^institute twelve Bishoprics
in it, the chief whereof was the Bishopric of Magdeburg, whose seat was at
the first in Styde, afterward it was translated to Valersleve, and thirdly to
Vrese. And afterward in the year 1130 Otto did translate it to Magdeburg, who
made it the primate of Germany, as it appears by a great book of Chronicles
which has no Authors name set to it. Albeit the Archbishop of Saltzburg, and
other Archbishops that are Electors, do not yield priority or supremacy to the
Bishop of Magdeburg, as Crantzius delivers in his Metropolis. But Otto the
first did make the Burggrave of Magdeburg, that he, might sit in public
judgment, in the Emperors steed, both in this Country and Bishopric, and
in the adjacent Countries. Ger^ Marquess of Lusatia was the first that bore
this office by the ordination and appointment of Otto; whose memory is
preserved by a Monument which is in the Friary of Geroden. After him they
reckon some others who followed successively in this order, Hermann Duke of
Saxony, Lotharius Earl of Waldeck, Frederick the son of Lothari^^,
Conradus his Nephew, Manfred half brother by the mother side to Conradus. He
being slain in the wars, Dittericus Earl of Plocensian, had his honors,
whose Daughter Vdo Marquess of Brandenburg having married, and thereby got the
Burgaviate, he left his son Henry his successor. After whose decease
Lotharius did leave the same office to Burchard of the house of the Lords of
Quetfort, from whom the Earls of Mansfeld are originally descended. After whom
there were the Lords of Schrapela, after whom the Emperor did translate it to
the Dukes of Saxony Electors for the Empire. The chief City is Magdeburg,
heretofore called Parthenopolis, from Venus Parthenia who was worshipped
there, situated by the River Albis; John Capnio calls it Domadum Pyrgum.
Aeneas Silvius calls it Magdeburg, and writes that Virginopolis, was a
famous Metropolitan City in Saxony, memorable both for wealth and strength;
Ligurinus calls it the Virgin City, and the habitation of Virgins: and
Ptolomie calls it Mesovion. Otto builded this City as Lupoldus writes: Otto
Frisingensis did enlarge it and was buried there. This is a famous Imperial
City, it is divided into three parts, and fortified with walls and Bulwarks,
having strong Towers and Rampires, also fair houses, large beautiful
streets, and magnificent Churches, especially the great Church of Saint
Maurice, being built by the Ottoes of square free stone. The Magistrate does
keep the civil law of the Romans written in the Saxon language, which was
confirmed and established by Charles the Great, so that the neighbor Nations
do thereby decide controversies, and this law is much reverenced and esteemed.
And let so much suffice concerning the Bishopric of Magdeburg. And now to
conclude this description, let us set down the Rivers which are in the
Countries contained in this Table: which are: Albis, Onacra, Oltemia, Sala,
Wiperus, Inderst, Struma, Roide, Ruma, Vker, Fues, and others. It has also the
Mountains, der Ramelberg, Meliborus, and others: and also diverse woods, as
Auffdem Hartzwaldt, Solingerwaldt, and others which you may behold in the Table
or Chart.

HASSIA or the Landgraviate of HESSEN.
Hassia has great store of Nobility and Noble places, which it ^ould be
convenient to know; but J could discover nothing hitherto of them, nor of the
state of the government. I have only found out that there are two Counties,
Solms, 30. 15. 50. 35. and Witg^^stein. 30. 17. 50. 50.

The Meridians are distant according to the proportion of the 510 Parallel to
the great circle.

AFter the Dukedom of Brunswicke, our method lays open Hassia: It is
doubtful whence the name thereof is derived. Some from the Mountain Hessus,
but this Mountain is neither found in Hassia, nor no where else, unless it be
that which is at Noviomagum, which is somewhat likely. For some do relate that
one Bato the son of the King of the C^ttians (who both enlarged, reedified,
and walled Noviomag^^) had a son called Hesus, who for the love of his native
Country, called it after his own name. Whence also the Mountain Hesus, was so
called. Others would have it so named from the Cattians, who (as they report)
did inhabit this Country, by changing the Letters, whence it is yet called
Catzen Elbogen, which shows the antiquity of this Nation. Beatus Rhenanus,
Li. 1. of the German affairs says, that the Hessians coming out of high
Gremanie, and having expeld the Ca^ti did possess these parts, and did call
them after their own name. This Country has Turingin on the East, on the
South Franconia, on the West Westphalia: and on the North it has the Dukedom
of Brunswicke, the Bishopric of Minden, and other Principalities. The air of
this Country is wholesome, having great plenty of wheat, p^^^e, and fruit:
But has no Wine, except it be by the Rhene. There are also fair Meddowes for
fatting of cattle, in which there are great herds of Oxen and young beasts.
The woods also are full of wild beasts, and especially of Hearts, which do
afford the Nobility good sport in hunting. It has also in some places
Mettalls, as Brass, and black Lead. It has no salt pits, but salt
Fountains. All the writers of our age are persuaded that the Catti did
formerly inhabit this Country, which was then a County, but now it is a
Landgraviate, although Crantzius be against them, who in stead of the Catti,
makes them to be the Saxones: Ptolomie calls them Chatta; who afterward, as
Tacitus mentions did pass into the Island of Batavia, where so^ memory of
their name does still remain in two Towns of one nam^ the one by the Sea, and
the other by the Rhene. Concerning the Etymology the most learned Iunius
writes thus: The Catti, who both ours and the former age did call Hessians,
were so named from Catts, in regard of fierceness in assailing their enemies.
For w^ knows not the violent fierceness of that beast, which though it b^
domesticke; yet will fly in his throat, that persues him closely: ^ else from
their sudden stratagems and ambushments by which the suddenly came upon their
enemies as Catts do leap upon t^^ Mice. For such the nature and disposition
of the warlike and fierc^ Nation of the Catti seems to be. Hither also may be
referred the word Hessius, which among the Huesdenians does signify a ^at^
Truly the virtue, and excellency of this Nation does no where a^peare more,
than in Tacitus, who for military discipline does prefer^ them before the
other Germans, etc. So that this name did most (...) express the nature and
disposition of those people. But Hessia wa^ heretofore only a County, and
subject to the Lordship of T^ringi^ which appears in the book of Tournaments,
in which we read tha^ in the year of Christ 1042 Ludovicke Earl of Hassia
was at a Tourneament at Hallis. You may read the Genealogy of the Landg^
(...) Hassia. There are moreover in Hassia besides other smaller To^ two chief
Cities, Marpurgum, and Cassula. Marpurgum which ^mie calls Amasia, and Amisia
Lib. 8. Geogr. is commonly ca^^ Martpurg: some would have it so called from
Marcomirus Prince France. Histories do report that this City was heretofore
a Village the famous River Lona flows by it. The City is famous for ^^^
Princes seat, and a free school, built in the year of Christ 15^ (...)
Ludovick Bishop of Munster. John Oldendorp, the most famous Lawye^ of Germany:
also John Draco, and Andrew Hiperius, famous Divine lived here. Cassula is one
of the chief Cities of Hassia, so called ^ it were Castellum or a Castle,
Ptolomie calls it Stereontium: they report that it was heretofore only a
Castle. The City is watered with the Rivers Fulda, Ana, and Trusula, and
has a fruitful soil, and pastures for feeding and breeding of Cattle. So
that the chief trading and traffic of this City consists in wool. Not
far from Marpurg is Franckenberg, which is a neat Town, both for situation
and building, and also venerable for antiquity, being seated by the Rive^
Edera: it was so called from the Frenchmen who there pitched their Tents
against the Saxones. King Theodoricke began to build it in the year of Christ
520. and afterward it was enlarged by Charles the great, 804. There are also
other Towns: as Eschwega seated on a hi^ it has a very fertile soil round
about it, and is watered with the ^ver Werra, so that the herb Isatis, which
Plinnie calls Glastum, and ^ kind of dye made of it, which grows also
plentifully in Thuring^^ a mile from this Town, is first put in boats, and so
carried to Mind^ and from thence by the River Visurgis which receives Werra,
it is carried by boat to Brema, and through all Ostland. Histories do man no
mention concerning the first original of Eschwega, in regard it wa^ map of
landgrave of Hesse HASSIA or the Landgraviate of HESSEN.
three times wasted with fire in the time of the Hungarian wars. But the
Chronicle of Franciburg shows that Charles the Great, about the year 796,
did institute diverse Bishoprics, and founded many Monasteries and Churches in
diverse Towns; and does mention also that Cauffinga not far from Cassela, and
also that Eschowega was built by him. Also the Emperor Henry the second was a
great benefactor to this Town, who reedified it when it was ruinated and
wasted by the Hungarian inroades and incursions, and did enlarge it with new
edifices and buildings. It was grievously aflicted again in the year 1377 in
the wars between Adolph Archbishop of Moguntinum, and the Landgrave of
Hassia, at what time it came under the government of Hassia. Frislaria also is
a famous Town of Hassia, commonly called Fritzlar, it is pleasantly seated by
the River Egra: and walled round about; but it is not level, nor the Country
it self which is here and there mountainous; yet it has a fruitful soil
round about it, both for wheat, pulse, and fruits, and some wine. And albeit
Frislaria be in Hassia, yet it belongs to the Archbishop of Moguntinum, so
that it has often tried the doubtful chance of war, but the Duke of Hassia
did often infest it, and the Saxons took it, and afterward burnt it. I pass
by many other Towns of this Landgraviate* Diverse Rivers do water, and glide
through this Country, the chief whereof are the Rhene which runs South
West: Visurgis or Wees^r^^ whose spring Wetra rises in the Toringian wood:
also Lupi^ which runs into Westphalia: There is also the River which Tacitus
calls Adriana, and Historians Aderna; Althamerus calls it Aedera, and
Ritheimerus Rhoer: Iunius in his Nomenclator names it Eder, and does add that
it is a River of the Catti, and that it falls into the River Ada^ But in his
Batavia he writes that it runs into Fulda, and this appears to be true by
the Tables. The lesser Rivers are Lanus or Lena which rises in the County of
Witgenstein, and so glideth by the Castle of Widekind sometime Prince of
England, it waters Lasphe a Town in the same County: there is also the River
Fulda, and others. The Country is every where Mountainous, but the most noted
are Melibocus, and Abnobus. The other Mountains have diverse names, as
Kesseiperg, and Geyne etc. There are many woods which are pieces of the wood
Hyrcinia. But let so much suffice concerning Halsia we will only add for
conclusion that which Aelius Eobanus Hessus, in his verses gratulatory for the
victory of the Landgrave Philip, delivers concerning the nature and situation
of the Country, and the manners of the inhabitants.

Qualis Hyperboreum prospectans Thrasa Booten,
Gradivi domus ad Rhodopen, Hemumque nivalem
Circumfusa jacet, gelidis assueta pruinis,
Gignit in arma viros duratos frigore, quique
Aut Hebrum Neslum que bibunt, aut Strymonis undas:
Talis and ipsa situ, talis regione locorum
Et fluviis, Silvisque frequens, and montibus altis
Hassia: Natura similes creat alma locorum
Ceu natos in bella viros, quibus omnis in armis
Vita placet: non ulla juvat sine Mart, nec ullam
Esse putant vitam, quae non assueverit armis.
Quod si tranquillae vertantur ad ocia pacis,
Ocia nulla terunt sine magno vana labor,
Aut duro patrios exercent vomere colles,
Aequatosque solo campos rimantur aratris,
(Namque and planities segetum foecunda patentes
Explicat innumeras, and plena mess colonos
Ditat, and ipsa sibi satis est) aut ardua Sylvae
Lustra petunt, Canibusque feras sectantur odoris.
Venatu genus assuctum, Genus acre virorum:
Aut leges aut Iura ferunt, aut opida condunt -- Fortia, etc.
As warlike Thrace looking upon the North
By Rhodope, and Hemus stretches forth
It self, and is inured to snow and cold,
Breeding such men as hardy are and bold;
Who of Hebrus, or of Neslus water drink,
Or of the River Strimon, yet never shrink.
Such for Situation, and Mountains hie
For many woods, and Rivers gliding by
Is Hassia: for the men by nature are
Like those, and even borne unto the war,
Who in the wars alone do take delight
And all their life time are enured to fight:
And if sometime they live in quiet peace,
From toilesome labor they do never cease.
For either they the level fields do till,
Or with the Plough they tear up the hard Hill
(For this same land has many fruitful Plains
Which plenteous harvests do bring in much gains
Unto the husbandman) or else repair
To the woods to hunt such wild beasts as there are
With Hounds, for these same people don't contemn
Hunting, but are a violent kind of men.
For either they make laws, or Towns do build
Which do not only strong defense them yield,
In times of War; but in the times of peace
They yield delight when as the wars do cease.
What should I here the Sacred springs commend?
The Greenes and valleys which do even contend
With the Aemonian vales, which do excel
For fruitfulness? or what should I declare
Those sweet and shady places which even are
Fit to be the Muses seats, and may right well
Become the Goddesses therein to dwell?
O ye Fountains of my Country clear, and cold!
And O ye Rivers that were known of old:
O the vales! and pleasant Caves which still did use
To be most acceptable to my Muse.
THE COVNTIE OF NASSAW, or NASSAVIA.
NAssavia is called as it were Nass-gavia, which word sign^fies a moist and
slimie Country: for the Town which names the Country, is encompassed on every
side wit^ moist and moorish grounds: and in the German speec^ Aw, and Gaw do
signify a Country; so Thurgaw signifies a dry Country, Rhyn-gaw a Country by
the Rhene, Otten-gaw, a Country abounding with corn, and so also Oster-gaw,
Wester-gaw, and Brisgaw. But this County has others annexed to it, as
Weilburg Idesteinen, Wiesbaden, Dietzen, Cattimelibocen, Beilstein. It is
boun^dered on the South with the County of Wiesbaden, and Ideste^^^ on the
East with Isenburg, Solms, and Hassia: on the North it ^^ bounded with
Westphalia and the County of Witgenstein: on the West with the Dukedom of
Bergen, and the Counties Weidan, an^ Seynen. It has many Praefectureships. As
Frudebergen, Sigene^^ Nephens, Hegerana, Ebersbacen, Dillenburg, Hilligenbacke,
Dring^steinen, Lonbergen, Herbornen, Dridorf, Beilsteinen, Marenberge^
Honstetten, Ellerana, Cambergen, Altenberg, Kidorff, Naffavia, and many others.
It is one of the freest Counties of the Empire, the Lords whereof are subject
to none but the Emperor, and do enjoy all the royal privileges, and
praerogatives of the Empire a^well as other Noble men. They have power also to
coin gold or silver or brass money, as appears by some pieces of gold which
are yet current. The Landgrave of Hassia and the Earl of Nassavi^ are
Coe-Lords, and by a joint Title, do receive the revennewe^ of the County of
Cattimeliboc, by a covenant made in the year 1557 between Phillip Prince of
Hassia, and the Earl of Nassavia. The Country in some places is plain
ground, and in other places it rises and swells into hills; here it has
flourishing Vines, as in the County of Dietzen, and by the bancke of the River
Lanus; and other where it has pleasant meddowes and pastures, or else
fruiteful cornefields. It has also metal Mines. For in the Territory of
Sigen, a certain kind of Iron Metal, is melted out of stone, out o^ which
they cast Fornaces, Iron Potts, Kettles, Stithies or Anvills Bulletts, and do
make all kind of Iron work. At Frendeberg ther^ is excellent steel made.
There are also the like Mines, in the Country of Dillenburg, Hegeran, and
Burback, out of which Lead and Copresse are dug as in Ebersback, where there
is also a Glassehouse. The chief wood is Westerwalt, which is a piece of
Hercynia the lesser woods which are also part of Hercinia are Kalt-Eych,
Heygerstruth, map of Nassaw THE COVNTIE OF NASSAW or NASSAVIA.
Schelderwaldt, die Horre, der Calemberg, in which there is great store of
wild beasts for hunting. The chief Rivers are Lanus, Siega, and Dille; near
Siega is Sigena, near Dilla is Heigera, Dillenburg, and Herborn: near Lana
are Dietz, Nassovium, Lhonsteinium, where Lane mingleth the river Rhene. The
Baths at Emsana do belong both to the Earls of Nassavia, and the Landgrave of
Hassia, unto which they come far and near in regard of the sovereign virtue
of the water, which they find to be very wholesome for many diseases. There
are also Fountains at Codinga and Camberga, the water whereof being drunk
will expel the wind Cholicke. Mernla and Bertius among others have drawn the
Pedigree of the Earls of Nassavia.

THVRINGIA, or the Landgraviate of DVRINGEN.
The Nobility and state of this Country are yet unknown unto (...) J have
only found out the County of Gleichen, 32, 50, 50, 58, etc. and I think
Kranichfelt, 34, 17, 15, 26, Also the Bishopric of Mersburg, 34, 17, 51, 26.

The Meridians are mutually distant one from another according to the
Proportion of the Parallel 510 to the Aequinoctiall.

THuringia follows after Hassia, commonly called Duringen, being situated
between the two Rivers Sala and Werra, The Situation
the latter on the West Side: the first on the East Side: on the North it has
the wood Hercynia which they call Hartz: and on the South the Forest called
Duringer waldt. The length is equal to the breadth, being 12 miles over. This
Country has abundance of all kinds of fruits and pulse, and has more
store of Corn than any other part of Germany. The fruitfulness of the soil.
So that George Agricola calls it the fat of Germany. Here is great
stoare of that herb, which Plinnie calls Glastum, is now called Guadum and
Pastillum, and commonly Weedt Pastell; which makes a blew color, which to the
great benefit of the inhabitants is transported into other Countries: i^ that a
famous Poet writes thus: Herba Thuringorum celeberrima crescit in agris,
Hanc Isatim Graecus sermo vocare solet.
Ponder is haec magni est, and multo venditur aere:
Hac etenim tingi lana parata solet.
A famous herb does in Thuringia grow,
In Greek called Isatis, and named so.
It is weighty, and much gain is made thereby,
For with it they their wool do use to die.


Concerning which Plinnie Lib. 21. cap. 1 Simile plantagini Glastum in Gollia
vocatur: quo Britannorum conjuges nurusque toto corpore oblitae, qui^^sdam in
sacris nudae incedunt, Aethiopum colorem imitantes. That is, in France there is
an herb called Glastum which is like a Plantaine, wherewith the wives in
Britain do paint their bodies, and in some sacrifices do go naked,
colored like Ethiopians or Indians. Ther^ is also great store of provision and
fruits, except wine, which (...) brought thither from other places. There are
also Mines of gold an^ Silver and rich salt pits. It was heretofore a Kingdom,
but now it i^ a Land graviate. Thuringia and Hassia were united together, and
governed by the Kings of France 366 years, The ancient Government:
until the time of Charl^ the Great, and Henry Auceps. At length the Emperor
Charles the Gross made Ludovicke Duke of Thuringia; his Nephew Burchardi^ was
slain in Hungary, and dyed without issue. So that the Emperor Henry Aueeps
took possession of Thuringia, and it is now subject to his successors, being
Princes of Saxony. For albeit after William the son of the Emperor Otto the
first, who being Archbishop o^ Moguntiunm, did possess Thuringia by his
fathers permission, his successors the Archbishops of Moguntum, did challenge
and arrogate t^ themselves the government of all Thuringia, and of the City
Erford which they do yet hold; whose substitute or Vicegerent was sometime
Ludovicke Barbatus in the reign of the Emperor Conradus Salicus: yet
afterward the Barbatians did yield up Thuringie with the title of Landgrave to
the right heirs. Until at length about the year of Christ 1250, it came into
the hands of the most illustrious Henry the son of Theodoricke, and Nephew to
Hermania Landgrave of Tha^^gia, and Marquess of Misnia, being descended from
the posterity (...) Widekind the Saxon. After whom succeeded his base son
Albert, (...) his sons after him Frederick, Admorsus, and Theodoricke, who
(...) made heirs by their Uncle Theodoricke Marquess of Misnia. The report
that the Sorahlans did heretofore inhabit this tract of (...) whom Eginhart and
Ammoinius do mention. Peucerus does not (...) the remainder of them Sorbec and
Sernestein, between the Rivers ^^bis and Sala. Reyneckius, in his book of the
original of the Mis^^^^^ supposes that these Tyringetians are as it were the
Tyring^tians, and from thence they imagine that the City was called Getha.
Ortelin writes that it was reported unto him by Hugo Brinckhorst an
Englishman, and a Citizen of the City of Erford, that there are in this
Country though it be small, twelve Counties, and as many Abbeys, which they
call Gefurstete Abtien, 144 Cities, and as many small Towns, commonly called
Merckt steken: 2000 Villages, and an 150 Castles. Erdfurdia or Erdford, called
aunciently Erphesfurdia, and Erdfesfurt, is a chief City of Thuringia, which
was so called from Erft the first founder thereof. For he being a miller placed
his mill by the River Gera, and so afterward the City began to be builded,
about the beginning of the reign of Arcadius and Honorius: afterward it was
much enlarged and beautified by Clodoveus King of France, in the year of
Christ 438: and in the year 1066, it was encompassed with such large walls, so
that now it is held to be one of the greatest Cities of Germany, and the
Thuringians do call it Nicht cine Stadt, or Sondern ein Gant^^^ Land. The
River Gera does water it and keep it sweet and clean. It was heretofore a
Bishops seat, but afterward it was translated to Moguntiacum. It has a
flourishing School, which Pope Boniface the ninth did adorn with privileges,
in the year 1392. The soil map of landgrave of Duringen THVRINGIA or the
Landgraviate of DVRINGEN.
round about this City is very fruitful, having pleasant Meddowes, and
great store of the herb Isatis. Henry the fourth did much impoverish this
City by laying a taxation of Tenthes upon it, having always enjoyed a
freedom and immunitie from such impositions. So that when the Saxon war
began, they chose rather to defend their ancient liberty with the sword, than
to submit unto the Universal taxation of Tenthes; and that with so great
courage, that they brought Augustus to a great strait. This City as if
fortune an enemy to greatness, meant to triumph over it, was oftentimes
burnt, so that no other great City in Germany, was ever burnt so often as
this: the last time that it was burnt, which was in the year 1472, it
sustained much loss, especially in the Churches of the Virgin Marie and
Severus, so that a third part almost of the City was burned down. This was a
terrible fire, which began by some that were hired to set it on fire, of whom
the chief was a Dominican. Two Collegiate Churches, as they call them,
together with the Bridge, and a great part of the City were all burnt down.
In the year of our Lord 1509 there arose a grievous sedition between the
Senate and the Citizens of Erford, occasioned by those unusual impositions
which the Senate laid upon the Common people. For the Commons gathering
together, would needs know how much the City was indebted. The Senate giving
way to the tumultuous fury of the people, endeavored to appease them with
fair and gentle words, telling them, that in convenient time they would bring
in an account of their receipts and expenses; which words quieted the Citizens
for a while. But when the day appointed came, they assembled themselves
together, and desired the Senate to bring in their account. But then one more
insolent than the rest, spoke sharply unto those whom the Citizens had sent
to the Senate, which did much provoke and exasperate the Citizens. And when
the Citizens saw that they prevailed nothing, but were put off with delays:
they put down the Senate and chose a new. In brief, from hence there arose a
grievous sedition, contention and war. But the Bishop of Herbipolis, and the
Emperor Maximilian endeavored to appease this sedition, and to bring them to
concord and agreement. Weimara is a fair Town, having formerly a County
belonging unto it, but now the Dukes of Saxony keep their Court in it, having
a fair Palace there, neately built of square freestone, and an Orchard
curiously planted with all kind of trees, and watered with the River Ilma,
which does run at length into Sala. There is also the City Iena, so called
from Ianus: but he was not worshipped in Germany. And therefore Stigellius
sings more probably.

Hinc placet Hebraeo nobis hanc nomine dici,
Vt vetus a Iajin nomen Iena tenet.
Cur ita crediderim, nisi mentem vocula fallit,
Certa hujus ratio nominis esse potest.
Quippe vocat Iajin Solimae pius incolaterrae,
Hoc quod nos Latio dicimus ore merum.
Quae caput in medijs urbs fertilis erigit vuis
Hanc quisquam a vino nomen habere negat?
Hence from an Hebrew word at first it came,
As we old Iena do from Iajin name;
And unless we be deceived in the word,
We may some reason for this name afford.
For the holy inhabitant of Palestine
Calls that Iajin which we do call wine.
So this City standing in the midst of Vines,
May well be named from the fragrant Wines.
Thus much Stigellius.
It has a public School which was erected in the year 1558. G^l^ was so
called from the Goths. And hence Rithaimerus in his description of the world,
writes, that the Turingians were originally desended from the Goathes, because
the Goths builded a City in this Country, which they called Gotha, about
the year 723. It had a wonderful strong Castle called Grimmenstein, which is
now level with ^^e ground. And this was the cause that it fell to ruin:
William Grun^^^, a nobleman rather by descent than virtue, in regard of his
many ^^^mous attempts, whereby he endeavored to depose the Emperor, and to
introduce a new form of Empire, was declared and pronounced to be guilty of
conspiracy with all his associates, and was condemned and banished, both by
the Emperor Ferdinand, and the Emperor Maximilian his son: and the Emperor
and the other States of the Empire, with one consent did commit the execution
of this sentence, to the most illustrious Prince Elector of Saxony. Which
banishment he contemned, trusting to himself, and his Protector John
Frederick the second, Duke of Saxony. Who after many admonitions from the
Prince, did still persist in defending the rebels, so that the most
illustrious Duke of Saxony and Prince Elector, enforced by necessity,
beseiged the City, and took it by surrender. And then Grunbachius, with
four more of the conspirators, for their treason against Caesar were put to
death, the Castle was razed to the ground, and Duke John Frederick, was
brought prisoner to Vienna. This Country is watered with many Rivers: as Sala
or Salza, Werra, Vnstrut, Ilma, Gero, Or, Apfelstet, Helbe, and Cling. And Her
testifies that the Mountains have mines, which have rich Veins of gold and
silver, which are found not far from Braitenborn, and Schwartzenburg. This
Country also is here and there clothed with woods, which are part of the wood
Hercynia: also the Thuringian wood is well known, commonly called Thuringer
Waldt, Caesar calls it Baceins, it is a wood in Germany which divides the
Cheruscians from the Suevians; there are also Hainich, Hainsette, and Finne
with diverse others, where there is good hunting of diverse kinds of wild
beasts. There are also in this Country many Churches, and Monasteries, among
which is the Church of the blessed Virgin Marie at Erford, which was built by
Boniface Bishop of Moguntium. This Church has a great Bell, which is famous
through all Germany. The people are fierce, hardy, courageous against their
enemies; the men are large of stature, strong, and well-set.

THE DVKEDOME OF FRANCONIA.
The Country whence so called.
THuringia a Country of high Germany being thus described, there follows
next Franconia or East France Which was so called from the Frenchmen. Some say
that the original of this name came from Francu^^^ whom others call Francio,
fabulously supposed to be the son of Hector, and the first founder of this
Nation. And Peter Ronsard the Poet writes, that the ancients did call him
Astyanct^ Francum, as it were Hastigerum, that is, the speare-bearer. Others,
(...) Gaguinus and Aeneus Pius, do affirm that the Emperor Valentine gave
that name to Franconia, because the Frenchmen in the Northern Language where
called fierce; or from the remission of tribute, and their freedom, they were
called Franci, that is, Freemen. Albeit do more approve of a latter
Etymology, that they were calle^ Franci, as it were Frioncy, because they were
free from taxes and impositions which cy signifies; or else they were so
called, as it were fryansi Fransi; for Ansi being a word proper to the Gothish
speech, does signify those who excel others in fortune and riches. And are
next to Heroes or Semigods, that are above the condition of mortals: whence
they corruptly call Great Noble men Ansos, and with an aspiration Hansos. But
to the matter; the Frenchmen after they grew wealthy, and weary of the Roman
yoke of subjection, encouraged by the desire of rule, got their liberty, and
thereby gained the name of Franci, instead of the old name of Germans.
Fronconia on the South is near to Suevia and Bavaria, on the West to the
Rhene, on the East it has Bohemia; on the North it has Hassia and Thuringia.
The air of this Country is pure and wholesome. The Country it self, except
it be that part which is called Norica and is near unto the Rivers, is not
very sandy, as Aeneas Silvius writes, nor yet very stony. But it is generally
very fruitful, and does yield a great increase of Barley, Wheat and all kind
of grain and pulse which is sowed there. There are no where greater and better
Turnips and Onions than here in this Country. And in many places there are
hills planted with Vines, of which excellent wine is made, and transported to
other Countries. The Country of Babenberg, does yield such great store of
Liquerize, that whole Cart loades of them are carried through Germany. This
Country also has many fair Orchards and pleasant meddowes; it has great
store of tame Cattle and wild beasts. The Princes do cherish the wild
beasts, who have many Dens in the Woods, where they live in the winter time,
and do house themselves as it were from the stormy map of Franconia THE
DVKEDOME OF FRANCONIA.
weather. It is not lawful for any private man to take them, or hunt them. It
is manifest that the Germans were originally and aunciently called Germans as
appears by others writings, as also out of Procopius Caesariensis, who was a
sharp sighted and judicious writer. The first Prince of Franconia was
Genebaldus, who was governor thereof thirty years. After him there succeeded
Marcomirus, Dagobert, Ludovicke the first, Marcomirus the second, Waramund
alias Pharamund, who being made King of France left his Dukedom to his brother
Marcomer: also Prunmesser, Genebald the second, Suno, Luitemarus, Hugbaldus,
Helmericus, Gotefrid, Genebald the third, Ludovick the third, after whom there
followed Erebart, Ludovicke the fourth, Gospert the second, and Hetacus the
last Duke, who dying without an heir, he left the Dukedom to Wituninus King
of France, who was also called Pepin, which afterward his son Charles the
Great, gave to Burchard the first Bishop of Viceburg, and to his successors
after him, and so bestowed it on the Church, in the year 752. It is now a
Dukedom which tittle the Bishop of Herbipolis assumeth to himself. Yet all
Franconia is not subject unto him. For Kitzinga and Bristadium are subject to
the Marquess of Brandenburg, and Gralingiacum to the Bishop of Babenberg. Also
Chronacum, Forchimium, Staphelsteinium, Hochstadium are under the bishop of
Herbipolis. Koningspergum, Oxenfordia, Carolastadium, Hasfordia, and
Bischofsheim, Alderburg, Middleburg, and some other towns are subject to the
Bishop of Moguntinum. Colburg belongs to the Duke of Saxony. Wirceburg;
which Conradus Corta calls Erebipolis, Ligurinus Herbipolis, Spanhemius
Marcopolis, Ptolemaeus, Artaunum, and the inhabitants Wirtzburg, from a sweet
kind of wort or drink, which the Country of Herbipolis does yield: is the
Metropolis and Mother City of East France, in which Boniface Archbishop of
Moguntinum in the year of Christ 751 erected a Bishopric. It is situated on
a plain, being encompassed on every side with fair hills, pleasant gardens,
and fruitful Meddowes, and also well fortified with ditches, rampires, walls,
Towers, and Bulwarks. It is full of Citizens, and has many fair buildings.
On the West Moenus runs by it, which is a navigable River, and it has a
stone bridge standing over it, which is built on strong piles. Near the River
Moenus there is a Castle seated on the Mountain, which has held out many
seiges, and therefore seems to be impregnable. At the foot of the Mountain
there is a Monastery, which was built by Burchard, at the cost and charges of
Cumbert King of France, in honor of the great confessor. But it would not be
much from our present purpose, to know the form and order of the inauguration
and consecration of the Bishops and Dukes of Wirceburg. After the decease of
the former Bishop, the Bishop that is designed enters into the City with a
great troop of horse. Being come into the City he alighteth from his horse,
and having put off his richest roabe, four Earls do bring him into our
Saviors Church, or house, bare headed, and barefooted, in a poor weed or
habit, girt about with a little cord. The official Earls are the Lords of
Hennenbergh, Castle, Werthein, and Reineck. Then the Deane together with the
Clergy goes forth to meet him, and asks him what he seeks? or what he
desires? And then he answers very submissively, That though unworthy he is
now ready to take upon him that office, unto which he was chosen, and to
discharge it faithfully. Then the Deane says; In the name of the Chapter I do
here commit unto thy charge the house of the Savior of the world, and the
Dukedom annexed to it, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. Afterward he follows the Clergy into our Saviors house, and having
put on the Pontifical roabe, he first hears Mass, and afterward has a
banquet, but first the body of the Bishop deceased is emboweld and set down in
the Chapel of the Castle: and his heart being took out is put in a glass
vessel. The next day he is brought out of the Castle into Saint James his
Monastery, holding in his right hand a Crozier, and in his left a sword; the
third day they go again to our Saviors house, where after Dirges and prayer,
he is at last buried with a Crozier and a sword. The other Cities are that
which Ptolemie calls Bamberg; Peter Appianus calls it Granionatium, and
Granionarion in a Greek book: it was at first called Balemberg, that is, the
Mountain of Baba, from Baba the daughter of Otto Duke of Saxony, and wife to
Albert Earl of Babemberg: others do call this City Pfawenberg; it is a very
pleasant City, situated by the River Regnuz. It has many Mountains, Hills,
and Gardens, and a very fruitful soil, where great store of Musmillians and
Liquerize do grow. It is an Episcopal Seat; and as it has bread many happy
wits, so it glories chiefly in Ioachim Camerarius a man famous for all kind
of learning, as appears by his works set out by him, which are read with
much admiration. There is also Francefort, or Francoford, by the River Moene,
which is commonly called Franck Furtam Mayn, to distinguish it from the other
Franckofort which is situated by Odera. Munster writes that it was heretofore
called Helenopolis, but he does not show when or from whence it was so called.
Henry Stephanus calls it in his Emconion of this City, the Academie of the
Muses, the Athens of Franckford, the Muses Mercuriall Faires, and the
Compendium or Epitome of all the Marts of the world. This City is divided
into two parts by the River Moenus, and joined together again with a stone
Bridge. It is now an Imperial City, and famous through the whole world for
two Marts or Faires. Here the Electors do choose the Roman Emperors, and if
there be competitors that stand for the Empire, they do here fight for it, and
try it by battle. There is also Moguntia commonly called Mentz, some call it
Moguntiacum. Ptolomie Lib. 2. cap. 8. tab. 3. calls it Neomagum. Moguntia is so
called from the River Moenus, which some do call Moganus and others Mogus. It
is an Episcopal and Metropolitan City. It has a fruitful soil on either
side of the River Rhene, which yields great store of wine. It is large and
well fortified, and very populous on that side which is toward Rhene: but on
the other side it has few inhabitants; it is very long but narrow There are
fair houses built after the Roman fashion, and magnificent Collegiate
Churches, with the Bishops Castle. Here was an University erected by Bishop
Theodoricke, and it is thought that the Art of Printing was invented here. It
is subject to the Archbishop who is elector, and Chanceller of the Empire.
There is also Mons Regius commonly called Conigsperg, where John de Monte
Regio, a great Mathematician was borne, whose Commentaries upon Ptolomies
Almagest are yet extant. Schweinfordia is situated by the River Moene in the
middle almost of Franconia. There are also Kitzinga, and Fridberg an Imperial
City, and others. Moreover the first Circle of the Empire is in Franconia, in
which these are called to Council, first the Clergy, as the Bishops of
Bamberg, of Herbipolis, of Wirtzburg Duke of Franconia; of Eichstett; der
Teutsch Ordens Master: the Provost of Camberg, the Abbot of Saint Galgen:
Secondly the secular Princes, as the Marquess of Brandenburg, Burger vom
Nurenberg: the Countes of Hennonberg, of Castle, of Wertheim, of Rheinecke, of
Hohenloe: the Lords of Reichelsperg, and Limpurg; and the Countes of Horpach
and Schwartzenburg: Thirdly the free Cities, as Norunberg, Rottenburg,
Winshaim, and Schweinfurt. Many Rivers which be full of fish do water this
Country, the chief whereof are Moenus, and Sala accompanied with eight lesser
Rivers: also Sinna, Rhadiantia, Aestus, Tubera, and some other. It has these
woods, Speshart, Ottoes wood, and other parts of Hercinia, which do enclose it
as it were round about with a growing wall. It is a warlike Nation, Noble,
witty, and laborious. Men and women do both plant Vines, so that none are
suffered to be idle.

THE DVKEDOME OF BAVARIA. The second Circle of the Empire.
WE come now to Bavaria, which were so called by the addition of one letter
from the Avarians the remainder of the Hunnes, The Country whence so called.
who having droven out the Noricians seated themselves in that Country; and
also Bojaria from the Bojans a people of Gallia Cisalpina, who sometime dwelt
here: it is commonly called Beyeren. It has on the East Austria, on the West
Suevia: on the South the Rhetian Alps: The Situation
and to the North Franconia. The length is 29 Germane miles. The breadth five
and twenty. The air is very wholesome, The temper of the air.
and the Country very pleasant: and generally very fruitful, but yet it has
no great store of Wine nor Corn: but in some places it has a End of sharp
hedge Wine. The fruitfulness of the soil.
The richer Wines are brought thither out of Alsatia, Franconia, and Austria.
There is great store of Corn about Ratispon and Landshut. Moreover, it has
abundance of Salt, fruit, Iron, Cattle, Foul, wild beasts, and all things
necessary to life. It does breed great store of Swine, which feed on Acornes
and crabbes, The variety of living creatures.
so that as Hungary furnishes other Countries with Oxen, so this Country
furnishes most parts of Europe with Swine. And besides Bears, Boares, and
other kinds of wild beasts, it has great herds of Dear, which they cannot
hunt without the Princes leave. In the year 1567, on the 22 day of August,
there was a Heart taken in Bavaria, of so large a body, that it weighed 625
pound. The Nariscians, Vindelicians, and Noritians were formerly seated here.
The Nariscians, whom Aventinus calls N^rtgow, and Melanchton Narcaw, are
divided from the rest by the River Danubius. The Vindelicians according to the
ancients Description, are situated between the Rhaetians and Noricians.
Rhaetia is two fold, the one is larger containing the Vindelicians, the
Noricians, and the Rhaetians, the other is lesser. The River Lycus does
separate the Vindelicians from the Rhaetians, if we believe Ptolomie; but if we
follow Strabo they are separated by the Rhene, and the Brigantine Lake, which
we have showed in our description of Helvetia. Danubius does part them from
Germany, and the Alps from Italy. Marcus Velserus has rightly observed out
of Ricardus the name of the Vindelicians.

Respicit and late fluvios Vindamque Lycumque
Miscentes undas, and nomina littoris, unde
Antiquam gentem, populumque urbemque vocarunt
Vindelicam --
It sees the Rivers Vinda and Lycus flow
Mingling their names and waters as they go;
Whence the Country, and the people it containd,
And City too were Vindelicians named.
It may be gathered out of Plinnie and Ptolomie, that there were ce^taine
Countries, and Cities belonging to the Vindelicians. August^^ sent to conquer
them Tiberius Claudius Nero, and Nero Claudius Dr^sus, who were both the
Emperors sons in Law, who having quic^ly dispersed and dissipated the
Barbarians forces, did easily overco^^ them, and reduced them to subjection.
See Paterculus Lib. 2. Di^ Lib. 53. and Horace Lib. 5. Odar. The Noricians do
begin from the Riv^^ Oenus; and so bend South East even to Hungary and Italy.
They we^^ always great soldiers, and being accustomed to war, they did
often invade the bordering Romans. As appears by the Norician swor^ which
Horace celebrateth. And also by an inscription which is found t^ this side
Danubius to this effect, and in these words:

DIS MANIBVS ET MEMORIAE LEGIONVM. ET MEMORIAE MISERRIMORVM, VINDELICIS
PRAEFECTIS MOCENIANIS ET VICTORI ET AVRELIO FILIIS VINDELICIS SVRINVS INFELIX
PATER F. C.

The ancient Government.
Bavaria was heretofore governed by a King of its own, even t^ the time of the
Emperor Arnulp: and as the Parthians called the^ King Arsaces, the Egyptians
Ptolomie, so they called their King Caca^nus. Afterward it had Dukes as it has
now. Bavaria is divided into the higher and lower. The higher lies Southward
by the Alps. (...) is full of Moors, violent Rivers, and dark thick woods.
It is only fit for pasturage, and feeding of Cattle. The Lower Bavaria is more
fertile, and fruitful, and more inhabited, having Vines all along the sides of
the Rivers Danubius, Isara, and Lavarus. And thus Bavari^ is divided naturally.
It is divided Politically into the County of Bavaria, The Cities.
and the Palatinate. The County is described in this Table and the Palatinate
in the Table following. The Cities of the highe^ Bavaria are Monachum commonly
called Munchen, being situated o^ the bancke of the River Isara, and built by
Henry Duke of Bavaria in the year 772, in the time of the Emperor Otho the
first. It is the pleasantest City of all Germany: being seated between the
River Oenus and Lycus, between the Cities Wassenburg, Augusta and Frisi^ga,
and between the fishie Lakes, among which the Duke has a fair^ Garden, full
of curious knotts, herbs, and flowers: there is an artificial fountain and
a Summer house adorned with Pictures and Statues, and about twy-light (which is
very wonderful) a great heard o^ Dear does come and graze, every day under
the windows. In the City there are Churches, Towers, Libraries, a Court, and
an exchange full of tradesmen and Merchants, and all things necessary no^ map
of Bavaria THE DVKEDOME OF BAVARIA.
only for use, but also for Ornament, and delight. Ingolstadium commonly
called Ingolstatt, is situated by Danubius, which was aunciently called
Ingelstat, or Angelostadium, from the Suevian Angeli, who first began to build
this City with others. It was at first a Town, but the Emperor Ludovick
Bavarus made it a City. There was an University instituted for all Arts and
sciences in the year 1410, and afterward Ludovicke Duke of Bavaria, and Pope
Pius the second, did adorn it and endow it with great revennewes and many
Privileges. Frisinga heretofore Fruxinum, as Rhenanus and Munster do
testify, is thought to have been built at that time when the Romans by their
Praefects and Lievtenants of Provinces, did possess and govern that part of
Bavaria, which runs out from the bancke of Danubius to the Alps. The River
Mosa does glide by it. There are also 22 Towns in it. In the Lower Bavaria
there are Ratisbona commonly called Regensperg, situated by the River Danubius,
it was built by the third Emperor Claudius Tiberius Nero about the time of our
Saviors passion, who called it Tiberina or Augusta Tiberij. Onuphrius writes
that Tiberius is mentioned in an old stone. And Goltzius produces some of
Tiberius coin, with this inscription. Col. Aug. Tib. Simlerus thinks that
this Regensburg is that which Antoninus calls Regium, and in the register
book it is called Castra Regina; Althamerus reckons up many other names
which the Barbarians did give unto it, as Reginoburg, Rhaetobonna, Rhaetopolis,
Hyaspolis, Imbripolis, Regnipolis, Tetrapolis, Quadrata and Germanisheim. The
name of Ratisbone is derived from Navigation. It was formerly the Metropolis of
Bavaria, and the seat of the Kings and Dukes of that Country; It has a stone
bridge which was built in the year 1115 by the Emperor Henry, over Danubius
on twelve Arches, being four hundred paces long, and 70 broad. There is also
Patavium or Patavia, which is called in their own language Passaw: Velserus
thinks that it is called in the Register books Batavas. That which Ptolomie
calls Bojodurum, Auentinus, Pyramius, and Lazius do think to be a City of
Vindelicia. It is a fair near City in the lowest part of the lower Bavaria,
at the beginning of Austria, in the confines or Frontiers of both Provinces,
between the meeting, and confluence of Danubius and Oenus, being commodiously,
and pleasantly seated in the manner of a Peninsula. It is famous for the
Bishops sea, and for traffic and commerce. For it is seated so conveniently
by the River both for commerce and trading, that as Lions in France, and
Gandauum in Flanders do flourish for merchandising, in regard of the concourse
and meeting of Rivers near unto them: so Patavia in this part of Germany,
does in this respect excel other Cities. Landshuten, commonly called
Landshut, is a famous City, and of chief note: being situate by the River
Isara, which glideth by this City, to the great advantage and commodity of
the Inhabitants. Irenicus out of the fifth table of Ptolomies Europe, supposes
it to be Inutrium, which has not the same situation. And therefore Ptolomie
does better place it, and makes Inutrium to be the same with Mittenwaldt a
Town of Bavaria on this side the Alps. It was built in the year 1207 by
Ludovicke Duke of Bavaria, having a fruitful soil round about it, both for
corn Cattle Wine and all kind of fruits. The City has many fair neat
buildings, the chief whereof is the great Church, which is curiously built of
freestone, wi^h a very high steeple. There is also in the lower part of the
City the magnificent Palace of the most illustrious Duke Albert, which was
heretofore called the New building. There are many Rivers which do water and
enrich Bavaria, The Rivers.
as Danubius the greatest River in all Europe, celebrated by Greek and Latin
writers; also Lavarus, and the River Isara, being pleasant, full of fish, and
running violently: also ^icetus, Oenus, Lycus, Alemannus, or Alimula, Nabus,
Regus, Ambra, Zoysa, Vilsas, Wolfada, Gyssea, and many others. And besides
these R^vers it has many great spacious Lakes; which have several forms and
shapes, and several sorts of fish in them: as the Lakes Ammersee, Asee,
Wirmsee, and Rorsee. It has diverse high Mountains, which I cannot reckon in
particular, but the chief are the Paenine Alps, and the Mountain Caravancas.
There are so many woods which lie scattering about, so that it seems to be
one wood: For without doubt they are parts of the wood Hercinia, which
heretofore did almost cover over all this tract of ground. But these parts of
the wood Hercinia have diverse names: as Heynerdoch, Schwardtzwalt, Greinwaldt,
Zellerwaldt, etc. The people are more addicted to tillage, and breeding of
Cattle, than to warfare, neither are they much given to merchandising, but
rather to drinking and getting of children, and they do seldom go out of
their native Country. Moreover the Bavarian circle of the Empire does consist
of three orders. In the first are the Bishops: as the Archbishop of Saltzburg;
the Bishops of Passaw, of Freifingen, and the Bishop of Ratisbone: the
Abbatesses of Alt Munster, and Ober Munster at Ratisbon. In the second there
are the Duke of Bavaria, the Count Palatine of Bavaria, the Landgrave of
Luohtenberg: Count Hage, B. in Stauffen, or Stuaffnegk: the Lord of Rinfelt or
Rhinfelden, B. Degenberg, Obesultzperg. In the third are Freistet, and
Regensperg.

THE PALATINATE of the Lower BAVARIA.
Jn which is the Landgraviate of Lutchtenberg. 33. 27. 49. 3^. It is in the
second Circle of the Empire. We do not yet know the other Nobility.

The Meridians are distant according to the proportion of the Parallels 49, and
51, to the greatest Circle.

BAvaria besides the aforesaid divisions, is divided into ^^varia on this side
Danubius; and Bavaria beyond Da^^^ is the Country of Nariscians, of which we
have sp^^^ before. It is now called Nortgovia, and commonly ^^^gow, and this is
the Palatinate of the Lower Bavaria, which, see^ ^^e have hitherto spoken of
Bavaria in general, and of that part which is called the County, we will not
describe. But Nortgovia, that we may begin with the Etymology, was so named
because it is a Northern Country. For Nort in the Germany language signifies
North, and Gow signifies a Land or Country. Moreover this Country is called
the higher Palatinate to distinguish it, from the Palatinate of Rhine, which is
called the Lower. This Bavaria was heretofore called Noricum, which Ptolomie
bounders with the River Aenus, and part of Danubius, which runs from Aenus
to the Mountain Cetius; also with the Mountain Cetius, and with part of
Pannonia, and the Mountain Catrancas. But after that the Bojans having driven
out the Romans, did transmigrate and remoove into that part of Vindelitia,
which lies between Aenus and Lycus, this tract also began to be called
Noricum, Bojaria, or Bavaria. For so the third Deacon of Lumberdie, as M.
Velserus intimates in his letters to Ortelius, does describe it in these
words. Noricum which is a Province of the Bojans, has on the East Pannonia, on
the West Swethland, on the South Italy, on the North the River Danubius.
Sextus Ruffus does reckon two Provinces of the Noricians, and the Register
books do mention the Mediterranean Noricum and the Ripensian. But this
Bavaria has on the North Voitlandium, on the East Bohemia, on the South the
River Danubius, which separateth it from the other part of Bavaria; on the West
it map of Palatine of lower Bavaria THE PALATINATE of the Lower BAVARIA.
is boundered with Hanecamp, The Fertility.
and a part of Suevia, and Franconia. The air of this Country is pleasant,
and wholesome: but the soil is hard and rugged, although in some places it
brings forth good store of Corn; and it has pleasant pastures fit for
feeding of Cattle. Near to Kelheime there are many Vines growing on the
bancke of Danubius. But they yield a kind of hard sharp Wine, so that it is a
common saying that Vinegar grows on those Mountains. In other places also it
produces diverse kinds of mettalls, especially great store of Iron, of which
the Nortgovians do yearly make a great gain and commodity. There is also an
excellent kind of blew color, which they call Lazurus. Moreover Noricum,
which is now the Palatinate of Bavaria, was heretofore a Kingdom, and had
Kings of its own, when the Romans had reduced the other part of Bavaria into
a Province even till the year of our Lord 500: whence Julius Caesar in his
Commentaries, mentions that Arivov^stus King of Germany, married the King of
Noricums Sister. But what Princes the Noricians had afterward does not appear,
until they became Christians. But in the year 511, by the labor and
industry of Theoden the second, Bavaria was reduced into one Kingdom, who
made a great slaughter on the Romans and drove them out of Bavaria; afterward
it was divided into three Dukedomes by his three sons: Theedon the third who
was seated at Ratisbon, Otto et Otingis, and Theobald at Tyrolis. It would be
too long to reckon up the other Princes. But at length the Emperor Ludovicke
Duke of Bavaria, in the year of Christ 1439, did divide it in this manner,
that the whole Norican Bavaria should belong to the Prince Palatines, except
some Imperial Cities, and whatsoever formerly appertained to the Empire. The
Metropolis of Bavaria is commonly called Nurenberg, which is pleasantly seated
by the River Pegnitius, which waters the City, it is very large and
beautiful, and has many fair Churches, curious buildings, great streets,
being fortified with strong walls, Towers, and Bulwarks; and full of
Citizens, rich in Merchandise and famous through the whole world for Mechanic
Arts: it is situated not only on the Navel as it were or middle of Germany,
but also of Europe; it is 500 miles di^tant from Jerusalem. Though the City
be of no great antiquity, yet the Castle which is situate on a high hill,
which was heretofore called Castrum Nuricum, is very ancient being built by
the Emperor Claudius Tiberius, whence it was called Neroes Castle. Heretofore
it was subject to Albert Duke of Franconia, after whose decease it came to the
Empire in the reign of the Emperor Ludovicke the third, and afterward it
increased and began to grow very populous. In the time of Charles the fourth it
was walled about: and again in the year 1538. Now it is the fairest and
largest City in all Germany, so that it has 128 streets* 11 stone Bridges,
which do conjoyne and unite the two parts of the City. The River Flavius
passing through the C^ttie does drive 68 water-mills. There are also in this
City 116 wells, and 12 Conduites, 6 great gates, and 13 common bathes.

In the year 1575, the Noribergians did institute an Academie or University
at Altorsium, and drew thither with great stipends and pensions, Professors of
the tongues, also of the Arts, Philosophy and other faculties: As appears by
an inscription at Altorsium: Inventuti, Religionis Christianae Doctrina,
Linguis Latina and Graeca, Optimis denique artibus ac disciplinis informandae,
Georgio Volkanfro, Philippo Geudero, Hieronymo Baumgartnero Oppido Praefecto,
Senatus Nortbergensis Scholam hanc nobilem and Patriciam aperiri and solemniter
introduci voluit. 3. Call. Iul. Qui dies Petro and Paulo Apostolis Sacra est.
Anno a nato Christo Salvatore 1575. That is, George Volkanfrus, Phillip
Geuderus, Hierom Baumgartner, being learned Praefects, and Balthazr Baumgartner
being Prefect of the Town, the Senate of Norinberg has solemnly instituted
and ordained this Noble free School, for the instructing of youth in the
doctrine of Christian religion, as also in the Latin and Greek tongues, and
lastly in all good Arts, and Sciences on the third of the Kall. Iul. which day
is sacred to the Apostles Peter and Paul: and in the year from the birth of
our Savior Christ 1575. This tract of Land has many other Towns besides this
Metropolis, as also diverse monasteries and Villages, one of the chiefest Towns
is Amberg, which was walled about in the year of Christ 1030, also Auwerback,
Sultback, and the Monastery of Castle, where the Princes of Nortgow did
formerly keep their Court: also the Towns Eger, Beierut, Eistet, Napurg,
Newenstadt, Ruwenkelm, Kemnat, Krusen, Grewenwerdt, and the Castle Gainum
which is so called from wayling or Lamenting. For here Danubius passes by
dangerous fearful places, which make the Mariners cry out when they pass by
it; in the Germane Language it is called Die Strudel from the noise and
violence of the waters: there are also the Towns, Eschenback, Weiden, Parnaw,
Pleistein, Herspruck, Rurbaock, Neumarkt, Tursentur, Elbagen, Cham, Scho^see,
Kunsperg, Stauff, and some others, which for the most part belong to the Prince
Palatines. This Country also of Nortgow does include one of the four
Landgraviates, which were heretofore instituted by the Emperors, namely
Lutchtenberg, in the second Circle of the Empire, which was so denominated from
the Castle Luthtenberg, albeit the Princes of that Territory do keep their
Court at Pfriembdt and sometime at Grunsfeld. This Landgraviate did not grow so
powerful as the other three, which in process of time were much enlarged both
in territory and power: but especially the Landgraviate of Hassia, as Munster
writes. This Country is watered and enriched by these Rivers, namely Egar,
Nubus, Vilsus, Regus, Pennitius, Schwartzach, Sultza, Altimulus, and Lautra,
and some others. Historians do relate concerning the River Regnitius, or
Regus, that Charles the Great being at Ratisbon, was persuaded; that a
navigable passage might be made out of Rhene into Danubius, if a ditch were
made between the Rivers Regnitius and Altimulus, which might be capable to
receive and carry boats and vessels: because the one of those Rivers do
run into Danubius and the other into Rhene. The King straightway chooses out
a convenient place for this work, and having got great store of Laborers, he
spent all the Autumn quarter about it. So that a ditch was made between the
aforesoyd Rivers, which was two miles long, and three hundred foot broad.
But this work came to nothing, for by reason of the rain, and that the soil
was a Moorish kind of earth, the work could not stand, for the earth fell
down in the night, and filled up as much as they had dug in the day time.
Near the Town Weiseberg, there are some tokens yet remaining of this vain
attempt. It is to be noted that all the Rivers of Nortgow have Iron mills and
other metal mills, so that they do blow the bellows, and drive the two
hammers with their streams, so that the Smith need but put the Iron under the
Hammers on the Anvill, and the water will make the Hammers forge it. There is
in this Country the Mount Pinifer, commonly called Fitchtelbergk, being six
miles about: out of which there do flow four famous Rivers, Moenus, Nabus,
Sala, and Egra, which winding in the figure of a cross; do run toward the
four several corners of the world. This Mountain does produce diverse kind of
mettalls, and the best blew color, which is called Lazurus. There is Lead also
found on the top of the Mountain, and many pits, out of which mettalls were
formerly dug. This Country also is, very where clothed with some pieces of
the wood Hercinia, as Weisenburwalt, Behemerwalt, and others, which are
represented in this Table. Moreover when Bavaria had received the Christian
faith, there were laws made, enacted for the government of the Land, namely
concerning the liberty of the Church, concerning Church-burners, and
Incendiaries, concerning those that took Sanctuary, concerning strikers of
the Clergy, concerning Tithes, seditious persons; also Martial Laws, Laws
for the tenure of Lands, for Brokage; for titles of inhaeritances, for buying
and selling, etc. These laws the Bavarians obeyed for many years, and some of
them they do still obey. And here I cannot choose but add some of the Bavarian
Laws. It was enacted that the Judge, to the end he might judge rightly,
should have the Book of the Statutes, and that thereby he should determine and
end all suits and controversies. Neither should the Judges respect persons or
gifts, but when he had Judged rightly he should have the ninth part of the
composition money. But if wrongfully, he should pay twice as much, as he had
took away by his unjust judgment: and moreover should be fined forty
shillings. He that sold any thing for a certain price, should set down the
bargain in writing, and have witnesses thereunto. No bargain or sale unless
it were free and voluntary, should be firm and current. I omit the rest,
least I should seem to over burden this description, with the repetition of
those laws, which John Boeme Aubanus does describe at large.

THE DVKEDOME of the higher SAXONY, with MISNA and LVSATIA.
The eighth Circle of the Empire.
WE come to the higher Saxony, which is the eighth Circle of the Empire. For,
Saxony is divided into the higher and the lower: The higher which this Table
does exhibit to your view, we will here describe. Concerning the Lower we have
spoken, in the foureteenth Table of Germany; and therefore we will not repeat
that which we have delivered before concerning Saxony, least it might seem
tedious to the Reader. The higher Saxony, commonly called Ober Saxen, the Duke
whereof is one of the Electors, has on the East old Marchia, on the West
Hassia: on the South Thuringia, and Misnia; The City of Wittenberg.
on the North the Dukedom of Brunswick. The chief City is Wittenberg,
situated by the River Albis. It was built by Windechind the first, some say by
Windechind his son, and that it was called Wittenberg, from Windechind the
father or the son. Duke Frederick erected there a University, in the year
1502, which another Frederick did so adorn and beautify, that being at the
first of small account, as Erasmus witnesses, yet at last it grew famous.
Peter Mosellanus says, that Frederick did so adorn and furnish Wittenberg,
with Professors of all Arts, and especially of the three tongues, so that it
seemed to be the pattern of a well founded University. In which Henningus and
Oldendorpius two Lawyers, did flourish and were famous for their works through
all Germany. Albertus Crantzius in his Wallia, Lib. 8. cap. 30. has a
memorable story concerning the trial by hot Iron which is used in this City.
It chanced that one was wrongfully accused in this City for setting houses on
fire by stealth: but he for swearing it, desired that he might be tried by the
trial of hot Iron, which the Lay-Iudges, did either not know, or else
contemned, as being interdicted by the law. Whereupon he took up an hot Iron,
and carried it a great way, and then cast it out of his hands, and was neither
burnt, nor had any harm by it. A year afterward, a Pavier paving the same
street, thrusting his hand into the gravel found this Iron, which being yet
hot burnt his hand. Thos^ which stood by wondered at it, and told it to the
governor of tha^ Ward. Who straight began to suspect that this man was guilty
(...) that fact, of which the other was wrongfully accused: so he commanded him
to be brought before him, whereupon examination, h^^ confessed the fact, and was
broken on the wheel, and afterward pu^ to death for this crime. There is also
a story concerning this tria^ by hot Iron, which Genildis wife to Henry the
third did undergo who being accused of adultery, did clear her self by this
trial o^ hot Iron. I find also in George Cedrenus, that they did use the lik^
kind of trial, for those who were suspected to be deflourers o^ Virgins, and
for those who were thought to be no maids. Some als^ do place Torga in higher
Saxony, which others do place in Misnia Misnia and Lusatia are described with
Saxony as parts thereof, o^ which seeing they are delineated in this present
Table, we will speak briefly.

Misnia.
Misnia or Meyssen, is a Country of higher Saxony, lying between the River
Sala and Albis, which was so called either from the Lake Misia, near which the
inhabitants hereof did dwell; or from the City Misna, to which opinion
Rithamerus in his description o^ the world does agree. But it seems that this
Country was lately (...) named, seeing we may gather out of Tacitus, that the
Hermundu^ia^ were formerly seated here, for he mentions that the River Alb^
did rise among the Hermundurians. It is bounded on the North wit^ the
Marquiship of Brandenburg and the higher Saxony, on the Ea^ with Lusatia and
Silesia: on the South it looks toward the Kingdom of Bohemia and the
Sudetian Mountains: on the West it has Turingia. They say the air was
heretofore very bad and insuffer able, in regard of moist exhalations arising
from the Mountains an^ the Woods, but now the Woods being cut down the foggy
cloud are vanished, so that the air is now more wholesome. This Country
abounds with all kind of fruits, so that it furnishes other Countries. It
has every where great store of Corn, and also great plenty of wine, honey,
and cattle: except in the Valley of Ioachim^ where the soil is harder, and
less fruitful. But the rich Mines o^ Silver does recompense the barrenness
of the superficies or surface of the earth. The Mountains also have diverse
kinds of mettalls, a^ Silver, Brass, Steel, Iron, Lead, and in some places
Gold. In the time of Otto the Great, this Country together with that higher
Saxony, was called the Marquiship of Saxony, before the higher Saxony was
made a Dukedom. Afterward in process of time, these Countries were divided
into more Lordships, and afterward the^ were reduced into one Dominion, and had
one denomination o^ name; which happened in the year 1241, when the Landgrave
o^ Turingia, dying without issue, his Territories came to the Lords o^ Misnia,
who from that time got both titles, and were called Marquesses map of higher
Saxony THE DVKEDOME of the higher SAXONY.
of Misnia, and Landgraves of Thuringia. And in the year of our Lord 1423, the
Prince Elector of Saxony having no issue male, the Emperor Sigismund did give
the Dukedom of Saxony, to the Princes of Misnia, which they do still
possess; and after that, as Munster writes, they usurped a triple or
threefold title. There are many Cities in Misnia: the chief City is Misena,
on the left hand bancke of the River Albis, which was built by Otto the first.
The next is Dresdena, very pleasantly seated and well fortified. Here the Duke
of Saxony has an armorie, and a magnificent Palace, and a curious stone
bridge. Lipsia is a famous Mart Town, situated by the River Pleissena which
excels all the other Cities of Misnia for wealth; and beauty: here is a
Noble School for learning and wisdom, which i^ those troublesome times at
Prague, was translated thither in the year 1408. In the same tract there are
Itenburg, Antiquae cellae, Lautenberg^ and other Towns. This Country is
watered with these Rivers, Albis, Sala, Mulda, and others; and it has many
woods, as Gabreta and others, which are parts of Hercynia. The inhabitants are
strong, valiant, and well proportioned in body; they are also merry and
pleasant, friendly, modest, and peaceable, and are not like the ancient
Germans for rudeness of behavior.

Lusatia.
LVsatia also as Rithamerus does witness, is a great part of Saxony which
lies between the Rivers, Albis and Odera, and the Mountains of Bohemia. But
the name of Lusatia is derived from the Elysians or Lygians, who, as Ioachim
Carens says, were seated here. Thi^ Country has good store of Corn, and is
very fruitful. It was some time joined with Misnia: at length the Bohemians,
who strived to enlarge their Kingdom, took it to themselves. Lusatia is
twofold, the Lower, and the Higher. In the latter there are these Cities,
Sprenberg, Prybus, The Cities.
and Cotbus: in the former Gorlits, and Zitaw. Gorlitum commonly called
Gorlitz, is the chiefest and Noblest City in the higher Lusatia: having many
fair houses, and being well fortified with walls and ditches, and by the
mountainous situation thereof, and also by the Vicinitie of the River, which is
very profitable and commodious, to Millers, Brewers, Dyers, and other
Citizens. There is a ston^ Bridge to pass over it, which is covered over
head. But of all the public and private costly aedifices, S. Peter's Church,
and the Palace at^ the chief. This City was first founded and built in the
year 1030 as the Annalls thereof do witness. But in the year 1301, it was
burn^ down to the ground, so that there was not one house left standing But
like a Phoenix that rises out of her own ashes, so eight yeare^ afterward out
of these ruins, it was built fairer and more curiously than before. It is
subject to the Kingdom of Bohemia, as also Lusatia* And John Dubravius Lib.
21. concerning the affairs of Bohemia, does show how it came to the Crown of
Bohemia. The River Nissa does water Lusatia and does much enrich it. But so
much concerning Lusatia. Now let us return to Saxony, and speak briefly of
it. These Noble Rivers do water Saxony, Albis, Sala, Visurgis, also
Lusimicius, Multauia, Misa, Sala, Fulda, Leyna, Allenius, Odera, Ola, Nisa, The
Rivers of Saxony.
and others. It has also many woods, as Lunenbergerheid, Spondawerheid, The
Woods.
Rottenawerheid, Galberheid, Pomerischeid, which are parts of Hercynia. The
Saxones were heretofore distinguished into four ranckes, or orders, the
Nobles, Gentry, Freemen, and Servants. And there was a Law made that every one
should marry, in their own rank or tribe. So that a Noble man should marry a
Noble woman, a Gentleman should marry a Gentlewoman, a Freeman should marry a
Freewoman, and a Servant should marry a Servant, and it was death to break or
infringe this statute. They had also excellent laws for punishing male
factors. Moreover, Their Laws.
Ober Saxon which is the eight Circle of the Empire, does consist of three
orders, the first are the bishops of Misnia, of Merspurg, of Naumburg, of
Brandenburg, of Havelburg, of Lubuke, of Caminum. The Abbots of Salveldt, of
Rottershausen, and Falc^^reiten. Also the Abbetesses of Quedelnburg, and of
Genrode: the second are the Princes and saecular Lords, as the Duke Elector of
Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburg Elector, the Dukes of Pomerania: the
Princes of Anhalt: the Earls of Schwartzenburg: Count Mansfelt: Count
Stolberg: Count Hohenstein: Count Buchlingen: Count Rapp^^: Count Mullingen:
Count Gleiche: Count Leisneck: Count Widersfelt: the Lords of Bernaw: B. de
Tautenberg: Count Regenstein, Rosse de Plaw. D. de GratZ, D, de Schonberg. The
third are the free C^ties, as Dantiscum, and Elbingen.

THE MARQVISHIP and Electorship of BRANDENBVRG.
THe Marquiship of Brandenburg, which is represented in this Table, was
heretofore inhabited by the Vandals, who spread themselves from the River Albis
Eastward, through the Countries of Mechelburg, Brandenburg, Pomerania, Bohemia,
and Polonia. It was so called from the Metropolis, which at first was called
Brenneburg: as George Sabine says: Italiam quando digressus ab urbe petebam,
A Duce quae Brenno condita nomen habet.
Going to Italy, that City I did leave
Which from Duke Brennus does her name receive.


Charles the Great did beseige them a long time, and Henry Aucep^ overthrew
them near Brenna, and put a Garrison in the City, with a Colonie of Saxons.
This Marquiship is 60 German miles long. On the West it is boundered with
Saxony, Misnia, and the Megalopensians Country; on the North it has the
Stetinians, Pomeranians, and Cassubians; and on the East it has Polonia, and
Silesia: and on the South Bohemia, Lusatia, and Moravia. The Country is very
fruitful, especially for corn: it has also Vineyards, out of which they
make great store of wine. Moreover this Country does produce Coral, and many
precious stones. Moreover the Marquess of Brandenburg is one of the Electors
of the Empire, and is counted one of the richest, and most potent Princes of
Germany. Who besides his Marquiship, has also many Cities, in the County of
Lusatia and in Silesia. There was a diverse and various succession of Princes,
for the line of the Marquesses being extinct, Ludovicke Bavarus in the year
1119, gave this Principality to his son Ludovicke: the Bavarians in the
year 1363, sold it to the Emperor Charles King of Bohemia: and so from John
the son of Charles, the Marquiship passed to the Princes of Moravia, Iudocus,
and Procopius: Iudocus being much endebted did morgage it to William Marquess
of Misnia: at length in the year 1417, in the Council at Constantia, King
Sigismund gave it to Frederick Burgrave of Noriburg. The whole Marquiship is
divided into three parts, namely into the Old, the Middle, and the New. The Old
Marquiship begins a the Desert or Forest of Luneburg, and stretches even
to the Rive^ Albis. It confineth also on the Dioecesses of Magdeburg,
Halberstadt map of Brandenburg ^HE MARQVISHIP and Electorship of BRANDENBVRG
and Megalopolis. The inhabitants hereof were formerly the Senonians and
Suevians, and also the Angrivarians, and Teutons. In this tract there are
seven great Cities, namely Tangeramond near the River Albis, and situated
there where Angra or Tonagra does empty it self into it; it was heretofore
the seat of the Emperor Charles the fourth. Also Stendalium, which is the
chief City of this Marquiship. There is also Soltwedelum which is divided
into two Cities, the Old and the New: also Gardelen with the Castle
Eischnippia. Also Osterburg, Werbum, Senohousum, which was so called from the
Senons. The lesser Towns are Arnburg situate by the River Albis, with a
Castle adjoining to it. Also Bisemarchum, Bostera, and Bucka, not far from
Albis; also Kalba, and Mestinga, which they call Letzolinga. And moreover here
are 465 Villages. The middle Marquiship does begin at another part of Albis,
and does reach to the Rivers Odera, and Suevum commonly called Spre. It was
formerly inhabited by the Suevians. The Metropolis of this Marquiship is
Brandenburg, which is a famous City situated by the River Havila, which some
think, was builded and named by Duke Brennus: some suppose that it was built
by Brandon Prince of France, son to Marcomir, who about the year of Christ
140 did subdue this Country. Here was the Vandals Pantheon, whose gods were
Zarnebocke, and SwandewitZ, besides others, as it is related in the Chronicles
of M^rsburg. Here the high Court is kept for all the Country. This City has
many privileges and immunities, which were heretofore granted by Emperors,
Kings, and Princes: which appears by a statue which stands in the New part
of the City, holding in his right hand a drawn sword, which they call
Roland. The next to Brandenburg is Rathenavium seated by the River Suevus: and
also the two Towns Colonia and Berlinum, which are separated by the River
Suevius. There is also Franckford a chief City, very pleasantly seated by
the River Viadrus (which they call Odera) which has great store of fish: this
River runs on the Eastside; the other parts of the City are encompassed
with pleasant hills, and choice Vineyards, out of which they make wine, which
they carry down the River unto Pomerania, Denmark, Borussia, and other
places. This City was first built in the year 1253 by Gedine of Hertsperg,
by the command of John the first Marquess of Brandenburg. It is a famous Mart
Town, and has three Faires kept there every year. It has an Academie for
Arts, Languages, and Sciences, which was built in the year 1506, by Marquess
Ioachim, and endowed with revenewes. In which there have been from the first
institution thereof most excellent professors of Arts and Sciences, some of
which Sebastian Munster reckons. There are also other Towns as Breitza,
surnamed Fida: also Belitza, Bernavium, Cellinum, Mittemwaldum, Monachobergum,
Bisenthalum, Blumoberga, Botzavium: also Fryenwaldum and Oderobergum. Here
Marquess Albert the second built a Castle by the River, which commanded those
that sailed by it to pay custom. There are also Frisachum, Gereswaldum,
Grimmitzum, Grunchyda, Grunewaldum, and Koppenicum. Also the little Town
Lichenum, and Parstaici^mum with a Castle: also the little Town Mulrosa;
Bornavicum, ^d the little Town Lossa, with a Castle, also the small Towns
Wru^^^, and Selowium, and many other Towns and Villages. The ^^ Marquiship is
disjoined from the middle Marquiship by the Ri^er Odera, where the River Warta
does discharge it self into Odera were Costrinum. The chief City in this
Marquiship is Gostrinum, which was reedified by Marquess John the son of
Ioachim the first, ^ well fortified, and chosen to be the Princes seat. There
are over Cities as Lansberg by the River Warta, also Regiomons, Bernwal^, and
the little Town Berstcinum with a Castle, also Bernawicum ^^ Berlinicum, or
the Town new Berlins Moreover there is the ^^ie Arnswaldum, the little Town
Thamum, and Soldinum, which (...) heretofore the prime City of this
Marquiship. There is also the ^^e Town Furstenfeld: and Bramburg, Driesenum,
and the City ^^b^rg with a Castle, which is situated on the confines of
Pomera^ia. Also Kartaw, Lepena, Morinum Schiffelbenum, Osemundum, Sc^ns^^,
W^ldenberg, Zeden, Zandocum. Some divide the whole Marqui^^p into seven or
eight Provinces, which are these, Alde Marck, or ^ Merchia; Meddel Marck, or
the middle Marquiship, new Marck, ^ the new Marquiship, the Dukedomes of Vber
Marck, Pregnitz, and C^sen; the Lordships of Sterneberg and Cotbus, and also a
part of I^s^^is. There are also lesser Countries in these Provinces, as Rapin,
and Vierraden, and Kustren, which are Marquiships. The whole Marquiship of
Brandenburg, with the territories belonging thereunto does contain 55 great
Cities, 64 Towns, 16 little Towns, which ^y commonly call Marctflecken, 38
Castells, or noblemens houses, ^^d 17 Monasteries. It is watered with the
Rivers Odera; or Viadrus, ^ueus, Albis, Havela, Warta, and others. Near the
Monastery of Carthesians at Franckford, there is a little Rivulet, which
rises out of a ^^ll of Vines, which as it has been proved, does harden every
thing that is cast into it, and turns it into a stone. And so much concerning
^^e Marquiship of Brandenburg; it remains that we speak something
concerning Pomerania which is contained in this Table.

Pomerania was called by the first inhabitants in the Vandall speech ^^^tzi,
now it is a Dukedom which lies by the Balthick sea, The Country whence so
called.
and is stretched in a long tract of ground, from the borders of Holsatia, ^^
the confines of Livonia. The Country is every where very fruitful, having
pleasant Meadows, and green pastures. The fruitfulness of the soil.
It has such abundance of Corn, Butter, Honey, Wax, Flax, Hemp, and other
such (...) commodities, that the inhabitants make a great benefit of them by
transporting them to other Countries. The inhabitants also do gather up Amber
by the Sea side, but in lesser quantity than the Bo^^ssians. There are diverse
kinds of tame cattle, The variety of living creaturese
and herds of wild beasts, which run up and down in the woods. This
Country had always Lords, and inhabitants of its own, which were never
con^^ered, nor driven out of their Country. Here are many fair Cities. The
chief is Stetimum, by the river Viadrus, which was heretofore a long fisher
Town, seated on the bancke of the River, and after it had received the
Christian faith, the Mart being translated thither it began to increase, so
that it is now the Metropolis of Pomerania. Place this lease after the quire
lii of two-sheetes in the quire, and after folio 564.
Gripswaldan is a famous town, for learning and good Arts, there w^ an
University built there in the year 1546. Iulinum accounted her^tofore the
greatest town in all Europe, was a Mart town of the V^dalls. Stralsundia is a
fair Town on the shore of the Balthick sea, h^ving heretofore a Duke thereof.
Wineta is a very rich seafaring Tow^ but it was ruinated by Conradus King of
Denmark. There are also ^ther Cities, as Neugardia, Lemburga, Stargardia,
Bergradum, Ca^nez, Publina, Grifenburga: and by the shore side there are
Colberg^ Caminum, Collinum, Sunda, Pucka, Revecol, Lovensburg, and Hecb^* And
so much briefly concerning Pomerania. Also Mecklenburg ^ the Dukedom of
Magnopolis is contained in this Table. There a^ also in the same Table these
Ecclesiastickes; the Bishop of Magdeb^^ Primate of Germany, under whom are the
Bishops of Brandenburg, the Marquiship of Brandenburg, and the Bishop of
Havelburg in Me^lenburg; also the Bishop of Swerinium under the Bishop of
Bremes; ^ Pomerania there is the Bishop of Camin.

THE DVKEDOME OF POMERANIA.
POMERANIA is now a Dukedom, it lies by the Balthick Sea, and reaches from
the confines of Holsatia even to Livonia. This Country was called by the first
Inhabitants in the Vandals Language, Pamorzi, and it had always a peculiar
people, who were never conquered and as Bertius witnesses, unto whom we are
beholden for this description, they were beaten or expulsed out of their own
Country. The Country is plain, and has few Hills, but every where fruitful,
and watered with Rivers and Springs, having pleasant Meddowes and green
Pastures, shadie Woods, in which there are ^^ers kind of wild Beasts. It has
abundance of Cattle, as also great store of Corn, Butter, Honey, Wax,
Cotton, Hemp, and other Commodities, so that the Inhabitants do gain much by
transporting them. There are many fair Cities in Pomerania. The chief City
is Stettinum which is situate by the River Viadrus, which is now called Odera:
it was heretofore a long Fisher Town by the bancke of the River, but now it is
the chief Metrapolis, and Mother City of Pomerania. Gripswaldum is a Town
famous for learning and humane Arts: an University was built here in the year
of Christ, 1556. Here is also the Town Iulinum, which was heretofore the most
famous Town of all Europe, and a Mart Town of the Vandals, ^^to which the
Russians, the Danes, the Sorabians, the Saxones, the Sar^^^ns, and the Suevians
did bring their Commodities, and Merchandise. The Inhabitants when they
perceived that the Christian Religion began to flourish and increase, would not
suffer any stranger ^ mention the new Religion, and this was the cause that
they received the Christian faith so lately. But at last by compulsion they
received this Religion about the year of Christ 1000. but they reuolting often
from their faith, and having made a great massacre and slaughter of the
Christians in the year 1066. did return to Paganism, until Otto Bishop of
Bamberg began again to preach the Gospel of Salvation in Pomerania, with such
good success, that three Brothers who were Princes, namely Ratisborus,
Bugislaus, and Suantepolcus, were baptized, and received the Christian
Religion. The first Bishop of Iuli^^ was Adelbert, but in regard the City was
still infested by the D^^s, he thought good thirty years afterward to
translate his seat to Caminum, and so the other City fell to the ground.
Stral^^dia is a fair Town on the shore of the Balthick Sea, which had
heretofore a Duke of its own, but now it is subject to the Duke of Pomerania,
it is supposed to have been built by the Frenchmen, and reedified by Waldemar
King of Denmark about the year of Chr^ 1209. but now it is a strong Town,
and is a defense to Denma^ and Swethland. Wineta is the richest of all the Sea
Cities, being ^tuate between the River Suenus, and the Island Rugia, and it w^
ruinated by Conrado King of Denmark, in the year 1030. The are also other
Cities, as Neugardia, Stargardia, Camenez, Grifenburg and by the shore,
Colberga, Caminum, Collinum, Sunda, Lovensburg, a^ many other.

map of Pomerania THE DVKEDOME OF POMERANIA.


RVGIA.
The Situation
RVGIA is an Island in that part of the Eastern or S^vian Sea, which is properly
called the Balthick Sea. ^ the North it has Denmark, and the Chaulkie Ila^
Mona. On the West and South it has the Cities ^merania, Bardus,
Stralesundius, Gryphiswaldus, and Walga^* This Island was heretofore far
larger then it is ^^ insomuch that the Island Ruden was so conjoined with it,
that it (...) nothing but a small Ditch which a man might leap over with a sta^
to part it. But in the year 1309. all that part of it which lies ^^tweene
Rugia and Ruden, was swallowed up and washed away, by violent tempest, which
did blow down and overthrow Tow^ and Houses, so that there is now a Channel
of half a mile bread^ which will bear Ships of great burden, and it is now
called t^ new passage. Das Neure Sief oder Shiffart. For heretofore great Shi^
were wont to fall down to Sea by another way or passage, not Ea^^ward, but
Westward, which they call Dan Bellen. This Island is e^compassed round about
with the Sea, and is seven Germane m^^ both in length and breadth. The
circumference whereof if it we^ round, according to the rules of the
Mathematics, should be a miles. But now the circumference of it is not only
distinguish with many Islands, and Peninsulaes some greater and some lesser, b^
also he that shall diligently note the windings of the Sea into t^ middle
parts of the Island, also the Islands, Isthmusses, Peninsula^es, ^ Bays,
turnings and windings of the shore, shall find that the c^cumference of this
Island is not much less then 70. miles. And besides it is observable that there
is no place in all this Island, that ^ above half a mile or three quarters of a
mile distant from the (...) The Shores also are so well fortified, so that the
raging waves of t^ Sea cannot endammage it. The fertility.
Moreover this Island has great store (...) Corn, and is as it were the
Granary of the City Stralesand, as Sici^ was the Granary of Rome, as Strabo
witnesses. Here are pretty sto^ of Horses, Oxen, and Sheep: but great store
of great Geese. The Island has no Wolfes, The variety of living Creatures.
nor Rats, albeit in the Peninsula of Wittov^ there were some seen, which came
either from some Ships whi^ rode there at Anchor, or were Shipwrackt against
the shore. T^ Inhabitants hereof were called heretofore the fierce Ranians or
^thenians, who could not be tamed or subdued by the power of neig^bour Kings
and Princes, and they were so strongly addicted to Id^latry, that they were the
last of all the Inhabitants near the Sweth^ Sea, who did receive the Christian
faith. For the Princes of t^ Island being heretofore very potent, did not only
possess many C^ties and Countries out of this Island, as Birdus, Grimma, and
Tribbe^^ but also they had continually wars with the King of Denmark, a^ the
neighboring Princes of Pomerania, and wearied the Lubecens^ map of Rugia RVGIA.
with continual wars, and so begun to be feared of their neighbors for
their power and fierceness. They used formerly the Slavonian or Vandalian
language, which the Pomeranians used also. There is nothing recorded concerning
their achievements, The ancient government.
in regard they desired rather to excel in martial matters, then in learning,
and there were but few learned men at that time especially in those parts. The
first Prince of Rugia was Crito, who lived in the time of Swanlibarus Duke of
Pomerania, and married his Daughter Slavina, about the year of Christ 1100.
They report also that this Crito was Prince of Holsatia and Dithmarsia, and did
found Lubeck, who after he had made himself drunk at a Banquet, as he
stooped and put forth his head to go forth at a low Gate, a Dane that stood in
a secret place cut of his head. After whose death his Father Retz^ surviving
after him was Prince of Rugia in the year 1106. whose Posterity did
successively possess the Principality of Rugia, even to Wartiflaus, in whom in
the year 1352. the Royal Line of the Princes of Rugia was extinct, and the
Dukedom of Rugia came to the Princes of Pomerania, and that by a certain
mutual covenant and agreement, whereby it was agreed, that if they did not
leave Sons to succeed them in their own Dukedomes, the Dukedom for want of
a Prince, should descend and come to the other Duke. There were three Churches
at Charantina, and many Idols in them: of the chief whereof is Rugae-viti:
which had seven faces on one head, and seven swords buckled to it, holding in
its right hand a naked sword. It was a long thick, and terrible Idol, which
they called Mars, or the God of war. The other had five faces on one head,
and without a sword which they called the God of peace. The third had four
faces on one head, and one in his breast, holding his forehead with his left
hand, and laying his right hand on his knee which they called Porcuitum and the
God of their Empire. It would be tedious to speak of their other monstrous
gods. Areona was heretofore the strongest City of Rugia, being situate on the
highest Promontory of the Peninsula Wittoviae Northward, on the North, and East
it is encompassed with the Sea, on the other side with a low Valley, there are
some ruins of this City yet remaining. The Valley was so deep, so that an
Arrow shot upright out of a strong Bow could not reach to the top. This City
was besieged on Ascension day, and it was taken on Saint Vitus day, by Gods
providence, who punished their Idolatries even on Saint Vitus day, which did
first spring and arise from S. Vitus. The Citizens of Arcona trusting at first
to their City and Castle, did valiantly resist the Enemy, but at length on
Saint Vitus day being wearied and tired, they were enforced to accept of
conditions of Peace, and to receive the Christian Religion, and to yield unto
the Conquerers the revenewes of the Swantovian Church and Idol to maintain
Christian Ministers: also to burn the Idol Swanto with the Temple, and to set
the Christian Captains at liberty without any ransom, and to pay tribute
every year to the King of Denmark. The strong City being taken, the City
Charentina did yield it self upon the same conditions. Among all the three
Princes of Rugia, Tetzlaus, ^^oustans, and Iaromarus, Stouslaus did first leave
his Principality to his Brother Geromarus, unto whom being a Christian Prince
of Rugia, ^^ldomarus King of Denmark married his Brother Canutus his daugh^er.
And thus Arcona and Charentina being wearied with continual wars, were not
yet quite extinguished or rased. But yet not long after the Princes of
Pomerania did raze it to the ground, because the King of Denmark had not
requited the Pomeranians for that aid which they lent them in subduing of
Rugia. But this Island which had heretofore strong populous Cities and Castles,
has now none at all, but only some few Towns, the chief whereof is Berga,
in which there are not above 400. Citizens: The other Towns, as Sagart, (...),
Bingst, and many others, are lesser. But yet this Island is well replenished
with Inhabitants, so that it can raise 7000. armed men on a sudden. In the
furthest part of the Peninsula Iasmunda Eastward, there is a very high
Promontory, which being hollow underneath, was formerly a safe harbor for
Pirates and Robbers at Sea, which they call De Stubben kamer. Not far from
thence on a woody Mountain, nere were some ruins of a strong Castle. Near
unto this Castle, is the deep black Lake, which albeit it has great store
of fish, The Lakes
yet they superstitiously believe, that it will not bear any Fisher-boats, or
suffer any Nets to be drawn through it: for some Fishermen having put a Boat
into it, the day before, and the next day afterward going to fish the Lake with
Nets, they could not find their Boat, whereupon being much amazed, and looking
every where about for it, straightway one of them espied the Boat lying on the
top of an high Beech tree: whereupon he cried out in their own language: what
Devil has laid the Boat on the top of the Tree? and by and by he heard these
words, though he could see no body: The Devils have not done this, but only I,
and my Brother Nicheli. Here is great scarcity of Wood for building of Ships
and Houses, The Woods.
but many places, and especially the Island Iasmund, in which there is a thick
Wood called De Stubhenitza, that is, a heap of Stubs of Trees, do yield
firewood enough for the whole Island: The Clergy here have both Meddowes, and
Fields of their own, and have also tithe Cattle, and tithe Corn. The
Nobility.
There are great store of Nobility in this Country, who are descended from
ancient Families, of which some are more hospitalious, and bountiful, and some
more sparing, some do addict themselves to the wars, and some to study, and
most of them do travel to foreign Princes, and Kings Courts, and do go to
Universities, and to the Wars. And so are chosen to be Governors, both in
foreign Countries and Provinces, and also in their own Country, in times of
war and peace, not only in Politic, but also in Ecclesiastic affairs. The
Country people also do live well in this Principality, who do only pay the
Magistrates a certain sum of money, and do certain services, and some of
them do none at all. And let so much suffice concerning the Island and
Principality of Rugia.

THE KINGDOM AND ELECTORSHIP OF BOHEMIA.
The Country whence so called.
BOHEMIA, Boemia, or Bojemia, as some would have it, was so called from the Wood
Hercynia. For in the Germane language Baum, and in Dutch Boom signifies a tree:
the Graecians call it Baemia, and Ptolomy calls the Inhabitants Bami: and
Strabo Lib. 7. calls them Kolduli. Some would have it so named from the
Bojans, who fled and transmigrated thither, which seem to be so called from
Bois, that is, from Wood. Ptol. lib. 2. cap. 11. in his description of Germany,
does place the Bamians under the Wood Harcynia, being a great Nation spreading
even to Danubius: Strabo calls it Bubiemium: for so Rhenanus, Aventine, and
others do read it: The Situation.
but yet in the Grecian printed Copies it is called Boviasmon, but Rhenanus
thinks this to be a corrupt reading of it: and Causabon notes that in
ancient Books it is called Bovialmon. Tacitus calls it Bojemum. On the East
it has the Marcomannians and Quadians: on the West the Noricians: on the South
the higher Pamonia, now called Austria, and on the North it is bounded with
Saxony, and Misnia. The Wood Hercynia does encompasse it round about, and
encloseth it in manner of a Roman Amphitheater. So that the length and breadth
is all one, being above two hundred mile broad, The temper of the air.
and as many long. The air, in regard the Country stands Northward, is cold
and sharp, but yet wholesome. But the soil yields such great store of Barley
and Wheat, so that it furnishes, and supplies other Countries. But it has but
little Wine, and that which grows there is very tart, and sharp. It has
excellent Saffron both for color and sent. The quality of the soil.
This Country also yields very rich Drugs: yet it has no Oil, nor any other
parts of Germany. It has many rich mines, the chief whereof are in the
Countries of Cromelaw, Budeveisz, and Kuttenberg. Also near the Town Beraun
there are Iron Mines. And in other parts it has Tin, Lead, and Brass. And
moreover it has Carbuncles, and Amethists which are taken out of the Oar.
Moreover there are great store of wild Beasts for hunting, as Foxes, Bears,
Hearts, and wild Oxen, which they call in their language Lomi. And they report
that this wild Beast Lomi, when he is hunted, fills a Bladder, which he
has beneath his neck, with hot water, and therewithal he sprinckles the
Dogs that follow him, which burns whatsoever it touches like scalding water,
so that it will make the hair and skin come of. This Country was governed at
first by a Duke. The ancient government.
The first Duke was Zechus, who coming out of Crotia, did first establish this
Country of Bohemia. After him succeeded Crocus, and his Daughter Labussa with
her Husband Primislaus, after him Nimislaus and his Nephew Mnato, and Vrislaus
the Son of Mnato, also Necla, Noctericus, and Borsinous. In whose time
Bohemia received the Christian faith in the year 900. in the time of map of
Bohemia THE KINGDOM AND ELECTORSHIP OF BOHEMIA.
the Emperor Arnulph, but in the year of our Lord 1086. Bohemia^ was made a
Kingdom, and in the Counsel at Moguntine, Vratisslaus the first was created
King by the Emperor Henry the fourth, and Gilbert Bishop of Trevers was sent
to Prague, to annoint the King in the presence of the people, and to invest him
with the Royal ornaments, his wife also Swatana was crowned Queen. But
afterward it fell to be a Dukedom again, when it came to Vratislaus the
fourth, who for his service in the Mediolanian expedition was created by the
Emperor Frederick, King of Bohemia, and an associate in the Empire: and had
given him for his arms a red Lion with a forked tail in a white Field, from
whom some Emperors descended, after that Bisetislau^ had carried away Iutha
the Daughter of the Emperor Otho the II. whence they began to be a kin to
the Emperors. The King of Bohemia is one of the seven Electors. Bohemia has
some Cities, which are subject to the King, and some to the Lords and Nobles.
The chief City is Prague, which was walled about by Primislaus the third Duke
of Bohemia, and his wife Libusla. It has the Castle Visegradum, or Herschin,
which is seated on a Mountain. The whole City is divided into three Cities,
the Higher, the New and the Less. The River Muldavia does separate old Prague
from the new, in which there is a Castle, and the Cathedral Church of Saint
Vitus: and these two parts of the City are joined together with a stone Bridge
of 24. Arches, which was built by King Vladislaus. The Emperor Charles the IV.
and the King of Bohemia, did much adorn and enlarge this City. The Castle
stands on a very steep Hill. In the Church of the Castle, there is an
Alablaster Monument wrought with curious workmanship, in which diverse Princes,
and Emperors have been buried. Ptolomy would have it called Casurges:
Aventinus, Marobudum: and Strabo, Bubienum. In the year 1370. King Charles
erected here an Academy or University, which continued until the year 1308.
And afterward by reason of a faction which arose it was translated to Lipsia.

The City Egra is situated in the first entrance into Bohemia, which was so
named from the River Egra by which it was seated. It was heretofore subject to
the Roman Empire, but now to the Kingdom of Bohemia. It is fair and
beautiful: within it has fair houses, and civil, courteous, and magnificent
Citizens. And without it has pleasant Orchards, and fruitful Fields, and a
River full of Fish. This City is famous for a kind of drink called Mede,
which is made of Honey. The chief Towns of Bohemia, toward Moravia, are
Mutha, Chrudima, Hradecium, Pardubitium, Litomossium, and from thence toward
Noricia, there are Glatovia, Dornazlicium, Misa, and Tacovia. On the South side
the chief Towns are, Budvicium, Crumlovia, Trebonia, Hadrecium Henrici: and
on that side which is toward Misnia, it has these Towns, Pons, Cadana,
Chomutavia, and Austio. And these Towns are near the confines of Slacia,
Hiaromirium, Glacium, Curia, and some others. The Inland Towns are Cuthna,
Colen, Pelsina, Verona, Zatecium, Launa, Slana, Lytomericum, Taborium. The
chief Rivers are Albis, which they call Labe, it breaks forth of the
Mountains near the City Aust, and has great store of Salmons. There is ^lso
Multavia, which Ptolemy calls Cassurgis, and the Germans Molea, ^^^d the
Inhabitants Vltauva, there are also the Rivers Egra, Sassava, ^^sera, Misa, and
others, some whereof have fine sands of gold, and ^^^e of them have shells, out
of which they get Pearls. The Mountains Sudetae do encompasse Bohemia on the
South, and West. The Mountain Pinifer, which is so called from the abundance
of Pines growing there, which rises in the Mountains of the Marquiship of
^udenburg between Franconia, Voitlandia, and Bohemia, in the compase of two
miles, does send forth four famous Rivers, toward the ^^^e parts of the
World, namely, Moenus in Francia, Sala in Turingia, John^ in Bavaria, and Egra
in Bohemia. This Mountain also has Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, Iron, and
Brimstone. It has also Mines (...) Precious-stones. The whole Country is as it
were walled about with Woods, of which that part which lies between the West
and the North, Strabo calls the Wood Gabreta, and Ptolemy Galrita. But the
part which stretches from the South to Danubius, Ptolemy called the Moons
Wood, but now it is called Passavica Silva, or Der Pass^er^aldt: on the West,
where it joyneth to Moravia it is called Der^^^. The Emperor Charles in the
year 1361. did devide the Kingdom of Bohemia into 12. Countries, which are
governed by Captains and Barons, who do first decide small controversies; and
secondly, if there be any thieves, they may call the Nobility to aid the^ in
suppressing of those Robbers: and at last in time of wars, ^very one
repaireth to his own Captain. I find that the Bur^^i^e of Carlstein is in
this Kingdom, where the Crown of the Kingdom is kept. There are these
Countries Lob^^^es, Hassenstain, Litzkaw, Camethaw, Passau, Melnic, Rosenberg,
Halretz, Dominia, Hasenburg, Leip, Perstain, Dobitschaw, Walstain, (...),
Dachaw, Totsnick, Wartenberg, Schellenberg, Kost, Schmirits, Lissaw, (...),
Dessaw, Schonpeck, Slawa, Grossen Bora, Liebenstain, Ioppendorff, ^al^e, and
Colourat, some of which are Counties: also the Baronies of Tr^chenberg, and
Millusch. Prague was made an Archbishops seat by Charles King of Bohemia, and
Emperor of Germany, and the Bishop ^^ Litomisliens was made his Suffragan. I
come unto their manners: concerning which John Dubravius writes thus. The
Bohemians in their manners and habit, do show a kind of Lion-like courage,
under which sign Bohemia lies, whether you consider the great sta^ute of the
Bohemians, or their strong broad breasts, or necks coverd with stiff yellow
hair: or their great voice, or glistering eyes, (...) their courage and
strength. Moreover the Lion is wont to swell i^ contempt of other beasts, and
cannot be disarmed especially if you (...) upon him by force. Neither does the
Bohemian degenerate from ^^em in this also, for he contemns others both in
word and deed, and shows much pride and arrogance both in his gate and
gesture. And ^^ is most fierce, when he is roughly entreated: Moreover he is as
h^ld as a Lion in any enterprise, and stout and hardy in the Execution: (...)
yet he is ambitious and vainglorious. And besides he is as hungry and sharp
as a Lion, and immoderate in his Diet.

THE MARQVISHIP OF MORAVIA.
MORAVIA, commonly called Marnhern, does confine on Polonia Westward. It is so
called from the River Moravia which runs through this Country. The Country
whence so called.
The Ancients did call it Marcomannia, because (...) did border Germany on that
part, where Danubius glideth toward Pannonia. For in the Germane language
Marck signifies a limmit or bound, and thos^ which dwelt there were called
Marcomanni, the Inhabitants of the Frontiers or Marches: as Dubravius thinks.
But Arrianus says thus* The last (says he) of these Nations, are the Quadians
and Marcomannia^ after them the Iazyges, or Sarmatians, then the Getes, and
lastly, a great part of the Sarmatians. And it appears manifestly that this
Moravia was the Seat of the Marcomannians, because near the Rive^ Hana, the
Husbandmen as they were ploughing did often find ce^taine coins of the
ancient Roman Emperors, as of M. Amonin^^ who as Histories do witness did
conquer and subdue this Nation* There was also money taken from the enemy as a
booty, with this In^scription: De Marcomannis. There are some do conjecture by
the Etymology of the word, that the Marcomannians did possess that Province
of Germany, which is commonly called Die Marck, or the Marquiship of
Brandenburg, beyond Albis toward the Ocean, for the Inhabitants thereof are
called Die Marcker, that is, Marcomannians, a^^ it were Marcmenner: some say
the Marcomannians were so name^ from Horses, as we call Mareschalcus a Prefect
of the Horse, and Marstaller a Master of the Horse: for Marrha and Merrhen do
signify i^ the Germane language a Horse and a Mare: whence they translat^
Merrhenlandt, the Country of Mares. But the former reason is more probable.
Moravia as it is now, is bounded on three parts of it wit^ Mountains, Woods,
Forests, or Rivers; on the East from Hungari^^ on the West from Bohemia, on
the North from Silesia. For on the South toward Austria it is plain ground,
and in some places it is parted from it by the River Thaysa, and in other
places by a small Rive^* The air of this Country is gentle and warm, The
Climate.
and so more subjec^ to corruption. And as this Country is populous, so it
yields great store of Corn and Wine, The fruitfulness of the soil.
and all things necessary for man's use. (...) has also great store of Saffron.
The inward part of the Country ^ Champion ground, the Fields are of a fat and
fruitful soil, an^ therefore good for tillage, there are Hills crowned with
Vineyard^ and in regard it has a better soil for Vines than Bohemia,
therefore map of Moravia THE MARQVISHIP OF MORAVIA.
it excels it for goodness and plenty of Wine. It is all tille^ so that
there is no part left for feeding of Flocks and Cattle, unle^^ it be in the
Woods and Deserts. The Mountains Sudetae near t^^ City Igla are thought to
be full of Mines. Moreover, it is wonde^full, that there is Frankincense and
Myrrh in Moravia, which do^ not distill out of a sweating Tree, as in other
parts, but is dug o^ of the ground, especially in one place called Gradisco,
in whi^^ there is both male and female Frankincense. But of late Veceslaus a
Nobleman, as he was laying the foundation of the head (...) a Fish Pond in his
own grounds at Sterenberg, found the whole bod^ of a man, which was nothing
but Myrrh. This Country was her^tofore adorned with the title of a Kingdom,
and it had former Kings, who governed all Bohemia, and Poleland, and it was a
very larg^ and potent Kingdom. About the year of Christ 700. Zuantocop^ did
possess Moravia, Bohemia, Silesia, and Poleland, and the Dukes the^^ of were
subject unto him. But he being proud of his large Terr^tories, did deny to pay
the Emperor that tribute, which he ha^ sometime paid to Lodovick King of
Germany. So that the King man wars upon him, but he drew up great forces to
defend himself. The Hungarians were as it were a bolt or bar, which the Kin^
of Moravia had placed, to shut up the passage that way. The Emp^rour who
purposed not to depart from Moravia without victory, pe^ceiving where they were
aided, opened a passage to Hungaria, an^ let in the Turks amongst them, who
did grievously afflict this Province. And so the Emperor using the Turks
Forces, did suppres^ the King of Moravia, and having made a great slaughter,
and take many prisoners, he put him to flight. Who by this means escaping
betook himself to a thick Wood, and having cast away his roya^ Robes and
apparel, he went to a Hermit, with whom he lived ^ solitary Hermits life
until his death, and then he discovered wh^ he was, and so slept in Christ.
After that the Princes of Bohemia Poleland, and Silesia, had every one Dukes of
their own, yet they pay^ some tribute to the Emperor. At the same time, when
Michael wa^ Emperor of Greece, there came Cirillus Doctor and Apostle of al^
S^lavonia, together with Merodius, who laid the foundation of the Christian
faith in Moravia; and erected an Episcopal Church it the Town Vielagrad. So
that being called and summoned by the Pope to answer why they read Mass in the
Sclavonian tongue, they answered, because it is writtten. Omnes Spiritus laudet
Dominum. Le^ every spirit praise the Lord. But afterward Moravia was governed
by Dukes, and Marquisses, and it is now divided, so that the better part of it,
and almost all of it is subject to the Kings of Bohemia: the other part is
subject to Barons and Lords. The chief head-Citty o^ this Marquiship is
Brunna, which the Germans call Brin, and the Bohemians Brino, and some do
call it Olmuzium, and Olomontium, it is a Bishops Seat, and heretofore it was
called Volograd. It has also many other fair walled Cities, as Zwoyma,
Radisch, Iglavia, Nova Civitas, Niclosburg, Mons Nicolai, Weiskirchen, Cremser,
Boserlitz, heretofore a Marquiship, and many others, which may be found in the
Table o^ Card. The chief Rivers in Moravia, are Morava, or Maravaha, Ptolomy
call it Ciabrus: it is commonly called die March, which flows by ^^e chief
City Olomuzium, and so running into Pannoniae, it falls at last into
Danubius. It is thought that this River named the Coun^ry, but it is more
likely that the Country named the River. The o^^er chief Rivers are Theya, or
Deins, which Dubravius calls Tharsa, and some Thysia. It flows by Zuoyna,
which is memorable in regard that the Emperor Sigismund dyed here, and it does
border Mo^^^ia and Austria. The River Igla, whence the City Iglavia is so
called, does devide the Maravanians from the Bohemians, and does ^^^er also
into Maravania. But the River Odera, which rises not ^^re from Olomuzium, does
keep his own name until he falls ^^to the Ocean: Some suppose that
Ptolomy does call it Viadrum. They called Odera by a word borrowed from
Fowlers, who set down ^ering Glasses to catch and allure Birds to their Nets,
which they ^ll O^^i, and the Fowlers do now set down such Glasses in Mora^^
by the Fountain of Odera. Neither can we pass by Hama, although it be a
small stream, yet it waters those Fields, which ^^e the fruitfullest in all
Moravia, so that the Husbandmen in regard of their great plenty of Corn which
they yield, do call them the ^^ght or eye of Moravia. And also Gold and Silver
coins of M. An^^^, and Commodus, and some other of the Emperors, are very
(...) found in these parts, which are manifest tokens of the wars which the
Romans had against the Marcomannians in Moravia. There is also the River
Nigra, commonly called Suarta and Suittaw, which does glide by the City
Brunna, and is next in esteem to Olo^^i^^. These Rivers have great store of
diverse kinds of Fish. This Country is not so Mountainous as Bohemia, neither
is altogether plain. Ptolemy places here the Wood Orcynium, and the Wood
Ga^^a. The Inhabitants are very rude, and do use a mixed kind of speech. But
they speak just the Bohemian language, for the Germane speech is only used in
Cities, and that among the Nobles and chief men. In other matters Dubravius
says that they are like the Bohemians in their rites and manners. In the
Villages of this Country there do dwell diverse Anabaptists, who profess that
there ought to be a community of all things. Mercator places these Counties in
Moravia, Huckenwaldt, Schonberg; and these Signiories or Lordships, Lomnicz,
Dubrantiz, Gemnicz, Walstain, Picenix, Neuhauss, Telesch, Boekowitz, Trebitsch,
Dernowitz, and Ragetz.

THE ARCHDVKEDOME OF AUSTRIA.
The third Circle of the Empire is AUSTRIA, in which there are two Orders.
THe next that follows in our method is Austria, call heretofore Pannonia the
higher. The name of Aus^ as Wolfgangus Lazius witnesses, is but of late time,
being called so either from the South wind, which is f^^quent in that Country,
or from the Germane wo^^ Oostreich, for so the Frenchmen called the Easter^
bounds of their Kingdom, as they called the Western bounds W^reich. But that
which the Frenchmen called Oostreich was situated the Rhene, and called
afterward Austrasia, which name having ^^ they called it Pannonia, as Lazi^s
testifies. Lib. 1. Cap. 11. Common ^^ Anst. Moreover the Austrians are
descended from the Frenchm^^ and Saxones, who by the sword got this Country
from the Hung^rians. Austria has on the East Hungaria: on the South the
Mo^^taines of Styria, which do run out with one continued Bri^^ from the
Alps into Hungary, and other Countries beyond it; it ha^ on the East Bavaria,
and on the North the Rivers Tejus and Moran^ It has a mild pleasant air, and
wholesome in regard that the E^^ wind does purify it. The soil is very
fruitful, and not chari^able in tilling. For the Husbandman, in that part
which is call^^ Campus Transdanubianus, or the Fields beyond Danubius, will
ploug^ the ground with one poor lean Horse. The Austrians do a^ know what
Marle is, with which the barren lean Fields in B^^^ are manured. All the
Country has excellent Wine, which i^ pure then the Germane wine, and weaker
then the Spanish wine, which i^ does transport to Moravia, Bohemia, Silasia,
and Bavaria. Besides it hat^ excellent good Saffron. It has also abundance of
Silver, but no Gol^ it has Salt also which is partly made at home, and partly
imported a^^ brought in from other parts. The Earls of R^benberg did sometime
govern Austria, the first was Lupold, whom the Emperor Ot^ the second created
Marquess of Austria; whose Line being extinct, Rudolphus of Habspurg, who was
elected Emperor in the yeer^ 1280. did govern it, and made it a Dukedom. And
Frederick the second made it a Kingdom. The arms of this Country were
heretofore five golden Larkes painted in a Sky-colour Field: but the Marquess
Lupold the V. has new Arms given him by the Empir^ which were set forth in
white and red colors, because his Buckle^ was so bloody in the Battle
against Ptolomies, that it was all bloody even to the bend which went cross
the Scutchion. Moreove^ map of Austria THE ARCHDVKEDOME OF AUSTRIA.
Austria is divided into the higher and the lower, the latter whereo^ is
situate beyond Danubius, and the former on this side. It has also the Dukedom
of Styria, which lies between the Rivers Danubius Muer, and Mietz, the
Inhabitants whereof do partly use the Germane speech, and partly the
Sclavonian. It has also the Dukedom of Carinthia, which is situate between
the Rivers Muer an^ Draicus: and also Carmina Southward. The chief City of
Austria i^ Vienna, which the Sarmatians and Windians did inhabit, before the
birth of our Savior Christ, after whom there succeeded the Boijans Senonians,
and others, whom Tiberius Nero did reduce into a Province: Antoninus calls it
in his Itinerarie Vindebona, and Ptolemy call it Iuliobona, and both of them
do place the tenth Germane Legion there, for many ancient Monuments, both
within and without the City do witness that it was seated in that place. To
this Legio^ from the Color or Ensign belonging to it, the name of ^ Lark was
given: whence it seems that the Marquess of Austria had their Arms at the
first, which are five Larkes. And Otto of Frisingen Lib. 1. Histor. Frid. cap.
32. calls it Faviana. For he says, Dux tunc demum terga hosti dare
compellitur, and periculis belli exemptus in Vicinum opidum Viennis, quod olim
a Romany inhabitatum Fabiana Dicebatur, declinavit. Tha^ is, The Duke was put
to flight by the enemy, and was feign to retire to the Town Vienna, which when
the Romans did heretofore inhabit it was called Fabiana. You may read the like
in the History o^ Severinus Bishop of Vienna. Lazius says that Strabo calls
it Vendum Iornandes calls it the City Pannonia: and in the Sclavonian
language it is called Wien Wydme. Ortelius writes that he learned out of D.
Carolus Rimius, who was sometime Orator to Zelimus the great Turk, that the
Turks do call this City Betz. Leunclavius calls it Wetsch, and Beetz: It
is a fair City situate by the River Danubius, and encompassed with a strong
wall, so that Vienna is a well fortified and a strong Bulwark against the
Turks. The Suburbs are great, and large. The Citizens have fair magnificent
Houses, which are adorned with Pictures, and strongly built. There are many
great fair Churches built of Freestone, and arched with diverse Pillars. Their
Wine-cellers are so deep and large, that they have as much building under the
ground as they have above ground. Their streets are paved with hard stone, so,
that Cart-wheeles cannot wear them. It has great store of Corn and Wine, so
that in the time of Vintage for 40. days together they do use 1200. Horses to
carry Corn and Wine in Carts. It received the Christian Religion in the year
466. by the preaching and instruction of Severinus, who built two Churches
there. The History of this City may be found in Lazius, and Otto of Friburg.
Frederick the second did adorn, and enlarge this City, as also all the other
following Dukes of Austria. The Emperor Frederick did erect there an
University for all Arts and Sciences, which was afterward renewed by Albert
Archduke of Austria, in the year 1356. But afterward through sedition it was
ruinated. These were famous men in Vienna, namely Wolfgangus, Lazius, Medius,
an Historian to the Emperor Ferdinand: also Julius Alexandrinus, Mathias
Parinat^r, also John Haselbach was Professor of Divinity in the University of
Vienna, who was so large in the explanation of that which he propounded to his
audience, that he preached twenty years out of the Prophet Esaiah, and yet he
was not come to the end of the first Chapter. This City is famous for the
Citizens valiant holding out against the Turks siege, in the year 1529. in
which 80000. Turks were slain. There is also in higher Austria Gmunda, which
is no great Town, but yet very neat and pleasant, situated by a Lake which is
called from thence the Lake Gmunda, out of which Dravus a River of Austria
rises. At Gmunda there is great store of Salt, which is dug out of the
neighboring Mountains, and so being brought to Gmunda in little Vessels
(which in their Country speech they call Kivelin) it is transported by the
River Dravus unto Danubius, and so from Vienna it is transported to other
Cities of Austria, Hungaria, Stiris, and Carinthia, to the great gain and
commodity of the Gmundians. It is watered also with many Rivers; the chief
whereof is Daubius, which was heretofore the limmiting bounds of the Country,
but now it cutteth through the middle of it. The other Rivers are ^^^osinus,
Genus, or Onasus, Tranus, Traunus, and Erlaphus, which arises out of a
pleasant Lake, by the River Cella famous for the Church of the Virgin Mother:
there are also the Rivers Traisius, Ypsius, Melicus, Marchia, and Tejus, which
devideth Moravia from Austria, also Cambus which is full of diverse kinds of
Fish, and Leytha: also Suegadus, in which there are excellent Crabs, and
others. It has many Mountains, the chief whereof are the Mountain Cecius,
commonly called Calenberg, which extends from Danubius even to the River
Dracus, the parts of it are Schneberg, Semering, Kemperg, Hertperg, Deusperg,
He^sterg, Plaitz: Also Cognanus now called der Haimburgerperg, which reaches
from Danubius to Arabon. It has also some woods which are parts and pieces of
the wood Hercinia, and the Moons Wood: And they are now called der Freystetter
und Konigwiserwaldt. But let us proceed to other matters. In the City of
Vienna, twelve Magistrates do daily sit in Judgment. Of which four are of
the Clergy, the Official of the Bishop of Patavia, the Official of the
Bishop of Vienna, the Deane of the Cathedral Church, and the Rector or
governor of the University. There are also four Citizens, and four out of
the City. The chief whereof are these whom they call Regimentum, where all
lower Austria do bring their suits and causes to trial, and they call the
Court the Exchequer, whether all the accounts of the Province are brought. The
rest are subject unto them, and causes are removed and brought from them to the
higher, the Senate of the Province does appeal to the ordinary of the
Province, the Senate of the City with the Consul does appeal to the City
Praetor, the Judgment of Custom, and the Merchants Praetor, which they call
the Landgrave, concerning which matter Wolfgangus Lazius, of Vienna does
discourse at large in his Vienna. Austria is the third Circle of the Empire, in
which there are two Orders. In the first there are the Clergy, as the Bishops
of Trent, of Brixen, of Goricen, of Segovia, of Labachia, of Vienna, Teutsch
Ordens Meister, Ordens Master in Eischtall. In the second are the secular
Princes, as the Archduke of Austria, Count Schaumberg, the Barren of
Wolkenstain, the Lord Senster, the Lord Roggendorff, Count Hardkeck. And
besides the Princes of the Empire, there are in Austria, the Counts of Thurn,
Crentz, Ortenburg, Perneck, Garb, Freyhern, Landskron, Wanberg, Hohen,
Osterwitz, Newberg, Guetenhag, Teuffenbach, Mairhofen, Awersperg, Dorneck,
Saraw, Hartenstain, Schwartzenaw, Turnstain, Wachanthall, Hoffkirchen, Eyizing.
The Lordships also are Aichelperg, Liechtenstain, Puchaim, Luetkurt, Porges,
Schoukirchen, Shifftenberg, Altensperg, Hornstein, and Setbersdorff.

THE BISHOPRIC OF SALTZBVRG.
THe Bishopric of Saltzburg is so called from the Metrapolitan City
Saltzburg. The Country whence so called.
Francis Irenicus makes this the chief of the five Bishoprics of Bavaria.
The Country whence so called.
This Territory is enriched with all kind of Metals, as Gold, Silver, Brass,
and Iron. Here is also Roren, Brimstone, Allom, and Antimony. There are also
Mines of Marble. The plain ground is ^it for planting of Vines or Tillage. The
Mountains do afford great store of game for Hawking and Hunting. Munster does
name 58. Bishops of Saltzburg, the last was Ernest Count Palatine of Rhene,
Duke of Bavaria, the Son of Albert and Ku^egundis the Daughter of the
Emperor Frederick. Moreover in the time of Arno the tenth Bishop hereof, it
was made an Archbishop by Leo the third, and it has under it these Suffragan
Bishops, the Bishop of Trident, of Patavi^, of ^e^^, of Gorcensa, of Brixen, of
Frisingen, of Seccovia, of Lavintiniam, and the Chyenensiam. The Metrapolis or
Mother City is Sal^^burgum, or Salt^burgum, it is commonly called Saltzburg,
from the River Saltzach: though some suppose that it is called Saltzburg, from
the Salt which is ^^gged near unto it. There is also Iuvancia, or Iuvavia, or
Iuvaviam, which was so called a juvando, from helping, and in the Germane
language Helffenberg, because Julius Caesar built a Castle there, to be a
defense and refuge to his Legions against the Germans whom he intended to
conquer, and subdue. For it is reported that the Romans slew 3400000.
Germans, and took 1500000. Prisoners. Some think that I^vavia was so called
from the River Iuvavius, which runs near unto it. It is called also the
Iuvensian Castle, as Pighius shows. Aventinus affirms out of ancient
writing, and records that it was that which Ptolomy calls Paedicum, and that
there is a Village still re^aining of that name. But Francis Irenicus writes
that it is Ptolomies ^^^^darum, or Badacum, unto whom Volateranus does also
assent. Au^aicus his Itinerary makes mention of Iuvaria. But Gasper Bruschia^
does think that the name Helffenberg is more ancient than Iuvavia* and from
thence it was called Iuvavia, which signifies the same. Pighi^^ writes, that
he read these Verses in a Church of this City: Tunc Hadriana vetus, quae post
Iuvavia dicta,
Prasidialis erat Noraci^, and Episcopo digna
Ruberti seeds, qui fidems coni^^it illis
Christi, quam retinet, Saltzbargum sero vocata.
Then Hadrian, which they did after call
Iuvavia was a seat Praesidiall
Of the Noricians, and a Bishopric it has
Where Robert taught them first the Christian faith,
Which since that time the people do retain,
And now of late they do it Saltzberg name.


For Rupert, or Rudpert, Bishop of Worms, being descended of the Royal Line
of France, when he was droven out of his seat after the death of King
Childerick, about the year of Christ, 540. came to Ratisbon to Theodon Duke of
Bavaria, whom he instructed, and baptized, and by his persuasions going forward
to Noricum, he converted many to the Christian faith. And out of the ruins of
the old Iuvavia he built a Church in honor of Saint Peter, and a Monastery of
the Order of S. Benedict, and he was Bishop here 45. year, and dyed in the
year of our Lord 1123. This City is situated on the middle of the Alps,
being strongly walled, and adorned with many fair public, and private
Buildings. It was heretofore a Royal seat, when it was proud of her high
Pinacles and Churches. It is now an Archbishops seat, which was first
instituted at Laureacum, then transported to Patavium, and lastly hither. This
City has Marshes, Plains, Hills, and Mountains. The fertility.
The Marshes do make good Meddowes, and the Mountains afford good Hawking
and Hunting. In this City in an Hospital near Saint Sebastians, there is the
Monument or Tomb of Theophrastus, a most famous Physician, with this Epitaph.
Conditu^ hic Philippus Theophrastus insignis Medicinae Doctor, qui dira illa
vulnera, lepram, podagram, hydropisin, aliaque insanabilia corporis contagia
mirifica art sustulit, a^ bona sua in pauperes distribuenda collocandique
ordinavit. Anno 1551. di^ 24. September. vitam cum morte commutauit. That is,
here lies Philip Thaeophrastus a famous Doctor of Physic, who by his
wonderful Ar^ caused these grievous diseases, the Leprosy, the Gout, the
Dropsy, and other incurable infirmities of the body, and gave order that his
goods should be distributed and divided among the poor. He dyed in the year
1551. on the 24. day of September. This Country is watered with an innumerable
sort of Rivers, and Rivalets, which do flow out of the Mountains. The Rivers.
The River Anassus does run Northward, which the Rivers Altzius, Saltzius, and
Mathicius do enlarge, by mingling their streams with it. Traunus rises in
the same place out of the Lakes. Hence also Mur and the noble River Dravus do
spring and arise, the latter Pliny. lib. 3. cap. 25. does mention, and says,
that it rises out of Noricum. The other lesser Rivers do run into those
Rivers which I mentioned before. The Country is Mountainous, and full of
Hills, which the Inhabitants do call Taurn, as the Mountains
Radstatterthaurn, The Mountains.
Felbergthaurn, Kornthaurn, Casteinerthaurn, and many others which are so high,
that those who go to the top of them, do find the air very cold in the
midst of Summer ^ no Cart or Wagon can pass over them, for the paths and
ways are narrow, and sometime so steep, that a Carriers Horse can scarce
pass that way, but are in great danger as they ascend the Hill, for sometimes
sudden winds do fling men down headlong, and great flakes of Snow do fall
down, and kill Horses, and beat down Houses near unto them to the ground.
Many Rivers do flow ou^ map of Saltzburg THE BISHOPRIC OF SALTZBVRG.
of these Mountains, which we have mentioned before. And besides the aforesaid
Alps, it has the Alps on the South, which they call Albis: and have diverse
names, as Villacher Albin, Swanberger Albin, etc. There are also the Mountains
Creutzberg, and Lettachberg, which have metal in them in the Vale Oevinus, of
which Conradus Celtes. lib. Amorum. 2. Odo. 6. sings thus.

Qui mihi de celsis nuper fuit Alpibus actus
Oenus ubi, atque Athesis murmura rauca facit.
Argenti aeterno scaturit qua vena Metallo
Et ditat totam patriam Alemanicam.
Hic halant liquido puro and de font Salinae
Ditantes Bavaros, Austriacosque Duces.
Hic turba est tetrae nigraeque simillima morti,
Qui solvunt vastis ignibus era suis.
Haud credas nostris decocta Metalla per ignem,
Sed Phlegetontaeis mundificata vadis.
Whom I did drive down from the Alps so high
Where Oenus, and Athesis run by
With a hollow murmour, where Silver vain
Enricheth all the Country of Alemaine^.
Here Salt does boil out of the pure spring,
Which to the Austrian Dukes much wealth does bring.
And the Bavarians, while a smooty crew
Do melt the Brass, as black as death in show.
You cannot think that fire does make it run,
But that it is refined in Phlegeton.
The Woods.
This Bishopric also has many woods, as the woods Hardio, Hendard, and Weyhard
which lie on the North. But let so much suffice concerning the Bishopric of
Saltzburg, it remains that we should speak something concerning the Dukedom
of Carinthia, which is contained in this Table.

The Dukedom of CARINTHIA.
The Country whence so called.
CARINTHIA, or Carnithia, (as Rithaimerus supposes it should be written) was so
called from the Carnians, who are the ancient Inhabitants thereof, whom both
Pliny and other Geographers do mention. But it is doubtful, whether they were
so called from Carnuntum an ancient Town, often mentioned by Authors, or
whether the Town was so denominated from them. There is a place in Pannonia,
almost seven miles distant from Vienna, where there are some ruins remaining
of a famous City, which is now called D. Petronell. Moreover, the Carniolians
are called in the Germane language, Karnten, Krain, Karst. This Country has on
the East and North Styria, on the West and South, the Alps Carniola is a part
of it: there are many Valleys and Hills in this Country which do yield great
store of wheat. Solinus cap. 30. says, The fertility.
that the Country Noricia is cold and unfruitful, but that part which is more
remote from the Alps is very fertile. The Metropolis of this Country is
Santo-Vicus, which is a fair City by the River Lana. It has a large
Marketplace, and a clear fountain of water. There is also the Town
Villacum, where the forepart of the houses are curiously painted with Histories
set forth in colors, which are very pleasant to behold. It is seated on a
plain by the River Dravus, and environed with high Rocks, and it has a ^one
Bridge: Clagenfurtum is a well fortified City, which as Lazius witnesses was
anciently called Claudia. Some do write that the Citizens of this City are so
severe and inexorable toward thieves, insomuch that upon suspicion of felony,
some have been put to death without trial, and three days after his
execution they araigne him, and if they find that he was not guilty they bury
him honorably, but if they find that he was guilty, they let him hang on the
Cross or Gallows. But Rithaymerus thinks it to be a fabulous report: there
is also Wolspergum which lies by the River Lavandus, also Santo Leonardus,
etc. There are many Lakes in this Country, The Lakes.
as Mulsettese, Ossiachersee, Werdsee, Lavandtsee, Iudenburgersee, Weisee. The
chief River is Dravus, which runs through Stiria and Pannonia into Danubus.
The Rivers.
The next unto it are Savo, Glana, Schleiniza, and Lavand, all which Dravus
does receive. Mura also runs into Dravus. But most of the aforesaid Rivers
have their Spring-heads and Fountains in this Country, which is every where
full of Mountains. For the high Alps, as Strabo writes, do run hither in
one continued ridge, The Mountains.
so that it seems one Mountain, which is sometimes lower, and sometimes
higher. I do think there are parts of the Mountain Taurus, which the
Inhabitants call by diverse name, on the West there is Gastein Taurn, Villacher
Taurn, Rastatter Taurn, and Karnen Taurn. But some of the Alps do keep their
own names, as Modringalbin, Serbisalbin, Sanalbin, etc. Dietzperg hangs over
the River Dravus, and above it there is the Mountain Argentatus, which the
Inhabitants call Silber Berg: in the Mountain Rasperg there are the Fountains
and Spring-heads of the Rivers Mura and Isara, the one running Southward, the
other Eastward. And between these high Hills of Taurus and the Alps, there
are many woods, which are parts of the wood Hercynia, as Hirschpuhl, Priewalt,
Adelwaldt, Eremus, commonly called in der Einod. The aforesaid Alps have Gold,
Silver, and Iron in them. Concerning the Ecclesiastical government it is
divided as Paracelsus says, between the Bishop of Saltzburg, and the
Patriarch of Aquilegium. Munster in his third Book of Cosmographie, and Pius
2. in his Europe, does describe a strange custom which they have in
inaugurating their Princes.

THE KINGDOM OF POLAND.
POLAND was so called from the Planesse of the Country, which they themselves
call Role. It is a very great Country: on the North side it has Borussia and
Pomerania, on the East Massovia, and Lithuania; on the South it is enclosed
with the Mountains of Russia, and Hungaria: on the West it has Lusatia,
Silesia, and Moravia; it is 480. Miles long, and three hundred broad. The air
of this Country is pure, but the Winters are cold and sharp. All the Country
is plain, and yields good store of Barley, Wheat, and Pulse. It has
abundance of fruits, Wax, Honey, and Butter. It has also great store of Sale
which is dug out of the earth. I and there are in these Mountains Mines of
Brass, which the inhabitants call Tatri, and also Mines of Brimstone. It has
also great store of Cattle, so that Saxony, and many Countries of Germany,
do live by Poland Oxen. There is great variety of living creatures, and great
store of cattle and wild beasts. It has wild Oxen, Buffones, Bulls, and wild
Horses, and Ounces, and the like. There are also great store of foul for
Hawking. Poland was dignified with the title of a Kingdom, in the year 1001.
in the reign of Boleslaus Chabri, who received his royal Diadem from the
Emperor Otto the third. But 77. years after, in the reign of Boleslaus
Audaci, or the bold, who cruelly murdered Stanislaus Bishop of Cracovia, the
Pope divested it of that dignity, and took it away. And it was made a Kingdom
again in the year 1295. and Primislaus the second Duke of the greater Poland,
and Pomerania was elected King. This Country is divided into the greater and
lesser Poland The greater is more Northward, and the River does part it in the
middle. The lesser is Southward, and the River Vistula runs through it. In
the greater Poland, the principal Cities are these Posnania by the Rivers
Varta, and Prosna, it is situate between the Hills, and walled with a double
wall, it has many fair tiled o^ slated houses: the Suburbs are large on the
farther bank of the River Varta, and encompassed with a great Lake, and
Marshes, it has even year two famous Faires, and it is a Bishops seat. It
has the Towns under it Koscien among the Marshes, which is 7. Miles distant*
Also Meidzyrzexze, in which the houses are built all of wood, and it is near
to Silesia and Pomerania. Also Ostresow, which is situate on plain between
the Woods, and the Towns Wschow, Sremck, Prene and Rogozno. Calisia is a
walled City, among the Marshes, the Riv^^ Prosna runs by it, and there are
some ruins of a Castle. Vnd^^ this City there are Gnesna, Pizary, Wartha,
Noklo, Land, Konin, Slupez and Kolo. Gnesna is walled about, and seated on a
Plain, between Lakes and Hills. This City was first built by Lechus, in which
Boslaus map of Poland THE KINGDOM OF POLAND.
Chabri Prince of Poland, received the Royal Diadem from the Emperor Otto the
third, which the Kings of Poland do still enjoy Siradia is a City built of
wood, walled about, and seated on a Plain Under it there are the Cities
Vielun^a, Sadeck, Petricovia, Rosprza, and Spicimiria. Petricovia is seated in
a moorish ground. Lancisia is a pleasant City walled about, and seated on a
plain. Under it there are Orlovia, Piatec, Bresma, Kornazew, Biechow, and some
other Towns. Cuiauia or Vladislauia is a fair City, and it has under it
Bistgostia by the navigable River Buda, by which commodities are transported
out of Poland into Vistula. Brestia has under it Raedzieiow, Crusphicia, and
Cowalow. Crusphisia is the chief City of all Poland next to mes^a, it is
built of wood, with a brick Castle, and it is seated by the Lake Goplo out of
which Lake Mice heretofore came forth, who by the just judgment of God did
devour Pompilius Prince of Poland in that Castle. Raua is a wooden City by
the River Raua, it has under it these Towns Sochaczouia, Gostinin, and
Gamhin. Ploozko is a pleasant City seated on a Hill by the River Vistula, it
is a Bishops seat: under it there are Bielsko, Raczyayaz, Steperoz, Strensko,
Mlawa, Plonsko, and Radzanow. Dobrinia is situated on a rock by the River
Vistula, it had a Castle which the Crucigerans did demolish. Under it there are
Slonsk, Ripin, and Gorzno. In the lesser Poland there are these Principal
Cit^ties, Cracovia, Sandomiria, and Lublinum. Cracovia is built on a Plain by
the River Vistula, (Peter Appiarus supposes it to be the same, which Ptolomy
calls Carrodunum) being walled with a double wall. It has a Castle on a high
rock, which they call Vanel. In this City the Kings of Poland keep their
residence, and are buried. It has also a University famous for study and Arts.
But the Cracovians, have no chief Advocate, so that the King himself is the
Praetor of Cracovia. There are three Cities near unto Cracovia, Clepardia,
Stradonia, and Casimiria. It has two Dukedomes under it, Biecz, Wonincz,
Sandecz, Lelow, Kzyaz, and Proszovice. Sandomiria is a principal City,
walled about, being situated on a Hill by the River Vistula, 22. Miles distant
from Cracovia. It has an ancient Castle, well fortified. Under which is
Che^i^y seated on a Plain, and famous for Mines of Blew, in which there is
also some silver found, also Korzin, Wislicia, Pilzno, Opoczno, Radomia,
Polonieck, Zannichost, Zarnow, and Mologost. Lublinum is a chief City,
well-fortified with a wall and a Castle. In which there are yearly three
Faires, to which both Turks, Armenians, Graecians, Germans, Moschovites,
Lithuanians, and others do resort, the River Bysterra does run by the
Castle. Under it there are Vrzendow, Lulow, Parcow, and Casimiria. Moreover the
Kingdom of Poland has many Lakes, in which there are all sorts of Fish. It is
watered also with many fair Rivers, the chief whereof is Vandalus or Vistula,
which the Germans call De Wixel. The next are Chronus, now called Pregell,
Nyennien, Ruhon, Viadrus, Varta, Tyras now called Nyester, Hypanis, now Bugh,
Borysthenes, now Nyeper, there are also many other small Rivers. There are
almost no Mountains, except Southward, where it is parted from Hungary by the
Sarmatian, and Carpathian Mountains which the inhabitants call Taury. The
Country is full of woods, which are parts of the wood Hercinia. But so much
hitherto. The Politic state of the Kingdom of Poland has 2. Members. The
first are the Clergy, in which are the two Archbishopricks of Gnesna and
Leopolis. The Bishops of Cracovia, of Ploczko, of Chelma, Vladislavia,
Pomesania, Varmia, (...), and Sambiensis, Posnonia. Proemislia, Cavenez, Vilna,
Medincque Luceo^^ In Livonia the Bishops of Riga, Dirpta, Absel, and Revalia.
Secondly ^^e Nobles, in which there are Castellanus Cracowviae: the Palatine of
Brevia, Posnania, Sandomiria, Kalischy, Siradia, Lancisa, Brezeste,
Inowla^^via, Russia, Podalia, Lublin, Belze, Plocense, Mozavia, Rava. Also in
^^^^nia the Palatines of Vilna, of Trochy Poletsho, Novogrod, and (...). Also
in Prussia, the Palitnes of Culma, Marienbourg, and Pomerania. The Counts are
of Posnania, and miria, Kalische, Voinice, Gnesne, Siradie, Lucise, Brizeste,
Inowladislavia, Leopolis, Camenezia, Lublin, Belze, Plocen^^, (...), Ravense,
Sandecia, Myedzeris, Vislicie, Biece, Rogostia, Radom, Zarichy, Landense,
Streme, Zarnowe, Molegost, Vielune, Premislia, Haine, Sa^^ Dobrine, Polaneice,
Premetense, Criswinense, Czecovia, Nacle, ^^rie, Byechovia, Bydgostia,
Brezezine, Crininice, Osvecimense, Camenetz, ^^^^rie, Inowlodense, Revalia,
Zavoloo, Sachazonia, Vasovia, Gostine, Vis^^, (...), Steprecense, Wisogrod,
Riprin, Zabrochzinense, Circhanouia, Li^^^, In Lithuania there are old
Palatines of Vilna, and Trochi. In Prussia of Calma, Elbingen, and Pomerania.
There are many Captains in the Kingdom of Poland. And two Mars-halls, of the
Kingdom and the Court. The Ecclesiastic does consist of these Archbishops and
Bishops aforesaid. The Noble men are very sharp witted, and they do travel
into foreign Countries to get knowledge, and languages. They are courageous,
and do not fear the stoutest Enemy, and if the Nobles do wrong them, all
their kinsfolks and friends do join with them to revenge it, and do never
cease until they have revengd it or lost their own lives. Lastly they are not
so liberal as Prodigal, both in Banqueting, and imoderate gifts, and also in
keeping a great retinew or number of Servants, whom they cloth and feed.

SILESIA.
ANd so much concerning the Kingdom of Poland, Silesia remains which I will
briefly unfold. It was so called from a River of the same name, as Conradus
Celtes witnesses. Others have other derivations. It is bounderd on the North
and East with Polonia: on the South with Moravia, and the Wood Hercynia, on the
West with part of Lusatia and Bohemia. It is 200. Mile long and 80. broad.
Though the air be somewhat cold, yet it is mild and gentle. The Country in
regard it is watered with many Brooks and Rivers is very fruitful in most
places, and it has in some parts Veins of Gold, Silver, Lead, and Iron, it
yields also clothing for it self, and many other Countries beside. The
Cities are well inhabited and adorned with Laws, and good Arts. The
Metropolis thereof is Vratislavia, some would have it to be that which Ptolomie
calls Budorchis, it is commonly called Breslaw, Duglossus writes that it was
built by Mieslaus Duke o^ Polonia, a little before the year of Christ, 1000.
And 40. years afterward it was adorned with a Bishopric by Casimirus King of
Poland and it increased so much, that the Bishops of this City were called the
golden Bishops, in regard of their wealth and riches. In the year 1341. it was
burnt down. But the Emperor Charles the third made it in stead of Brick, of
Gold. On the Steeple of St. Elizabeth's Church there is this Inscription.
Mirabilis in altis Dominus. The Situation, the beauty of the Houses, Towers,
and Churches, the fair Bridges, and large Streets, do much set forth this
City. Nissa is an Episcopal City. There are besides in this Country 15.
Dukes, Lignicensis, Bregensis, Teschinensis, Monsterhergensis, Olsvicensis, and
Beoustadiensis, and three ancient Families, namely, Ligvicensis, Teschinensis,
and Monsterhergensis. Tropaviensis, Opoliensis, Nissensis, Vratislavensis, or
Breslaum, Swinisensis, Hurensis, Glagoviensis, Ratibonensis, and Sagonensis.
But these latter honors the Kings of Bohemia since the decease of their Lords
have gotten. There are three Baronyes, namely, of Trachenberg, of Vertenberg,
and Plessensis. The Kings high Court in Silesia is kept at Vratislavia, where
there is a Bishops seat, as also at Kissa. Viadrus runs through this
Country, into which many Rivers and Streams, do flow, as Elsa, Ola, Bobrus,
Barusius, and others.

POLAND.
POLAND which is situate in the Europian Sarmatia is both long and wide, and
does take up a great part of it, it was so called from the Fields and plain
ground, for Pole signifies as much as Plain: it is a very great Country,
having on the North Borussia and Pomerania: on the East Massovia, and
Lithuania; on the South Russia, and the Mountains of Hungaria: on the West
Lusatia, Silesia, and Moravia. It is divided into the greater and lesser
Poland. The greater is more Northward, and the River Varta runs through the
middle of it. The lesser is Southward, and the River Vistula glideth through it.
The Polanders are descended from the Sclavonians, as Neugebaverus witnesses.
Lib. Rer. Polonicar. and their Kingdom was never so large as it is now,
because the great Dukedom of Lituania and Livonia are joined unto it, albeit
the King of Swethland has lately gotten a great part of these Provinces. It
reaches from the River Notes and Obra, which do devide it from Marchia, and
from the River Odera, which does part it from Silesia, even to Beresaia, and
Borysthones, which seperateth it from Moscovia, and so it extends West and
East 120. Germane miles, and as much from the farthest part of Livonia, to the
confines of Hungary. And so being of a round form, it is very wide and
capacious. There are in the greater Poland these principal Cities, Posnavia,
built by the Rivers Varta and Prosna between the Hills, with a double wall, it
has fair slated Houses, and great Suburbs by the farther bank of the River
Varta, being encompassed with a great Lake and Marshes, and having two famous
Faires every year, it is a Bishops seat, and has many Towns under it.
Calisiae is a walled City among the Marshes, by which the River Prosna
runs. It had sometime a strong well fortified Castle, as the ruins do
testify, there are other Towns also subject unto it. Gnesna is walled about,
being situate in a Plain between Lakes and Hills, and it is an Archbishops
seat. This City was first built by Lechus, in which Boleslaus Chabri Prince
of Polonia received the royal Diadem from the Emperor Otto the III. when
before that time Poland was only a Dukedom. Siradia is a wooden City,
walled and seated on a Plain, it has a strong Castle by the River Varta. This
City was honored with the title of a Dukedom, which dignity belonged to the
Kings second Son. It has also many Towns under it, among which is
Petricovia, which was heretofore of great note, where the Sessions for the
whole Kingdom were wont to be held, which are now translated to Warsavia.
Lancicia is a pleasant City, seated on a Plain, and walled about, having a
walled Castle on a Rock, by which the River Bisura glideth. Cujavia, or
Vladislavia, is a fair City, being a Bishops seat; Bidgostia is subject unto
it, which is seated by the navigable River Buda. Brestia has under it
Radzieiow, Crusphicia, and Cowalow. Crusphicia is the chief City of Poland
next to Gnesna, it is built of wood with a slated Castle by the Lake Golp^.
Rava is a wodden City situate by a River of the same name. Ploczko is a
pleasant City seated on a Hill by the River Vistula, in which there was a
Castle which the Crucigerians did demolish. In the lesser Polonia, the chief
Cities are these, Cracovia, Sandomiria, and Lublinum. Cracovia is built on a
Plain near the River Vistula, being fortified with a double wall and a deep
ditch. It has a Castle on a high Rock which they call Vanel, in this City
the Kings of Poland keep their residence and are buried. It has a famous
School for the study of Philosophy. The Castellanus of Cracovia takes place
of the Palatine in the Senate, but in other Provinces the Palatine is preferred
before the Castellanus. Moreover, there are three Cities near unto Cracovia,
Clepardia, Stradomia, and Cassimiria. It has two Dukedomes under it
Zarocensis, and Oswlec^mensis. It has many Towns under it. Sandomiriae is a
principal City, walled about and situate on a Hill by the River Vistula,
being 22. miles distant from Cracovia. It has an ancient Castle well
fortified, under it there are Checiny in a Plain, which is famous for Mines of
Blue, in which there is Silver also found, also Korczin, Malogost, and other
Towns. Lublinum is a City beyond Vistula, being fortified with a Wall, a
Ditch, a Lake, and a Castle. In which there are 3. Faires every year, unto
which both Turks, Armenians, Grecians, Germans, Muscovites, and Lithuavians
do resort. The Jews do ininhabite a great part of the Suburbs, and have a
Sinagogue there. The River Bystizna does run by the Castle Poland as we said
before is a plain Country, the most part of it is coverd with Woods, and it
yields good store of Barley, Wheat, and Pulse. It has abundance of Cattle.
It has Lakes which are full of all kinds of Fish. The chief Rivers are
Vistula, Viadrus, commonly called Odera, Tyres, now Niester, Hypanis, which is
called Bugh. Vistula, now called die Weixel, was heretofore called Vandalus,
some call it Issula, and Vissula. This River rises in the Carpathian
Mountains, and before it comes to Cracovia it is enlarged by the receipt of
many Rivers, and afterward being grown very deep and broad before it come to
Dantiscum, it discharges it self into the Codan Bay. Boristhenes so well
known of old, is now called Nieper. It has a few Mountains, and those
Southward where it looks toward Hungaria. The State of the Kingdom
consists of the Clergy and Nobles. The Ecclesiastic Order has two Bishops,
the Bishop of Ghesnia who is Primate of the Kingdom, who does also crown the
King, and the Bishop of Leopolis in black Russia. The Bishops are of Cracovia
in lesser Poland, the Bishop of Posnia in the greater Poland, and in other
Provinces the Bishops Plocensis, Chelmensis Vilnensis, Kioviensis, Lucensis,
Ianoucensis, Samogitiensis, Warmensis, Culmensis, Sambiensis, Pomasaniensis,
Rigensis, and others. The Polltick order of the Nobles has 26. Palatines, 60.
Counts, 4. Marshals, a Chancellor, and a Vicechancellor, two Generals or
Captains: in the lesser Poland there are forty common Captains, in the
greater 30. in Massovia 12. So that the kings when occasion requires, can raise
200000. Nobles. He that desires to know more concerning the state of this
Kingdom, let him have recourse to Stanislaus Kizistanowic his map of Poland
POLAND.
description of the State of the Kingdom of Poland: or to Guagninus or Boterus
their description of Germany, and Neugebaverus his Polonian History. There are
also in Poland Mines of Salt by Bochnia and Veliscus, which do exceed all
others. Veliscum is 8. miles distant from Cracovia. Bochina is a fair Town
with a Castle, where the Governor of the Saltpits dwells, who is called
Zupparius. The Country round about is barren, but this Country makes a greater
revenue out of these Mines, then some Countries do out of Gold and Silver
Mines. The people of Poland, especially the Nobles, do now differ much from
the Scythian barbarism of the ancient Sarmatians. They have no Robberies, so
that in Summer time they ride in Wagons, and in Winter time in Coaches,
safely, and without danger. Most of the Nobility are very sharp witted, and
do get experience and languages by traveling into foreign Countries. They
are courageous, and will not shun the stoutest enemy: if anyone be wronged by
the Nobles, all their kindred and friends do join together in revenging it,
and do never cease until they have revenged it, or lost their own lives.
Lastly, they are not so liberal a prodigal, both in their frequent Banquets,
and in the great retinue and number of Servants which they keep and clothe.

THE KINGDOM OF HUNGARY.
HUNGARIA, commonly called Hongeren (which name it received from the Huns or
Hungarians, who came out of Scythia, and did inhabit it, does contain
Pannonia, and the Countries of Iazigus and the Dacians, beyond Danubius. On the
South it has the River Sa^^^, which devideth it from Croatia and Servia, which
are a part of Il^^^ over against the Adriatic Sea. On the North it has Poland
and Russia, which are disjoined by the Mountain Carpatus. On the West it has
Austria, which was heretofore the head of the higher ^^^^nia, together with
Moravia, and Styria; on the East Mysia which (...) now call Rhetiana. It is an
excellent Country both for the goodness of the soil, and the pleasantness of
the Situation. The Country is very fruitful and fertile, and yields Pearls,
Gold, Silver, Colors, and Salt, which are to be dug out of the Earth. It
has abundance of Grass, Wheat, Pulse, and Fruit. That Country which (...)
Danubius does yield excellent wine, even from the Country of the five Churces
to Taurunus, or Belgrad. But there is no Oil, and accepting that, it is
adorned with all the gifts of nature. It has di^ets kinds of living
Creatures, having such great plenty both of Oxen, and Sheep, that great Droves
are carried into other Countries, especially into Italy and Germany. It has
also abundance of wild beasts, as Hares, Does, Goats, Hearts, Wolves, Bears,
and the like. And also great store of Birds, especially Thrushes, Partridges,
and Pheasants. The Paeonians or Pannonians did first inhabit this Country:
afterward the Goths, who were expulsed by the Huns; and the Huns by the
Longobards, who were seated here 13. years. (...) the Huns came in again
under the conduct of their Captain A^^^la: after whose death, Charles the
Great took it into his own possession. But in the year 700. the Huns coming
out of Scythia, in the Reign of the Emperor Arnulph, possessed those parts,
being Pagans until King Stephen, whom they called the holy, was inaugurated
and made King. And after him, even until our times Hungary did profess the
Christian Religion. Hungary does contain all the whole Country of Iazigus
Metanastarum, which Ptolemy circumscribeth or foundeth with Danubius Tibiscus,
and the Sarmatian Mountains. There are some ruins yet remaining, which by
contracting the word are commonly called Iaz. But they inhabit those parts
which (...) describes, and their speech differs from the Hungarian language.
The first King of Hungary, after the Christian Religion was established
therein, was Stephen surnamed the Holy, after whom there followed his Cousin
Peter, his Kinsman Andreas, also Bela, Solomon, Geysa, Ladislaus, Almus,
Stephanus the II. Bela Caecus. Geysa the II. Stephen the III. Bela the III,
Emericus, Ladislaus the II. and others, even until the time of the Emperor
Rudolphus, King of Hungary. The King of Hungary does govern his Kingdom by
two Magistrates: the higher is divided into three Magistrates, the first of
which governs the Kingdom in the Kings name, in which are the Palatine of
the Kingdom, who is next to the King, and judges the King if he be accused,
whom the people of the Kingdom do choose, neither is it an heriditary office.
Also the Judge of the Court, who is one of the ordinary Judges of the Kingdom.
The Chancellor, who is the Metropolitan of Strigonium, who is called the
Primate, and Secretary of the Kingdom, and he has power to annoint the King
that is chosen, and he keeps the Privy Seal. The Master of the Court does
follow the Kings, and is one of his Privy Counsel. The Master of the
Regallities does judge of all matters concerning Mines of Gold and Salepits,
and lastly, all matters which appertain to the Exchequer. Secondly, those
which sit in Judgment, of which there are certain Officials, three of greater
authority, as the Vice-Palatine of the Kingdom, the Judge of Personal
Presence, The Vice-Palatines Protonotary, o^ chief Clarke, the Vice-Judges
Protonotary. They are all called Masters, and have these assistants or
associates joined to them: the Archbishop of Strigoniums Secretary, who is
called the Secretary of the Exchequer, twelve Assistants, and some sworn
Clerks. Thirdly, those that serve the King, as the Treasurer, the Master of
the Bedchamber, the Cup Bearer, the Master of the Pantry, the Master Porter,
and other lesser offices. Moreover, because the Country is large there are
several Judges appointed through the Provinces, which the Hungarians call
Counties. And they are these beyond Danubius on the West of the River Tibiscus.
Posoniensis, Nitriensis, Cepusiensis, Gewinariensis, Posthiensis, Semliniensis,
Comariensis, Leptoniensis, Novigradiensis, Abavivariensis, Bathiensis,
Vngensis, Traachimensis, Barsiensis, Hontensis, Borsodiensis, Bodroghtensis,
Peregriensis, Turoezensis, Omuzolis, Tornensis, Heweciensis, Zolnocensis,
Moramarusiensis. Above Danubius on the East of Tibiscus there are Vgoghiensis,
Bihoriensis, Zatmariensis, Oradiensis, Zabolciensis, Temesiensis. Between the
Rivers Danubius, and Dravus, there are Musunensis, Zaladiensis, Tolnensis,
Rhab, or Iauriensis, Vespriniensis, Strigoniensis, Soponiensis, Albensis,
Sinigiensis, Castriferrensis, Pelisiensis, Waraniensis. Between Dravus and the
River Savus, there are Valkonensis, Rifiensis, Syrimiensis, Warasdiensis,
Prosegiensis, and Zagrabiensis. The Ecclesiastical government belongs to the
two Archbishops, of Gran, or Strigonia, the Popes Legate and Primate of the
Kingdom. It has under it Agriensis, Vaciensis, Nitriensis, Quinque
Ecclesiensis, Vespriniensis, who is the Queens Chancellor, and crowns her,
and the Bishop Iauriensis commonly called Rab: Colosensis, or Colotz, under
whom are Sagabriensis, Transilvaniensis, Voceadrensis, Visemburgensis,
Suiniensis, Cenadiensis, or Chonad, and Bosnensis. All Hungary is divided into
the hither-most, and the farther. The hither-most Hungary does contain all
that Country which is on this side Danubius: the farthermost does contain that
Country which is beyond Danubius, and Tibiscus map of Hungary THE KINGDOM OF
HUNGARY.
glideth through the middle of it. The Metropolis and Mother City of this
Kingdom is Buda, which was so denominated, as the most do suppose from Buda
the builder of it, who was Brother to King Artila, or as others write, from the
Budines, a People of Scythia, of whom Herodotus makes mention. If you consider
the Situation of this City, it is seated partly on a Mountain, and fortified
with strong Bulwarks, so that it is the strongest, and pleasantest City in
all Hungaria, it has many fair buildings both public and private. It
stands in a fruitful soil, Soliman the Turkish Emperor took it from the
Christians in the year 1526. on the 20. day of August. The Next is Posonium,
commonly called Prezborgh, which is a noble City. Here the River Leyta
deviding the higher Pannonia from the lower, does mingle it self with the
River Istrus. It is an ancient fair City, having a pleasant air and
situation, and does therein excel all tne Cities of Pannonia. It has
Mountains planted with Vines, which are also full of Wood. In the Suburbs it
has a Castle seated on the top of a high Rock. There is also Belgrad at the
meeting or confluence of the Rivers Savus, and Danubius, it is commonly called
Alba Graeca, the ancients called it Taurunum, and the Germans Griechs
Weissenburgh: Soliman the Turk took it in the year 1520. and having been
before a Town of defense against the cruel enemy of Christianity, now it is
the Turkish Emperors seat. A little lower down the River Danubius there is
Singidunum, which was taken by the Turk in the year 1439. In the midst
between these two Cities, there is a Field famous for the victory of
Hunniadus against Mahomet the Turkish Emperor: they call this Field Maxons.
This Battle was fought in the year 1456. Down the River there are many places
where the Christians have received many fatal overthrowes. The City Valpo was
taken in the year 1543. Quinque Ecclesiae by Dravus in the year 1543. Zigetha
was taken in the year 1566. Buda we have mentioned before. Strigonium by
Danubius, commonly called Gran, was heretofore an Archbishops seat, but it is
now in the Turks hands. Alba Regalis, or Stulweyssenburg, is famous in regard
the Kings are crowned and buried here, it was taken in the year 1543. In the
same Country there is Stridon, where Saint Hierom was borne. There is also the
City Comara, in an Island of the same name, which the Turks in vain
attempted. Iaarinum, commonly called Raab is an impregnable City by the River
Danubius. I pass by the other Towns. There are also in Hungaria many famous
Lakes, the chief whereof is Balaton, which the Germans call Platze, being 40.
Italian miles broad, and 8. Hungarian miles. The chiefest Rivers are Danubius,
Savus, Dravus, and Tibiscus, the three former are common to other Countries,
but Tibiscus runs only through Hungary. It rises in Maramusia, in the high
cliffes of Carpatus, and for plenty of Fish it exceeds all the Rivers in
Hungary, for it has abundance of all kinds of Fish, as great Pikes, Lampreys,
and Sturgeons. There are also other Rivers besides these, which have great
store of excellent Fish, as Trowts, Salmons, Perches, Lampreys, Barbels, and
others, and those Rivers have gold veins in them. The chief Woods and
Mountains beyond Danubius, beginning from Austria and Moravia Lazius reckneth
to be ^^chzal, in Greek Carpatus, which was heretofore so called from the
Minerals in it, it stretches and extends it self through the Countries
Turocensis, Arnensis, Liproviensis, Cappusiensis, Gewineriensis, and Sa^^^sis,
which the Inhabitants call by diverse names, as den Vatter, den ^^^ch, den
Wurtgarten, den Schnepberg. The second River is Matran, which is planted with
Vines near Agria. The third and greatest of all is Erdel. There are many other
Rivers, which for brevitie sake I ^^it, and so conclude Germany.

ITALY.
IN WHICH THESE Countries are contained.
Lombardie. The Dukedom of Venice. Liguria, the Dukedom of Genua. The
Dukedom of Friulum. Istria. The Country of Romandiola. The Dukedom of
Thusany. The Dukedom of Spoleto. The Marquiship of Anconitana. Latium, now
called Campagna di Roma. Abruzzo, Aprutium, Sa^^nites. Terra di Lavoro,
Campag^^ felice, a Principality. Apulia, the Kingdom (...) Daunia piana.
Lucania, Basilicata, Princip^^ Terra di Barri, Apulio Peu^^tia. Terra di
Otranto Regnum. Calabria superior Regnum. Magna Graecia. Brutij, Calabria
inferior.
The Kingdom of Naples does contain a great part of these Countries.

Because I know but a few Counties and Sigeionries in Italy and Greece, and
seeing their names and places cannot be assigned in Tables, in regard of the
imperfection of Table therefore I will describe but a few of them. For every
Stude^^ may set down those which he shall find. It would afford* a fair
prospect into matters of Policy, if the Nobility of several Kingdoms, and
their Offices, Places, and Lordships we^^ known. Which if every one would
perform in his own Country, he should deserve much praise.

map of Italy ITALY.


ITALY.
GERMANY was described before both in general and special: and now having
viewed the former I do enter into Italy: which as Pliny says Lib. Nature.
Hist. cap^ 20. is a Country sacred to the gods, the most happiest in all
Europe, the Mother of Plenty, the Mish^^ of Policy, the Princess of Nations,
and the Queen of the World. It had heretofore diverse names. Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, Lib. 1. of Roman Antiquities, writes that the native people
did call this noble Country Saturnia: and the Graecians did call it Hesperia,
Ausonia, and Oenotria: and that at last in Hercules time it began to be called
Italy. It was called Saturnia from King Saturn. But it seems that this
appellation did not appertain to all Italy, but to a part of it, which was
also called Latium. Hyginus would have it called Hesperia, from Hesperus, who
fled from his Brother Atlas: and Macrobius from Hesperus the Evening Star, in
Latin called Vesperugo, which is seen always in the West. It was called
Ausonia from Auson. They called it Oenotria from the goodness of the Wine, or
from Oenotrus King of the Sabius. It was called Italy from Italus, whom
Aristotle makes to be King of Oenotria. But Festus says, Lib. 9. Italiam
dictam, quod magnos (...) est Boves habeat, vitulos enim Italos esse dictos.
That is, Italy was so called, because it has great Italy, that is, Oxen for
Calves are called Itali, Timaeus fabulously reports, that it was so called
from the O^^talus, one of Geryons Heard, which being droven away by Hercules
did swim over the Sicilian Bay, and in the Tyrrhene language a ^all is called
Italus. And the same Dionysius Halic. Lib: Antiq. Romans says, that it was
heretofore called Vitalia, if we may believe Hellanicus. Other ancient
appellations of Italy, which belong rather to the parts thereof than to the
whole Country, we omit. Strabo and Ptolemy do make Italy a Peninsula, being
encompassed on three sides with the higher Sea, the lower Sea, and the Jonian
Sea: on the fourth side it has the Alps, for toward the West it has the
Italian Alps, which the ancients did distinguish by peculiar names, as the Sea
Alps, the Cottians, the Grajans, and the Rhetians, which lie Northward even to
the River Arsia, and contains the Poenine and the Julian Alps: and so it
runs Northward by the Hadriatick Sea, even to the Jonian Bay, which is over
against it Eastward: and lastly, Southward and Westward it is beaten with the
Mediterranian Sea, as also the Tyrrhene and Ligustian Shores: and the Hadrian
Sea washes the Southern part, where Forum Iulij and Histria lies. The length
from Augusta Praetoria, to Brutium, even to the Promontory or Le^^ropetra, is
755. miles: the greatest breadth is 475. miles, the middlemost breadth is 130.
the least breadth is 72. The whole compass of Italy according to Castaldus is
2550. miles. Those which have measured it more exactly, do make it to be 2250.
and those who have measured it most exactly, do reckon it to be not above
2240. Buslathius do liken Italy to an Ivy leaf: Pliny, Solinus, and others,
do resemble it to an Oak leaf, because it is longer then broad, bending his
head on the left hand, and so ends in the figure of an Amazonian Brestplate.
The latter Writers do more conveniently compare it to a man's thigh, the skin
whereof lies over against the lower Sea: the Calfe over against the higher
Sea: and all the foot is washed with the Jonian Sea: The heel does look
toward Epirum: the sole of the foot is the Tarrentine Bay, the more fleshy
parts do make the Pronontories Zephyrius, Carcinus, and Bruttium, the toes are
turned toward Sicily, the knee is in the Populonian Promontory, the hippe and
upper part of the thigh do touch the Alps. I have spoken of the name and
quantity of Italy: the quality follows, which always arises from the
Situation of a Country. If any one will take a diligent account of it, he shall
find that according to the Longitude, the most Western Meridian does fall
upon the 29. degree; and the most Eastern Meridian the 43. degree. It is 7.
degrees in Latitude: for the most Southern Parallel is 28. degrees distant
from the Equator, and the most Northward 46. and so he shall find that Italy
is in the fifth and sixth Climats, and all the Parallels between eleven and
sixteen, in which space of Land the day differs one hour. For the longest
day of Summer in the Southern Parallel is 14. hours long, with three fifths,
but in the Northern Parallel it is 15. hours long with three fifths.. Italy
having such a Situation, and having the Alps running through it, which pass
length-wayes through the middle of Italy, on both sides, especially on the South
side have fair fruitful Fields and Hills lying by them: and therefore it is
no marvel, that all the times and seasons of the year are so temperate, and
that it is so fruitful, especially in some places. The Country is very
temperate, and very plentiful, and has good store of Corn, being not
chargeable in tilling, but very gainefull to the Husbandman. The Rosselanian
fields in Vmbria are reported to have been so fruitful, that Varro witnesses,
Caesar Vopiscus, when he pleaded his cause before the Censors, said that the
Rosean Fields were the Senum Italiae, in which if a Pitchforke be left the day
before, the grass will cover it over in one nights growth. Unto speaking of
the endowments of Italy, says, that it produces all things necessary for
food. Campania does yield Corn, Falernus wine: Cassinas Oil: Tusculan Figs,
Tarrentine Honey: and Tiber Fish. Moreover Pliny witnesses that Italy is the
Mother of all kinds of Trees. I will not mention the Vulgar common sort. For
here are great store of Orange Trees, Lemmon Trees, and Quince Trees. All the
Coast, as for example, Liguria, and that which belongs to Genoa, is adorned
and beautified with fair Trees, and great high Palm Trees, which are full of
sweet smelling fruit, so that it is pleasant ^oth in sight and scent: and it
has every where pleasant Gardens to recreate sad minds, and drive away
Melancholy. And the same may be said of a thousand other places. The same Pliny
shows that there are Pepper trees in Italy. The Hydruntine Country has
abundance of Olives, so that he that has not seen the great Woods of Olive
trees which are in these parts, would think it incredible. The Barian Fields
in Apulia Peucetia, do bring forth great store of Oil, Wine, Corn, Almonds,
and Cotton, and other fruits. The Valley of Onelia in Liguria, has such great
store of Oil, that sometimes it yields 32. and 22. thousand Jarres, which
the Inhabitants call B^rilas. There is also Manna in Italy. For Manna is
gathered near Altom^ntium in Brutia, which falls down like dew by night,
especially when the sky is serene and clear after rain. It is gathered from
the Leaves of certain Trees. Pliny reports that it has the choicest and
best Vines, so that it excels the most odoriferous Nations of the world, for
there is no scent to be compared with the delicious smell of the sweet budding
Vines. As the excellent Wines which are so celebrated and praised by ancient
Writers do testify. Pliny does devide the Wines of Italy into four sorts. He
prefers the Setine Wines before all others, which was so called from Setia a
Town of Latium. The next he accounts to be the Falerne Wine. The third he
^^^kneth to be the Albanian, the Surrentinian, the Massu^ (...) S^^^nian, the
Calenian, the Fundanian, the Vilitertian, the Pr^^^^tian, and the Signinian
Wines. The fourth sort are the Pretut^^^ the Anconian, and the Palmesian Wines.
But of these things others do report: I pass to the other gifts of Italy: and
will describe th^^ briefly. It is very fruitful in producing all kind of
herbs. What should I speak of the Metals, Stones, and other gifts. Pliny
says that it is inferior unto no Country for Metals. In Forum ^u^^um there
is the River Hydra, and not far from thence a Mine of Quicksilver Great store
of Allom was found heretofore among the Etruscian^ in the Territory of Masla.
In Campania there are Mines of Brimstone. Three miles from Volaterris toward
the River Caecina, there are some Hills, in which there are Salt Pits. At
Brutia also there are Salt Mines, which are hollowed into the inner parts of
the Mountain with digging forth of Salt. I omit the Stone Quarries, out of
which diverse Stones are cut. I do not mention the Marble, the Alablaster,
Crystal, and diverse sorts of precious Stones, nor the Saffron, Blue* and
Rosen. And that I may not be tedious in reckoning up the variety of living
creatures, Aulus Gellius. Lib. 11. Noct. Attica^. Cap. 1. T^meus in his
History, and M. Terentius Varro in Antiquit. do report that there are great
store of Oxen in Italy, and that there are many Buffons bred in this Country.
Lucillius witnesses that the great strong Lucanian herbs did graxe here: Quem
neque Lucanis oriundi montibus Tauri
Ducere pro telo validis cervicibus possent.


Italy, besides other Foul, has Eagles and Vultures, which are so often
mentioned in the ancient Roman Histories. I come now to the ancient
Government. There is no indubitable certainty concerning the ancient Government
of Italy. Annius of Viterbium does speak of Comer, who came first into this
Country as a stranger, also of Chamus, Ianus, Sabatius, Sagus, Cranus, Aurunus,
Malotte, Tages, Ofrides, Hercules, Tuscus, Alteus, Ritis, Italus, Morgetes,
Roma, Romanessus, Iasius, and others: but approoved Historians do make no
mention of them. But if we read Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Pompeus Trogus,
Solinus Polyhistor, and other Greek and Latin Writers, that many years
before the building of Rome, we shall find that Italy was governed by diverse
people, as Sicilians, the Aboriginians, the Ligurians, the Umbrians, and the
Etrurians: which at last were all reduced under the government of the Roman
Empire. Rome at the first was governed by Kings for 245. years together, as
Dionysius and Livie do witness, whom in the Roman History it is best to
follow. In whom we may read the order and progress of their achievements,
and it is to be considered, that their power did increase abroad by military
Discipline, and at home by moderation and Justice, and by the order of
government. Afterward the Kings for their tyranny and lust were expelled, which
many times had caused many changes, and mutations in the Empire. The names of
the Kings are these: Romulus, who reigned 38. years, (...), who reigned 43.
years, Tullus Hostilius, who reigned 32. years, La^^^ Martius, who reigned
24. years, Tarquinius Priscus, who reigned 37. years, Servius Tullius, who
reigned 44. years, Tarquinius Superbus, who reigned 25. years. He was
expelled the Kingdom for his Sons wicked act, who ravished Lucretia. But when
the Kings were expelled, the government became Annual, and two Consuls were
created. The first of which was L. Iunius Brutus, unto whom was joined Sp.
Lu^^ius Tricipitinus. and after him M. Horatius Pulvillus. Thus Italy was
governed by Consuls, until the time of the Emperor Caesar Fl. Mo^^lus
Augustulus, whom Odoacer Herulus King of the Goths did depose, and subverted
the Country to himself, and afterward being shine, he left it to Theoderick
his Successors. I need not set down a Catalogue of the Roman Consuls and
Emperors, which are well known. And we may read in Histories the form of the
first royal government, the changes of Laws and Magistrates, the Romans
valor, their wars, and their many civil dissentions, until Rome had got
the Monarchy of the World: and how by luxury, civil wars, and the fatal
vicissitude and change of things, it lost again both virtue, and Empire. I
proceed to other matters. Italy has many fair flourishing rich Cities, many
famous populous Towns: and many Villages, adorned with Noblemens houses. It
will not therefore be impertinent to set down what Thomas Edwards an
Englishm^n has written concerning the most famous Cities of Italy.

Rome's holy by the blood of Saints there shed,
Rich Venice with the Sea's encompassed.
Parthenope does Captains stout beget.
Mediolanum pleasant is, and great.
Bononia does for study much excel
Many Citizens in shining Florence dwell.
Ferraria does yield much Iron Oar,
Verona has of all things wondrous store.
For Law and Physic Padua is extolled
Se^as for eloquence may be enrol'd.
Cremona is a miserable place,
And Mantua sweet Virgins birth does grace.
Vtinus does transport of Wine great store.
Rich Brixia is liberal to the poor.
Papia does for Italian Verses shine
And Luca on two Dukedomes does confine.
Risa bewailes her honor lost in the end.
Milk, Cheese, and Butter, Parma do commend,
And fair Placentia wants not Innes most dear.
Virtue and Piety in Taurinum are.
Perusia has for Soldiers got much fame.
Vercella delights not in unjust gain.
Mutina holds that Frogs most wholesome be.
Anconas walls contemn the Enemy.
Macerata does all suits of Law decide.
Emporia is with Havens beautifie'd.
The City Livium is most prone to War.
In Bergomum they rude in language are.
Aretium does make the sharpest Sword.
Viterbus to the poor does help afford.
In Asta courteous Citizens are found.
Ariminium does with fruit and Geese abound.
Fanum has women fair, and most complete.
Novaria hates all Fare-like deceit.
Ravenna has lost the fame she had before.
Anglia has few Earls, Vincentia store.
Pisaurum has great store of Figs so great.
Pistorium of Chestnuts, Oil, and Wheat.
Dertona many rustic Clownes does feed.
And Regium great store of Hogs does breed.
Sweet Vineyards do Cesena compass round.
Clear Springs and Streams are in Tarvisium found
Imola does it self in two devide,
Vrbinum by her Dukes is dignifide.
Faventia is well known for Potters ware,
Spoletum harbors those which strangers are.
Pompeia does fair Sheep and Oxen breed.
And Narnia on Eggs and Grapes does feed.
Assissum does rejoice because that here
Holy Saint Francis Corpse interred were.
Comum with Fish and Flesh is amply stored.
Savona leaving studies, wealth does hoard.
Italy has many Lakes, the chief whereof are in Etruria Transumenus, Aprilis
Marinus, Vadimonis, Ciminus, Vulsiniensis, Sabatus, Palus Bientina, and Ciana.
In Latium there are Hostiae Lacus, Albanus, Aquae Salviae, Lacus Nemorensis,
Iuturnae Lacus, Regillus, Fucinus, Pontina Palus, the Fundale Lake, the
Tiburtine, Caecubus, the Simbruine Lake. In Picenum there is the Nursine Lake.
In Vmbria, the Veline Lake, Floridus, and the C^^iliens^^n Lake. In Campania
the Lucrine and Avernan Lake, Linterna Palus, Stativa, and ^^mpeia. In
Salentinum and Apulia, the Adurianian Lake, and the Lesi^^. In Flaminia there
is 7. Seas, and the Moore Padusa. In Langbardia ^^^^s-padana, there are
Verbanus, Ortanus, Larius, Luganus, Gaviratius, ^^^^tius, Trinatius, Chivensis,
Puscianus, Sebinus, Benacus, Idrinus, and Poeni^^. In Venice Visigiolus. In
Istria Costiacus. It is watered also with many Rivers, as Padus, Athesis,
Rubico, Tiber, Arnus, Mincius, Tucinus, Ollius ^^d Abdua. The chiefest of these
is Padus, which as Strabo affirms, is (...) greatest River in Europe except
Ister. The Latin writers as Livy, ^^gill, and others do call it Padus, but
the Italians call that which is ^^lled Pades, as Metrodorus Scepsius noateth in
Pliny, because there are many pitch-trees growing about the Fountain, which
are called in French Pades, and the Grecians and Poets did heretofore call them
Her^^^^s. Servius would have it so called from Phaeton the Son of Apoll^, for
before that Phaeton rhrough his own temerity and rash^^^^e was cast down
headlong into this River, it was called Eridanus. (...) was called Bodincus as
Pliny witnesses, and Liguridus because it has (...) ^ottome, Polybius Lib. 3.
calls it Bodegkos, and the ancients did (...) it Vesulus as Pliny shows,
who notes also that Springhead ^^ereof is in the borders Liguria, which is
called Visendo, because it is ^^^derfull, and worthy of sight. It flows from
the Fountain with ^^^^eare stream, and so runs, through the straight
narrow Rocks, ^^d the Valleys of the Rockie Mountain: and it falls down
with (...) violence as is wonderful. And so runs with a murmering ^^^se
through the stones, and afterward it flows abroad, and is (...) confined
with any channel, for the space almost of three Miles, (...) to Paysana, where
it runs almost under ground, so that very ^ittle of it can be seen. But a
Mile from thence it rises up again ^^^ete Paracolum, and so running forward
it receives many Torrents, and Rivers, from the Alps, and the Apennine
Mountains, and so being much increased by those tributary streams, it runs
through ^^e middle of Langbardia, and a part of Romonula, and so with 7. mouths
^^^letts, it discharges it self into the Hadriatick Sea. Pliny says (...) it
makes 7. Seas, because it runs with 7. streams a great ^^y into the Sea,
in whom Lib. 3. Cap. 16. see more concerning the ^^^rse of this River, as also
in Polybius Lib. 2. in Strabo, Lib. 5. in ^^^^itius Mela, Lib. 3. in Solinus in
his Polyhist. Cap. 7. also in Leander Albe^^us, and other modern writers.
Virgill in the ninth of his Ae^^ds calls it Rex Fluviorum the King of Rivers.
And Lucan Lib. 2. ^^geth thus. Non minor hic Nilo, and a little after, Non
minor hic Istro, (...) is, this River is as great as Nilus, or as great as
Ister. The River (...) so called by Virgill and other does follow next; Strabo
calls (...) Athigis, which the Italians do now call l' Adice or l' Adese:
and the ^ermanes Etcsh. Pliny reports that Athesis does flow out of the
^^lentine Alps, at first with a small stream, but afterward having (...) more
strength by the acsension of many Rivers, it runs with ^^olent course
Southward, and afterward from Tridentum it runs ^^ch a more gentle stream
through the Plain: and so having glided ^^rough those fields, it runs
through the narrow passages of the Mountains with so great a violence, that it
seems to threaten these places by which it flows, and with the same
vehemence it does run headlong by Verrona, beneath which it is divided into
two Rivers, the one whereof goes toward the Marshes, the other bends to the
Sea-ward, and makes a fair Haven, you may see more in Leander. From the
Springhead thereof to Verona, it is not navigable o^ passeable for boats, by
reason that it has such a violent Current, but they bring down trees, and
pieces of timber out of the Tridentine Mountains, which they tie together and
make them swim down the River. But from Verona it is navigable even to the
Fossions. Torellus in his History of Verona, would have Athesis to be the same
which Ptolemie calls Atrianum. And some do think that Adrias is the same
with Athesis, which Stephanus and others do mention. The third River is
Rubicon, which Ptolemie and other Greek writers do cal^ Rubikoon: Strabo
calls it Roubikoon: now it is called Pisatellus. It was that River which a
^liuy witnesses did anciently bounder Italy after the bounds thereof were
translated from the River Aesus* The fourth River is Tiber, which is the bounds
between E^ruria and Latium. There is no River more famous in Roman Histories.
It has had diverse names, some profane and some sacred. The profane heathen
names are Ianus, Albula, Rumen, and Tiberis, the Divine is Serra Athenaeus
reports that it was anciently called Ianus, from the God Ianus. It appears
in Varro and others that it was called Albula, which Paulus Diaconus and
Servius do derive ab albo color from the white colou^ of it, who shows also
that it was called Rumon. But the chiefes^ name of this River was and is Tiber,
of which there are diverse Etymologies. Some do derive it from Tibris, a King
of the Aborigines Festius and Servius say that he was King of the Tussians:
Livy, Ovid, Festus Pompeius, and Eusebius do derive it from Tiberinus Silvius,
Prince of the Albanians. Varro delivers that this River was called Deh^beri^^
from Dehebris an Earl of the Vejentians: Servius says that it was called in
the Scripture by a sacred name Serra a secando from cutting* So much concerning
the names, in which it is to be noted that there was a difference observed in
the pronunciation of these words Tiberis, Tibris, and Tiberini. For in common
speech it was called Tiberis in Poesy Tibris; and in holy writers Tiberinus, as
Servius notes, which is not always true. It was called commonly Tevere. The
head of Tiber is in the Apennine Mountains, in the middle of it near the
confines of the Aretineans, in that part, where the Fountain of Arnus, is
above Aretium. It is a small stream at first like ^ little Rivilet, but when
it has run forward it increases but a little, in regard it receaveth no
great streams, but such as proceed^ from small Fountains, but afterward by
the receipt of some River it grows larger, and is Navigable for boats and
little vessels eve^ to Rome, and so running not far from Tiphernum, Perusia,
Otriculus, i^ divides Eturia from the Vmbrian and Sabinians: and afterward 13^
Miles from Rome, it divides the Vesentians from the Crustiminians an^
Fidenations: also it seperateth Latium from Vaticanum: and is so great and
broad a River at Rome, so that they cannot pass over it but b^ Bridges or
Boats, as Halicarnassaeus writes, and from thence it runs forward, and
rowleth into the Tyrrhene Sea. Pliny in his 3. Book Cap. 4. and Servius Lib.
7. of his Aeneads do describe the course of this River. See also Florus Lib. 1
Histor. Romans Cap. 4. and Varao Lib. 4. de L. L. Paulus Iovius writ a Book
concerning the fish in Tiber, Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 4. affirms that 42. Rivers
do run into Tiber. The River Arnus follows which Livy, Pliny, and others
have mentioned, Strabo and Ptolemy do call it Arnus: and in Italian it is
called Arvo. It rises, as Strabo reports on the right side of the Apennine
Mountain. It is a small stream at the beginning, and runs westward through
the steep rocks and valleys: and afterward being increased by the receipt of
many Torrents, and Rivers, it enters into the Florentine fields, and having
divided Florentine and Pisa it runs to the Sea. Virgill, Strabo, Pliny, and
others do call that Mincius, which the Ital^^^s do now call Mencio of Menzio.
This River having entered into the clear Lake Benna^um, and having encompassed
Mantua, 13. Miles from thence it runs into Padus. Livy, Pliny, Silius,
Polybius, Strab. Plut. Ptol. Steph. do call it Ticinus. The Itenarie Tables
call it ^i^enus: it is now called Tisino. It rises out of the Mountain
Sumano, which is now called the Mountain of S. Gothard; from whence Rhene,
Rhodinus, Athesis, and other Rivers do run diverse ways. Out of this
Mountain it runs by the Lepontians Southward among the steep Rocks to
Belinzona a strong Town, and afterward growing greater by the aversion of many
Rivers and Torrents, it rowleth it self into the Lake Verbanum, through which
it runs, as Pliny affirms, and so returning through the Plain, it runs
with a clear stream into Padus. The water of this River is so clear, that
you may see any thing in the bottom of it. It has also some veins of gold
and silver, which may be seen in the sands. The River Ollius which in Italian
is called Oglio, has great stoare of good fish, especially of that sort which
they call in Italian Thymallo. In this River near the Palace, a great many
wicker wares are set, and at certain seasons of the year the water brings
down infinite stoare of Eeles into them, which are taken out and salted. To
search out the rising of this River would be troublesome. The common received
opinion is that two small Rivers do run out of the Lake Frigidulph, which is
between the Alps, the one on the right hand is called Fridigulph, and at
length is joined with Ollius: the other on the left hand does run with
another River, and from thence the River Ollius begins. Others make other
conjectures. It runs into the Lake Iseum near the Town Pisonium: it
waters the fields of Brixianum and Cremona, and make their barren soil very
fruitful: and it seperateth the Brixian Country from Cremonia and Bergoma: It
receaveth above 37. other Rivers. Pliny and Tacitus do call that River Abdua,
or Addua, which Polib. and Strab. do call Adovas, it is commonly called Adda.
It divides the Cenomanians from the Insubrians. It rises in the Mountain
Baulius: and Strab. notes that it takes his force from the Mountain Adula.
And so returning from the Lake Larius, through which it runs, it windeth
through the Plain toward Padus, and brings with it many other Rivers, as
Pilclavo, Meyra, Lira, Tartene, Lacieumortum, Brembrum, and Serimortum, and
also Serius, which rising in the Mountains above Bergomum, and flowing by
Seriana, in the winter time it hides himself in his channel, and runns under
ground, and afterward rising up again near Crema, it runs into Addua: but
in Summer by reason that the heat of the Sun melts the snow upon the
Mountains, it does so increase and swell, that it does not only fill those
subterranean channels, and windings under the earth, but also it continually
overfloweth the upper face of the earth. I pass over the other Rivers, which
are many for brevitie sake. The Seas, Baies, and Havens do follow. The higher
Sea, the lower Sea, and the Ionian Sea do encompasse three sides of Italy.
Whence Pliny thus concerning Italy. Tot Maria, portus, gremiumque Terra^um
c^mercio patens undique, and tanqam ad iuvandos mortales ipsa avide in mare
procurrens: that is: there are so many Seas and Havens as if the Country did
spread and lay open her bosom for traffic and Commerce, and for the good of
men; she shoots herself far into the Sea. It has many Bays, as
Rappalinus Froycis, Amuclanum Mare, the Bayan Baye, the Paestanian Bay,
Hypponiates, Scyllericus, the Tarentine Bay, Vrias, the Tergestine, the
Largian, and Flanitian. After the Bays I will name the Havens. Strabo Lib. 6.
write that Italy for the most part has no Havens, and those which it has are
very great and strong both to prevent the invasion of enemies, and for the more
convenient trading and Commerce. These are the Ports or Havens, the Haven of
Olivun^na, of Avaon, of Avison, of Hercules Menaecus, of Mauricus, of
Alb^^g^unus, of the Sabatrian Vadians, of Savona, of Genua, of Delphin, of
Er^cis, of L^na, of Pisanus, of the Vadians, of the Populonium, of the
Scabrians, of ^^lamon, of Hercules, of Gravisia, of Augustus, of Antias, of
Caieta, the Julian Haven, the Bajon, the Vilinian, the Metaurian, Orestes
Haven, Hanniballs Castra. The Tarentine, and Brundusian Havens, Garne, Agasus,
the Anconitanian Haven, the Arminian, Ravenas, Peretolas, Livenza, P^la, and
many others. After the description or Catalogue of the Havens, the Mountains
do follow. The chief whereof are the Alps, which whether we make them belong
to France, Germany, or Italy it matters not: for these Mountains running
along do with a wall as it were separate Italy from France, and Germany.
Festus thinks that the Alps were so called ab Alberdine from their witness,
for the Sabines says he called that Alpum, which the Latins afterward called
Album or white. Isidorus would have the Alps to be a French name, and that
high Mountains are called in French Alps. The German speech does
acknowledge the name of Alps, for Alp or Alpen signifies in their language
pasturing Mountains, on which no Hay is cut or got against Winter, but only
Oxen and other herds of Cattle are put there to graze. Strabo writes that
these Mountains were heretofore called Albia and Alpioni: Stephanus also
calls them Alpia and Alpij. Phavorinus calls them Olbia, and Lycophran,
Salpij. Ovid. Lib. 3. de Art amandi, Lucan and others do call them Alpis in
the singular number, and Dionysius Afrus calls them Alpius. The Alps in
ancient writings and records have many names, which show that there were many
parts of the Alps over which they traveled. And these are the Sea Alps, which are also called the Ligustina Alps: The Cottian, Grecian, Penine, the Sammian
Alps, the Lepontian, the Rhetian, Julian and Carnician. And so much concerning
the Alps, which breadthwayes do seperat and part Italy from France and
Germany, the Apinine follows, which running with a continuing ridge between
the higher and the lower Sea, it divides it length ways into two parts or
sides. It is thought to have been so called, because the foot of this Hill is
by Hannibals Penine passage. Some think it was called the Apenine, because the
Paenians or Carthaginians breaking into Italy under the conduct of Hanniball
did make and open a passage this way, some derive it from Apis an ancient
Captain who overcame and conquered all Italy. Ptolamie and others call it
Appennina, Stephanus Apennium, the Apennine Mountain, says Pliny, is the
greatest in Italy, running with a continued ridge from the Alps to the
Sicillian strait. Italy has many other Mountains, which are either parts or
pieces of the Apennine, or such as it thrusts forth here and there, or such
as lie at the foot thereof, so that it overlookes them. But I pass over them,
least I should be tedious. Moreover the Mountains and aforesaid, the Valleys
and fields are crowned with woods, groves, and thicketts, many of which are
named and celebrated by the ancients. In Etruria there is the wood Viterbium,
which in Italian is called Boscodi Monte ^i^^one, which is commonly called
Bolsena, the ancients as Leander reports did call it the Valsinan Wood. On
Ciminus a Mountain of Etruria, here was a wood, so thick that few travelld
through it, of which Livy thus. Silva erat Cimina, magis tum invia atque
horrenda, quam nuper f^ere Germanicj Saltus, nulli ad eam diem, ne Mercatorj
quidem adita, Eam (...) e haud fere quisquam praeter Ducem ipsum audebat. That
is, the Cimi^le^ Wood was more thick and impassable, than the Germane Forests
were of late, so that no man nor Merchant has passed through it, into which
none but the Captain durst enter. In Latium among the Capenatians there was
the Wood Feronia, of which Silius sings thus.

Dives ubi ante omnes colitur Feronia Lucos;
Et Sacer humectat Fluvialia Rura Capenas.
Where Feronia is reverenced above the other Woods;
And Capenas does moisten the Country full of Floods.
Near the River Numicum there was a Wood sacred to Jupiter Indigites, as Pliny
witnesses. Livie places Dianas Wood by Agninum Compitum. Festus notes that
the Wood Naeviam was four miles from the City. Livie writes that the Wood
Camenarus, was without the gate Capena. That which he calls Algidum Nemus, is
now called Selvadel Aglio. Servius places the Albunean Wood on the high
Tiburtine Mountains, and another of the name in the Laurintinian fields.
Virgil intimates that the wood Angitia, was near to Alba of the Marsians.
Cicero makes the wood Lurina to be in the Territory of Romania. D. Victor
places the wood Furina, in the 13. Region beyond Tiber. Plutarch calls it
the Furies wood. Pliny places the wood Vacuna near the Mountain Fiscellus in
Vmbria. Campania also has fair woods, as Luco Sacro, and Gallinaria Silva.
Livie calls Sacer Lucus, or the holy wood, it is now called Hamij. Cicero
writing to Poetus, and Strabo. Lib. 5. do call it Gallinaria Silva. The
Lucanian woods are Eboli, Perigrinalis, Velia. In Brutium there is the Rhegian
Forest. In Apulia there are Batini Saltus, and Lucus Gargani. In Gallia
Cis-Padano there is the wood Lucina, and the Bedanian woods. In Trans-Padana
there is that which Strabo calls Castrorum Lucus: Lastly, there are two woods
in Venice, the one is called Iunoes wood, the other Diana^es. I come now to the
public works both sacred and profane, which are innumerable, but we will
only reckon some few of them. And that we may begin with the sacred works,
they are almost infinite, for Rome alone has at this day above 300. Churches,
of which seven are chiefly resorted unto for Religion sake; the first is Saint
Peter's Church in the Vatican: which exceeds all the Churches in the World for
costly Marble work, and magnificent building. There are many singular things
in it: as some Pillars which were brought out of Salomons Temple: two Brass
Peacocks which were brought from P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus his Pyramisse,
which was heretofore in the Vatican Valley. There are also the Tombs and
Sepulchers of many Popes, and a Marble Tomb of the Emperor Otho the second:
and in the Popes Chapel there is Doomesday, or the day of Judgment lively
drawn by Michael Angelo. And that I may not omit the Monasteries, the
Hospitals for Strangers, the Hospitals for the Sick, and for Orphans. What
should I speak of the Popes and Cardinals Palaces? The Popes Palace is in the
highest part of the Valitan, being fairly seated: who leaving his Lateran
Palace, did remoove thither in regard of the pleasantness and wholesomenesse
of the Seat. It was begun by Pope Nicholas the third, and enlarged by others,
but perfected by Julian the second, and Leo the tenth, and at last it was
adorned with Buildings and Pictures by Xistus the fifth, so that now the proud
Pile seems to touch the Heavens. The Stairs are broad and easy to ascend,
so that one may ride on Horseback to the top of the House. For it is so great
that it seems rather a Town than a House, there is Xistus Chapel which is as
big as a great Church, whether when the Sea is vacant, the Cardinals do meet
together to create a Pope, which is commonly called the Conclave. It would be
tedious to mention the other Palaces, and therefore we will pass to other
matters. The government of Italy follows, which is twofold; Political and
Ecclesiastical. Concerning the Politic and Civil government, this noble
Country is divided into many Signiories. Among which, beside the Pope, the King
of Naples, and the free Commonwealths, as Venice, Genoa, Lucensis, and others,
the chief in the Northern part are, the Princes of Etruria, Ferrara, Mantua,
Mediolanum, Montis-Feratensis, of Parma, of Salluzzia, and Verona. In the
Southern part there are many Nobles, which when occasion shall be offered, I
will reckon up in their proper places. In Ecclesiastic government the Pope is
the Hierarch and the head of the Church, and has a great Train. Quoties pro
cedit Gemmis conspicitur ornatus, and Seri^is vestibus, tectus Auro, vectus
Equo albo, stipatus Milite, circumstrepenti^^s septus Ministris. That is, as
often as the Pope goes forth, he wears silk Robes, embroidered with Gold
and Pearl, he rides on a white Horse, and is guarded with Soldiers, and has
Officers which play on Music before him. The other Priests are here much
honored, and have great authority. And are more honored than Noblemen. The
Cardinals as Peter Mossias notes, did succeed in place of the Consuls, who
heretofore governed the Roman Empire: the Archbishops are equal to Dukes: the
Bishops to Earls, their Vicars or Substitutes are as it were Presidents of the
Empire, and the Provosts are as it were Praefects: the Arch-priests are in the
place of Tribunes of Soldiers, and the Chancellors do represent the Tribunes
of the People. Moreover, Italy has a threefold Law, the Pontifical, the
Caesarian, and the Municipall, the first and second are to be known ^^her
where is; the third consists of Statutes and Laws, which the Cities themselves
do enact and make: but let so much suffice. I will ^^ely here set down that
which is read in a certain Manuscript concerning the Counsels of these
several Cities. It is written the Mediolanians are excellent in Counsel: the
Venetians wise: the Lucanians rash: the Pisanians inconstant: the Placentians
provident: the Florentines slow: the Veronians faithful: the Ferrarians wary:
the Genoans ignorant: the Lucensians profitable: the Volscians envious: the
Brutians blockish: the Mutinensians acute and ingenious: the Perusinians quick
and ready: the Senenians slow: and the Patavians irresolute. The Italians do
maintain, cherish, and honor Scholars, and are good Maecenasses unto them.
And hence there are so many Universities in Italy, as Romana, Mediolanum,
Bononia, Patavina, P^^iensis, Naples, Perusina, Salerne, Pisona, Ferrara,
Senensis, Florence, Vene^^, B^gomensis, Mutinensis, and Taurinensis; for the
Universities of Par^^, Placentia, Anconita, and Macerata, are for the most part
decayed. And hence proceeds that great plenty of Doctors, and famous men
learned in diverse Arts and Disciplines. It would be troublesome unto me to
reckon up a Catalogue of them, and tedious to the Reader. Moreover, the
Italians do exceed other people for courteous conversation, for gentleness,
and for witty conference, and discourse. They are very ingenious and witty,
quick of invention, and very docible, in matters of study, and also in learning
diverse Arts. They have in all ages thirsted after honor and glory, and have
been more desirous of praise than any others. They are soft and effeminate,
and given to Venery, quenching pleasure with Milk, as fire is with Oil. They
are very desirous of revenge: and they think it sweeter than life, and do
sometime leave it by Will to their Posterity. Moreoover the aforesaid
Manuscript does paint forth the women of diverse Cities in this manner: the
Senensians are fair: the Florentines delicate: the Perusenians neat: the
Cajetanians fair: the Consentineans obstinate: the Beneventanians clownish:
the Bononians arrogant and proud: the Mutinensians bountiful: the Cesenatians
covetously scraping: the Genoans wanton: the Cremonians deceitful* the
Placentians hard: the Lucensians chaste: the Pistoriensians loving and
tractable. The Romans grave: the Capuanians proud: the Neapolitans careful:
the Brundisinians slothful: the Ferrarians greedy: the Ravennatians courteous:
the Urbinatians affable: the Vincentinians constant: the Parmensians covetous:
the Papiensians desirous of gain: the Mediolanensians witty conceited: the
Pedemontanians prating and talkative: the Venetians wanton: the Verronians
comely: the Brixians diligent: the Formianians fair and beautiful: the
Laudensians superstitious: the Cremonensians costly: the Tarvisians jealous:
the Bergomatians crafty: the Aretinians saving: and the Puteolanians fair. The
Italians were heretofore sottishly adicted to many superstitions. But now they
do all religiously observe the Ceremonies and Rites of the Roman Church: but
that some few in the Southern part of Italy do follow the Grecian Rites, who
are also descended of the Graecians. But what a warlike people the Italians
have been, the conquest of the world does declare. And the aforesaid
Manuscript does show which Cities do exceed others in matter of War. In
warlike affairs the Perusinians are stout: the Calabrians rash: the
Spoletanians crafty: the Senensians fortunate: the Bononians fierce: the
Neapolitans courageous: the Turentines are mitigators of their enemy: the
Pratensians sacrilegious: the Collensians lustful: the Picenians ravenous: the
Aemilians inconsiderate: the Placentinians cruel: the Romans valiant: the
Mediolanians undaunted: the Vincentinians desirous of revenge: the Pistorians
bloody: the Papiensians firm and constant. Their Diet is sober and frugall,
and they are not curious in furnishing their Tables, but when necessity
requires. They do not all wear one kind of habit, but they vary according to
the time or the quality of the Person, and also in the form and shape of it.
The Matrons heretofore did go with naked arms, breasts, and shoulders, and now
they cover all with thin Vailes according to the Spanish fashion. The Venetians
go civilly and neatly, the Florentians, the Tuscians, the Mediolanians, the
Aemilians, and Ligurians, do go somewhat braver. But the Roman Courtier does
excel all the rest for long various colored Garments, but the Roman Citizen
goes more frugally, yet hansomely, but especially the women who of late did
affect the Tuscane dressing. Naples has a habit that is more shining and
splendide than costly. The Mediolanians in their apparel are gorgious, the
Genoas neat, the Mantuans childish, the Neapolitans costly, the Venetians
magnificent, the Florentines ridiculous. In revenging of injuries the
Lucensians are gentle, the Mediolanians are soon reconciled, the Perusinians
are dissemblers, the Fulginatians are hot, the Mutinensians are placable, the
Senensians courageous. The Neapolitans are bountiful, the Ferrarians stiff
conceited, the Venetians crafty, the Cremonians plain and open, the Picenians
backbiters, the Romans unjust. Toward Strangers the Calabrians are
inhospitable, the Lucen^^^s faithful, the Senensians loving, the Venetian^
faire-spoken, the Patavinians hard, the Mediolanians unwary, the Ferrarians
sharp, the Mantuans flatterers, the Placentians severe, the Picenians
troublesome, the Neapolitans bountiful, the Florentines profuse and prodigal,
the Astensians benevolent, the Spoletanes rude and rustic, the Verronians
studious, the Papiensians wise, the Genoaes inhospitable, the Parmensians
inconstant, the Mutinensians tedious in speech, the Novocomians inhumane.
Lastly, the Italians are much given to merchandising. And the same Manuscript
shows their dispositions in trading and commerce: namely, the Florentines are
crafty, the Genoaes tolerable, the Mediotanians plain and open, the Lucensians
faithful, the Venetians stately and vary.

THE FIRST TABLE OF LOMBARDY.
IN WHICH THE WESTERN Alpine part thereof is described, and also Valesia,
which is commonly called Wallis.
Sedunu is a Bishopric of Valesia, 260. 4534* it is subject to Tarentasia,
also the Archbishopric o^ Sabaudia, and Augusta likewise. 96. 454.
HItherto we have described Italy in general, now we come to describe the
several parts thereof in particular. Some have divided Italy diverse ways.
August^^ as Pliny witnesses has divided it into 11. Countrie^ Strabo does
part it into eight. Others into more, bu^ we omitting them will follow the
devision and method which Merc^tor has propounded unto us. And the first is
the Table of Lombardy in which the Western part thereof, together with Valesia
is described. It is now Euphoniae gratia, or for the sound sake called
Lombardi^ in stead of Langbardia, which was so called from the Langbardian^ who
came hither out of Germany in the reign of the Emperor Iust^nian: who for
many years together were seated on both banks o^ the River Po. It was called
heretofore Gallia Cisalpina. Gallia wa^ inhabited by the Frenchmen, the Boyans,
the Senonians, the Insubr^ans, the Cenomanians, and others, who inhabited all
that part which is between the foot of the Alps, and the River. That Rubicon
was calle^ Cis-Alpina, because it was on this side the Alps, as the ancient
Ital^ans and the Roman Writers do report, and the other was the which was
inhabited beyond the Alps. This Cis Alpina where it^ most Northward, and lies
nearest to the Mountains, Pliny calls S^ Alpina, and Caesar calls it the
higher France for the causes befo^^mentioned. Ausonius calls it ancient
France: Appian calls Italia Gallica, or Galatiken: the Register Book of the
Provinces c^^leth it the Mediterranean Italy: not because it lies in the
Medite^ranean Sea, but because it lies in the inward part of the Countr^ it is
encompassed on the North, West, and South with the Alps, a^ the Apennine: on
the East with the Hadriatick Sea. Polybius and Pl^^ map of Lombardy THE FIRST
TABLE OF LOMBARDY.
do make this Country to have a Triangular form, the top whereo^ is the
Alps, and yet Plutarch in Camillus witnesses that it is watered with many
Rivers. Sidonius speaks elegantly of this Country. Camp^ adeo culti and
uberes intercedunt (de Pado loquitur) ut satis constet haud temer^^ alios
repiriri aut natura feraciores, aut rebus necessarijs ad hominum vitam
instructiores. that is, The Fields are so rich and fruitful that do lie on
either side (for he speaks of Padus) so that there are none more fertile, or
that afford more necessaries for the sustentation of man^ life. Sigonius
afterward adds that the Ligurians and Etrurians were the ancient Princes
thereof: afterward the Frenchmen: and lastly, the Romans after whom the Goths
succeeded: and the Romans again after the Goths: and after the Romans the
Langbards, as we may see in Sabellicus. Lib. Hist. Venetae 1. Decade 4. Strabo,
Pliny, and others do make Gallia Cis Alpina toward the West twofold, either
Cis-Padana, commonly called Lombardia di qua dal Po, or Trans-Padana, dell^^
dal Po, because the one is on the hither side, the other beyond Po. But here we
describe the Western part of the Alpine Lumbardy, which does contain a great
part of Lombardy Trans-Padana. This Country although it be Mountainous, and in
some places woody, yet it is enriched with diverse natural gifts: for the
Valleys and Champion grounds, are of a fruitful soil, having abundance of
Corn, Wine, and other fruits. And Hills which bear excellent Vines. In the
Woods also and the Mountains there is good hunting of wild beasts. Here are
many Cities and Towns: as Mediolanum, Crema, Bergomum, Comum, Clavenna,
Luganum, etc. which may be seen in the Table. It has also more great Lakes
than any other parts of Italy: among which is that which Pliny and Strabo call
Verbanus, which the Italians, in regard it is greater than the rest, do call
Lago majore: and the Germans Langsee. Strabo makes the length of it 300.
furlongs, and the breadth of it 30. furlongs. It is so deep in most places,
that it seems to have no bottom. It does breed excellent Fish, especially
large Trouts and great Pikes, also Perches, and others. The Lake which Virgil
and others call Laris Lacus, and Paul Diaconus and Antonius do call Comacenus
from the adjacent City, the Italians do now call it Lago di Como, and the
Germans Chumer-see, it is greater than Benacus, and almost equal to Verbanus.
Strabo writes that the length of it is 300. furlongs, and the breadth 30.
furlongs. But modern Writers do measure it otherwise. It runs Northward
unto the South, but somewhat bending Eastward. But between Verbanum and
Larium, there are some lesser Lakes. As the Lakes Luganus, Gaviratius,
Monatius, and others. These Rivers also do water this Country, Ticinus, Adava,
Serius, Tosa, Bremba, and many others. There are also diverse Mountains, as
Lucumonis Mons, commonly called Lucmannier, Gothards Mountain, and the greater
Alps of Lepontium: also the Rhetian Alps, and many others. But so much
hitherto: now it remains that we should entreat of Valesia in the other part
of this Table.

VALESIA.
I Have not yet found whence the name of Valesia is derived, which they call
Wallis, or Walisser Land^. But it is supposed that it comes from the Latin
word Vallis, which signifies a Vale, or from Valeria a Castle of the City
Sedune. Valesia has on the North the Bernatians, L^cernatians, and Helvetians:
on the South the Cottian and Lepon^^^^ Alps: on the East the high Rhetian
Alps: on the West the C^^cian Alps, and the Lake Lemman. The length of it
from West to East is 5. days journey: but the breadt^ is very narrow, but that
it is somewhat broader near to Octodurum, and Sedunum. This Coun^^y although
it be encompassed with high Mountains, and sharp Rocks, which for the most
part are a Germane mile high, and many of them are covered with continual Ice
and Snow: yet it wants ^^thing for the sustentation of man's life: for it has
good store of Corn, Wine, and other kinds of fruits: it has Wheat, Barley,
Oats, ^^^nes, Pease, Fetches, and Mill. Wine begins to grow among the
Brigentian Dioecese among the Mountains, and the Plantation both continue
through all the descent of Rhodanus, until you come to ^. Mari^ius. At Sedunum
the red Wine is better than the white, and it is so black and thick, that you
may write with it. Near Octodurum (...) white is better than the red. And
there is no better Wine in (...) than that which grows at Sedunum, and so is
transported and carried into neighbor Countries. Here as also in Siders and
(...) Saffron grows in great abundance. There are Oranges, Al^oods, and
Figs. And through the whole Country you shall find all kind of Apples,
Pears, Nuts, Prunes, Cheries, Chestnuts, Mul^eries, Peaches, Apricocks, and the
like. Moreover the Mountains of this Country do yield many sorts of Physical
Herbs and Roots, which have special sovereign virtues. This Country also
^very fruitful of Mines: and pure Crystal is dug forth in Gums ^^ere the
Springhead of Rhodanus. It produces also diverse kinds of living creatures,
as Kine, Oxen, Horses, Asses, Mules, Sheep, ^ogges, Goats, and Cunnies: also
Geese, Ducks, Hens, Peacocks, ^^d Doves. It has also abundance of Bees, of
which they make great profit. Moreover the Mountains have some beasts unknown
^o us as the Aegocerots, which are horned like Goats, also wild Oxen, Alpine
Mice, and Hares unlike to ours, also Pheasants, Wood^^cks, and Birds which they
call Parnifas, also Partridges, Vultures, ^^ing-Doves, Hernes, Finches,
Magpies, Stares, and Thrushes. They ^^ve also abundance of Bears, Wolves,
Leopards, Foxes, Martines, ^^d Faulcons. But they have no Hearts, Goats,
Boares, Scorpions, or ^^^lfrogs. Yet they have such great store of Venison in
this Coun^^^, that it is sold in the Market like Oxe-flesh, and sometime
chea^^^. Moreover the Bishop of Sedunum is Prince and Lord of all Vale^^^, both
in spiritual and temporal matters, and Charles the great a^^ the year of
Christ 805. gave this Country and Praefectorship to S. Theodolus Bishop of
Sedunum, and to his Successors. And many other Emperors did confirm this
donation, and strengthen it even until this day. Valesia is divided into the
higher and the lower. The higher does speak the Germane language, and
begins at the Mountain Furca, and so runs forth to Marca which is under
Seduum, near the River Morsus, and it contains seven Tithings, or Dioeceses,
which they call Zenden, namely, Sedunum, Syder, Leuck, Raren, Visp, B^igg, and
G^mbs. In the lower Valesia they use the Sabaudian language: i^ begins from
the River Morsus, and stretches even to the Bridg^ of S. Mauritius, the
Inhabitants whereof were formerly called Veragrians. This lower Valesia has
six communities which they cal^ Vexica or Bannerat, namely Condes, Ardon,
Sallien, Martinacht, Intremen^ and S. Mauritium. The Metropolis of Valesia is
Sedu^um, in the Germane language Sitten, and in French Siun, it is a neat
City and grows every day more fair and beautiful. It is seated by a
Mountain which rises Eastward in the middle of a Plain between the high
Mountains which do enclose the Valley, and it has two forked high Rockie
tops. But Sedunum a Bishopric of Valesia is subject to Torentasia the
Archbishopric of Sabaudia, and likewise Augusta. Ther^ is no walled City in
Valesia besides Sedunum, although S. Mauritius, o^ Agaunum may be counted a
pretty Town. Moreover here are the Castles of Martinacht, or Octodurum; of
Gradetsch and old Sider, als^ the Towns, Sider, Leuc, Raronia, Vespia, Brig,
Naters, and Mo^^ll. The Mountains which do encompasse Valesia, have other
names now than they had heretofore. The Mountain out of which Rhodanus rises,
was heretofore called Subecus, Coatius, and Vrsellus, it is now called Furca.
Near unto this is the Mountain Gothard, near to Briga i^ the Mountain
Sempronius, now called Simpelberg. Near unto it ar^ the Mountains Saces and
Matter. On the other side of Rhodanus are the Mountains Loetsch, and Gemmi. In
the Poenine Valley, is the Ici^ Mountain Arolla. Over against Sider Northward
is the Mountain^ Silvius, which is called Austalberg, and on both sides the
Mountain o^ S. Bernhard. The Wood Hercynia reaches forth some of his arms
hither, which are called by diverse names, for in some places near Arne^ it is
called the Wood Milebach, and near Perigrad it is called Persin^ Waldt, and in
other places it has other names. The people in Valesi^ are now very courteous
and affable unto Strangers. But they ar^ somewhat more harsh and riged, then it
becomes friends an^ neighbors to be.

THE SECOND TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN WHICH THESE Countries are especially
described, the Country of Tirolis, and Marca Tarvisina.
THe second Table of Lombardy contains the County of Tirolis, and Marca
Tarvisina. The County of Tirolis is so named from the Town Tirolus, which was
heretofore very fair. It lies between the Rivers Athesis, and Oenus, and
between the Alpine Rocks: on the North it is enclosed with Bavaria, on the
South with Lombardy: on the East with Marca Tarvisina, and Forum Iulij: on the
West with Helvetia. It was heretofore a part of Rhetium. This Country although
it be enclo^^d with Alps, and extends it self through the Rhaetian Rocks,
(...) it is rich in fruits, and all things necessary to life, as also it has
great store of Gold, Silver, and all kinds of Metals, which are drawn out of
the bowels of the Mountains, the tops whereof are crowned with vast Woods, and
full of great store of wild beasts: the Hills and Cliffes, are full of fruits
and Vines: the Valleys are watered with fountains and Rivers, and full of
Herds and Flocks of Cattle. And therefore this County may be equaled and
compared not only to a Dukedom, but also to a Kingdom. It was joined to the
House of ^^stria, in the year 1460. by Rodolph the Son of Albert Duke of
Aus^^ia. The Chief City is Oenipons, commonly called Inspruck, on the right
hand banck of the River Oenus, being the seat of the Prince, and the
Parliament of Austria is kept here. There are also the Town Ma^^^^m, by the
Royal Castle; and Bolzanum a Mart Town of Tirolis. Hella is a Town by the
River Oenus famous for making of Salt: Brixia ^s an Episcopal City by the
River Isacus where the River Rientius does disburden it self into Isacus.
There is also the old City Triden^^^ by the River Athesis, which Pliny and
Strabo do place in the tenth Country of Italy, some would have it built by the
Frenchmen; and so ^^ogus delivers. It is supposed that it was so named from
Neptunes Tri^^nt. For as the Randenensians do worship Saturn, so the
Triden^^nes did worship Neptune, whose effigies and statue may be yet seen ^t
the Church of B. Viglius, on that side which lies toward the Mar^^t.
Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths did wall this City with fair ^^ee stone.
And he fortified the Castle of Tridentum on the other banck of the River in
Verruca in like manner. Afterward when t^^ Ostrogothes were expelled out of
Italy, the Langbards did possesse^ as a Dukedom. But Desidorius King of
Langbards being overcome (...) Charles the great, it came again to be under
the Emperors Juris^^ction; and the Emperor did enlarge it, by the accession
and addition of the Town Ripa near Benacum, with some Valleys and Villag^
After him Charles the Saxone gave to the Church the whole Coun^^ of Tridentum,
together with a fair Valley, and the Town B^lzam^ And the Earl of Tirolis
was made Defender and Protector thereon And from that time the Bishop had
Jurisdiction over both. The Cit^zens do speak partly the Germane language,
and partly the Ital^ans: and which is seldom seen in Frontiere Cities, they
speak pure language, as in the middle of Germany, or in the middle of Ita^^ In
this City that famous Counsel was celebrated, in the year 15^ under Pope
Paul the third. This Country is watered with two speci^^ Rivers, Oenus and
Athesis. The other may rather be called Rivule^ than Rivers. Here are no
particular Mountains, for they are (...) called by one general name the
Rhetian Alps, although they a^^ afterward distinguished by their proper names.
Here are also ma^^ woods: as Grinwald, Hofgarten, In der Aich, Milrinald
Forest. ^^ser P^wen Holtz, etc.

Marca Tarvisina.
I Have spoke of the County of Tirolis: it remains now that w^ should speak
of Marca Tarvisina. It was so named from the Ci^^ Tarvisium, where the
Marquesses of Lombardy kept their residen^^ who were Governors of this
Country. Cassiodorus and others d^ call it Tarvisinum. It is called also
Venetia from the Venetian peop^^ But now in the Country speech it is called
Marca Trevigiana. Conce^ning the bounds thereof, Leander writes, that Mincius,
Benacus, a^^ the River Sarca do enclose it on the West: on the North the
Tar^^sanian Mountains, which devide Italy from Germany: on the East t^ mouth
of the River Timavus, and part of the Hadriatick Sea: on t^ South the mouth of
Athesis, and the Melarianian, and Brigantini^^ Marshes: and the same Leander
affirms that these were the boun^ of ancient Venetia, and not of Marca
Tarvisina, which was far straig^ter, and lay lengthwaies between the Rivers
Mincius and Alsa, a^ that beyond Alsa they were joined to Forum Iulium, and
besides t^ which is now called Marca Tarvisina, did contain some places of
(...) Cenomanians, etc. The Country is fruitful, the air wholso^^ pleasant,
and temperate. It has pleasant Fields, which yield gr^^ store of Corn and
Wine, and other fruits. It has plenty of Mett^^ and good store of Cattle. And
it is adorned and enriched with many gifts of nature, that it is worthy to be
accounted one of (...) principal Countries of Italy. Heretofore the Euganeans
dwelt h^ the derivation of whose name if we seek it from the Greek, (...)
map of Lombardy THE SECOND TABLE OF LOMBARDY.
be derived from their noble generous birth. The Venetians as Livie notes,
Lib. 1. did drive the Euganeans from home, from whom the whole Country wa^
called Venet^a. The Cities of Marca Ta^visina are Verona, Vin^^nti^, Patavi^m,
Venetia, Tarvisium. Of the former of which, namely, Verona, Vincentia, and
Patavium we will speak in their proper Table. Venice is a City which
contains about 60. small Islands, and it is seated in the innermost part of
the Hadriatick Bay, in the midst of the Lakes, which the Tide fills every
6. hours: the Sea flows on the East side, which that the violence and rage
thereof may do no harm, some other Islands do lie before it to restrain the
fury of the Sea. And although it be not fortified with walls, Bulwarks, or
Towers, yet it is strong by the natural situation. It is divided with many
Channels. There are Rivers in all the streets, which are joined together by
450. stone and wooden Bridges. The chiefest Channel is that which is called
Canal grande, three miles long, which devideth the whole City into two parts.
So that you may either go on foot, or by Boat, of which there are 8000.
through the City, they commonly call these Boats Gondelas. The compass of
this City is about 8. miles, which is famous for populousness, wealth, and
store of Merchandise: it has produced excellent wits, and most learned men,
and it is adorned with good Laws, and laudable Statutes. It does abound with
Corn which is brought thither out of diverse parts of the World, as also with
diverse sorts of Wine, among which is that generous sort of Wine, which is
commonly called Malmesy, and with other things, necessary to man's life, so that
it may be rightly called the Paradise of Delight. There are in it 64. Parishes.
There are also magnificent and sumptuous public and private buildings. The
chiefest Church is that which is dedicated to Saint Mark the Evangelist, which
is gilded in many places. And to omit other matters, there is an Armory within
the City, commonly called the Arsenale, which is about two miles in compass.
Here are made of Wood, Iron, Brass, Hemp, and Flax, all kinds of provision
for Ships, as Anchors, Guns, Cables, Ropes, Tackles, and Sails. Here are also
some Ensigns kept which were taken from the Turk, or Pirates, or Enemies, and
those Trophies which were taken at Naupactum in the year 1581. And also there
are the Praetorian Barges, and the Ship Bucentaurus, in which the Prince
accompanied with the Senate and chief men of the City, is carried every year
to the entrance of the Sea, where the Castle stands, and there after some
Ceremonies performed by the Bishop, he marries the Sea, and puts a Ring upon
it to show his perpetual dominion over it. There is also a public Library,
together with the Library of Bessarion Cardinal of Nicen, which at his death
he gave to the Commonwealth of Venice. Venice is very populous, so that there
are thought to be in it about 300000. Citizens. They are of three sorts or
ranks: the Patricians who govern the Empire and Commonwealth: the Citizens
who do bear under Offices: and the Artificers who use Mechanic Arts. And
besides these there are great store of Merchants and Strangers, which come
thither in diverse habits out of all parts of the World to traffic: as Turks,
Aethiopians, Slavonians, Arabians, Syrians, Cretensians, Cyprians, Macedonians,
Germans, Hungarians, Spaniards, Frenchmen, and others. The Venetian
Commonwealth was governed at the first by Consuls, afterward by Tribunes for
252. years: afterward in the year 707. it began to be a Dukedom. The Duke
commonly called Doge, is the head of the Commonwealth, and the Prince of the
Senate, and he can do nothing neither in time of peace or war without the
consent of the Senate, for he consulteth with them. The Senate make Decrees
which yet are published in the Dukes name. The Duke has certain stipends paid
him out of the public stock: and after his decease another is chosen by
suffrages and voices, out of the Senate. The Senate which is commonly called
Gr^^ Co^siglio, is the Basis and Foundation of the whole State: the Members of
it are all Nobles, of 25. years of age, or above: who have free liberty to
speak: very faithful in Counsel, and very careful to preserve their
liberty, and enlarge their Empire, and very constant in adversity. There are
many other Magistrates besides the Duke, which here for brevity sake I omit.
This City is held to be ^e fairest and most flourishing City of all others,
the Theater of the World, and the common Mart for the whole Universe, the
Mistress and Conqueror over so many Enemies: the Queen of the Hadriatick
Sea, and the glory and honor of Italy. Although it has waged many wars,
and tried the varieties of fortune for the space of a thousand years, yet it
was never subdued by any foreign Enemy. I pass by the other Cities and
lesser Towns. The most famous Rivers of this Gountry are Plavis, commonly
called Piave, also Brenta, Ba^^^io,, and Athesis, which is the greatest of them
all. There are Mountains in this Patavine Country, which neither belong to the
Alps, nor to the Apennine, so that in this respect there is no Country like it
in Italy. One of these Mountains is Gemula, the other Venda, and the Euganean
Hills so famoused by Poets. There are subject to the Patriarch of Aquilegium,
the Bishoprics of Mantua, of Cuman, of Tri^^^tum, of Verona, of Maravia, of
Padua, of Vicentium, of Trevisium, of Ce^^da, of Feltre, of Bellun. And so much
briefly concerning the County of Tirolis, and Marca Tarvisina.

THE THIRD TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN WHICH ARE DESCRIBED Pedemontana, the
Marquiship of Montisferrat, and the Dukedom of GENOA.
THe third Table of Lombardy follows, in which Pedemontium, the Marquiship of
Montisferrat, and the Dukedom^ of Genoa are described and delineated.
Pedemontium is the first, which is so called, quod ad pedem sit montium,
becau^^ it is at the foot of the Mountains, or the Alps, which do devide
France and Sabaudia from Italy: it is commonly called P^^^monte. It is
bounderd on the East with Padus; on the South with the Ligurian Alps: on the
West with the Alps of France: on the Nort^ with Duria and Riparia. This
Country is full of fruitful pleasa^^ Hills, which do yield excellent Corn,
Wine, and other fruits. An^ it has Mines of Iron near Turinum, and of Marble
near Paisan^ Here the Turinians dwelt heretofore, who were well known t^
Polybius, Livy, and Plutarch; and also Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolemy do plac^
them in the ninth Country of Italy, and do make them to be of the stock of the
Ligurians. Afterward this Country began to be calle^ the Taurinian Dukedom
under the Langbardians, who having reduced it into a Province, made it a
Dukedom. After them it cam^ to be under the government of the Kings of Italy:
and afterward o^ diverse other Princes: especially of Sabaudia: and the Country
o^ France: it was much wasted in the time of the wars between the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and Francis King of France. The chief^ City of this Country
is the ancient City Taurinum, which Tacit^^ Pliny, and Ptolomy do call
Augusta Taurinorum. Antonius says in man^ places that this City was called
Taurinorum from the people, it i^ commonly called Turino. Stephanus the
Gramarian would have it s^ called from a Bull, which was the arms of the
Massilians, whose Colonie it was: it lies at the mouth of Duria on Padus, in a
four squar^ figure, and has four Gates, and many fair Aedifices or
building^ and it has plenty of all things. The chief Church is consecrated t^
Saint John Baptist, besides which there are some 20. other Churche^ or
thereabouts, also there is the Dukes Palace; and a famous Unive^sity, in which
Erasmus Roterodamus was made Doctor of Divinity. Th^^ was one of the first
Cities in Italy, which had a Printing house: it map of Lombardy THE THIRD
TABLE OF ^OMBARDY.
also a Bishopric. Near the Hill there is Rivoli, a populous Town: and a
little farther near the River Po there is the Town Carignano: A little higher
between the Rivulets and Aviliana there is the fair Monastery of Saint
Antonius Ravisinus: and a little from thence near the Monastery of Saint
Ambrose, there is Susa, which the most do reckon to be in Saubaudia. Near to
Po, six miles from the mouth of Sangonus there is a Town, which they call in
their Country speech Pinarolo^, which is very rich, and has a sumptuous
Monastery: a little above there is Petrosa: and on the left side of the
Fountain Sangonus there is Pagellato, and Bricasse, on the right side of the
Mountain Bobius. Not far from the River Pelice, which runs into Po, there
is Villa Franca, where a Bridge does join both the Banks of the River Po.
There are also by the Springhead or Fountain of Padus, Revello, and Paisana,
and a little farther Critio: and a little farther Mambrino, where the Valley of
Po begins. The Inhabitants do call it Valle di Lucerna, from a Castle which
is there of the same name.

The Marquiship of MONTIS-FERRAT.
NOw the pleasant and fruitful Country Montis-ferrat is to be unfolded which
is so called as Leander thinks as it were Mons Ferax the fruitful Mountain,
in regard of the fertility of the little Hills which are in it: or from Ferro,
that is from Iron, by comparison, because as Iron does excel all other Metals
both for strength and hardness: so this Country does excel all other
Countries for plenty of sweet and pleasant fruit, as also for Wine. Merula.
Lib. 6. Antiqu. Vicecom. does describe Montis-ferrat in this manner, Mons est
perpetuis expansus jugis, totus amaenus and fructifer, omniumque rerum ad vitam
utilium fertilis, est colonis admodum frequens. Incipit diurno fere itinere ab
Alpibus, planitieque seperatur, quae inter hos colles and Alps intercedit.
Nihil his incultum quidquam propter summam soli bonitatem oportunitatemque.
Laevam Tanarus, dextram Padus alluit, nec ullius alveum Regio egreditur. Quanto
magis autem ab amnibus abscedunt Colles, tanto majores amoenioresque Campi
inter eos panduntur, quos haud male Mesopotamiam queas dicere, quippe quod
amnibus utrinque sint inclusi. That is, it is one continued Mountain,
pleasant, and fruitful, and yielding abundance of all things necessary, and it
is full of Husbandmen. It begins almost a days journey from the Alps, and
it is separated from them with a Plain which lies between these Hills and
the Alps. It is all tilled in regard of the goodness of the soil. This River
Tanarus waters the left side, and Po the right side, neither do their
Channels reach further than this Country. But where the Hills lie farthest from
the Rivers, there are fairer and pleasanter Fields, which may be well called
Mesopotamia (...), because they lie in the middle between Rivers. The
Offspring of Palaeologa did first possess the Marquiship of Montis-ferrat,
even to the year 1534. when after the decease of George, the last of the
Palaeologians, the Emperor Charles the fifth declared the Duke of Mantua to be
lawful Heir of Montis-ferrat. ^^e Marquiship was made a Dukedom in the year
1575. by the ^^perour Maximilian, and the first Duke of Montis-ferrat was
William ^^e third, Prince of Mantua. In this Country the Duke of Mantua (...)
three famous Cities, which are Casalis D. Evasij, which was made (...) City
by Sixtus the fourth, in the year 1474. it is a Bishops Se, and the (...) of
the Marquess of Montis-ferrat. It has two Castles: the old ^^ich was
heretofore the Marquesses Palace, and the new, which ^^^^tius G^nzaga, Duke of
Mantua and Montis-ferrat, built, which is ^^^monly called La Citadella: Also
Alba, which Pliny calls Pompeja, ^^d so calls the Albensians Pompejanians.
It is far bigger than (...) D. Evasij, but it has not so good an air, it
was heretofore ^^bject to the Marquesses of Montis-ferrat, but now to the Dukes
of (...). That part of the Country is very fruitful which is commonly called
Lag^villa. The third City is that which is commonly called (...) Acquae
Sa^yellorum, which Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 5. places in Liguria. ^teninus call it
Aquae: from the hot and wholesome Waters and fountains which are here: for
there are in this City public Bathes with stone Tables, and steps to go
down into them. Beside the aforesaid Cities, there are Bassimana, Valentia,
S. Salvatore, Moncalvo, Alexandria, Nicaea surnamed Palea, Asta, Pollentia,
Ceva, and many others.

The Dukedom of GENOA.
THe Dukedom of the Genuensians, or the Country of Genoa was heretofore called
Liguria, yet not all but that part, which was beyond the Alps. There are
diverse opinions concerning the name of Lig^ria. Some, among whom is Paulus
Ciaconus, do report that it was so called ab legendis Leguminibus from
gathering of Pulse: some from Ligo one of the fabulous Captains of Iapetus,
and Berosus, Caro, ^abius Pictor, and Semprocius suppose that it was so named
from Ligures the Son of Aegiptian Phaeton: Now it is commonly called Riviera a
de Ge^^^, from Genua a famous City. It is bounderd on the West with the Alps
which divide Gallia Narbonensis from Italy: on the East with E^^i^ and Macra
or Marga which flows between them: on the South it is beaten with the
Ligurian Sea: on the North it is enclosed with the Apennine. This Country as
Strionnius writes, was heretofore barren, and had nothing in it worthy of
memory, but that it had great vast Trees, fit for building of Ships. But now it
yields good fore of Wine, Oil, and other fruits. The Country Dianus does so
abound with Oil, that sometimes it makes 18. sometimes 20000. ^^rres, which
they commonly call Barilas. Genoa is now twofold: the Eastern, and the
Western, which from the Metropolis, which stands in the middle of them both,
is called Riviera di Genova, di Ponente, and de Levante. Livie and others call
the chief City Genua, Stephanus calls it Genoa, and Luitprandius
Ticinensis, and the Writers of his age, Ianua; it is now called Genoa and
Genova, concerning the situation. I fronteth on Meridium, and the Island Cirnus,
the bank of it is opposit^ to the North, and so it has a gentle descent into
a Plain, being seated at the foot of the Mountains, and behind a Trench or
Bulwar^ does keep off the cold Northward, having neither a Mountainous
Situation nor a plain, but of a mixed kind. The Compass of it is 35955 foot,
as the Bishop Nebianus reports. So that if we allow 7. foot^ to a pace, the
measure of the whole City will be 5. miles, but if we^ allow 6. foot, then
neither the Bulwark nor the Haven can com^ within this compass or dimension.
It has a fair Haven which lies to the South and Southwest, which affoordeth
safe harborage for Shipping. But concerning Genoa there are these smooth Verses
o^ Scaligers extent, in English thus.

The Asian wealth, and Eastern honors great,
And all that Land the Euxine Sea does beat,
The Pisanian Armies, and the youth of worth,
And the French Colors I alone drew forth.
The subdued Alps I held and kept in awe,
And Afric trembled when my Ships it saw.
And the Venetian has fled from the shot
Which in my Haven he has found too hot.
O France you are deceived much, and Spain
In your attempts, you take up arms in vain,
I conquer being conquered, for if I obtain
Victory, or lose it, I am still the same.
Having viewed the Metropolis, we will show some of the other Towns and
Cities. Not far from Varus is that which Ptolemy calls Nicaea. Antoninus
Nicia, and now Nizza. It is a Sea Town, built heretofore by the Massilians,
and seated behind the Alps, partly on the Cliffes, and partly on plain
ground. Now it is strong, having a well-fortified Castle, and it is subject to
the Prince of Sabaudia. A mile farther above the Port or Haven of Hercules
Monae^us, T^bia, or Turbias is seated on the high Mountains. There are also
the Towns of D. Remi, or S. Remo, seated in a pleasant fertile soil, and
wonderfully terrified and adorned with Citterne-trees, Palme-trees,
Lemmon-trees, and others. Castellum Tabia is but a little Town, but famous for
good rich Appian Wines. Albigaunum is an ancient City, seated in a Plain,
500. paces from the Sea, which has an ill air, but very rich, and abounding
with all things necessary. Finartum also, or Naulum. Savona is an ancient
City, adorned with many magnificent buildings, and the compass of it is 1500.
paces. These Cities are on the Western side of Genoa: on the East side there
are Claverium, Sestri di Levanto, and others. The Rivers here are Varus which
devideth Province from Liguria, the latter being a Country of Italy, the former
of France. This River on the Western bank thereof which is toward France,
receives those Rivers which are commonly called in French Caremp, Lavaire, and
Esteron: on the Western bank toward Italy, it receives the Rivers La Lince
and La Vesubie. There are also by the Coasts of Liguria Paulon, now called
P^lion: Rutuba now called (...). There are also Merula, Porzevera, Ferisano,
Lavagna, Maera, now called Magra. Concerning the Ecclesiastic government you
may read in Mercators Table: the Bishop of Taurinium, under whom are the
Bishops Casalensis, Salutiarum, Montis Regalis, Novariensis, Lodensis,
^^^cellensis, Ipporegiensis, Actensis, Aquensis, Albensis, Terdonensis,
Saonensis, Albingaunensis, Vintimeliensis, Placentinus, and Papiensis, are
subject to the Archbishop of Mediolanum. There are under the Archbishop of
Genoa, the Bishop Bobiensis, Aprumacensis, or Brumacensis, Metenensis, or
^^^^nensis, Acotensis, or Ampruniacensis, Nubiensis, in Corsica, or Nebiensis,
Naulensis, Albigaunensis, or of Arbenga, which is reckoned among the Suffragans
to the Archbishop of Mediolanum.

THE DVKEDOME OF GENOA.
THe Dukedom of Genoa which stretches forth to the Ligustick Sea, belongs
properly to the Transalpine Liguria. The Metropolis of it is the City Genoa,
the other part is divided into the Eastern and Western. The bounds of the
former is the Lunensian Haven, of the latter the Haven of Monaecus: This
Country has a rude stony soil, so that it brings forth nothing but that
which is forced out of the Earth with great pains. It was heretofore covered
over with woods, having a few Husbandmen, who did live rather by robberies than
tillage. Strabo the Geogr. Lib. 4. writes thus concerning Liguria. Qui
Liguriam habitant, ut plurimum ex pecore victum agitant, lacte hordeaceaque
potione, maritimis ex locis ac montanis pastum quaeritantes. That is, those
which inhabit Liguria live for the most part of Cattle, their drink is Milk,
and a kind of drink made of Barley, they get their food on the Seashore and
on the Mountains. These Mountains afford good Timber for building of Ships,
and great Trees, which are so thick that the Diameter of some of them is 8.
foot. The Ligurians were heretofore a very warlike People, who put the Romans
to much trouble, and at last could hardly be subdued. Whence Livie calls
them, Durum in armis genus, a People hardy in the Wars, and Virgil says,
Assuetumque malo Ligurem, the Ligurian is inured to trouble.

Genua the Mistress of Liguria is supposed to be the ancientest City of
Italy, and that it was built by Ianus, whom some suppose to be Noah, others
conjecture that it was so named from Genuus the Son of King Saturn. Paulus
Perusinus delivers that Genuinus an Egyptian and one of Phaethons Companions
who lay sick here, after he had recovered his health called it after his own
name Genua. Others devise other Fables, but it is the famousest Mart-towne of
Liguria, and it has increased much within these 400. years, and now it is
very strong, and much feared. The Territories of this City did reach
heretofore even to the River Tanais. It had under it Theodosia a City of
Taurica ^hersonesus, which is now called Caffa, as also Cyprus, Lesbus, Chius,
which are Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, and Pera a City of Thrace. It
contended long time with the Venetians concerning the Dominion and Empire of
the Sea. In this City there are 28. Patrician Families, out of which a
Counsel of 400. men is chosen, and the Duke is President thereof. It began to
be established at Genoa in imitation of the Venetian Commonwealth about the
year 1237. but afterward being much troubled with the factions and discords of
the Citizens, and being enforced to obey foreign Lords, as the Mediolanians,
Frenchmen, and Spaniards, it lost much of her former power and authority, map
of Genoa THE DVKEDOME OF GENOA
and being now subject, it enjoys rather an imaginary than a free
Commonwealth. But to conclude, referring the Reader that desires to know
more, to Bracelius, Bizarus, Aug. Iustinianus, Fr. Leander Albertus, I think
it fit to set down Scaligers Verses.

The Asian wealth or Eastern honors great,
And all that Land the Euxine Sea does beat.
The Pisanian Armies, and the youth of worth,
And the French Colors I alone drew forth.
The subdued Alps I held, and kept in awe,
And Afric trembled when my Ships it saw,
And the Venetian has fled from the shot
Which in my Haven he has found too hot.
O France you are deceived much, and Spain,
In your attempts, you take up arms in vain:
I conquer if conquered, for if I obtain
Victory, or lose it, I am still the same.
THE FOVRTH TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN WHICH ARE THESE Countries Romandiola, the
Dukedomes of Parma and Feraria, and the Marquiship of Mantua.
THE fourth and last Table of Lombardie does present to your view Romandiola,
and the Dukedomes of Parma, and Mantua. The first is Romandiola or Romanula,
which was so called by the Pope and the Emperor Charles the great. The bounds
of Romanula on the North are the Moors or Marshes of Verona, and Patavina,
even to the Mouth of the River Po, together with a part of the Hadriatick Sea:
on the East Isaurus together with Picenum, on the South the Apinnine, with
Etruria, concerning the Western bounds there are different opinions. Some go
no farther than the River Vatrinus on this side of Fo^an C^^nelij: some pass
over to Scultenna, now Panarium, and there they stay. We will follow the
latter, and make the length thereof to be 11^. Miles or thereabouts between
Folia and Panarium: and the breadth almost 96. Miles, between the Apennine and
the Marshes before mentioned. Concerning the quality of this Country Leander
writes that it has a very good soil, yielding all kinds of fruits both for
delight and necessary use. Here are large fields planted with all kinds of
fruit bearing trees, pleasant Hills full of Vines, Olives, and Figgs, Woods
full of fruit, Meddowes full of grass, and Bushie thickets fit for hunting,
also many wholesome waters, many Salt Pits, both near the Shore side, and
within the Country, also Mettalls Mines, and innumerable other excellent
gifts of nature, which would be tedious to rehearse. There are some famous
Cities in this Country and many Towns. The chief are, that which Ptolemy and
other call Arminum, the Inhalitants do now call it Rimini, and the Germans
Rumelen. It was so so called from the River which waters it. Others have
other derivations. It abounds with plenty. The Haven was heretofore very
fair, large and capable of Shipping, but now it receives only small vessels
being filled and choked up with sand. There is also Cervia a Sea City,
heretofore called Phicoles. The Cernians for the most part are Salt-makers, of
which they make so great gain, that the Pope has yearly from thence 60.
thousand Crowns. There is also Cesena, which Ptolemy calls Caeseni. Strabo,
Caesena, and now the most do call it Caesena and some Cesnadigo, and lastly
Cesna. It is now a very populous City, and in former time it was enlarged on
the West and Noth sides, by Bernardine Rubrius of Parma. There is a strong
Castle seated on a Hill on the South side of the City, which was built by the
Emperor Frederick the second: Sarsina is an ancient City at the foot of the
Apennine, where Plautus was borne. Ravenna which Strabo calls Raovenna and
Ptolomy Ravennai, is an ancient City. Concerning the situation whereof Strabo
writes much Lib. 5. There are under the Archbishop hereof, the Bishop
Adriensis, Comaclensis, Cerviensis, Foroliviensis, Foropompiliensis,
Vellimensis, or Fille, Cesenatensis, Sareniensis or Sarsinatensis, Faventinus,
Imolensis, Mutinensis, Bonotensis, Reginensis, Parmensis, and Barcinensis.
There are very good Meddowes and Pastures by this City, which do yield grrat
stoare of Milk, Butter, and Cheese. Forum-Livij is now called Forli. It is a
City that cxcelleth both for Situation, and plenty, being seated between the
two Rivers Roncus and Montonus, and has a good air. Forum Cornelij commonly
called Imolais seated by the River Santernus, the soil round about it is
fruitful, and yields great store of Corn, Wine, Oil, and other fruits.
Bononia is an ancient noble City, commonly called Bologna, it is seated at the
foot of the Apennine, by the River Rhene, and the Torrent Aposa runs
through the middle of the City: it lies all against the East, on the South
side it has Vine-bearing hills, on the other sides fair fruitful Meddowes.
The air is not very wholesome. The compass of it is 7. Miles. It has 12.
Gates, and Magnificent houses, and Noblemens Palaces. The Emperor Theodosius
did institute an Universitie here, in the year 423. Now we come to Ferraria,
concerning the name whereof there are diverse opinions. But it is most probable
that it was called from the Inhabitants of Ferrarida, which was beyond Po, who
were translated hither in the year 423. by the Decree of the Emperor
Theodosius: at what time it was a Village without walls, and afterward about
the year 658. it was walled about by Smaragdus, Exarchus, and by degrees it
was so much enlarged, that at length it became a noble City. The Bishopric
was translated hither by Pope Vitellianus about the year 658. and 12.
neighboring Villages made subject unto it by the Emperor Constantine the 2.
who gave it also many Privileges. It is now called Ferrara. And it is seated
on the Banck of the River Po which waters it on the East and South sides. The
air is thick, in regard that it is situate in the Marshes. It has strait,
long, broad streets, the most whereof the Marquess Leonell caused to be
paved with brick, and it is wonderfully beautified with public and private
buildings. There is a great Church, and two Castles, the one by the River, the
other over against S. Georges Church, which is the Dukes Seat: and both are
well fortified: it is populous, and abounds with plenty of all things, and it
is one of the pleasantest Cities in Italy, being the head seat of the
ancient and noble family of the Atestines. The Emperor Frederick the second
did institute here an University in contempt of Bononia. It has a great
Plain round about it but barren. I pass by the other Cities of Romandiola
and the lesser Towns.

map of Lombardy THE FOVRTH TABLE OF LOMBARDY.


The Dukedom of PARMA.
THE Dukedom of Parma is so called from the City Parma. The Soil is
pleasant, and bears excellent fruit and good Vines, it has also wholesome
waters, Parmizan.
and pleasant Meddowes, and it is very much commended for cheese and fleeces of
wool. This City of Parma from whence the Dukedom is denominated, was built
by the Tuscians, and as many other Cities in these parts, afterward it was
possessed by the Borians, and in Process of time the Romans were Lords of it,
who as Livy delivers Lib. 29. in the year 570. brought, thither a Colonie.
Mar. Tul. in the last of his Philippicks, bewaileth that calamity which L.
Antoninus brought upon it. Afterward it was freed from the power of the Roman
servitude: and now it sometimes belonged to the Emperors, sometimes to the
Popes, but it was always joined in friendship with Bononia. It endured two
whole years a grievous siege which was laid against it by the Emperor
Frederick the second about the year 1248. because it took part with the Pope.
But he being driven away, it had afterward many Earls, as the Corregians,
Scaligers, Atestians, also the Galeatians, and the Sforzas, who were Vicounts:
and lastly, the Frenchmen, with whom the Pope of Rome did often contend for the
Dominion and Sovereignty over this City, who at last being aided by the
Emperor Charles the fifth, expulsed the Frenchmen out of Italy, and got the
City. Now it has Dukes, the first whereof was instituted by the Pope, namely,
Peter Aloysius Farnesius, the Son of Pope Paul the third, who within two
year being cruelly murdered; his Son Octavius was put in his place, and
after his decease his Son succeeded him. But Strabo and Ptolemy do place
Parma in the Aemilian way, five miles from the Apennine. It was so called from
the River Parma: or as others suppose, Quod Parmam, hoc est breve scutum,
referat, that is, because it resembles a little round Buckler or Target, which
is called Parma. It has fair houses, strait broad streets, and plenty of all
things necessary. It is very populous, and seated on a Plain: the air is very
wholesome: so that Pliny makes mention of 5. men of Parma, three whereof lived
120. years, and two 130. years. The Winters and Summers are temperate. It
has a strong Castle, and many Palaces belonging to Princes and noble Families.
In the Marketplace which is very large there is a fair Fountain: and a
Church built in imitation of the Roman fashion: and a Bell hung on three
Pillars: and a Steeple like that at Bononia. The Suburbs are divided from it by
a River of the same name, and it is an Archbishopric. The Inhabitants are
comely, noble, Martial, courageous, and witty. Also the ancient and noble
City Placentia has a Duke as well as Parma, which Ptolemy and others call
Plakentia, and commonly Piazenza. It is seated near Po, from which it is
distant about 1000. foot, it stands in a pleasant soil, and glories in her
fruitful fields, and famous Citizens. The walls are new: the Bulwarks and
Fortifications very large and strong. It is also a Bishopric. It has a
School for all Arts and Disciplines. The fields round about this City in
regard they are well watered do yield Wine, Oil, Corn, and all kind of
Fruits: for it has many Springs, Rivers, and Rivulets, which do water the
Pastures, and Meddowes.

The Dukedom of MANTUA.
THe Dukedom of Mantua is so named from the City Mantua. It was first
governed by the Thuscians, who built this City, afterward the French
Cenomanian did govern it, after whom the Romans obtained it. It endured much
misery under the Triumvirate. For when Cremona was left as a prey to the
Conquerours, it lost a great part of his Territory by his vicinity and
neighborhood unto it. Whence Virgil says. Mantua vae miserae nimium vicina
Cremonae.
Mantua alas does stand too nigh,
Cremona oppressed with misery.


There succeeded after the Romans, the Goths, and Langbards: who being
expelled; it was reduced to the obedience of the Roman Empire, which afterward
decaying, it got liberty with many other Cities, which it enjoyed, until the
Emperor Otho the second gave it to Theobald Earl of Canossaw. There succeeded
after him his Son Boniface, and he dying without any Issue Male, his Wife
Beatrix, and his Daughter Mathilde succeeded, who much enlarged Mantua. That
City which Strabo and Ptolemy did call Mantua, is now called Mantoa. Diverse
have sundry opinions concerning the original of this City. Howsoever, the
original is most ancient. It is seated in the midst of the Marshes, which
the River Mincius flowing out of the Lake Be^^^um does make, neither can you
go unto it but by great high Bridges: hence in regard of the natural
situation it is accounted one of the strongest Cities of Italy. It is a fair
City, adorned with magnificent public and private buildings, and fair
streets.

THE COUNTY OF BRESSIA, AND THE DVKEDOME OF MEDIOLANVM.
HItherto we have viewed Lombardy: now we must describe the County of
Bressia, and the Dukedom of Mediolanum. The former was so named from the no^
City Brixia. It contains part of that Country, which the Cenomanians
heretofore possessed. And the Territory of Brescia is 100. miles long, from
Limon a Town near the Lake Benacum, to the Town Vrceanum. The breadth of it
is 50. miles from Moso even to Dialenges: and it is situate between the Lakes
Benacum and Sabinum. The soil is fruitful, and yields great store of
Wheat, and other kinds of Corn, as also great store of Wine, and Oil, it
has also Iron and Brass. And moreover it has Gold, Silver, Alum, Marble,
Porphiry, and an other kind of Stone enameld with black and green spots,
which they call Serpentium; Pliny calls it Ophites which is a kind of Marble
having spots like a Serpent and many other Precious-Stones: also the
Marchasita, which the ancients did call Pyrites, or the Fire-stone. And it has
abundance of all things necessary for the sustentation of man's life. Brixia did
always continue faithful unto Rome: especially in the Punick War, after
that overthrow which Hanniball gave them by the River Trebia, C^ Pompeius.
Strabo brought thither a Colony with other Transpadanians, in the year 665.
and afterward Caesar the Dictator made it a City with many others. Afterward
it was subject to the Roman Emperors as long as the Roman Empire flourished.
But afterward Ra^gisus King of the Goths did waste it with fire in the year
412. an^ then it was ruinated by Attila Prince of the Hunnes, but it was
reed^fied in the year 452. by the Emperor of Martianus; afterward the
Langbards possessed it until Charles the great took Desiderius: aft^^ whose
decease the Frenchmen succeeded. Afterward the Empero^^ Otho a Saxon made it a
free City of the Roman Empire, in the yee^ 1136. and not long after Henry
sacked it, threw down the Walls, a^ and deprived it of all Privileges: and the
Scaligers, Dukes of Vero^ being aided by the Gwelfians took it. After them
there succeed^ Vice-Counts, who were Princes of Mediolanum: by whom being oft^
vexed, it revolted unto the Venetians: from whom the Frenchm^ took it, and
afterward it was restored to them again. The which Strabo and Ptolemy do call
Brexia, is now called Brescia. The are diverse opinions concerning the original
of this City. But Li^ opinion is most probable which many follow. For he
notes tha^ was built by the Cenomanians: and by the Captains Elitovius a^
Belovesus, when they came out of France, over the Taurine and Iul^ Alps into
Italy. Hence Pliny and Ptolemy do attribute the build^ map of Bressia and
Mediolanum THE COUNTY OF BRESSIA, AND THE DVKEDOME OF MEDIOLANVM.
of it to be the Cenomanian Nation, and Livie also, Lib. 32. mentions that
Brixia was the head City of the Cenomannians. It is an ancient, rich,
populous, large, and well-fortified City, having an impregnable Castle. and
fair buildings both public and private. Also the River Garcia slideth by it,
which some call Mela. It has a strong Castle which overlooketh the City,
which was fortified by the Venetians with a strong Garrison: it has also
magnificent Churches, wondrous great Monasteries, and a fair Hospital. In the
Captains Palace there are these Verses.

Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiem, pacem, crimina, jura, Probos.
This place does love, 1 hate, 2 punish, 3 keep, 4 and reverence, 5
Wickedness, 1 peace, 2 faults, 3 laws, 4 and good men's 5 innocence.
There are many inscriptions upon Marble, and many Elogies of Statues, and
diverse Epitaphs both in the Churches, the Bishops Palace, and also in all parts
of the City and the Territories thereof. The Inhabitants are wealthy, neat,
Noble, subtle, and witty. It flourishes now for riches: so that it is usually
called Vrbis Veneta Sponsa, the City of Venice his Bride. It received the
Christian faith from D. Appollinaris Bishop of Ravenna. And it is a Bishopric.
Of which Scaliger thus. Quae pingues scatebras specula despectat ab alta
Postulat Imperij Brixia magna vices,
Caelum hilarum, Frons laeta urbi, gens nescia fraudis,
Atque modum ignorant divitis uber agri.
Si regeret patrias animas concordibus oras,
Tunc poterat Dominis ipsa jubere suis.
Great Brixia that from a Hill does view
Those fruitful springs which do the ground bedew,
Complains of change of government, the air
Is pleasant, and the City is most fair.
The people are ignorant in all deceit,
The richness of the soil is very great,
And if dew concord could be here maintained,
Those who are now her Lords, she might command.


There is also in this Territory the Town Quintianum, situate 20. miles from
Brixia Southward, near the River Ollius. Also Reggiate, Bottesino, Vtele,
Novalara, with many others, it has also the Lake Benacum, so called from a
Town, the ruins whereof are still remaining. Catullus calls it Lydius, from
the Lydians that is the Tyrrhenians, who as fame reports did sometime inhabit
the Country near unto it: it is called in Italian Lago di Garda: and in the
Germane speech Gard-se, from the Castle which is seated on the East bank
thereof. This Lake, as Alexius Vgonius writes to Cardinal Pole, does excel
all others for good fish: it is environd with pleasant Hills, and Springs ^e
every where break forth: here there are woods, and green Meadows, Vines,
Olives, Maple-trees, Bay-trees, and Cedars: and Towns full of all provision
do encompasse it round about, so that ^t wants nothing either for delight
and pleasure, or for use and profit. There is also another Lake called Sebinus
or Sevinus, now it ^s called Lago d'Iseo, from the Castle Iseus which is on the
bank there^. This receaveth the River Ollus on the North, and casts it forth
again on the South. Lastly, there is also between Sebinum and Be^um the Lake
Idrinus, commonly called Lago d'Idro, or Idro Lago. It was so named from the
Castle Idrus: Some suppose it was so called from the Hydra, which Hercules slew
here, it has abundance of fish. It discharges it self into Idrinus by diverse
streams: the lesser Lakes are those which are called in their Country speech
Lago Cap. Lago ^cone, and others. The River Mella or Mela does cut through the
middle of this Territory. It still retains the name of Mella even until this
day. But yet it does not run by the City as we may see, b^^ by the Precincts
thereof. The little Rivulet which glideth by the City is now called Garza.

The Dukedom of MEDIOLANUM.
THe Dukedom of Mediolanum is 300. miles in compass. The soil is very
fertile and fruitful. Livie, Florus, and Polybius, do report that this
Country, with the most of the Transpadane Cities did yield themselves to the
power of the Romans, and became a Province, Marcellus and Cn. Scipio. being
Consuls. And it is manifest that some of the latter Emperors, allured by the
convenience of the place, did make this City their seat of Residence, as
Nerva, Trajane, Hab^n, Maximinian, Philip, Constantine, Constantius, Iovianus,
Valentes, Valentinian, and Theodosius. Trajane built a Palace here, which still
retains that name. But when the power of the Caesar's grew weak, this City
was wasted and spoiled by the incursions and in rodes of the Barbarians: as the
Goths, Hunnes, and Langbards. Whom when Charles the great had droven out of
Italy, this Country did put it safe under the protection of the Kings of
France, and afterward of the Germane Emperors. The most of which were yearly
crowned here with an Iron Crown, in the ancient and famous Church of Saint
Ambrose, as ^eander proves by several examples. At length under the reign of
the Emperors Frederick the first, and the second, against whom it continually
rebelled, it had new Lords, which were the Vicounts Caloatij, who afterward in
the year 1394. were created Dukes by the Emperor Wenceslaus. Afterward they
had the Dukes of Sfortia, by the suffrage and consent of the Citizens, and by
the authority of the Roman Empire: which the Galeatians could never obtain.
But their Line being extinguished, the Emperor Charles the fifth was their
Successor, who passed over this Principallity to the Kings o^ Spain his
Successors. The chief City is called by all Latin Writers Mediolanum:
Polybius, Strabo, Ptolemy, do call it Mediolanium, and Mediolana, the Italians
do now call it Milano, the Germans Mey-lands, Mediolanium was built by the
French Insubrians, as Livy, Trogus, and others do report; who coming into
Italy under the conduct o^ their Captain Bellovesus, and having expulsed the
Tuscians, they founded a City here: in the year, as some do reckon, before
the birth of Christ 339. and as others reckon, 380. Howsoever it is most
ancient. Isaac Causabone. Lib. 4. and Strabo do think that it was so named
from Mediolanium a City of the Santones in France. Some say that it is derived
from a Germane word, as it were May-landt, from the green fields, which are as
fresh and pleasant as the fields are in the Month of May: or else it is called
Midlandt, because it is the middle and Navell, as Iovius shows of Insubria,
being enclosed with the River Ticinus: or lastly, it is called Maegde-landt, or
Meydel landt, that is the Virgin Country, from Minerva who had a Temple there,
which was heretofore consecrate to our Savior, afterward to the blessed
Virgin, and now to Saint Tecla. Mediolanum is situate between Ticinus and
Abdua, not far from the Alps: having a temperate air and climate. It is
thought to be one of the greatest Cities of Europe, and it flourishes for
wealth and merchandising: it has fair buildings, great Churches, and wide
large streets: and it is well fortified with Walls, Bulwarks, and an Armory,
which do take up a great space of ground. It has large Suburbs, some of which
may compare with great Cities, being ditched and walled about as the City is
next to the Church which is call Domus, being fairly and magnificently built,
there is Saint Laurences great Church, which was built upon the ruins of
Hercules Temple. There are also in it seven high channelled Pillars curiously
wrought. There is also the strongest Castle which is in this part of the world,
and it is called Porta Iovia, it is impregnable, and the fairest in all Europe.
There is in the Suburbs an Hospital for Strangers, or for the sick, by the
way of Bernomatius, the foundation whereof contains many Acres, it was begun
by the Sfortians, but is not yet finished. Also there is the Church of S.
Gothard, in which are the Tombs, and Sepulchers of many noble Vicounts. There
are many ancient Inscriptions in the Cities, and many other Monuments of
Antiquity. It has an ancient University, where it is thought that Virgil
studied. And Leander writes that it has a famous Library. There are so many
diversities of Tradesmen, that it is a common Proverb. Che chivolesse
rassettare Italia, si ruma Milano, which is to say, Mediolanum scilicet
destruendo, Italiam instrui posse. That is, if Millan were destroyed all Italy
might be furnished with all kind of Tradesmen and Artificers. It is said that
the King of Spain receives yearly from hence 80. thousand crowns. The
ridding and determining of civil and criminal causes belongs to the Senate
of Millan, in which there are 16. Doctors, and some Prelates and Patritians of
Millan. Millan is an Archbishopric, the Archbishopric whereof has these
Suffragans under him, Bergomensis, Brixi^sis, of Cremona, Landensis, Novaria,
Vercellensis, Ipporegtensis, Vigleviensis, Astensis, Aquensis, Albensis,
Terdonensis, Saonensis, Albingaunensis, Vin^liensis, Placentinum, Papiensis,
and Ferrara are exempted.

THE DVKEDOME OF MILLAN.
THis is the greatest and most potent Dukedom of a Europe, which heretofore
the Insubrians inhabite^ between the Rivers Abdua and Ticinus. The chief
Cities in it are Millan, Lauda, Ticinum, which is now called Papia, and
Novarra. The soil is every where fruitful, pleasant, and watered with many
Streams and Rivers: the chief City hereof is Millan built by the Frenchmen,
for when Tarquinius Prisius reigned at Rome, King Bellonesus having passed over
the Alps with a great band of Frenchmen, and having expulsed the Hetruscians,
he built a City in that place, which Leander says was called Subria, and he
called this City Mediolanum, or as some are persuaded Meydlandum, as it were
the Virgin Land, perhaps from Minervas Temple, who was worshipped in this
place, which is now consecrate to S. Tecla, whence Alciat thus.

Quam Mediolanum sacram dixere puella
Terram: nam vetus hoc gallica lingua sonas.
Culta Minerva fuit, nunc est ubi numine Tecla
Mutato, Matris Virginis ante domum.
Mediolanum the Virgin Land they name,
For in the French it signifies the same,
'Twas sacred to Minerva, now they adore
Tecla, and the Virgin Mother heretofore.
Some think it was so denominated from a Sow that was half covered with
wool, which Alciat seems to glance at thus in his Emblemes, when he says.
Laniger huic fignum, Sus est, animalque biforme
Acribus hinc setis, lauitio inde Levi.
Their arms a Sow, a creature most uncouth,
The One side bristled, 'tother woolly smooth.


So also Claudian in the marriage of Honorius and Maria. -- ad maenia Gallis
Condita lanigerae suis ostendentia pellem.
The wall built by the French, which yet do show
The skin and shape of their wooll-bearing Sow.


map of Milan THE DVKEDOME OF MILLAN.


This Country was reduced to the form of a Province, and was subject to the
Romans, as Polybius and Livie report. And many Emperors taking delight in the
convenience of the place, did make the City of Millan their seat of
residence, and adorned it with many public Aedifices and Buildings; whence
Ausonius. Mediolani mira omnia, copia rerum,
Innumere cultaeque domus; tum duplice muro
Amplificata loci species, populique voluptas
Circus, and inclusi moles cuneata Theatri:
Templa, Palatinaeque arces.
All things at Millan are most wonderful,
There Is plenty, and the houses beautiful.
A double wall the City does augment,
The People in the Cirque take much content,
And in the Theaters they do delight,
There are Temples, and fair Palaces most bright.


But when the Emperor decayed, it was oftentimes vexed by the Huns, Goths,
and Langbards. It was taken and destroyed by Fred. Barbarossa. It was a long
time governed by Vicounts, John Galeatius was first created Duke by the
Emperor Wenceslaus, and from thence it descended to the Aurelians and
Sfortians, and at length Charles the fifth did bring it into his own Family.
In this City there is the royal Castle of Porta Iovia, the strongest in all
Europe. It is full of Artificers, especially Smiths, who forge out of Iron,
Swords, Brest-plates, Bucklers, and other Military instruments. Hence arises
that saying, Qui Italiam armis instruere totam velit, eum destruere Mediolanum
oportere; That is, He that would furnish all Italy with arms, must destroy
Millan. But I conclude with this eloquent Elogie of a Divine Writer.

This Land a people did first entertain,
From whom this Kingdom at the first began.
The French, Italians both all'yd did grow,
And gave new laws unto the ancient Po.
Then Germany joined in so great affairs,
And Fame her golden Trumpet now prepares,
Let one poor honor some poor Town advance,
While threefold honor does unto me chance.
THE PRINCIPALITIES OF VERONA, VICENTIA, AND PATAVIVM.
And the Territories of the chief Cities of MARCA TARVISINA are amply
described.
IN this Table the Territories of three chief Cities of Marca Tarvisina are
delineated and described, Verona, Vicentia, and Patavium. The first is the
Territory or Country of Verona. The length of it from the Town Bruchelius unto
the River which comes out of the Lake Bevacum, is 65. Miles: the breadth from
the Castle on the Frontiers even to Rivoltella is forty Miles. The soil in
some parts is stony, and therefore untilled, and some part of it is very good.
It has abundance of Wheat, Oil, Wine, Cattle, Wool, and other precious
commodities. It has also famous Quarries of Stone. And many wholesome
medicinal herbs, especially on the Mountain Baldus, whether Physicians do
often resort to gather them. The Tuscans are supposed to have built Verona,
others think that the French Cenomanians did build it: who being expulsed, it
was a long time subject to the Romans, and Cn. Pompeius Strabo, the father of
Magnus brought thither a Colonie. Afterward being wasted by Attila King of the
Hunns, it was afterward subject to many Tyrannies, first to the Kings of the
Goths: the Langbards did expel them, and the Frechmen under the conduct of
Charles the great did expel the Langbards: after whom the Berengarians being
droven out of Italy by the Emperor Otto the first, it enjoyed some quiet and
rest under the authority and Protection of the Roman Empire. Actiolinus
Romaninus having got it by force, did change the Praefectorship into a
Lordship, having expulsed Azo Atestinus, whom the Senate and People of Verona
had made Praetor. He dying obout the year 1259. the Saligerians by the
suffrage and common consent of the Citizens were entitled Princes of Verona
almost 128. years; who being droven out, and partly made away by poison, the
Galleatians got possession of it, and afterward the Cariensians, whom the
Venetians did drive out, under whose jurisdiction it constantly and peceablely
continues. The City which Ptol. calls Verona and Overona, does still
retain that name. The Germans call it Dietrichs Bern. It has a thin air.
It is like the City Basil in Heluetia, for situation, having many fair
buildings: it is seated on a plain level, both Southward, Eastward, and
Westward, but on the North side the ground rises a little, like a Roman
Theater. It is fortified, and encompased round about with the River Athesis.
There are diverse Monuments of antiquity, which do testify the ancient
magnificence and riches of this City. It has strait, large streets, paved
with stone, and about 35. Churches, the chief whereof is the ancient
Cathedral Church, and the Church of S. Anastasius; it has 10. Monasteries. On
the top of a rock there are two famous Castles of S. Peter, and S. Faelix. Also
an ancient Castle, which is commonly called Citadella. There is also a great
Amphitheater in the middle of the City. This City is a Bishopric. The
Inhabitants are magnificent, beautiful, comely, very witty, and prone to
learning. I cannot omit this one thing that when the Venetians did fortify
this City, they found certain hollow Caves, and when they dug in the
Mountains, they found Vrchins or hedghoggs of stone, also Oisters, Birds
bills, and star fishes which were as hard as any Stones.

The Territory of VICENTIA.
THe Country of Vicentia follows, the soil whereof as it is pleasant, so it
is fruitful, yielding great store of Wine, and other fruits, especially
Mulberries, on whose leaves Silke-wormes do feed. Not far from the City
there are two famous stone Quarries in the Mountain, which the Latins call
Cornelius, it is commonly called Covelo. There are also Marble Mines in the
Valdanian street. This City was built by the Tuscans, or as Trogus writes,
by the Frenchmen, afterward it continued faithful to the Romans, until
Attilas time who wasted it, and afterward it was subject to the Goths, the
Langbards, and lastly to the Kings of Italy. They being expulsed, it was
subject to the Roman Empire, until the reign of the Emperor Frederick the
second, by whom being sacked and burnt, it had afterward diverse Lords, as the
Carrasieni, of Patavini, the Scaligers of Verona, and the Galeatians of Millan:
and also the Venetians. At length being infested and vexed by the forces of the
Emperor Maximilian the 1. it was restored at last to the Venetians. This City
Trogus, Pomponius, Tacitus, and others do call Vicentia. Plin. and Antoninus
do call it Vicetia: Aelianus Bisetia and Bitetia, Ptol. calls it Ovikenta, and
it is commonly called Vicenza. It is seated near the foot of a Hill, being
divided into unequal parts by the two navigable Rivers Rerone and Bachilione.
It is not very fair or beautiful, but populous, and abounding with plenty.
There are four things here worthy of noting, the Praetors magnificent Palace,
a Bridge of one Arch, the great Altar stone in S. Laurences Church, which is
of a wonderful length, and lastly the Theater, which is commonly called L.
Academia. There is also the Monastery of St. Corona, where there is also a
famous Library. The Inhabitants are of a lively disposition, prone, and apt to
learning, warfare, or merchandising, and Industrious, they live bravely and go
decently in apparel. It is a Bishopric. Moreover in the Territory of
Vicentia, there are these Towns, Morostica which is a famous rich Town. Also
Brendulum which is rich and populous. Also Leucium both for wealth,
populousness, and largeness, may compare with many Cities of Italy. There
is also six Miles about Vicentia, toward map of Verona THE PRINCIPALITY OF
VERONA.
the South, the Town and Castle Custodia, which was so called because
delinquents and loose persons, were kept there at work in great Quarries of
stone, to dig stones for building of houses.

The Territory of PATAVIUM.
THe Territory of Patavium follows, which we are to describe in this Table,
which is thus bounderd by Bernardinus Scardeomus: on the South the River
Athesis runs: on the North the little River Muso glideth: on the East the
gulf of Venice: on the West the Euganian hills, and the Country of Vicentia.
The compass and circumference of this Country is 180. Miles, in which there
are six hundred and seven and forty Villages. Caelius Rhodiginus writes that
Constantinus Palaeologus was wont to say, nisi secreta sanctissimus viris
affimari in Orient Paradisum esse, arbitrari se non alibi eum reperiri posse,
quam in persuavi Patavina amanitate. That is if holy men had not affirmed that
Paradise was in the East, he should think that it could not be found any
where else but in sweet and pleasant Patavium. The soil is fruitful, yielding
corn, fruit, and rich Wines, whence Martial, Pictaque Pompineis Euganea arva
jugis.

The Euganean fields which painted are
With hills that purple Vines do bear.
It affoordeth also great store of Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing. The
Inhabitants have a Proverb, concerning the incredible Plenty of this Country,
Bologna la grassa, Padova la Passa. This City was always joined in friendship
and amity with the Romans, as appears in Livie Lib. 41. and in M. Tullius
his Phillippicks. The Colonie brought hither was better conditioned than other
Colonies. For the Patavians had power to give their voice and suffrage, as the
Roman Citizens. It was taken and sacked with other Cities by Attila King of
the Huns, and an hundred years afterward by the Langbards, who burnt it, when
in the reign of Charles the great, it began to be partly under the Kings of
Italy, and the French King: partly under the Berengarians: but afterward it
became free in the reign of the Emperor Otho the first. The form of this
Commonwealth lasted, until Frederick the second, by whose command and
authority Actiolinus Romaninus possessed this City: after whom it had these
Lords, the Carrariensians, the Scaligerians, and the Galeatians, and about the
year of Christ 1404. the Venetians, whom it still obeys, and like a good
Mother, finding her self weak and infirm through age, she yields all her
right to her Daughter (for the Venetians were a Colonie of the Patavines) not
to be governed, but rather sustained and helped by her. Patavium is a most
ancient City, the flower and honor of all the Cities in Italy, Ptolemy
calls it Patavium, it is now called Padua. Ptolemy also in another place
calls it Baetobium. Some suppose it was so named in regard of the Vicinity
and neerenesse thereof unto the River Po, and the Marshes, and so called as it
were Padaveum: some derive it a petendo or from hitting, because An^^r the
builder of this City, Avem telo petiverit, did there shoot a Bird with an
Arrow. But Antenor is reported to have built it as he came from Troy. Thit
City is situate in a fruitful level soil, and it has a gentle temperate
air, it is happy both for the goodness of the soil, the pleasantness of the
Euganian Mountains, and the vicinity of the Alps, and the Sea. The River
Brenta flows by it. The compass of it is now twofold, and heretofore
threefold: the outward compass or circumference does contain 6200. paces,
with 6. magnificent Gates. The inward circumference 3000. paces, having a long
walk round about it. It is also fair and magnificent, abounding with all
things necessary, it is also paved, and well fortified with Ditches, Trenches,
and Bulwarks: it has magnificent, and sumptuous Aedifices, both sacred,
profane, public, and private. There are 23. Friaries, and 49. Nunneries.
There is a Palace which was built by the Emperor Henry, which is now a Court
of Justice, and the chiefest of note in all Italy, which is not supported with
any Pillars, but covered with Lead. Moreover there is the Court of public
counsel, with a Porch, it is supported with Marble Pillars, built of stone,
and covered with Lead, there are 5. great Marketplaces, 38. Bridges, arched
with stone, over the River Bronta. There are large Porches, spacious Courts,
three Hospitalls for the sick, and as many for strangers. There is also an
Hopitall for Orphans. It does contain 4000. houses. The Inhabitants are very
witty, apt and prone to warfare, virtue, and studies. Titus Livius, Cn.
Valerius, Flaccus, L. Ar^^tius Stella, and many others have graced Padua with
their birth. It has the famous University of Padua, which was founded and
instituted by the Emperor Charles the great, or as some think by Frederick
the second, which was much enlarged by Pope Vrbane the fourth, and perfected
and established by the most illustrious Commonwealth of Venice. There are also
many Libraries, well furnished with Greek and Latin Books, one at S. John's
in the Garden, another at S. Iustines, the third at S. Antonies. This Country
is so watered with Rivers, that to the great commodities and profit of the
Inhabitants, there is no Country Town which is above 5. miles distant from a
River.

FRIVLI, and ISTRIA, KARSTIA, CARNIOLA, AND the Marquiship of the VVindorians,
and the County of CILIA.
THere follows in Mercator, Forum Iulij, and Istria, with other Countries.
This Country was at first so called from Forum Iulij, the chief City, or as
some would have it, from Julius Caesar, who brought hither some Legions against
the Germans. The Italians call it new Friuli, the Germans Friaul: the
Venetians and others do call it Patria. It appears also in Histories that it
was called Aquilejensis. The bounds of this Country on the East are Istria: on
the North the Stony Mountains: on the West the Vindelician and Norician Alps:
on the South the Hadriatick Bay. This Country has a temperate climate, a
wholesome air, fair fields, well watered, and yielding abundance of all
kinds of fruits, the Meadows and Pastures flourishing and full of Cattle, it
has also Vines which yield excellent rich Wines. Woods it has which afford
good Timber, and excellent Hunting, and also Mountains full of Metals,
Marble, and other Precious Stones. The Euganians did first inhabit this
Country, afterward in process of time the Venetians, afterward the Frenchmen,
afterward it was under the Roman Empire, which declining, it was subject to
the Langbards. After them succeeded the Emperors, and after them the
Berengarians, who being destroyed and extirpated, it returned to the obedience
of the Roman Empire. The Emperor Otho gave a good part of it to the Church of
Aquilejum, and Conradus gave the other part with Istria. The Venetians at
length possessed it, about the year 1420. who still do govern it, although
the most part of it be subject to peculiar Earls and Lords. The Metropolis of
this Country is Vtinum, commonly called Vdene, the Germans call it Weiden.
Leander supposes that it is an ancient Town, and that Pliny makes mention of
it. Niger believes that it is that which Ptolemy and others do call Forum
Iulium. Howsoever it is a large City, magnificent, and abounding with plenty
of all things. The compass of it is 5. miles. The Venetians do now govern
the Commonwealth by Presidents sent thither, which they call Locumtenentes or
Substitutes. There are in it 16000. Citizens. There are also other Cities,
Aquileia, commonly called Aquilegia, the Germans call it Agler. It is situate
by the River Natison. The City was heretofore large and spacious, and
fortified with walls, and also beautified with Churches, a magnificent Theater,
and other public and private Buildings. It is now unfrequented, which was
heretofore very fair and populous. It remained faithful and constant to the
Roman Empire, until the time of Attila King of the Huns, by whom being
besieged and much distressed for map of Friuli FRIVLI.
want of Corn, at length it was taken and sacked, and 30000. men who lived in
it were put to the Sword, the rest fled to the Island. Afterward it was
re-edified by Narsetes, and for a time it was under the power of the Langbards,
until the coming of harles the great into Italy, after which time it was
subject to the Kings of Italy, and afterward to the Roman Emperors. Afterward
it began to be under the government of Patriarchs, from them it came to the
Venetians, under whom it now continues in peace and tranquillity. But these
Bishops are subject to the Patriarch of Aquilegium, the Bishop of Concordia,
Pola, Parentium, Triestinensis, or Tergestinensis, Coma^lensis, or Petenensis,
Iustinopolitanus, Madrientis, of the New City, or Emonians. Seek the rest in
the second Table of Lombardy. Under the Bishop of Gradensis, are the Bishops of
Castellanium, or Venice, also Tercellanensis, Equilensis, or Eusulanus,
Caprulensis, Clodiensis, of the New City, or Goritia according to Leander,
which Ptolemy and Antoninus call Iulium Carnicum. Amasaeus Lib. of the bounds
of Venice, places Goritia where Noreja was heretofore, Candidus calls it
Noritia. Goritia has his Princes, which are subject to the Dukes of Austria.
It is a Town famous for wealth and nobility. There is also Portus Gruarius,
which Pliny calls Portus Romatinus, or Spilimbergum, which is well fortified
both by nature and Art; also Maranum which is very populous and rich. The Mount
Falcon is a noble rich Town. There is also the City Palma, and a round Castle
built by the Venetians in the year 1593. under the foundation whereof there
was money laid with this Inscription on one side, Pasale Ciconia Duce
Venetorum, An. Dom. 1593. On the other side, Fori Iulij, Italiae, Christianae
fidei propugnaculum. That is, the Fortress of Forum Iulium, of Italy, and the
Christian faith. I omit the other lesser Towns. These Rivers do appertain to
this Country. Romantinum, Tilaventum, Sontius, Frigidus, Natiso, Alsa ^urus,
and others. The Inhabitants are very prone and apt to humane Arts, Merchandise,
and other honest studies.

ISTRIA.
AFter Forum Iulium follows Istria, well known to Latin and Greek writers,
which still retains that name, the Germans call it Hister-reich, as it were
the Kingdom of Istria. Plinny shows that it was heretofore called Iapydia.
It resembles a Peninsula, and lies for the most part between the two Bays
Tergeslinum and Carnarium, it is encompassed with the Hadriatick Sea, on the
North it is bounderd with the Carnician and Norician Alps; on the West before
it runs forth into the Sea, it has the River Formio, and the River Arsia on
the East. The breadth of it is eleven Miles, the compass of it 122. Miles,
from Formio aforesaid, even to the Fanatic Promontorie, or the innermost
corner of the Carnarian Bay. The whole Country is rugged, yet more hilly then
Mountains, which hills do yield great store of wine, oil, and other fruits,
but little wheat or other grain, except the fields Piscino and Humagio. There
is a Mountain commonly called Major, which is full of wholesome drugs and
herbs, and Physicians do resort hither to gather them. Istria does yield
abundance of Salt. There are also stone Quarries. Marble is cut forth of the
Rovinian fields, which is called Istrian Marble, which is of great esteem
through all Italy. Moreover part of Istria belongs to the Venetians, and part
to the Austrians. Let us come to particulars. The first City that we meet
withal is Iustinopolis, which is a chief City of Chersonesus. For so the
learned call it, which is commonly called Cab^ d' Istria. It was so named at
first from the Emperor Iustine. Afterward it was called by a latter name,
because it lies in the entrance of the Country as you come from Forum Iulium.
It possesses a small Island, which is a Mile long, and of a little breadth
being divided from the Continent unto which it is joined by Bridges, which may
be drawn up. It has a Castle in the midst fortified with four Towers: It
belongs now to the Venetians. Five Miles off, there is another Castle, which
is joined to the continent with a stone Bridge. Afterward there follows
Vranum, which the Italians call Castellatium, and Cistellerium, commonly called
Castelier. Fifty paces hence is S. Simon and Piranum is 5. Miles distant from
thence: and Salvorum as many: and Vinacum. From Vinacum it is two Miles to S.
Peregrine: and a Mile from thence to S. John della Corn; and as many to S.
Laurence commonly called di Daila: a Mile off is Daila it self, and three Miles
off is the raw City, commonly called Aemonia. From the River Quietius it is
three Miles to Port Cerverius. Four Miles from thence is the City ^mium,
which is now called Parenzo. The Town Orser follows, which in Latin is
called Vrserium. Lemus being passed by, we come to ^nium and afterward to that
Town which is commonly called Le ^ne, also to Portesuol, and Mutazzo: and from
thence it is three (...) to the Promontorie Cisanum, Muratio, and Phasiana, and
from t^ence it is two Miles to the Bandonian Valley, and as many to Marco^um:
and it is three Miles from thence to Port Pola. Afterward there is the
Episcopal City Pola seated on a high Mountain, which ^^ll retains his
ancient name, a hundred Miles from Tergeste: and ^^. Miles from Ancona being
divided from it by the Hadriatick Sea. The Rivers of Istria are Risanus,
Draconia, Quietus, Lemus, and Arsia. There are also woods which afforde very
good Ship timber. The Inhabitants are poor in regard the Venetians do
engrosse all traffic to themselves. We will speak hereafter concerning the
Marquiship of the Vindorians, and therefore I will here omit it. I have scarce
any thing to write concerning Karstia, and the County of Cilia: but I will add
something concerning Carniola.

CARNIOLA.
CArniola was so named from the Carnian people, as also Carinthia. Concerning
whom Valaterranus writes thus Lib. 2. of his Ge^graphie. The Carnians are
beyond the Istrians, the Country is broad, beginning from Forum Iulium, and
reaching to the Mountains. The Country of Carniola although it be
Mountainous, as the other Countries of this Province; yet it has plenty of
Wine, Oil, Fruit, aad Corn. But they make Carniola twofold: the dry which
wants water: and the moist, in which the River Nauus rises, and also
Nauportus which is now called Labatus, and many other Rivers. It is adorned
with the title of a Dukedom. The chief City is Labacum, which has the same
name with the River. Some do place Goritia in Carniola, which we mentioned
before in Forum Iulium. On the left hand banck of Sontius upwards, there are
two Fortresses, which the Venetians built heretofore to defend the River, and
to prevent the incursions and inroads of the Turks. Moreover there is a Lake
in this Country, which affords every year a harvest, fishing, and hunting.
The Inhabitants do call it Zircknitzerzee from the Town Zircknitz, which is
situated by it. But I will make a more accurrate description of it out of
George Wernherus: it is enclosed every where with Mountains, for half a Mile
together it is not very broad. Out of the Mountains there do issue certain
small Rivers, which are every one contained in their own Channells: on the
East side there are three, on the South five. The farther that they run the
more narrower they grow, for their banks are strait, until they are
swallowed up in the hoany passages of the Cliffes, which seem as if they were
cut out by humane Industry. So that where they find an open place the waters
do spread abroad, and make a Lake. These waters do as speedily run back as
they flow forward, not only in those narrow channells, but also through the
earth, which when the Inhabitants perceive, they stopp the greater passages,
and Concavities, and so go to fishing, which is both pleasant and profitable.
For the fish which they take here being salted is transported to other
Countries. Moreover when the Lake is dry they have a kind of harvest, for they
sow it and mow it before that it be overflowed again. It bears such
abundance of grass, that in twenty days it will be ready to cut. Who
therefore cannot choose but admire at these wonders of nature? But so much
cocerning these things, I pass to the rest.

THE BISHOPRIC OF TVSCIA
TUSCIA follows, which ancient Writers do celebrate by three special names,
Tyrrhenia, Etruria, and Tuscia: the latter of these three names it still
retains. For it is commonly called Tuscany. The bounds of it are on the South
the Nether Sea, or the Tyrrhene Sea: on the North the Apennine Mountain,
where there is a part of Vmbria, and Gallia ^ogata: on the West Liguria, from
which it is parted by the River Macra: on the East Tiberis. That part which is
nearer to the Sea, is plainer and pleasanter, but the inward parts are more
Mountanious; but in general it is as fair and delightful as any Country in
Italy. It has spacious flourishing fields, very fruitful, pleasant Vales,
Mountains, and Hills, which are adorned with fair houses, and Orchards
planted with Orange Trees, and Cittorne-trees. It has abundance of Vineyards,
which yield excellent rich Wine. The ancient Inhabitants were heretofore
generally called Tyrrhetians, Etruscians, and Tuscians. Afterward from Romulus
time the Romans began to war against the Tuscians, which war they
maintained a long time, so that matters being brought to a dangerous estate,
they were feign to send out a Dictator against them. But in the year from the
building of the City 474. the Vulsinensians and the Vulciensians the most
flourishing people of the Etruscians being overcome by the Consul. Ti.
Coruncanius, they were added to the Roman Empire, and so the Empire was
enlarged on that side even to Arnus. Neither had they afterward any just
occasion to war with the Tuscians. So that being thus subjected they
continued faithful to the Roman People. But when the Roman Empire began to
decline, they were oppressed with many calamities, by the Goths, the
Langbards, the Huns, and others. At length it came to pass that the greater
part of Etruria is now subject to the great Duke of Etruria, under whose
government there are these noble Towns, Florence, Pisa, Sena, Pratum,
Pistorium, Volatterra, Mons Politianus, Aretium, Cortona, Pescia, Pientia, Mons
Alcinus, Liburnum, Plumbinum, and many other Towns. That which they call S.
Peter's Patrimony belongs to the Pope. It begins from the River Pescia, and
S. Quirie, and so reaches to the Castle Caparanum in new Latium not far from
the River Lirus. Pontremulum near the Fountain of the River Marca belongs
to the King of Spain, which heretofore belonged to the Dukes of Millan, also
Portus Herculis, Orbetellum Mons Argentarius, and Plumbini Arx, also the
Carfenianian or Grasinianian Valley, which lies beneath the Apennine on both
sides of the River Sercia, in which there map of Tuscia THE BISHOPRIC OF
TVSCIA.
is the new Grasinianian Castle, with many other Castles and Towns, are
subject to the Duke of Ferrara. Sarzan by the River Macra looks toward Genoa.
Massa and Carraria do belong to particular Marquesses, who are adorned with
their Titles. There are also other Towns which were subject to the Romans, as
Bracianum, of which the Ursines are Dukes. Moreover in Tuscia there are these
chief Cities: Pisa a very curious City, which Trogus, and others call Pisae.
The Inhabitants have a very good memory, because the City is seated in a thick
air. It lies between the Rivers Auseres, and Arnus, as Strabo, and Pliny do
note. Now Arnus runs by it which has three Harens. Dionysius Halic. Lib. 1.
does celebrate and praise the antiquity and nobility thereof. Others do
deliver, that it was usually accounted one of the 12. chief Cities of
Etruria, the Duke of Etruria, is often styled Duke of Pisa, and the Knights of
S. Stephen, who were instituted by this Duke, have a house in this City. The
Pisanians did build the chief Temple which they call Domus, or the House,
which is 540. paces in compass, and supported with 70. Pillars, and also they
built the Bishops house with, the spoils which they brought away after the
conquest of the Sarazens at Panormus. The soil round about this City is fit
for tillage; and so fruitful, that it feeds all Etruria, and sends Corn
to other Countries. The Wines are not very good: but there are excellent
Melons. There is also Leuca, of which Julius Scaliger says, Tuscis delitium,
Tusci laus incluta Coeli: Luca is well known both to Latin and Greek Writers:
Strabo and Ptolemy call it Leuca. It is a fair City, and populous, seated on
a Plain, and environed on every side with Hills strongly walled, and well
paved, it is not very great, but full of Citizens, and has continual
traffic and trading. The Inhabitants are neat, wise, witty: who have a long
time kept their liberty, albeit their neighbors have often assaulted them.
Pistorum, ^ow called Pistoja, is walled about and was much enlarged by
Desiderius King of the Langbards. At length the Florentines laid it to their
own Territory. Florence is the chief City and Metropolis of Etruria. It is
now commonly called Fiorenza, or Firenza. It is thought that Florence was so
called ab Flore from a Flower, in regard that the happy and flourishing estate
thereof resembles a Flower, or else in regard of the flourishing excellent wits
of the Inhabitants, or lastly, because it was derived from Rome the most
flourishing City. It is 6. miles in compass, and contains above 90000.
Inhabitants, it is seated on a level plain by the River Arnus, which cutteth
it into two parts which are united again, and joined together with fair
Bridges, it is paved, and adorned with fair streets, and on the East and North
it is encompassed with pleasant Hills clothed with fruit-bearing trees, and on
the West side it has a fair Plain. It lies in a middle Climate between
Aretium and Pisa, the former of these Cities does produce sharp wits, and the
other, men of a strong faithful memory. The arms of the Appennine do
fortify it against the invasions or incursions of enemies, it is very fair
and beautiful, insomuch that it is a common saying Florenza la bella,
totiusque flos Italiae; that is, Florence the fair, and the flower of all
Italy: there are here many sacred, and profane public Buildings, which for
brevity sake I omit. The Inhabitants are witty, grave, eloquent, and studious
of good Arts. They love to get money, and to that end they trade into foreign
Countries. The Women are very beautiful, and chaste, and their habit, as also
that which the men wear is very decent and comely Volaterra, which Ptolemy
calls Ovolaterrai, and the Itinerary Tables Aquae Volaterrae, is seated on a
steep rugged Rock. The walls are of Free square stone, six foot broad,
which are neatly and cunningly built without Mortar. This City has five
Gates, and at every one of them a Fountain of pure water. The walls do show
the antiquity thereof, as also the Sepulchers, Epitaphs in Etrurian Letters,
and ancient Marble Statues, and also carved stones which are dug forth
daily, and other things. That which Ptolemy calls Saena, and the Itinerarie
Tables Saena Iulia, is commonly called Siena, being distant from Rome 800.
Furlongs, and seated on a high ground, on this side Arbia, having as it were
three corners, of which that which looks Southward is broader than those
which are Eastward and Westward: it has a good wholesome air, but that it is
troubled sometimes with blasting winds. Many of the Poets do call it delitias
Italiae, that is the delight and pleasure of Italy, Saena is paved, having
strait long streets, and high Towers, and also many noblemens houses. The
Citizens are very courteous toward Strangers, much adicted to gain and
worldly affairs. That which Ptolemy calls Perusia, and Eutropius and the
Itinerarie Tables Perusium, the Italians do now call Perugia. It is seated on
a Hill of the Apennine, and fortified by the natural situation. It has many
fair Buildings both public and private, Viterbium stands in a fair
spacious place, and has Cyminian Mountains behind it, it is built of square
stone, and has many Towers. Among the public works there is a famous
Fountain, which springs continually. It has a good fruitful soil, which
yields abundance of Wine and fruits. There are also many Lakes in Etruria. As
that which Livie and others call Trasumenus, and Silius Trasimenus, and now it
is called from the City near unto it Lago de Perugia, that which Antoninus
calls Lacus Aprilis, is now called Fangosa Palude, the Sea-lake, or the
Salt-lake, or Lago d'Orbitello, is called in their language Lacus Vadimonis,
there are also the Ciminian Lake, the Volsiniensian, the Sabatian, the
Bientinian, and the Cianian. It has many Rivers, which are full of excellent
Fish, as namely, Laventia, Frigidus, Anser, Arnus, Cecinna, Cornia, Alma,
Brunus, Vmbro, Osa, Albengia, Floris, Martha, Minio, Eris, Vacina, Sanguinaria,
Aron, and some others. It has also wholesome Bathes, and other waters endued
with wonderful virtue. Here are diverse Mountains, as also the Mountain
Ciminus, well known to Livie, Vibius, and Virgil. That which Pliny calls
Soractis is now called Mente de S. Silvestro. Orosius also places the
Fessulanian Mountains in Etruria. The Corronensians also are there on the
North side of the Lake Transumenus. The Woods are the Volsinian wood, the
Ciminian wood, and Maesia. It has also diverse Libraries, as at Pisa by the
Dominicans, at Luca by the Franciscans, six in the City of Florence, and one
at Saena, and Perusia. Moreover Livy and Diodorus do report that the Etrurians
are the strongest, richest and best governed Nation of Italy. It appears by
ancient Writers that they were always much adicted to ceremonies, insomuch
that they were the first that invented Sacrifices, Divinations, South sayings,
and Auguries, and so delivered them to the Romans, as Tully in his Book of
divination and others do note. Mercator does reckon these Bishops in Tuscany,
Nepesinus, Castellanensis, Montis Falconis, Viterbiensis, Suavensis,
Castellanus, Vulteranus, the Archbishop Senensis, Fesulanus, Zarzanensis,
Sutri, Ortanensis, Cornetanensis, Tuscanensis, Clusinus, Aretinas,
Pientinensis, Pistoriensis, Binensis, Corthonensis, Civitatensis,
Bal^^rigensis, Vrbevetanus, Castrensis, Perusinus, Grossetanus, Lucanus,
Florentinus, Arch, Lunensis: the Archbishop of Pisa under whom are Messanensis,
Civitanensis, and other Bishops in Corsica.

THE MARQVISHIP OF ANCONITANA, AND the Dukedom of SPOLETO.
THE Marquiship of Ancomitana was so called by the Langbards from Ancone a
famous Mart Town, where the Marquesses of this Country had their seat of
residence. Livy and others do call it Picenum. There confineth on the
Marquiship of Ancomitana, on the South the Sabinians, Vilumbrians, and
Vmbrians, with the Apennine Mountain: on the West Gallia Cisalpina, with the
River Isaurus; on the North the Adriatic Sea. Concerning the Eastern bounds
there are diverse opinions. Pliny makes them to be the Rivers Aternus and
Ancon: and Ptolomy the River Matrinus with Ancon. The modern writers the
chief whereof is Leander, does make the River Truentum to be the bounds and
limmits between them and the Preturiarians. The Country of Picenum according
to Livy, is very fertile, but yet it has greater store of fruit than corn.
The best wine is made at the Town called Sirolum, which Plinny calls
Anconitanian Wine. This Country is for the most part under the Popes
Jurisdiction: there are these Towns in it Ancona, Recanatum, Fanum D. Mariae
Laureti, Camerinum, Fanum Fortunae, Tolentinum, Firmum, Macerata, and some
others Towns: also Eugebium, Coligum, Forum Semrronij, S. Leo, Senogallia,
V^binum, and some others. The chief City is Ancona, which Ptolomy calls
Ancon. It still retains that name, which was first given to this City,
because the Country bends here like an Elbowe. It is opposite to the
Promontorie Cumeras, and it is enclosed on the North with the Sea and the
Haven: moreover it is well fortified with Gates, Bulwarks, and Walls: It has a
Port or Haven which is strong both by Art and nature, and has a convenient
entrance into it, and is able to receive many ships, which was built by the
Emperor Traian. The City has twelve Fortes, which are all well furnished
with ordinance. It is famous in regard that Graecians, Illyrians, Pannonians,
and all Europe do trade and traffic here, it is very populous, and the
streets are long and strait. The soil round about is fruitful, yielding
Wine, and other commodities. There are also Firmium, now called Firmo, an
ancient City. Ricenetum, Reccanoto, or Recunati, which the Italians do now
call Ricanati, is a famous Mart-towne, in so much that Merchants out of all
Europe and Asia do come thither twice a year to Faires. Some ruinous pieces
of Helvia Ricina may be seen as you travel along, among the rest there is a
great brick Amphitheater on the bank of the River Potentia, and other
carcasses of great Buildings. Auxinum is an ancient Episcopal City, commonly
called Osmo. Livy calls it Oximum. Many Epitaphs and Elogies which have been
found here of late do show the antiquity thereof. Fabrianum in Latin called
Faberiana, is a Town map of Anconitana and Spoleto THE MARQVISHIP OF
ANCONITANA, AND the Dukedom of SPOLETO.
very full of Shops, which are so distributed, that every street has several
shops, so that one street has all Smiths, and another all Shoomakers, and
another Papermen. Sevogallia is an Episcopal City, which as it appears by
Polibius and others was first called Sena, afterward Senogallia: it is now
called Sinigaglia, or Sinegalia: it has a thick air. Parvum is watered on the
West with the River Misa: being fortified with a thick brick wall, with a
Ditch and Bulwarks. But yet in regard it is so near unto the Sea it wants
fresh water, so that they are feign to use that which is brought thither. Fanum
is an Episcopal Town not very great, situated on a Mountain, commonly called
Fano, Tacitus and Ptolemy do commonly call it Fanum Fortunae, for there are
still many ruins remaining of that sumptuous Church which was dedicated to
Fortune. Here is a Marble Arch of costly and curious workmanship, which is
thirty Cubits high, and thirty broad. On the top whereof which is fallen down,
there was an Elegy engraven in praise of the Emperor Constantine. The River
Argilla runs by it Forum Sempronium, now called Fossumbrunum, or
Fossumbruno, is an Episcopal Town, in which there are many tokens of
antiquity, for besides Aquaeducts, paved ways, pillars and other things, there
are many marbles thrown down with ancient inscriptions, which have been
gathered by others. Pisaurum is an Episcopal City now called Pesaro. A famous
Mart-towne of Italy, rich in Merchandise, beautiful, and adorned with fair
houses. Vrbinum is situate on a high unlevell Mountain between the same
Rivers, it is a neat City fairly built, and has a fruitful soil round
about it, and it is adorned with a fair Library, which is furnished with many
excellent Books. In Picenum by the side of the Mountain Victor there is a
famous Lake, which they call Nursinum. The common people do affirm that evil
spirits do swim in it: because the water do continually leap up and fall
down again, to the great admiration of those who are ignorant of the cause
thereof. These Rivers do water it, Truentus, commonly called Tronto,
Castellanus, Asonus. Letus mortuus, Tenna, Chientus, Flastra, Letus Vivus,
Asinus, Potentia, Muson, Esinus, Misa, Sontinus, Cesanus, Metaurus, Cantianus,
Boasus, Argila. There are these Mountains, Furcas, Pescas, and Auximus so
called from the City Auximum, and Corvus, whence many Rivers together with
Albula and Truento do run through the Marrucinians, the Praecutianians, and
the Marsins. But the Apennine Mount in this place where it hangs over this
Country is highest. Here are these Bishoprics, Asculanensis, Firmianus,
Camerinensis, Auximanensis, Humanas, Anconitanus, Esinensis, or Exinas,
Senogaliensis, Fanensis, Pisaurensis, Forosemproniensis, Calliensis, Vrbinas,
or S. Leonis, Maceratensis, Racanatensis.

The Dukedom of SPOLETO.
THe Dukedom of Spoleto commonly called Ducato di Spoleto, is so called from
the City Spoleto, which was heretofore the Palace of the Dukes of Lombardy. It
was heretofore called Vmbria. It may be clearly collected out of Strabo that
the bounds of Vmbria were heretofore very large, who make the Apennine
Mountain, and the Hadriatick Sea to be the bounds thereof. Some do make the
length of it to be from Ravenna to Tiberis, which is a 1650. Furlongs, or 1128.
Furlongs and an half. The Country is here full of high rugged Mountains, and
there garnished and trimmed with Hills, which do yield great store of Wine,
Oil, Figs, and other fruits, and then again it opens into fertile and
fruitful Plains. The Cities of the Dukedom of Spoleto are Eugubium, which
is seated at the foot of the Apennine, and there lies a pleasant fair Plain
before it. Some would have it to be that which Silius calls Inginium: Cicero
Iguvium: P^^l. Isovion. It is an old Town, and of great Antiquity. It is now a
populous Town, and the Inhabitants do live by dressing and spinning of Wool.
The soil is partly Mountainous, partly Champion. And it has every where great
store of Corn. Neuceria also cleaves to the side of the Apennine, the
Itinerarie Tables do call it Nuceriu^, commonly Nocera, and in their language
Fulignum or Fuligno, it is above an hundred and threescore Furlongs from
Perusia. Sillus Italicus calls it Fulginia. Timia is divided with a little
poor stream. In the Market place there are three Palaces: in one of which
there do dwell the 7. men called Fulginates, before whom all civil
controversies are brought, who bear that office for two years: in the other
the Praetor who judges of more weighty causes, and his office lasts six
months: in the third is the governor, who has chief power under the Pope.
Assisum was so called from the Mountain Asis near unto it, Ptolemy calls it
Aesisium, Strabo Aesium, it is commonly called Ascesi, and Sisi, it has a
Bishop. Here S. Francis was borne, who instituted the Order of Minorite Friars,
and it has a sumptuous Church. Here is also a well-furnished Library. Mons
Falco is a new Town seated among pleasant Hills, and very populous, B. Clara,
who founded the Order of S. Clares Nuns, was borne here. There is also
Spoletum, from whence Vmbria was called the Dukedom of Spoleto. It is commonly
called Spoleto, Strabo and Ptolemy do call it Spoletium. It has an unequal
situation, partly on a Plain, and partly on a Hill, on which there is a strong
Castle built out of the ruins of an Amphitheater. It is now a fair City,
abounding with plenty of all things. There is besides many other ancient
Edifices, as the foundation of an Amphitheater, and the old Church of Concordia
without the City, and there are pieces of Aquaeducts, which were cut out of
the Apennine, and partly conveyed to the City through brick Vaults and
Channels. Ceretum is a new Town but populous, from whence the Ceretain are now
called Errones, or wanderers, who travel through all Italy under the pretense
and color of sanctity and religion, and get their living by diverse Arts. The
Castellanian Bridge, or Ponte Castello was built by the Ceretanians. Here John
Pontanus was borne, a famous, learned man. Conissa is a new Town seated on a
Mountain, but very populous. That which Strabo calls Interamna, and
Antoninus Interamnia, and the Itinerarie Tables Interamnium; is commonly called
Terni, or Terani: it abounds with all things necessary, and is very populous.
The River makes the soil very fruitful. Vernaccia has excellent Wine. Tuder
is an ancient City situate on a pleasant Hill, adorned and garnished with
Figs, Olives, Vines, and other fruits. It has these Lakes Floridum, Velinum,
Cutiliensis. And besides Inginium which Strabo mentions, it has these
Mountains, Eugubinum, Floridum, and others. There are also the Crustumenian
Mountains, out of which the River Asia flows with a deep Channel. There is
all Fiscellus which Pliny calls the top of the Apennine, whence the River Nar
issues from two Fountains; it is now called Monte Fiscello. There is also a
part of the Apennine, which is called Mons Victor, where it lifts up his high
top above the Castle Arquatae, and seems to exceed it self in height, and
thence it is called Mons Victor, because it exceeds the rest in height. The
Inhabitants are more warlike then the other people of Italy. The Bishop
Ar^^inensis is subject to the Archbishop of Ravenna. There are these
Bishoprics in the Dukedom of Spoleto, Assisinas, Fulginas, Nucerinus,
Eugubinus, Spoletinus, Tudertinus, Ameliensis, Narniensis, Interamniensis.

CAMPAGNA DI ROMA, HERETOFORE CALLED LATIVM.
NExt Latium offers it self to be described, which is a Country of Italy much
celebrated and praised by all Authors. It is thought that Latium was so callen
from Saturnus, who flying from his Country in his locis latebat, hid himself
in these parts. Varro thinks that this Country was so na^ed, because it lay
hidden among the high steep Rocks of the Alps, and the Apennine, the Sea,
and Tiber. Others say that it was named Latium from King Latinus, some derive
it from the Latitude, because there is no Country between the Mountains and
the Sea, that has a greater Latitude then this. It is now called Territorio
Ro^um or Campagna di Roma. The most do make the bounds of Latium on the North
the Apennine Mountain, and the River Anio: on the East Li^. on the South the
Tyrrhene Sea; on the West the River Tiber, which ^^th encompasse the Tuscians,
Sabinians, Marsians, Samnites, Praeguti^ians, and Campanians. It is a very
fertile Country, except in some places near the Borders, where it is stony and
mountainous, and has many Marshes, which do make the air thick and
unwholesome. The Sicilians, the Aboriginians, the Pelasgians, the Arcadians, the
A^^uncians, the Volscians, the Oscians, the Ausonians, and others did first
inhabit it. So much briefly concerning Latium in general: now our method
requires that we should describe it in particular, beginning from that City
which was heretofore the Compendium or Epitome of the whole world. This City
shows her self in ancient Latium, as soon as you have passed out of Etruria
over Tiberis. It will keeps her former name. It is situated in a soil not
very fertile, right against the South, and has an untemperate air and
climate. It was three miles in compass, which was the compass of ancient
Rome, but now it is far less. It has 360. Towers on the walls, and
heretofore 750. There are the 14. Quarters and Regions of the City, but their
names are changed. It is watered with the River Tiber and Almo. There are also
in many places the ruins of Fountains, and Aquaeducts, or Conduites. There
are diverse Marketplaces, and seven Hills within the walls. Whence some do
call Roma Septicollis, because it is seated seven Hills, Varro calls it
Septimontium, and Statius Septemgemina. Moreover there are in this City above
300. Churches. There are four Vaults under earth, where when the Emperors did
persecute the Christians, they hid themselves. There were, and are ^8.
Churchyards or burying places. There are five public Hospitals for Strangers
of all Nations, and 20. several Hospitals for several Nations, besides an
University. And there are Seminaries and Colleges of all Nations instituted by
Pope Gregory the third. There are many public Libraries, three in the Vatican,
one of choice Books which is shut, and another which is not kept so close, and
a thir^ which on Holy Days is open two hours for all comers. There ar^ also
other Libraries in S. Mary's Church, and the Church of the Alta^ of Heaven, S.
Martins, S. Augustines, and otherwheres. There are als^ diverse Gardens and
Palaces in this City which belong to the Pop^ and the Cardinals. There are
both public and private Conduite* Bathes, Triumphant Arches, Amphitheaters,
Theaters, Cirques, Ga^leries, Pillars, Spires, Colosses, or great Images,
Pyramisses, Horse^ Statues, and many other such like antiquities, which our
intende^ brevitie will not permit us to number or describe. He that beholds
these things, and compares them with ancient Rome, may worthily say, Qui
miseranda videt veteris vestigia Romae,
Ille potest merito dicere, Roma fuit.
He that the ruins does of Rome behold,
May justly say that this was Rome of old.


And so much concerning Rome from whence as you go Southward, the Town which
the Latins and Greeks call Ostia does offe^ it self, which has an
unwholesome pestilent air, but the soyl^ bears great store of Melons. So
leaving Ostia, I will take a view o^ the other chief Towns of Latium, which
are seated by the Sea. Neptunium is situate on a more fruitful soil, where
the Citizens have leisure to Hawke and Fish. There is also Astura which is a
memorable place, both by the unworthy death of M. Tullius Cicero, who wa^
slain there as he fled from Antony: and also by the fatal death of Co^radinus
the son of the Emperor Frederick the second, whom Charle^ Eculismensis put
to death. There is also Taracina or Tarracina, which Strabo calls Taracina,
Ptolemy Tarraecina, Stephanus Tarracine, and Antoninus Tarracina. In the
Volscian language it was called Auxur. It is (...) small Town but neat and
populous. The walls are made of squar^ stone without Mortar or Cemont, the
soil round about is fruitful^ and pleasant, abounding with Oranges, Citternes,
Lemmons, and such like fruit. Cajeta, which Strabo calls Cajatta, and now
Gajetta, is (...) well fortified City having an impregnable Castle on the top
of (...) Mountain, which in former time, the Frenchmen being expulsed
Ferdinand King of Arragon and Naples, did wall it about. Spart^an^^ reports
that there was a famous Haven here, which was much renewed and re-edified by
Anton. Pius. But now there is none. The next (...) Velitra, which Strabo
calls Belitra, and Stephanus Belitre, or as some do^ write Belletri, it is an
ancient Town of the Volscians, fair and populous, and it is a Bishopric, it
has a delightful Situation, and (...) pleasant Prospect, and it is walled
about. That which the Latins an^ Graecians do call Alba, the ancient Writers
do surname it long Alba, or long Alba, in regard of the Situation. It is now
called Savell^ if we may credit Leander, others do call it Gandolffi, or S.
Gandolffe. I^ was built by Ascanius the Son of Aeneas, 30. years after
Laviniu^ map of Latium ^AMPAGNA DI ROMA, OR, LATIVM.
was built, but now it is desolate. Now let us describe the more Northern
parts of Latium by the way Valeria T^burtina. Here the first is that which
Ptolemy calls Tiber, Strabo Tibura, and now Tivola. It is a City by the River
Aniene being 150. Furlongs distant from Rome, having a temperate air, and a
wholesome situation in regard it has great store of Waters and Springs, and it
is a Bishopric. Maruvium by the Lake Fucinum, was heretofore the chief City
of the Marsians, now there are some ruins only remaining, which are commonly
called Marvo. The Latins and Strabo do call it Alba. And Strabo reports
that the Romans were wont to assign Alba, because it was situate in the
innermost parts of the Country, and was well fortified, as a Prison for those
which were to be kept in custody, but now it is fallen down, and ruinate.
Praeneste, which Strabo calls Praenestus, Ptolemy Praenestum, and now
Pilastrina, had heretofore a very pleasant and delightful situation on a
bending Mountain by the River Venestris, in so much that when the Roman
Empire flourished, the Emperors did often make it their place of retirement
and recreation. There is a Castle on the top of the Mountain, and it is now a
Bishopric. Tusculum was famous heretofore, which they suppose by the ruins
yet remaining was not far from Frascata. There are more Towns in this noble
part of Italy, which for brevity sake we omit. There are also Lakes in Latium,
as the Lake Hostia, which is commonly called Stagno. Between Marinus and long
Alba there is the Alban Lake, which Livy mentions, Lib. 5. it is now called
Lago di ^astel Gangolfo: there is also the Nemorensian Lake, which is now
called Lago di Nemo: the Lake Iuturna, or Regillus now called Lago de S.
Prassed^: the Lake Fucinus, now called Lago di Marsos, Pliny also describes
the Pontine or Pomptine Lake in Latium, which is now called the Lake Aufente.
There is also the Fundane Lake, the Tiburrine, the Coecubian, and the Simbruine
Lakes. The Rivers are Tiber, which I have delineated in the general
description, and diverse other Rivers, which having lost their names do run
into the Sea with it. The other Rivers of Latium as they were anciently called
are Numicius, Loracina, Stura, Nymphaeus, and Vfens. Moreover besides the 7.
Hills aforesaid whereon Rome is seated. Albanus is most famous in all Greek
and Latin Writers. The Mountain Caecubus which reaches to the Cajetan Bay,
is noted for bearing excellent rich Wines. There are also the Mountains
Vestinus, Algidus, Aventinus, Lepinus, Catillus. Halecarnassaus does mention
the Ceraunian Mountains of Latium. The Woods are Feronia, Jupiters Wood,
Diana's Wood, the Wood Naevia, the Muses Wood, the cold Wood, the Wood Albuna,
the Wood Angitia, and the Wood Furina. The people of this Country even until
these times, except it be in the Cities, are rude, rustic, stout, and strong
of body. Mercator does thus describe the Ecclesiastic government. Rome is the
Mother Church, in which the Pope resideth, and has under him within the City
5. Patriarchall Churches, which are these, the Church of S. John of Lateran, S.
Peter's Monastery, and S. Paul's Monastery within the walls of the City, S.
Mary's Church, and S. Laurences Monastery. There are 8. Bishops assigned to
govern these Churches, the first and chiefest is the Pope, the rest are under
him, as the Bishop Ostiensis, who is Patriarch of Campania, and does consecrate
the Pope, unto whom is joined Velletrensis, or Valeriensis, Portuensis,
Salinensis, Tusculanensis, Praenestiensis, and Albanensis. There are also
assigned for the government of the same Churches 28. Cardinals, ^amely, by the
title of the holy Cross of Jerusalem, by the title of S. John and Paul, by the
title of S. Stephen, in Celio-Monte: by the title of S. Susanna: by the title
of S. Peter, by the title of S. Prisca: by the title of S. Siriack: by the
title of S. Marcellus: by the title of S. Balbina: by the title of S.
Grisogoni. S. Marcellinus, and Peter, S. Anastasia: S. Clement, S. Potentiana,
S. Martin on the Mountains: S. Praxedis: S. Marcus: S. Laurence: S. Mary: S. 4
or. Coronatorum: S. Sabina: S. Nereus, and Archileus: S. Sixitus, S. Eusebius:
S. Vitalis: the 12. Apostles Church: S. Laurentius: and S. Cecilia: unto which
are adjoined 18. Cardinals as Deacons. Without the City there are in Campania,
the Bishops, Agnaninus, Alatrinensis, Fundanus, Tiburtinus, Sagninus,
Terracinensis, Verul^nus, Feretinus, Soranus, Aquinus. Moreover, the Pope has
under him in other parts of the world four Patriarchall Churches, unto which
all other Churches in the same parts are subject: as the Church of
Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Antioch, of Jerusalem.

ABRVZZO, AND TERRA DI LAVORO, A PART of the Kingdom of NAPLES.
IN this Table two Countries of the Kingdom of Naples are to be described,
Aprutium and Terra Laboratoris. The former or Aprutium, the Italians do now
call Abruzzo. The bounds thereof on the West are the Sabinians and Picentians,
with the River Truentum: on the North the Hadriatick Sea, on the South the
Picentinians, Campanians, Martians, Aequicolians, dwelling on every side of the
Apennine Mountain. The Country has a very wholesome air, and is very
populous, pleasant, and commodious toward the Sea, but the inward parts are
Mountainous. Besides other commodities it has abundance of Saffron, and it
breeds great store of Cattle. The chief City of this Country is Aquila.
They report that the Langbards did build it, and afterward Charles Martell, or
as some think, the Emperor Frederick the second did wall it, and fortify it,
and did call it Aquila, or Eagle, because the Emperors Standard had an Eagle
in it. And this City in short time was so much enlarged, that it is now the
principal City in all this Country. Moreover, there are the Towns Guastum,
or Amonium in Italian Guasto di Amone, which Pliny and Mela call Histon^um, and
Ptolemy Istodium without an aspiration. Laucianum is a famous Mart-towne,
whether every year in the Months of May or August, Italians, I^luricians,
Sicilians, Graecians, Asians, and Merchants from other parts of the world do
come to traffic. Soulmoon, which Ptolemy calls Sulmo, and Strabo Soulmon, is
now called Sulmona, as Leander witnesses, and some do call it Sermona. It is
a fair City, both for beauty, populousness, and abundance of waters, and
famous, because Ovid was borne here. Chieti commonly called Civita Cheto, is an
Archiepiscopall City. Asculum is an ancient City, which Antoninus calls
Asculum, and Pliny calls it the noble Colonie of Picenum. It stands in a
plain open soil, being well fortified with strong walls On one side there is
a high Mountain with a Castle seated on it, on the other side it is fortified
with the River Truenius. It is called now by a more fortunate and auspicious
name Beneventum, though at first it were called Maleventum, from the ruins
which it suffered a malo Vent^, or from evil fierce winds. It is commonly
called Beneventi. This City has a very convenient and pleasant situation, and
an excellent fruitful soil round about it. Sora is near unto the River
Lirus, being populous, and adorned with the title of a Dukedom. There is also
the Town which Ptolemy calls Aquinus, where the great Philosopher Thomas
Aquinas was borne. It retains still that name, but it is almost fallen down,
yet the ruins do show the ancient largeness thereof: and it has the title
of a Country. I omit the description of the other Towns for brevity sake. The
Rivers here are Phinternus, map of Abruzzo ABRVZZO.
which devideth Samnium from Apulia, commonly called Fortore. The Fountain
whereof issues out of the Mountain Tifernus, not far from Bovianum. And it
discharges it self into the Hadriatick Sea near the Lesinensian Lake. There
are also Trintus, which Pliny notes is full of Havens, also Asinella, Sentus,
Sangrus. There are also the Rivers Morus, Feltrinus, Pescara, Aternus,
Rafentus, Orta, Liberata, Salinus, Plumba, Vomanus, Turdinus, and others.
Moreover, there are also among the Samnites Mountains so high, that they do
exceed the Apennine Mountains. Among which is the Virgins Mountain, famous
for S. Mary's Church which is built thereon. Majella is a very great Mountain,
having a very difficult ascent, and full of rugged cliffes and Rocks. The top
of it is continually coverd with Snow, yet it has many green Meddowes, and it
sends forth many Rivers, and has very spacious woods, which are full of
wild beasts, especially Bears, and it has many rugged cliffes. There are
also the tops of the Apennine, which they call Montes Tremuli, or the trembling
Mountains.

Terra di Lavoro.
THis Contry is now called Terra Laboris, or Terra di Lavoro, that is the Land
of labor. It was heretofore called Campania. The bounds thereof, as we may see
in Strabo, Ptolemy, and others, are on the west the River Lirus and Latium: on
the North the Samnitian Mountains: on the East the River Silarus, which
parts it from Lucania, and a part of the Samnitians Country: on the South the
Tyrrhene Sea. Truly Campania is Campus, or a Field, into which nature has
powered forth of her own bosom, all the delights, pleasures, and delicacies,
which any place can afford. So that it may be rightly called the Paradise of
Italy, for fertility and fruitfulness. Diverse people did heretofore govern
this Country, which Strabo mentions Lib. 5. and Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 5. as
namely, the Opicians, Ausonians, Oscians, Cumanians, Tuscians, and Samnites,
whom the Romans last of all subdued. So much briefly in general concerning
Campania, now I come to a more particular description thereof, and first of the
Cities. The Metropolis or mother City of Campania and the Kingdom of Naples
is called in Coins Neapolis or Naples. Which name it still retains, and is
commonly called Neapolis. It takes up a great space of ground being
magnificently built between the Sea and the foot of the pleasant Hills: being
fortified with Bulwarks, Towns, and Castles, by Charles the fifth, so that it
is now impregnable. It has Ditches, which are 80. feet deep, 8. Gates, and
spacious Marketplaces. There are great store of common Condiutes, out of which
the water is conveied through an hundred Pipes. The figure of it is long, and it
bends like an half Moon. The compass of it heretofore was 3. miles, but
now the Territories thereof being enlarged, it is 5. miles about. It has a
gentle pleasant air, and scarce any Winter. This City has many fair
Churches, and private Buildings, and a strong impregnable Castle, with an
University which was instituted by the Emperor Frederick the second, unto
which Students do come out of all parts of the Kingdom. There are also some
Libraries, the chief whereof is S. Dominicks Library. The Country round about
it and the neighboring Hills are pleasant and delightful, and do yield good
store of Corn, Wine, diverse Fruits, Herbs, Flowers, and all delicacies, both
for necessity and pleasure. I omit many things concerning this City for
brevity sake. There are also other Cities, as the old and new Capua, the
ancient is known to all Latin Writers, and the beauty, fairness, and
magnificence thereof is praised by all men. Great ruins thereof may be yet
seen a mile from new Capua, near S. Mary's Church. New Capua was built out of
the ruins of the old, which stands now on the left bank of Vulturnus, 22.
miles from the Sea, on a plain well inhabited, but not much frequented: it
has strait streets paved with stone and high buildings, on the East and North
the River Vulturnus does water it, and from thence it runs Westward. There
is a fair stone bridge over the River. There is also Teanum surnamed
Sidicinum, it is called in Italian Theano, and it is a Bishopric. There is
also the Town Calvus which is a Bishopric: Virgil calls it Cales. Strabo
and Ptolemy, and other Grecians Cuma. But now it is fallen down, and buried in
ruins, yet the foundations of some fair buildings may be discerned. There are
also Aversa, Cas^^, a Nola, Summa, Puteoli, and other lesser Towns. The chief
Lakes of Campania are the Lucrenian, and Avernian. There are also in Campania
the Lakes Linterna, Popeja, and Statina. The Rivers are Lirus which receives
on the right hand Fibernum, Cosa, Alabrum, Trerus, and others. On the left hand
Casinus, Melfa, and Omnes. The next to Lirus is Vulturnus, which receives many
Rivers and Torrents, among the rest, on the right hand it receives Cusanum,
and Correctam, on the left hand Freddus, Pratellus, Sabbatus, Isclerus, and
others. Also Glanis, Sebetus, Linternus, Sarnus, Furor, Ebolis, Silarus. The
Mountains that belong to this Country, are Gaurus, Massicus, Falernus, and
others, as Vesuvius, Pausilypus, Misenus, Culma, Christ's Mountain, Taburnus,
Tifata, Planus, Astrunus, and Trifolinus. Moreover in the Kingdom of Naples
there are these Principalities and Dominions. Namely 10. Principalities, as
Ascolt, Besignano, Evoli, Melfi, Mefetta, Monchercole, Squilaci, Sligliano,
Sulmona, Venosa, And 23. Dukedomes, namely, Andri, Amalphi, Ariani, Asu,
Boyano, Castrovillari, Gravina, Martina, Montalto, Monteliano, Nardo, Nocera,
Popoli, Rocca di Mondragone, S. Petro in Galatina, Seminara, Sessa, Somma,
Sora, Tagliacozzo, Termoli, Terra Nova, Trajetto. There are 30. Marquiships,
54. Counselors of State, 11. Lords, 403. Titular Barons. The Archbishops and
their Suffragans in this Table are taken out of the Roman Province. In
Aprucina and Marcicana, there are these Bishops, Aquilensis, Forcanensis,
Marsicanus, Valvensis, or Sulmonensis: Theatinus, Adriensis, Pennensis,
Aprutinus, or Teranus. The Archbishop of Beneventum under whom are these
Suffragans, Telesinensis, Agatha, Alphiensis, or Alepharensis, Mons Marani,
Avellinensis, Vicanensis, Arianensis, Rojanensis, or Rojanensis, Asculanensis,
Nucerinus, Tertibulensis, Traconensis, Vulturanensis, Alarinensis,
Ferentinensis, or Florentinensis, Civitacensis, Termelensis, Lesinensis,
Frequentinensis, Triventinensis, Biminensis, Vadiensis, or Gadiensis,
Musanensis, S. Mariae. The Archbishop of Naples, under whom are Nolanus,
Puteolanus, Cumacensis, Acerranus, Iscalanus. The Archbishop of Capua, under
whom are Theanensis, Calvensis, Calmensis, Suessanus, Venefranus, Aquitanensis,
or Aquinatensis, Iserniensis, Casertanensis. The Archbishop Amalfitanus, under
whom are Capricanensis, Scalensis, or Camensis, Minorensis, Siteranensis. The
Archbishop of Salerne, under whom are Aquensis, Palicastrensis, Nusautanensis,
or Nuscanensis, Sarnensis, Acervensis, or Acernensis, Maricensis. The
Archbishop of Surrentine, under whom are Lobrensis, Serpensis, Aquensis, or
Equensis, or Vianus, Castellimaris, or Stabiensis. And let so much suffice
concerning this part of the Kingdom of Naples, I pass to the other part.

PVGLIA PIANA, TERRA DI BARRI, TERRA DI Otranto, Calabria, and Basilicata.
The other part of the Kingdom of NAPLES.
NOw we must view the other part of the Kingdom of Naples, in which the first
Country is that which the Italians do call Puglia Piana, from the large
spacious fields there of. It was heretofore called Apulia Daunia. It is bounded
on the East with Apulia Peucetia, and the River Aufidus: on the South with the
Apennine, together with the Hirpenians, and Samnites: on the West with the
Frentanians, Caracenians, now called Aprutians, and Phiternians: on the North
with the Hadriatick, and Jonium Sea. The soil is very fruitful, yielding
abundance of Wheat and Corn. Here are both Cities and Towns, as
Manfrelonia, a fair and populous City, being situated on the bank of the
Bay, which lies in the hollow winding of the Mountain Garganus, and it has
an invincible Castle by the Shore side. Leuceria is an Episcopal City; which
Ptolemy and Suetonius call Neuceria: the ruins yet remaining do show the
spaciousness of it. Troy is a rich City, having a fruitful Soil about it.
Asculum is a City, which is adorned with the Title of a Dukedom: Appianus
Alexandrinus calls it Asculum, it is commonly called Asculo, and surnamed
Sattriano. There are also Salpe, or Arpi, which Pliny mentions, which was
sometime called Argos Hippium, and afterward Agrippa: and two Cities, which
became a Proverb, Apina and Trica, etc. The Rivers are Aufidus, now called
l'Ofanto. Also Candilaris, and Cervaria.

So much concerning Apulia Daunia: the next Country which is to be described is
Peucetia: now it is called in Italian, Terra Bariana, or Terra di Barri, from
the chief City Bario. This Country for fertility of soil, and plenty of
choice fruit, may compare with other parts of Italy. But yet there are some
places which are full of Boggs, and Waters. The chief City is Barium, which
Pliny calls Barion, it is commonly called Barri. It is an ancient City, and
so fair and populous, that it is the chief City of the whole Country, which
is called from thence Terra Bariana. There are also Monopolis, which is a new
City adorned with the title of a Marquiship, which is not very great, but
fair and beautiful, and full of magnificent Buildings. The soil round about
it yields great store of Oil. Polonianum or Polignano is an Episcopal
City, which although it be seated on a high stony Rock, yet it is fair and
populous. Mola has many houses, but inhabited with rustic people. The
Marquess Polinianus built a Castle there for the defense of the Coast.
Iuvenatum, or Ginvenazzo, is an Episcopal City, seated in a fertile soil.
Marfette or as some write it, Morfitta, or Melfatta, flourishes with the Title
of a Principality. Vigiliae commonly called Bisegli is an Episcopal Town
seated by the shore, on high Rocks: Tranum is an Archiepiscopall City,
commonly called Trani. It had fair Buildings, but now for the most part it is
desolate. There are Woods of Olives and Almonds, which do reach from this Town
even to Tarentum. Barulum is commonly called Barleta. Ostuna is a populous
City, seated on a little Hill. Cilium, or Cilio, which Ptolemy calls Cilia,
and Horace Venusia, or Venusium, where he was borne, is now called Venesa.
There are also Canusium, Acherontia, Biletum, and other Towns.

Next to Apulia we must describe the Country of the Salentinians, which is also
called Iapygia, Massapia, and Calabris. The Italians do now commonly call it
Terra d'Otranto. This Country has on the South Tarentum, and the Sea even to
the Salentinian Promontory: on the East the same Promontory, with the Jonian
Sea: on the North it is watered with the River Hidruntes, even to Brundusium:
on the West it has Apulia, Peucetia, and a part of great Greece. This Country
has a wholesome air, and a clear fair Climate except on that Coast, which
reaches from the Hydruntine Lake to Brundisium, where there are Marshes in
those places which are near the Sea. The Country is fatt and fruitful, and
the chief City which names the Country is Hydruntum, which Strabo, Ptolemy,
and others do call ^arous. Mela calls it Hydrus: it it now called Otrante.
It is an ancient City, having a sweet mild air, a strong Castle, built by
Alphonsus the second, and a large spacious Haven. The soil is pleasant and
fruitful. The other Cities are Gallipolis, now called Callipolis. Others call
it Callipoli, as it were the fair City. It has a strong situation: for it is
seated on a Rock or small Island, which is encompassed every where with the Sea,
and it is joined to the Continent with a stone Bridge. Castrum is a City much
frequented by Merchants, who come thither to buy Oil. Brundusium, or
Brundisiam, which Ptolemy calls Breundesium, Steph. Brentesium, and Benjamin
Barnedis, is now called Brindisi. It has a gentle air. It had heretofore a
famous Haven, out of which the Romans did formerly pass safely into Creece,
but now it is filled up, so that a Galley can hardly come up into it. The City
is fortified with a strong Castle. The City Oria is seated on a Hill looking
toward Tarentum, and has a strong Castle. That Town which Ptolemy calls
Aletium, is now called Leze, and Leccie. It is the prime City of the
Salentinians, in regard that the Royal Counsel of Apulia is held here, and
because all the Nobility of this Country have houses here. Vxentem, now called
Vgento, Vsenti, or Ogento, is a very small City,

Calabria is so called from the Calabrians, who as it appears in Ptolemy, did
possess a part of great Greece from the Salentinians to the Jonian Sea, about
the Promontory Iapygium. It is a Country of Italy which being stretched forth
in the farthest borders thereof like a tongue, does lie between the higher and
lower Straites. It does plentifully produce all things that may serve for
necessity, or delicacy, as Wheat, Barley, and other kinds of Corn, also
Wine, Oil, Sugar, Manna, Honey, Wax, Salt, Figs, Oranges, Lemmons, and other
excellent fruits: also Gold, Silver, Wool, Cotton, Saffron, Silk, map of
Puglia Piana PVGLIA PIANA.
Hemp, and what not? Calabria is twofold, the lower which was heretofore the
Seat of the Brutians, which is now called the lower Calabria, and the higher
which was heretofore great Greece. The bounds of the lower Calabria are on the
West Laus the Lucanians: on the South the Tirrhene and Sicilian Sea: on the
East it is enclosed with part of the Hadriatick Sea: on the North with great
Greece, and the River Crathus. Strabo Ptolemy, and other Graecians do call the
Metropolis, or Mother City hereof Consentia: it is now called Consenza. It is
seated by the bending of the Apennine, and it contains 7. Hills, on which the
most part of the houses are situate. The other Cities are Manthia, Fredus,
Belmontium, Sancta Euphemia, Fanum Rhegium, Tropia, Castrum Villare, Altomonti,
Turranom, Rugianum, Marturanum, Nicastrum, Briaticum, Hippo, and that City
which was called Vibo Valentia The bounds of the higher Calabria which was
heretofore called great Greece, are on the East the Adriatic Sea: on the South
the River Alex and the Brutians: on the West the River Crathis, with the
Apennine, and the Lucanians: on the North the Tarentine Bay with Apulia. Here
is the ancient and noble City Tarentum, which Appianus Alexandrinus calls
Tarantum: Strabo and Ptolemy, Tarus: now it is called Taranto. Lucius Florus
says that it was heretofore the chief City of Calabria, Apulia, and all
Lucania. It is situate in the innermost part of a Bay, which is called from the
City, the Tarentine Bay.

There remains in this Table Lucania to be described, which is now called
Basilicata, but from whence it is uncertain. The bounds thereof on the West
are the River Silarus, which bounders Campania: on the South the Tyrrhene See:
on the East Laus the Brutians, and great Greece: on the North the Peucetians in
Apulia, with a part of Hirpinia. Livy shows that it is all Mountainous and
rugged. But now perhaps it is more inhabited than it was formerly, yet in many
places it is very desolate, in regard of the hard uneven ways, and the
dreadful hideous woods in which many robberies are committed The Towns here
by the Sea are Paestum, which Virgil mencioneth Lib. 4. Georg.

Biferique Rosaria Paesti.
The Rose-Gardens of Paestum, where
Sweet Roses do grow twice a year.
Servius makes Paestum a City of Calabria, where Roses do grow twice a
year. Acropolis is a Town 12. Miles from the mouth of the, River Silarius,
having an excellent air. The name shows that it was built by the Graecians,
as the most of the other Towns in this Country. There is also Pisciotta, which
Pliny, Mela, and Ptolemy do call Buxentum. Palicostrum is a Noble City and
adorned with the title of a Dukedom. In the middle of the Country there is the
Town Padula, which is honored with the title of a Marquiship. The City
Capacia was heretofore very populous, and rich. I omit the other Towns.
Moreover in the other part of the Kingdom of Naples there are these
Archbishops, the Archbishop of Regiensis: under whom are Lucrensis,
Cotroniensis, Cassanensis, Cathacensis, Neocastrensis, Giracensis, ^^^etensis,
Vibonensis, Squilacensis. The Archbishop of Consentinus, under whom is
Maturanensis. The Archbishop of Rosania has no Suffragans. The Archbishop of
S. Severine, under whom are Ebriacensis, Strangulen^is, Geneocastrensis,
Gerentinensis, S. Leonis. The Archbishop of Larcatinus under whom are
Mutulensis, Castellanensis. The Archbishop of Brundi^^us, under whom are
Astrinensis. The Archbishop of Hidrontinus, under whom are Castrensis,
Gallipolitanus, Liciensis, Vgentinensis, Lucensis, Nolanensis is exempted. The
Archbishop of Barensis, under whom are ^entinensis, Calphajanus, Iuvenacensis,
Rubentinensis, Salpensis, Cauriensis, ^^rensis, Conversanus, Minerviensis,
Polignercensis, Cathericensis, Lavellinensis. The Archbishop of Tranensis,
under whom are Vigiliensis, An^ensis, and Penensis. The Archbishop of
Sipontinus, under whom are Tesenensis excepted, Trojanensis excepted,
Melphiensis, Monopolitanensis, and R^polensis are excepted, Cannosanus under
whom are Auranensis, ^^ranensis, Montisviridis, Laquedonensis, S. Angeli de
Lombardis, Bisaciensis. The Archbishop of Acheronti, under whom are
Potentiensis, Tricariensis, ^^^^siensis, Graviensis, Angelensis.

THE ISLANDS CORSICA AND SARDINIA.
CORSICA was so called from Corsus, who was Lord o^ this Country. The Graecians
called it Kurnon from Cyrnus the son of Hercules: Ovid names it Teraphne, as
Villanovanus writes. On the West and North it has the Ligustick Sea: on the
East the Tyrrhene Sea: on the South Sardinia. It is not above 120. Miles long,
although Strabo makes the length thereof to be 160. Miles, and Pliny 150. who
also makes the breadth thereof to be 60. Miles: and Strabo makes it 70.
Miles, which appears to be true by measuring it with a pair of Compasses.
The compass of it according to Pliny is 3^0. Miles, but according to Maginus
325. which he says that he found out by measuring it exactly. This Island is
hard to come unto, being enclosed on every side with inaccessible dangerous
cliffes, and Hills. Within likewise it is for the most part Mountanous, and
therefore it yields no great store of Wheat and Pulse; which grow but in
some few places, where the Country opens it self, and is watered with Rivers,
which make it fruitful. That part which looks toward Etruria is indifferent
plain, having a fruitful Soil, which bears excellent sweet fruits. This
Island has excellent wines, of chief note, which the Romans much esteemed,
they are called from the place Corsican Wines. Here is great store of Honey,
Rosen, Oil, and Figs. But Servius notes in his 4. Book of Geogr. that the
Corsian Honey is bitter, which comes to pass by reason that there are great
store of Ewe trees, from whence the Bees do gather Honey. And Ovid believed
that it was venomous. This Country only does produce the Precious stone
Catochites, which Democritus the Abderite used when he contended against the
Magitian. Rhenus concerning Corsica says thus.

Hanc solam perhibent Catochitem gignere terram:
Corporibus lapis hic seu glutine tactus adhaeret.
Pliny, Lib. 37. Cap. 10. and Solinus Cap. 9. do report the like. But Pliny
doubts of the truth thereof. Here is also Allom: and there are Iron Mines
near the River Bivincum, in the County Nebiensis. There are also Saltpits,
commonly called della Roya, not far from the Haven of S. Florence: and near
Niolum there are deep Valleys, which are always covered with Snow, under
which they say there is great store of Crystal. There is also, as Pliny and
Diodorus witness, great plenty of Box, and Eewe trees. It breeds diverse
kinds of living map of Corsica and Sardinia THE ISLANDS CORSICA, AND SARDINIA.
creatures, especially lusty Horses, and great Hounds, and also a kind of
beast called Mufmo, which Pliny says, is a kind of Ram, they call it now
Mosoli: which beast is not found in any part of Europe, except in this Island,
and Sardinia. It has a hide and hair like a Heart, and Horns like a Ram,
which are not long but do bend backward about his ears, and are so hard, that
if he should fall down 50. foot high among the rocks, and alight upon his
head, it would not hurt him; it is as big as an Heart, and feeds only on
grass, being very swift of foot, and the flesh of it is very pleasant in
taste. Moreover this Island is full of sheep and Oxen: It was heretofore
inhabited by the Phocensians, then by the Ligurians, and afterward by the
Romans, who brought thither two Colonies, the Marian, and the Alerian, which
do still continue. The Barbarians possessed the rest: afterward when the
Romans invaded them, they brought a great Company of Slaves from thence to
Rome, of which they made no great commodity, for they were such brutish
people, that albeit they were bought for a small price, yet their Masters
repented them of their bargain. After the Romans the Sarazens succeeded, and
after them the Geonoa's: then the Pisanians, and now it belongs to Genoa. It
is divided now into two parts: they call the Eastern part the innermost side,
and the Western side the outermost side. That part which is nearer to Italy is
called Cismontana, or on this side the Mountains, and that which runs out
toward Sardina is called Vltramontana or beyond the Mountains. Pliny
witnesses that there are 33. Cities in it, which also Martianus Capella does
note out of him. But it apeareth by Strabo that they were rather Castles then
Cities. There is now the Town Bastia, in which the chief Governor lives,
and has a Garrison to defend him. There is also the City Nebbium which
Ptolemy calls Cersunum. It is watered with the Rivers Gelone, Tavignano,
Sago^a, Bavono, Tegiamo, and some others. The Mountains also are clothed with
woods which do yield Rosen. The chief Mountains are Illia Orba: also the
Mountain Cheparteno, the Mountain Tenda, the Mountain Gualango, and the
Mountain Russus. In the Sea between Corsica, Sardinia, there is Corrall
gathered. This Island has two great Havens, which are able to receive great
Ships, in S. Florences Bay. There is also S. Bonifaces Haven, which Ptolemy
calls the Syracusan Haven. The Inhabitants of Corsica both were, and are
accounted very poor men, that live by stealing and robbing: and altogether
unletterd. There are these Bishops in Corsica, who are Suffragans to the
Archbishop of Pisanum, namely, Aciensis, Alariensis, Sagonensis, and
Civitanensis, and the Bishop Nubiensis, or Nebiensis, who is subject to the
Archbishop Ianuensis.

SARDINIA.
SARDINIA was so named from Sardus the Son of Hercules. Timaeus called it
Sandaliotin, because it resembles the shape of a shooe-soale. Mirsilus and
Chrysippus called it Ichausa, because it is like the soale of the foot. Which
Manilius intimates when he says.

Sardiniam in Lybico signant vestigia plantae. It is now called Sardegna. On
the East the Tyrrhene Sea does beat upon it, on the South the Affricke, on the
West the Sardian; on the North the Sea that flows between it and Corsica.
This Island has an ungentle air: and therefore Q. F. does admonish M. Cicero
to have a care of his health, and to remember that although he were now in
health, yet he was in Sardinia: and in his Epistles he says that one
Sigellius a Sardinian was a man more pestilent and contagious than his Country.
All the Island abounds with fruit, Wheat, Wine, Mines of Silver, Cattle,
and all things necessary. There are such store of Horses, that many run
wild, and have no owners; they are lesser than ours, but full of metal,
strong and nimble. It affoordeth much Hunting, so that the Country people do
live only by it. For this Country has abundance of Boares, Hearts, Does, and
another kind of Beast which they call Muflo, which we have described before in
the description of Corsica. But Sardinia has no Wolves, nor any other
harmefull beast, nor Serpent, and therefore Silius says.

Serpentum tellus pura, ac viduata Veneno,
Sed tristis coelo, ac multa vitiata palude.
This Country is from poysond Serpents free,
But many noisome Marshes in it be.
But the Soligunda in Sardinia is as offensive and hurtful as Serpents are in
other Countries. It is a little creature like a Spider. L.S. calls it
Solifuga, because it shunneth the daylight. It lives much in the Silver
Mines, for this soil is very rich in Silver Oar. It creeps closely along,
and if any one sit upon it unawares, it infecteth him. There is also a strange
Sardinian Herb, which Pausanias says, is like unto Parsley: which if it be
eaten, it does contract and draw together the Visage and mouth, so that they
dye as it were laughing. Strabo writes that the Spaniards make poison of it,
which being drunk, does dispatch them without any pain, and hence grew the
Proverb Sardonius risus, or the Sardinian laughter. The chief City of
Sardinia is Calaris, commonly called Cagler. It is situate on a Mountain near
the Sea, looking toward Afric, and it has a fair Haven. This City is
adorned with many privileges: it creates Cons^ls, who have power to punish
delinquents without authority from the King: and it has power with the peoples
consent to make new laws. In this City the reliuqes of S. Augustine were
kept, until Heliprandus King of the Langbards did translate them to Papia. In
this City the viceroy of Sardinia resideth, together with many Barons, Earls,
and diverse rich men. Mela and Pliny do make mention of the City Sulchitana.
There are now also the Cities Oristagnum, which is a Metropolitan City,
situate on a Plain, not far from the Sea. It was heretofore called the
Country of trees, but now it is called the Marquiship of Oristagnum. There is
also the City Sassaris which has a pleasant soil watered with many Springs,
and abounding with diverse sorts of fruits, but it is weakly fortified. Algher
is a new small City, but yet populous and strong, and adorned with many fair
aedifices and buildings: the inhabitants whereof are almost all Tarraconians.
Sardinia has also other Cities, and Towns, which for brevitie sake we omit.
It has many pleasant Rivers which are not deep, so that in summer time you
may pass over the bards. There are many Magistrates in Sardinia. The chief is
the Viceroy, who has all the Kings authority: and according to their ancient
laws none but a Spaniard can bear this office. The King does assign and
appoint him one assistant, who is Doctor of both Laws, whom they call there
the Regent. Moreover he has other Counselors, who dispose and order all
matters, and this Court is called the Kings audience. Heretofore it was a
privilege of the Kingdom that no man could bear this office longer than
three years, and then another succeeds in his place. But now one continues
in that office as long as the King pleases. Concerning the manners and
dispositions of the Sadinians: they are strong of body, and inured to Labor,
except it be some few who are given to effeminacy and wantonness. Many of them
do keep Cattle, and are contented with poor fare and water. Those that
dwell in the Towns and Villages, do live peaceably and quietly together. They
love strangers, and do use them kindly. They live from hand to mouth, and go
in a poor habbit. And which is strange, there is not one Artificer in all the
Island, that can make either Swords, Daggers or other weapons, so that they
fetch them out of Spain and Italy. Mercator mentions these Bishops. The
Archbishop Claritanensis, under whom are these Bishops, Sulcitanus or
Sulciensis, Doliensis, Suellensis. The Archbishop Turitanus, under whom are
these Bishops, Sorrensis, Plotanensis, Ampuriensis, Gifacensis, or Girardensis,
Castrensis, Othanensis, or Othricensis, Bosanensis, or Bossa. The Archbishop
Alborensis, under whom are the Bishops of Vssellensis. S. Iustia, Terra Alba,
Civitatensis, and Gastelliensis are excepted.

THE KINGDOM OF SICILIE.
SICILIE is next to be described, which excels all the Islands of the
Mediterranean Sea. Thucidides calls it Sicania from Sicanus, who, as Solinus
and Capella do write, came with a band of Iberians into that Country before
the Trojan wars. Many do call it Trinacria, and especially the Poets, in
regard it has 3. Promontories. Or else because it resembles a Triangle or
three cornerd figure, for it runs forth diverse ways with three
Promontories, and so is like the greek letter Delta, which bears this shape
D. These three Promontories are Pelorus, Pachynus, and Lilybaeum. The Graecians
did call it Sicelia. But some suppose, -- Trinacria quondam
Mutavere, situm: rupit confinia Nereus:
Italiae pars una fuit, sed pontus and aestus
Victor, and abscissos interluit aequore monteis.
Trimacria has her situation changed,
And now the Sea their borders has estranged,
Heretofore it was a part of Italy,
From whence it is now divided by the Sea.


And hence Rhegium Rhegium is so called from (...), which signifies to break,
because Sicilie is here broken of and divided from Italy.
is so called in Italy, because Sicilie is there divided from Italy: On the
North it has the Tyrrhene Sea; on the East the Hadriatick and Ionian Sea; on
the South the Afric Sea, and on the West the Sardinian Sea. Thycydides
writes Lib. 6. that the compass of Sicile is about 8. days journey, and yet
it lies but 20. furlongs from the maine land or continent of Italy. Moreover
this Island does excel for the wholesomenesse of the air, the fruitfullnesse
of the soil, and plenty of all fruit, and other things, which are necessary
for the use of man: For it lies in the 4. Climate, which for the gentleness,
and temperatenesse of the air, does exceed the six others. So that Sicilie
produces the best fruits. So that Marcus Cato calls it the Stoarehouse of
the Commonwealth, and the Nurse of the Roman People; and Strabo the Barn of
Rome. In the Sunensian fields, where the ancients do feign that Proserpine was
took away violently, which they call the Navell of Italy, the Corn yields
so great an increase, insomuch that one bushel of Wheat sowed yields an
hundred, which field they call therefore Camp dallo cento Sal^e. The Leontine
field is not inferior unto this, concerning which Cicero says in his third
Oration against Verres. Quid Vina commorab^ optimi saporis adorisque? What
should I mention the fragrant pleasant Wines.? Pliny (who was most diligent and
curious in reckoning the best sorts of Wines) does affirm that there is
excellent good Wine made in Sicilie. And he says that there is the Balincian
Wine in Sicilie, which tastes like Methegling, or Wine mingled with honey. So
that they suppose the Balincian Wine is that which they call Muskadine,
Muskadine whence so called.
which is very sweet. For both Alps Muskadine whence so called, that is Bees,
and Muscae that is flies do haunt these Grapes, which are therefore called
Muskadine Grapes, out of which a sweet pleasant wine is pressed which they call
Muskadine: though some suppose that it was so called because it smells like
Musk. So that the Wine of Sicilie may be rightly esteemed the best, for it is
as good as the Italian Wine, and as pleasing to the Pallat, and will keep as
long. Moreover Sicilie has great store of Oil, Sugar, Saffron, Honey, Salt,
all sorts of fruits, and excellent Silk. Besides Sicilie is rich in Mettalls:
for it has Gold, Silver, Iron, and Allom. It produces also Precious stones,
as the Emerald, the Achates, the Berill, the red Marble stone, the Jasper, and
it has great herds and flocks of Oxen and Cattle. There is excellent hunting
of Does and Boares, and Hauking at Partridges and Quails, which they commonly
call Francolinas. And Falcons, who are enemies to all flying foul, are taken
here. The fierce Lestrigonians did first possess this Country, afterward the
Sieanians, a Colonie of Spaniards, and lastly the Trojans and Cretensians came
hither. Afterward the Graecians did invade it, then the Romans, and after the
division of the Eastern, and Western Empire it was subject to Constantinople
almost 200. years. But in the reign of the Emperor Justinian, the Goths
invaded this Island, who 17. years afterward were expelled and droven out by
Belisarius. Afterward the Saracens did possess it, under Michael Ba^bus, and
held it 400. years. The Normans succeeded them, and afterward the Langbards,
Suevians, and Germans: but they being droven out by Clement the 4. the
Frenchmen possessed it 16. years. Afterward it was subject to the Aragonians,
until the reign of King Ferdinand, after whose decease the Kings of Spain
were also Kings of Aragon, and Sicilie. Pliny reckons that there are 72.
Cities in it. But now there are 173. Cities and Towns, as Maginus
witnesses. The Metropolis or mother City of the Kingdom is Panormus, which
Ptolomy and others do call Palernum, it is now called Palermo. It is an
ancient City, and a Colony of the Phoenicians, as appears by some Epitaphs
written in Caldean letters. It is thought that it was built in Abraham's time,
being seated in a pleasant fruitful soil. It looks Northward, and is washed
with the Tyrrhene Sea, having high walls, which were built by King Frederick.
Near the Sea there is a Castle, which has been much enlarged, which they
call Castrum ad Mare, or the Castle by the Sea. There are also three Gates of
the ancient City yet standing, and the old Walls, with many Towers built of
four square stone. There is a Church at Panormus consecrate to S. Peter, which
was built by Rogerius King of Sicilie, which excels both for beauty, and
costly building, all the ancient and new Churches in map of Sicily THE KINGDOM
OF SICILIE.
Italy, so that learned men and travelers that come to see it do much admire
it. The greater Church of this City is of a kind of a networke building,
carved with diverse figures and Images, and built by Gualther the second
Archbishop of that name, which was founded in the year 1185. where the bodies
of the Kings, and Queens, and Dukes are buried and interred. There is also a
public School, and an Hospital for strangers. It would be tedious to
rehearse the other fair buildings, and aedifices which are in this City. The
other Cities are Siracusa, which was heretofore a great City, which the
Orator thus describes in his 4. Oration against Verres. You have often heard
that Siracusa is the greatest and fairest of all the Grecian Cities. And so
it is, O Judges as you have heard. For it is strongly situate, and has a fair
coming to it both by Sea and Land, and it has Havens which are enclosed on
every side with bvildings, which having diverse entrances, do at last meet and
flow together. Where a part of the Town, which is called the I Will, being
disjoined by their meeting together, with a strait Sea, is joined together
again with a Bridge. It is so great a City, that they say it does consist of
4. great Cities, one of which is the Island aforesaid: which is encompassed
with two Havens, at the Mouth of one of which there is King Hierons Palace, in
which the Praetors now dwell. There are many Churches in it, but especially
two, which do far exceed the rest, one consecrate to Diana, and the other
to Minerva, which was a fair Church before Verres came thither. In the
farthest part of the Island, there is a Fountain of sweet water, which is
called Arethusa, which is very great, and full of fish, which would be coverd
with the waves of the Sea, but that it is walled about with stones. But there
is another City of Syracusa which is called Acardina, in which there is a
great Marketplace, a fair Gallery, and Counsell-house, a great Court, and a
Temple of Jupiter Olympus, and many private Aedifices. There is a third City
which is called Tyche, in which there is a great School, and many Churches,
and it is well inhabited and frequented. The fourth City is that which because
it was last built, is called Neapolis, or the new City, in which there is a
great Theater, and two great Churches, one consecrate to Ceres, and another to
Bacchus, and a fair Statue of Apollo, which is called Tennites. But not all
the beauty of this City is decayed, and only some ruinous parts of the Town
are remaining. Messana is a City by the Sea side, the Inhabitants whereof were
first called Messanians, and afterward Mamertinians, which Herodotus and
Thucydides do mention. There is also Catina, which is called Catana, where
Charonda the Lawmaker was borne, and it has now a famous School. Taurominium
is a City built by the Zanclaeans, it is now called Taormina. There is also
Leontium, where Gorgias Sophista was borne. Agrigentum is an ancient City,
which heretofore the Carthaginians raced, and Megalus and Feriscus re-edified
it again. There are also Augusta which was heretofore called Megara: also
Castrogianum, heretofore Ennea: Drepanum, Monreale, Heraclea, and many other
Cities. It is watered with many Rivers, in which, as in the Lakes there are
good store of Mullets, Eeles, Tenches, and Trowts. And in the Sea there is good
fishing for Tunyes, not only at Pachynum, but also at Panormum, and Drepanum,
and all that Coast which lies by the Tyrrhene Sea. There are also Sword-fishes
taken in the Massonian Sea. Lastly, there is excellent good fishing in the
Sicilian Sea, for there are great store of Mullets, which the Grecians call
Trichias, and Sophrorius and Cicero do call them Barbels, and also great store
of Lampreys. But the Cicilian straites are narrow, dangerous, and rough, and
are called by the name of Scylla and Charybdis. The chief Mountains Aetna and
Eryx. Aetna by Pindarus is called the Pillar of Heaven. Silius ^adicus calls
it Tiphoeum. It is now called Monte Gibella, or Mongi^ello. Eryx is much
memoriz'd for Venus Chapel, which was built by Encas. In Sicily are the
Archbishops Panormitanus, under whom are the Bishops Agrigentinus, Masarensis,
Milevitanus, or Maltensis. The Archbishop of Montis Regalis, under whom are
Siracusanus, and Cothanensis. The Archbishop of Messanensis, under whom are
Cephaludensis, Pacensis, Liperiensis, Marc^^ and Mili^ensis, now Milaza.

STIRIA, COMMONLY CALLED STIRMARCK, which was made a Dukedom by FREDERICK
BARBAROSSA.
In it there are many Countries, among the which is WARASDEN; by the River
DRAVUS and LEBNAW, by the River MURA.
STIRIA commonly called Stirmarck, was without doubt so called from a Bull or
Steer, to which opinion Aegidius Tschudus subscribeth: where he reports out
of Pliny, that Caro does affirm that the Lepontians and Salassians were of the
Taurick Nation: but these Tauriscians were Frenchmen, who in the ancient French
wars seated themselves beyond the Alps, of which Polybius Lib. 2. of the
French war writes thus. Those that are called the Transalpine French* do
dwell by the Alps on either side of Mountains, on that side which looks
Northward, and toward the River Rhodanus, but on that side which lies toward
the plain ground, there are the Tauriscians, the Agonians, and many other
barbarous people, from whom the Transalpines are only distinguished by their
different habitation, and therefore called Transalpines, because they live
beyond the Mountains. But after these Tauriscians departed hence, they sought
themselves other habitations, and possessed the Country, which is now called
the County of Goerts, and so coming into Stiria, they left their name unto
that Country. For a Bull in the Germane language is called a Stier. And so they
spread and dispersed themselves into Austria, and Hungary. Some affirm that
Stiria was heretofore called Valeria, in honor of Valeria the Daughter of
Dioclesian, as Marcellinus does report. Volateranus thinks that it was called
Iapidia: for so he writes in the 8. Book of his Geogr. The next unto this
Iapidia, which they now call Styria, though Pope Pius thinks it should be
called Valeria, by according to Rufus his description, do think that Valeria
should be rather called Croatia, between Danubius and Dravus* The last
Marquess was called Ottocarus, whose Daughter Lupold Duke of Austria married,
who by the Emperor was made Duke of Stiria* Afterward his Line being extinct,
the Governor of Hungary sent hi^ Son to govern his Country, but he living
loosely, and having laid intolerable taxes and taxations on the Stirians, was
droven out and Ottocarus the King of Bohemias Son was called in, who did usurp
the Dukedom of Austria, and got Carinthia in the year of Christ 1269. but he
could not keep it long. For he grew so arrogant, tha^ he contemned the
Emperor, and would not do homage for the map of Stiria STIRIA OR STIRMARCK
Lands which he held in Bohemia unto the Emperor Rudolphus Habsburgius: the
Emperor at Augusta called a Counsel of the Princes of Germany, and cites
Ottacarus to appear at his peril and to answer concerning those Provinces of
the Empire which he unjustly possessed, as also concerning his contempt against
the Emperors Majesty. Ottacarus laughs at the Citation: and sends no body to
the Counsel to answer for him. In the mean time Ambassadors being sent from
the States of Austria, came to Augusta to the Emperor, and the Counsel of
Princes there assembled, and there having grievously complained before Caesar
and the Princes of Ottocarus his injury and cruelty, they showed that he had
gotten Austria by an unjust Title: and that he had repudiated and divorced his
lawful wife Margarite, the Inheretrix of Austria, and kept a Whore, and at
length poysond his own wife: and that he took away the lawful Inheritance of
Austria from Agnes Badensis, and her Daughter Elizabeth, with her Brother
Henry: and that he had murderd many of the Noblemen in the City of Vienna, and
had butcherd many innocent people: and that he had secretly divided Austria,
Stiria, Carniola, and the Marquiship of the Vindorians, which were in the
Emperors gift, and that he might hold Austria by the aid of a foreign
power, and lay the yoke of servitude on the people, he did therefore revolt
from the Empire and Caesar, etc. It was hereupon decreed by the Princes, that
Embassado^s should be sent to Bohemia. But they in stead of an answer giving
reproachful speeches to Caesar, and the Princes of the Empire, they decreed
and agreed that Caesar should make wars against them, and should have their
aid therein. He having levied a great Army goes into Austria. On the other
side Ottocarus marches forth with no less forces, but he doubting the event
of the war, and fearing Caesar's wisdom and force, by the intercession of
two Noblemen, made a peace with him, and restored back Austria, and did homage
unto Caesar for Bohemia, and the other Provinces which he held of him: and
while he did his homage, he kneeled before the Emperor, and the whole Army,
which matter being taken in dudgeon by his wife, and some factious spirits,
they violated the peace, and entered Austria with a great Army. On the other
side the Emperor Rodolphus marches forth with his Army of Germans, and his
auxiliarie Hungarian forces, and so joining battle with Ottocarus not far
from the Town Mar^he^^us, he overcame him, and slew him, afterward he invaded
Bohemia, and with fire and sword enforced the young man Wenceslaus the Son of
the deceased Ottocarus to seek peace, and prescribed him conditions according
to his Imperial pleasure. But he made his eldest Son Albert Duke of
Austria: and afterward by the common consent of the Princes of the Empire, he
was made Duke of Austria and Stiria. Stiria is distinguished into the higher, by
the turning of the River Mura, and the lower near the confluence and meeting
of Dravus and Mura, which is next unto the second Pannonia, or Hungary, whence
that place is called am Hungerischen. The chief Cities of Stiria are Bruga,
by the River Mura, and also Grazium, Viana, commonly called Voylsperg, by the
River Kaynacha. Also Wolspergum by the River Lavandus. Marchpurg is a
Metropolitan City on the left bank of the River Dravus, and on the same side
there is Petovia, or the Petovian Colonie, where the Roman Legions were
seated. Beyond the River is Warasinum, which they call the Varian Castle, there
is also Rachelspurg seated on the left bank of the River Mura, where the
Country of Savaria begins. In this Country also there is Cilia on the bank
of the River Savus, which seems to be an ancient City, for there are many
Inscriptions of Roman names in it. The Townsmen say that it was built by
Sulla, and that it was called Sullaces, but on no ground as Volaterrarus says.
For perhaps it was that City, or built out of the ruins thereof, which
Ptolemy places not far from home, and calls Celia. In the Dukedom of
Styria there are more Counties, among which are Warasden, by the River Dravus,
and also Lebnau, by the River Mura. Stiria is watered with these Rivers, Dravo,
Lavanda, Sackan, Sulmo, Raynatho, Mura, Martza, Arrabone, Veystritza,
Lausintio, and infinite many Torrents, and Rivulets, which at length do all
run into Danubius. Here are no particular Mountains, for they are all called
by one general name the Norician Alps, whence they are called by the name of
Alps, as Rauch Alben, Subalben, Saw Alben, Schwaberger Alben. In the confines
of Austria, Carinthia, and Stiria, there is the Mountain Taurus. The Mountain
Gesacus does hang over the River Mura, which is now commonly called Der
Schockel, and Sattli, Mansenperg, Wemsperg, and near unto the River Salzis it
is called Ina Sawrussel, that is, os porcinum, or Hogs mouth, and Deifelsteig,
that is, the Devils Praecipisse. Below the River Mura it is called in Gaistal,
Stainperg, and Kainacher Alben: and somewhat lower are the Mountains
Kreiczpergus: and toward the East Radel and Plaitzperg. Beyond Dravus Southward
is the Mountain Claudius, which is now called Dracimperg. Vadianus relates,
that it was a current report at Vienna in Austria, that a Mountain began to
burn in Stiria, whereupon the Emperor Maximilian sent Messengers who found it
to be true. And it is probable that this happened about the year of Christ
1520. at what time Vadianus writ thus much. Moreover the aforesaid Mountains
are every where clothed and crowned with woods. The Stirians are a rustic
people, and some of them have such swellings about their necks, that it
hinders their speech, and women that give suck do cast it behind their
back, that it may not hinder their Children from sucking. Ortelius does report
that he saw at Frisachium, while he traveld from Vienna to Venice, in the year
1558. a man that had a Chin that was as broad as his shoulders, and it hung
down upon his breast. The Inhabitants do think that the air and water are
the cause of this swelling. The Stirians do use the Germane speech and habit,
except it be those that dwell by the River Dravus.

SCLAVONIA, CROATIA, BOSNIA, WITH PART of DALMATIA.
AMONG the Countries which are presented in this Table Selavonia is the first,
which was so called from the Sclavonian Nation, who did heretofore inhabit by
the Maeotick Lake. Pliny called it Illyricum, from Illyricus the Son of
Cadmus, or as some think of Poliphemus. Ptolemy, calls it Illyris, and Stephen
Illyria. Ptolemy does stretch it forth from Istria even to the confines of
Macedon, by the Sea shore, and does make it extend to Pannonia and Maesia.
Pomponius Mela, and Dionysius Alexandrinus do describe it to be larger, for
he makes Illyria to contain all the coast of the Hadriatick Sea, from
Tergestus even to the Ceraunian Mountains, and places it beyond Danubius. For
Mela reckons Danubius among the Rivers of this Country. But Pliny makes the
Rivers Arsia, and Tisius to be the bounds thereof. And the most do follow
Ptolomies description, who says that Illyris where it looks toward Macedoe,
does contain Dalmatia, and Liburnia, which Lazius does call Crabates: and
others Croatia. Pinetus calls it Contado di Zara. The length of it from Arsa
to Drinus is 380 Italian Miles. In some parts it has a pure wholesome air,
but in other places not so wholesome, by reason of Moorish exhalations and
vapors. This Country, as Strabo witnesses is very pleasant: it has strong
Havens, a fertile Soil, and full of Vines, unless it be upon the stony
rockie cliffes, or on that side which lies toward Pannonia, where it is cold,
and coverd with snow. Florus in his book of the first P^nicke war, writes
that the Illyrians grew so licentious, that they slew the Roman Ambassadors
like sacrifices, and burnt the Captains of the Ships, and to disgrace them
the more, at the command of a woman who as he writes was called Teuta. Again
the Illyrians being hired by King Perses, began to set upon the Romans behind
their back, but Scorda which was the head City of the Nation being rased, they
straightway yielded themselves. Pliny writes that the coast of Illyria was
more frequented than the Islands, when on the contrary, the coast of Italy over
against it is very impetuous and stormy. The chief Cities and Towns of
Illyria are Senia, commonly called Segna, being seated on a Plain by the Sea,
which is often troubled with the North wind. Iadera is now the chief and
strongest Metropolis of the Liburnians. Also Zara commonly called Sebenicum,
Ptolomy calls it Sicum. It is situate in the Bay Scardonicor near the Sea, at
the foot of a Mountain, where there is a Castle. It has fruitful fields,
but it is thinly inhabited, by reason that the Turks do continually vex it.
Spalatum and Salena is celebrated by Ptolomy and Strabo. There is also Salona,
which is a Haven of the Dalmatians, which has few inhabitants, because it is
so near unto the Turk. Tragurium now called Tran, is divided from the
Continent by map of Sclavonia SCLAVONIA
a small arm of the Sea. Epidaurus is an ancient City, by the ruins whereof
there is Ragusium commonly called Ragusi, the Turks call it Pobrovicha, it is a
small City with a strong Castle: here is a famous Mart for all Turkish
commodities, the Commonwealth is governed by good laws, the Citizens are
rich. This Country is watered with two chief Rivers Savus and Dravus, which
do run into Danubius. Beyond the Mountains many lesser Rivers do break
out into the Hadriatick Bay, as Edanius, Ticicus, Naron, Rhizon, and Drinus.
The Illyrians or Sclavonians do dwell in wooden houses, thatched, unless it
be some Towns upon the Coast where they live civiller. And so much concerning
Illyricum or Sclavonia in general. But Sclavonia which our table does exhibit,
is only a part of that Illyricum, unless we make it to be Plinyes Sclavonia.
It contains the Marquiship of Windorum, and the County of Zagabria.

CROATIA.
CRoatia is a part of Illyricum toward Hungary, which we described in the
beginng. Rufus and Volaterranus call it Valeria: others Liburnia. It joyneth to
Istria on the East by the Fanatic Bay and is situate between the Rivers Cuspa
and Savus, and the higher Maesia. The Metropolis of this Country is now called
Bigihon, and sometime Fumium. It has many other Cities at Zeng, Wickat,
Tu^naw, Modrish. But the Turk by his invasions made this Country known, having
broken the league with the Christians, had a great desire to join this Country
to his Kingdoms and Provinces, that so he might more conveniently invade Italy
and Germany, whereupon at the beginning of Summer in the year 1592. the great
Turk sent an Army into Croatia, under the conduct of his Bashawes and
Captains. The Soldiers being terrified at the approaching of this army, the
Bashaw of Bosnia took the strong Fort Hrastovitza by treachery. And afterward
the fury of his Soldiers being not appeased therewith, he laid siege to
Wyhitz, a strong walled City: the Soldiers having neither munition nor
victuals, yielded up the Town by surrender, and the Turk afterward contrary
to his promise put them all to the Sword, and many inconveniences followed
after this surrender, which I omit. Moreover in the year following, which was
1593. The Turk glorying in his many victories, and Towns which he had taken,
had a great desire to get the strong City Sissegkum: and so raising an army
he besieged it. But the Germans considering what great detriment and loss,
not only Germany but all Europe should sustain, if the Turks should take
it, they levied an army, and so passing over the River Savus, they intended to
relieve the City. The Turkish horsemen who were 8000. or some say 10000. made
haste to possess themselves of the other Banck of the River Savus by the
Bridge which was built before, that so they might hinder the Christians
approach, where joining battle with the Christians, the Turks were put to
flight, and fled to the Bridge, which the Carolostadien Soldiers had first
possessed. The Turks were at last all cut off, and a great many drowned in the
Rivers Savus and Kulpa. The other part of the Turkish Army fled, the Bridge
being cut down, so that they could not retire to the rest of their army. And
so on the 22. of June in the year 1593. this City was freed from this strait
siege.

BOSNIA.
THe Eastern part of Liburnia they now call Liburnia, from the Bessi, a people
of lower Moesia: who afterward being expulsed by the Bulgarians, did remove
into higher Maesia, and by changing the letter e for o, they were called
instead of Bossis Bossi or Bosni: and afterward Bosna, and Besnia. There have
been the like changes in other cames, as Melita, now called Malta, Langones
and Lingones, Scandia and Schondia, etc. Iaitza is a City of Bosnia, seated on
a high hill, and encompassed with two Rivers. These Rivers do flow at the
foot of the Mountain, and so having encircled the City, do join together,
and run both into Savus. It was the Metropolis of Bosnia, and it has a
strong impregnable Castle. This Country also has other chief Cities,
especially Schwonica, and Warbosayne, which is now the Metropolis, but not
walled about. The River Milliatzka does devide it into two parts, etc.

DALMATIA.
IT remains that we should speak somewhat of Dalmatia, a part whereof is
described in this Table. It was so caled from Deliminium the Metropolis of this
Country. Heretofore Dalmatia was a potent Kingdom, and the Dalmatians were
heretofore strong and rich, and confident in the situation of their Country.
They lived for the most part in Woods, and so were much given to robbing. The
Cities are Salanum, and not far from the borders of this Country, the City
Apollonia is situated by the Sea side, near unto which there is a Rock which
sends forth flashes of fire, and beneath it hot water and Brimstone does
boil forth, especially when the Rock blazeth and burns. The Ecclesiastical
government according to Mercator is in this manner. There is the Archbishop
Iadra, who they now call Zara. Under whom are Anzara, Vegla, Arbe: also the
Archbishop of Spalato, under whom are the Bishops Tragurium, of Teniensis Tina,
Sardona, Temnensis, Nenensis, Nonensis, Almisa, Sibinicensis, Farensis. The
Archbishop of Ragusine, under whom are Stagnensis, Rossonensis, Tribuniensis,
Bacensis, Rosensis, Bidnanensis, Budva. The Archbishop Antiberensis, under whom
are the Bishops of Dulcinium, Suacinensis, Drinastensis, Polastrensis,
Scodrensis, Sardensis, Surtanensis, or Acutarensis, Arbensis.

VVALACHIA, SERVIA BVLGARIA, ROMANIA.
VALACHIA was so called from the Flaccians, a Nation of the Romans. For the
Romans having overcom^ the Getes, brought thither a Colonie under the conduc^
of one Flaccus, whence it was first called Flaccia, and afterward Valachia. The
Alps and a continued ridge of Mountains do devide it from Hungary and
Transylvania. It has on the East a Lake full of Fish, which the River Pruth
makes: on the South it is bounded with Danubius; and on the West it touches
upon Transylvania, by the Town Severine, where there is Trajans Bridge, which
had 34. Piles. On the North it is bounderd with the small River Ho^na and
Ister, and so the Country bends over against the Island Pau^^ well known to
Writers, which they now call Barillana. But Valachia although it be encompassed
with high Mountains, yet it yields al^ things necessary. Moreover, it is
rich in Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, and Salt. Neither does it want Vineyards,
but it has diverse kinds of Cattle, especially excellent Horses and Ginnets.
Here is the Town Teniovizza where the Vaivode resideth. There are also other
Towns, as Braila, and Trescortum, not far from which there is Brimstone
dug, of which they make Candels, as of wax. The other parts of this County
do consist of Villages, the Rivers Hierasus, which the Inhabitants call Pruth,
Hoyne, Danubius, and others.

SERVIA.
SERVIA, which Lazius calls the higher Maesia, is a Country between Bosnia and
Bulgaria. Some suppose that this was the Triballians Country: and that these
people came hither, at the declining of the Grecian and Roman Empire.
Cuspianus and Volaterranus do write that the Trojans did inhabit Servia and
Rasica. The chief City of Servia was Sinderovia, which some do call
Spenderoben, and other Simandria, or Semendria, the Turks do call it
Semender, and the Hungarians Zendrow, which lies not far from Belgradus by
the banks of Danubius, and it was taken by the Turkish Emperor Amurath, in
the year 1428. and reduced into a Sangiacate under the Beglerbeg of Buda.
There are also the Towns Vidina, which the Turks call Kiratovum, which is
seated by the Mountain Argentarus. Also Novogradum on the borders of Servia,
which some do call the new Mountain, it has an impregnable Castle. There is
also the black Mountain, in which there are Silver Mines. There are also
Samandria, and Prisdena, where the Emperor Justinian was borne. Also
Stonibrigadum, and Belgradum, heretofore called Taurunum.

map of Walachia VVALACHIA.


BVLGARIA.
BULGARIA is so called as it were Volgaria, because certain people coming
from Volga about the year of our Lord 566. did possess this Country. Some
think that this Country is the lower Maesia. It lies between Servia,
Romania, and Danubius. This Country for the most part is Mountainous, and it
runs out on the back side of the Mountain Haemus toward Danubius, and
Romania, whence the middle part of the Country is ragged, and the steep parts
of it are full of solitary Woods. The Metropolis of this Country is Sophia,
which Niger thinks to be that Town which Ptolemy calls Tibiscum. Here the
Beglerbeg of Greece resideth, whom the Turks call Rumeli Beglerbeg, who has
21. Sangiacates under him. There is also Serrajum a famous City of Bulgaria.
And Nicopolis which is governed by Sangiacks. Near this City there are some
ruins of an admirable Bridge, which the Emperor Trajan built over Danubius,
when he warred against the Getes.

ROMANIA.
ROMANIA is next to Bulgaria, which was so called from the chief City
Constantinople, which was called also Roma nova, or new Rome. It was heretofore
called Thrace, either from Thraces the Son of Mars, or from the Nymph Thrara,
or rather, a feritate seu temeritate, from their wildness or rashness. It is
parted from Macedon by the River Strymon; on the North is the River Haemus, on
the other sides the Sea washes it. This Country has neither good air, nor
soil: and except it be that part which lies toward the Sea, it is cold and
unfruitful. But by the Sea it has fruit, and Corn. It has few Apple trees,
and but few Vines, which unless they be defended from the cold, the Grapes of
them do seldom come to maturity or ripeness. It has these Cities Abdera
where Democritus was borne; also Nicopolis, Philippopolis, Hadrianopolis,
Trajanopolis, Selymbria, Perinthus, and many others. The Metropolis or Mother
City is Bizantium, which was built by Pausanias, now they call it
Constantinople, from Constantine, who made it the seat of his Empire. The
Turks call it Stampolda, as it were a large City. It is seated by an arm of
the Sea, and it has Pera over against it, which they call Galata, which was an
ancient Colony of the Genuensians. There are diverse Monuments of Antiquity in
this City, some of which were brought thither from Rome. The chief are the
Church of Sophia, which was built by the Emperor Justinian. The Palace of
Constantine. St. Lukes Church. A new Castle, a Colossus, a place to ride
Horses, and many old Steeples. Two Rivers do water it Cydrus, commonly called
Machl^vam, and Barbises, also Chartaricon. The compass of this City is 13.
miles. And there are in it 700. thousand Inhabitants. This Country has but few
Rivers but those very famous, as Hebrus, Melanes, Tearus, Arsus, Bithynia, and
Nesta. It has these Mountains, Haemus, Rhodope, Orbelus, Pangaeus, and
Messapus, these Countries are now subject to the Turk, who has a Palace at
Constantinople. Of whose power, and government I will speak briefly. There are
about 200. whom the Turk every 4. years does command to gather through Greece,
Walachia, Bosnia, and Anatolia, and his other Territories all the Christian
Male Children, out of every Family, as a tenth due unto him, which they bring
to Constantinopolis, Pera, and Adrianopolis, and deliver them to Citizens to
bring them up, and the less hopeful they put forth to Country people in
Bursia, and Caramania. All these are called Aza^^gla, or Iamogla, that is,
innocent Infants, that know nothing, and when they are 8. years old, 50. of
the handsomest and hopefullest of them are placed in the Emperors Palace at
Constantinople, which is called Saray, and there they are instructed in
learning and rudiments of war, until they have attained to 20. years of
age. Out of these beside other Officers of the Court the Janitzaries are
chosen, of whom there are 12000. who are the Turks Guard. Out of the
Janitzaries 3000. Spachoglani are chosen, who go on the Princes right hand,
and do every one keep 4. or 5. Horses for service. Hemus is a very high wood,
so that from the top thereof you may behold the Euxine and Adrian Sea. The
Inhabitants of this Country are yellow of complexion, long hayrd, courageous,
fierce, and cruel: they are great drinkers, and do love Wine.

GREECE, WHICH CONTAINS THESE CHIEF COUNTRIES, ALBANIA, MACEDON, EPIRE,
ACHAIA, and MOREA.
GREECE follows which is a famous Country of Europe, and the Fountain and
mother of learning. The Inhabitants did call it Hellas. But these that do now
inhabit it do call it Romechi, and the Turks Haromels. Leunclavius calls
it Rumelia: and the 70. Interpreters Phobel, and Iava. But Greece has several
bounds assignd it. It reaches properly from Epire by the River Achelous. On
the East it has the Aegean Sea: and thus Greece is properly bounderd. Which
Pliny does intimate, who says, that Greece begins from the Istmus, and
again he says, that Greece is joined to Peloponesus with a short neck of
ground. Sometimes also Peloponesus and Thessalia are comprehended in Greece. So
L. Aemilius Paulus, when he travaild through Greece, he went to Delphos through
Thessaly, from thence to Lebadia, then to Chalcides, afterward to Aulides, and
from thence to Athens, then to Corinth, Sicyon, Argos, Epidaurus, Lacedemon,
Megalopolis, Olympia: and so having traveled through Greece, he returned to
Amphipolis. Homer calls the Phtiotae only Graecians. Herodotus makes a
difference between the Thracians and Pelasgans. But now we call Greece all the
Country, which lies Westward, and is washed with the Jonian Sea, on the South
with the Libian Sea: on the East with the Aegean; on the North it is parted
from Thrace, Mysia, and Dalmatia. This Country did heretofore excel other
parts of Europe, both for the temper of the climate, and fertility, and Herds
of Cattle. This is that Country which flourished along time, and was a famous
Empire for Learning, Arts, and warlike Discipline. It was first free, but while
it affected Sovereignty over others, it was it self brought into servitude,
for now it is under the Turks Dominion. And heretofore Cyrus, afterward
Xerxes, and other Kings of Persia did vex it. Afterward the Macedons governd
it, and then the Romans, after the division of their Empire it was subject to
Constantinople, until the Goths, the Bulgarians, and Sarazens did waste and
destroy it, and now last of all the Turk has brought it all into miserable
servitude, except some Islands which are subject to the Venetian, namely,
Corcyra, Cephalenia, Zacynthus, Crete, and other little Islands. Greece had
heretofore many flourishing Cities, as Athens, Lacedemon, Delphos, Argis,
Mycenis, Corinth, and many others, the most of which are ruinate, and decayed.
Here are 32. great Rivers, as Strymon, Chabrius, Echedorus, Axius, Erigon,
Lydius, Aliacmon, map of Greece GREECE.
Pharybus, Peneus, Sperchius, Panyassus, Apsus, Lous, Celidnus, Thyamus,
Acheron, Arachthus, Achelous, Evenus, Ilissus, Asopus, Ismenus, Cephisus,
Boagrius, Asopus, Sus, Peneus, Alphejus, Selas, Panysius, Eurotas, and Inachus.
The Seas are called the Jonian Sea, from Ionia who was a Queen in the farthest
parts of Italy, as Solinus affirms: or as Archidamus thinks, from Ionius a
King of the Illyrians, or from the Jonians who were drowned in passing that Sea.
It was called before the Cronian and Rhaean Bay, and the Cretian from the I Will
Creete, as ancient Writers do witness, it is now called Mar di Candia, or the
Candian Sea. There is also the Carpathiam Sea, so called from the Island
Carpathus, which lies by the Eastern Promontory of Creete. The Aegaean Sea,
as Festus and others do write, was so called from Aegeus the Father of
Theseus, who cast himself into it. I omit other opinions. Valerius Flaccus
calls it Aegon, and Aegeon, Thucydides calls it the Greek Sea, and the
Europeans do call it by a Greek name Archipelagus: The Turks call it the
white Sea. The Romans did heretofore call this Sea by two names, as Pliny
witnesses, namely, all that which touched Macedon and Thrace, the Macedonian
Sea; and that which touched Greece, the Grecian Sea: Ptolemy calls it Myrtoum,
or the Myrtoan Sea, being a part of the Aegean, which beats on Caria a
Country of Asia the less: Castaldus calls it Mar di Mandria. Strabo, Pliny,
and others do place it between Peloponesus, and Attica. It was so called from
Myrthus the Son of Mercury, who as Solinus and Isodorus report was cast into
this Sea by Oenomaus, or as Pliny thinks, from a small Island, situate not
far from the Town Carystum. The most do call it the Icarian Sea, from the
fable of Icarus. It is now called Mar di Nicaria, as Castaldus writes. It has
also diverse Mountains, as Bertiscus, Athos, Olympus, Ossa, Pelion, Citerius,
Othris, Oeta, Pindus, Aroceraunij, Stimphe, Calidromus, Carax, Parnassus,
Helicon, Cithaeron, Himettus, Stimphalus, Pholoe, Cronius, Zarex, Minthe,
Taigetus, and others. Moreover Athens famous for Arts and Disciplines was in
Greece. So that Diodorus Siculus calls it the common School. Cicero Lib. 4.
Epist. Famil. calls it the famousest University of Europe, whether Romans
and other Nations did repair to study Philosophy and the Greek tongue. Cicero
does often commend Greece for Arts, Eloquence, good wits, and plentiful
speech, so that the Romans got the knowledge of Philosophy, and other Arts and
Sciences from them. And Flaccus sings thus.

Graijs ingenium, Graijs dedit ore rotundo
Musa loqui. --
The Muses gave the Graecians wit,
And eloquence of speech to it.
GREECE has yielded these famous Scholars, Nusaeui the Poet, Solon, Socrates
the Prince of Philosophers, Xenophon, Plato, Isocrates, Demosthenes,
Thucidides, and many others. Concerning the Graecians religion, Idolatry
reigned amongst them, so that they had an infinite number of Gods and
Goddesses. Augustine Lib. 3. of the City of God, affirms according to Varros
opinion, that the Romans and Graecians together had above 3000. gods, of which
there were 300. Jupiters. Every one had his Lar or Household god. And they had
Tutelary gods for every affection of the mind, and for defense and protection
from danger, and every god had distinct and peculiar Ceremonies, Prayers,
Priests, Sacrifices, and Offerings. The common people do not now keep their
ancient fashions. For they let their hair grow long, and do only cut the
forepart of their hair, and do wear a double thick Hat. They use but little
household ^^^ffe as the Turks: neither do they lie on Fether-beds, but on
Flock-beds, or Beds stuffed with Wool or Toe. They never mingle any wine with
water, and women are not present at their drinking feasts and meetings, neither
do they sit Down at Banquets. But the Heathenish Greeks have an ancient
custom in bewailing the dead. The Greek Christians do differ in Religion
from the Romans, and do call themselves the Eastern Church. They have four
Patriarks, the Patriarchs of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Jerusalem, and
Antioch. These are created by the Metropolitan Bishops, as the Popes are by the
Cardinals, and they are famous for their sanctimonious, holy, modest, and
religious life. Their yearly revenue is 400. crowns, which is begged in the
Churches which are under their government. For the Clergy men have no
Inheritance. They may marry one wife, but no more, they acknowledge only two
Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper. They communicate in both kinds,
both in Bread and Wine. They hate Purgatory, and detest graven Images, and do
not shave their hair. But the richer Graecians, and men of Authority, do
wear Princely apparel. Those that are under the Venetians do go in habit
like to Venetians. Those that are under the Turks, do go like Turks. The
Governor of Greece is called Vromeli Beglerbey, that is, King of the Roman
Princes, for he governs all those Countries which the Turk has in Europe,
which are subject to Constantinople. He has 40. Sangiacks, under him, who are
Captains of the Horse troops chosen out of the Spachoglans, and they are
Governors in the chief Cities of the Provinces, to keep them in peace and
obedience, and they have 150. Sobasci Cimmeriotae, or more, who are
Vice-governours under them of lesser Towns. Under these Sangiacks there are
30000. Spachi, every one of which maintains 3. or 4. Horses for service. And
these Spachi are distributed through the Flamboler, that is, the bands, which
do contain 200. 300, 400. or 500. Horsemen. The chief of the Sangiacks is
the Governor of Modena, who is President also of all Morea, who upon the
Beglerbeys command is to bring forth a thousand Horse, who are bound to serve
him for wages. Also the Governor of Bosna brings 900. Horse, and the
Governor of Thessalonia brings forth 500. Horse, an hundred whereof he has
always in a readiness, the rest he sends when the Turk demands it. There
are also under this Beglerbey, 20000. Horsemen who are subject to the
Sangiacks, who are called the Tymariots, because they have stipends out of the
Tymar, which is the Emperors Exchequer. And also 40000. Akengi, or Acconti,
that is, Scouts or light Horsemen, who being free from any taxes or
contributions, do serve without wages, and are supplyd with victuals by the
chief Cities through which they pass. There are also many Feudataries who are
called Mosselin, out of which there are sometime raised 60000 Horsemen, and a
great number of Footmen. It would be tedious to rehearse all matters, neither
do we intend it, wherefore we returns to the more special parts of Greece.

MACEDON, EPIRE, AND ACHAIA, WITH which ALBANIA is described.
SOME have divided Greece in another manner. But we will follow Mercator, who
does accurately describe the parts thereof in three Tables. But in this Table
he sets forth 3. Provinces of Greece, Macedon, Epire and Achaja, afterward
Morea, and in the third and last place Candia. The first is Macedon, being a
large Country, and so called from King Macedon the son of Orsiis, some say
that it was so denominated from Jupiter and Thia, or as Salinus thinks, from
Ducalions Nephew. It was heretofore called Emathia, as Pliny and Trogus do
witness. Livy writes that it was first called Paonia, afterward Aemonia,
Solinus calls it Edonia, and Pieria. Trogus writes that it was heretofore
called Baeotia. Stephanus and Hesychius do write that a part of it was called
Macetia, and from thence Eustathius reports that the whole Country was so
called. It is also called in the Book of Machabees, Cethim, where we read
that Alexander went out of the Land of Cethim. It is situate in the middle of
two great Seas, the Jonian Sea on the West, and the Aegaean on the East: on the
North it has a part of Dalmatia, and the higher Maesia: on the South it
touches Epirus and Achaja. The Country is every where fruitful; and
encompassed with great Mountains; and the borders thereof toward the Jonian
Sea are plain and woody: for that part which is called Albania is well known
to be large, fruitful, and pleasant. Moreover, it is very rich in Gold and
Silver, and as Aristotle witnesses, a kind of strange Gold was heretofore
found here, there is also Brimstone dug out of the Earth. Moreover Macedon
does produce a Precious stone called Paeantides, which does help women to
conceive, and bring forth children, as Solinus writes. This is that Macedon
(says Pliny) which heretofore had the Empire of the whole World, that is, that
Country which passed over Asia, Armenia, Iberia, Albania, Cappadocia, Syria,
Egypt, Taurus, and Causasus: this Country had Dominion over the Bactrians,
Medes, and Persians, and possessed all the East, this conquered India, following
the steps of Bacchus and Hercules, this is that Macedon, in which our Emperor
Paulus Aemilius in one day took 72. Cities and sold them. Such was the change
of Fortune. Macedon contains many Countries, among the which Thessaly is the
chief, which Castaldus calls Comenolitari. There are also many fair Cities
in Macedon. The chief now are Thessalonia, which was and is now frequented by
diverse Christian Nations, and Jews, who have there 80. Synagogues. The
Sangiack of Macedon resideth here. He at the command of the Beglerbeg, as often
as the Turk sets forth any Army has 500. Horsemen well appointed, an
hundred whereof he keeps near him to defend his own borders. Near unto
this City is Siderocapsa famous for Gold Metal. And Pella where the Kings
Treasure is kept, and 3000. of the Kings Mares are kept to breed, as Pliny and
Strabo do witness. Stagira was the Town where Aristotle was borne. Also
Apollonia where Augustus Caesar learned the Greek tongue. Dyrrachium which was
heretofore called Epidaurus, is in the Country of Brundusium: also Aulon,
Croja, and Cavalla. The Rivers of Macedon next to Strimon, in the borders of
Thrace, are Axius, Erigonus, Aliacmon, and Peleus. It has these Mountains,
Pelion, Ossa, Pindus, Nimphaeus, and Athon. Athos is a great steep rugged
Mountain, which casts a shadow even to the Island Lemnos: it is planted with
Vines, Olives, Bay-trees, Mirtle-trees, and Apple Trees. Now it is inhabited by
the Colojerians, who are so religious, that even the Turks do abstain from
this part alone, and do often give the Monks gifts, and benevolences.

EPIRVS.
EPIRUS is a Country of Greece, as Ptolemy and others do call it. Martianus
Capella writes that it was heretofore called Chaonia, Grabellius affirms out
of Dionysius and Thrasibulus that it was called Oricis and Dodona, Leander and
Erythraus do write that it is now called Albania, Richerius, and Aeneas
Silvius Larta. Castaldus says, that it was called Ianna. This Country is
bounded on the East with the River Celydnus, or Pepylychnus: on the North it
has Macedon. This Country in many places is Woody and barren, but by the Sea
Coast it fruitful. It produces great store of living creatures, except Asses,
but it is has fair large Oxen, and great Dogs, and also Sheep. Virgil. 1.
Georg. does commend Epire for Horses.

India mittit Ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei,
At Chalybes nudi ferrum, virosaque pontus
Castorea, Eliadum palmas Epiros equarum.
India her whitest Ivory does send,
The soft Sabaeans Frankincense does lend,
The naked Chalybes dig Iron forth,
And Pontus has that precious stone of worth,
Which usually is called the Bezars stone,
Epire has the best Mares to breed upon.
The Molossians first possessed this Country as Trogus reports. But in the
Trojans time Ulysses governed it. After whom it came to Achilles, who much
enlarged his Empire. Afterward it came to the Romans, and afterward to the
Emperors of Constantinople, and by their grant and donation to the Despotians,
which were a family in Epire. But Amurath the Turk at last having droven out
the Christians, did subject it to himself. Here are the Cities Dodone, famous
for the Oracle of Jupiter Dodonaeus. Also Nicopolis built by Augustus in memory
of map of Macedonia MACEDON.
that victory, when in a Sea Fight he overcame Marcus Antonius and Queen
Cleopatra. It was heretofore a great City and populous, now it is called
Prevesa. Ambracia is now called Laria from a River of that name. Here was the
Palace of Pyrrhus of Epire, and the Country of Cleombrotus Ambraciota, who as
Cicero relates, having read Platoes Book of the immortality of the Soul,
being weary of the miseries of this life, did cast himself down from a high
place. There is also Actium, which Gerbelius makes to be a famous City of
Acarnania. It was heretofore a Colony of Augustus, now it is called Capo
Figulo. Strabo, and Virgil do call Buthrotum. Pliny calls it Colonia.
Sophianus calls it now Butrinto. There is also Leucas, where Apollo has a
Chapel, and a Grove which has power to mittigate the flames of Love, and
Strabo does report that the Poetesse Sappho did first come out of it full of
poetical inspirations, as Ovid does mention in one of his Epistles to Sappho.
The Rivers of Epire are Acheron, which Livy calls Acheros. Strabo Achelous,
Sophianus Aspri, Niger Catochi, Kyriacus Ancomtanus calls it Geromlia. The
Ceraunian or Acroceraunian Mountains are very high, and fearful to the
Mariners. For as soon as clouds do begin to arise from thence, Tempests do
immediately follow. There is also the Mountain Stymphe, out of which the River
Arachtus follows, as Strabo witnesses, the Inhabitants as Bellonius
relates, do go forth of their Country in troops in the Summer time, in
regard of the barrenness of the soil, and so do remove to some other place,
namely, into Macedon, Romania, and Natolia, where they work under the Turk
for hire and wages, sometimes they reap Corn, and so after Harvest is done,
they return again in Autumn with their Wives and Children. But they are
Christians, and have a peculiar speech different from the Greeks: yet they are
of the Greek Religion, and because they are neighbors to the Graecians,
therefore they understand the Greek.

ACHAIA.
THere remains in this Table Achaja, which is a Country of Greece. Ptolemy
calls it Hellades. Pliny in his Epistles calls it Maera-Graecia, or mere
Greece. It is bounderd on the North with Thessalia, near the River Sperchus,
the Maliacan Bay, and the Mountain Ceta, on the West with the River Achelous,
beyond which the Country of Epire begins: on the East it bends somewhat
Northward, and is washed with the Aegean and Mirtoan Sea, even to the
Promontory Sunium, which is now called Cape delle Colonne: On the South it has
Peloponesus, over against it, which is joined unto it by our Isthmus. I find
in Writers that here are 9. Countries which are Dorus near Parnassus. Aetolia
by the River Evenus. This latter is plain and fruitful toward the North, but
rugged and barren toward the South. It has many ancient Cities, one of the
chief whereof was Calydon, which is now ruinated with the rest. Evenus a most
clear transparent River does flow through this Country, which afterward runs
into the Sea. The Country of the Locrians and Opuntians was rugged, the chief
City whereof is Amphissa, There is also in this Country Naupactus, which some
do place in Aetolia. Phocis is by the Mountain Pernassus. The City thereof
is Delphos, where there was the sumptuous Church and famous Oracle of Apollo.
Baeotia lies among the Mountains, in a moist moorish place, but fat and very
fruitful. There is also the City Ascra at the foot of the Mountain Helicon,
where Hesiod was borne. And Orchomenus famous for Tiresias Oracle. Also Thebes
which as Pliny witnesses, was sometimes equal to Athens, where many famous
men were borne, but now these Towns lie buried in their own ruins. There is
also Cheronaea where Plutarch was borne. Also Plataea memorable for a famous
victory which the Graecians obtained under the conduct of Pausanias, against
Mardonius. Tanagra was a most superstitious City. And Aulis where the Greeks
assembled themselves before their coming to Troy. Attica is a barren woody
Country. The chief City is Athens, which needs no commendation to make it
famous. Euripides calls it the Grace of Greece, or the Compendium and Epitome
of Greece. Cicero does much praise this City, in his Oration for Lucius
Flaccus, Lib. 2. of Laws, and in his Dialogue de Partitione. There was also
Marathon well known by Milti^^^es his famous victory. And Eleusis famous for
Ceres sacrifices, which were therefore called Eleusinian. Stephanus calls
Megaris a rugged Country. The chief City hereof is Megara seated by the
Isthmus from whence the Country was so called. The most famous Rivers of Achaja
are Ismenus a River of Baeotia, which waters the City of Thebes. Also Cnopus
which Strabo calls Asopus. Homer surnames it flowery Cnopus. Also Evenus which
before as Apollodorus and Strabo do witness, was called Lycormas. It is a River
of Aetolia. The most famous Mountains are Parnassus, which Lucan Lib. 4.
calls Mons Phoebo Bromioque sacer, A Mountain sacred to Apollo and Bacchus.
Which Claudian and Lucretius do situate in the middle of the World. There is
also Helion which Pliny calls Musis natale, the Muses birth place. The
Mountain Hymettus is famous for Honey, Marble, and all things medicinable.
There is also Citheron, which Lactantius calls so from Cithara a Harp,
because this Instrument was often played on in this place, and Poets Verses were
frequently sung here. There are these Bishoprics in this Country. The
Archbishopric Philippensis, under whom are Citrensis and Veriensis: Also the
Archbishop Laricensis, under whom are Dinutriensis, Almurensis, Cardicensis,
Sidoniensis, Dinucensis. The Archbishop Neopatensis, under whom is
Lariaetensis. The Archbishop Thebanensis, Iorocemensis, Castoriensis, The
Archbishop Athenensis, under whom are Thermopylensis, Davaliensis, Salonensis,
Nigropontensis, Molgarensis, Roonensis, Eginnensis. The Archbishops
Corcyrensis, and Duracensis.

MOREA, HERETOFORE CALLED PELOPONNESVS.
SO much concerning the chief Countries of Greece, which are in the Continent:
Morea and Candia are next to be unfolded. The former Ptolemy, Srabo, and Steph.
do call Peloponnesus, it is a Peninsula, but now it is happily called Morea
from the incursions of the Moors. Heretofore as Apollodorus and Pliny do
witness, it was called Apia and Pelasgia. Strabo delivers that it was Argos,
and afterward Argos Achaicum; and Orosius Lib. 1. cap. 11. says that it was
called Achaja. And also Apulejus in his 6. Book of the golden Ass. Eustathius
did also call it Pelopia, and Stephanus Inachia. And in Eusebius Chronicle it
is called Aegialia. It was called Peloponnesus from Pelops a barbarous man, who
coming out of Asia reigned here. For Pelopis signifies an Island, whereas it is
not an Island, but a Peninsula. and as Mela writes it is most like to a
Plantine leaf, being as broad as long. The Perimeter or compass of it is
4000. Furlongs, unto which Artemedorus adds 400. It is joined to the
continent by an Isthmus or neck of Land, the breadth whereof is 40. Furlongs.
Many have vainly attempted to (...) through this narrow tongue of ground, as
Demetrius, C. Caesar, Caligula, Ne^^, and others: but being frustrated of their
purpose, they made a wall there which they called Hexamilium. Amurath the Turk
threw it down, and the Venetians re-edified it in the year 1453. in 15. days
space, but the Turks afterward did raze it down to the ground. In this
Isthmus there was heretofore the Temple of Neptune, where the Isthmian sports
and Plays were celebrated. Peloponnesus has on the East the Cretian Sea: on
the West the Jonian or Hadriatick Sea^ on the North it has the Corinthian and
Saronick Bay, between which is the Isthmus: on the South it has the
Mediterranean Sea. This Peninsula is the Castle and chief part of all Greece,
and Pliny says that it is not inferior to any Country. For it has plenty,
and abundance of all things which serve rather for pleasure or necessity. It
has fruitful Plains and Hills, and it is full of Bays and Havens which do
make many Promontories. The Elians, the Messenians, the Achivi, the Sicyonians,
the Corinthians, the Laconians, the Argives, and the Arcadians did heretofore
inhabit Peloponnesus. And this part of Greece was famous heretofore through the
whole world for the Commonwealths of the Myceneans, Argives, Lacedaemonians,
Sicyonians, Eliensians, Arcadians, Pylions, and Messenions, out of which there
came many famous Princes, as Agamemnon, Menelaus, Ajax, and others. For this
Country in regard of the situation, and Majesty thereof did govern all the
other parts of Greece. But now all Peloponnesus is under map of Morea MOREA.
the Turks Dominion, as also the rest of Greece, although it were valiantly
defended by some Earls of Greece, whom they call (...), or Lords, and also by
the Venetians. But now a Sangiack does govern all Morea under the Turk, who
is more potent than all the rest, who resideth at Modonum, and at the
Beglerbeys of all Greeces command he is to bring a thousand Horse into the
Field at his own cost and charges. This Sangiack is called by the Barbarians
Morabegi, whose yearly revenewes in this Province 700000. Aspers, that is, 14.
thousand Crowns. But it appears in Ptolemy and other Authors, that all this
Country was divided into 8. Provinces, which are Corinth, Argia, Laconia,
Messenia, Elis, Achaja, Sicyonis, and Arcadia. Corinth is seated in the
Isthmus, it was so denominate from the chief City which was first called
Ephyre. Cicero does worthily call it the light of Greece. It has a Haven on
either side, the one whereof looks toward Asia, the other toward Italy, so
that the convenient situation made it soon grow famous, and the Isthmian
Plays which were celebrated here. Acrocorinthe was seated on a Mountain 3.
Furlongs and a half high, and under it was Corinth 40. Furlongs in compass.
On the top of the Mountain there was a temple dedicated to Venus: near which
was the Fountain Pyrene, which did first spring up as the Poets report, from a
stroke of Pegasus his hoof, who was the winged Horse of the Muses. This City
was razed by L. Mummius, because they had discourteously entertained the Roman
Ambassadors, after it had been builded 952. years by Aletes the Son of
Hippotes, as you may find it in Paterculus. Argia follows, which Ortelius
calls Romania. The Cities of this Country are Mycenae, where Agamemnon had
his Palace, whence Ovid calls it Agamemnons Mycenae, it was famous for the
ancient temple of Juno, whence Juno was called Argiva. They report that the
Cyclops did wall it about. Not far from hence was the Lake Lerna, where
Hercules killed the Lernaean Hydra, or rather did scatter and kill the Thieves
that did rob in those parts. The City Argos was built as some report by Argus.
Nauplia now called Neapolis is a strong City of Romania, Epidaurus is in the
innermost part of the Saronian Bay, a City famous for Esculapius temple. Next
to Argia is Laconia. The Metropolis or Mother City whereof is Sparta, which
was also called Lacedaemon, and now Misuhra: it was heretofore a great potent
City, being not fortified with walls, but by the valor of the Citizens,
neither does Pomponius praise it for magnificent Buildings, but for Licurgus
his Laws and Discipline, in which it contended with Athens, as Thucidides
notes in his 8. Book. Leuctra may be known out of Plutarch by that sad and
tragical History of Scedasus Daughters. There is also Epidaurus which is now
called Malvasia. Messenia reaches from the Mountain Taygetus and the River
Panijsus even to Alpheus. The chief City of it is Messene situate by the Sea,
it is now called Mattegia. Aristomenis was the Country where renowned Messenius
was borne, who as Pausanias reports, being ripped open after he was dead, had
a hairy Heart. There is also Methone, now called Modon, where the Turkish
Sangiack did sometimes keep his residence. Corone is now called Coron. Pilus
was the Country, where Homers eloquent Nestor who lived three ages, was borne.
And Ciparissi is now called Arcadia. Elis is situate between Messenia, Achaja,
and Arcadia. The Cities are Elis through the middle whereof Peneus and Alpheus
did run, famous for Jupiters temple. Olympia was famous for the solemn
Grecian Plays, which were called Olympian games, and for the sumptuous Temple
of Jupiter Olympius, which by the offerings and gifts of potent Princes and
other men grew so great and beautiful, that there was no Church in all Greece
that could compare with it for magnificence and riches, for Jupiter was
religiously reverenced here. Cipselus the Tyrant of Corinth did consecrate and
set up a golden Jupiter at Olympia of massy gold. Afterward Phidius the
Athenian did set up a great Image of Jupiter of Gold and Ivory, being 60.
foot high, which work was reprehended by other Artificers, because the Image
was not proportionable to the Temple. For whereas this Jupiter sat in an Ivory
Throne, and yet touched the top of the Church with his head, it must needs come
to pass that if this Ivory god being weary of sitting would rise up at any
time, that he must throw down the top of the Church. There is also Pisa.
Achaja which Ptolemy calls Propria, reaches from the Promontory Araxas, even
to the Sicyonian, from whom it is divided by the River Sus, on the South it
has the Mountain Stymphalus, on the North the Corinthian Bay. There are also
the Cities Dyme, which they now call Charenza, whence they call the Araxean
Promontory Capo di Chiarenza there is also the famous City Patrae which is now
called Patras. The City Aegium in former time was called Vostiza or Bostizan,
and it was raced by the Turks. Aegira was heretofore a chief City, being
seated on a rugged steep Hill, which is now ruinate, and called Xilocastro.
And in the Crissaean Bay there are Helice, Bura, and Pellene. Sicyonia is
situate between Achaja and Asopus: the chief City thereof is Sicion, the
ancientest of all the Greek Cities, and built in Abraham's time, being full of
Churches, Altars, Statues, and Images. There was also Phlius, which happily is
that which they now call Vasilicon. There remains Arcadia which is a
Mediterranian Country in Peloponnesus, being every where encompas'd with the
Sea. Which was so great that they seemed to shadovv and obscure the beams of
the Sun. a (...). i. e. ab obstipando vel obscurando. Pli.
In this Country there is the City Megalopolis, where Polibius a grave and
wise Writer was borne. It is now called Leontari. There is also Stimphalus,
whence the Stymphalian Lake, and the Stymphalian Birds. There are also Lilaa,
Mantinea, and Psophis. But the chief Cities of all Peloponnesus, Ovid Lib. 6.
Metamorph. has thus briefly described and Epitomized.

Finitimi Proceres coeunt, urbesque propinque
Oravere suos ire ad solatia reges:
Argosque and Sparte, Pelopejadesque Mycenae,
Et nondum torvae Calidon invisa Dianae,
Orchomenosque ferax, and nobilis aere Corinthus,
Messeneque ferox, Patraeque humilesque Cleovae,
Et Melea Pilos, nec adhuc Pitheia Troezen,
Quaeque urbes aliae bimari clauduntur ab Isthmo.
The neighboring Princes met: the Cities near
Entreat their Kings the desolate to cheer
Renowned Mycenae, Sparta, the Argive State
And Calydon, not yet in Dian's hate;
Fertile Orchomenos, Corinthus, famed
For high-priz'd Brass, Messene, never tamed;
Cleovae, Patrae, Pylos, Nelius crown;
And Throezen, not as then Pitheus Town,
With all that two-sea'd Isthmus Straites include:
And all without, by two-sea'd Isthmus viewed.
The most famous Rivers are Asopus, which Theverus calls now Arbon, also
Penejus, which Thevetus and Niger call Igliaco: there is also Alpheus which the
Inhabitants call Rophea, and as Niger says Orphoa: the Italian Mariners call
it Carbon: and 140. streams and Rivulets do run into this River. There is
also Panisus which Niger calls Stromio, but Castaldus and Mercators tables
call it Pirnaza, which is the greatest River of all Peloponesus. The water
whereof does heal (as it is reported) all diseases belonging to Children and
Infants. (...) is now called by Stephanus and others Basilopotamo, but Niger
calls it Iris; whose banks are full of Bay-trees: and Inachus, which
Sophianus and others do now call Planizza, but Niger calls it Iris, whose
banks have also great store of Bay-trees. I omit the other Rivers. The
Mountains are Stimphalus the highest Mountain of Arcadia, which Dominicus
Niger calls Poglici. Xitias Niger calls it Phalos. Mela Cillenius, Strabo
Cyllene, it is the highest Mountain in all Arcadia. There is also the
Mountain which Mela calls Menalius, Ptolemy Cronium. Also Grevenos, which
Niger calls Zarex, and Gemistus Zaraca. That which Ptolemy and Strabo call
Minthe, Niger calls Olonus. Pausanias calls it Evan, from Evoe, a noise
which Bacchus his Priests did use; because it is reported that Bacchus and
those women that followed him did use this acclamation or cry. That which
Pliny, Pausanias, Vibius, and Stephanus do call Taigotus is a Mountain of
Peloponesus in Laconia, near unto the River Eurota. From the top whereof there
is so fair a prospect, that you may behold all the Peninsula, and every famous
City in it. This Mountain does breed many wild beasts, being consecrate to
Bacchus, Apollo, Diana, and Ceres. In Morea there are these Bishoprics: the
Archbishop of Corinth, under whom is Argivensis: The Archbishop Patracensis,
under whom are the Bishops Coloniensis, M^thonensis, Coronensis, Amiclensis,
and Androvillensis.

CANDIA WHICH POPE BONIFACE of MONTIS-FERRAT, sold unto the VENETIANS.
WE are come at length to the last Table of Europe, in which Mercator does
delineate and paint forth Candia, with some small Islands near Greece. Ptolemy
calls it Crete which is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea. It is now commonly
called Candy. On the North the Aegean Sea does beat upon it: on the South the
Lybian and Egyptian Seas: on the West the Hadriatick Sea: on the East the
Carpathian Sea. The form of it is long: on the East the Promontory Samonium
shoots forth, on the West there is the Promontory Criu Metopum: on the North
there is a third Promontory, which Stra. lib. 10. calls Cimarus, now it is
called Capo Chesis. The length is 270. miles, the breadth 50. The compass of
it 588. The Country is every where rugged and Mountainous, but it yields good
store of Corn and Grass. The soil is very fruitful, and there are abundance
of trees. Pliny also witnesses that whatsoever grows in Creete, is better
than any of the same kind that grows otherwheres. It bears Vines, Olives,
Oranges, Figs, Lemmons, Cittrons. Malmesie is made only in this Country, and
so is transported from thence to Venice, and other parts of the world. This
Wine as Bellonius witnesses, the ancients did call Pramium. But Volaterranus
thinks that those wines which they called Arvisia, are now called Malvisia or
Malmesie, by the addition of one letter, and he adds that those kinds of
Vines, were brought out of Arvisium, a Promontory of the Island Chios, into
Creete, whence they were heretofore called Arvisian Wines. It bears also and
produces Honey, Wax, Cheese, Saffron, store of Gum and Bitony, peculiar only
to Creete. In the whole Island there is neither Wolf, Fox, Serpent, or any
harmefull creature except Spiders. In regard whereof the Flocks and Herds of
Cattle do feed securely and safely in the Meddowes, especially Sheep, which
they call Striphoceri. But it produces diverse living creatures. And Authors
do report of Creete. That it has no Owls, and that they dye if they be
brought into this Island. Jupiter did first govern this Island, then Radamanth,
afterward Minos and the Graecians. The Romans power over it began from
Metellus, who was therefore called Creticus. Afterward the Constantinopolitans
did possess it. Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and Emperor of Constantinople gave
it to the Marquess of Montis-ferrat, who sold it to the Venetians in the year
1194. for a great sum of gold: and so it is still under their Empire. Ancient
Writers do report that it had heretofore an hundred famous Cities, and Pliny
mentions about 40. The most noted City is Gnossos, where Minos had his
Palace, whence came the Gnossian Bow, and the Gnossian Darts. Cortina
follows, whence came the Cortynian habit, as Claudian says in his Book of
the rape of Proserpine.

Crispatur gemino vestis Cortynia cinctu.
Her Cortynian Garment then
With a double Girdle was girt in.
And also Phestos. Proxima Gnossiaco jam quondam Phaestia regno. Also Cidon
whence the Cydonian Bow, and Cydonian Horn. Also Dictinna, Mannethusa,
Licastos, Lictos, Holopixos, and others. But now as Bellonius witnesses, it
has only three Cities of any note, which are Candy, heretofore Matium, the
chief City of the whole Island, from whence the Island is denominated. The
second City next to Candy, is Canca, heretofore Gidon. The third is Rhetimo,
which the ancients called Rhetimna. This latter has an inconvenient Haven,
(...) Canea and Candy have convenient Havens. There are no Navigable Rivers in
the whole Island. Yet there are many great Rivers, in which Bean; do grow of
their own accord. On the Northern shore there are Melipotamus, Scasinus,
Cladilis, Epicidanus, Giffo, Divotro: on the West there is Naupuliar: on the
South Limens. Crete has great (...) of a kind of Fish as big as Mullets on
the Coast which are (...), being very rare in other Countries, which ancient
Writers for often mention, and the Romans did account them great dainties and
a very dainty Dish. The chiefest Mountains are three, Ida, which the
Inhabitants call Psilori: Leuci which Pliny calls Cadissi, now de Madara: and
Dicta which is now called Sethia. They are so high, that all the Winter time
they are covered with Snow, but yet Cypress trees do grow here and there
among the Cliffes. The Mountain Ida is the highest of them all. It beholds
the Sun before the Sun rises, for as Lucretius says.

-- Idaeis fama est e montibus altis
Dispersos igneis orienti limine cerni.
They say the Idaean Mountains are so high,
That ere Sun rise, the Sun we may epsy,
Whose scattered beams within the Eastern skies
Are seen before the Sun it self do rise.
It has abundance of rare Herbs and Plants, which Bellonius lib. 1 cap. 7.
does reckon up. Many do mention the Labyrinth in Crete which was built by
Daedalus, of which as also of the Italian Labyrinth Plin. lib. 36. cap. 13.
witnesses that there is now nothing remaining. Wonderful therefore is the
stupidnesse and ignorance of the Inhabitants, who do still show at the foot
of the Mountain Ida, a new Labyrinth in stead of that old one: but it is no
wonder that the Cretensians map of Crete CANDIE.
should Cretissare, that is, should be Liars. For the Inhabitants whether by
the influence of the Heavens, the quality of the soil, or their own
disposition, are naturally given to evil. They were heretofore Liars,
deceitful, greedy, covetous, and gluttonous Drinkers, idle, and not adicted to
any trade or course of life, but much given to drinking and Banqueting. But
now, as Bellonius reports by the instinct of nature, they delight from their
childhood in the Scythian Bow, and therein do follow their ancient custom.
For they report that they heretofore adored Diana: and therefore they exceeded
the Turks themselves for shooting, also they are nimble and stout in
Sea Fights. For the Cretensians were the first that were strong in Shipping,
and Bows, whereby it is to be understood that they were the first Graecians
that followed these studies. For as the Philosopher has it (...) Lib. 2.
Politic. This Island naturally belongs to the Principal^ (...) Greece, and is
better seated than any other. For it lies in the Sea over against Greece. And
one part of it lies but a little distant from Peloponnesus, the other part
lies not far from a part of Asia which is above Triopium, and not far from
Rodes. Wherefore King Minos was governor of the Sea, and held other Islands in
subjection: and upon others which had been long uninhabited he planted
Colonies. There were these Bishoprics in it. The Archbishop of Crete or Candy
under whom are these Suffragan Bishops; Kirokensis, Archadensis, Gerapetrensis,
Sicinensis, Milopotamiensis, Ariensis, Calamoniensis, Aglensis, Kissaniensis.
The Archbishop Atridensis, under whom are Casensis, S^epulensis, Napronensis,
Margaricensis. The Archbishop Soltaniensis, who has these Suffragans under
him, Helenensis, Sudensis, Monovasiensis, Taurisiensis, Marrachitaniensis. The
Archbishop Vospreniensis, under whom are these Suffragan Bishops, Tephiliensis,
Matrehensis, Cersonensis. And so much concerning Candia: there are some Islands
yet to be described, which lie round about Greece.

Corfu which Ptolemy calls Corcira is a fair Island, being strong both by Land
and Sea. It is 2. miles distant from Epirus, where the Sea is straitest, but
where it is broadest 20. miles. It is 97. paces in length, as Pliny witnesses.
The Climate is very temperate and gentle. so that there are whole woods of
Citterne Trees, Orange Trees, and those kinds of fruits. The soil is
fruitful, having abundance of Vines, Olives, Apples, and other sorts of
fruits, here is also great store of Honey. But it has no good Corn in regard
of the Southern winds, which dryes it so much, that it withers before it come
to Maturity and ripeness. It is now subject to the Venetians, who defended it
valiantly against the fury of the Turks. It has a City of the same name. The
Inhabitants are Graecians.

Zacynthus commonly called Zante. Pliny places it between Cephaleria and
Achaja. It is 36. miles in compass. This Island brings forth great store of
Corn, but especially Raisons, Wine, and Oil, out of which the Inhabitants do
yearly make 150000. Crowns. They are Graecians and subject to the Venetians.
It has a Town of the same name, with a Castle seated on a Mountain, which
hangs over the Sea: it is full of Woods, and it is much commended for the
wholesomnesse of the air, the fruitfulness and the fertility of the soil.
The Mountain it self is called Elatos.

Milo is an Island which was anciently called Melos, which is in the Cretian
Sea. The compass of it is 80. miles. It has fruitful Fields, which do yield
Corn and Oil, but little Wine. In this Island a Mine of Silver is also found,
and the Onix stone.

Naxus is an Island which Sophianus and others call Nissia. It is 80. miles in
compass. And it is reckoned among the fruitful Isles. It has great store of
Wine, and there is a kind of Marble found in it, which the Graecians and Pliny
do call a Carbell, having spots like a Serpent. The stone also Smirillus
wherewith Glasiers cut their Glass, which Pliny calls Smiris is found here.
Some think that there are veins of Gold here, which are not found out by
reason of the Inhabitants sloth and idleness. Here is also a kind of Waspe,
which if it sting any one, he dies presently afterward: also here are great
store of Bats. It was heretofore subject to John Quirinus a noble Venetian.
Afterward to Duke Job Crispus, whom Selinus the Turkish Emperor drove hence.
But now it is inhabited by Turks and Jews.

Santorini, or Santorino, or Therosia, which is an Island in the Aegean Sea,
according to Strabo and Ptolemy, has the figure and form of an horned Moon,
although it had another shape before it was burned, and that the Sea divided it
into two parts, between which some Rocks do lie. It is fruitful and has
convenient Havens. The Inhabitants live by fishing. And it is subject to the
Turk.

Scarpanto was heretofore called Carpathus, or according to Homer, Crapathus.
Hence the Carpathian Sea. It is situate in the middle between Crete and Rhodes.
The compass of it is 60. miles, or as some will have it 70 miles. It is rugged
and full of Mountains, in which there are Mines of Marble. It had heretofore
four Cities, and therefore it was called Tetrapolis, as Eustathius has it
upon Homer. It has many Havens which are not very great, nor safe. The
Inhabitants speak Greek, and do embrace the Grecian Religion: but they are
subject to the Venetians.

But let so much suffice concerning Europe. Now we enter upon the other parts
of the world, and first of Afric, which in our devision is next to Europe.

BARBARY, IN WHICH ARE THE KINGDOMS OF TVNIS AND EGYPT.
IN Afric, which with Ptolemy we make to be the second part of the World,
Barbary does first present it self to view, The Country whence so called.
being a noble Country of Afric. It was so nominated either from the
Inhabitants murmuring speech, which the Arabians call Barbar, because the
Numidian speech seemed such to the Arabians; or from their frequent deserts;
for Bar signifies in their language a Desert. It reaches from Egypt even to
the Gaditane strait, The Situation
and does contain both the Mauritania's, namely, Tingitana and Caesariensis,
properly called Afric, also Cyrenaica, Marmarica, with the farther Lybia.
Late Writers of Afric do make the bounds of it on the East to be the Deserts
of Marmarica, (which is now called Barcha) which reaches to a part of the
Mountain Atlas, now called Mejes, which part Strabo describes under the name
of Aspis: on the South it has the Mountain Atlas, which lies from the East
to the West, even to the Sea, which from thence is called the Atlantic Sea: on
the West it has the Atlantic Sea: on the North the Mediterranean Sea. The
quality of the Soil.
The Air and Climate of this Country is various and different. In the Spring
the air is gentle, mild, and clear; in Summer the heat is most vehement,
especially in the Months of June and July, but in Autumn it is somewhat
cooler: in the Winter the cold is somewhat sharp, especially about December
and January, but it is but in the morning only, so that no man is compelled
through cold to come to the fire. The end of Autumn, and all the Winter, and a
good part of the Spring, has great store of impetuous and violent winds and
storms. And sometimes they are troubled with Hayle, Lightning, and fearful
Thunder: and in some places there is thick Snow. This Country yields great
store of Dates and Pomegranats, but it has but little Wheat, so that the
Inhabitants for the most part do make Barley bread. It has also great store
of other fruit, as Cherries, Figs, Apples, Pears, Prunes, Peaches,
Apricotts, Quinces, Olives, and the like. It has abundance of Oil, Honey and
Sugar, and great store of Herds of Cattle and wild beasts. For this Country
does breed Dragons, Elephants, Goats, Bulls, or wild Oxen, and the like; The
variety of living creatures.
also Lions and Libbards: it has also Wesils which are as big as Cats, but
that they have not such great jaws, and great store of Apes. The Phaenicians
and others who came out of Asia or Egypt did first inhabit this Country:
afterward it was subject to the Romans, then to the Grecian Emperous, and
afterward to the Vandals, Sarazens, and Arabians, now it is partly subject to
the Turk, and partly to a Seriffe of its own: also the King of Spain has
some Castles map of Barbary BARBARY.
in it. There are four Kingdoms in Barbary, the Kingdom of Morocco, of
Fesse, of Teleusinum, and Tunis, unto which some do add Barca. We will
entreat of the two former, namely, Morocco and Fesse in the following Tables,
but of the other we will entreat here. The Kingdom of Teleusinum which they
call Tremisen, is Mauritania Caesariensis. The length of it from the West to
the East is 380. miles. The breadth of it is narrower being 25. miles, namely,
from the Deserts of Numidia, even to the Mediterranean Sea. The most part of
this Country is unhabited, dry, and rugged, especially Southward. But the
Coasts by the Sea side are somewhat more fruitful and fertile. There are few
Cities or Castles in it. The Metropolis is Teleusina, which was heretofore a
great City, but now it is for the most part ruinated. In the same Country
there is also Algiers, a great City and well fortified. This City did first
revolt from the King of Telusianum, and paid tribute to the King of Bugia:
afterward it revolted from him and received Ferdinand King of Spain to be
their King. And at last it was taken by Barbarossa, and added to the Ottoman
Empire, it is famous for the Shipwreck of Charles the 5. for the sad captivity
and slavery of the Christians, and the excursions of the Turkish Pirates. It is
now so fortified, that it is thought to be impregnable. Castaldus supposes
that Ptolemy did call this Salden, but Ortelius and our Mercator do think
that that which Ptolemy called Salden, is now called Tadelis: Iovius thinks
it to be Iulia Caesarea, and others Critae. There are also the Cities
Mersalcabir, Messagran, Mustaganin, and others. This Kingdom has two famous
Havens, the one the Haven of Horamus, or Orania, with a strong Castle, the
other of Marsa Eltabirus, whether great store of Merchants Ships do resort,
especially from Italy, both which the King of Spain got some years ago, to
the great detriment and loss of this Kingdom. The Kingdom Tunitanum does
contain Afric the less, and a great part of Numidia. For it reaches from
the River Major, which Maginus supposes to be that which Ptolemy calls Audum,
even to the River of the Country of Mesrata.

EGYPT.
EGYPT is a noble ancient Country, which was first inhabited by Misraim the
Son of Chus, Nephew to Cham, and Nephew once remoov'd to Noah. Wherefore in
Osiris sacred rights, it was called from Cham Chemia, in stead of Chamia, as
from the other Misraim, for the Arabians do still call it Mesre. The Turks
call it Elquibet or Elchebit. The bounds of it on the West beyond Nilus are the
Deserts of Barch, Libya, and Numidia, with the Kingdom of Nubia. On the South
it is enclosed with the Bugiensian Country, and Nilus, where Nilus bends his
course from the West Eastward. Pliny does bounder it with the City Syene,
which is now called Asna. On the East it has the Deserts of Arabia, which lie
between Egypt and map of Egypt AEGYPTUS
the red Sea. On the North it is enclosed with the Mediterranean Sea, which is
there called the Egyptian Sea. It seldom raineth in Egypt, ^^d Plato says
that it was never seen to rain in Egypt, so that the ^re is continually
serene and clear, whence happily it was former-called Aeria. The Country is
wonderful fruitful, being full of ^en, and all kind of creatures. The River
Nilus, which runs ^orow the middle of it, and does overflow it every year,
does so ^oisten, and fatten it, so that it is wonderful fertile, and
fruitful. The fruitfulness of the Soil.
^riters have left many Elogies in praise of the fruitfulness of this ^ountry,
Iustine affirms that there is no Country more fruitful ^^n it. For (says
he) there is in Egypt great store of Wheat, Pulse, ^^ly, Oats, Beans, and
other kind of Grain; and also excellent ^ine. It has also pleasant Pastures,
but has but little Oil and ^ood. Besides wild beasts, of which this Country
has abundance, ^oth breed great store of tame Cattle, as Buffes, Oxen,
Camels, The variety of living creatures.
^orses, Asses, Rams, and Goats, all which are of a great size, as ^onius
witnesses, in regard of the temper of the air, the abundance of Fother, and
the sweet Grass which grows there, by the overflowing of Nilus: among the
rest there are very fatt great Rams, which have a great thick tail that
hangs down to the very ^ound, and dew lappes hanging down under their neck
as Oxen ^^e, and their wool is black. Moreover all Egypt did heretofore ^^ish
under diverse Kings of diverse names, even to the Ptolemies: for ^^re were few
Phar^es. But the Ptolemies reigned a long time, even the Roman Empire, which
declining, Egypt was governd by the ^^^renes of Arab a felix, the Prince
whereof was called the Sultan, ^ those that followed him were also called
Sultanes, being all Mahometans, they reigned many years until they were
expulsed by the ^^urkes. But now Soliman the great Turk does possess all
Egypt, and ^^veth there a President, who is called the Baxa of Egypt.
Alexander Macedon did devide it into Praefectureships of Towns, whereof
He^^tus reckons 18. Strabo one more, and Ptolemy 46. Pliny 50. who ^o adds
that some of them had changed their names, so that it is ^ot to be imagined
that there were heretofore so many Praefectureships of Egypt as are nominated
in Historians, seeing there might be ^any names of one and the same
Praefectureship. Leo Africanus says, that the Mahometans did devide it into
three Provinces. Sahid the ^^her or Thehais from the borders of Bugia even to
Cairus* Errifia (...) Heliopolis was heretofore the City where the Priests
dwelt, and the place where Strabo the great Astronomer and Philosopher lived.
Memphis heretofore called Arsinoe, was a royal City, where Nilus first
devideth it self into two parts, and makes the form of the Greek letter
Delta. They call it now Cairum, or Alcair. This City is built in a triangular
or three-cornerd form, being above 8. miles in compass. The Turks, the
Egyptians, the Arabians, the Hebrews and others do inhabit it. Bellonius
places Babylon a little above Cairus, and the ruin of many famous Buildings
are yet remaining. It is now a little Town of the Christians. Alexandria was
heretofore a noble fair City built by Alexander the great, upon the
Mediterranean Seacoast, and seated pleasantly. The Turks do call it
Scanderia. Pelusium is called now Damiatum, which is a potent rich City,
famous for the convenience of the Haven, wherein many Ships may ride, being at
the Pelusiacian mouth of the River Nilus. This Country is divided, watered, and
made fruitful by the River Nilus, which is the fairest River in all the world.

THE KINGDOMS OF MAROCCO and FESSE.
THat part of Barbary which was heretofore called Mauritania Tingitana, does
now contain two Kingdoms, namely, The Country whence so called.
of Marocco, and Fesse, of which we will now speak in order. The Kingdom of
Marocco was so called from the chief City thereof Marocco. It lies between
the Mountain Atlas, and the Atlantic Ocean, in a triangular or three cornerd
form. The fruitfulness.
It is a pleasant Country abounding with all kind of Fruit and Grain, as
Oil, Honey, Sugar, and other fruits, as also Dares, Grapes, Figs, Apples,
and diverse sorts of Pears. It has also great Flocks and Herds of Cattle:
and many Goats, The variety of living creatures.
whose hides are called Marocchini, and the hair of them are good to weave a
kind of cloth which they call Camelottes. Lastly, this Country produces all
things which are necessary for food, or to delight the smell, or recreate the
sight. The Provinces hereof are Hea, which on the East is enclosed with the
River Essivalus, on the South with the Mountain Atlas, on the West and North
with the Ocean, it is a rugged Country, Mountainous, Woody, rich, and
populous. It has not such plenty of Wheat as of Barley and Millet. But there
is very little fruit, which arises rather from the slothful idleness of the
Inhabitants, than the indisposition of the Climate or Soil. But there is great
store of Honey, on which they live for the most part, but they cast away their
Wax, not knowing how to use it, here are few Cities, The Cities.
but many strong Towns, Villages, and Castles. Susa has on the North the
Mountain Atlas, and the Town Hea, on the East the River Sus, it is a
fruitful, pleasant, and rich Country. It has abundance of Wheat, Barley, and
Pulse, and in some parts great store of Sugar, although the Inhabitants know
not how to boil it, or use it: in other parts it has diverse fruits as Eggs,
Grapes, Peaches and Dares* it (...) a triangular or three cornerd figure: Tedsi
is a great City, founded heretofore by the Affricans, and seated in a pleasant
soil: and Tagavost the greatest City of all this Country. The Country of
Morocco has a triangular or three cornerd form, the bounds thereof on the
West are the Mountain Netisa, on the East the Mountain Hadimeus: on the North
it is extended even to the confluence and meeting of the River Tensift and a
sisinual. This Country as Leo reports, is well inhabited, and abounds with
Herds of Cattle and wild beasts. It is a continued Plain, not much unlike
to Lombardy, those Mountains which it has, are cold and barren, so that they
bear nothing but Barley. In this Country there is the City Marocco, which
some think to be that which Ptolemy calls Bocanum Hemerum. It is accounted one
of the greatest Cities of the world. For it is so great, that in the reign of
Prince Halis the Son of Josephus, it contained above 100000. houses, and it
had 24. Gates. But this great famous City has been so harassed and wasted by
the Arabians frequent inrodes and excursions, so that now there is scarce a
third part of the City standing. There are also in this Country other lesser
Towns, as Elgiumuha, a little Town, seated on a Plain, near the River
Sesseva, and built by the Affricans. Tenezza is a strong City, built
heretofore by the Affricans on that side of the Mountain Atlas which is called
Ghedmina, Delgumuha is a new City seated on a high Mountain with a strong
Castle. Imizmizi is a fair City seated on a Rock: Tesrast is a small Town
seated on the bank of the River Asiselmel: also Agmet and Hanimmei. Guzzula is
seated on the North side of the Mountain Atlas, and on the East it joyneth to
Hea. This Country does yield great store of Barley, and Cattle, and it has
Mines of Brass and Iron. The Towns here and Castles have no Trenches or
Ditches: the Villages are fair, populous, and rich: and all the Country is
well inhabited. Duccala is a Country which begins on the West from the River
Tensiftum, it is bounderd on the North with the Ocean, on the South it is
enclosed with the River Habiel, and on the West with the River Hammirabith.
There are few walled Cities in this Country. Among which is the City Azaefi
situate on the Ocean shore. The Affricans built it: there is also Conie which
was built by the Goths, and Tit built by the Affricans: Elmedina is the head
City of all this Country: Centopozzi is a small Town: There (...) map of
Morocco MOROCCO.
large, it is bounded on the West with the Rivers Servi and Omirabih, on the
South it joyneth to the Mountain Atlas, on the North it is bounderd with the
confluence and meeting of the Rivers Servi and Omirabih, so that the Country
lies in a triangular or three cornerd figure. There are some Towns in it, the
chief whereof is Tesza, built by the Affricans, and well inhabited. There are
also Esza, Githiteb, and others. The chief Rivers of this Kingdom are
Tensift, and Omirabih, which issuing out of the Mountain Atlas, do run into
the Ocean. But Tensift rises in the Country of Morocco, and is enlarged by the
receipt of many Rivers, the greatest whereof are Sifelmel and Niffis. But
Omirabih does break forth among the Mountains, where the Province of Tedles
confineth on the Kingdom of Fesse. On the shore side in some places there is
found great store of Amber, which is very cheap there, so that the Portugals
and other foreign Nations do transport it into other Countries. Here are
many Mountains, as Nisipha, Semede, Sensana, and others. The most whereof are
cold and barren, so that they bear nothing but Barley. In this Kingdom there
are no great store of Churches, Colleges, nor Hospitals. In the City of
Morocco there are many Churches, and one of the most curious and magnificent is
that which stands in the middle of the City, and was built by the aforesaid
Halis. There is also another built by his successor Abdul Miomem, and enlarged
by his Nephew Monsor, and enriched which many Pillars brought thither out of
Spain. He made a Cisterne under this Church, which is as big as the Church,
he coverd the Church with Lead, and made leaden Pipes at every corner, to
receive and convay the rain water into the aforesaid Cisterne. The Tower or
Steeple of stone like unto Vespasians Roman Amphitheater, is higher than the
Steeple of Bononta in Italy, the steps which go up into it are very broad, and
the walls thick. This Tower has three Belfries or Turrets, on which there is
another little arched Tower built. And this has three Turrets one over
another, and they go from one to another by a wodden Laddet. If any one look
down from the highest Tower he will think that men of great stature are no
bigger than children of a year old. And this Tower has a golden Moon for a
Weathercock, and three golden Globes, so fastened upon Iron, that the greatest
is placed lowest, and the lesser highest. There is also a strong Castle in this
City so that (...) do use no Tables, nor Table-cloathes. They are clothed
with a kind of cloth made of Wool like Carpeting stuff, they wear a great
deal of fine cloth about their heads, yet the forepart of their head is bare,
none wear Hats or Caps but old men, and learned men, they wear no Smocks, and
in stead of Beds, they have hair Blankets in which they wrap themselves. They
shave their beards before they are married, but afterward they wear them long.

THE KINGDOMS OF THE ABISSINES AND CONGVS.
THE Kingdom of the Abissines is called Aethiopia, which Ptolemy places
beneath Egypt. The Country.
The Moors do call the Prince thereof Asiela Bassi, and in the Ethiopian
language he is called John Belul, that is, High and Precious, not Presbyter, as
some are of opinion. He glories that he is descended from the stock of
David, and this is his Title. N. N. The supreme Governor of my Kingdoms, the
only beloved of God, the Pillar of Faith, descended of the stock of Judah, the
Son of David, the Son of Solomon, the Son of the Pillar of Sion, the
Son of the seed of Jacob, the Son of Mary, the Son of Nahu according to
the flesh, the Son of the Saints Peter and Paul, according to Grace, the
Emperor of the higher and lower Aethiopia, and of my large Kingdoms,
Jurisdictions, and Territories; King of Noa, Caffares, Fatiger, Angola, Baru,
Balig^^ca, Adea, Vangua, and Goyama, where there are the Spring-heads of Nilus,
etc. He is without doubt one of the greatest Monarchs of the world, whose
Territories do lie between the two Tropickes, even from the red Sea to the
Ethiopian Ocean. And that we may describe the bounds of his Empire more
accurately: on the North it has Egypt which is subject to the Turks: on the
East the red Sea, and the Bay of Barbery: on the South it is encompassed with
the Mountains of the Moon, on the West it is bounderd with the Kingdom of
Cengus, the River Niger, the Kingdom of Nubia, and the River Nilus. In which
bounds are contained ancient Aethiopia, below Egypt. Troglodite, and the
Cinnamon-bearing Country, and part of the innermost Libya. The Country in
general (as appears by those who have taken a late view of it) is most
fruitful. The fruitfulness if the Soil.
There is a double Summer, which almost lasts all the year, so that in some
Fields they are sowing, and in others they (...) map of Abissines THE DVKEDOME
OF THE ABISSINES.



