Constitutions, AND CANONS ECCLESIASTICAL, Treated upon by the Archbishops, and
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of IERLAND.

And agreed upon with the Kings Majesty's License in their Synod begun at
Dublin Anno Dom. 1634. And in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
CHARLES by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, the
Tenth.

And published for the due Observation of them, by His Majesty's Authority
under the Great Seal of IRELAND.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castle street. 1669.

THE TABLE Of the Church of Ireland.
1. OF the agreement of the church of England and Ireland in the profession of
the same christian Religion. 2. The Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical to
be maintained. 3. Of the Prescript form of Divine service contained in the book
of Common Prayer. 4. Of the form of consecrating and ordering Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. and of the churches established according to that order. 5.
Anthors of schisms and maintainers of conventicles censured.
Of Divine Service, preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments.
6. DVe celebration of Sundays and Holy Days. 7. The prescrip form of Divine
service to be used on sundays and holy days, with all decency, and due
reverence. 8, Of the ordering of certain parts of the service. 9, Beneficed
Preachers being resident upon their livings, to preach every sunday. 10. No
public opposition between Preac^ers. 11. Ministers to Catechize every Sunday.
12. The people to be informed in the body of Christian Religion; and reformed
in their conversation. 13. Preachers and Lecturers to read Divine Service, and
administer the sacraments twice a year at the least. 14. Ministers not to
refuse to Christen or Bury. 15. Ministers not to defer christening, if the
child be in danger. 16. Fathers not to be Godfathers in Baptism, nor children
not communicants. 17. Confirmation, or laying hands upon children, to be
performed by the Bishop once in three years. 18. Of the receiving of the holy
communion. 19. Warning to be given before hand for the communion. 20. Notorious
offenders not to be admitted to the communion. 21. Ministers not to preach or
administer the communion in private houses. 22. Ministers not to hold private
conventicles.
Of Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, and Prebendaries.
23 OF Ordering Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. 24. Of ordering the revennes of
Ecclesiastical persons. 25. Of Archdeacens. 26. Residence of Deans in their
Churches. 27. Deans and Prebendaries to preach during their Residence. 28.
Prebendaries to be resident upon their benefices.
Of the Ordination, function, and charge of Ministers.
29. FOur solemn times appointed for the making of Ministers. 30. The titles of
such as are to be made Ministers. 31. The quality of such as are to be made
Ministers. 32. The examination of such as are to be made Ministers. 33. Caution
for Institution of Ministers into Benefices. 34. Patrons of Ecclesiastical
Benefices. 35. Prevention of Symoniacal contract, in those that are presented
by them. 36. Small Parishes to be united and residence enjoined. 37. Absence of
Beneficed men, and livings appropriated to be supplied by Curats that are
allowed Preachers. 38. None to be Curats but allowed by the Bishop. 39.
Strangers not admitted to preach without License. 40. Ministers to confer with
Recusants. 41. Ministers to visit the sick. 42. Soberness of conversation, and
decency of apparel required in Ministers. 43. Of Consecration of Churches. 44.
A Terrier of gleabe lands and other possessions belonging to Churches. 45.
Payment of Tithes. 46. A Registry to be kept of Christnings, Weddings, and
Burials.
Of Marriages and divorces.
47. NOne to marry within the degrees prohibited. 48. None to marry under XXI
years without their Parents consent. 49. Security to be taken at the granting
of such Licenses, and under what conditions. 50. Oaths to be taken for the
conditions. 51. An exception for those that are in Widowhood. 52. Ministers not
to marry any person without Bannes. 53. No sentence for divorce to be given
upon the sole confession of the parties. 54. No sentence of divorce to be given
but in open court. 55. In all sentences for divorce, bond to be taken for not
marrying during each others life.
Of Ecclesiastical Courts, and Jurisdiction.
56. THe order of Jurisdictions to be kept. 57. The restraint of double
Quarrels upon the respite of Institution. 58. Inhibitions not to be granted
without the subscription of an Advocate. 59. Inhibitions not to be granted
until the Appeal be exhibited to the judge. 60. Solemn denunciation of parties
excommunicated. 61. Notorious crimes and scandals to be certified into
Ecclesiastical courts by presentiments. 62. Schismatics to be presented. 63.
Not communicants at Easter, to be presented. 64. Ministers may present. 65.
Ministers and churchwardens not to be sued for presenting. 66. church wardens
not bound to present oftener than twice a year. 67. Church wardens not to be
troubled for not presenting oftener than twice a year. 68. Convenient time to be
assigned for framing presentiments. 69. None to be cited into Ecclesiastical
courts by Process of Quorum nomina. 70. Maturity required in proceeding. 71. No
sentence of deprivation or deposition to be prenounced against a Minister but
by the Bishop. 72. No Act to be sped but in open court. 73. No court to have
more than one Seal. 74. Convenient places to be chosen for keeping of courts.
75. Peculiar and inferior courts to exhibit the original copies of Wills into
the Bishops Registry. 76. The quality and Oath of Judges and Surrogates. 77.
Proctors not to retain causes without the lawful assignment of the parties.
78. Proctors prohibited the Oath in animam domini sui. 79. Proctors not to be
clamorous in court. 80. The Oath de calumnia not to be refused. 81. Abuses to
be reformed in Registers. 82. A certain rateof fees to all Ecclesiastical
Officers. 83. A table of the rates of fees to be set up in, courts and
Registries. 84. The whole fees for showing Letters of orders and other
licenses, due but once, in every Bishops time. 85. The number of Apparators
restrained.
Of Parish Clerks, Church wardeus, and Schoolmasters, and their several duties.
86. PArish clerks to be chosen by the Minister. 87. The choice of
churchwardens, and their account. 88. The choice of Sidermen, and their joint
office with churchwardens. 89. The old churchwardens to make their
Presentiments before the new besworn. 90. The duty of church wardent touching
such persons as are out of the church in the time of Gods worship on sundays
and Holy days. 91. Their duty touching those persons that are in the church at
that time. 92. To keep the church from being profaned at all other times. 93.
To see churches and church yards kept in sufficient reparation 94. To furnish
all churches with things necessary for the celebration of Divine service,
Preaching and administration of the sacraments. 95. To provide things sitting
for every communion, and to observe those that come, or come not to the same.
96. To provide a chest for Alms in every church. 97. To abolish all monuments
of superstition. 98. None to teach school without License, and curates desirous
to teach to be licenced before others. 99. The duty of school masters.
Of the authority of the Synod.
100. The Authority of this National synod established.
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

CHARLES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Desender of the faith, etc. To all men to whom these presents shall come,
greeting. Whereas our Bishops, Deans of our cathedral churches, Archdeacons,
chapters and colleges, and the rest of the clergy within our Kingdom of
Ireland, were summoned and called by virtue of our writs directed to the
Archbishops of the four several Provinces, and bearing date the four and
twentieth day of May, in the teuth year of our Reign to appear before the said
Archbishops in the cathedral church of St. Patricks Dublin upon the one and
twentieth day of July then next ensuing, then and there to treat and conclude
upon certain high and urgent affairs in the said writs mentioned, who did
thereupon at the time appointed, and in the said cathedral church of St.
Patricks aforesaid, assemble themselves and appear in convocation for that
purpose, according to the tenor of the said writs. And whereas we for diverse
urgent and weighty occasions us thereunto moving, of our especial grace,
certain knowledge, and mere motion, did by virtue of our prerogative royal and
supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical, give and grant by our Letters
Patents under our Great Seal of Ireland bearing date the one and twentieth day
of July in the teuth year of our Reign, full power and authority unto the said
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, chapters, colleges and clergy of
this Kingdom then assembled in convocation, in the said cathedral church of St.
Patrick, that they from time to time during the Parliament then begun at Dublin
might confer, treat, consult and conclude of and upon such Articles, canons,
Orders, Ordinances, Statutes and constitutions Ecclesiastical, as they shall
think necessary, fit and convenient for the honor and service of Almighty God,
and augmentation of his divine worship, the rooting out of heresies and errors
out of the Vineyard of Christ, for the procuring of the good and quiet of the
church and preservation of good government in causes Ecclesiastical, and to the
Jurisdiction of the church belonging, as also to make and set down ordinances
and decrees to have such force and effect as other canons and constitutions of
the church have, and the same (our royal assent being thereunto first had and
obtained) to set forth and publish freely and lawfully, and that as well the
Archbishops and Bishops, and all other inferior persons whom it may concern,
should yield due obedience thereunto, as in and by our said letters Patents
more at large it does and may appear. Forasmuch as the said Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, chapters and colleges with the rest of the clergy
of this Kingdom having met together at the time and place before mentioned, and
then and there by virtue of our said authority granted unto them, have treated
of, concluded and agreed upon certain canons, orders, ordinances, and
constitutions, to the end and purpose by Us limited and prescribed unto them,
and have thereupon offered and presented the same unto Us, most humbly desiring
Us to give our royal assent unto their said canons, orders, ordinances and
constitutions, according to the form of a certain Statute or Act of Parliament
made in that behalf, and by our said Prerogative royal, and supreme authority
in causes Ecclesiastical, to ratify by our letters Patents under our Great
Seal of Ireland, and to confirm the said canons being one hundred in number,
and contained in a book, Entitled, Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical,
treated upon by the Archbishops and Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of
Ireland, and agreed upon with the Kings Majesty's license in their Synod begun
at Dublin, Anno Domini 1634. and in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord, CHARLES by the grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland
the Tenth, which book is remaining with John Forth Clerk of the upper house of
Convocation. We of our Princely inclination and royal care for the maintenance
of the present estate and government of the church of Ireland by the laws of
this our Realm now settled and established, having diligently with great
contentment and comfort read and considered of all these their said canons,
orders, ordinances and constitutions agreed upon, as is before expressed, and
finding the same such, as we are persuaded will be very profitable, not only to
our elergy, but to the whole church of this our Kingdom; and to all the true
members of it, (if they be well observed.) Have therefore for us our Heirs and
lawful Successors, of our especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion,
by the advice and consent of our right trusty and right well beloved cousin and
Counselor, Thomas Visecunt Wentworth our Deputy general of our said Kingdom
of Ireland, and President of our council established in the North parts of our
Kingdom of England, given and by these presents do give our royal assent
according to the form of the said Statute or Act of Parliament aforesaid, to
all and every the said canons, orders, ordinances and constitutions, and all
and every thing in them contained. And furthermore, we do not only by our said
Prerogative royal and supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical, ratify,
confirm and establish by these our letters Patents the said canons, orders,
ordinances and constitutions, and all and every thing in them contained, as is
aforesaid, but do likewise propound, publish, and st^aightly enjoin and command
by our said authority, and by these our letters Patents the same to be
diligently observed, executed, and equally kept by all our loving Subjects of
this our Kingdom, in all points wherein they do, or may concern every or any of
them; according to this our will and pleasure hereby signisied and expressed.
And that likewise for the better observation of them, every Minister, by what
name or title soever he be called, shall in the Parish Church or chapel where
he has charge, read all the said canons, orders, ordinances and constitutions
once every year, upon some Sundays or Holy Days in the afternoon before
divine service; dividing the same in such sort, as that the one half may be
read one day, and the other another day. The book of the said canons to be
provided at the charge of the Parish betwixt this, and the Feast of Easter next
ensuing. Straightly charging and commanding all Archbishops, Bishops, and all
other that exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Realm, every
man in his place to see and procure (so much as in them lies) all and every of
the same canons, orders, ordinances and constitutions to be in all points duly
observed, not sparing to execute the penalties in them severally mentioned upon
any that shall wittingly or wilfully break or neglect to observe the same, as
they tender the honor of God, the peace of the Church, tranquillity of the
Kingdom, and their duties and sorvice unto Us their King and Sovereign. In
witness, etc.

Constitutions, AND CANONS ECCLESIASTICAL, Treated upon by the Archbishops, and
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of Ireland; and agreed upon by the Kings
Majesty's license in their Synod begun and holden at Dublin, Anno Domini, 1634.
and in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles by the Grace of God
King of Great Britain, France and Ireland the Tenth.
I. Of the agreement of the Church of England and Ireland, in the profession of
the same Christian Religion.
FOR the manifestation of our agreement with the church of England in the
confession of the same christian faith, and the doctrine of the Sacraments: We
do receive and approve the book of Articles of Religion agreed upon by the
Archbishops, and Bishops, and the whole clergy in the convocation holden at
London in the year of our Lord God, 1562. for the avoiding of diversities of
opinions, and for the establishing of consent touching true Religion. And
therefore if any hereafter shall affirm that any of those Articles are in any
part superstitious or erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience
subscribe unto, let him be excommunicated, and not absolved before he make a
public revocation of his error.

II. The Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical to be maintained.]
ALl Ecclesiastical persons having cure of souls, and all other Preachers, and
Readers of Divinity lectures, shall to the uttermost of their wit, knowledge
and learning, purely and sincerely (without any color or dissimulation) teach,
manifest, open and declare, four times every year (at the least) in their
Sermons, and other collations and lectures; That all usurped and sorrain power,
(forasmuch as the same has no establishment nor ground by the law of God,) is
for most just causes, taken away and abolished: and that therefore no manner of
obedience or subjection within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, is due unto
such foreign power: but that the Kings power within his Realm of Ireland, and
all other his Dominions and Countries, is the highest power under God, to whom
all men, as well Inhabitants, as born within the same, do by Gods laws, owe all
loyalty and obedience, and to no other foreign power and potentate in the
earth. And whosoever shall hereafter maintain, that the Kings-Majesty has not
the same authority in causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings had amongst
the Jews, and Christian Emperors in the Primitive Church, or impeach in any
part his Regal supremacy in the said causes restored to the Crown, and by the
laws of this Realm therein established, let him be excommunicated, and not
restored but only by the Archbishop of the Province, after his repentance, and
public revocation of his error.

III. Of the prescript form of Divine Service, contained in the book of Common
Prayer.
THat form of Liturgy or Divine Se^vice, and no other, shall be used in any
Church of this Realm, but that which is established by the law, and comprised
in the book of Common Prayer, and administration of Sacraments. And if any one
shall preach, or by other open words declare or speak any thing in the
derogation or despising of the said book, or of any thing therein contained,
let him be excommunicated, and not restored, until he repent, and publicly
revoke his error.

IV. Of the form of consecrating and ordering Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and of
the churches established according to that order.
THat form of ordination, and no other, shall be used in this Church, but that
which is contained in the book of Ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
allowed by authority, and hitherto practiced in the Churches of England and
Ireland. And if any shall affirm, that they who are consecrated, or ordered
according to those rites, are not lawfully made, nor ought to be accounted
either Bishops, Priests, or Deacons; or shall deny that the Churches,
established under this government, are true Churches; or refuse to join with
them in christian profession, let him be excommunicated, and not restored until
he repent and publicly revoke his error.

V. Authors of Schism, and maintainers of Conventicles censured.
WHosoever shall separate themselves from the communion of Saints, as it is
approved by the Apostles rules in the Church of Ireland; and combine themselves
rogether in a new brotherhood; (accounting the christians, who are conformable
to the doctrine, government, rites and ceremonies of the Church of Ireland, to
be profane and unmeet for them to join with in christian profession) or shall
affirm and maintain, that there are within this Realm other meetings,
assemblies, or congregations, than such as by the laws of this Land are held
and allowed, which may rightly challenge to themselves the name of true and
lawful Churches, let him be excommunicated, and not restored until he repent
and publicly revoke his error.

VI. Due celebration of Sundays and Holy Days.
ALl manner of persons shall celebrate and keep the Lords day, commonly called
Sunday, and other Holy Days, according to Gods holy will and pleasure, and the
orders of this Church; that is, in hearing the word of God read and taught in
private and public prayers, in acknowledging their offenses to God, and
amendment of the same, in reconciling themselves charitably to their
neighbors, where displeasure has been, in oftentimes receiving the Communion
of the Body and Blood of Christ, in visiting the poor and fick, using all godly
and sober conversation.

VII. The prescript form of Divine Service to be used on Sundays and
Holidays, with all decency and due reverence.
EVery Sunday and Holy Day, the Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, shall celebrate
Divine Service, at convenient and usual times of the day, and in such place of
every Church, as the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ecclesiastical Ordinary of the
place, shall think meet, for the largeness or straitness of the same, so as the
people may be most edified. All Ministers likewise shall use and observe the
Orders: Rites, Ornaments and Ceremonies prescribed in the book of Common
prayer, and in the Act for Uniformity printed therewith, as well in reading the
holy Scriptures, and saying of prayers, as in administration of the Sacraments;
without either diminishing in regard of preaching, or in any other respect, or
adding any thing in the matter or form thereof. And in Cathedral, and
Collegiate Churches, all Deans, Masters, and Heads of Collegiate Churches,
Canons and Prebendaries, being Graduates, shall daily at the times both of
Prayer and Preaching, wear with their Surplices, such Hoods as are agreeable to
their degrees. No man also shall cover his head in any Church or Chapel in the
time of Divine Service, except he have some infirmity, in which case he may
wear a nightcap or coise. Neither shall any person be otherwise at such times
busied, than in quiet attendance to hear, mark, and understand that which is
read, preached or ministered: using all such reverent gestures and actions, as
by the book of Common Prayer are prescribed in that behalf, and the commendable
use of this Church received; and not departing out of the Church, during the
time of Service and Sermon, without some urgent or reasonable cause.

VIII. Of the ordering of certain parts of the Service.
ALso the Minister reading the lessons, Epistle and Gospel, and the Ten
commandments, and such other parts of Divine service, as do greatly tend to
the edifying of the people; shall so place himselt, and so turn him to the
people, as they may best hearken thereunto, and be edified by the same. And
every Beneficiary and Curate, shall endeavor, that the confession of sins and
absolution, and all the second service, (at or before the communion, to the
Homily or Sermon) where the people all, or most, are Irish, shall be used in
English, first, and after in Irish, if the Ordinary of the place, shall so
think meet.

IX. Beneficed P^eachers being resident upon their livings, to preceh every
Sunday.
EVery beneficed man, allowed to be a Preacher, and residing on his benefice,
having no lawful impediment, shall in his own cure, preach one Sermon every
Sunday of the year: And therein he shall reach no vain opinions, no He^esies,
nor Popish errors, disagreeing from the Articles of Religion, generally
received in the Churches of England and Ireland; nor any thing at all, whereby
the people may be stirred up to the desire of novelties or contention; but
shall soberly and sincerely divide the Word of truth, to the glory of God, and
to the best edification of the people.

X. No public opposition between Preachers.
IF any Preacher shall in the Pulpit, particularly or namely, of purpose,
impugn or confute any doctrine delivered by any other Preacher in the same
Church, or in any other near adjoining; or otherwise make any public
opposition unto him, before he has acquainted the Bishop of the Diocese
therewith, and received order from him what to do in that case, (because upon
such public dissenting and contradicting, there may grow much offense and
disquieting to the people;) the Churchwardens, or party grieved, shall
forthwith signify the same to the said Bishops, and not suffer the said
Preacher any more to occupy that place which he has once abused, except he
faithfully promise to forbear all such matter of contention in the Church,
until the Bishop has taken further order therein: who shall with all
convenient speed so proceed therein, that public satisfaction may be made in
the congregation where the offense was given. Provided that if either of the
parties offending, do appeal, he shall not be suffered to preach pendente lite.

XI. Ministers to catechize every Sunday.
EVery Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon every Sunday before Evening Prayer, shall
for half an hour, or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons
of his Parish, in the Ten commandments, the Articles of the belief, and in the
lords prayer, and shall diligently hear, and instruct and teach them the
catechism, set forth in the book of Common prayer. And all Fathers, Mothers,
Masters and Mistresses, shall cause their children, Servants and Apprentises,
which have not learned the catechism, to come to Church at the time appointed,
obediently to hear, and to be ordered by the Minister, until they have learned
the same. And if any Minister neglect his duty herein, let him be sharply
reproved upon the first complaint, and true notice thereof given to the Bishop
or Ordinary of the place. If after submitting himself, he shall wilsully offend
therein again, let him be suspended. If so the third time, there being little
hope that he will be therein reformed, then excommunicated, and so remain until
he will be reformed. And likewise if any of the said Fathers, Mothers, Masters
or Mistresses, children, servants or apprentices shall neglect their duties, as
the one sort in not causing them to come, and the other in refusing to learn,
as aforesaid, let them be suspended (if they be not children) and if they so
persist by the space of a month, let them be excommunicated. Neither shall the
Minister admit any to be married, or to be Godfathers or God mothers, at the
Baptism of any child, or to receive the holy communion, before they can say
the Articles of the belief, the Lords Prayer, and the commandments, in such a
language as they understand.

XII. The People to be informed in the body of Christian Religion, and reformed
in their conversation.
FOr the better grounding of the People in the Principles of christian
Religion, We ordain, that the heads of the catechism, being divided into so
many parts as there are Sundays in the year, shall be explained to the people
in every Parish church. In the handling whereof, the Ministers and Curates are
to use such moderation, that they do not run into curious questions, or
unnecessary controversies, but shortly declare, and confirm the doctrine
proposed, and make application thereof to the behoof of the hearers. The
Ministers also in all their preachings, and catechizings, and private
conferences, when need requires, shall teach the people to place their whole
trust and confidence in God, and not in creatures, neither in the Habit or
Scapular of any Friar, or in hallowed Beads, Medals, Relics, or such like
trumperies. They shall do their endeavor likewise to root out all ungodly,
superstitious, and barbarous customs; as using of charms, sorcery,
enchantments, witchcrast, or sooth saying; and generally to resorm the manners
of the people committed to their charge, unto a christian, sober, and civil
conversation.

XIII. Preachers and Lecturers to read Divine Service, and administer the
Sacraments twice a year at the least.
EVery Minister being possessed of a benefice, that has cure and charge of
Souls, although he chiefly attend to preaching and has a Curate under him, to
execute other duties, which are to be performed for him in the Church; and
likewise every other stipendary Preacher, that reads any lecture, or
catechizeth, or preaches in any Church or Chapel, shall twice at the least
every year, read himself the Divine Service, upon two several Sundays,
publicly, and at the usual times both in the forenoon and afternoon, in the
Church which he so possesses, or where he reads, catechizeth, or preaches;
as is aforesaid, and shall likewise as often in every year administer the
Sacraments of Baptism (if there be any to be baptized) and of the Lords Supper,
in such manner and form, and with the use and observation of all such Rites,
Ornaments, and Ceremonies, as are prescribed by the book of Common prayer, (and
the Act for Uniformity printed therewith) in that behalf, which if he do not
accordingly perform, then shall he that is possessed of a benefice (as before)
be suspended, and he that is but a Reader, Preacher, or catechizer, be removed
from his place by the Bishop of the Diocese, until he or they shall submit
themselves to perform all the said duties, in such manner and sort, as before
is prescribed.

XIV. Ministers not to refuse to Christen er bury.
NO Minister shall refuse or delay to christen any child, according to the
form of the book of Common prayer, that is brought to the Church to him on
Sundays or Holy Days to be christened; or to bury any Corpse, that is brought
to the Church or churchyard, (convenient warning being given to him thereof
before,) in such manner as is prescribed in the said book of common prayer. And
if he shall refuse to christen the one, or bury the other, (except the party
deceased were denounced excommunicated majori excommunicatione, for some
grievous and notorious crime, and no man able to testify of his repentance,)
he shall be suspended by the Bishop of the Diocese from his Ministry by the
space of three months.

XV. Ministers not to defer christening, if the child be in danger.
IF any Minister, being duly (without any manner of collusion) informed of the
weakness and danger of death of any Infant unbaptized in his Parish, and
thereupon desired to go or come to the place where the said Insant remains,
to baptize the same, shall either wilfully refuse so to do, or of gross
negligence shall so defer the time, as when he might conveniently have resorted
to the place, and have baptized the said Infant, it dies through such default
unbaptized: The said minister shall be suspended for three months, and before
his restitution, shall acknowledge his fault, and promise before his Ordinary,
that he not wittingly incurr the like again. Provided, that where there is a
Curate or a Substitute, this constitution shall not extend to the Parson or
Vicar himself, but the Curate or Substitute present.

XVI. Fathers not to be Godfathers in baptism, nor Children not communicants.
NO Parent shall be urged to present, nor be admitted to answer as Godfather
for his own child; nor any Godfather or Godmother shall be suffered to make any
other answer or speech, than by the book of Common Prayer is prescribed in that
behalf. Neither shall any person be admitted Godfather, or Godmother to any
child, at christening or confirmation, before the said person so undertaking,
has received the holy communion.

XVII. Confirmation, or laying hands upon children, to be performed by the
Beshop, once in three years.
EVery Minister that has cure and charge of Souls, for the better
accomplishing of the Orders prescribed in the book or common prayer, concerning
confirmation, shall take such special care, as that none may be presented to
the Bishop, for him to lay his hand upon, but such as can render an account of
their says, according to the catechism in the said book contained. The Bishop
also in his own person, every third year (at least) in the time of his
Visitation, shall perform that duty of confirmation; or if in that year, by
reason of some infirmity, he be not able personally to visit his Diocese, he
shall not omit to do it the next year after, as he may conveniently. And
whenever the time shall by him be assigned, every such Minister shall use his
best endeavor to prepare and make able, and likewise to procure as many as he
can, to be then brought to be confirmed.

XVIII. Of the receiving of the holy Communion.
IN every Cathedral and Collegiate Church, at least once every month, and in
every Parish Church and Chapel, where Sacraments are to be administered within
this Realm, the holy communion shall be ministered by the Parson, Vicar, or
Minister, so often, and at such times as every Parishioner may communicate at
the least thrice in the year, (whereof the Feast of Easter to be one) according
as they are appointed by the book of common prayer. And that no minister when
he celebrateth the communion, shall wittingly administer the same to any but
such as kneel: Provided that every minister as often as he administreth the
communion, shall first receive the Sacrament himself. Furthermore, no bread,
nor wine newly brought shall be used, but first the words of Institution shall
be rehearsed, when the said bread and wine be presented upon the communion
Table. Likewise the minister shall deliver both the bread and wine to every
communicant, severally.

XIX. Warning to be given before hand for the Communion.
WHereas every Lay person is bound to receive the holy communion thrice every
year, and many notwithstanding do not receive that Sacrament once in a year. We
do require every minister to give warning to his Parishioners, publicly in the
Church, at morning prayer the Sunday before every time of his administering the
holy Sacrament, for the better preparation of themselves. Which said warning,
we enjoin the said Parishioners to accept and obey under the penalty and danger
of the law. And the minister of every Parish, and in Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, some principal minister of the Church, shall the afternoon, before
the said administration, give warning by tolling of the Bell, or otherwise, to
the intent, that if any have any scruple of conscience, or desire the special
ministry of reconciliation, he may afford it to those that need it. And to
this end, the people are often to be exhorted, to enter into a special
examination of the state of their own souls: and that finding themselves either
extreme dull, or much troubled in mind, they do resort unto Gods ministers, to
receive from them as well advise and counsel for the quickening of their dead
hearts, and the subduing of those corruptions, whereunto they have been
subject, as the benefit of absolution likewise, for the quieting of their
consciences, by the power of the Keys, which Christ has committed to his
ministers for that purpose.

XX. Notorious offenders not to be admitted to the Communion.
NO minister shall in any wise admit to the receiving of the holy communion any
of his cure, or flock, which be openly known to live in sin notorious, without
repentance. Nor any who have maliciously and openly contended with their
Neighbors, until they shall be reconciled. Nor any Churchwardens or Sidemen,
who having taken their Oaths, to present to their Ordinaries all such public
offenses, as they are particularly charged to inquire of in their several
Parishes, shall notwithstanding their said Oaths, and that their faithful
discharging of them is the chiefest means whereby public sins and offenses may
be reformed and punished) wittingly and willingly, desperately and
irreligiously incur the horrible crime of perjury, either in neglecting, or
refusing to present such of the said enormities and public offense, as they
know themselves to be committed in their said Parishes; or are notoriously
offensive to the Congregation there, although they be urged by some of their
Neighbors, or by their minister, or by their Ordinary himself, to discharge
their consciences by presenting of them, and not to incur so desperately the
said horrible sin of perjury.

XXI. Ministers not to preach, or administer the Communion in private houses.
NO Minister shall Preach, or administer the Holy communion in any private
house, except it be in times of necessity, when any being either so impotent,
as he cannot go to the Church, or very dangerously sick, are defirous to be
partakers of that Holy Sacrament, under pain of suspension for the first
offense, and Excommunication for the second. Provided, that houses are here
reputed for private houses, wherein are no Chapels dedicated and allowed by
the Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm. And provided also under the pain before
expressed, that no Chaplains do preach, or administer the Communion in any
other places but in the Chapels of the said houses, and that also they do the
same very seldom upon Sundays and Holy Days. So that both the Lords and
masters of the said houses, and their families, shall at other times resort to
their own Parish Churches, and there receive the Holy Communion at the least
once every year.

XXII. Ministers not to hold private Conventicles.
FOrasmuch as all Conventicles and secret meetings of Priests and Ministers,
have been ever justly accounted very hurtful to the state of the church
wherein they live: We do now ordain and constitute, that no Priests or
ministers of the word of God, nor any other persons, shall meet together in any
private house, or elsewhere, to consult upon any matter or course to be taken
by them, or upon their motion or direction by any other, which may any way tend
to the impeaching or depraving of the Doctrine of the Church of Ireland, or of
the Book of Common prayer, or of any part of the Government and Discipline now
established in the Church of Ireland, under pain of Excommunication.

XXIII. Of Ordering Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
NO Archbishop, Bishop, or other person whatsoever, having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, shall appoint, constitute, make and confirm any Chancellor,
Commissary, or Official for longer time than their own incumbency, except he be
of the full age of twenty six years at least, and one that is learned in the
civil and ecclesiastical laws, and is at the least a master of Arts, or
Bachelor of law, and is reasonably well practiced in the course thereof.
Neither shall they let their Jurisdictions to farm, or grant, or confirm to any
man, the next, second, or third advowson of any Prebend or Benefice, being in
their gift. And if they shall make or confirm any such Grant or Patent of the
place of Chancellor, Commissary, or Official, for longer term than during their
Incumbency, to any that is not qualified, as is hereby required, then the said
person so accepting the said Patent or Grant, is to be held and declared
incapable thereof, to all intents whatsoever. Lastly, the said Archbishops and
Bishops, shall provide, that the clergy and people be not burdened with unjust
exactions by their servants and Officers in their Visitations: And that neither
the Archbishops therein, shall charge their Suffragans, nor the Bishops their
clergy, with any Noctials, or Refections, over and above their ordinary
procurations, (reserving notwithstanding unto the Archbishops in their
Visitations, the Refections usually heretofore received in those Diocesses,
where the same procurations are not received by them, which are yearly paid by
the clergy unto their Bishops.) And that no Archbishop, or Bishop, shall demand
from the Executors or Administrators of any of their clergy, any Heriots or
Mortuaries; as in some place of this Kingdom heretofore has been accustomed.

XXIV. Of ordering the Revenues of Ecclesiastical persons.
NO Archbishop, Bishop, Dean and Chapter, or Dignitary, shall in any wise
diminish the ancient Revenues of their Sees, or Churches, nor alienate their
Lands in Fee-farm, nor destroy their woods, nor give power to their Tenants to
make wast thereof, nor by any devise, demise their Mensal or Demeasne Lands,
unless it be to their Curates, actually discharging the said cures, without
forty days absence in any one year, and to them for no longer time or term,
than during their own Incumbency. Neither shall they join with any Dignitary,
Prebend, or other Beneficiary or Beneficiaries to confirm the Leases or
alienations, made or to be made, by him or them, of any Ecclesiastical profits
or obventions. And the said Archbishops, and Bishops, shall carefully provide,
that all Churches, Chancels, and Manse houses, the repair whereof properly
belongs to them, or any of them, or to any other Ecclesiastical person or
persons be from time to time preserved from ruin and decay.

XXV. Of Archdeacons.
EVery Archdeacon which has authority to visit, either by common right, or by
prescription, shall visit the precinct of his Jurisdiction, once every year, in
his own person, and he shall not substitute any to be his Official, but such a
one as has been brought up in the University, and has studied the civil law
(if such a one may be had) being able not only in learning, but also with
gravity and modesty to discharge that Office.

XXVI. Residence of Deans in their Churches.
EVery Dean, Master, or Warden, or chief Governor of any Cathedral or
Collegiate Church, shall be resident in his said Cathedral or collegiate
Church, fourscore and ten days, conjunctim aut divisim, in every year at least,
so that they have houses, or ground to build houses upon, belonging to their
Churches; and then shall continue there in preaching of the word of God, and
keeping good hospitality, (evcept he shall be otherwise let with weighty and
urgent causes, to be approved by the Bishop of the Diocese.) And when he is
present, he, with the rest of the Canons or Prebendaries resident, shall take
special care, that the Statutes and laudable customs of their Church, (not
being contrary to the word of God, or Prerogative Royal) the Statutes of this
Realm being in force concerning Ecclesiastical Orders, and all other
constitutions, now set forth and confirmed by His Majesty's Authority, and such
as shall be lawfully enjoined by the bishop of the Diocese in his Visitation,
according to the Statutes and customs of the same Church, or the Ecclesiastical
Laws of this Realm, be diligently observed. And that the petty canons, Vicars
chorals, and other Ministers of their church, be urged to the study of the Holy
Scriptures, and every one of them to have the New Testament, not only in
English, but also in Latin.

XXVII. Deans and Prebendaries to preach during their residence.
THe Dean, Master, Warden, or other chief Governor, Prebendaries, and canons in
every cathedral, and collegiate church, shall not only Preach there in their
own persons, so often as they are bound by ^aw, Statute, Ordinance, or custom,
but shall likewise preach in other churches of the same Diocese where they are
resident, and especially in those places, whence they, or their churches
receive any yearly rents or profits. And in case they themselves be sick, or
lawfully absent, they shall substitute such licensed preacher to supply their
turns, as by the bishop of the Diocese shall be thought meet to preach in
cathedral churches. And if any other wise neglect or omit to supply his course,
as is aforesaid, the offender shall be punished by the Bishop, or by him or
them, to whom the Jurisdiction of that church appertains, according to the
quality of the offense.

XXVIII. Prebendaries to be resident upon their benefices.
NO Prebendaries, or canons in cathedral or collegiate Churches, having one or
more benefices with cure, (and not being Residentaries in the same cathedral or
collegiate Churches) shall under color of the said Prebends, absent themselves
from their benefices; with cure, above the space of one month in the year,
unless it be for some urgent cause, and certain time to be allowed by the
Bishop of the Diocese. And such of the said canons and prebendaries, as by the
Ordinances of the said cathedral or collegiate churches, do stand bound to be
resident in the same, shall so among themselves sort and proportion the times
of the year, concerning residence to be kept in the said Churches, as that some
of them always shall be personally resident there. And that all those who be,
or shall be Residentaries in any cathedral, or collegiate church, shall after
the days of their residency, appointed by their local Statutes or customs,
expired; presently repair to their benefices, or some of them, or to some other
charge where the Law requires their presence, there to discharge their duties,
according to the law in that case provided. And the Bishop of the Diocese shall
see the same to be duly performed and put in execution.

XXIX. Four solemn times appointed for the making of Ministers.
FOrasmuch as the ancient Fathers of the church, led by the examples of the
Apostles, appointed Prayers and Feasts to be used at the solemn ordering of
Ministers, and to that purpose allotted certain times, in which, only sacred
Orders might be given or conferred. We following their holy and religious
example, do constitute and decree, that no Deacons or Ministers be ordained and
made, but only upon the Sundays, immediately following Jejunia quatuor
temporum, commonly called Emberweeks, appointed in ancient time for prayer and
fasting, (purposely for this cause at their first Institution,) and so
continued at this day in the church of Ireland: And that this be done in the
cathedral or parish church, where the Bishop resideth, and in the time of
Divine Service, in the presence not only of the Archdeacon, but of the Dean and
two Prebendaries at the least, or (if they shall happen by any lawful cause to
be let or hindered) in the presence of four other grave persons, being allowed
for public Preachers. And lastly, that no person, of what quality or gifts
soever, be made a Deacon and a Presbyter both together upon the same day.

XXX. The titles of such as are to be made Ministers
NO person shall be admitted into Sacred Orders, except he shall at that time
exhibit to the Bishop, of whom he desires imposition of hands, a presentation
of himself: to some Ecclesiastical preferment, then void in that Diocese, or
shall bring to the said Bishop, a true and undoubted certificate, that either
he is provided of some church within the said Diocese, where he may attend the
cure of souls, or of some Ministers place vacant, either in the cathedral
church of that Diocese, or in some other collegiate church therein also
situate, where he may execute his Ministry, or that he is a Senior Fellow of
some College in the University, or except he be a Master of Arts of five years
standing, that lives of his own charge in the University, or except by the
Bishop himself that does ordain him Minister, he be shortly after to be
admitted either to some Benefice or Curateship then void, not to be removed,
until he be otherwise provided for; except by his notable evil carriage he
deserve the contrary. And if any Bishop shall admit any person into the
Ministry, that has none of these Titles, as is aforesaid, then he shall keep
and maintain him with all things necessary, till he do prefer him to some
Ecclesiastical living. And if the said Bishop shall refuse so to do, he shall
be suspended by his Archbishop, being assisted with another Bishop, from giving
of Orders by the space of a year.

XXXI. The quality of such as are to be made Ministers.
NO Bishop shall hereafter admit any person into Sacred Orders, which is not of
his own Diocese, except he be a graduate of some University within the Kings
Dominions, or except he shall bring letters dimissory (so termed) from the
Bishop of whose Diocese he is; and desiring to be a Deacon, is three and twenty
years old, and to be a Presbyter four and twenty years complete: and has taken
some degrees of School in some of the said Universities, or at the least,
except he be able to yield an account of his faith in latin, (according to the
Articles of Religion, generally received in the Church of England and Ireland,)
and to confirm the same by sufficient testimonies out of the holy Scriptures.
And except moreover he shall then exhibit letters Testimonial, or authentical
certificate of his good life and conversation, under the Seal of some College
where before he remained, or of three or four grave Ministers together, with
the subscription and testimony of other credible persons, who have known his
life and behavior, by the space of three years next before.

XXXII. The examination of such as are to be made Ministers.
THe Bishop, before he admit any person to holy Orders, shall diligently
examine him in the presence of those Ministers that shall assist him at the
Imposition of hands. And if the said Bishop have any lawful impediment, he
shall cause the said Ministers carefully to examine every such person, so to be
ordered. Provided, that they who shall assist the Bishop in examining and
laying on of hands, shall be of his Cathedral Church, if they may conveniently
be had, or other sufficient Preachers of the same Diocese, to the number of
three at the least. And if any bishop or Suffragan, shall admit any toSacred
Orders, who is not so qualified and examined, as before we have ordained, the
Archbishop of that Province having notice thereof, and being assisted by one
bishop, shall suspend the said bishop or Suffragan so offending, from making
either Deacons or Priests, for the space of two years. Neither shall any person
be received into the Ministry, nor admitted to any Ecclesiastical living, nor
permitted to preach, read Lecture, catechize, or minister the Sacraments;
except he shall first by subscription declare his consent to the first four
Canons of this present Synod, and every thing contained therein.

XXXIII. Caution for institution of Ministers into benefices.
NO bishop shall institute any into a benefice, who has been ordained by any
other bishop, except he first show unto him his letters of Orders, and bring
him a sufficient testimony of his former good life and behavior, if the bishop
shall require it, and lastly shall appear upon the due examination to be worthy
of his ministry.

XXXIV. Patrons of E^clesiastical benefices.
THe Bishop shall earnestly and diligently exhort Patrons of benefices to
consider the necessaries of the Churches, and to have before their eyes the
last day of judgment, and the Tribunal seat of God: Therefore that they prefer
no man to any Ecclesiastical living, but him which by doctrine, judgment,
godliness, honesty and innocence of life, is able to bear so heavy a burden,
that they do nothing therein, but uprightly, uncorruptly and truly: but if any
Patron shall be convicted to have made any Symoniacal contract, either directly
or indirectly, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, not to be absolved but
alter public penance, in the Cathedral Church, and the Church so Symoniacally
presented unto.

XXXV. Prevention of Symoniacal contracts in those that are presented by them.
TO avoid the detestable sin of Symony, because buying and selling of
Ecclesiastical functions, offices, promotions, dignities and livings is
execrable before God, therefore the Archbishop, and all, and every Bishop or
bishops, or any other person or persons, having authority to admit, institute,
collate, install, or to confirm the election of any Archbishop, bishop, or
other person or persons to any spiritual or Ecclesiastical function, dignity,
promotion, title, office, jurisdiction, place, or benefice, with cure, or
without cure, or to any Ecclesiastical living whatsoever, shall before every
such admission, institution, collation, installation, or confirmation of
election, respectively minister to every person thereafter to be admitted,
instituted, collated, installed, or confirmed in or to any Archbishopric or
other spiritual or Ecclesiastical function, dignity, promotion, title, office,
Jurisdiction, place, or benefice, with cure, or without cure, or in any
Ecclesiastical living whatsoever, this oath in manner and form following, the
same to be taken by every one whom it concerns in his own person, and not by
a Proctor. IN. N. do swear that I have made no Symoniacal payment, contract, or
promise directly or indirectly, by my self, or by any other to my knowledge or
with my consent, to any person or persons whatsoever, for or concerning the
procureing and obtaining of this Ecclesiastical dignity, place, preferment,
office or living, (respectively and particularly, naming the same whereunto he
is admitted, instituted, collated, installed, or confirmed) nor will at any
time hereafter perform or satisfy any such kind of payment, contract, or
promise made by any other without my knowledge or consent, so help me God
through Jesus Christ. And for the better expressing of this cursed abuse, we
ordain and appoint, that if any Clerk, or any other with his consent shall Seal
any bond or bill to any person or persons, with condition of resignation of his
benefice, whereto he is to be, or has been presented, or shall make or
covenant to make any Lease of the profits of the said benefice, or any part
thereof unto the Patron or any belonging to him or any other person to his or
their use, to continue during his Incumbency, or for above three years, or with
notable diminution of the rent under the true value, he shall be holden for
convict of Symony, and proceeded against according to the severity of the
ancient Canons in that behalf.

XXXVI. Small Parishes to be united, and Residence enjoined.
FOr remedy of the smalness of the maintenance of the Clergy, We ordain that
when there is in one Parish a Rectory and Vicarage, or portion of Tithes
collative, the bishop shall unite them perpetually: And those Unions the Deans
and Chapters shall be bound to confirm to remain perpetually, as one entire
benefice, and that no dispensations be granted to hold more than one benefice
of greater value than forty pounds English per annum: But to such only as shall
be very well able and sufficient to discharge his duty, having taken the degree
of a Master of Art at Jest, in some University within His Majesty's Dominions,
and being a public and sufficient Preacher licenced. Provided that he who is
qualified as aforesaid, shall always reside in one of his benefices, and some
reasonable time of every year in each of them. And lastly, that he have under
him, where he does not reside, a Curate able to catechize, and instruct the
people, to have such maintenance as to the Ordinary shall seem fit.

XXXVII. Absence of beneficed men, and livings appropriated to be supplied by
Curates that are allowed Preachers.
EVery beneficed man licenced by the laws of this Realm (upon urgent occasions
of other service,) not to reside upon his benefice, shall cause his Cure to be
supplied by a Curate that is a sufficient, and licenced Preacher, if the worth
of the benefice will bear it. But whosoever has two benefices, shall maintain
a Preacher licenced, in the benefice where he does not reside, except he preach
himself at both of them usually. Also every beneficed man not allowed to be a
Preacher, shall procure Sermons to be preached in his cure once every month at
the least, by Preachers lawfully licenced, if his living in the judgment of the
Ordinary will be able to bear it. And upon every Sunday, when there shall not
be a Sermon preached in his cure, he or his curate shall read one of the
Homilies prescribed by authority, to the intents aforesaid. And as for those
Churches where all the Tithes both great and small are taken by the
Appropriator, we ordain that the bishop of the Diocese, according to the laws
of the Church, shall allot out of the said appropriation, such maintenance to a
sufficient curate, as in equity in his discreeion shall seem meet and competent.

XXXVIII. None to be Curates but allowed by the Bishop.
NO Curate or Minister shall be permitted to serve in any place without
examination, and trial first to be made of his sufficiency, sobriety and
fitness every way for the ministration, whereunto he is to be deputed. Having
respect to the greatness of the cure, and meetness of the party. And being
found worthy, he shall be admitted by the bishop of the Diocese in writing
under his hand and Seal. And the said curates and ministers, if they remove
from one Diocese to another, shall not be by any means admitted to serve,
without testimony of the bishop of the Diocese or Ordinary of the place, as
aforesaid, whence they came, in writing, of their honesty, ability and
conformity to the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of Ireland. Nor any shall
serve more than two Churches or chapels in one day, and those to be in a
convenient distance, and unless the said Church or chapel, where such a
minister shall serve in two places, be not able in the judgment of the bishop,
or ordinary, as aforesaid, to maintain a curate. Provided that no clergyman,
holding any benefice in title, shall by this constitution be debarred from
nominating an able curate to such benefice, so often as the said cure shall be
void, to be examined and admitted by the bishop as aforesaid.

XXXIX. Strangers not admitted to preach without license.
NEither the Minister, Churchwardens, or other Officers of any parochial or
collegiate church, shall suffer any stranger to preach unto the people in their
churches, except they know him to be sufficiently authorized thereto, as is
aforesaid. And if any in his Sermon on shall publish any doctrine, either
strange, or disagreeing from the word of God, or from the Articles of Religion
generally received in the churches of England and Ireland, they shall by their
letters subscribed with some of their hands that heard him, so soon as may be,
give notice of the same to the bishop of the Diocese, that he may determine the
matter, and take such order therein as he shall think convenient.

XL. Ministers to confer with Recusants.
EVery Minister being a Preacher, and having any Popish Recusant or Recusants
in his Parish, (and thought fit by the bishop of the Diocese,) shall labor
diligently with them from time to time, thereby to reclaim them from their
errors. And if he be not a Preacher, or not such a Preacher; then he shall
procure, (if he can possible,) some that are Preachers so qualified, to take
pains with them for that purpose. If he can procure none, then he shall inform
the Bishop of the Diocese thereof, who shall not only appoint some neighbor
Preacher, or Preachers adjoining to take that labor upon them: but himself
also (as his important affairs will permit him,) shall use his best endeavor
by instruction, persuasion, and all good means he can devise, to reclaim both
them, and all other within his Diocese so affected.

XLI. Ministers to visit the sick.
WHen any person is dangerously sick in any Parish, (although they have not
formerly resorted to the church,) the minister or curate, having knowledge
thereof, shall resort unto him or her; (if the disease be not known or probably
suspected to be infectious,) to instruct and comfort them in their distress,
according to the order of the communion book, if he be no Preacher: Or if he be
a Preacher, then as he shall think most needful and convenient. And when any
is passing out of this life, a bell shall be tolled, and the minister shall not
then slack to do his last duty. And after the parties death, (if so it fall
out,) there shall be rung no more but one short peal, and one other before the
burial, and one after the burial.

XLII. Soberness of conversation, and decency of apparel required in Ministers.
NO Ecclesiustical persons shall at any time, other than for their honest
necessities, so much as resort to any Taverns or Alehouses, neither shall they
board or lodge in any such places. Further more they they shall not give
themselves to any base or servile labor, or to drinking, or riot, spending
their time idly by day or by night, nor shall they give themselves to playing
at dice, cards, or tables, or any other game unbeseeming their function; but at
all times convenient they shall hear or read somewhat of the holy Scriptures,
or shall occupy themselves with some other honest study or exercise, always
doing the things which shall appertain to honesty, and endeavoring to profit
the church of God, having always in mind that they ought to excel others in
purity of life, and should be examples to the people to live well and
christianly, under pain of Ecclesiastical censures to be inflicted with se
verity according to the qualities of their offenses. We do likewise constitute
and appoint, that Archbishops and Bishops shall not intermit to use the
accustomed apparel of their degrees. Likewise all Deans, Masters of Colleges,
Archdeacons, and Prebendaries in cathedral and collegiate churches, (being
Priests or Deacons) Doctors in Divinity, Law, and Physic, Bachellors in
Divinity, Masters of Arts, and bachellors of law, having any Ecclesiastical
living, shall usually wear Gowns with slanding-collars, and sleeves straight at
the hands; or wide sleeves, as is used in the Universities, with Hoods, or
Tippets of silk or sarcener, and square caps in places and times convenient.
And that all other ministers, admitted or to be admitted into that function,
shall also usually wear the like apparel as is aforesaid, except Tippets only.
We do further in like manner ordain, that all the said Ecclesiastical persons
above mentioned shall usually wear in their journeys, Cloaks with sleeves,
commonly called Priests-cloaks, without guards, welts, long buttons, or cuts.
And no Ecclesiastical persons shall wear any coyse, or wrought nightcap, but
only plain night-caps of black silk, Satin, or Velvet. In all which
particulars concerning the apparel here prescribed, our meaning is to attribute
any holiness, or special worthiness to the said Garments, but for decency,
gravity and order. In private houses, and in their studies, the said persons
Ecclesiastical may use any comely and Schollarlike apparel. Provided that it be
not cut or pinkt, and that in public they go not in their Dublet and hose
without coats, or cassocks: And also that they wear not any light colored
Stockings.

XLIII. Of consecrating of Churches.
AS often as Churches are newly built, where formerly there were not, or Church
yards appointed for burial, they shall be dedicated and consecrated. Provided
that the ancient churches and churchyards, shall not be put to any base and
unworthy use.

XLIV. A Terrier of Gleabe-lands, and other possessions belonging to Churches.
WE ordain that the Archbishops and all Bishops within their several Diocesses,
shall procure, as much as in them lies, that a true note and Terrier of all
the Lands, Gleabes, Meadows, Gardens, Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements,
Tenements and portions of Tithes, and all rights whatsoever, which are in
possession, or of right do belong to their several Sees, or to any dignity,
Parsonage, or Vicarage, or rural Prebend, within any of their Diocesses, be
taken by the view of honest men in every Parish, by the appointment of the said
Archbishops or Bishops whereof the Minister to be one, and be laid up in their
several Registries to the use of posterity. And the Archbish^ps and bishops
shall in their Visitations carefully provide, that this canon be observed, and
that the said Terrier be renewed every ten years. And no minister shall make a
lease of his Gleabelands, or of his benefice, or the profits or means thereof,
above the term of three years at the uttermost, saving unto all Patentees from
His Majesty such power as is, or he easter shall be granted to them in their
Patents, to demise their Gleabe or any part thereof.

XLV. Payment of Tithes.
FOrasmuch as every man is bound to pay his Tithes, no man shall by color of
duty omitted by their Curates, detain their Tithes, and so requite one wrong
with another, or be his own judge; but shall truly pay the same, as has been
accustomed, to their Parsons, Vicars and Curates, without any restraint or
diminution. And for such lack and default, as they can justly find, in their
Parson, Vicars and Curates, they shall seek for reformation to their
Ordinaries, and other Superiors; who upon complaint and due reproof thereof,
shall reform the same accordingly.

XLVI. A Registry to be kept of Christnings, Weddings, and burials.
IN every Parish church and chapel within this Realm, shall be provided one
parchment book, at the charge of the Parish, wherein shall be written, the day
and year of every christning, wedding, and burial, which shall be in the
Parish, from the time that this canon shall be established. And for the safe
keeping of the said book, the Churchwardens, at the charge of the Parish,
shall provide one sure coffer, with three locks and keys, whereof the one to
remain with the minister, and the other two with the churchwardens several: So
that neither the minister without the churchwardens, nor the churchwardens
without the minister, shall at any time take that book out of the said coffer.
And henceforth, upon every Sabbath Day, immediately after morning, and evening
prayer, the minister and churchwardens, shall take the said parchment book out
of the said coffer: And the minister in the presence of the churchwardens
shall write and Record in the said book, the names of all persons christened,
together with the names and surnames of their Parents, and also the names of
all persons, married and buried in that parish the week before, by the minister
or his curate, and the day and the year of every such christening, marriage and
burial. And that done, they shall lay up the book in the coffer, as before. And
the minister, and churchwardens, unto every page of that book, (when it shall
be filled with such inscriptions) shall subscribe their names. And the
churchwardens, shall once every year within one month after the 25. day of
March, transmit unto the bishop of the Diocese, or his chancellor, a true copy
of the names of all persons christened, married, or buried, in their parish in
the year before (ended the said 25. day of March,) and the certain days and
months, in which every such christening, marriage and burial was had, to be
subscribed with the hands of the said minister and churchwardens, to the end
the same may faithfully be preserved in the Registry of the said bishop, which
certificate shall be received without Fee. And if the minister or churchwardens
shall be negligent in the performance of any thing herein contained, it shall
be lawful for the Bishop, or his chancellor to convent them, and proceed
against every of them, as contemners of this our constitution.

XLVII. None to marry within the degrees prohibited.
NO persons shall marry within the degrees prohibited by the laws of God, and
expressed in a Table set forth by authority in England, in the year of our Lord
God 1563. And all marriages so made and contracted, shall be adjudged
incestuous and unlawful, and consequently shall be dissolved, as void from the
beginning. And the parties so married, shall be by course of law separated. And
the aforesaid Table shall be in every Church publicly set up, and fixed at the
charge of the Parish.

XLVIII. None to marry under XXI. years without their Parents consent.
NO children under the age of XXI. years complete, shall contract themselves,
or marry without the consent of their Parents, or of their Guardians and
Governors, if their Parents be deceased.

XLIX. Security to be taken at the granting of such licenses, to marry without
publication of banns, and under what conditions.
THe security mentioned shall contain these conditions: First, that, at the
time of the granting every such license, there is not any impediment of
precontract, consanguinity, affinity, or other lawful cause, to hinder the
said marriage: Secondly, that there is not any controversy or suit depending
in any court before any Ecclesiastical Judge, touching any contract or marriage
of either of the said parties with any other. Thirdly, that they have obtained
thereunto the express consent of their Parents, (if they be living,) or
otherwise of their Guardians or Governors. Lastly, that they shall celebrate
the said matrimony publicly, in the Parish church or chapel, where one of
them dwells, and in no other place; and that, between the hours of eight and
twelve in the sorenoon. Neither in the time of Lent, nor of any public fast,
nor of the solemn festivities of the Nativity, Resurrection, and Ascension of
our lord, or of the Descension of the holy Ghost.

L. Oaths to be taken for the conditions.
FOr the avoiding of all fraud and collusion, in the obtaining of such licenses
and dispensations; We further constitute and appoint, that be ore any license
for the celebration of Matrimony, without publication of bannes, be had and
granted, it shall appear to the Judge, by the Oaths of two sufficient
witnesses, one of them to be known to the aforesaid Judge himself, or to some
other person, of good reputation then present, and known likewise to the said
Judge: That the express consent of the Parents, or Parent, (if one be dead,) or
guardians or guardian of the parties, is thereunto had and obtained. And
furthermore, that one of the parties personally swear, that he believes there
is no let or impediment of precontract, kindred or alliance, or of any other
lawful cause whatsoever; nor any suit commenced in any Ecclesiastical court,
to bar, or hinder the proceeding of the said Matrimony, according to the Tenor
of the aforesaid license.

LI. An exception for those that are in Widdew-bood.
IF both the parties, which are to marry, being in Widow. hood, do seek a
faculty, for the forbearing of Bannes; Then the clause before mentioned,
requiring the Parents consent, may be omitted, but the Parishes where they
dwell both, shall be expressed in the license, as also the Parish named, where
the marriage shall be celebrated. And if any, having power to grant license,
shall offend in the premises, or any part thereof, he shall for every time so
offending, be suspended from the execution of his Office for the space of six
months: and every such license or dispensation, shall be held void to all
effects and purposes, as if there had never been any such granted; and the
parties marrying by virtue thereof, shall be subject to the punishments which
are appointed for Clandestine marriages.

LII. Ministers not to marry any person without Bannes.
NO minister of what place soever, nor under color of any peculiar liberty or
privilege, claimed to appertain to any Church or Chapel, shall upon pain of
deprivation, if he be beneficed, or degradation, if he be not beneficed,
celebrate matrimony between any persons, without a faculty or license granted,
except the bannes of matrimony have been first published three several Sundays
or holy days, in the time of Divine service, in the Parish churches and
chapels, wherein the said parties have dwelled, by the space of three months
before. Neither shall any minister upon the like pain, under any pretense
whatsoever, join any persons in marriage at any unseasonable times, but only
between the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoon, nor in any private
place; but either in the said churches or chapels, where one of them dwells,
and likewise in time of Divine service, nor when Bannes are thrice asked before
the parties and Governors of the parties to be married being under the age of
21. years, shall either personally, or by sufficient testimony, signify to him
their consents given to the said marriage.

LIII. No sentence for Divorce to be given upon the sole confession of the
parties.
FOrasmuch as Matrimonial causes have been always reckoned, and reputed
amongst the weightiest, and therefore require the greater caution, when they
come to be handled, and debated in judgment, especially in causes wherein
Matrimony, having been in the church duly solemnized, is required upon any
suggestion, or pretext whatsoever, to be dissolved or annulled. We do
stralghtly charge and enjoin, that in all proevedings to divorce, and nullities
of Matrimony, good circumspection and advise be used, and that the truth may
(as far as is possible) be sisted out, by the deposition of witnesses, and
other lawful proofs and evictions, and that credit be not given to the sole
confession of the parties themselves, howsoever taken upon Oath, either within
or without the court.

LIVE. No sentence of Divorce to be given but in open Court.
NO sentence shall be given, either for separation a Thoro and Mensa, or for
annulling of pretended Matrimony, but in open court, and in the seat of
Justice. And that with the knowledge, and consent, either of the Archbishop
within his Province, or of the Bishop within his Diocese, or Sede vacant, of
the Guardians of the spiritualities, or the judge of the Prerogative, in their
several Jurisdictions, and courts, and concerning them only, that are then
dwelling under their Jurisdiction.

LV. In all Sentences for Divorce, bond to be taken for not marrying during
each others life.
IN all sentences proncunced only for Divorce and separation a Thoro and Mensa,
there shall be a caution and restraint inserted in the Act of the said
sentence, That the parties so separated shall live chastely, and continently,
neither shall they during each others lise, contract Matrimony with any other
person, and for the better observing of this last clause, the said sentence of
Divorce shall not be pronounced, until the party, or parties requiring the
same, have given good sufficient caution and security into the Court, that they
will not any way break, or transgress the said restraint or prohibition. And if
any Judge aforesaid, giving sentence of Divorce, or separation, shall not fully
keep and observe the premises, he shall be suspended from the exercise of his
Office, for the space of a whole year.

LVI. The order of Jurisdiction to be kept.
FOr the a voiding of the unjust vexation of the people, and for the better
preserving of order in the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, we ordain
and appoint that the Probate of all Wills, and granting Administration of the
goods of any defunct, shall be had before the Bishop of the Diocese where he
dwelled, unless it do appear, that the said defunct had goods to the value of
five pounds sterling in any other Diocese: In which case, the said Probate, and
granting Administrations, shall be referred to the Prerogative court, Provided,
That if any dye, in itinere, the goods that he has about him at that prefent,
shall not cause his Testament, or the Administration to be liable to the
Prerogative court. And the same order shall be holden in Appeals; without
passing by the intermediate Jurisdiction, upon pain of nullity in all Acts
contrary to this canon. And if any Judge of the Prerogative court, or any his
Surrogate, or his Register, or Apparitor, shall cite or cause to be cited, Ex
officio, any man to the intents aforesaid, contrary to this canon, not having
knowledge, that the probate of a Will, or granting Administration or Devolution
of the cause, do appertain to his cognizance, he shall restore to the party so
cited all his costs and charges, and the Acts and proceedings in that behalf,
shall be held void and frustrate: which expenses, if the said Judge, or
Register or Apparitor shall refuse accordingly to pay, he shall be suspended
from the exercise of his Offiee, until he yield to the performance thereof.

LVII. The restraint of double Quarrels upon respite of Institution.
WE do ordain and appoint, that no double Quarrels shall be hereafter granted
out of any the Archbishops or prerogative court, at the suit of any clerk
presented to any benefice, except he shall first take his personal Oath, that
the space of two months at the least is expired, since he first tendered his
presentation to the Bishop, and that he refused to grant him Institution
thereupon, under pain of suspension of the granter thereof, from the execution
of his office for half a year, and nullity of the said double Quarrel, so
unduly procured to all intents and purposes.

LVIII. Inhibitions not to be granted, without the subscription of an Advocate.
THat the Jurisdictions of bishops may be preserved, as near as may be entire
and free from prejudice; and that for the behoof of the Subjects of this land,
better provision be made, that henceforward they be not grieved with frivolous
and wrongful suits and molestations: It is ordained and provided, That no
Inhibition shall be granted out of any court, belonging to the Archbishop of
the Province, or the supreme Prerogative, at the instance of any party, unless
it be subscribed by an Advocate, practicing in the said Court, which, the said
Advocate shall do freely, not taking any Fee for the same, except the party
prosecuting the suit, do voluntarily bestow some gratuity upon him for his
counsel and advise in the said case. The like course shall be taken in granting
forth any inhibition at the instance of any party, by the Bishop or his
Chancellor against the Archdeacon, or any other person exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and if in the court or consistory of any Bishop,
there be no Advocate at all, then shall the subscription of a Proctor
practicing in the same court, be held sufficient.

LIX. Inhibitions not to be granted, until the Appeal be exhibited to the
Judge.
IT is further ordered and decreed, that henceforward, no Inhibition be granted
by occasion of any interlocutory decree, or in cause of correction whatsoever,
except under the form aforesaid. And moreover, that before the going out of any
such Inhibition, the Appeal it self, or a copy thereof, avouched by Oath to be
just and true, be exhibited to the Judge, or his lawful Surrogate, whereby he
may be fully informed, both of the quality of the crime, and the cause of the
grievance, before the granting forth of the said Inhibition. And every
Appellant, or his lawful Proctor shall before the obtaining of any such
Inhibition, show and exhibit to the Judge, or his Surrogate in writing, a true
copy of those Acts, wherewith he complains himself to be agrieved, and from
which he appealeth: Or shall take a corporal oath, that he has performed his
diligence and true endeavor, for the obtaining of the same, and could not
obtain it at the hands of the Register in the Country, or his Deputy, tendering
him his Fee. And if any Judge, or Register, shall either procure, or permit any
Inhibition to be sealed, so as is said; contrary to the form and limitation
above specified, let him be suspended from the execution of his Office, for the
space of three months. If any Proctor, or other person whatsoever by his
appointment, shall oflend in any of the premises, either by making, or sending
out any Inhibition, contrary to the Tenor of the said premises, let him be
removed from the exercise of his Office, for the space of a whole year, without
hope of release or restoring.

LX. Solemn Denunciation of parties Excommunicated.
ALl Ordinaries shall in their several Jurisdictions carefully see, and give
order that as well those, who for revolting, and still obstinate refusing to
feequent Divine Service, established by public authority within this Realm of
Ireland, as also, (especially of the better sort and condition,) who for
notorious contumacy, or notable crimes stand lawfully excommunicate, (unless
within three months immediately after the said sentence of excommunication
pronounced against them, they reform themselves, and obtain the benefit of
absolution) be every six months ensuing, as well in the Parish Church, as in
the Cathedral Church of the Diocese, in which they remain, by the Minister
openly, in the time of Divine service upon some Sunday declared, and pronounced
excommunicate; that others may be thereby admonished, and excited to refrain
their company and society.

LXI. Notorious crimes and scandals to be certified into Ecclesiastical Courts
by presentiments.
IF any offend their brethren, either by Adultery, Whoredom, Incest, or
Drunkenness, or by Swearing, Ribauldry, Usury, or any other uncleanness and
wickedness of life; the churchwardens, or Questmen and Sidemen, in their next
presentiments to their Ordinaries, shall faithfully present all and every of the
said offenders, to the intent, that they, and every of them, may be punished by
the severity of the laws, according to their deserts, and such notorious
offenders shall not be admitted to the holy Communion, till they be reformed.

LXII. Schismatics to be presented.
IF the Churchwardens, or Questmen, or assistants, do, or shall know any man
within the Parish, or elsewhere, that is an hinderer of the word of God to be
read, or sincerely preached, or of the execution of these our constitntions, or
a fautor of any usurped or foreign power by the laws of this Realm justly
rejected, and taken away, or a defender of Popish or erroneous doctrine, they
shall detect and present the same, to the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary of
the place, to be censured and punished, according to such Ecclesiastical laws,
as are prescribed in that behalf.

XLIII. Not Communicants at Easter to be presented.
THe Minister, Churchwardens, Questmen and assistants of every Parish Church
and Chapel, shall yearly within forty days after Easter, exhibit to the
Bishop, or his Chancellor, the names and surnames of all the Parishioners, as
well Men as Women; Women; which being at the age of sixteen years, received not
the Communion at Easter before.

LXIIII. Ministers may present.
BEcause it often comes to pass, that the Churchwardens, Sidemen, Questmen,
and such others of the Laity, as are to take care for the suppressing of sin
and wickedness, in their several Parishes, as much as in them lies, by
admonition, reprehension, and denunciation to their Ordinaries, do forbear to
discharge their duties therein, either through fear of their Superiors, or
through negligence (more than were fit,) the licenciousness of these times
considered. We ordain, that hereafter every Parson and Vicar, or in the lawful
absence of any Parson, or Vicar, then their Curates and substitutes may join in
every presentment, with the said Churchwardens, Sidemen, and the rest above
mentioned, at the times hereafter limited, if the said Churchwardens and the
rest will present such e^ormities, as are apparent in the Parish; or if they
will not, then every such Parson and Vicar, or in their absence, as is
aforesaid, their Curates may themselves present to their Ordinaries, at such
times, and when else they think it meet, all such crimes, as they have in
charge otherwise, as by them, (being the person that should have the chief care
for the suppressing of sin, and impiety in their Parishes,) shall be thought to
require due reformation. Provided always, that, if any one confess his secret
and hidden sin to the Minister, for the unburthening of his conscience, and to
receive spiritual consolation and ease of his mind from him, We do not any way
bind the said Minister, by this our constitution, but do straightly charge and
admonish him, that he do not at any time reveal, and make known to any person
whatsoever, any crime, or offense so committed to his trust and secrecy,
(except they be such crimes, as by the Laws of this Realm his own life may be
called into question for concealing of the same) under pain of irregularity.

LXV. Ministers, and Churchwardens not to be sued for presenting.
WHereas for the reformation of criminous persons, and disorders in every
Parish, the Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen, and such other Officers, as are
sworn, and the Minister charged to present, as well the crimes and disorders
committed by the said criminous persons, as also the common fame which is
spread abroad of them, whereby they are often maligned, and sometimes troubled
by the said delinquents, or their friends: We do admonish and exhort all
Judges, both Ecclesiastical and temporal, as they regard and reverence the
fearful judgment seat of the highest Judge, that they admit not in any of
their Courts, any complaint, plea, suit, or suits, against any such
Churchwarden, Questmen, Sidemen, or other Church Officers, for making any such
presentiments, nor against any Minister for any presentment he shall make,
tending to the restraint of shameless impiety: and considering that the rules
both of charity and government, do presume that they did nothing therein of
malice, but for the discharge of their conscience.

LXVI. Churchwardens not bound to present oftener than twice a year.
NO Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidemen of any Parish shall be enforced to
exhibit their presentiments to any, having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, above
once in every year, where it has been no oftener used, nor above twice in any
Diocese whatsoever; the Bishops visitation whereof to be one: for the which
presentiments of every Parish Church or Chapel, the Register of any Court,
where they are to be exhibited, shall not receive in one year above four pence,
under pain for every offense therein of suspension from the execution of his
Office, for the space of a month, toties quoties, Provided always, that as
good occasion shall require it, it shall be lawful for every Minister,
Churchwarden, and Sidemen, to present offenders, as often as they shall think
meet. And likewise, for any godly disposed person, or for any Ecclesiastical
Judge upon knowledge, or notice given unto him or them, of any enormous crime
within his Jurisdiction, to move the Minister, Churchwardens, or Sidemen, as
they tender the glory of God, and reformation of sin, to present the same, if
they should find sufficient cause to induce them there unto; that it may be in
due time punished and reformed. Provided, that for these voluntary presentiments
there be no Fee required, or taken of them, under the pain aforesaid.

LXVII. Churchwardens not to be troubled, for not presenting oftener than twice
a year.
NO Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidemen, shall be called or cited, but only at
the said time or times before limited, to appear before any Ecclesiastical
Judge whosoever, for refusing at other times, to present any faults committed
in their parishes, and punishable by Ecclesiastical laws; Neither shall they
nor any of them, after their presentiments exhibited at any of those times, be
any further troubled for the same, except upon manifest, and evident proof, it
may appear, that they did then, wittingly and willingly omit to present some
such public crime or crimes, as they knew to be committed, or could not be
ignorant, that there was then a public fame of them amongst diverse honest, and
well reputed persons; or unless there be very just cause to call them, for the
explanation of their former presentiments. In which case of wilful omission,
their Ordinaties shall proceed against them, in such sort as in causes of
wilful perjury, in a Court Ecclesiastical, is already by law provided.

LXVIII. Convenient time to be assigned for framing presentiments.
FOr the avoiding of such inconveniences, as heretofore have happened, by the
hasty making of Bills of presentiments, upon the days of the Visitation and
Synods, it is ordered; That always hereafter every Chancellor, Archdeacon,
Commissary and Official, and every other person having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, at the ordinary time, when the Churchwardens are sworn; and the
Archbishops and Bishops, when he or they do summon their Visitation, shall
deliver or cause to be delivered to the Churchwardens, Questmen, and Sidemen of
every Parish, or to some of them such books of Articles, as they, or any of
them, shall require for the year following, the said Churchwardens, Questmen
and Sidemen, to ground their presentiments upon; at such times as they are to
exhibit them. In which book shall be contained the form of the Oath, which
must be taken immediately before every such presentment. To the intent, that
having before hand, time sufficient not only to peruse, and consider what their
said Oath shall be, but the Articles also, whereupon they are to ground their
presentiments; they may frame them at home, both advisedly and truly, to the
discharge of their own consciences, after they are sworn, as becomes honest
and godly men.

LXIX. None to be cited into Ecclesiastical Courts by Process of Quorum nomina.
NO Bishop, Chancellor, Archdeacon, Official or other Ecclesiastical Judge,
shall suffer any general Process of Quorum nomina to be sent out of his Court,
except the names of all such as are thereby to be cited, shall be first
expressly entered by the hand of the Register, or his Deputy, under the said
Processes; and the said processes and names, be first subscribed by the Judge
or his deputy, and his seal thereto affixed. And we further ordain, that when
any person appears upon citation whatsoever, that if the next Court day
after, there be not Articles or a libell put in against him, he shall then be
dismissed with his costs.

LXX. Maturity required in proceeding.
NO man for neglect of appearance shall be excommunicated for the first
absence, but shall be cited again upon the same Process, And if he cannot be
found, nor afterward appear upon viis and medis; then to be decreed
Excemmunicandum fore. Yet for preventing such neglect, and that the party
querelant may sustain no detriment; hereby it is likewise ordered, that in
causes of instance upon the appearance of any such person, he shall pay the
charge past, before he be admitted to stand Rectus in curia. And in the end of
every Court, the names of those that are deereed, shall be publicly read, to
the intent that they may avoid the danger of the fearful sentence of
Excommunication. Which course also, we ordain shall be holden with those that
be already denounced excommunicate, before the time of the signifying of their
obstinacy: to the end they and others may be admonished of the danger in which
they stand, and to the aggravation of their obstinacy, if they continue in the
same.

LXXI. No sentence of deprivation or deposition to be pronounced against a
Minister but by the Bishop.
WHen any Minister is complained of in any Ecclesiastical Court, belonging to
any Bishop for any crime, the chancellor, commissary, Official, or any other,
having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, (to whom it shall appertain) shall expedite
the cause by Processes and other proceedings against him; and upon contumacy,
for not appearing shall first suspend him, and afterward (his contumacy
continuing) excommunicate him. But if he appear and submit himself to the
course of law, then the matter being ready for sentence, and the merits of his
offense, exacting by law, either deprivation from his living, or deposition
from the Ministry, no such sentence shall be pronounced by any person
whosoever, but only by the Bishop, with the assistance of his chancellor, the
Dean, (if they may conveniently be had,) and some of the Prebendaries, if the
court be kept near the cathedral church, or of the Archdeacon, if he may be had
conveniently, and two other at the least grave Ministers and Preachers, to be
called by the Bishop, when the court is kept in other places. It is likewise
ordered that no chancellor, commissary, Official, or any other person shall
exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, over a Minister in causes criminal,
except he himself have been admitted into the holy Orders of Priesthood.

LXXII. No act to be sped but in open court.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other person using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whosoever shall speed any judicial Act, either of
contentious or voluntary Jurisdiction, except he have the ordinary Register of
that Court, or his lawful Deputy, or if he or they will not, or cannot be
present then such persons, as by law are allowed in that behalf, to write or
speed the same, under pain of suspension, ipso facto.

LXXIII. No Court to have more than one Seal.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall, without the Bishops consent, have any more
than one seal for the sealing of all matters incident to his Office, which Seal
shall always be kept either by himself, or by his lawful substitute
exercising Jurisdiction for him, and remaining within the Jurisdiction of the
said Judge, or in the City, or principal Town of the county. This seal shall
contain the title of that Jurisdiction, which every of the said Judges, or
their Deputies do execute.

LXXIV. Convenient places to be chosen for keeping of courts.
ALl chancellors, commissaries, Archdeacons, Officials, and all others
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall appoint such meet places for the
keeping of their courts, by the assignement or approbation of the Bishop of the
Diocese, as shall be convenient for entertainment of those who are to make
their appearance there, and most indifferent for their travel. And likewise
they shall keep and end their courts in such convenient time, as every man may
return homewards, in as due season as may be.

LXXV. Peculiar and inferior courts to exhibit the Original copies of Wills
into the Bishops Registry.
WHereas Deans, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars, and others
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, claim liberty to prove the last Wills
and Testaments of persons deceased within their several Jurisdictions, having
no known nor certain Registers, nor public places to keep their Records in; by
reason whereof, many Wills, rights and legacies, upon the death, or change of
such persons and their private Notaries, miscarry, and cannot be found, to the
great prejudice of his Majesty's Subjects. We therefore order and enjoin, that
all possessors and exercisers of peculiar Jurisdiction, shall once in every
year exhibit into the public Registry of the Bishop of the Diocese, or of the
Dean and chapter, (under whose Jurisdiction the said peculiars are,) every
original testament of every person in that time deceased, and by them proved in
their several peculiar Jurisdictions; or a true copy of every such testament
examined, subscribed and sealed by the peculiar Judge and his Notary.
Otherwise, if any of them fail so to do, the Bishop of the Diocese, or Dean and
chapter, unto whom the said Jurisdictions do respectively belong, shall suspend
the said parties, and every of them from the exercise of all such peculiar
jurisdiction, until they have performed this our constitution.

LXXVI The quality and Oath of Judges and Surrogates.
NO man shall hereafter be admitted a chancellor; commissary, official or
Surrogate, to exercise any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, except he be of the
full age of six and twenty years at the least, and one that is learned in the
civil and Ecclesiastical laws, and is at the least a master of Arts, or
Bachellor of law, and is reasonably well practiced in the course thereof, as
likewise well affected and zealously bent to Religion, touching whose life and
manners no evil example is had; and except before he enter into or execute any
such office, he shall take the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, in the presence of
the Bishop, or in the open Court: and shall declare his consent, by
subscription to the two first Canons of this present Synod, And also shall
swear that he will, to the uttermost of his understanding deal uprightly and
justly in his Office, without respect of favor or reward; The said Oaths and
subscription to be recorded by a Register then present. And it is likewise
ordered that every Register shall take the said Oath of Supremacy, and
subscribe as aforesaid, before he be admitted to exercise that Office. And also
that all Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, Registers, and all others that
do now possess, or execute any places of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or
service, shall before Christmas next in the presence of the Archbishop or
Bishop, or in open court, (under whom or where they exercise their Offices,)
take the same oaths. Or upon refusal so to do, shall be suspended from the
execution of their Offices, until they shall take the said Oaths.

LXXVII. Proctors not to retain causes without the lawful assignment of the
parties.
NOne shall procure in any cause whatsoever, unless he be thereunto
constituted, and appointed by the party himself, either before the judge, and
by Act in court; or unless in the beginning of the suit, he be by a true and
sufficient Proxey thereunto warranted and enabled. We call that Proxey
sufficient, which is strengthened, and confirmed by some authentical Seal, the
parties approbation, or at least his ratification therewithal concurring. All
which Proxeys shall be forthwith by the said Proctors exhibited into the court,
and be safely kept and preserved by the Register in the public Registry of the
said court. And if any Register or Proctor shall offend herein, he shall be
secluded from the exercising of his office, for the space of two months,
without hope of velease or restoring.

LXXVIII. Proctors prohibited the Oath in animam domini sui.
FOrasmuch as in the probate of Testaments, and suits for Administration of the
goods of persons dying intestate, the Oath usually taken by Proctors of Court,
in animam constituentis, is found to be inconvenient. We do therefore decree,
and ordain, that every Executor or suitor for administration, shall personally
repair to the judge in that behalf, or to his Surrogate; and in his own person,
(and not by Proctor,) take the oath accustomed in these cases. But if by reason
of sickness or age, or any other just let or impediment, he be not able to
make his personal appearance before the Judge; it shall be lawful for the
Judge (there being faith first made, by a credible person of the truth of his
said hinderance, or impediment,) to grant a commission to some grave
Ecclesiastical person, abiding near the party aforesaid, whereby he shall give
power and authority to the said Ecclesiastical person in his stead, to Minister
the accustomed oath above mentioned, to the Executor, or suitor for such
administration. Requiring his said substitute, that by a faithful and trusty
messenger, he certify the said Judge, truly and faithfully, what he has done
therein. Lastly, we ordain and appoint, that no judge, or Register, shall in
any wise receive for the writing, drawing, or sealing of any such Commission,
above the sum of six shillings and eight pence: whereof one moiety to be for
the Judge, and the other for the Register of the said court.

LXXIX. Proctors not to be clamorous in Court.
FOrasmuch as it is found by experience, that the land and confused cries, and
clamors of Proctors in the Ecclesiastical courts in this Kingdom, are not only
troublesome and offensive to the judge, and Advocates; but also give occasion
to the standers by, of contempt, and calumny toward the court it self. That
more respect may be had to the dignity of the judge, than heretofore, and that
causes may more easily and commodiously be handled and dispatched: We charge
and enjoin, that all Proctors in the said court do especially intend, that the
Acts may be faithfully entered, and set down by the Register, according to the
advice and direction of the Advocate, That the said Proctors refrain loud
speech, and brabling, and behave themselves quietly and modestly, and that when
either the judges, or Advocates, or any of them shall happen to speak, they
presently be silent, upon pain of silencing for two whole terms, then
immediately following every such offense of theirs. And if any of them shall
the second time offend herein, and after due monition shall not reform himself,
let him be for ever removed from his practice.

LXXX. The Oath de Calumnia not to be refused.
WE ordain and appoint, that as well the Actor, as his Proctor and Advocate,
(if they be required,) shall take the Oath De c^lumnia wheresoever in the suit
the same shall be tendered before sentence, upon pain that the cause shall be
dismissed by the Judge, with costs for the party grieved.

LXXXI. Abuses to be reformed in Registers.
IF any Register, or his Deputy, or substitute whatsoever shall receive any
certificate, without the knowledge and consent of the Judge of the court, or
willingly omit, to cause any persons cited to appear upon any court day, to be
called or unduely put off, and defer the examination of witnesses to be
examined by a day set, and assigned by the Judge, or do not obey and observe
the said Judicial, and lawful monition of the said Judge, or omit to write, or
cause to be written such Citations and decrees, as are to be put in execution,
and set forth before the next court day: or shall not cause all testaments
exhibited into his office, to be registered within a convenient time; or shall
set down or enact, as decreed by the Judge, any thing false or conceited by
himself, and not so ordered and decreed by the Judge; or in the transmission of
Processes to the Judge ad quem, shall add or insert any falsehood, or untruth,
or omit any thing therein, either by cunning, or by gross negligence, or in
cases of instance, or promoted of Office; shall receive any reward in favor of
either party, or be of counsel directly or indirectly, with either of the
parties in suit, or in the execution of their Office, shall do ought else
maliciously or fraudulently, whereby the said Ecclesiastical Judge or his
proceeding may be slandered or defamed: We will and ordain, that the said
Register, or his deputy, or substitute, offending in all, or any the premises,
shall by the Bishop of the Diocese be suspended from the exercise of his
Office, for the space of one, two, or three months, or more, according to the
quality of the offense. And that some other public Notary do execute and
discharge all things pertaining to his Office, during the time of his said
suspension.

LXXXII. A certain rate of Fees to all Ecclesiastical Officers.
NO Bishop, Suffragan, Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any
other exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever, nor any Register of
any Ecclesiastical courts; nor any Minister belonging to any of the said
Offices, or courts shall hereafter, (for any cause incident to their several
Offices,) take or receive any other or greater Fee, than such as are, or shall
be allowed by lawful authority in this Kingdom: under pain that every such
Judge, Officer, or Minister offending therein, shall be suspended from the
exercise of their several Offices, for the space of six months, for every such
offense.

LXXXIII. A table of the rates of Fees to be set up in courts and Registries.
WE do likewise constitute and appoint, that the Registers belonging to every
Ecclesiastical Judge, shall place two Tables, containing the several rates and
sums of all the said Fees, one, in the usual place or consistory, where the
court is kept; and the other in his Registry: and both of them in such sort, as
every man, whom it concerns, may without difficulty come to the view and
perusal thereof, and take a copy of them. And if any Register shall fail to
place the said Tables according to the Tenor hereof, within the space of a
month, after the same has been delivered to him, by the Bishop of the
Diocese; he shall be suspended from the execution of his Office, until he
cause the same to be accordingly done. And the said Table being once set up, if
he shall at any time remove, or suffer the same to be removed, hidden, or any
way hindered from sight, (contrary to the true meaning of this constitution,)
he shall for every offense be suspended from the exercise of his Office, for
the space of six months.

LXXXIV. The whole Fees for showing letters of orders, and other licenses, due
but once in every Bishops time.
FOrasmuch as a chief and principal cause, and use of Visitations, is, that the
Archbishops, Bishops, or other assigned by them to visit, may get some good
knowledge of the state, sufficiency and ability of the clergy, and other
persons whom they are to visit. We think it convenient that every Parson,
Vicar, Curate, Schoolmaster, or other person licenced whosoever, do at the
Archbishops or Bishops first visitation, or at the next visitation after his
admission, show and exhibit unto them, his letters of Orders, Institution and
Induction, and all other his dispensations, licenses or faculty whatsoever, to
be by the said Archbishops or bishops, either allowed of, or (if there be just
cause,) dis-allowed and rejected, and being by them approved, to be, (as the
custom is,) signed by the Register. And that the whole Fees accustomed, be paid
only once in the whole time of every Archbishop or bishop; and afterward but
half of the said accustomed Fees, in every visitation, during the said bishops
continuance.

LXXXV The number of Apparitors restrained.
FOrasmuch as we are desirous to redress such abuses and grievances, as are
said to grow by Sumners or Apparitors. We think it meet that the multitude of
Apparitors, be (as much as is possible,) abridged or restrained. Wherefore, we
decree and ordain, that no Bishop or Archdeacon, or their Vicars or Officials,
or other inferior Ordinaries, shall depute, or have more Apparitors, to serve
in their Jurisdictions respectively, than one in every Deanery at the most,
besides the general Apparitor of the Bishop. All which Apparitors shall by
themselves faithfully execute their Offices; neither shall they, by any color
or pretense whatsoever, cause or suffer their Mandats to be executed by any
messengers or substitutes; unless it be, upon some good cause to be first
known, and approved by the ordinary of the place. Moreover they shall not take
upon them the Office of Promotors, or Informers for the Court; neither shall
they exact more or greater Fees, than are in these our constitutions formerly
prescribed. And if either, the number of the Apparitors deputed, shall exceed
the foresaid limitation, or any of the said Apparitors shall offend in any of
the premises; the persons deputing them, if they be Bishops, shall upon
admonition of their Superior, discharge the persons exceeding the number so
limited; if inferior Ordinaries, they shall be suspended from the execution of
their Offices, until they have dismissed the Apparitors by them so deputed;
and the parties themselves so deputed, shall for ever be removed, from the
Office of Apparitors. And if being so removed, they desist not from the
exercise of their said Offices, let them be punished by Ecclesiastical
censures, as persons contumacious. Provided, that if upon experience, the
number of the said Apparitors be too great, in any Diocese, in the judgment of
the Archbishop of the Province, they shall by him be so abridged, as he shall
think meet and convenient.

LXVI. Parish Clerks to be chosen by the Minister.
NO Parish Clerk, upon any vacation, shall be chosen, but by the Parson or
Vicar, or where there is no presentative, or collative Parson, or Vicar, by the
Minister of that place for the time being: which choice shall be signified by
the said Minister, Vicar, or Parson, to the Bishop of the Diocese, to be by him
approved. And if the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall fail to make choice of
such a man, and present him to the Bishop, to be by him allowed, by the space
of forty days after the vacancy: in such case, the Bishop shall have power to
nominate and appoint a Clerk for that place. And the said Clerk shall be of
twenty years of age at the least, and known to the said Parson, Vicar, or
Minister, to be of honest conversation, and sufficient for his reading,
writing, and also for his competent skill in singing, (if it may be.) And,
where the Minister is an English man, and many Irish in the Parish, such a one,
as shall be able to read those parts of the Service, which shall be appointed
to be read in Irish (if it may be:) and the Clerks so chosen shall be resident;
and perform their duties in their own persons. For which they shall receive
their d^e wages without diminution at such times as have been accustomed. And
if any question do arise, concerning the said custom or wages, the Bishop of
the Diocese shall set an order therein.

LXXXVII. The choice of churchwardens and their account.
ALl Churchwardens or Questmen in every Parish, shall be chosen, on Monday or
Tuesday in Easter week by the joint consent of the Minister and the
Parishioners, (if it may be:) but if they cannot agree upon such a choice, then
the Minister shall choose one, and the Parishioners another, and without such a
joint, or several choice, none shall take upon them to be Churchwardens,
neither shall they continue any longer than one year in that Office, except
perhaps they may be chosen again in like manner. And upon the next consistory
day after such election, they shall take their Oath before the Bishop or his
Chancellor: and in case the Parish shall fail to join, or elect as is
aforesaid, the Ordinary shall supply the defect. And all Churchwardens at the
end of their year, or within a month after, at the most, shall before the
Minister and Parishioners, give up a just account of such money, as they have
received, and also what particularly, they have bestowed in reparations and
otherwise, for the use of the Church. And last of all, going out of their
Office, they shall truly deliver up to the Parishioners, whatsoever money or
other things, of right belonging to the Church or Parish, which remains in
their hands: that it may be delivered over by them to the next Churchwardens by
Bill indented.

LXXXVIII. The choice of Sidemen, and their joint Office with Churchwardens.
THe Churchwardens of every Parish, and two or more discreet persons, in every
Parish, to be chosen for Sidemen or assistants by the Minister and
Parishioners, if they can agree; (otherwise to be appointed by the Ordinary of
the Diocese,) shall diligently see, that all the parishioners duly resort to
their Church, upon all Sundays and Holidays, and there to continue the whole
time of Divine Service, and none to walk or stand idle, or talking in the
Churchyard or Church Porch, during that time. But especially they shall see,
that in every meeting of the Congregation, peace be well kept: and that all
persons excommunicated, and so denounced, be kept out of the Church, during the
time of Divine Service. And all such, as shall be found slack, or negligent in
resorting to the Church, (having no great or urgent cause of absence,) they
shall earnestly call upon them; and after due monition, (if they amend not,)
they shall present them to the Ordinary of the place. The choice of which
persons, viz. Churchwardens, or Sidemen or Assistants; shall be yearly made in
Easter week.

LXXXIX. The old Churchwardens to make their Presentiments, before the new be
sworn.
THe Office of all Churchwardens and Sidemen, shall be reputed ever hereafter
to continue, until the new Churchwardens that shall succeed them, be sworn;
which shall be the first court after Easter, or according to the direction of
the Ordinary: which time so appointed, shall always be the time in every year,
or one of the two times, when the Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish,
shall exhibit to their several Ordinaries, the presentiments of such enormities,
as have happened in their Parishes since the last presentiments. And this duty
they shall perform, before the newly chosen Churchwardens and Sidemen be sworn:
And shall not be suffered to pass over the said presentiments, to those that are
newly come into Office, and are, (by intendment) ignorant of such crimes; under
pain of those censures, which are appointed for the reformation of such
dallyers, and dispensers with their own consciences, and oaths.

XC. The duty of Churchwardens touching such persons, as are out of the Church,
in the time of Gods worship, on Sundays or Holy Days.
THe Churchwardens and their assistants, shall warn Inholders, Taverners,
Victuallers, and Alehouse-keepers, that they sell no meat, or drink, and that
they receive none into their Tavern, or Alehouse, all the time wherein there is
preaching or celebration of Divine Service, upon Sundays or Holy Days, If any
do contrary upon contempt, or stubborness; they shall present both him and
them, whom he received, by name, in the next visitation. Also, they shall see,
that none of those light wanderers in markets, and pelting-sellers, which carry
about, and sell Pins, Points, and other small trifles, whom they call Pedlers,
set out their Wares to sale: And that no Beggars, or idle persons abide, either
in the Churchyard, or near the Church, all that time, but shall cause them
either, to come in, or to depart.

XCI. Their duty touching those persons that are in the church at that time.
THey shall also see, that in every meeting of the congregation, peace be well
kept; and that none behave themselves rudely, or disorderly in the church. And
to that end, they shall warn the people, that they bring not with them to the
church, Dogs, Hawks with bells or children which are not so nurtured, as they
can be kept quiet in their seats, without running up and down; Neither shall
they suffer any person to disturb the Service or Sermon, either, by untimely
ringing of bells, or by walking, talking, laughing, or any other noise, which
may hinder the Minister, or offend the people. And the names of all such as
offend in this kind, they shall truly, and personally present in the
Ordinaries visitations.

XCII. To keep the churches from being profaned at all other times.
THey shall suffer no plays, feasts, banquets, suppers, churchales, drinkings,
exposing any wares to sale, temporal coures or leets, lay-juries, Musters,
commissions, (other than for cause; Ecclesiastical,) playing at ball, or any
other profane usage, to be kept in the church, chapel, or churchyard:
neither the bells to be rung, either in the feast of all Souls; or upon any
Holidays or Eves, abrogated by the book of common prayer, neither for months
or twelve months minds, or remembrances of the dead, nor at any time at all
prohibited by the Bishop.

XCIII. To see Churches and Churchyards kept in sufficient reparations.
THey shall take care and provide, that the Churches be well and sufficiently
repaired, and so from time to time kept, and maintained; that the Windows be
well glazed, and that the floores be kept paved, plain and even; and all things
there, in such an orderly and decent sort, (without dust, or any thing that may
be noisome, or unseemly, J as best becomes the house of God. The like care
they shall take, that the churchyards, be well and sufficiently repaired,
fenced, and maintained, with walls, rayles and pales, as have been in each
place accustomed, at their charge, unto whom, by law the same appertains.

XCIV. To furnish all churches, with things necessary for the celebration of
Divine Service, preaching, and administration of the Sacraments.
THey shall provide in every church, at the common charge of the Parish, two
books of common prayer; one for the Minister, and the other for the clerk, with
all convenient speed; but at farthest, within six months after the publishing
of these canons. And likewise the Bible of the last translation, set forth in
the time of King James, of blessed memory. And where all, or the most part of
the people are Irish, they shall provide also the said books in the Irish
tongue; so soon as they may be had. The charge of these Irish books, being to
be borne also, wholly by the Parish. They shall also at the same common charge,
provide a fit seat for the Minister to read Service in, a comely and decent
Pulpit, to be set in a convenient place for the preaching of Gods word; a Font
of stone set in the ancient usual place, for the ministration of baptism;
together with a fair Table, to be placed at the East end of the church or
chancel, and a cup of Silver for the celebration of the Holy communion. Which
Table also shall stand covered in time of Divine Service, with a carpet of
Sikl, or other decent stuff, thought meet by the Ordinary of the place, (if
any question be made of it;) and with a fair linen cloth, at the time of the
ministration, as becomes that Table.

XCV. To provide things fitting for every communion, and to observe those that
come, or come not to the same.
LIkewise, they shall at the charge of the Parish, against the time of every
communion, with the advice and direction of the Minister, provide a sufficient
quantity of fine white bread, and of good and wholesome Wine, for the number of
communicants, that shall from time to time receive there; which wine they shall
cause to be brought, to the communion Table, in a clean and sweet standing pot,
or stoop of Pewter, if not of purer metal. Also they shall mark, as well as
the Minister, whether all and every of the Parishioners, come so often every
year, to the holy communion, as the laws and our constitutions do require; and
whether any strangers come often, and commonly, from other Parishes to their
Church: and shall show their Minister of them, least perhaps they be admitted
to the Lords Table, amongst others which they shall forbid, and remit such
home, to their own Parish Churches and Ministers, there to receive the
communion, with the rest of their own neighbors.

XCVI. To provide a chest for Alms in every church.
THey shall provide and have, within three months next after the publishing of
these constitutions, a strong chest with a hole in the upper part thereof; to
be provided at the charge of the Parish, having three keys: of which, one shall
remain in the custody of the Parson, Viear, or Curate; and the other two, in
the custody of the churchwardens for the time being. Which chest they shall set
and fasten in the most convenient place, to the intent the Parishioners may put
into it, the Alms for their poor neighbors. And the Parson, Vicar or curate,
shall diligently from time to time, (and especially, when men make their
Testaments,) call upon, exhort, and move their neighbors, to conferr and give,
(as they may well spare,) to the said chest, declaring unto them, that whereas,
heretofore they have been diligent, to bestow much substance otherwise than God
commanded, upon superstitious uses; now they ought, at this time, to be much
more ready, to help the poor and needy: knowing that to relieve the poor, is a
sacrifice which pleases God, and that also whatsoever is given for their
comfort, is given to Christ himself, and is so accepted of him, that he will
mercifully reward the same. The which Alms, and devotion of the people, the
keepers of the keys, shall yearly, quarterly, or ofther (as need requires)
take out of the chest, and distribute the same, in the presence of most of the
Parish, or fix of the chief of them; to be truly and faithfully delivered, to
their most poor and needy neighbors.

XCVII. To abolish all Monuments of superstition.
MOreover they shall, (with the approbation of the Ordinary of the place,) see,
that all Rood-lofts, in which wooden crosses stood: all shrines, and all
coverings of shrines, and all other Monuments of fained miracles, pilgrimages,
idolatry, and superstition, be clean taken away and removed.

XCVIII. None to teach School without license, and curates desirous to teach,
to be licenced before others.
IT shall not be lawful for any to teach the Latin tongue, or to instruct
children either in public School, or private house, but such, as shall be
allowed by the Ordinary of the place, under his hand and Seal, being found
meet, as well for his learning, and dexterity in teaching, as for sober, and
honest conversation; and also for right understanding of Gods true Religion,
(saving to all Patrons and Founders of Schools the right of nomination.) And
in what Parish soever, there is a Curate, which is a Master of Arts, or
Bachellor of Arts, or is otherwise well able to teach youth, and will willingly
so do, for the better increase of his living, and training of children in the
principles of true Religion: We will, and ordain, that the license to teach
Grammar, shall be granted to none by the Ordinary of that place, but only to
the said Minister or Schoolmaster. Provided always, that this constitution
shall not extend to any Parish, where there is a public School founded
already. In which case, we think it not meet, to allow any to teach Grammar,
but only him, that is allowed for the said public School.

XCIX. The duty of Schoolemasters.
ALl Schoolemasters, and Ushers, shall endeavor to train up the children
committed to their charge, in good learning, civility and piety. And in the
latin tongue, they shall teach the Grammar, set forth in England by King Henry
the eight, and so continned ever since; and none other. They shall also teach
such other books as shall be allowed, and appointed by the Bishop of the
Diocese. Provided, that according to the privilege granted to the University,
near Duotin, Logic and Philosophy shall not be taught in Grammar Schools.
Provided also, that none be admitted, or licenced to be a Schoolmaster, or
Usher within this Kingdom, unless he first, by his subscription, testify his
consent to the two first canons. And also, that every Archbishop, and Bishop,
and other Ordinary (having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction) shall, by censures of
the Church, respectively compel, all such as are subject to their Jurisdiction,
which do now teach School, or hereafter shall presume to teach School, not
having testified their consent by subscription as aforesaid, to desist from
teaching of School.

C. The authority of this National Synod established.
THis sacred Synod, being the representative body of the Church of Ireland in
the name of Christ, and by the Kings authority, lawfully assembled, does
pronounce and decree, that if any, within this Nation, shall despise and
contemn the constitutions thereof, (being by the said Regal power ratified and
confirmed;) or affirm, that none are to be subject thereunto, but such as were
present, and gave theirm voices unto them* he shall be excommunicated, and not
restored, until he shall publicly revoke his error.

FINIS.

