decorative border

A most necessary and fruitful Dialogue, between ye seditious Libertin or
rebel Anabaptist, and the true obedient christian, wherein, as in a mirror or
glass ye shall se ye excellence and worthynesse of a christian magistrate: and
again what obedience is due unto public rulers of al the^ yt profess Christ
yea, though ye rulers, in externe and outward things, to their utter
dampnatyon, do otherwise then well: translated out of Latin into Englisshe, by
Iho^ Veron Senonoys.

Romans.xiii. chapter: Whosoever resists ye power, resysteth ye ordinance
of God, but they yt resyst shall receive to them selves dampnation

The contents of this book.
i That a christian, contrary to the pernicious opynion of thanabaptistes or
seditious Libertins, may lawfully execute the office of a Magistrate. ii That
ye office of a Magistrate, is not only profitable, but also most necesary to a
Christian commune weal. iii That we are all bound to obey magistrates and
rulers, in externe and outward things, but if they command any thing against
god, and his word better it is to obey god then men: Yet not to resist
violently. iiii Whether it be lawful to resist ye magistrate, where we do
write against them that do rebel against magistrates and rulers.
To ye right worshipful Sir Ihon Gates, Knight, Ihon Veron wissheth peace,
grace, and health, both of soul and body, with increase of divine knowledge
and understanding, from god the father, through our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.
Calling to remembrance right worshipful Sir, ye great inconuenyences and
harms, that lately did chance to this most illustre and flourishing Realm by
the disobedient rebellyon, of certain ungodly and wicked persons, which
casting god and his word behind their backs, did seek naught else, but an utter
confusyon of all things: I can not but lament and mourn, that yet so great
blindness and ignorance does, When prophecy, yt is to say, true ministering of
gods word shall cease, the^ shall the people be scattered says the scripture.
for lack of true preachers and ministers of gods word (without the which
being purely and syncerely preached, no true obedience, nor duty can be
learned, whatsoever the enemies of the truth do babell and prate) reygne among
the commons and inhabiters of this country, that they being wrapped in all
kinds of error, do not know, nor yet understand, that to rise for any manner
of cause, against the Magistrates, Three things ye rebels do incur by their
rebellion
rulers and high powers, is most dampnable too their souls, most paryllouse
to their natural countreye, and to their bodies (for whose sake, they, like
brute beasts, stir up all this hurly burly) most hurtful and dangerous.
Which three things, I will here prove by the word of god, and examples of ye
scriptures, puttyng before their eyes, how sore god does abhor and detest al
rebellious insurrections and tumultes: to the intent, yt they being taught and
instructed out of gods word, way leave of and cease from their rasshe and
ungodly enterpryses. Romans xiii. cha


Rebels do purchase unto them selves everlasting dampnatyon.
First and formest let them look upon the.xiii. Chapter to ye Romans. Where
Paul speaks after this manner: Whosoever resists the power, resists ye
ordinance of god: but they that resist, shall receive to them selves
everlasting dampnation. Here in these few words of the blessed apostle and
chosen vessel of god we do learn, that we ought in no wise to resist the high
power. And why? Because he is the ordinance of god. Who can, I pray you, O
brayneles Libertins resyst the ordinance of god, and escape unpunished? No
man truly. For the holy ghost says, that they that resyste, shall receive
to them selves dampnatyo^ This were enough to prove that to rise against the
high powers, is most dampnable to the souls, except some were emonge them,
most craftye and subtle which by and by, will make an obiectyon, and say.
The tirannycall power is of god, as pestylence, hayle unseasonable wethers, and
other like plagues.
does resyst ye ordinance of god, thereby purchasing unto him self everlasting
dampnatyon. But I will tell the how the tyrannical power is of god, even as
pestilence, hail unseasonable weathers, and other like plagues, which are by
the righteous judgment of god, sent upon us, for our sins. Which thing we
may well se of Pharao in Hieremy, Esai. iij. chap
and of Sennacherib, king of the Assirians, in Esaie ye prophet, yea, the lord
says him self: I will give chyldisshe men to be your Princes and governors,
scornful or womanly or effeminate persons shall bear rule over you. Mark ye
this oh rebels, and acknowledge ye wicked rulers, are a rod sent of god, to
punish your sins.

The lord does make the wicked to reygne for ye sins of the people.


Ye shall also be pilled and polled and one shall ever be doing violence and
wrong to an other. The boy shall presume against the elder, and the vile
person against the honorable. And why? Because that both your words and your
counsels are against the lord, to provoke the presence of his majesty,
unto anger. By these words of the holy prophet, it is easy to understand,
that our sins are the chief causes why ye Lord god above, does send
ungodly and wicked rulers. But this, we will not se nor hear, our eyes are so
fixed upon the faults of the high powers, and governors that we do utterly
forget our own, we can epsy a mote in their eye, Mat. vij. cha It is the
propertye of folyshnesse too forget his own, and to se other men's sins.
but ye beam that is in our own, that will we not se We blame them for
covetousness, and we our selves, are an hundredth times more couetouse in our
hearts, then they are, we blame them for their pride, and no man is so proud,
so high minded, so stubburne and hawte of courage, as we are our selves, we
blame them for their gay apparel, and costly fare, and we our selves if we
were as able as they, would go a thousand times more gay, and fare a thousand
times more costly then they do. I do appele to your own consciences, whether
it be not so as I say. Truly though ye dissemble never so much, Psalm. vij.
and clooke that poison that lies hidden in your hertes, never so craftily,
yet almighty God which is the searcher of the hearts, and of the loins,
knows what beast ye nourysshe and bear about with you in your hearts.
Which thing shall be manifest and open, How we may deliver our selves from
misery and calamitye.
when the lord shall reuyse the secrets of every man's heart. Will ye then be
rydde from the myserye that ye are wrapped in? Will ye be delivered from
extorcion, tyranny and oppressyo^? Remove and put away the causes. Let us put
away these enorme sins, that we are drowned in, I mean, unfaithfulness,
murmuring against GOD, ingratytude and unthankfulness. Let us banysshe from
emonge us vncleanelynes, fornycatyon, adulterye, dronkennes, backbytynge
periurye, untrue dealyng, unlawful oaths, and blasphemous swearynges. This
done, let us boldelye fly unto the Lord, and with earneste prayers,
procedynge from a true and an unfeigned faith, call upon him for aid and
succoure, and without doubt he will hear us. For the truth it self did
say: Psalm. l.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will both hear and deliver
the, that thou may gloryfye my name. Mark this well, he does notte say:
In thy trouble, that is to say, when thou art afflycted and oppressed, run
into the fyelde, and there mutter, and make unlawful assembles against the
magistrates, but he says. Call upon me, addyng a most comfortable promise,
that he will both hear and deliver thee.

Seek then the means that the Lord has appointed the, and follow not thy
carnal and flesshelye affectyons, for they are blind, Carnal^ ^ ^ly
affec^^^^^ are blind.
and will bring the intoo all kinds of calamity and myserye, whereas if thou
do obey gods word, and suffer pacyentelye the wrong, if any were done
unto yt, by the high powers and rulers, thou may be sure that he will
deliver the at length though it be not so soon, as thou would have it. For
it is written. Psalm. ix.
The poor shall not be forgotten always, the pacyente abiding of the meke,
shall not perysshe for ever. Oh, that this doctrine were prynted in all men's
hearts, the^ should we have less tumulte and sedytyon, Tumult and sedition
does come of plain ignorance of gods word.
which truly does rise of nothing else: but of plain ignorance of gods
word, and heavenly truth. Were not the children of Israel, the chosen and
elected people of God, a long season in Egypt, being by the space of four
score years and more, so sore afflycted and oppressed by that cruel tyraunte
Pharao, Exo. i.ii. cha.
that besides all other myseryes, wherewyth they were there overwhelmed, they
were feign to se all their men children as soon as they were borne, too be
killed before them, or else before their ^yen, to be drowned in ye river of
Nilus?

And yet we do not read, nor hear, though they were six hundredth thousand
men, besides women and children, that there was ever any mutteryng, any
insurrectio^ or unlawful assembles among them; Exo. xiiij. cha.
but did abide still patiently the helping hand of the Lord, which at
length, when they did call earnestly up on him, did deliver them so mightily,
yt without any sweard drawing they were revenged of their enemies, which
oppressed them. Let us do the same, let us abide patiently the helpyng hand
of ye Lord, let us put away vice, and embrace virtue, Prayers are ye armure and
weapons of ye christians in affliction. Psalm. ix.
calling night and day upon our heavenly father. (For prayers are the armor
and weapons of ye christians, when they are in affliction and trouble) and we
may be sure that he will not forget us, the holy Prophet David, saying: God
forgets not the complaynt of ye poor But if we go about, by unlawful
means and ways, to deliver our selves, besides that we shall run (as the
late experience taught us) intoo farther thraldom and bondage, we shall
without all doubt, purchase unto our selves, everlasting dampnatyon. For why?
We do resyst the ordinance of god. Which to do is most dampnable, as the holy
Apostle does testifye. Rebels goo about too bring their natural country to
utter desolatyon. Mat. xij. chap


Now let us se intoo what parell and ieopardye, these brayneles and ungodly
folks, do most unnaturally bring their own natural country. Do not they, as
much as in them lies, by their sedityous tumulte, go about to bring it to
utter desolatyon? Christ our sauyoure, the everlasting wisdom of the father,
and eternal truth, says: Every kingdom divided against it self, shall be
brought to naught. And every City divided against it self, shall not
stand. Whereby it may be gathered, that they that seek or make any division
within a Realm or country, do intend nothing else (though they falsely pretend
an other thing) but to bring the same Realm or country to naught. It is
impossible that ye words of our savior, which is the truth it self, should
be false. Which to be most true and infallible, What Realms and co^mun weals
did fall to decay by dyuysyon
daily experience does suffycyently teach us. For, what thing I pray, did
bring the florysshynge commune weal of the Assirians to naught? Division. What
thing did make ye Medes, Persians, and almost all Asia, so weak, that they
could not withstand a handful that came out of Macedonia? Division. What
thing did subvert and turn vpside down, that goodlye and well ordered common
weal, of the Lacedaemonians, which in virtue and manlynes did far excede all
other men? Dyuision. What thing did bring the Athenienses, which were rulers of
al Grecia and lords of the seas, to so great thraldom, servitude and
bondage, that they could never get them selves into liberty again? Division.
What has brought the Romans, which by their prowess, had conquered all the
wholl world into so base a state, that the less kingdom of Europa, is able
too compare with them, which before made all the wholl world to tremble and quake
at ye dynt of their sword? Division. To be short, what thing did in times
pass, encourage the Danes and Normans, too invade this country, almost to the
utter undoing and confusyon of this noble and florysshing Realm? Division.
That I should in the mean season let pass, and speak nothing of the common
weal of the Jews and Israelites, which after that they were ones divided
against them selves, were never able to resyst their enemies. In so much,
that at length, they were brought into perpetual captiuitye and thraldom.
Read the holy Bible, read Josephus, Herodotus, Justinius, Titus Liuius,
Sabellicus, and for the historyes of England, Polydorus, Virgilius. Ye may se
now that by stirryng up of division, ye did bring your own natural
country, into as great a paryll as might be. God was the defender of this
realm in the time of insurrction.
For unless God had been a strong Bulwark, unto this most victorious
Realm of England, and a most favorable father, protectoure, and defendoure
unto our Virgyn king, (for whose sake only though all things, yea and
your own lives had been taken from you, ye ought to have suffered, and too
have refrayned from such deuelisshe enterprises) it had been impossible but
the forenne natyons had come upon us. Praise and land be given unto the
for ever, O merciful father, that thou dyddeste of thy mere mercy, without
any deservings or demerites of ours, preserve our illustre and noble king,
with all his dominions and Realms, in this most parillous time of insurrectyon
and tumult which these children of Belial, did so ungodly stir up. For what
will ye have us to call you? Good fellows? Maynteners and defenders of ye
common weal? Why I was loath at ye first that these tumult and insurrectyon
makers, should be called rebels and traitors
By lykelyhode ye would be so called Nay, nay, I was full loath at the first
(I have many to bear me record of ye same) that ye should be called rebels or
traitors, because I thought those names to be to heynouse for you. Again, I
had a good hope that ye would be won, and reclamed by some fair and gentle
means. (For who would have thought so much stubburnesse in you?)
Farthermore, I was afraid that your rageouse madness should rather be set on
fire by such words, then assuaged. It was, I say, sore against my will, that
so horrible and odyouse names, should be given unto you at the first: but sith
now that ye did persyst, and some of you do yet furyously persyst in geuyng
the occasyons of such most deuilysh interpryse, being persuaded by no manner
of reason: What may we ryghtly call you, but rebels and traitors, and most
extreme enemies of the commune weal? For, all that ye go about, is to undo
this noble and florysshyng Realm, and most unnaturally to betray your own
natural country, unto forenne nations and Princes. I say unto you, that all
your mortal enemies yt compass you round about (set them all together,
Frenchmen Scotts, Danes, Turks) culd not have found or ymagined a more ready
way to destroy England, then ye English men did. For as a Realm, be it
never so small, is invincible, if the subjects of it, being knitted in love,
do hold together: so, if they be once divided against them selves, it is
impossible, but that the same land and country, Scilurus king of ye Scitians.
must be brought to utter desolation. Which thing Scilurus, a King of the
Scitians, did most lively set forth, by a goodlye exaumple and Apophthegme,
which I would it were both written and painted upon every wall, that men
might learn thereby how strong a thing concord and unity is. This king,
Maruail not yt this king had so many sons, for it was lawful unto them, to
get children upon many women.
as the histories do testify had.lxxx. sons, whom a little before his death,
he did call altogether, biddynge them, to bring every one of them an arowe.
Which thing being done, he commanded that all the arowes should be fast
bound together, and so delivered ye bondell of arowes, being thus fast bound
to every one of his sons, bydding the^ to break the arowes, as they were
fast bound together in one bondell. Which thing, because it was impossible,
they refused to do. Then the king commanded the arowes to be unbound, and
did give to every one of them an arowe too break, which they did lightely.
Then the king exhorting his sons to unity and concord, did say to them
after this manner: By concord small things do grow, but by discord great
things are brought to naught.
If ye agree within your selves, and hold together, ye shall be invincible no
man shall be able too overcome you, but if ye disagre and fall out among your
selves, ye shall be both weak and easy to be ouercomen. Shall not this
heathen and ethnike king, rise in the day of judgment, and condemn you, yt
so ungodly do break ye unity, peace and concord of your own natural
country? Oh how many of ye heathen, which neither knew god, nor his word, did
offer them selves manfully to die for the welfare and preseruatyon of their
own natural country, and these unreasonable beasts (to call them christians,
I am ashamed) do go about and study all that they can to destroy it, to
betraye it, and most trayterouslye to bring it to naught. Oh what may I say
now unto you?

Repent for gods sake, and come to your right mind again, for if ye go on
thus by unlawful means to shake of and put away the plague and scorge, that
god has sent to you, for your detestable sins, besides everlasting
dampnation, and utter undoing of your own natural country, Rebels do
always come to a shameful end, and death of their bodies.
ye shall incur a most shameful death of your bodies. Read all ye histories
both profane and holy, that ever were written since the beginning of the world,
and ye shall your selfs find, that always rebels have had a shameful end.
And no merueile, for they do resist the ordinance of god. I might here
repete and reherce ye hystory of Corah, Number. xvi. cha
Dathan and Abyram which with their wives and children and xiiii. M, and.dcc,
that held with them, did horrybly peryshe for their rebellyon, Iudi. xii. chap
I might allege how Ephraim made insurrection against Iephtha, whom god had
raised to be judge over Israel, of ye which Ephraites.xlii. M. were miserably
slain? What need I to bring here the horrible tragedy of Absalon, ii Reg.
xviii. chapter.
and of Siba, ye son of Bocheri. Look ye your selves upon the books of the
kings, and of Paralippomenon, ii. Reg. xx. cha
or Chronycles, and ye shall there find, that the one being hanged up by the
locks of his hears in an oak, was thristed thorough with.iii. spares, with
whom.xx. M. of the people were slain and lost, and yt the other being
pursued by Ioab, and besyeged within Abel and Bethmaaka, was by the council of
a wise woman beheaded and his head thrown over the wall to Ioab. Did ye people
therefore, that rebelled with him, escape unpunished? ii. Reg. xxiiii. chapter.
rebelled against David ye anointed of ye lord. Oh ye the same noble
Historiograph Josephus, were traunslated in to English, for your sakes. There,
there, should ye read and se, how many. M. of ye Jews were disconfited, over
thrown and slain at sundry times, because yt they rebelled against ye
Romans. But what need we strange and forenne examples? We may learn at home
how rebels do speed.
we may learn at home, how they speed ever, that resist the ordinance of god
taking most ungodly upon them selves, ye thing which belongs only to the
lord and to his anointed. Since then ye god does punish so grievously al rebels,
here in this world, with fire from heaven, with pestilence and sword and in ye
other world with everlasting torments of hell: any child may se and understand
how sore god does detest and abhor all rebellyon. Therefore if ye tender the
health of your own souls, if ye tender ye weal of your own natural country, if
ye tender your bodies, and lives leave of betimes, cease from such deuillish
enterprises, and in this your trouble and affliction, which doubtless does
happen unto you either for your sins or else for a tr^al of your faith and
pacieence) call upon the Lord with a contryt heart, and he will (be ye sure
thereof For he has so promised) either molyfy the hearts of those tirantes,
that oppress you, that they shall be very fathers unto you, or else he will
shortly root the^ out of ye earth, and put into ye hertes of ye powers, to
shorte^ their arms, Our godly young king which may well be compared with
that godly king Josias, shall shortly deliver his people from extortio^ and
oppression.
and to rule his elect people with justice and equytye, Bear a while think
not long, we have a most godly Prince toward, which wtin a short space, shall
comfort us, as concerning our sorrowful trouble and afflictyon, he shall wede
out of his Realm and dominions with the sword of equity, al those blood
suckers, that now, as gredy horsleches do suck ye blood of his people, and
loving subjects, in the mean season, quiet, and paryfye your selves, and let
every man according to his vocation, labor to live truly in this world, to
the mayntenaunce of the common weal. Give no more occasyon, for ye tender love
of god, which so loved us, yt he gave his only begotten son for us, give no
more occasion I say, by your unquiet behavior to these worldelynges, to
blaspheme the gospel and word of god. All tumultes and insurrections, are
laid upon gods word, and the ministers thereof.
Do ye not both hear and se, that all the insurrections tumultes and sedityons
yt have now chanced in our times are by them adscribed and laid to ye word of
god (which by some of them is called new lernyng) and the ministers thereof?
Verily it had been better for you, to have been cast with milstones about your
neck into ye deep of ye sea, and there to have been drowned, then by your
sedycious tumultes, to have ministered such an occasion of offense: for says
the truth it self: Woe, Mat. xviii. ch
yt is to say, everlasting dampnation hangs over ye manne, by whom the
offense does come. This one thing (if we were true christians) should be enough
to fray us from all vprores and insurrections.

Objection. But me think I hear yet some among you which do grudge and say.
Who in this world, were he never so pacient, could refrain him self, for
besides the many fold wrongs, that we suffer daily and hourly by the^, they
do so bitterly revile us, at eueri second word most despitfully calling us
peysauntes, and vilaines, yt no man can hold his hands from them. Whom I am
compelled to answer after this manner. Are ye Chrystans, the disciples of
Christ, do ye not think yt it is enough, and sufficyent for you, to be as your
master? Math. x, cha-
But they did call your master and savior, Beelzebub, which is a thousand
times worse, These.ii. words Paysant and Villayne are trewly and according to
the right sygnifycatyon of them expounded.
then Paysant or Villayne, which words if they were well understood, are
nothing at all reproachful. Here in this matter, plain ignorance does blind
you. For paysaunt being derived of this laten word, Paganus, does properly
betoken in Englysh, a man of the country, or that dwellethe in villages or
vplande. And ye other word, Vilayn does also come of this lattin, vocable,
Villanus, and signifies none other thing, in our mother and vulgaire tongue,
but a fermer, or fearme holder, or else ye dwells in villages. Lo good people
these be ye reuilyng and oprobrious words for the which ye do stir up al
these enorme, and grievous tragedies. But go to what and if they were, the most
reproachful words that ever could be spoken with mouth: or thought with heart
(how be it to tell the very truth, I would that these french terms had
been left to the french men, and that he that brought them first over into
England, thereby to offend his weak brethren, had been better aduysed)
ought ye not to have borne them pacyently for his sake which for your
salvation, and health of your souls, did besides all kinds of ygnominie,
opprobriousnes and reproach, suffer the most cruel and shamefullest death that
ever in this world could be ymagined or thought. Anabaptists and Libertius
do always boste and crake of their perfection.
Truly ye would be loathe to suffer death for his sake, sithe that ye can not
abide words. Where is now that perfectyon, that some of you do never cease to
boaste and crake of emonge the simple and ignoraunte people.

A dygression Hear, must I somewhat digress from my purpose, and declare what
kind of people they be that make this business and stir up contention in
this Realm and common weal. The Anabaptists do seek and hunte after a
carnal liberty in the gospel.
There be a sort of men which now at this present hour that the euaungily
call doctrine, is purelye and syncerely preached, do seek nothing else in the
scriptures and gospel, but a carnal and fleshly lybertye, going about with
their craftye and subtle reasons and textes of the scriptures, half alleged,
to persuade the ignorant people yt they are not bound to obey temporal
rulers and maiestrates. These men sitting upon there ale benches, whersoeuer
they dare utter their poison conveniently, do inculcate and beat into men's
heads, The erroneous opinion of the anabaptists, concerning the magistrates.
that no christian can laufully exequute ye office of a maiestrate. Which
office of a maiestrate, say they, is neither profitable, nor yet necessary to a
christian common weal Wherefore, away with these tirantes, kyl them, rote them
out of the earth, ye contrary to Christ's word and doctrine, do most
presumpteously take upon them, to be rulers, or rather tyrants over the people
of Christ, to whom he did, so derely, with ye shedyng of his most precious
blood, purchase a perpetual fredome and lyberty. This is done commonly in
those places where ye pure sede of ye gospel, The anabaptists will always
come too those places, where the gospel is preached.

Mat. xiii. cha. The anabaptists and Libertins, do go about to persuade men,
yt the magystrates may not kill with the swearde.

What they be ye stir up commotyon, where ye Gospel is not preched.

The oratyon of ye papystes too the simple and ignoraunte, to stir them up to
tumulte and commotion


has been dyligentlye sown. For there the devil whiles men are a sleep, is
most busye to sow in his cockle and darnel. Which would god, it were
diligently weded out by the maiestrates and rulers, yt these most pestyferous
Anabaptists and Libertins, might ones both feel and know, yt they do not
bear the sword, delivered unto them of of god, in vain. In other places where
they do yet for ye most part, sit in darkness of ignorance and shadow of
death ye popes darlings are ye styrers up of al myschief. For they, by there
hypocrysye blandiloquence and flattery, are so far sunk in to men's
stommackes, that they can easily persuade them, yt both ye king and al his
honorable counsel, are ungodly, yea and stark heretics. Have they not (will
ye shauelinges say to the poor simple folks of their country) taken away and
broken our godly images? Have they not abolyshed our holidays, put down our
ceremonies, and disanulled the holy and blessed Mass? Look how irreverently
they do use ye blessed sacrament of the Altar. Do they not also goo about to
pluck down all our holy Aulters. Who having a christian heart could abide
such impiety, and ungodliness? Come on therefore neighbors, better it were
for us, to dye a thousand deaths, then to se this blasphemy. Let us fight for
ye holy church and rytes thereof. We may be sure that we shall lightly overcome
these rank herytykes. And if we chance to have ye overthrow our selves
(which thing is not lykely, sith that we fight in gods quarrel) and dye in
the fyeld, who would doubt but that we shall go straighte way up to heaven? Oh
false doctrine.
For Christ (whose blessed body and blood, made by the holy hands of the
priest, these false heritikes do tread under foot) has said, Math. x. cha-
Yet this text as all other is falsely aleged of them.
yt whosoever loses his life, for his sake and the church, shall find it
again in the resurrection of the dead. With such mistes and iuggelynges of
words, these clean fyngered ge^tlemen, do utterly subuerte the minds of the
simple and ignorant people, which else, if they had true pastors, and good
minysters, If the people had true pastoures they wlold embrace gladlye gods
word.
would with all mekenes and due obedyence, receive the heavenly doctrine,
mynystred so fatherlye unto them, by the King, and his honorable counsel.
They would notte mutter, nor open their lips against the kings most godly
procedinges, butte would gladly with the other subjects of this realm, embrace
the wholesome doctrine of their salvation, and acknowledge that they have been
hitherto led in error and blyndnes, Who they be that prycke the people
forwards to tumulte and insrrection.
by these false Antychristes and Pseudoprophetes, whom they now accept and
embrace, as gods. Too be short, these two sorts of men, I mean the
Libertins and papists are they, that do prick ye people forwards (which
else of theymselues, are ready inoughe to such things, and especially now,
By greadye mammons.
that they are so on every side, pilled and polled) too tumultes and
insurrections, too the utter confusyon of them selves, and undoing of this
honorable country, and Realm.

Therefore, An exhortation to the maiestrates against the libertins and Papists.
O ye magistrates and rulers whom god has appointed over his chosen and
elected people, with the swearde of equity, to defend the widows and
fatherles, to maintain ye good and righteous, and to punisshe the evil and
wicked doers: it is your part and duetye to seek out such run agates, and
without any favor or mercy, to punysshe them that all other may take
example by them Put away in this case all folish pity: for as the common
proverb is, folish pytye leseth ye country, and besides yt, better it is ye
ii. or.iii. be thus extremely punished, the^ thousands, All foolyshe pitye is
to be ut away.
should through their wicked counsails and entisements, most miserably and to
the great loss of the country, perisshe. Pick out these rauenynge wolves,
and for gods sake, favor the people as much as may be, have that noble
capteyn Ioab always before your eyes which as soon as that traiterous rebel
Absalon, was by ye righteous iudgmente of god, ii. Regu^. xviii. Chapter.
most shamefully slain, did by and by blow to the retrayte, and commanded to
spare the people. Do the same and ye shall hyghly please god. Call ye ye pore
unto you, and hear their complayntes patiently, o ye gods (for, so the
scripture does call you, because that ye are in the stead and room of god)
here ye the complaynte of the poor (I say) and redress those things that
are amysse. Know of them ye causes, why they are now contrary to their old
wont and custom, An apt similitude.
so bent to insurrectyon and tumult. If a phisycion would go about to heal any
disease or syckenesse, and not search out the causes thereof, would not all men,
and ye by good right, call him an vnkunning physician. The whole body of the
common weal is sore sick, it can in no wise be healed except the cause of
this disease and syckenesse, be both searched out dilygentlye, and taken
away. Suffer no longer, the loving subjects of this most victoryous
country, which by our most souereygne Lord the king, are committed unto
your charge, custodye and protectyon (Verelye it is you which be hear in the
earth lyeutenauntes and vicayrs of god, The magistrates are Gods vycares in ye
earth.
that should revenge the wrongs and injuries of the people) too be eaten and
swalowed up, by these gredye Cormorauntes, which never being content till
they have the devil brought to them in a sack, join house, to house, land
to land (but woo be to them, says the prophet) although they should dwell
alone upon the earth, Esai. v. Chap
One of them has a thousand men's liuinges in his hands and yet can he
scantelye suffer his poor neighbor to dwell in a poor cotage besides him.
All that he has is to little as long as he sees any poor man, to have any
thing by him. What should I say A whole shiere is not enough to satisfye his
couetouse and vnsasiable mind. And why, I pray, is all this? forsooth that he
his wife, and his children, may go gaye and fare dayntely. If he can have
that, it makes no matter, how many thousand do go a begginge or storne for
hunger by him. Ah worldlinges, worldelinges, the hand of god is stretched
forth to plague Have ye forgotten what the holy prophet says? Hiere. vii. cha
Because ye are from the lowest unto the hiest, given to covetousness and
fylthy lucre: I will give your wives, unto other, and your fyldes unto
strangers, to possess. Has the lord god given you riches, to confound the
poor therewith, to oppress them, and to tread them under fete, and not rather
to help and succor them? Ye are not the lords but the stewardes and
dyspensatours of riches. Se the^ that ye be faithful in your stewardshyp, or
else your stewardshyp shall be taken from you, and given unto an other. The
Lord god has given you, and does daily give you warninges ynowe, but ye are
so blinded with worldelye covetousness and prosperity that ye will not see,
Why the worldelinges will not take ye warnynges yt God gives them daily. Pro.
xi. chap. Soph. i. chap.
ye are so pufte up with pride and hautenesse of mind, yt ye think that no
manner of thing in this world, can, or is able to bring you down Mark and note
therefore, what the scripture of God, does say: Their riches shall profit
them nothing in the day of wrath, and he yt trusts in his worldly
substance, shall have a fall. Neither their gold nor silver shall, be able
too deliver them, in the day of the wrath of the Lord. Does not the
exaumple of the rich glutton, make you afraid? Do not his cruel pains and
torments in hell, Luke xvi. chap
make your hearts to quake and tremble for fear of like punishments? The
rich glutton was damned, for unmercifulness.
And yet he was dampened for ye sin of unmercifulness only. For we can not
find nor read, that ever he came by his goods unjustly, or that he gatte his
riches by hook or crook, as the most part of you do. Therefore look for a
thousand times more grievous punysshementes, then he had. For not only, ye
did not feed Christ, when he was an hungered, give him drink when he was a
thyrste, clothe him, Mat. xxv. cha
when he was naked. etc. but also, ye did spoil him ye did pille and polle
him, ye did rob him, and most tyrannously oppress him But I know that ye
will say with the ungodly: for the devil and his angels. A godly prayer. O
merciful and heavenly father, grant I beseech the, that all men puttyng
away from their hearts, worldly couetousenes, and pride of mind, wherwyth
they are holden blind, may have grace, to see how they came into this world,
and so too use the riches, wherewith you do indue the^ too thy glory, and
saluatyon of their souls.

Now therefore, O christyan magistrates, be ye strong in the lord, take
righteousness for your shield, and weapon your selfs with upright and
uncorrupted judgment, God has ordained magistrates too revenge ye wrongs of
ye poor
and having the fear of the lord for your guide, revenge manfullye the wrongs
and iniuryes of the poor (for therefore has the lord god ordained you) Let
them both feale and know, that ye bear a fatherly affection toward the^,
and that ye will not se them to suffer any such vilany at these worldlinges
hands. Se an order (for this is your duty) yt the rich may be content
with the poor, and that the poor may be suffered too live by the rich. Seek
out the causes of this narre, that is now between the nobilytie and the
commens, cut of, with the sword of equity al occasion of strife and debate,
The gentyllmen, and communes of this realm, being knitte in love are a wall
too the country
that the gentilmen and commons of this Realm, being knytted in love again,
may be as before times a strong bulwark and wall unto this most victoryous
country of England. Ye can no better deserve of the common weal then so. And
if in the mean season ye find any of those wicked Anabaptists and Libertines,
or any of those obstynate papists that go about to subvert, seduce,
intoxycate, and poison the minds of the people, persuadyng them, that they may
lawfully rise against their maiestrates, spare them not, root out those
pernicyouse wedes from among the people. Better it is that few do peryshe,
then that all the whole country should through their wicked persuasion, be
brought to naught. These be they that are the troublers of the common peace.
Math. vii. Chapter.
Therefore beware of the^, O christian brethren, for they come unto you in
shepes clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolfes. Trust them not, suffer
not your selves in any wise to be persuaded, that ye may for any manner of
cause, rise against the maiestrates. All that they go about, is to bring you to
utter confusyon. For though the maiestrates were come to that madness
impietye, and ungodliness, that they should command you to do things, contrary
to gods laws, and his holy word (as ye marked monsters of Antichriste, Read
ye Acts of ye Apostles, and all whole Eusebius and you shall find yt always ye
disciples of christ did defend them selves with gods word.
do go about to make you to believe) yet ought ye in no wise to resist them.
None other swerd ye have to fight against ungodly maiestrates, but gods word,
with ye same wepon ought ye always to defend your selves, against all kinds
of ungodliness and yet it must be done, with such sobrietye and mansuetude,
lenity and gentleness, yt alwais christian like obedience, toward the
ordinance of god, shall shine and apere in you. Mark now this: If we may not
with material swerd resist ye maiestrates, for ye defense of godliness and true
relygyon, what shall we say by them, which for the maintenance of false
religion, do bring all ye world, upon ye necks of godly maiestrates? It was
not for naught, O christan rulers, yt the godly kings of ye old Testament
when they did put down Idolatry and superstition, did sley and kyl all the
priests and sacrificators of ye ydols and falls gods, weding out ye false
prophets from emonge the people to the intent, yt they should not bring
again, the simple and ignorant into error. What I do mean any man that has
wit, may understand. How be it, I would not have them to be put to death nor
slain, unless they be over stubburne and obstacle, or go about some tumult
or nouation of things, but I would have the^ to be kept so short till they
depart hence in peace, yt they might do no harm in ye mean season. As for ye
other, I mean ye Libertines and Anabaptists they ought in no wise to be
spared, except we will have the country by their tumultes and insurrections,
to be brought to utter desolation, Against whom, yt ye may ye better herafter
be fe^ced and enarmed in this point, yt is to say, concerning ye true obedience
toward magistrates and rulers, I have here traunslated out of Laten into
Englysh.iiii. small dialogues, That famous clerk Bullinger, is the autur and
maker of these dialoges.
between ye rebel Libertin or anabaptiste, and the true obedient christian.
Wherein ye shall learn first, that a christian, contrary to their most
erroneous doctrine, may lawfully execute the office of a maiestrate. Secondlye,
that a Christyan Maiestrate is not only profitable, but alsoo necessary to a
christian common weal. Thyrdly, yt we are bound to obey the maiestrates in all
externe and outward things. Fourthlye, that we ought in no wise, nor for any
manner of cause, to resyste the rulers and governors, where we do write
largelye against them, which rebel against the maiestrates.

Which small labor of mine, I thought no man in this country, so worthy to
have as your right worshipful mastershyppe First because of the good report,
that is given you of all the country about, both for the fervent zeal that ye
have to gods word, and maintenance of true religion and also because that ye
use your self always among them, as a most loving and tender father, sekyng
not your own profit, but only the profit and welfare of them that are under
your governance and ruledome. Oh that all other gentylmen would imitate and
follow you, both in ye same thing, and also in keeping of hospitality, then
should we have shortly a merry England. The second cause that moves me, to
dedicate, this little work unto you is that ye are by the divine providence of
god and the kings majesty, placed in authority for this our country of
Essex, in the which, many of these Libertines and Anabaptists, are runnyng in
hoker moker, emonge the simple and ignoraunte people, to impell and move them,
to tumulte and insurrection against the maiestrates and rulers of this Realm.
Whom I trust (if ye ones know them) ye will soon wede out of the countreye,
to the great good and quiet, of the kings subjects, of the same countye and
shiere Now right worshipful Sir, though I be not known, nor yet acquainted
with your maistershyp, wherefore it may peraduentur seem to some to be a bold
act, or interprise for me too offer, or nuncupate any manner of book unto you:
yet notwithstanding the great facilytye and gentylnes, that all men, women
and children do depredycate and say, is in you, does put me in very good
hope, that ye will take this my rude labor in good worth. Which thing if ye
do, hereafter paraduenture greater and more seryous things shall ensue, god
willing, who of his infynyte mercy and bounteous goodness, vouchsafe with
his holy spyryt, so to rule and guide your heart, with that godly Lady your
true loving spouse and wife, that what so ever ye shall do or think, in all
your affairs may be to the glory of god, the common weal of the Realm and
the salvation of your souls. AMEN.

The Dialogue. That a Christyan may execute the office of a maiestrate. The
interloquutours. IOIADA the true and obedient Christian, and SIMON the
Libertine or Anabaptiste.
IOIADA. GOd speed Simon, you come betyme, I se that thou art desirous of the
truth, wherefore I have a good hope, yt thou shall obtain and come by that
thing, which thou desireste so greatly. Touching ye magistrate, where upon,
we were determined to have reasoned, I doubt not, but that I shall satisfye the
in all things. But tell first what thy judgment is.


SIM. Thine opynion is that a christian may execute the office of a
Maiestrate, but I do think that both the word and example of Christ repugneth
to this opinion. For when they would at a certain time choose him to be a king,
he did run away. Ihon vi. Which thing he would not have done if it had not
been against all godliness. And in the.xxii. cha of Luke. Christ with
expressed words speaks to his disciples after this manner: The princes of
gentiles do bear rule, and they that have power are called benefyciall, ye
shall not so, but he that is greatest emonge you, shall be ye least, and he that
is chyfest, shall be as he that mynistreth. By these words it is manifest and
plain, that it becomes not chrystyans to execute the office of a maiestrate.
It is lawful for the heathen and infidels, for Christ says. The princes of
the gentiles. Christ came to redeem the world with his blood.



IOIADA. Christ came not to take away the publyke magistrates, much less to
execute their office, but to redeem ye world, with his blood. Wherefore he does
run away, not consenting to the affections of ye people, for he could not
have taken upon him the office of a king, without commotion, the Romans not
permitting it, which were the^ rulers But who ever so gathered his argument
Christ was never a baker, ergo, no Christyan, The folysh argument of the
Libertins or Anabaptists.
can be a baker? Why then do ye make this argument: Christ never executed ye
office of a maiestrate, ergo, it is not lawful for a christyan, to be a
maiestrate or bear rule. In the.xxii. of Luke Christ does warn the apostles
of their duty and forbyddeth that they should not be busye in other men's
matters, for they had stryued by the way, who should be greatest emonge them
after the death of Christ. For they did ymagin, that there should be such a
power and rule among them, as the bishop of Rome has usurped in the latter
days in the church. He does pluck from the minds of his disciples this sour
disease of ambition, and desire of honor, knowinge well that this should be the
chief destruction of Ecclesiastical prelates. Therefore he uses these words:
The princes of nations, etc. As if he should say: The princes and governors
of nations, are appointed to rule and to govern, as for you, ye have an other
office given you. Yet notwithstanding, the office of a magistrate is not
abolysshed by these words, but it may very well stand by the apostleshyp, as it
is most manifest by the words of Christ. But this does begyle and deceue the,
yt thou do take this word, Gentium for the heathen and infideles. For they
are here, by a manner of speaking, called princes, and kings of nations, which
do govern and bear rule in ye world, which power (as the apostles do testifye)
is ordained of god, which thing Christ does express by these words. Why
princes and rulers are called euergetae, yt is to say, beneficial.
They are called Euergetae, that is to say, beneficyall, because that they are
ordained to do good to them that are good and virtuous.


SI. By this reason and mean, I may cast of whatsoever can be laid against
me, out of the scriptures, saying: This was said to the apostles, it
pertains nothing to us: But Christ teaches us an other thing in the.xiii.
chap, of Mark: These things (says he) that I tell you, I do tell to al. This
word then, where he says (But ye shall not do so) perteyneth unto al them yt
are godly, and not only to the apostles. How ye place of the.xiij. cha of
Mark, ought too be understood.



IO. Thou do pass thy bounds, my Simo^, and do not abide in the matter
that was propouned, our communication is of the magistrate. In the.xiij. chap.
of Mark, which thou do aledge, Christ does exhort his apostles to sobernes
and watchinge, and we do gladly confess yt this was said to al them that are
godly. For since yt the day of ye lord shall come as a thief, being unknown
unto al men, and yt the same dredeful judgment of Christ, before whose
judicial seat, all men must apere, does indifferently hang over al men, he
does well in the apostles warn, monish, The libertins and anabaptists do alege
ye textes of the scriptures, by halfes.
and exhort al men to watch Thou do bring the text of ye euangelyst imperfect
and mutilate. For these be the words. Watch ye therefore, for ye can not tell
when ye lord of yt house will come, whether it will be in ye evening, or at
midnight or when ye corkes crow, or in ye morning lest if he come suddenly, he
does find you sleping, That which I say to you, I do say it to al me^. Thou
can not deny, but ye certain things are so set forth by Christ ye in a manner,
they perteine to al men, but not without a dyfference, An apt and meet division
of all things ye are commanded us in the scriptures and word of god.
as when Christ says: Ye are the salt of the earth. Ye are ye light of the
world. For these things do so pertain to all them yt profess ye religion of
Christ, that in ye mean season they do chiefly belong to the bisshops, and
their successors: yea, and to the magistrates. Again, certain things are
equally and generally commanded to al men: as he al ye precepts of mutual
charity and love, and of forgiving our brethren their offenses. Finally,
certain things are so spoken, that they do pertain only to the apostles,
and to their successors, the bysshoppes and Pastors, as: Goo ye throughoute
all the world, and preach the gospel to al creatures. We ought not to make the
particular precepts, universal commandments.
Therefore, it is not lawful too make the singular precepts, general and
universal commandments. For he yt reasons on this manner: What soever is
said to the apostles, is said to al men, it is said to the apostlles, go
intoo all the world, and preach: ergo, the same is said to all men, does
reason foolyshlye. For Paul says, yt al be not apostles. Therefore, that,
where he says. But ye shall not do so, is a perticulare or singular precepte,
and perteyneth only to the apostles and their successors. Thou haste not yet
proved then, that a Christian may not execute the office of a magistrate.


SIM. By what arguments, canste thou thy self prove, that a Christyan may
lawefully execute the office of a magistrate?


IOIA. Of the election of the magistrates we find written in the.xviii. Would
god al maiestrates and rulers, had always this place of the scripture before
their eien
chap. of Exodus, after this manner: Provide or choose out of al people, wise
men, which fear god, in whom the truth is, and which hate covetousness, and
make of them, heads over the people etc. I do suppose and think them, to be
ryghtly chosen, which are chosen and elected by them, who^ it belongs too,
How maiestrates and officers be well and trewly chosen What shall we say by them
yt by their office so dear, yt they be of necessity compelled too spoil the
kings subjects for to make up their monye again.
or whose part it is to choose, elect, and make officers, not, which do get
offices by favor, by bribes or other deuylish ways and means; the^ (I say)
do I think to be lawfully called, which either are such as Iethro does
describe here, or else do study and labor to be such. I do suppose now,
that it is sufficiently proved, and that by the words before aleged, that such
godly men, may execute the office of a maiestrate in god, for the words do
signify the same. They that are made rulers, must be just, righteous,
faithful, true, fearing god, not couetouse. But who can do these things
better then a christian? It follows again in the same chapter. If thou do
these things, thou shall fulfill the commandment of god, and shall be able to
sustain or bear the commandments, or burdens of the lord. Since then that a
christian ought to execute and do the commandment of god, which thing is
done by ye magestrate, it follows yt a christian may execute the office of a
maiestrate. Does not Paul say that the magestrate, is ye minister of god?
Romans.xiii. chapter. Wherefore I do make mine argument after this fasshyon.
Mark and way this argument you rebel Libertin.
All things whereby god is served, are lawful for a christyan: but god is
served by a magistrate, ergo, it is not forbidden, that a Christian should
execute ye office of a magystrate. Of this thing we have innumerable examples
of most holy men, which were magistrates as Abraham, Joseph, Judas, Moises,
Iosue, Gedeon, Samuel, David, Ezechias, Josias, and other.


SIM. What is yt to us, yt they did in the old testament? If we may so gather
our argument, it shall be proved by the same reason, yt we must sacrifice, and
offer up bulls and goats.


IO. Does Paul pertain nothing to ye? That, which you bring of ye sacryfices
has no place here: All sacrifices are abolished by Christ
Do thou not know yt they are abolisshed by Christ? But you can not prove
yt the magystrate is abolisshed. Tell me now, I pray the, were not Abraham,
Moises, Samuel, and the other, whom I have recited, faithful, and the friends
of god?


SIM. But they were not christians.


IO. What is a christian?


SIM. What a chrystian is.
Which believes in Christ Jesus and has ye spirit of Christ.


IO. Very well Tell me, had the apostles an other spirit then ye prophets?


SIM. The spirit of the apostles, and ye spirit of the prophets was al one.
The holy fathers of ye old Testamente were christians and also maiestrates.



IO. The holy men of ye old testament, believed in Christ, and had the spirit of
Christ: ergo, they were christyans, and they were not only christyans but
also magistrates, rulers, and officers then a christian may be a Magistrate.
That the holy men of the old testament, had ye spirit of Christ, it is
manifest by ye first chap. of the.i. Epistle of Peter. For he speaks after
this manner. Of ye which salvation. ye prophets have enquired and sought,
which did prophecy of ye grace yt should come upon you, seking to whom or to
what time, ye spirit of Christ, which was in them, did signify. And that they
did believe in Christ, Christ him self does testify in the.viii. chap. of Ihon,
and Paul in yt.i. to ye Corin. and.x. chap. They did all (speaking of ye
fathers of ye old testament) eat one spiritual meat with us, and all did
drink one spiritual drink. And they did drink of ye spiritual rock, What
difference there is between the congregation of the Patriarchs and our
congregation
yt followed the^ and the rock was Christ. The congregatyon the^, of them yt
did believe in those days, and of them that do believe now, is al one, which
congregation is gathered in one spirit. This difference only there is yt they
did believe in Christ, being promised, and which was yet to come, and we do
believe in him, yt is already come and exhibyted How they did esteem, regard,
and understand the ceremonies, it is easy to be seen in the prophets.


SIM. Then when we do judge, we must use the laws of ye Jews.


IOIA. That does not follow, sith yt they were no more bound to the law, then
we are. The mark that the christian maiestrate does shote at, is that peace
and justice may florishe, that men may live righteously, godly, innocently,
and honestlye: on the contrary side, that vices and wickedness may be roted
out and punisshed, that sedition, tumult, and rebellion and al such other
things, may be either taken head of, or else banished away utterly. It
scilleth not by what laws these things be done, so ye they be done. We do not
read that the apostles did ever preach against the laws of the gentyles. And
why? because that the fasshions laws, and customs, of countries and natyons,
were diverse and sundry, nor it could be possible, that all things should be
conuenyent for all men. But what need we to speak of ye ancient fathers? We
will come to the new testamente. Nicodemus, and Joseph did bear rule. He was
the steward of Queen Candace that was baptized by Philip, and received into the
flock of Christ Cornelius was a christian, which did send for Peter, and was
baptized by him. Surgius Paulus and Erastus were received by Paul. Thou canste
not deny but that all these were common officers.


SIM. They were officers, when they came to the faith but it is not
expressedlye set forth, yt they did remain in their office, after yt they did
receive the faith.


IOIA. Therefore I will hear by what reasons thou can prove, yt faith did put
them from their office.


SIM. What neadeth any probation, sith that it is not written, that they did
abide in their office?


IOI. Show then, that they did not continue in their office.


SIM. I can not.


IOI. Then you have proved nothing, and mine arguments that I do bring, are as
strong as thine. Trewly these questions do engender infinite contentions, and
bring a man's mind into perplexity. Harken to me then. The christian faith,
does put no man from his office.
The christian faith, does put no man from his empire, dominion, rule, or
office: For Joseph and ye other which we have named before, were christyans,
and were alsoo public magistrates and officers. Likewise, Iho^ does not
command ye soldiers to put a way and forsake warfare, inioyning the^ only,
yt they should hurt or accuse falsely no man, and that they should be content
with their wages. Luke.iii. chapter. If faith, and the name of a Christian
should constrayne any man to goo from his power and authority, truly it should
compel him to go from the service of god. For ye Magistrate or officer, is ye
minister or servant of god. The Euangeliste, when he makes mention of Joseph
of Arimathia, does say yt he was a senator or alder man. Again he says, yt he
was an honest and just man, but without faith there can be no righteousness. (For
by faith ye righteous does live) He is righteous, he is faithful, he is a
senator, ergo, a faithful may be an alder man or senator. Paul. To. xv.
says: Erastus yt receyuer of ye town, does salute you. He was then in office,
he was notte gone from his office of a receiver. For in ye ii. to Tim. iiii. He
did say yt he did dwell in Corinthus. Thou do not read yt Philip did forbid ye
Eununchus his stewardship But now I will hear whether thou can bring any
other thing.


SIM. I have no expressed words, touching the same But this does seem unto me
most detestable, and most unseemly for a christyan, yt he should sit there,
where many things are done against the law, and against right as it is often
times done in judgments and in the senate or parliamente house.


IOIA. I have proved yt a christan may execute the office of a Magistrate. What
shall I say to thine objections? Nicodemus and Joseph were in ye bloody
council, where Christ was condemned, and yet not wtstanding, they were not
polluted with yt bloody judgment. For they did not consent to ye counsails of
ye ungodly. Lu. xxiii Wherefore a christian, is nothing harmed though yt he sat
in ye council of ye ungodly, so yt he does not consent to their filthy deeds
and acts, but defend and counsel, ye which is right, as much as lies in
him. Psalm.i. But now look upon ye thing more narowly, and ponder it more
diligently, whether it is better yt godly men and christyans, should be rulers
and Magystrates, or ungodly persons? For if the Magystrate be an infydell,
what goodness can we look too have of him?

For he can do no manner of good him self being not good, as be all they, yt
neither know, nor worship god, which thing ye do not deny your selves. Sith
then that ye do say, that a christian neither can, nor ought to bear rule or
be a Magystrate, what other thing do ye say, but yt there ought to be no
goodness at al in ye magystrate? If ye doctrine of ye Libertins and
anabaptists should stand, al right and justice should be perverted.
Which doctrine if it should stand should not all right and justice be
perverted? They that ay yt a Christian can not be a Magistrate, and grant that
the ungodly may, they seek nothing else, but to destroy al religyon and common
weal. Can any man govern and rule better then he that worshpipeth god, As
kingdoms did always florishe under godly and virtuous princes, so they have been overwhelmed with al kinds of calamites when ungodly men did bear rule
and lives innocently before him? We do learn out of ye books of judges, of
Samuel, of Kings, and of ye Chronicles, that the Realms and kingdoms were
never in a better and more prosperous state, then when godly judges and kings
did bear rule. Again, yt there were never so troublous times, so much
wyckednes, famine, hunger, wars, tumultes, and calamytyes, as have been under
ungodly tyrauntes, as was Hieroboam, Achab, Manasses. etc. Therefore we do now
conclude, not only that a christian may execute the office of a magistrate,
but also that such an office can not be prosperously and well administered but
by christians.


The second Dialogue That the office of a magystrate, is not only profitable,
but also most necessary to a christyan common weal.
SIMON. But what do thou say to this yt Christ answers to Pilate: My
kingdom is not of this world? Since then that christyans are named after
Christ, surely (for so it seems to me) they ought to have nothing to do with
such a kingdom, nor I think it to be necessary to the children of god. For he
yt is a true christian, does wrong and violence to no man, he does not contend
he does not strive, he hurts no man, he smites no body, but lives according
to the commandment of god. Math. v. chap.


IOI. Christ was accused of high treason, against the imperial Majesty,
whereby the Iues thought soon to have condemned him. For they said, he makes
him self king of the Jews Our lord would be seemed (as he ought by right)
to be so far from the affectation and coveting of any earthly kingdom, that
it should be against all reason, to suspect any such thing of him. Therefore he
did answer: My kingdom is not of this world, else I should have servants and
ministers, which would endeavor them selves, to defend me. So that Christ bid
both confess that he was king of heaven and also did signify unto Pilate,
that he had no cause to be afraid of the kingdom that he did minister unto, as
though he should go about to challenge it unto him whereof the Iues did accuse
him before Pilate. The kingdom of Christ is not of this world, but in spirit
and truth
As though he should say, I am a king, yet notwithstanding, my kingdom is not
of this world, but in spirit and truth


SI. This is my meaning. Then ye kingedom of Christ, is not of this world, yt
is to say, it does not consist in outward dominion and power, whereby it
follows yt it is destituted or spoiled of glory, pomp, riches, and outward
puissaunce and might Wherefore we ought to be here ye outcast of ye world, we
shall at length reygne with Christ in ye regeneration.


IO. I do say nothing against ye, but that you do gather thereby, ye
christians have no need of a magistrate, yt I do deny. The reason, why? Because
that Christ speaks so of his kingdom, that in ye mean season, Christ does so
speak of his kingdom, yt in ye mean season, he does not take away ye
politic magistrate.
he does not condemn nor take away the magistrate. Besides that, the
christians are not bare spirits, but they dwell yet in ye flesh which they do
carry about. As touching the spirit, by the which man is renewed and made a
christian, he has no need of a magistrate. For the inward manne can be
preserved with no outward things. But as touching the flesh, which he bears
about, and his outward conversation, man has as much need of a Magistrate, as
of meat, and other outward things. For it is a like reason to say: The
Magystrate is as necessary to christians in this world, as meat and drink
The kingdom of the christians is not of this world, ergo they have no need of
a magistrate, and to say: The kingdom of ye Christians, is not of this world:
ergo, they need no meat. For meat is eaten in this world.


SI. If ye spirit of a christian man, is a true spiryt he hurts no man. If he
hurts no body, what needs he a magystrate.


IOI. Paul answers ye. Princes are not fearful unto them yt do well, but to
them yt do evil. Will thou not fear the power? Do ye thing yt is good. and you
shall have praise of it: for he is the minister of god, for thy good. If thou
do that thing, which is evil, fear, for he bears not the swerd in vain
But he is the minister of god, to take punishment and vengeance of him, yt
does ye thing which is evil. Wherefore we must be subjects or obedient, not
only for fear of punishment, but also for conscience sake


SIM, There shall be no need of al these things: for the christian knows,
what Christ has said: Do not resist or wtstand ye evil.


IOI. It is true, a christian ought not to revenge him self rashly, since yt
the same does perteine to ye magistrate. But this does beguile you, The
libertins and Anabaptists do dream that Christians do not sin nor commyt
any fa^te.
that ye do ymagin and dream, yt the christian people is such, as it is not,
nor ever was, nor ever shall be, yea such, as it can not be: ye will, I say, ye
christians to be of such a perfection, yt no man shall fall, or syn among the^.
In this ye are deceived. For, although there be many good me^, yet
notwtstandyng there be many mo hipocrites. And ye old and ancient partiarks,
had ye same commandments yt they should hurt no man, they that were good in
deed, and godly, did wrong to no body, yet for the wicked sake yt were among
them, there were, yea, them selfs were magistrates.


SIMON. If we were true christians, we should have no need of Magistrates.


IOI. The old patriarchs were very godly men, and yet not wtstanding they had
need of a magistrate not for them selves, but for ye wicked sake We do not
speak of yt, if we were such, If we had ye, that we have not, we would do that,
which we do not.
but of yt, yt we are. Sith the^, yt we be not as we ought to be, it is
necessary, that we have yt, with out yt which, it is impossible for us to live.
If we had great riches, truly we should be rich, if we had great lerning we
should without doubt, be great clearkes But we may not so gather, ergo, we need
not to labor, we need not to study. If we had wings we should flee, since then
yt we have no wings, we have need of fete to go.


SIM. We are al together undone and lost. we are clean cast away, for we are
no true christians.


IOI. Why so?


SI Because that we are yet so imperfect yt we have need of a magistrate.


IO. Do you not yet understand, yt the magistrate is for the wicked sake, ye
honesty and virtue may be safe among ye evil persons, Why the Magistrate is
ordained of God.
and ye god has ordained it?


SIM. I do not understand, how it has been ordained of god, sith that Christ
says: Do not ye resist or withstand evil.


IOI. He does forbid that no private person, No private person ought to
revenge his wrong, for ye belongs to ye magistrate.
should of affection, revenge his wrong, he does not forbid, yt a magistrate
should not punisshe the evil doers. For the power is the mynister of god, to
punish and take vengeance of them yt do commit evil. Also, where Christ
says, when any man goes about to take away thy cloak, give him also thy rote,
if thou do confer it with ye place of Paul. i. Cor. vi. cha, thou shall
find ye same saying, to be somewhat mollifyed, when he does permit yt there
should be judgments among christians, for things perteinyng to ye life.


SIM. If you do discuss diligently ye words of Paul, you shall find ye Paul
permits no such thing to ye christians.


IOI. These be ye words of Paul: Can any of you abide, having business, or to do
with an other, too be judged under unrightful judges, and not rather under ye
saints? Do ye not know yt the saints shall judge ye world? And if ye world be
judged by you, are ye unworthy of small iugements? Do ye not know yt we shall
judge angels, and not only those things yt pertain to ye living? Therefore if
ye have judgments, touching those things ye pertain to ye use of life, make
the^ judges yt are vilest in ye congregation, I do speak to your shame. Is
there not among you a wise man? not as much as one? which can give judgment
between brother and brother? But one brother strives with an other, and ye
under infidels. Therefore now there is a great fault in you, ye ye have strife
among you. The place of Paul is discussed.
Why do not ye rather suffer wrong Why do ye not receive harm? yea, but
rather ye do injury and wrong, and yt to your brethren. These, I say, be the
words of Paul, wherbye we do learn, that we ought rather to suffer wrong, and
to receive patiently harm, then to strive and contend among our selves,
wheruntoo Christ, in the.vi. of Mathewe, has a respect. But if this, for the
imbecyllytye, weakness, and corruption of our flesh, can not be done, there
be Magystrates, courts, and judges, before whom, such matters, if any do
chance, may be discussed and pacifyed, too the intents, that he, which
suffers wrong, may be revenged and he that does the wrong, may be punisshed
and holden in. Wherefore courts and judges serve, look upon this, O ye judges.
Now they that so contend before a judge, for things that pertayne to the use
of life, are christians for Paul says: One brother does wrong to an other,
whom he commands (if need do so require) to sue for their right before
christian judges. For brothe^ and christian, are al one. Finally, by the
foresaid words, it may be manifestly gathered, that a christian may execute ye
office of a magistrate. Saynctes are every where in the scriptur taken for the
faithful.
For he appointed the saints to be judges, and here the saints be put for the
faithful whom he will rather to be chosen of the vilest sort in the
congregation, then that they should repair to unfaithful judges.

Of all these things we do gather and conclude that the faithful have need of
a magistrate, since that the congregation is gathered of good and evil, the
faithful them selves being in the flesh, as long as they live. And again, since
that the Patriarchs and elect of god, had need of a magistrate: We have no
less need then they had. Therefore the magistrate is not only profitable, but
also most necessary to a christian common weal.


The third Dialogue. That we are bound to obey the Magistrate.
SIMON. THose things that thou have brought out of Paul, do please me very
well, but I do not se, that we are bound to obey this Magistrate.


IOI What is this? Doste thou think that we are not bound to obey ye power
which is of god?


SIM. I would not be greatly against it, if al power were of god if they did al
rule well, if they did defend right and equity. What if this power does fight
against god, does break and violate laws and statutes, does oppress ye poor
wylt thou say yt it is of god? or do thou think that we are bound to obey
it? As far as I can judge, a tyrannical power is not of God, yea, rather it
is no power ergo, we ought not to obey it. The tiranous poweris given of god,
as a rod to punysh and try the people.



IOIADA. A tyrannouse power is also of god, given of god, as a rod wherewith
the people is both tried and punysshed.

Which thing is made most plain and manifest in Pharao, in Saul, and
Balthazar. Paul also does say, that all power is of God.


SIMON. Paul speaks of that power, which is benefycyall to the good, and
punyssheth the wicked But contrary to that, a tyraunte does wrong to them
that are good and virtuous, he oppresses them, and does enhaunce and set up
the wicked. Since then that such power is not beneficyall to ye good, God does
ordeine ye which seems evil to us, for the good of the electes.
but rather do them wrong, how can it be of god?


IO. That thing which seems evil unto us, god does ordeyn it to the good of
his elect. Did not ye cross and death of so many martyrs, which were slain
and put to death by tyrauntes and cruel persecutours, serve to the glory of
god, and to the increase of their own felycitie and beatitude? That officers
and rulers do sometimes wax tyrants it comes either of the vices of them yt
are in office or else, of the Ire and wrath of God.
God uses Nabugodonosor as a rod, wherewith he punyssheth his people. Besides
yt, if any chaunges and alterations do happen, so that he which was a good
magystrate, a godly ruler and officer, is clean changed, and does become
most wicked, ye proceeds not of ye nature of the magistrate, or office, but it
comes of the vices of most perverse and wicked men, yt are in office, and
execute the office of a magistrate, yea, many and sundry times it comes of ye
plain ire and wrath of god. Are not many times yt water and air, yea, ye meat
it self pestiferous which notwtstanding by them selves, are most wholesome. But
so god does punish our sins. Understand ye same of ye tirannous magistrates.


SI. What if he commands that, which is unjust and unrightful? Shall I
obey?

What if the tyrant be both unrighteous and ungodly, shall I obey nevertheless?
No. For thou have said before, that no man can better execute the office of a
magistrate, then a christian. Again, Paul does with a certain stomach, speak
against them that suffered them selves to be judged under unrighteous judges.
Finally, the apostles them selves, would not obey the commandments of the
ungodly magistrates, saying: It behooves rather to obey god, then men.


IO. I have made a comparison betwixt the godly magistrate, and the ungodly,
when I said these words: No man can better nor more godly execute ye office of
a magistrate, then a godly man, Though the ungodly magistrate is not to be
comparid with the godly, yet notwtstandynge in externe and outward things he is
not to be disobeyed.
and yet in the mean season, I did not say, that an ungodly and tirannous
magystrate, is not a magistrate. I did prefer the rule that the christian
does bear, before the rule yt the ungodly does bear, and yet notwythstanding,
I did not condemn the last although it were no power, or rule, or as though
we were not bound to obey it. The commonweals never florisshed better, then
when godly men did Raygne. That we may se in Ezechias, and other holy Kings.
Whereunto same Paul had also a respect when he did bid ye Corinthians to chose
and make judges of ye saints, yt is to say, of ye faithful. The apostles did
well, yt in certain things they did not obey ye ungodly edictes and
commandments of ye senate. When you do then ask and demand a question,
touching obedience, I do answer after this manner: When you say these
words: Too obey an ungodly magistrate, and to obey ungodly laws and
statutes, is not all one.
Shall I obey an ungodly magistrate? Shall I obey ungodly laws, statutes and
commandments? Thou do not ask all one thing. Thy question and demand is
not al one. For to the first question, I do answer yt we are bound to obey, to
ye second again I say, yt we ought not to obey. The magistrate bears no rule
over ye souls, but over ye bodies and outward substance, and whatsoever does
perteyn to ye outward conversation of me^. Now if he commands any thing
against god, against conscience and health of ye soul, we ought rather to obey
god, then ye ungodly commandments of the tirant. Now has place yt the
apostes do say: It behooves rather to obey god, the^ men. But if he commands
only yt, which pertains to outward things, or to thy body, which thing,
ca^, We owgh obedience to a tyrant, and again, we owe no obedience, that is to
say, in outward things we owe to obey, but in matter of conscience if he
commands any thing against god we are not bound to obey Why the magistrate
does meddle in matters of relygyon.

What profyt does come of the statutes and ordynau^ces of godly magistrates.


or may be performed and done by the, without the loss of ye truth and
righteousness, without paril of salvation (though it seems never so hurtful to
thy body and substance, though it seems never so uncomely for ye) thou art
bound to obey. Therefore we owe obedyence to the tirant, and again, we owe him
not obedience.


SI. Now an other question does rise, If ye public magistrate bears no rule
over ye soul, why does then ye magistrate now a days, usurp so much power, in
matters of faith?


IO. He does yt, not as a magistrate only, but as a christian magistrate, nor
he does it, without commandment and example. In Deutero. ye king is commanded
to have ye book of ye law by him, and to read it diligently which book also is
delivered to Iosue by Moses. Let us look upon ye example of Iosaphat, I^ada,
Josias, Ezechias, Nabugodonozer and Darius in Daniel.


SI. Have they any power over the soul and spirit of man, or can they print
faith by their statutes and commandments, in the hearts of men?


IO No forsothe: But their statutes and ordinances do profit in this thing yt
the ungodly do less harm, do commit less offense, less ydolatry and
blasphemy being fraied, cohibited and brideled by such godly edictes and
proclamatyons. Else the weak, by such licencious doings of ye ungodly, either
are let to come to Christ or else too take occasyon, too swerne a way from
Christ, and his word. Therefore ye administration, which is done by ye laws of
ye Magistrates, does bring this to pass yt there is less evil and harm among
mortal men, that men do live godly, honestly, and quietly, and although, ye
ungodly do hide their ungodliness, malice and wickedness within in their hearts,
yet not with standing they dare not suffer it to break forth, to trouble
disquiet, and offend them, yt will live godly. God only does look in ye
heart, and judges it. Wherefore I think this proposition, to be sufficiently
proved yt we are bound to obey the Magistrate For, if ye magistrate be a
christian, so much more ought we to obey him. Again, if he be an heathen and
ungodly, ye art also bound to obey him though he does oppress the, in thy
body and substance so yt he does not call ye from god and the truth But let us
make it stronger with the scripturs, In ye.xx. of Luk, Christ commands to give
to Caesar, ye which belongs too Caesar, and to god, What by Caesar we owe to
understand in the scriptures
that which belongs to god. By Caesar he understands generally al ye
maiestrats of ye world, to who^ our bodies and goods are subjects.i. of ye
kings, viii. Our mind does only belong to god, and therefore touching it, we
are more bound to obey god, then man. Peter teaches us after this manner: Be ye
subject to al humain ordinance for ye lord sake, whether it be to a king, as
to ye most excellent, or to his deputes, which are sense of him, to ye
punishment of the evil doers, and to the praise of them yt do well, for so is ye
will of god, yt by well doing, ye stop ye mouths of ignorant persons. etc.


SI. Ye have always taught out of Esaias, and words of Christ, yt god is
worshipped in vain, by ye precepts and commandments of men, and now ye
affirm ye plain contrary out of Peter, yt is to say, yt we are bound to obei
al humain ordinances. There be two kinds of humain traditions.



IO. Humayne traditions or constitutions, are taken.ii. ways. Some are set
forth too this end, that they should be a worshipping of god which men do
prescribe unto other, as necessary to salvation, which if a man should
omytte and neglecte, he should grievously sin and offend: again, if he keeps
them, they think them selves, and also make other too believe, yt he deserves
much of god. With these precepts and commandments, which are mere inuentyous
of men, god is worshipped in vayn. There are again certain constitutions of
magistrates, touching heritau^ces, proprieties, selling and bying, letting forth
touching public contractes and such like, of yt which things, princes and
magistrates do make laws and constitutyons, for a peace and common quietness and
tranquillity. Al men generally are bound to obey al such co^stitutions and
laws. And of such Peter does speak, as it appears manifestly by his words.
Besides yt, Peter writes not to the heathen, but to the christians, which were
dispersed here and there.i. Pet. ii. cha To Titus.iii. chap. it is written after
this manner. Warn the^ (says saint Paul) yt they be subject to Princes and
potestates, ye they be obedient too magistrates and rulers, yt they be ready to
al good works, and that they speak evil of no man. To the Roma. xiii. he
says. Every soul (yt is to say, all men and women) be subjects to the higher
powers, for there is no power but of god: and all the powers yt are, be ordened
of god. Therefore, whosoever does resyst ye power, does resist the ordinance of
god But they yt resist, shall receive to them selves dampnation.


The fourth Dialogue. Whether it be lawful to resist ye magistrate, where we do
write against them that do rebel against magistrates and rulers.
SIMO. Tell Ioiada, if there were a magistrate (as there be to mani) which should
do nothing well, nothing soberly, nothing justly, and according to right, which
being rebellyous to god, and his laws, should with infynit wro^ges, oppress ye
good, and not revenge them yt suffer wrong, nor yet deliver them from the
hands of their enemies, were it not lawful to resist him? Does not Esaias call
the wicked maiestrats thieves and robbers? Esai. i. Does not Christ call them the
power of darkness? Paul does revile Ananias to his face. Acts. xxiii. calling
him a whited or painted wall.


IO. To an ungodly and wicked magistrate, his faults and wicked deeds are to
be showed, yt he may turn from them, to a better life, and that ought to be
done now in time, now out of time. The fact of Paul has some occasyon. Be thou
like to Paul, and then imitate and follow Paul's deed.


SIMO. What avails if the wicked deeds of magistrates and princes be rebuked,
sithe that they be wicked still, and amand not? It were far better that they
should be roted out of the earth, even as Iehu, and other did.


IO. Why, and wherefore do thou say so my Simon? How far have thou over
shoot thy self? do not ye Catabaptistes datest and abhor warrely tumultes?
But I se what it would be, if al things should happen and chance too you, All
ye doyngs of ye Anabaptists do breath and savor tumult and confusion of all
things.
according to your own desires, I fear me, lest all your doings do breathe
and savor tumulte and confusyon of all things, Not so, my Simon. Paul says
i. Cor. vii. chapter. Let every man abide in that vocation that he is called
in. Art thou called, being a servant? Care thou not therefore, but also, if you
canste be made free, use rather the same.


SIM. Thou do hear then, that he does prefer fredom and liberty, to
servitude and bondage and warns that (if it may be done) we do seek it.


IO. I hear that fredom and liberty is to be wisshed for, and also (if it may
be done conveniently) to be embraced, but I do not hear, Liberti ought not to
be sought by sedition and blood sheding If all things were done, as we would,
every hour tumultes should rise.
yt it ought to be desired and sought, by seditions, by tumultes, by evil
ways, by violence, blood, and wars. Nor ye apostles did ever use such
means, for to be made free, or to get the^ selves to liberty, therefore we
must abstain also from them. If al things were done by our council, every
hour tumultes and seditions, should be styrred up against the magistrate, for
every man (as soon as any thing should not come too pass, according to his
lust, and inordynate desire) should begin an uproar and tumulte, and would say:
The magistrate is ungodly, he has handled me agenst al right and equity
Should not thus ye christyan name be a cloak of tumults, inordinate
affections, The Libertins go about to make the Chrstian name, a cloak of
tumultes and confusion.
and of al confusion?


SI. Truly this thing must be tried and proved by hands, and by strength, for
words do not avail with those tirauntes. By and by, as soon as any manne
does rebuke their tirannye, and wicked factes, O brayneles Anabaptiste
they wax hot and angrye, they threaten, they take, they cast intoo prison,
they spoil men of their goods, they banishe, they kill and murder the^ yt
are godly. This way neither godlynes, nor justice, nor good men are seen to.
Therefore this sore sickness and disease of ye common weal, can not be helped,
but by tumult and the swerd, yt the ungodly may be utterly destroyed, and roted
out of ye earth.


IO. That thing which to men seems impossible, before god is possible.
Therefore, this high and weighty vnsines, and matter, ought to be committed to
god, with most ernest and burning prayers, for he says: God does never forsake
his elect.
Put or remyt ye ve^gaunce to me and I will reueng or require. It is most sure
yt god does never forsake, his elect, and yt he does never deny his help unto
them that with a sincere heart, and true faith do call upon him. To them that
are godly, all things ye god does, seem well done.
Luke xviii.


SIM. But he does help many to late.


IOI. To them yt are godly in deed, nothing does seem to soon, nothing to
late, that the lord god does work. They do receive with a thankful heart,
what so ever their merciful father does give, whether it be weal or woo, they
know that they are always in the hands of their most bou^teous father from
the which, nothing can take them away. They do commyt them selves
altogether, to this most merciful father, yelding them selves whollye to his
will. For, they do remember ye saying of Peter, which says. The lord knows
how to deliver ye godly from temptation, and how to keep the unrighteous to be
punished in the day of judgment. Mark these golden sayings and prynte them in
thy mind, who souer thou be, ye art opressed and so committing thy self holly
into the mercy of thine heavenly father, beware of deuylyshe tumult and
insurrection
Also that saying of David stycked in their minds: I never saw the righteous
forsaken. Finally yt golden sentence of Paul is never from their memory: God
suffers not us to be tempted above yt we be able, to bear, and makes a
joyful and prosperous end with the temptation. With out doubt god does always
deliver his true servants, for either he does illuminate and lighten the
hearts of the tyraunts and princes, that they shall favor his elect, as he
did to Pharao, toward Joseph, too Cirus, toward ye Jews, to Xerxes, toward
Eseras, to Artaxerxes, toward Rehemiah, to Ahasuerus, toward Mardorche, to
Nabugodonozer, toward Daniel, that ye faithful and godly might have some
respit. Or if he be determined to utterly destroy the tyrants and ungodly
rulers, he begins that matter with so great, and so notable signs and
tokens, that no man can doubt of the good will of God, and alsoo he does
always atcheue and fynysh the thing yt he has begone, with a prosperous end
Now if any man does go about any delyueraunce, Note this dreadful example of
Ismael, which killing Godoly as, ye Babylonians depute, did bring ye remenaunt
of the Israelites to utter confusyon.

All ye yt are oppressed let never this goodly hystory be from your heart, and
then I trust that ye shall never have mind to insurrection and tumult, but
rather to call ernestley upon god for delyuerance.


without, or against this order, as though he had begone or enterprysed
that thing, by the will and commandment of God, he shall auayl no more then
Ismael did against the Babiloniens, in kyllyng Godolias.iiii. of ye Kings.xxv.
chapter. and Hieremye.xl. chapter. But go to, we will bring forth out of the
armorye and storehouse of the scryptures, weyghtye exaumples, where by it shall
be made manyfeste and plain both by what means, god delyuereth his elect,
and alsoo how vnfortunatelye and vnluckelye, they did speed, which did go
about to deliver them selves by boldenes and tumulte against the will of
God. The people of Israel did serve in Egipte, certain hundred years,
being oppressed with sundry and diverse labors, and greuouslye afflycted,
besides that, they were compelled too se how their children and infantes, as
soon as they were borne, were drowned in the river of Nilus. By and by, as
soon as they began too call to the Lord with a true heart, they were
heard of the Lord. For he did send Moises, which should be a captain
and a delyuerer of the people. He did carye them dry shoed thoroughe the red Sea, and did drown Pharao, with all his host and army, in the botome
of the deep. Exodus the fourtene Chapter. Saul, king of the Israelites, did
kill and murder the Prophets of God, and persecuted the innocente and
ryghtuouse David. Oh most godly David, yt we might have grace in our troubles
and affections and when we are most oppressed, to ensue and follow thy steps,
god grant, we may.
David does notte revenge him self, nor put him from his kingdom, but rather
he flies him self, and when he had fallen twyse intoo his hands, he spare
him, and did suffer him too goo away unhurt, or without harm, saying: The
Lord be merciful unto me, that I do not that thing too my Lord, the
anointed of the Lord, that I should lay mine hand upon him, for he is the
anointed of ye lord The Lord lives, that except, the lord does smite him,
or his day become that he dye, or he, going down too battle, do perysshe,
the lord be merciful unto me, yt I do not lay mine hand upon ye anointed of
ye lord.i. of the kings xxiiij. At an other time, when Abisai did say. The
lord has shut up to day thine enemy into thine hands, now therefore will I
thrust him through with a spear to ye ground once, and it shall be no need of the
second time. David said unto Abisai: Do not sley him. For who shall lay his
hands up on ye anointed of the lord, and shall be unguilty?.i. of the
kings.xxvi. cha. These words, my Simon, being well weighed and pondered, do
teach us, yt we must not follow ye blind affection of our flesh. For when the
time was come yt the lord had appointed, not David, but ye lord him self did
take Saul away from the world, with the swerd yt he him self had sent, and did
set up David in ye roial and kingly seat. The children of Israel, have been
many times afflicted under tirants and ungodly kings, as we have in the
history of ye judges, no man did go about of his own head, or of his own
industry, to deliver them. But ye lord him self did deliver them by Gedeon,
Samson, Iephte, and other like, who^ he him self had chosen to such
businesses. Who does by sedition and tumult, invade or come upon the ungodly
king Achab. when he does set up ydols, and commands yt innocent and good
man, Naboth, to be stoned to death, keeping neither right nor equity, slaying
the prophets, persecuting Helias (till yt the lord does stir up Eliseus,
which at ye commandment of god does anoint Iehu king, yt he should take
vengeance for ye lord, of the ungodly.iiii. of the kings.ix.x. So Io^ada did
unto Athalia, so the king of the Assirians did to Manasses. How long time did
ye Emperors of Rome, shede the christian blood, yet notwtstandyng no man goes
about to better it by tumult, til Constantinus Magnus did come. I could rehearse
unto the Thrasibulus, a tirant of ye Athenienses, and William Tell, and
Stouffaker, tirants of the Heluetians, but we will be content with the examples
of the scripture.


SI. Shall it then be always lawful to tirants to be ungodly, and that without
punishment? which of the words of Paul. To. xiii. Do take a cloak, a buckeler
and shield of their own malice, under ye which they fraud and deceive, they
steal, they rob, they slaye, they murder, and confound all things, they
every foot slay ye poor commons to the very bones, with new exactyons, taxes,
and subsidies, being in the mean season, given to riot, and outragyous excess,
to drunkenness, to unlawful gaining to whordome, and most unjust wars, and
therewith committing most detestable deeds, and wicked factes against god, and
the common weal. But I will show to the out of Hieremy.xv. chap, yt the people
is punisshed of god, because yt they thus suffer tyrauntes and ungodly princes,
to kill and flea, without any punishment. For after the.iiij. plagues yt he
does rehearse there, he adds by and by ye cause, saying: And I will deliver
the^ up into the fury of al ye kingdom of the earth yt is to say: I will stir
up against them the fury and rage of all the kingdoms of the earth, for
Manasses sake, ye son of Ezechias, the king of Judah, for all the wyckednes yt
he has done at Jerusalem. Se in the.vii. of the kings.xxi. chapt, what
wyckednes he did commit, if the Jews had not suffered their king, thus without
punishment, to be so wicked, they should not have been so greuouslye plagued of
god. It behooves to pull out the offending eye, and to cast it away, likewise
of the hand and of the foot,


IOI. Here be.ij. questions. The first is: whether the tyraunte must be
removed from his room or not? The second: how, and by who^ Therefore I do not
deny, but that a wicked magystrate, must be put down, but not the same way
that thou will. No man ought to kill him, nor to stir up war and sedition
against him, we must go to work, an other manner of way, the matter must be
attempted and assayed by lawful means, for god has called us in peace.i.
Corinthians the seventh chap the tyrant must be taken away (that do I not
deny) for Samuel does depose Saul from his office, and does anoint David,
king over the people of Israel. Ioiada puts furthe Athalia from the
ruledome and makes Ioas a king. If then a king be made by the common assente
of all the people, and begins too be wicked, let him again be put down
with common assente of the people, except they will all be punysshed with him.
And if he be chosen by ye consent and election of few princes, let ye people
signify and show unto them, ye wicked and ungodly life of this king, and that
it ought to be borne or suffered no longer, let them be commanded, that have
chosen him, to put him down again. Now here shall be all the labor, What the
tyrant will do to them, that dare speak against his wicked tirannye.
for against them ye do this thing, the tyrant shall exercise all kind of
crudelytye, handlyng them according to his inordynate lust, and whom it
shall please him, he will sleye and murder. But it is a glorious thing to dye
for ryghtuousnes, and the truth of God. And better it is too be slain, for the
defense of justice and ryghtuousnes then assentyng unto unrighteousness, It is
far better to be put to death for defense of righteousness, then afterward to
be killed, with the ungodly and wicked. What we owe to do if he be come to ye
kingdom by ye sword, or by enherytaunce.
or dyssembling, to be afterward killed to the ungodly and wicked. They that
can not away with this thing, let them suffer and bear a vycyous and proud
tirannie, and with him, let them look too receive an extreme punysshemente
Yet notwythstandyng, the hand of the lord is stretched furthe, and
threateneth a plague. Finally, if he has invaded or come into the kingdom, by
any other chance, as by strength, or by enherytaunce, we must bear him,
till the lord vouchsafe to deliver the oppressed, lest any commotyon and
tumulte be styrred up by us, for the kingdom of god is righteousness, peace, and
gladness in the holy ghost. Romay.xiiii. There be then many ways, whereby
tiraunts may be taken away and put down, but we do want a fervent study of
righteousness, and of the truth, we do want the fear of god, and deuilish
wickedness reigns eueri where For it could not be possible that a tirant durst
do so much, except there were mo wicked, by whom he should mainteyne and
uphold his tyranny. But first and formest, the prophets, that is to say, the
ministers of gods word, must be bold to rebuke the sins and wicked factes of
Princes and rulers: Which is the most commodious way, to overcome tyrauntes.
none other way more commodious to overcome tirauntes can be, then if the
preachers of the truth, do once determyne too dye, they must put their bodies
and lives to ieopardy. If Nero, Dominitanus, Maximianus, with other, could not
by murtheringe and sheding of blood, root out and utterly destroy the
doctrine of Christ, much less shall these braynlesse and mad princes (if we
do stand up boldly) oppress ye gospel and the truth. This is not spoken in
derogation of any godly prince, (...)
Therefore this is ye first and chiefest way, that ye overseers be not blind,
that the dogs be not dombe, yt they put them selves a wall betwixt the
sins of the people, and god, that they amend up the broken hedge. The second
that we do always, The lawful ways and means to get our selves out of
miserable oppressyon.
and without ceassing pray unto god, which in his wrath and indignation,
makes the hypocrytes too reign, for our sins. Finally, and last of all,
that we thyrst for ryghteousnes, that we amend our lives, and change our
co^dytyons. For if we be godly, and righteous, it is impossible, that a
tyraunte do reign long.


SIM. All Israel, after ye death of Solomon, did swerve away, and forsake
Roboam, because he oppressed them to much, and that of their own head iii. of
the kings, and.xiii. chapter.


IOI. Why, do thou not read, that, which follows: Why Goboam did not
grant ye petityon of ye people, wherefore he was utterly forsaken of ten trybes.
And the king did not grant the people their petytyon, because yt god has
forsaken him, yt he might, or should perform his word, that he had spoken in
the hands of Achias the Silonite, to Hieroboam, the son of Nabate. Thou
can not prove by this, that it is lawful for any man to make insurrection of
his own head, against tyrants, or evil rulers


SIM. I fear, least this doctrine will make men sluggish, negligent, and
dastards that if at any time, the lord does send a deliverer, they will be in
doubt, of the will of the lord.


IOI. Care for other things when ye lord does begin and go about so high
things, he calls not sluggyshe dastards, and negligent persons: When god will
put down tyrauntes, he does always stir up men meet for the purpose.
he gives wisdom, confidence and boldness, he gives lustynes of courage, and
strength, and brings all things to the appointed end. Which thing we may se
in Moises, Gedeon, and other. The godly man, does direct al things to peace,
unity, and concord. Again, he knows that the people is punished, if princes
do rule and govern wickedly. The solicitud and care of a godly man.
These things do make a godly and faithful man, heavy, and full of thought and
kyndell him with a certain study of godlynes, these things do make him to
beware, and circumspect, not temerouse rash, and over bold, these things do
constrain him to pray earnestly to god, and to think both day and night,
upon the amendment and redress of those things that are done and committed
against god. Then god does open the ways, whereby the desires of the godly may
be fulfilled nor does forsake the^, that put their trust and confidence in
him, nor yet does repulse or put them back, that cry and call upon him.


SIM. When the tyrant sees, that he may do al things, without punishment,
he every day waxes worse, and more high minded.


IOI. What so ever he sees, let him be sure, that an utter destruction does
hang over him, Who soever does misuse the long suffraunce of god, shall not
escape punishment.
if he will continue s^yl in his wickedness. For no man did ever escape without
punishment that did misuse ye long suffraunce of god


SI. Why do ye then every where depredicate and say, that they are like unto
Judas the Gaulonite, and not christians that will not obey the magistrates and
rulers? No godly man does resist the magistrate.



IOI. Because that no godly man does resist the magistrate. For since yt the
apostles do warn and bid us to obey heathenysh magystrates, who does not se,
yt it is an vnfittely thing for a christian, to show him self disobedient to a
christyan magistrate?


SIM. That were well said if we had a christyan Magistrate. Who is to be called
a Christyan magystrate.



IOI I do call him a christian magistrate, which is baptized in Christ Jesus,
which believes in Christ, does confess him, and hears his gospel, which he
does also suffer to be preached among his subjects nor does persecute it,
withstanding (as much as in him lies) wickedness and iniquity, or
unrighteous and punysshing the evil doers, that do offend openly, which does
bend al his care and study to this, that ye glory of god may increase, may be
promoted and set forth, that men may live godly, honestly, and quyetly in the
common weal. And (thanks be given to god) we do not want such now a days,
among the magistrates and high powers, which thing, no man can persuade to
you. The Lybertines and Anabaptystes, do think no man to be a Christyan,
except he receives their doctrine and be baptized again.
For ye think no man to be a christyan, except he does cleave too you, and
receive your doctrine, and at length be baptized again by you, though all
these things be altogether repugnant to christyan statutes, and publyke laws
No tongue can express how bitter and venymouse, or poisoned railyngs, ye do
here vomit and spue out against the magistrate.


SI. These things never pleased me.


IOI. But yet they are done of them. They do pycke and gather certain bitter
and grievous sayings out of the psalms and prophets, which afterward being
learned without book, they do vomit against the magystrates. These things do
please to stubburne and disobedient persons, The scripture does call the judges
and magystrates gods, because that they be here in the room and stead of god,
who soever then does rise or rail against them, God shall punyshe him extremly
where as gods word does forbid us to rail against the gods (for ye holy
scripture does so call the magistrates and judges) Peter does lively set them
forth, under the name of false prophets, in his latter epistle, and.iii. chap.
O Citizins (say they) the magistrate is no chrystian, but yet be obedient unto
him. And they their own selves will not be obedient unto him, in the least thing
of the world. What should I say? They go about to abolish and put down all
magistrates and high powers, that so they may do, what soever they list. Paul
says: If thou will not fear the high power, do that which is just, but they
do fear the high power (for they go about to abolysh and put it down) ergo,
they will do that which is evil. They are then the fellows of Judas, the
Gaulonite, and of Siba, the son of Bocheri, which both for their high treason,
were worthily put to death. Of Judas the Galonit, se Iesephus, in the xviii.
book of antiquityes, and first chap. Acts.v. chapter. He did stir sedition
emonge the people, which he seducynge with hope of liberty, did perish at
length with many. Of Siba thou shall read, in the second of kings, and.xx.
Chapter. Such sedytyous persons, are in the scriptures, called the children
of Belial. Therefore, my Simon, if thou wylt follow my council, thou shall leave
this false opinion, and afterward stycke to the truth, and be obedient to the
Magistrates, and rulers.


SIM. Thou have well satisfied my mind, therefore I will follow thy council.


FINIS.
Imprynted the third day of April.

Anno. Do. 1551.

At Worceter in ye high street, by Ihon Ofwen.

They be also to sell at Shrewesbury.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


