AN EXPOSITION OF Christ's Temptations.

OR CHRIST'S COMBAT AND CONQUEST: BEING The LION of the Tribe of JUDAH,
vanquishing the Roaring Lion, assaulting him in three most fierce and Hellish
TEMPTATIONS.

BY Thomas Tailor, D. D. Preacher of Gods Word at Aldermanbury, London.

HEBR. 2.18. For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted.

Tentatus est Christus, ne vincatur a Tentatore Christianus. August.

LONDON, Printed for A. K. and R. I. and are to be sold by Elisha Wallis at the
Golden Horse-shooe in the Old-Bayley. 1659.

To the Right Worthy and Noble Knight, Sir Francis Knollis, and the virtuous
Lady Lettice, his Wife; All blessings of this Life and a better.
SIR,
WHEN that great Prophet Moses, was to be confirmed in the certainty of his
vocation for the delivery of Gods people out of Egypt, Act. 7.30
There appeared unto him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, Christ himself so
called, (...) Just. Matt.
an Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in the bush: Exodus 3.1
and he looked, and behold the bush burnt with fire, and the bush was not
consumed. A sight at which Moses Act. 7.31
wondered; and so may we. But if you please with Moses, Exodus 3.4
to turn aside to see this great sight; that is, Act 7.31
draw a little nearer to consider it, This it is:

I. The bush (which at that time betokened the people of Israel, Exodus 3.7, 9.
under the oppressions of Egypt) signifies the Church of God: for 1. As a
bryarbush is a base and despicable thing, made for nothing but the fire, or to
stop a gap, or some other base use: so seems the Church and members to be in
the eyes of men; in so much as not the most eminent members, the blessed
Apostles themselves, are 1 Cor. 4.10 and 13. (...).
despised, and accounted the filth of the World, and the off-scowring or
out-sweepings of all things: but the Head of it, our Lord himself, was in the
eyes of men without form Isa. 55.2, 3
or beauty, despised and rejected of men, who hid their eyes from him, and
esteemed him not. 2 As a bush pricketh and vexes him that deals roughly with
it; so shall the Church of God be as a stiff and prickly bramble, to vex, and
wound at length, all the proud enemies of it, so as all that Zach. 12 3
lift at it shall be torn, though all the people of the earth should be gathered
against it. 3 As the creatures for their own safety make their nests and muses
in a bush; so the mighty Creator (not for his, but the bushes safety)
vouchsafes Deuteronomy. 33.^^.
to dwell in this bush of the Church. The bush was in Mount Exodus 3.1 Famous
for s^^ memorable things in Mos^^ done there. 1 This vision 2 Fasting the^^
forty days an^ nights. 3 Receiving the (...) there. 4 Scriking the rock for
water. 5 Lifting his hands against Am^^^ck. 6 Breaking t^^ ^ables of (...)
Horeb, and God was in the bush: even so the Church is in the mountain of the
Lord, lifted up (as a mountain above the valleys) in holiness and privileges
above all the earth besides: for of this mountain the Lord has said, Psa 68.16
there will I dwell for ever.

II. The bush burns with fire: In this resemblance is shadowed the oppressed
estate of the Israelites in the Egyptian furnace: and by fire here is meant,
the most painful, and pitiful afflictions and miseries, which seiz upon the
Church and Members, as a raging and devouring fire upon a dry bush: for 1 Fire
is a diffusive and spreading element, catching whatsoever combustible matter is
near it: even so not a sprig of this bush of the Church, shall escape the flame
of affliction, but whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12
shall suffer persecution: for either the fiery darts of Satan shall scorch
them within; or they shall be sindged with the fiery 1 Pet. 4.12.
trials of the worlds hatred; or at least, they must look to be be-smeared,
and blacked in their names, with the colly and smoke of odious, false, and
scandalous imputations: and what are Quid a^^^ su^^s quam flemma (...)?
Gods people (says one) but the fuel of the wicked worlds fiery indignation?
2 Fire shines and inlighteneth: so the afflictions of the Church, as fire,
inlighten the mind, Psalm. 119.71
teach the statutes. The rod and correction (says Solomon) Prove. 29.15
give wisdom: and the Lord Job 33.16. and 36.9.
opens by correction, (says Elihu) the ears of man which he had sealed: in
which use, this fire of affliction becomes as another Exodus 13.21
pillar of fire, to inlighten and guide the Israel of God, in the night of
their wandering through the wilderness of this world, toward their land of
promise, that heavenly Canaan. 3 Fire gives heat and warm'th: so the heat of
this fire of affliction melts and thaweth our frozen hearts, condensed and
congealed by the pinching air of cold security: this fire kindles our
devotion, enflameth our zeal, Isa. 26.16. and Hos. 5.15.
warmeth our prayers, and makes us hot suitors for releef. 4 Fire softneth and
smodreth metals: Exodus 9.27
Pharaohs steely heart will melt and soften while it is in this hot furnace:
yea, in the same man it separateth dross from pure metal, and like that fire
which burnt only the D^n 3.27 Ig^is non perdi^ sed purg^s.
bands of them that were cast in, but not their bodies: so it only consumes
the corruptions, but preserves alive the children of God, who only walk at
more liberty and further enlargement in the fire, than they did out of it; and
as gold, come forth more purified, more glorious. 5 Fire is a climbing and
ascending element: so the fire of affliction makes the heart to ascend, and
raises the thoughts to heavenward. Luke 15.17
Misery makes the Prodigal bethink himself of his Fathers house, when he is a
great way from it: and this is the fire which Moses saw seizing upon the bush.

Stabilitatem populi ex veritate promissionum dei ad^^ravit. Junius in analys.
III. The bush burning is not consumed: signifying the preservation of the
Church and Members (as Israel in Egypt) in the hottest furnace of their
afflictions. Well may we wonder, that so flaming and terrible a fire, falling
upon so contemptible a bush, and so dry and despicable a shrub, should not
presently turn it into ashes: for why? is the fire too weak; or is the bush so
strong as to defend it self; or is it not disposed or apt to be burnt and
consumed by so fierce a fire? Certainly it is not from the impotency of the
fire, nor from the strength or constitution of the bush (which is in the matter
of it as combustible as any chaff, and as easily destroyed as any stubble) that
it is not consumed. But, 1 This fire is not kindled against the bush, cut of
the sparks of Gods wrath, Heb. 12.29 Heb. 12.10.
and indignation (which is indeed a consuming fire) but of his Fatherly
affection and love, not for the hurt of the bush, but for the profit of it: not
to destroy the persons, but the sin for the persons sake. We have indeed
kindled and blown up our selves a violent and devouring fire, Heb. 10.27
which God might send into our bones, Lam. 1.13 Psalm. 83.14 Lam. 3.22
to burn us up, as fire burns the forest, and as the flames set the
mountains on fire: But the mercy of God is as water to quench this fire (for
else would it burn to the bottom of Hell) and instead of a Furnace of fury
which melts away his enemies, Ezekiel. 22.22
he sets up in Zion, Isa 27.9
a furnace of favor, only to melt the metal, consume away the dross, and
refine his chosen ones to become vessels of honor. 2 Because the fuel of the
consuming fire of Gods wrath are slaves, not sons: those wicked brambles, Ezekiel.
15.7
which if they escape one fire (says the Prophet) they fall into another,
which shall consume them: but not this bush, which is only made brighter, and
better by the flame, but not blacker, not worser. The chaff and stubble must
feed the fire of wrath, never to come forth more; but the pure metal is cast
into the furnace to come forth so much the purer, as it has been the longer
tried. Exodus 3.2
3 Because the Angel of God is in the bush. This Angel was Jesus Christ, the
Lord of the holy Angels, and the great Angel of the Covenant. For Moses says
expressly of this vision, ver. 4.
The Lord appeared unto Moses: and, God called unto him out of the midst of
the bush: and S. Luke recording the same vision; Act. 7.31. 2. greeing with
Exodus 3.6
after that he had called him an Angel, brings him in, saying, I am the Lord
of Abraham, etc. This same presence of the Son of God, was noted the cause why
the three children in that furious furnace of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.25.
being cast in bound, walked loose in the midst of the flames; why, not they,
but their bands were burnt; and why, not an hair of their clothes, verse. 27.
and much less of their heads were touched, no nor smelt of the fire. Isa. 43.2
Behold the bush burned, but not consumed; because the King saw four men
walking loose, having cast in but three bound: and, they have no hurt; for the
form of the fourth is like the Son of God. Because God is in the midst of it
(says David of the Church) it shall not be moved: No^ potentia urendi sublata
ab ig^e, sed operatio tantum: ut Dan. 3
for God shall help it very early. How? partly, 1 by restraining the natural
force of the fire: 2 partly by obfirming and strengthening the bush against it:
3 partly by watching it that it spread not too far; for himself (as it were)
sits by the fire to tend it: 4 partly by slaking and cooling it when it grows
too hot, lest the heat smite the bush, as the worm did Jonas his gourd. By
these means, Jonab 4.7.
the bush in the flame becomes like the Gem Amiantus, Amiantus g^^^a ig^^ non
absumitur, sed lucidi^^ ac ^urior redditur. Dub. Chytr^^s. Isa. 53.3.
which is not consumed by fire, but becomes brighter and purer than before.

This most holy and comfortable truth is fully assured unto us, in the person
of our Lord and Head, as well as in the body: who in the days of his flesh
was, 1 A bush, most able to pierce and wound his enemies: in himself most
desplicable, and base in all outward appearances: and in this bush God dwelt
not in any visible sign of his presence; but (as never in any before)
essentially and bodily. 2 A bush in the fire; partly of Gods wrath, Col. 2.9.
(...). Isa. 53.10. Matthew. 26.38 Mat. 27.46 Lam. 1.14 True first in the head,
and then in the members.
in inward passion and suffering in his soul the sorrows of the second death,
which made him cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? into which flame
had the bush of the Church been cast, it had been utterly consumed. Partly of
man's wrath, in outward passion and misery, such as whereof he complained, that
no sorrow was ever matchable to his. And partly of Satan's wrath, in most fiery
and furious temptation: the which hellish fire was renewed, and blown up
against him, in most violent sort three several times, as in the Treatise
following we shall (by Gods grace) discover. 3 A bush in the fire not consumed:
but came forth of the hotest Furnace that ever was kindled, more bright and
glorious than the Sun in his strength. For easy it was with him to convince his
temporal adversaries by the mighty raising of himself from the dead, through
his own Divine power, Romans 1.4
when he had overcome the wrath of God his Father: and not difficult for him
that had in his life overcome Satan's Temptations, and in the wilderness spoiled
him of his power and weapons in part: Col. 2.15
upon the cross by his death openly and perfectly to destroy his Forces; and as
on a glorious Chariot to triumph over him.

This bush burnt, but not consumed. As he is the end of all the Scriptures, so
also of the exposition of them; in whom, and for whose glory I have published
this Exposition, at the importunate request of some Friends: Notwithstanding
many discouragements that was on the one hand, and sundry godly lights in our
own tongue opening the same Scripture on the other. Mr. Udal. Mr. Perkins. Mr.
Dike. 2 Samuel 23.13
The truth is magnified in the mouth of many witnesses: and a poor man may give
in as true an evidence as a rich. If I may hold Benajahs place in the Church of
God, and stand for God among the thirties, and the many of his Worthies, it
shall well content me, although I attain not unto the first three.

What ever this labor is, I have presumed to dedicate it unto you (noble Sir)
as a testimony of my true and unfeigned affection and duty. 1 Because God has
made you a worthy instrument in this place, which as well by your authority and
care, as through your godly affection and countenance of good men and causes,
has a long time enjoyed much comfort, assistance and refreshing. 2 Your sound
love to the truth has invited this truth to run under your patronage. 3 As he
which has been once friendly bid welcome, will boldly come again; so your good
entertainment of this doctrine in the delivery of it, assures it you will now
bid it as welcome to your eye, as it was to your ears at the first offer of it.
4 Your loving respect of me and mine, has been as a continual shadow and
refreshing, Phil. 2.2.
unto me, who may and must truly say with the Apostle, I have found no man in
these Parts Like-Minded: And out of my answerable respect, I would set by you,
for your refreshing, a little vessel of comfortable water drawn out of the
Scriptures, Isa. 12.3.
the wells of consolation; by which you may allay and cool the heat of that
fire, which every sprig of the bush shall be scorched withal, and which
perhaps you have not altogether, or shall not escape. I would also express my
desire to put into your hands a weapon against the like fiery assaults of
Satan, who spares neither head nor members: which while you buckle fast unto
you; as you have your honorable Fathers name, and resemble him in other
virtues; so herein also you shall imitate his wisdom and prudence: of whom I
have heard, that living in the Court to a great age, and usually wearing his
weapon about him, one asked why he being so weak, burdened himself with his
weapon: his Noble answer was, He would not lay off his weapon so long as he
knew one Papist in the Court. A resolute answer of a grave and noble Counselor.
This will be also your wisdom, so long to buckle your weapon unto you, as you
know one enemy left to tempt and assault you. And now in leaving you, let me
leave with you a medicine or receipt against the sting of that fiery Serpent,
Rabi folia superjecta serpenti, interimunt eum. Amb. Hexam. lib. cap. 9
of power to drive him away. For as Ambrose speaks of the leaves of the bramble
bush, that being cast upon one kind of Serpent they kill him: so much more
true it is, that the leaves of Gods word, which properly belong to the bush of
the Church, and opposed to Satan's poisoned temptations, overcome and Master
them. Deuteronomy. 33.16
And thus as Moses requested that the blessing of him that dwelt in the bush,
might come upon the head of Joseph; even so, the good will of him that dwelt in
the bush, come upon your head, upon the head of your virtuous Lady, upon the
heads of your children, to the sweetning and crowning of your age: verse. 13.
And blessed of the Lord be your portion, verse. 23
for the sweetness of Heaven, and for the sweetness of the earth, till you be
satisfied with favor, and filled with the blessing of the Lord. Amen.

Reading, October. 28. 1618. Your worships in the Lord to be commanded, THO.
TAILOR.

A Threefold Alphabet of Rules concerning CRISTIAN PRACTICE.
The First Precept of every Letter concerning Duty toward God; The Second
toward our Neighbors; The Third toward our Selves. Gathered at a Friends
request in this order for the helping of the Memory.

First,

AWake with God in the morning, and before all things give him your first
fruits and calves of your lips, in 1 Confession of sin: 2 Petition of
necessaries for body and soul: 3 Thankfulness for mercies received, especially
your late preservation, rest, and protection of you and yours.

Josh. 24.15. Psa. 101.2 Genesis 14.14 and 18.19. Esth. 4.15.
2 Account it not enough that your self serve God, unless that you see all in
your charge do the same.

3 Arm your self against whatsoever the day may bring forth: and upon all
occasions think on your happy redemption, with much thankfulness for so happy
conjunction of Justice and mercy.

B
1 Beware of occasions of sin, and wisely inure your self in subduing the
least, that at length the greater may be foiled.

2 Believe all that God speaks unto you out of his word, but not all that man
tells you: 1 Samuel 10.16. Eccl. 3.7.
nor tell to any other all that you hear, but only the truth, and that neither
all, nor always.

3 Before you take in hand any thing, Luke 2.19. 2 Samuel 2.1 1 Samuel 30.8.
counsel with Gods word if it be lawful, and then perform it with prayer, that
it may be as successful as lawful.

C
1 Carefully set your self in Gods presence all the day long, that setting him
at your right hand you may not fall.

2 Carry your self unto all as the weak may be won, 1 Cor. 1^ 32. Col. 4.5.
the strong comforted, and the wicked ashamed.

3 Consider the dignity of your soul how beautiful it is to God and his Angels
so long as you keep it unspotted; Mat. 15.18. Ephesians. 4.^3 31. Col. 3.5.^
that so you may cleanse your heart from the first motions of sinful thoughts,
as lust, anger, envy, pride, ambition covetousness, fullenness: and the rather,
because the least sin deserves death.

D
1 Daily morning and evening, at least solemnly on your knees make confession
and requests with thanksgiving: first preparing your heart to seek the Lord: in
the morning think that that day may be your last day, and when you go to bed,
you know not whether you shall rise unless it be to judgment. It is safest
therefore to use prayer as a key to open the morning, and as a bar or lock to
shut in the evening.

2 Delight to do all the good you can to Gods Children; Gal. 6.10
and to receive all the good you can from them.

3 Distrust not Gods providence in any matter, 2 Chr. 16.3.9.12. 2 Cor. 3.5 1
Cor. 3.7 Romans 1.25
although you see the means wanting, neither when you have them, let them be
relied on more than God himself; but let him be prayed unto for the prosperous
use of them.

E
1 Exercise your mind in meditating often on the works of God, Jer. 12.2 H^b.
1.13 Mat. 15.31
as his creating and governing of the world, his prospering and punishing the
wicked, his blessing and correcting his children, his preparing of unspeakable
Joy for the one, and unutterable torment for the other; Exodus 10.8
But especially on the Sabbath, add to these meditations the holy exercises of
prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, holy conference, and such like.

2 Esteem of every one better than your self, Romans 12.16.
and the more you excel another, be so much the more humbled

Phil 2.3. Romans 14.23. Prove. 6.14 Zac 8.17 Psa. 49.3
3 Examine your thoughts well whether they tend, before you fulfill your own
desires; if you find them unprofitable, curious, vain, or such as you cannot
yield a sufficient reason to God or man for, kill them in the shel, let them
not live or breathe longer in you.

F
Eccl. 12.13 Prove. 5.8 and 6.27, 28
1 Fear God and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

2 Fly and avoid places and persons; infectious, wanton, idle, unthrifty and
bad company, which are to the soul as poisoned and infected air to the body.

Eccl. 1.13 Genesis 3.19 2 These. 3.6
3 Follow with faithfulness and diligence your own business, in the lawful and
particular calling wherein God has placed you; only be careful in your earthly
business to carry an heavenly mind.

G
1 Grow up daily in the practice of every commandment, and in the faith of
every promise of God; seeing God would have the planted in his house thrive,
Ps. 92.13.14
well liking and more fruitful in their age: he that is not best at last, may
fear whether ever he were good.

1 Cor. 10.32. Romans 14.13
2 Give no offense justly unto any man; whether within or without: for woe to
them by whom offenses come

3 Grieve for nothing in the world so much as for your own sins, Romans 7.18, 19,
24
and in them for nothing so much as for offending so loving a God; and that not
only in committing of evil, but also in omitting of good.

H
1 Cor. 11.31.
1 Humble your self for your sins, that the Lord may raise you up; for he that
judges himself aright, shall never be judged of the Lord,

2 Honor all men in their places, 1 Pet. 2.17
but no man so much for his greatness as for his goodness: Act. 10.35
and thus shall you imitate the Lord himself, who accepts not persons, but in
every Nation accepts him that fears him.

3 Have special care to avoid the sins which you have found your self most
inclined unto, and which have in times past most prevailed: for sin is loath to
be said nay, and Satan seeks re-entry.

I
1 Justifye Gods wisdom in all his proceedings concerning your self and
others; his Power in sustaining, his Providence in maintaining, his Justice in
punishing, his Love in correcting, his Bounty in promising, his Faithfulness in
performing, his Grace in giving, his Mercy in taking away: and in every thing
say from the heart, Job 1.21
Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

2 In every company receive some good, and do some also to your power: leave no
ill savor behind you, neither do hurt by speech, silence, countenance, or
example: in your praises be discreet, in saluting courteous, in admonishing
brotherly: and wise in moving and entertaining speech or conference.

3 It is fearful to sin, Psalm. 51.3 Ephesians. 4.26
but much more to lie in it: and therefore registerall your sins daily, bewail
them at fit times, pray for pardon of them, and strength against them: contemn
none as counting it little, because Gods law has condemned it; and Christ has
dyed for it, or else must you eternally.

K
1 Know God in Christ, Job. 17.3
which is life everlasting, kiss the Son of God lest he be angry, Psa. 2.12
and know your self to be a believer, and that Christ is in you, and you in him.

2 Keep as your vows with God, Psa. 15.4
so your lawful promises with men: for faith and truth must kiss each other in
Christian conversation.

3 Keep out wandering and worldly thoughts as much as possible may be, prove.
4.23
narrowly watching your heart; for, such as you suffer that to be, such will
be your words, deeds, and whole conversation.

L
1 Love all things for Gods sake, and God only for his own; and look you make
him your friend, whosoever be your enemy for it: this you shall do, if as an
obedient child, you live in the eye of your heavenly father.

2 Look upon the lives and behaviors of the wicked, to avoid them; of the
godly, to imitate them; upon the Life and Death of them both, as also your own
not far off, to make you loathe this world, and long after the life to come.

Luk 21.34. Rom 13 13. Deuteronomy. 28.58 Mat. 7.12.
3 Let your meat, apparel, recreation be lawful, needful, and moderate.

M
1 Make not mention of God, or any word or work of his but with fear and
reverence: nor of any man but with love and carefulness, using his name as you
would have him to use yours.

2 Mark other men's profiting in religion, to provoke your self, their slips to
make your self more wary, their risings to be thankful to God for them.

3 Meditate often upon the four last things. 1 Death. 2 Judgment. 3 Heaven. 4
Hell.

N
1 Never make show of more holiness outwardly, than inwardly you have in your
heart which God sees, in which he desires truth: Romans 12
nor please your self with your unprofitableness, unfitness, or unwillingness
to good.

2 No man is owner, but steward of that he has, you must therefore impart of
the blessings you have, to those that stand in need, wisely, heartily, and in
due season.

1 Cor. 11.28 Romans 12.12
3 Note your own special corruptions whether they grow stronger or weaker, and
how your self can resist them: and if any assault you more strongly, pray, and
make the matter known to God: The best way for a woman solicited to folly, to
be rid of the Tempter is, to tell her Husband.

O
Prove. 27.2 and 10.19.
1 Often speak to the praise of God, never of your self. For other things,
because many words want not iniquity, speak as few as you can, or rather none
than unprofitable.

^am. 1.19.
2 Open not your mouth to speak of other men's infirmities, Psalm. 15
especially behind them: nor before them without grief and sorrow.

3 Of every idle word account must be given, Mat. 12 36
and much more of every wicked word, and therefore let your speech be gracious,
poudred with salt, Col. 4.^
and tending to edification.

P
1 Praise the Lord for every new benefit bestowed, 1 These. ^ 18
and then by it promote his glory, the Churches good, and your own salvation;
esteeming of graces given as spurs to godliness, and pledges of eternal life.

2 Prevent anger before it kindle; Eccl. 7.^ Prove. 14 17
it is wisdom to quench the least sparkle of fire before it begin to flame.
Consider 1 the original of anger, being pride or self-love. 2 The cursed
fruits, by giving place to the Devil. 3 Gods patience. 4 Gods image in your
brother. 5 Your own weakness in the same kind. 6 The wrong is not remedied by
revenge, but enlarged; nor the wrong-door amended, but imitated.

3 Prepare your self for death, 1 Cor. 1 56
and pull out his ^^ing by 1 Bewailing sins past. 2 Turning to God in time to
come. 3 Purposing a new life. None can dye ill, that has had a care to live
well. Persuade your self, if you live well, you shall dye well; but if you dye
well, doubt not but you shall do better.

Q
1 Quiet your heart, Psalm. 39 ^
and be still under the correcting hand of God, because 1 He does it. 2 For
your best. 3 He will moderate it. 4 Supply strength. 5 Seasonably deliver out
of it.

2 Question not whether others should do you good, or you them first: Mat. 5.^
Romans 1.20.
it is praiseworthy to be first in well-doing: and if you do good to your
enemies, your reward is with God.

3 Quench not the Spirit; 1 These 19
not suffer any good motion arising in your heart to pass away, but feed it by
reading, meditation, prayer, and practice.

R
1 Read daily something of Gods book for the increase of knowledge and
conscience; Psalm. 1.^ Deuteronomy. 6
and add hereto meditation and prayer: for these three, says Luther, make a
Divine: all time thus spent is well redeemed. As for lascivious and idle books,
shun them as rocks.

2 Rejoice in the good you know by another: praise God for it, pray for the
increase of it. But if you know any evil by any, mourn for it, and if you can,
by brotherly admonition amend it.

^ob 31.1 ^sal ^59.^7.
3 Retrain your ears, eyes, mouth, and hands, from hearing, seeing, speaking or
performing any wicked and vain thing; knowing that death often enters in at
the windows.

S
^am. 1.2
1 Stick to God, as well in adversity as prosperity; the one being as necessary
as the other. If you want necessaries, humble your self for them: if you have
them, be humble with them; and use them well, lest you forfeit them.

^at. 5.23 ^sal. 35.14
2 Seek Reconciliation with your Neighbor, freely forgiving those that have
offended you, and earnestly desiring to be forgiven of all that have been
offended by you.

^at. 23.25 ^.7.9, 10
3 Study to approve both your heart to God, and your Life to Gods Children in
your particular calling, and especially to such, ^hes. 5 ^. and 6.^
as to whom God has joined you: as, if a servant in obeying, if a Master in
ruling, if an husband in loving, if a wife in reverence; for a good conscience,
a good name, and good manners must go together.

T
^b. 3.12. ^. 1.11 ^. 15 ^. m. 1. ^. and 12.
1 Take heed of performing holy duties for fashions sake, or without feeling,
and profit: for this is hypocrisy or profaneness.

2 Thankfully requite, at least with 1 Acknowledgement, 2 Hearty affection, 3
Prayer, the good you get by any man: for there is no member in the body but
stands in need of others men's gifts

Cor. 11.^.26
3 Think it the greatest work in the world to dye well: which to do, you must
inure your self to dye before hand, 1 by dying to your sins. 2 Leaving the
world in affection, before it actually leave you. 2 In your last leaving of it,
do it willingly, yea Joyfully, whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever God shall
call you.

V
1 Vow to God and keep it: Eccl. 5.34 Psalm. 16.14
especially strive in performing the solemn vow of your baptism, and the
covenant which you renew in the Lords Supper.

2 Vatiance and discord with men will not stand with your peace with God. If
you love God, 1 John 4, 20
you will love men also, for Gods image; or else for his Commandments sake.

3 Use the World as not using it, and your prosperity and liberty to be
bettered by them. That is not gained, 1 Cor. 7.31 Mat. 16.26
which is gotten with the loss of your soul, and then is the soul exchanged
with an handful of the world, when it is not gotten and held, 1 In Christ
restoring it. 2 With Christ the chief gain. 3 For Christ the Lord of it.

W
2 Wait upon the Lord, and he will direct your way, become his servant, Psalm
37.7.
for this is the way to attain your truest liberty.

2 Weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15 Jer. 13.17 Psalm. 69.9.
and fellow-feel the afflictions of the brethren that are in the world; Christ
in Heaven accounts the sufferings of his Saints his own, and we his members
upon earth must do the same; Religion and mercy are well matched by God, and
must not by man be divorced; Ezekiel. 9.4
as for the miseries and sins of the age wherein you live, mourn also for them,
and pray to God for remedy.

3 Wish not a long life so much as a good life: he has lived long who has
lived well. A short life in grace sets into the everlasting life of glory.

The Analysis of Christ's Temptations.
In Christ's Temptations consider, 1 The preparation: parts three. 1 Christ's
entering the lists: here, 1 Time: Then. 1 When he had been baptized. 2 When he
undertook his high office. 3 When the Spirit had descended upon him. The Son
of God. The Teacher of the Church.
4 When he had received testimony from heaven that he was
2 Person: Jesus. 3 Guide of his way: was lead of the Spirit: Here, 1 The
Guide: The Spirit. 2 The manner: was lead.
4 Place: into the wilderness. 5 End: To be tempted of the Devil: Here, 1
Author: The Devil. 2 End it self: To be tempted.

2 His expectance of the enemy: Here three things. 1 How he was furnished: He
was filled with the Holy Ghost, Luke 4.1. 2 His Company: He was with the wild
beasts, Mar. 1.13. 3 His employment: 1 He was tempted within that time, Luke
4.2. with lighter on-sets. 2 He fasted: in his fast, 1 time: forty days and
forty nights. 2 effect: he was afterward hungry


3 Entrance of the adversary: where, 1 The time, Then, when Christ had fasted,
and was hungry. 2 The name of the adversary, The Tempter. 3 The manner of his
entrance, he came: in an assumed shape, externally.

2 The Combat it self in three fierce on-sets. First consist of an 1 Assault:
in it 1 The ground: If thou be the Son of God. 2 The inference: Command these
stones to be made bread: Here, 1 Facility: Command. 2 Readiness of object,
these stones. 3 Utility, to be made bread.

2 Repulse: in it 1 The manner: it was 1 reasonable, 2 meek, 3 modest. 2 The
affection, negative; But: conjunction discretive. 3 The matter a testimony of
Scripture, It is written. 4 Parts of the testimony: 1 Negative, Man lives not
by bread only. 2 Affirmative, but by every word which proceeds, etc.


Second consists of 1 Preparation: here 1 The time: then. 2 The place, set
down, 1 In general, the holy City: Luke expresses it to be Jerusalem. 2 In
special, a pinnacle of the Temple.
3 The manner how Christ was conveyed thither, in 2 things, 1 He took him up.
2 He set him on the Pinnacle.

2 Temptation: in it, 1 Assault: in it, 1 The ground, If thou be the Son of
God. 2 The matter, cast thy self down: Here, 1 The action, Cast down. 2 The
agent, thy self. 3 The place whence, from hence, says Luke; where means of
safety were.
3 The argument to persuade him, a testimony of Scripture, in which 1 General
consideration, It is written. 2 Special matter: 1 As abused by Satan. 2 In his
right use: here, 1 Angels ministry, keep thee. 2 Who seals their commission,
He shall give his Angels charge. 3 The limitation, in all thy ways. 4 The
manner, they shall bear thee in their hands, etc.



2 Repulse: in it, 1 Resistance: Jesus said unto him. 2 Reason. 1 Scripture
alleged: for it is written to the contrary. 2 in the allegation, 1 who must
not tempt, thou, 2 who must not be tempted, The Lord. Thy God.
3 action of tempting.




Third: in it 1 Assault: in it 1 preparation; in it. 1 choice of a fit place:
Here, 1 what place it was: the top of an exceeding high mountain. 2 How Christ
came thither: the Devil took him into, etc. 3 Why he chose that place.
2 a vision represented: here 1 What it was, All the kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them. 2 How he represented them, He showed him. 3 How long
the sight lasted, in a moment, says Luke.

2 Dart it self: in it. 1 A profer: All these will I give thee. 2 A reason: for
they are mine, and to whom I will, I give them: in Luke. 3 The condition: in it
1 the matter, worship me. 2 the manner, fall down: if it be but externally.


2 Repulse: in it, 1 The denial; But Jesus answered. 2 The manner; Avoid Satan:
sharp in the Title Satan. Commandment, Avoid.
3 the reason: from a testimony of Scripture: in it, 1 Allegation: It is
written. 2 precept: in it 1 Person to whom, Thou, every man. the whole man, in
Soul. Body.

2 matter: shall worship and serve, i. divine worship. 3 object: the Lord thy
God, and him only.




3 The issue. 1 Christ's victory: 1 The time; when the Devil left him: Then. 1
When Christ had stoutly resisted. 2 When all the temptations were ended: in
Luke. 3 When Christ had said, Avoid Satan.
2 The manner: He departed from him. 3 How long: for a season, says Luke.
2 His triumph 1 A note of attention set as a star before it: And behold. 2
What we must behold, 1 the coming of the Angels unto Christ: here 1 When they
come. 2 To whom they come. 3 Manner of their coming.
2 Their ministry unto him; where 1 How they ministered unto him, by Adoring
him as Conqueror. comforting his soul vexed with temptation. body pined with
fasting.

2 why they did so, Not for necessity on Christ's part; But their own duty, as
to Their Lord. The head of the Church.








AN EXPOSITION OF Christ's Temptations.
MATTHEW. 4. Verse. 1 Then was Jesus led aside of the Spirit into the wilderness,
to be tempted of the Devil.

2 And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward
hungry.

3 Then came the Temper to him, and said, If thou be the Son of God, command
that these stones be made bread.

4 But he answering, said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread only, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

5 Then the Devil took him up into the holy City, and set him on a pinnacle of
the Temple,

6 And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it is
written, That he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands
they shall lift thee up, lest at any time thou should dash thy foot against a
stone.

7 Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God.

8 Again the Devil took him up unto an exceeding high Mountain, and showed him
all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,

9 And said unto him, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me.

10 Then said Jesus unto him, Avoid Satan: for it written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

11 Then the Devil left him, and behold, the Angels came and ministered unto him.


OUR Lord Jesus Christ having passed the former part of his preparation to his
Ministry and Office, by his most holy Baptism (of which we have spoken at
large in the former words) now he proceeds to the second, which stands in
Temptation: For as in the former he publicly revealed himself to be that
Messiah so long expected, in whom salvation is purchased to all believers of
Jews and Gentiles: so herein he shows himself most evidently to be that
promised seed of the woman, who was to break the serpents head, and him who was
set a part and sent from his Father, to destroy and dissolve the works of the
Devil. And therefore this holy doctrine bringing us such glad tidings of Satan's
confusion, and our own rescue out of his hands, must be most welcome to us;
whereof if we would taste the sweetness and benefit, we must stir up our best
attentions, affections, petitions, to hear with readiness, receive with
gladness, and practice with fruitfulness, such holy instructions as this
Treatise will abundantly afford unto us. Wherein must be handled three things:
1 The preparation to Christ's combat, verse. 1, 2. 2 The combat it self, with
the several assaults, from verse. 3. to verse. 11. 3 The issue and event, verse.
11.


The preparation has three parts, 1 Christ's entering the lists, by going into
the wilderness. 2 His expecting of the enemy, by his abode and converse there.
3 The entrance of his adversary.

The first part is enlarged by sundry circumstances; as, 1 The time when this
combat was, Then. 2 The person opposed, Jesus. 3 His guide, he was led by the
Spirit. 4 The place, into the wilderness. 5 The end why he came thither, to be
tempted of the Devil.

In the second part, three points are afforded out of the three Evangelists, 1
How he was furnished, He was full of the Holy Ghost, Luke 4.1. 2 What company
he had, He was with the wild Beasts, Mark. 1.13. 3 What was his employment.
1 He was tempted, Luke 4.2. 2 He fasted forty days and forty nights, and
afterward was hungry; which was both the effect of his fast, and the occasion
of the first temptation.

The third general part, namely the entrance of our Saviors adversary, stands
in three circumstances, 1 The time, then. 2 The name of the adversary she
Tempter, before called a Devil. 3 The manner of his entrance, he came.

The first circumstance in the preparation is the circumstance of time, noted
in the word Then; which is not a word of supplement, but of reference unto the
former History of Christ's Baptism, which this immediately succeeds: as Mark
1.12. Immediately the Spirit drives him (note the present tense) into the
wilderness: so as Christ went directly from Jordan into the wilderness.

Then] 1 When Christ undertook his high-office. 2 When he was baptized. 3 When
the Spirit had descended upon him. 4 When he had received testimony from
Heaven, that he was the Son of God, and Doctor of his Church.

Doct. The more God graceth his children, the more Satan lets himself to
disgrace and molest them.
Hence note, That the more God does grace any man, or advance him in gifts or
place, the more does Satan set himself to disgrace and molest him. We read not
that the Devil did ever set upon Christ, while he lived as a private man,
though perhaps he did: but now, his Father setting him apart to work man's
redemption, baptizing him, pouring his Spirit upon him, and giving testimony
with him, that he is the Son of his love, now he is assailed with most
violent temptations.

No sooner is he set apart to his office, therein to glorify God, and gratify
man, but he is set upon by Satan, a deadly enemy to both. Moses was quiet
enough till God set him apart to deliver his Brethren, and after that he was
never at quiet. The like may be said of David, an eminent type of Christ:
while he kept his fathers sheep, he was at rest; but if he will set upon
Goliath, and be anointed King by Samuel, let him look to himself; Saul will
hunt him like a Partridge, and so narrowly espy his haunts, that himself will
say, he must surely one day fall by the hand of Saul. Zech. 3.1. when
Jehoshuah the High Priest, (another type of Christ) comes to stand before the
Lord in his service, the Devil comes and stands at his right hand to resist
him. The Apostle Paul, so long as he was of the strict sect of the Pharisees,
he was highly esteemed, and lived quiet enough: but when he became an elect
vessel to carry the Gospel among the Gentiles, then he was tried and buffeted;
now he knows that bonds and imprisonment abide him every where, 2 Cor. 7.5.
and 6.5.

1 Satan's hostility against God, and his glory, and the means of it,

2 This is not without the good providence of God, who hereby will prove his
servants, to whom he will commit some special work, whether they will shrink
or no: he will have them also to have good proof and trial of his strength and
faithfulness in supporting them, that they may the better commit themselves
unto him in time to come, who has upheld them formerly, and go on undaunted in
constant walking with him, through the experience of his goodness.

3 God sees (though Satan's malice blinds him) that his children without such
strong trials should not be so fitted for his service. It is a training of
them to great employments, and makes them not only more expert in themselves,
but also far more able to help others in any kind. God would not exempt his
natural and only Son from temptations, that he might know how to help others
that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. nor the Apostles, for the same end, 2 Cor. 1.4, 6.

Use 1 All sorts of men, the more they set themselves to glorify God in their
places, the more they should expect trialls. A Christian can no sooner give his
name unto Christ, nor the Spirit descend upon him, but Satan with all his
malice will assault him. Christ was no sooner baptized, but he must go forth
to be exercised with Satan: and his Members also, who not only by outward
profession, but inward sincerity also make a league with God to renounce Satan,
sin, and this evil world, shall not want all the molestation that Satan can
create them, Rev. 12. the red Dragon watches for the Child to be born, to
devour it: and such is his malice, Whom Sat^^ cannot (...) in the end^ which is
sal^^tion, be w^ trouble the^ in the way^
that whom he cannot hinder of Salvation, he will hinder of their peace and
joy, as much as he can: if he cannot chase virtue out of the world, he can
disgrace it: and if he cannot quite hinder all good proceedings, he will by
molestation delay them as long as he may. He is subtle; if he cannot do the
greatest evil that he would, he will do the lesser that he may; as by
Sanballat he did hinder the re-edifying of the Temple. The condition of the
child of God is military in this life; He has Satan and all his Army of
wicked ones mortal foes against him.

Many deceive themselves, who mean to profess Religion so long only as they
may enjoy peace, and credit and the applause of the world, so long as they may
see Christ with a golden crown and scepter, and follow him into Jerusalem with
Hosanna: But they have not cast their accounts right, nor weighed the
difficulties of sound profession of Christ, and therefore, like the foundation
of the foolish builder, when winds and floods rise, they fall down right; with
shame they forsake Christ, and religion, and all; they look back and run back
to the filthiness of the world, they embrace a course which stands with
their own ease: but never shall they have the honor of honoring God, or of
effecting any thing which shall bring God true praise, and themselves true
peace.

It will be the wisdom therefore of every Christian, undertaking any
commendable action, so to look and begin with God, that ever he have another
eye upon Satan and his malice, both to expect it, and resolve not to be beaten
off for it. Shall the Israelites being set out of Egypt run back again, because
Pharaoh pursues them? no, but hye them more hastily away. Shall I give ^^er my
profession, because the greatest part of men hate and reproach it? no, I must
see Satan's old malice renewed, who casts a flood of poisoned water against
Christ himself; who should not avoid the same measure of obloquie and reproach
if he lived again upon earth. Was it thus with the green tree? it is no
marvail then if it be so with a dry. Shall I neglect my duty to which God and
good conscience ties me, A wise Christian may stop the mouth of Satan, but
never his malice.
because I would not displease men, and be thought no medler? then farewell
Gods glory, if I go about to stop the Devils mouth; which if I could, yet I
shall never stop his malice.

Use 2 The more public a man's calling is, the more does Satan aim at him to
cast him down, who does conscionably intend it: as for example, 1 The
Magistrate, Satan's chief aim is against Chief^^in^ in Church and Commonwealth.
Satan stirs up David to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. 2 The Minister,
being the Lords standerd-bearer, the Devil seeks to winno^ him especially, and
begges leave to be a lying spirit in the mouths of four hundred false Prophets
at once. And both these, because God has specially instituted these callings,
for the beating down of Satan's Kingdom, and lifting up the Scepter of Christ:
and again, if Satan can foil the Leaders, the bands are soon overcome: smite
the Shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered; cast down Cedars, and they
will crush many shrubs with their fall. Hence must both these be more careful
of themselves than ordinary men, as being in greater danger, as men set upon
steep and slippery hills, beset with enemies to cast them down: And the less
that men see these oppositions, the less service do they to God or his Church:
For if they do their duty in one place or other, they shall hear on both sides,
both of Satan and his instruments.

Now because the Devil uses two special weapons against those in higher place,
to make them unprofitable or hurtful, one open, the other secret, it behooves
Magistrates and Ministers to watch against them both, and fully resolve against
both.

Magistrates and Ministers must watch against two things especially.
1 Satan will stir up his instruments openly against them: Let either or both
rebuke the world of sin, and force men to walk in the narrow path of life,
wicked men grow mad against them, and rage with all open rebukes, and hellish
and horrible slanders, and, so far as they dare, blaspheme the Ordinance it
self in their hands. Hence Jeremy was a contentious man with the whole earth,
both Moses and Aaron take too much upon them. What? must men now, because they
must be counted peaceable, suffer every man to do what he list, as though
there were no God nor King in Israel, till iniquity so abound as it know no
bounds, banks, nor bottom? No, but we must look both to the Commandment,
and to the Promise, Jer. 1.18, 19: If sinners be obdurate as iron, and of
brazen and impudent foreheads, we must be as brazen walls to make their
wickedness recoyl and bound upon them; and with the Palm Tree rise against the
burden that lies upon us.

2 If this will not weary them, but they hold on with courage, then he works
more secretly, more dangerously: If he see them inclined to gain, he will
offer them Commodities and profits: If ambitious, he will choke them with
preferments: If given to ease or pleasure, he can easily persuade them to a
course of favoring themselves: And experience shows how commonly Satan
prevails with men some of these ways: and who would think him now an enemy,
or in the field, and yet he has won a fort, which open force could not attain?

And, as being in great danger, they must add to this watch, Three means for
their comfort and safety*
the means of their comfort and safety: as, I Let them look to their entrance
and drift, undertaking these functions not headily, or hastily, but as Christ
did, with fasting and prayer. How few do it, who have much more need than
Christ had, and are in greater danger than he was? When ambition, or
covetousness, or idleness, or any thing but earnest desire of Gods glory, leads
men into these places (besides that they never do good) no marvail if they fall
fearfully, as being not fenced; they cannot say God set them there, or will
help them against temptations. 2 Let them look that they have good warrant for
that which they do, and for every action of their calling, that they may see
themselves to be in Gods work: for so long they have promise of protection,
he will keep and help thee in thy ways. 3 Let them pray to God for power and
success, notwithstanding their trials; which they shall do, if they see the
need of Gods strength, as the Apostle did, Ephesians. 6.19. Pray for me; and
besought the Saints for Christ's sake and the love of the Spirit, to strive with
him in prayer to God.

Use 3 Seeing high estates are so dangerous, Mean estate the safest and best
for Reason.
why should not men content themselves with a mean condition, but insatiably
gape after promotion? 1 High callings are like high trees, upon the tops of
hills, which are subject to every wind. 2 If height could bring content, or a
sweet life, it were more worthily desired: but we see it consumes a man with
envy, and fear, desiring still some thing beyond his present estate. 3 There is
as great sorrow in the fall, as labor in rising, and to come down in the
height is greater grief. And all this comes upon a man besides Satan's malice.

Use 4 Lastly, this serves to comfort Christians, Four grou^^ of comfort weak
Christans in ^^^ption.
who are acquainted with temptations in the beginning of their conversion, and
are ready to give up all, as seeing nothing but discomfort. For, 1 It was the
lot of Christ the head. 2 It is a cursed peace to be at peace with the Devil;
and a blessed war to fight for God and Christ Jesus. 3 A Thief breaks not into
an empty house, and a dog barks at strangers; it is a good sign that thou art
gotten out of Satan's power, because he pursues thee; he needs not pursue
those whom he possesses; they be good men whom Satan is an enemy to. 4 The
Lord first strengthened Christ with his voice from heaven, and then brought him
into the field, and so he will deal with thee his member.

The second circumstance, is the person opposed, Jesus.]

This will seem strange, if we consider in our Lord Jesus, 1 The perfection of
his nature; he was free from all Original Corruption, by his most holy
conception, by the over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost; as also from actual sin, 1
Pet. 2.22. he did no sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth; And though
he had our substance, and our infirmities, yet with one exception, without
sin, Heb. 4.15. a The perfection of grace: for he was now full of the Holy
Ghost, endued with infinite knowledge, wisdom, holiness, and grace; and it
might seem that there was no place or room for Temptation. 3 The perfection of
his power, being the Creator and preserver of all things, the Lord of Hosts, by
whose very word or beck, all creatures, as they be sustained, so might be
brought to nothing; who being at the weakest, was able by one word to cast down
to the earth all that came to apprehend him, and compel the very Devils to
beg favor of him. 4 The perfection of his Fathers Love, having immediately
before testified, that he was his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased,
who as in his private estate he increased in favor with God, Luke 2.52. So now
much more has he gained his fathers love, as we have heard. Doct (...)
excelle^^^ (...) exemp^^^ man f^^^ S^tans temptations.
And yet Jesus must not escape the Tempter.

It is not any excellency, or high respect, that can exempt any man from Satan's
temptations. If a man had all the perfections which Christ had, of nature,
grace, power, and the love of God, yet in this life he must be exposed unto
them. If we look at all the worthies of the World, of greatest grace, in
greatest favor with God; as Job, Lot, Aaron. Moses, David, Peter, none of them
could escape his onset. Satan desires to winnow the Disciples as wheat, even at
the side of Christ, Luke 22.31. Nay, our first Parents Adam and Eve, created in
absolute perfection, concerning present righteousness and holiness, met with a
Serpent even in innocence, in Paradise. If neither holiness of person or place,
can privilege a man from temptation, but Prophets, Apostles, yea the first
Adam, and the second Adam also must be tempted, who can expect immunity from
the Tempter?

Michael and his Angels fight against the Dragon and his Angels; and can the
Captains and Leaders of the rest, that go before them in grace, in strength, in
knowledge, in holiness, escape the onset, seeing the sharpest and most keen
assaults of every battle, is upon the fore-ward and forelorn hopes?

2 Satan's malice being the greatest sin in the world, and the sin against the
Holy Ghost, is directly, and professedly against God; and consequently against
those that appertain to God, (...) ven^^ self (...)od in (...) ^nts. (...) 22.
because they do so. That he hates the Godly, it is because he hates God,
and in us would be revenged on him; in the servants he persecutes the Master,
in the members the head, whereas his chief quarrel lies against the Master and
Head. This cannot be new to him that considers either Christ's prophecy, Ye
shall be hated of all men for my sake, that is, of all wicked men that carry
Satan's image and properties; or else the Saints experience of the
accomplishment of it, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, Psalm
44.22. Whence it must follow, that the nearer any man is to God, more graced,
or more like him, the more is Satan's malice kindled against him, and he is
less exempted from temptation; the nearer Christ, the more desirous is he to
winnow him.

(...) great (...) ^se.
3 Gods Providence so orders the matter, that where he gives greater
strength and grace, there should be greater exercise, to prevent pride, to
keep grace on work, and to make his gifts known to the world.

Use 1 If Satan's malice and impudency set upon the green tree, what will he do
to the dry? If he dare make trial of Christ's strength, will he fear our
weakness? If be dare encounter with perfection, can we impotent and infirm
Creatures look for exemption? No, we had more need arm our selves, and expect
our adversary: and the rather, because the Prince of the World comes upon
Christ, and finds nothing to help his temptations by; but to us he needs
bring no weapons; he finds in our selves a whole armory of weapons, by which
he may fight against us be finds a rebel within us, an old Adam of our
corrupt nature, that gives him strength and help against us; and therefore his
boldness will be so much the more against us, when he sees our, own wicked
inclinations yielding strength to his wicked temptations. Many men say, they
are of so strong a faith, and of such grace, that they defy Satan, they were
never troubled with him, (...) ^ce, ^ouble.
he has nothing to do with them: Alas poor souls! the more grace, the more
trouble: If strength of faith and grace had given privilege from temptation,
our Lord Jesus had not been tempted: have thou more than he? or have thou more
than Adam in innocence? yet Adam in innocence was tempted. Oh take heed lest
the strong man have carried all away, and so thou have peace: think thou
that he durst assault Christ, and dares not come near thee? dares he
encounter with a Lion, and will he stand in fear of a fearful Hare?

(...) ^on (...) de^ ^d not (...)
Use 2. Temptation is no sign of Gods hatred, but of the Devils. It is the
weakness of flesh to think, that a man's own, or other men's temptations,
proceed from an angry God, and thence to give false witness against himself or
others, being assailed by Satan. See we not here Christ proclaimed the Son of
God, and in whom his Father is well pleased, yet subject to temptations by the
Devil? will thou now conclude, that Christ is suddenly cast out of favor? Nay,
our Duty is, if we see any buffered by Satan, rather to pray for them, and
pity them, than pass sentence (as Judges) upon them, considering that our
selves also may be tempted. And if our selves be not molested and troubled,
let us take heed we have not given Satan peaceable possession, which makes him
now fawn upon us. Many will spit at the mention of the Devil, who are linked to
him sure enough, and lulled asleep with the pleasures and profits of this
world, and are never diseased or disquieted, because they go on pleasantly with
full sail and gale to destruction.

Use 3 This Doctrine confutes that Romish delusion of driving away the Devil,
and exorcising him with holy water of Baptism. The holiest water that ever was,
did not drive away the devil.
For the holiest water that ever was, was that which washed the holiest Son of
God, and yet the Devil was never a whit afraid of that, but immediately Christ
must go forth to be tempted.

Papists use the name of Jesus uttered in so many letters and syllables, to be
powerful to hinder the entrance of Devils, and to drive them out being entered.
For (say they) when it is uttered, the authority of Christ is present, which
they cannot resist. But I answer, 1 Never did the Apostles acknowledge any
great miracle or work to be done by the name Jesus, but as Peter says, Act.
3.6, 13. By Faith in his name, which goes beyond the bare repeating of it. 2
Satan delights to see silly people, being deluded, to abuse both this name, and
all the names of God to sorcery; which is the cause, that when he is raised by
the Sorcerer, be is content to be adjured by all the holy names of God in the
Scripture, as though they bound him: whereas he deludes them the more, and
exercises his malice against God in an high measure, and his holy titles. If
Satan fear not the person of Jesus, he less fears the name of Jesus.
3 If Satan fears not the person of Jesus, but dares set upon him, certainly
he fears not the name and word. Christ might easily (according to Papists)
have shaken off the Devil, and said, What? know thou not that my name given
me in my circumcision, is Jesus? how dare thou be so bold with me? And
surely, if that Name in the mouth of a wretched man, would by any virtue in it
make him fly, then much more in the mouth of Christ himself. But all this is
but diabolical and Antichristian delusion.

Object. But must not every knee bow at the name of Jesus, Phil. 2.10.
even of things under the earth, by which are meant the Devils?

Ans. They wickedly abuse that place: for the name Jesus is not only a title of
Christ, but of his Power, Majesty, and Authority, sitting now at the right hand
of his Father; which if they had to command, they might command all creatures
in heaven, earth, or hell. Whence we see, that the literal understanding of
that place is the ground of Magic.

The like they speak of the relics of Saints, bones, apparel, etc. which the
Devil cannot abide. I answer, 1 They have few or no true relics of Saints,
but false collusions. 2 if they had, what warrant, word, No use of dead bodies
or bones, in scripture, but to be buried.

Satan fly not the living body of the Son of God, and much less the dead
bones of a sinful man.


or calling have they for the use of them? what is the use of dead bodies or
bones in Scripture, but to be buried; yea, if it be Christ's himself, so long
as he is dead? 3 What virtue had any body, bone, apparel, or any relic of
any Saint above Christ's blessed body? and yet the Devil feared not that. If he
feared not the virtue of Christ's living body, certainly he fears not the
rottenness of a dead bone of whatsoever sinful man. But this is also another
trick of the mystery of Antichrist, plainly discovered by our present Doctrine.

The Jesuits teach at this day, that the Apostles appointed the manner of
hallowing water, and that being hallowed it has power to pardon sins, to drive
away Devils and diseases, and by it they have wrought many miracles. But I
prove the contrary: De invent. ^er. lib 5 cap. 8. Six reasons against Popish
hallowing of water.
1 Their own Polidore Virgil affirms, that Alexander the first, a Pope,
instituted it; and therefore not the Apostles. 2 If the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7. then hallowed water cleanses not
venial sin, as they term it. 3 If the weapons of our warfare be not carnal,
but spiritual, 2 Cor. 10.4. then hallowed water cannot drive away Devils. Faith
is our shield, prayer is our buckler, and the Word of God our Sword; where is
their holy water? 4 Their miracles are either false relations, or collusions,
or magical, of no other use, but whereby we may know and discern, as by sure
notes, the false Prophets and Champions of Antichrist, of whom the Spirit has
prophesyed, Mat. 24. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.5 The use of water is 1 natural and
external, 2 By institution, sacramental and significative, the Scripture
acknowledges no other: If their holy water be hallowed, then it is hallowed
by the word and pray^^: Let them show this for their practice, if they can. 6
In this use of it, it is one of the strange gods of spiritual Egypt, or
mystical Babylon, and there is a vain confidence in the creature, which is due
to the Creator.

Object. Elisha took salt, and healed the waters, 2 King. 2.21.

Answ. 1 That was common salt, not hallowed. 2 That effect was extraordinary,
for that occasion only, never since that time produced by any. When we have a
pleasant City infested with naughty and deadly water, So said the blessed
Martyr Tho. Hawks.
and a Papist will come and heal it with his hallowed Salt, we will believe
their doctrine, and hearken to their exorcismes, not before.

Use 4 Lastly, This doctrine yields us comfort in our temptations, in that our
Lord Jesus has begun to us. He was the best beloved, yet he must not lead his
life in delicacy and softness, but was in continual molestation; so as his
whole life was a continual monument of the Cross, that we should not think much
of the same condition which our Head underwent: and besides, that we should in
all our temptations cast our eyes upon him, who was tempted, that he might
have compassion on them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18.

The third particular in the preparation, is, the guide which Christ had in
this combat with Satan; he was led by the Spirit.]

Here consider, 1 the name of the guide, the Spirit, 2 the manner of his
guidance, he was led by him.

1 By the Spirit indefinitely set down, what is meant?

Three sorts of created spirits in this Text.
Answ. A spirit is either created, or uncreated. Of the former we read of
three sorts in this History, 1 Diabolical, tempting us to sin: for the Devil is
a spirit that being unchangeably turned from God, is called a spirit that
rules in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. a lying spirit, 1 King. 22.
an unclean spirit, Luke 11.24. such spirits are all the wicked Angels 2
Angelical, comforting Christ; and these are the good Angels, which now
unchangeably cleave unto God, called Ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. 3 Humane,
hungring, the soul of Christ, which (as other souls of men are) was a spirit,
as, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and the humane and reasonable
spirit of man returns to God that gave it, Eccles. 12.7. None of these are
here meant, but the Divine and uncreated Spirit, even the third person in
Trinity, The holy Spirit of God here meant for three reasons.
even that Spirit which had now descended upon Christ like a Dove, and that
holy Spirit whereof Luke says he was full, Chap. 4.1. And this 1 the
opposition of the Leader, and of the Tempter proves: for it were harsh to say,
that Jesus was led of the devil to be tempted of the devil: but he was led of
the good Spirit to be tempted of the evil. 2 The same phrase is used, Luke
2.27, Simeon came in the Spirit into the Temple, i. e. In that holy Spirit, of
which mention was made in the former verse. 3 The Chalde and Syriak expresses
it, led by the holy Spirit.

II. The manner, he was led; not by any local transportation from Jordan to
the wilderness, as Elias from earth to heaven; or carried through the air, as
the spirit carried Philip from the Eunuch, Act. 8.39. but as one led by the
hand; so he was by a strong instinct of the Spirit, forced to go thither. And
for the strength of the motion, S. Mark says, (...), the spirit drives him
out: and St. Luke uses another word, (...), he was led out: not that any
thing befell Christ being forced to it or unwilling (for all his obedience was a
free will offering) but he is driven or drawn as the faithful are drawn by the
Father, Joh. 6.44. (...). Chrysostom.
None can come to (...) unless my Father draw him; namely, by the effectual and
forcible working of his Spirit in their hearts, not as stocks and stones
without wills, nor as enforceing them against their wills, but sweetly
inclining their wills, and working effectually in them both the will and the
deed, according to his good pleasure.

Object. But Christ sends the third person; he^ then does the third ^^^son lead
him.

Answ. Christ as God, and as the second person in Divine unity sends the Holy
Ghost into the hearts of his Elect: but consider him in the form of a Servant,
and so he is subject unto providence, and led by the Spirit this way and that:
And this is, because the humanity of Christ is the Organ or instrument of his
divinity, and in all the actions and Offices of it, is moved and guided by the
Holy Ghost.

All Satan's temptations are appointed and limited by God. Doct. All Satan's
temptations are appointed and limited by God.
It is the Spirit of God that here leads the Son of God into temptation, and
consequently God is the Author of all the Trials of his Saints. Paul went bound
in the Spirit to Jerusalem, Act. 20.22. Genesis 45.5. what a number of Trials was
Joseph cast into, being sold to a hard Master, a tempting Mistress, to bands
and imprisonment? yet he tells his brethren, it was not they, but the Lord
that sent him thither.

1 Gods Providence so watches over his Creatures,

2 Satan, although he be never so malicious, yet is restrained and cannot
tempt us until we be committed into his hands: for the just are in the hands
of God, and not of Satan: he cannot touch their goods, no not the swine of the
faithless Gadarous, though he was a Legion, till he had begged leave, and
Christ said, Go: and much less their bodies, no more than he could Jobs, till
the Lord say, Lo, all that he has, is in thine hands, only save his life.
He is a Lion in chains, and as he could attempt nothing against Christ, until
the Spirit led him to be tempted, and so committed him unto him so neither
against his members.

Object. But how can the Spirit lead Christ to be tempted, and not be the
Author of evil.

Answ. There is a twofold temptation, one of proof or Trial, Tentatio
probationis, and deceptionis.
the other of delusion: by the first God tempted Abraham, Genesis 22. and the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 13.3. But of the second S. James says, chapter 1.13. Let us man
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God tempts no man.

Object. But this temptation of Christ was to delude and deceive him, therefore
evil.

Answ. If we consider as temptation to evil, we must conceive God to be an
actor in that which is evil sundry ways, though no way the Author of evil: For
in the worst of them all, God does most righteously use the malice of Satan,
either in the punishing and blinding of the wicked, or in exercising and trying
his own; both which are just and good. As for all the sin of this action: God
some way an actor in that which is evil, no way an author.
1 It can be no work of God, because it is formally no work at all, but a vice
and corruption inherent in it: and 2. It is all left to Satan, who instilleth
malice, and suggesteth wicked counsels, and that to the destruction of men. As
for example, 1 Samuel 16.14. an evil spirit of the Lord vexed Saul; that is, so
far as it was a just punishment, it was of God, and Satan was Gods instrument
in executing his judgments so far as it was a punishment: but God left the
malice of it to the wicked instrument working after his own manner.

But to come to the very point: In the deceiving of Ahab and the false
Prophets, 1 King. 22.22. God not only nakedly and idly permitted, but
expressly commanded the wicked and lying spirit, saying, Go, and deceive, and
prevail: Where we must distinguish between the righteous action of God as a
just judgment, and revenge of God, and most properly ascribed unto him; and
the malice of it, which was the Devils infusing corruption instigating ^o
wickedness; which very wickedness the wisdom of God directed and turned to the
execution of his most righteous judgment.

Use 1. This serves to rectify our judgments in trials, and clear our eyes to
see this hand of God in them: commonly we look too low at men who are but
dust, as though misery came out of the dust; and we look too near us at the
staff or stone, which with the Dog we bite, but consider not the hand that
smites us, 2 Samuel 16.9. Abishai looks at Shemei that barked at David, and said,
Why does this dead Dog curse the King? But David could tell him, verse. 10.
The Lord has bid him curse: that is, he has so decreed and ordained, and in
his secret will bid him.

Use 2. Let us willingly submit our selves unto temptations, because God by his
Spirit leads us to be tempted, as he did his natural Son: so Christ willingly
yielded himself to be tempted, being led by the Spirit: he was led, he was not
forced and drawn to it, though the trial was as great and fierce, as Satan
could make it: 4. Reasons to be contented and cheerful intrials
and so let it be with us. For,

1 As we must be cheerful in doing the will of God, so also must we be
cheerful in suffering it. True it is, that trials and persecutions come often
by the Devils means, but never from the Devil. 2 The Lord knows best in his
Divine wisdom what is best for us; and in his fatherly goodness disposes to
us what he knows so to be. 3 He that leads us into the lists, measures
our temptations, weighs our strength, and will not suffer us to be tempted
above that we are able: he gives shoulders, and fitteth the burden. 4 He has
promised his presence with us in six dangers, and in seven, and goes out with
us into the field, not as a looker on, but to supply us with new strength and
wisdom, to help our infirmities, and uphold us unto victory.

These considerations are forcible to work in us a contentment of mind with
Gods fatherly appointment, without which we can never be cheerful in trials:
for nature will be working in Peter himself, and when he is an old Disciple,
he shall be led where he would not; and oftentimes the fear of danger and
trouble, Pejor est bell^ timor ipse belli. Senec.
is greater than the trial it self.

What was it else that moved Christ in that bitter trial, when otherwise he
could have wished the cup might pass from him, to say, Yet not as I will, but
as thou will; but the remembrance that he came to suffer, as well as to do the
will of his heavenly Father? What else added such courage to Paul, Acts 21.13.
as to say, What do ye weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to
be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord. What else made
the Martyrs so invincible in suffering, that often, when they might, they would
not be delivered, but that they found themselves led and bound by the Spirit,
yea strengthened to all long-suffering with joyfulness?

Obj. But we pray, not to be led into temptation.

Ans. 1 Tentation is two-^old (as we said before) one of Trial, which we must
suffer with cheerfulness; the other of delusion, against which we may and must
pray. 2 Again, there are two leaders into temptation: the Spirit of God leads
Christ and Christians, the evil spirit leads the wicked at his will; we pray
against this Leader, and not against the former. 3 And further, we must
distinguish between being tempted, and being led into temptation in our
Saviors sense: the former is a work of Gods mercy, to try, exercise, or
chastise any of his Children; the latter is a work of Justice, in which God
leaves a man to himself, so as the temptation is prevailing against him. Now
we pray only against the latter, which is, to be left, and so overcome in
temptation; neither does God so lead us into temptation, but to make us in the
end more than Conquerors: so as still we may bid Temptations welcome, and with
cheerfulness submit our selves unto them.

Use 3 In every trial see that the Spirit lead thee: for this is a sure ground
of comfort, and has assured hope in it of a good end. Christ was not led into
temptation by private motion, neither did he thrust himself unto it: no more
must we rashly run into, or pull dangers upon us, or through presumption
object ourselves unto temptations: if we do, We must not thrust our selves
into trials, but expect the leading of the spirit.
we must needs fall, and cannot expect safety, because we tempt the Lord, and
provoke him to withdraw his Fatherly protection from us; whereas there is no
danger in following the leading and guidance of the Spirit. Many a man is of so
strong a faith, that nothing can harm him; he is for all courses, and all
companies. But how can a man be safe where Satan's throne is? Peter thought
himself strong enough to go into the Highpriests Hall; but he found in the
end, it was no fit company for him.

Others through vain presidence of Gods protection, run in times of contagion
into infected houses, which upon just calling a man may: but for one to run out
of his calling in the way of an ordinary visitation, he shall find that Gods
Angels have commission to protect him no longer than he is in his way, Psalm
91.11. and that, being out of it, this arrow of the Lord shall sooner hit him
than another that is not half so confident.

Others are bold-hardy to set upon the Devil in his own holds, they dare enter
into, and lodge in houses given up by God to the Devils possession: which is
(if it be out of ones lawful Calling) to cast a man's self into most probable
danger: for whereas we ought to use all good and lawful means for the
preventing of imminent danger, this is to seek danger and hurt; and commonly
they that seek it, justly find it. The issue of such presumption we may see in
the sons of Sceva, Act. 19.16. who took upon them to do as the Apostles did,
namely to name Christ over those that were possessed; but the Devil seeing
their want of calling thereunto, ran upon them, and overcame them, so as they
fled out of the house naked and wounded.

Others through temerity and rashness, bring on themselves much woe, who follow
the motions of their own spirits in their courses, and never or seldom
consider whether they have Gods Spirit before them, or no: they look not for
warrant out of Gods Word in the things they do or speak; they beg not Gods
direction and assistance; they spy not in what ambush Satan lies, what
advantages he easily takes, and so for want of Christian watchfulness lay
themselves open to many evils and dangers, wherein they can meet with no great
comfort, because they cannot say with a good conscience, Lord, thou have led
me into this estate; but rather, I have cast my self into this danger.

If therefore thou would find comfort in troubles, keep thee in thy way
that thou may never be without the leading of the Spirit; Three notable
effects from assurance of the spirits guidance in trials.
and then this will be the issue.

1 Being led by the Spirit, thou will follow willingly, thou will lay aside all
reasonings, excuses, and delays, as Christ did; he murmures not, delays not,
does not first return to Nazareth, bids not his Parents and friends farewell,
consults not with flesh and blood, but was driven out with a strong motion ot
the Spirit. This is the same free Spirit which dwells in the hearts of
Christians; he leads them too, and they obey, and follow; Abraham follows him
from his own Country, and Moses into Egypt.

2 If thou see the Spirit leading thee, thou shall not faint under the Cross,
no not when thou look upon the greatest danger that can be threatened,
because the other eye is upon the Spirit which helps thy infirmities, and
according to the measure of affliction ministers a sound measure of comfort, 1
Pet. 4.14. therefore the Saints rejoice in affliction, because the Spirit of
glory and of God rests upon them. A valiant Captain leading the way,
incourageth the most timorous soldier to follow with courage and resolution:
So this Spirit which leads, is a spirit of strength, and of power, not in
himself alone, but supplying with new strength those that give up themselves to
be led by him.

3 If thou see the Spirit leading thee into trial, it will keep thee from
seeking to wind thy self out by any unlawful or unwarrantable means: thou will
follow him to be led out by him, as well as thou wast led in by him; thou will
wait his leisure for the removal of thy Trial, in whose good pleasure it lies
most seasonably to deliver thee. This is often the reason why God gives his
children to be led by the Spirit, to try whether they will abide with him in
temptation, or no. And those who will shift themselves out of trouble, by
lying, swearing, and the like; or avoid crosses and losses by wicked means, as
poverty by breaking the Sabbath, sickness by sorcery and witchcraft, what
spirit soever led them in, certainly the evil spirit has led them out; the
remedy is worse than their disease, and their escape is made only by breaking
the prison.

Use 4. As Christ was led by the Spirit in all his course of life, so should
Christians: for as many as are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God,
Romans 8.14. So the Apostles in their Ministry went hither and thither, stayed or
departed, preached and prophesied by the Spirit; They were forbidden by the
Holy Ghost to preach the Word in Asia, and Bithynia, Act. 16.6, 7. and 21.4.
certain Disciples told Paul by the Spirit, that he should not go up to
Jerusalem. And it is the duty of all true Believers, to resign themselves in
subjection to Gods Spirit.

Quest. How shall I know when I am led by the Holy Ghost?

Answ. By these rules: 1 Gods Spirit works in, and by the Word: therefore if
thou inquire in every thing what is the good and acceptable will of God, Three
rules to know a man's self led in every thing by the Holy Ghost.
Romans 12.2. thou art led by the Spirit. 2 Discern his guidance by the
mortification of the deeds of the flesh: for the life of the Spirit is opposed
to the life of the flesh, Romans 8.13. Therefore in any strong motion, examine
thy self whether it tend to thy own profit, credit, or lusts: if it do, suspect
it, and cast it off: The Apostles in all the motions of the Spirit, respected
the public good of the Church, not their own ease and reputation. The guidance
of the Holy Ghost requires denial of our own wills, strife against the spirit
that bears rule in the world, and against the spirit of a man that lusts
after envy. 3 Know it by the excitation of the Spirit, which still stirs and
moves the will and mind, and raises it from under the oppression of the
flesh, and thus preserves and maintains the gift of regeneration, and
effectually bends a man to obedience.

And this duty is necessary, 1 In regard of the unregenerate, who are blind and
in darkness, and without a guide know not what way to go: the natural man
perceives not the things of God. 2 In regard of the regenerate, who are but as
little children, weak and feeble, and cannot go without a Leader. And therefore
all of us need the leading of the Spirit.

Into the wilderness.]

This is the fourth circumstantial point. A Wilderness is taken in the
Scripture two ways: 1 For a place inhabited, although not fully peopled, as
Josh. 15.61. six Cities of the Priests in the wilderness: and John Baptist
came Preaching in the wilderness of Judea, because Zachary his Fathers house
was there: and 1 King. 2. Joab was buried in his own house in the wilderness. 2
For a place utterly desolate, not inhabited or frequented of men, but possessed
only of wild Beasts: and thus it is here to be taken, as Mark. 1.13. he was
with wild Beasts, utterly separate from the society of men. This place Christ
makes choice of by the motion of the Spirit, for these Reasons.

1 In opp^sition to the first Adam, who was tempted in Paradise, Four reason a
why Christ made choice of the wilderness to be tempted in.
a place in all the World strongest and fittest to resist temptation in; and
being overcome was cast out thence into the wilderness, as all the world was in
comparison. But the second Adam to recover this loss, encountreth with Satan in
a wilderness; the fittest place in the world to be overcome in, and
overcomming, restores us to the heavenly Paradise again.

2 That Christ might manifest both his willingness to be tempted, and his
courage against his enemy: the former, in that he appoints a place wherein
Satan might take all advantage against him: the latter, in that like a Champion
he challenges the field where they two alone might try it out. A Coward will
be ready to draw in the streets, that dares not look a man in the face in the
field: But Christ appoints a field, where Satan may have all his power against
him, and he no help at all: and by both these he shows himself the promised
seed, appointed to bruise the Serpents head.

3 That Christ being known to be the only combatant and maintainer of the
fight, all the praise of the conquest over Satan might be ascribed to him
alone, and to bring in no compartners, with him, as the Papists do the Virgin
Mary, and other Saints; whereas Christ was therefore the only Conqueror,
because he was of infinite power, as they are not.

4 In imitation of Moses at the giving of the Law, and Elias at the restoring
of it, the one being forty days in the mountain, the other forty days in the
Cave of Horeb; Christ at the bringing in of the glorious Gospel would be
answerable to those figures of him, who (as they) comes now out of a
sequestered place wherein he was fitting himself to undertake so weighty a
business as this is.

1 Note hence, That no place in the world is free from Satan's temptations, but
he lays his snares in every place. Lot is caught in the Cave, No place in the
world free from temptations.
his wife in the field, David in his house, Adam in Paradise, and Christ is
tempted in the Wilderness. The Reason hereof is taken, 1 From Satan's diligence
and malice, who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1
Pet. 5.8. and is diligent in compassing the earth to and fro, Job 1.7. his
Commission is of large extent, no place in earth is privileged from his
temptation. 2 From his spiritual and powerful nature: no place is so secret but
he can find it, none so strong but he can enter it, none so holy, but be
can slily get into it, and boldly stand even among the Sons of God, the Angels,
Job 1.6.

Use 1. Seeing the whole compass of the earth is Satan's circuit, Satan's circuit
is the earth compass.
let us where ever we are, consider of our enemy, and of our danger by him,
seem the place never so secret, never so secure: the greenest grass may harbor
a serpent: And surely, the more free and safe we think our selves, the nearer
is our danger. There be two places in which men may think themselves safest: 1
The place of their particular calling. 2 The public place of their general,
the Church: the former because of Gods promise; the latter because of his
presence: yet Satan shuns neither, neither may we lay off our watch in either.
Experience shows how he lays snares in the special calling, whereby many
fall: some he wins to injustice, and secret cousenage; some to lying, and
swearing; some to Sabbath-breaking: Now though thou art in thy calling, yet
thou art not conscionable in it, and so art out of thy way, and without Gods
protection. The same experience gives witness to the truth of Scripture, how
Satan not only haunts us in our own house, but also follows us to Gods house,
and there intercepts the Word, or steals it away, or corrupts the judgment,
or casts men on sleep, or occupies their minds with worldly and base
thoughts; and thus, where they think themselves most safe, they are most
foiled: The reason is this, though thou be in Gods presence, yet thou
set not thy self in his presence, but come carelessly and inconsiderately;
and so God having no delight in thy service, suffers the Devil to exercise his
will on thee. So as there is no place, wherein we must lay aside our watch, if
we would not be overcome.

Neither Popish c^osses, nor Conjurers circles, bar the Devil further than he
lists.
Use 2. This shows the vanity and delusion of the Papists, who think the
Devil is barred out of Churches by their Crucifixes, consecrated Hoasts,
Crosses, and Holy Water: For the Leviathan of Hell laughes at the shaking of
these spears. Also it shows the madness of Magicians and Conjurers, who think
they can bind the Devil within their circles: for although (to delude them and
winn them sure to himself) he be serviceable, and at their command, yet he
keeps his liberty permitted him of God, and compasses the whole earth.

Some places are more fi^ for temptation than others.
2 Note, that some places are more fit for temptation than others; as namely,
solitary and desert places. For Satan has then greatest advantage for his
assaults, when he has men alone, without the help of others to counsel
confirm, and comfort them. This the Preacher confirms, Eccles. 4.9. Two are
better than one, and we be to him that is alone; if he fall, he has none to
help him up: and two are stronger than one, and a threefold cord is not easily
broken. Nay, God himself did see disadvantage of solitary life, when he said,
It is not good for man to be alone. When did Satan assault Eve, but when she
was alone? when did he David, but being alone on his Gallery? when Lots
Daughters, but when they were alone in the cave? Genesis 19.30. And therefore the
Devil is delighted to walk through solitary places, Matthew. 12.43. if he
possess any, he carries them into solitary places, Luke 8.29. and where do
Conjurers and Sorcerers talk with the Devil, but in Woods and Wildernesses,
where Satan most easily appears? For these reasons: 1 Because being a Prince
of darkness, he hates the light, and passes all his exploits in as much
darkness, secrecy, and silence as he can. 2 He sees how easily we sin, when
there is none by to hinder us from it by fear or shame.

Use 1. This overthrows the dotage of the Papists, who approve and magnify as
meritorious, the strict and solitary life of their Monks, Eremites, and
Votaries; The Devil has Monks and Eremites where he would have them.
who to free themselves from Satan's malice, and for more holiness, (as they
say) voluntarily forsake the societies of men, and live by themselves in Woods,
Caves, Cloisters, and Wildernesses, as though they had the advantage of Satan
because of the place, whereas indeed he has them where he would. And because
they seem most to build upon the examples of John Baptist, and Christ himself,
both whom they find in the Wilderness, we will a little clear this place.

Lib. 2. de monach. cap. 39
And first for John Baptist, whom Bellarmine says for his fare, apparel, and
strict manner of living, was a right pattern of true Eremites. True it is, his
life was austere, as his office and calling was singular and extraordinary, and
no ground for any ordinary office and order in the New Testament; wherein he is
no more to be imitated, than in his springing in the womb at Mary's presence,
which was an extraordinary testimony of an extraordinary person. Besides, John
being no Minister of the New Testament (for the least Minister in the Kingdom
of God is greater than he:) but the last of the Prophets, and greater than any
of them, how can any order of Evangelical Ministers be raised from his example?
Further, whereas Christ himself the Head of our profession, cam^ eating and
drinking, and familiarly conversed among men for good, why should we not
rather hold our selves to his example, into whose name we are baptized, than
John's who was an extraordinary forerunner of him? Lastly, we have heard that
the Wilderness wherein John lived, was not such a Wilderness as they dream of,
utterly remote from the society of men; but a Wilderness, in which were Houses
and Cities, yea his Fathers house; a wilderness though less peopled than the
frequented places of Judea, yet not without people, because it was a wilderness
wherein John preached, who preached to men, As their St. Francis is did, to
show his great humility and charity.
and not to beasts; a wilderness wherein Christ among a multitude of people was
baptized: and so it scarce affords a color of their Eremitical Orders,
vowing such a solitary life separate from all men, which John never did.

And for the example of Christ his going into the Wilderness to fast and pray;
I answer: I Christ was led thither by the Spirit, Christ's going into the
Wilderness, no g^ound to Popish Mon^s or Eremites, for four Reasons.
but they of their own heads: and to pretend a spirit without a word of
warrant, is a ^rensie and delusion. 2 Christ went for forty days, and came
again to his calling; they go and never return again. 3 Christ went to offer
opportunity and advantage to Satan, the more victoriously to foyl him, and
purchase Heaven for us; they in a superstitious end, to merit and purchase
Heaven for themselves. 4 Christ never ate nor drank all the while he was in the
Wilderness, wherein would they tie themselves to imitate him, they would soon
grow weary of their holiness and devotion.

Accursed therefore be this Monkish and Auchorish life, which professes open
hostility to human society, which thrusts them out of their lawful callings,
wherein they ought to be profitable to men in the societies of Church,
Commonwealth, or Family. What? are these the lights of the world, that fly
the light like Bats and Owls, and prison themselves in Cloisters; whereas they
should lighten others, and not thrust their light under a bushel, or under the
table? Are these the salt of the earth, who never apply themselves to season
the fleshly and unsavory manners and behaviors of men? The Apostle teaches
them another lesson, Heb. 10.24. saying, Let us provoke one another to love,
and to good works, not forsaking the assemblies, as the manner of some is:
implying that to be an unlawful calling, which cannot but fayl against such
duties of charity as these be. It were to be wished, that because the world
receives no seasoning from them, the unprofitable burdens of the earth were
cast out upon the dunghill the place which Christ himself assumed unto them.

Use 2. It teaches those that are troubled with temptations, to beware of
solitary and secret places, because Satan is there the strongest: and much less
must they thrust themselves into desert places, forgetting their weakness, as
though they would with Christ offer battle, and tempt the temptor: for this his
practice is no warrant for us: but they must avoid the place so soon as they
can, and get into the society and fellowship of men. Joseph when he was alone
with his Mistress tempting him, fled out of the house: Bad company worse than
solitariness.
so if there be none but the temptor with thee, take the benefit of company so
soon as thou can: but see thy company be good; for bad company is far
worse than solitariness, as many find, who being troubled in mind, or tempted
by Satan, run to lewd company, to Cards, Dice, drinking, and sporting; and so
by Beelzebub will cast out the Devil: But this enlarges the grief; and they
find in the end the remedy nothing inferior to the disease: Whereas had they
resorted into the society of the godly, by godly and religious communication
and conversation, they had been much comforted and confirmed; according to the
promise of Christ, Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, I
will be in the midst of them.

Use 3. Yet if God shall by virtue of our calling draw us into solitary places,
we must be careful so to carry our selves, Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus.
as we may say with Scipio, We are never less alone, than when we are most
alone: and with our Savior, Joh. 16.32. I am not alone, the Father is with me.
The faithful need never be alone, because they may ever be in conference with
God: then may they go close to God, and sharpen their prayers, and meditate on
his Word and Works, to fit them better for their callings: then may they
enlarge their hearts to God in confessions and praises: and thus he that is led
by the Spirit into these solitary places, is in safety; because, as the hills
compass Jerusalem, so does the Lord his people while they are in his service:
thus shall Satan be most disappointed, who while he hopes to make our
solitariness his advantage, we shall by it draw nearer unto God, and be set
so much the more out of his reach.

4 Directions for solitariness.
Directions for solitariness.

1 VVatch the benefit of time, to spend it best in musing upon heavenly things,
and enjoy the sweet liberty of conversing with God. 2 Know that no time must be
spent in roving and ranging thoughts, but must be redeemed from evil, and
unprofitableness: and therefore choice must be made of objects presented, and
as little time as may be, spent in worldly and indifferent things; and then
with as little delight as may be. Holy wisdom is ever diminishing the love of
earthly things. 3 Consider the danger of sin in thy solitariness, when fear,
shame, witnesses, and counselors are removed, and that there are no open sins
which are not secretly first hatched and warped: and therefore, if we muse on
any sin, let it be to overcome it, and beware of secret allurements. 4 Consider
the slipperiness and business of the heart, which is a wandering thing, like a
Mill ever grinding, ever in motion, still setting us on work with more
Commandments than ever God did: and therefore, giving it leave to muse, we
must the better watch it.

To be tempted of the Devil.]

This is the fifth circumstantial point, namely the end of Christ's going into
the wilderness. Here consider two things: 1 The Author of the temptation, the
Devil. 2 The end it self, to be tempted of him.

The Devil] that is, a wicked spirit, the Prince and Captain of the rest, as we
may gather out of Matthew. 25.41. A wicked spirit, not by creation, but by
defection: Full of wickedness, whence Elimas the Sorcerer is called the child
of the Devil, Act. 13.10. because he was full of deceit and wickedness: Full of
malice, a red Dragon, full of poisons, seeking nothing but destruction: Full of
craft, an old Serpent, more crafty than all the beasts of the field: Full of
power, called the Prince and God of the world, and the power of darkness: the
strong man keeping the hold: Principalities, powers, etc.

(...).
The word comes of (...), trajicio, calumnior, and signifies an accuser,
calumniator, or slanderer, having his name from his continual practice: For so
he is called the accuser of the brethren, which accuses them before God day
and night, Satan accuses man 1 To God.
Rev. 12.10. and no marvel, seeing he durst accuse God himself as an envier of
man's happy estate, and careless of Christ's estate here. But especially he
accuses, 1 Man to God, as he did Job, that he served God in Hypocrisy, and
upon affliction would curse him to his face, chap, 1. verse. 9. 2 Man to man, 2
To man.
stirring up strife and contention from one against another; and by this means
he works effectually in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. Where
strife and envying is, there wisdom is sensual and devilish, Jam. 3.15. An
example hereof we have in Saul, who, when the evil spirit was entered into him,
all manner of accusations came against innocent David, and were received; that
he was a Traitor, and one that sought Saul's life, etc. 3 Man to himself: 3 To
himself.
when he has drawn a man to many loathsome sins, then he stretches them
beyond all the measure of mercy, aggravates Gods justice, extenuates his mercy,
and all to bring the Sinner to despair. Thus he accused Cain, Achitophel, and
Judas, whom he brought to confess their sin, but to deny Gods mercy.

Whence note, 1 The miserable estate of wicked men, that serve such a Lord and
Master as the Devil is; Satan^ best wages to his most diligent Servants.
who in stead of standing by them for their diligent service, will stand
against them to accuse them to God, to men, to their own Consciences; will
reckon up all their faults, and deprave whatsoever was best intended. While he
can draw them along in his service, he will lie close like a crafty Fox and
Serpent, in one corner or other, to devour their souls: but afterward will
terrify them, and roar like a Lion on them, setting in order before them the
villainies to which he himself tempted them, crying out on them as damned
VVretches, and making them often cry out so of themselves even in this life,
and for ever in the life to come. And yet alas! he is the Prince of this World,
to whom generally most men yield their subjection and homage: yea, the God of
this world, to whom men offer themselves, and whatever they have or can make in
sacrifice: yea, men sell themselves as slaves and bondmen to be ruled at his
will. How should this one consideration move men to get out of his power, and
out of the service of sin, and come to Jesus Christ, who is meek and merciful,
one that covers sins, acquitteth and discharges; one that answers all
accusations, and crowns our weak endeavors, which himself works in us, in
such sort as a cup of cold water shall not go unrewarded?

2 Note, how expressly Satan has stamped this quality as his own mark upon his
Children, who so lively resemble* him as that they have his name also given
them, Tit. 2.3. and 2 Timothy 3.3. and 1 Timothy 3.11. For how quick and nimble are
men to go between man and man with Tales and accusations, to cast bones of
enmity? Sometimes charging men openly, or secretly, with things utterly untrue
and false, as Ziba dealt with Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16.3. sometimes blazing
infirmities, which love would have covered: sometimes aggravating with
vehemence of words, facts, or speeches, which charity would give a favorable
construction unto, as Doeg pleaded against Ahimelec, 1 Samuel 22.9. sometimes
depraving the truth, by adding to men's speeches; and this cost Christ his life,
his enemies adding, I will destroy this Temple, and make another in three days,
made with hands: or diminishing it, by concealing that which might make for a
man. All which are Satanical practices, who being the Father of Lies, would
chase all truth out of the world.

Let all Gods Children labor to express Gods Image, 7 Rules or means against
false accusation.
in hating this hateful sin, and help themselves thereunto by these rules. 1
Consider thy charge, Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not walk about with tales among
thy people: and consider, that whispering and backbiting are the sins of men
of a reprobate sense, Romans 1.29. 2 Receive no false accusation: receivers of
stolen goods are accessory to the theft: if there were no receivers, there
would be no thieves; if no hearers, no informers. Drive away the slaunderer
with an angry countenance, as the North Wind drives away rain, Prove. 25.23.
have no pleasure in this sin of another man, Romans 1.32. 3 Do thine own
business, look to the duties of thine own calling: busybodies and pratlers
are joined together, 1 Timothy 5.13. 4 Take heed of envy: malice never spoke
well, it is always suspicious, ever traducing. Embrace the love of thy
neighbors person. 5 Deal with another man's good name, as thou would have him
deal with thine, if it came in his way. Consider thou may restore his goods,
but never his name: once broken, ever a scar. A felon is more tolerable in a
Commonwealth than a slanderer. 6 In receiving reports, excuse the person so
far as thou can; Vide Pe^ald. tom. ^. p. 561 de detractore^
construe the speech or fact in the most favorable sense; do as thou would
be done to: and if thou can not, advise the reporter to look to himself, and
tell him, that in many things we sin all. 7 Curse not the deaf, says the
Scripture: now a man that is absent is a deaf man.

Object. But I speak the truth.

Answ. But not truly. 1 Without ground, thou art uncalled and unsworn; thou
do it not by way of charitable admonition to the party himself or others. 2
Not in a good manner, without love, pity, sorrow nay, thou rejoycest rather in
thy tale. 3 Not to any other end, but to fill men's mouths with prattle, and
bring thy brother into contempt. And why speak thou no good of him as well
as evil, but art like a swine in a garden, that leaves all the sweet flowers,
to dig or wallow in a dunghill?

Five motives to lay aside calumniation and slandering.
Motives to lay aside and abhor calumniation and slandering.

1 Charity is not suspicious, but in doubtful cases thinks the best. 1 Love
thinks not evil, 1 Cor. 13.5. 2 It covers a multitude of sins, Prove. 10.12.
and 3 It gives to every man his due, in his goods and good name. And therefore
the tale-breeder, talebearer, and tale-beleever, who do none of these, but
hammer tales and slanders upon the anvil of envy, and set them upon the wings
of fame and report, are uncharitable and unchristian persons, the Devils
fewellers and gunpowder: for where no wood is, there the fire goes out; so
where there is no talebearer, the strife cease, Prove. 26.20.

2 We have a common Proverb, A man museth as he uses, as himself uses to
do, so he imagines of another: and therefore to judge lewdly of another upon
bare suspicion, is commonly a note of a lewd person: those that are so ready to
tax men of Hypocrisy, commonly are hypocrites themselves.

3 It is a question among the schoolmen, whether a man that has impaired
another good name, be bound to restore, as he that has pilfered his goods;
and it is concluded by all the Doctors, that he is bound in Conscience,
because a good Name is better than all Riches, says Solomon: And because it
has more enemies than our goods, even this law of restitution and satisfaction
should be of force to keep them off us: and if the law bind him that steals
our goods, to restore five-fold, certainly he that steals our name, is bound
to restore fifty-fold, because it is so far above a man's substance, and the
blot is never wiped away. If Serpents sting us, or mad dogs, or venomous beasts
bite us, there is some remedy; but against the tongue of the slanderer, there
can none be found.

4 It is one of the sins against the ninth Commandment, to hear our Neighbor
falsely accused, and not to clear him if we be able. Jonathan when he saw
Saul stirred up by tale-bearers against David, spoke boldly in his defense, and
said, Why shall he dye? what evil has he done? And Nicodemus, Ioh. 7.51
when he saw the Scribes and Pharisees so set against Christ, that they would
have condemned him being absent and unheard, stood up, and said, Does our Law
condemn any before it hear him, and know what he has done? A good rule for us
how to carry our selves toward all Christians.

5 We must hold us to our rule, to judge no man before the time, 1 Cor. 4.5.
and if no man, then, 1 Not our superiors: people must not bolt out opprobrious
words against their Pastors and Teachers; sin is aggravated by the person
against whom it is committed: to tevile an ordinary man is odious, but much
more to revile the father of our souls or bodies, Pastors or Parents. 2 Not
godly men and professors of the Gospel, as to charge them with hypocrisy, and
traduce with violence that which would receive a charitable construction, Heb.
6.9. 3 Not such as in whom Gods graces shine more eminently than in others,
through pride or envy: this is a high sin, and cost Christ his life: yea, to
disgrace and obscure Gods gifts, which ought to be acknowledged with
thankfulness, is in the skirts of that unpardonable sin, and had need be
stayed betimes: for it is to hate goodness; and if it did hate it because it
is goodness, it were far more dangerous.

3 Note: Seeing Satan is such an Arch-accuser, If there be so many accusers, no
marvail if godly men want no manner of accusation.
and that his special hatred is against goodness, is it any marvail that the
Children of God pass through many slanderous accusations? If speech be of the
faithful Preachers of the Word, neither Prophets nor Apostles shall avoid most
dangerous slanders. Amos shall be accused by Amazia to preach against the
King, and that the whole land is not able to bear his words, chap. 7. ver. 9.
Paul and Silas preaching nothing but Christ, are brought before the Governors,
exclaimed upon as men troubling the City, preaching Ordinances not lawful to
be received, and teaching men to worship God contrary to the Law, Act. 16.20.
and 18.13. Let speech be of professors of the Gospel, how do men in their
minds accuse and judge that to be done in vainglory, which is done in
simplicity, and for Gods glory? and that to be done in hypocrisy, or for
commodity, or other sinister ends, which God sees is done in sincerity? Yea, as
if men did see their hearts, and inside, how do they speak it, that such are
not the men they make show of? or if grace evidently appear in the eminent
notes of it, they can so lessen, so diminish and clip the beauty and glory of
it, as still they shall be disgraced.

Our blessed Lord himself was accused and condemned for a malefactor, yea, and
executed; his doctrine, notwithstanding most heavenly, and as his enemies
witnessed, Never man spoke like this man, yet was condemned, his wonderful
miracles obscured, yea, blasphemed, He cast out Devils by Beelzebub: and shall
the servant look to be better than his Master? Lamentable it is to see how our
times accuse the first restorers of Religion, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, and
the rest, as the Layers of sedition and rebellion; and as lamentable, that such
as preach the same holy Doctrine as they did, should under the titles of
Puritans and Schismatics be coupled with Papists, yea accounted worse. And no
marvel, if the whole profession of Religion be accused, and religious persons
made the songs of the abject, and scum of the Land, because the Devil is an
accuser. When the Devil lays off his name and nat^re, and cease to be a
Devil, it will be otherwise, but not till then. But let such as would be wise
by Gods wisdom, labor to see Satan's malice in all this; and that, if to be
accused be sufficient, who can be innocent?

4 Note: Seeing Satan is such an accuser of us in himself and his instruments,
So many accusers should make us watchful of our selves.
to God, to men, and to our own consciences, how careful ought we to be in
our whole conversation to stop Satan's mouth, and the mouths of wicked men,
which will be open against us? How ought we to make right steps to our feet,
seeing we shall be sure to hear of the least halting? How ought we to examine
the uprightness of our hearts, that in those accusations we may be bold to go
to God and say, Lord, do thou prove and try me, if there be any such
wickedness in me.

Rules to become in-offensive and unreproveable, and so stop the mouth of of
Satan.

1 The matter of thy work must be good, and warranted by the Word: 4 Rules to
stop the mouths of all accusers.
then God will justify that which himself sets thee about, and thee in it. 2
The manner of doing it must be proportional: a good thing must be done well,
in good circumstances. 3 The end must be found, namely Gods glory, and man's
good. A bad end spoils the best action. 4 In every thing remember, that Satan's
eye is upon thee to accuse thee, the eye of thine own conscience to witness for
or against thee, and Gods eye to judge thee, to whom thou must stand or fall as
to thine own Lord.

To be tempted.]

The word to be tempted is spoken of, 1 God, 2 Man, 3 Satan; all tempt.

I God tempts, 1 When he proves the graces of his Children: so he proved
Abraham, Genesis 22.1. and Job, chap. 7. verse. 18. 2 When he discovers the sin
and corruption which lurketh in them: and thus God tempted the Israelites, who,
when their desires in the Wilderness were not satisfied, usually broke out into
murmuring and impatiency, and showed naughty hearts, full of distrustfulness.
And thus God is said to lead into temptation, when being provoked to wrath, he
with-draweth his grace, that so his Children by their falls might see their
weakness, as David and Peter; and that the wicked might in justice be prepared
to judgment, as Pharaoh burst into blasphemy, Achitophel hanged himself
through impatiency, and Saul used unlawful means to escape his cross.

2 Rules in Gods tempting of man.
But in these temptations of God, observe two rules: 1 That the word tempting,
referred to God, is ever taken in good part: for he tempts only to prove,
never to seduce: and his temptations are always good, because they proceed from
him that is goodness it self, and tend altogether to the good and profit of his
children; and are the execution of justice on the wicked, which is good also.

2 That all these temptations are not to confirm Gods knowledge of men, who
perfectly knows what is in them, yea who sees things that are not as though
they were; but to bring men being exercised by them to the clearer knowledge of
him and themselves.

Man tempts God two ways.
II Man tempts, 1 God, two ways. 2 Man, both himself, and others. Man
tempts God, 1 By presumption and curiosity, as when men forsake the ordinary
means of their good, and presume too much upon Gods help, to try whether God
will use any other than the appointed means to succor them: so it is said,
verse. 7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. 2. By distrust, when men by
unwarrantable means try the power of God, whether he can or will help or hurt.
Exodus 17.2. when the Israelites by murmuring would have water, Moses said, Why
tempt ye the Lord? and Psalm. 78.18. they tempted him in the Wilderness,
requiring meat for their lust, and said, Can God prepare a table in the
Wilderness? Here they tempted him by doubting, 1 Of his Promises. 2 Of his
Presence. 3 Of his Power. 4 By limiting him to that straight. 5 They thought he
was bound to them, to fulfill their lusts.

Man tempts man three ways.
Man tempts others, 1 When upon just occasion, he tryes a man's affections
and disposition to this or that: so Jonathan tried his Father Saul how he stood
affected to David, 1 Samuel 19.3. 2 When men go about by captious and subtle
questions, and with fair show of words, to get matter of reprehension and
accusation against others. Thus the Pharisees came to Christ, tempting him,
Matthew. 16.1. and thus the Herodians came to him to entangle him in his talk. 3
When men allure and entice one another to evil, as Prove. 1.10.11. Come, let us
lay wait for blood, and have all one purse: so the Harlot said to the young
man, Come in with me, let us take our fill of love till the morning.

Man tempts himself two ways.
Man tempts himself two ways: 1 When his own concupiscence moves and
draws him aside to sin: Jam. 1.4. Every man is tempted when he is drawn aside
of his own concupiscence. 2 When he wilfully casts himself into danger, as
Peter when he went into Caiaphas the High Priests Hall among Christ's enemies
and his; here he is moved to deny his Master, and Satan prevails against him.

III Satan tempts, and in his tempting goes beyond all these: Satan tempt^^^
two ways.
1 When by outward objects he stirs up inward corruption, as David walking
on his leds, and seeing Bathsheba, the Devil wrought lust in him. 2 By infusing
inwardly evil motions and thoughts, without objects: and thus stood he up
against Israel, and caused David to number the people; a thing merely needless,
as Joab confessed, 1 Chronicles. 21.1, 2, 3.

Now thus God cannot tempt to evil: he with-draweth his Spirit, by outward
occasions he brings to light the sins of men; and punishes one sin with
another, but moves no man to evil, and much less drives him to it, and least
of all infuseth wickedness into any man's heart; which to think were high
blasphemy, So men by tempting may stir up corruption in others, but to
infuse wickedness into the heart belongs only to Satan, because of his
Spiritual nature, and ready intercourse with our spirits.

Now seeing these temptations of the Devil are so wicked, coming from evil, and
tending to evil, two points are worthy our consideration: 1 How Christ, being
so holy and powerful, could be tempted of the Devil. 2 Why he would be so
tempted.

For the former. How Christ so holy and so powerful could be tempted of the
Devil.
1 It is not against the holiness of Christ to be subject to temptation without
sin, no more than to hunger, thirst, weep. 2 Nor against the power of Christ to
be tempted, no more than it was a sign of infirmity and weakness in Adam so to
be, before infirmity and weakness came in. It argued not impotencie in Christ,
to dye; nay, so to dye, argued omnipotency. So it was not weakness in Christ to
be tempted, but willingness: and so to be tempted argued virtue and strength.
But howsoever the Apostle says, Christ was tempted, and like us in all things,
yet without sin: and Christ himself, Joh. 14.30. The Prince of this world
comes, and has naught in me; that is, no sin at all: yet it is hard to be
conceived, and therefore we will explain it by these propositions.

1 That temptation that wholly rises from another, and not from a man's self,
is not necessarily mixed with sin: But such were the temptations of Satan to
Christ, wholly hatched by the Devil: for there was no manner of evil thought,
no corruption in the holy person of Christ for any such to rise forth of. We
indeed have many temptations arising out of our own corruptions, which are sin
in the beginning, though no consent be given unto them, but are presently
resisted: but no such thing could be in the holy Nature of Christ. A fire
kindled within the house is dangerous; but the lightning coming from without,
being but a flash, is without danger. Joseph allured by the words of his
Mistress, resisted and fled away, Genesis 39.12. this was not his sin. And
Hezekiah, provoked to distrust by Rabshakies railing letter, resisted, and was
confident, 2 King. 19.10. it was not his sin: the temptation was wholly without.

2 Those temptations, which are offered by others, either by voice, gesture, or
outward objects; or else by inward thoughts, utterly abhorred, without the
least liking, are not the sins of them that are tempted; their exercises and
trials they be, not their sins: But such were the temptations of Christ; he was
troubled and vexed with them, as appears by his Avoid Satan; and the voices and
objects carried to his ear and eye; yea motions to infidelity, covetousness,
and Idolatry, to his mind; but yet by the perfect light of his mind, and the
unchangeable holiness of his will, were instantly repelled, and gained not the
least affection, and much less left the least infection behind them. True it
is, that evil thoughts cast into our minds, can hardly be cast out without
some taint: for we are ready as tinder to receive such sparkles; we must pause
upon them, till they gain some delight, if not content. But it was not so with
Christ, whose perfect holiness was as water to quench all such sparkles.

Three degrees of temptation.
3 Of temptation there are three degrees: 1 Suggestion. 2 Delight. 3 Consent.
Suggestion is the mere motion of another, altogether without us, and cannot be
our sin, if neither of the latter come to it; either of which two is a token of
infirmity. But Christ's temptations were all in suggestion, because he stood
last without alteration of his mind, without the least delight or consent to
the thing tempted unto. Whereunto serves that distinction of glancing, and
permanent motions; the former passing through the heart without any footing,
against no Commandment; the latter either without consent, against the tenth;
or with consent, against all the nine.

Hence note: 1 Seeing Christ himself of so holy condition was subject to be
tempted, let no man living look to be exempted from temptations. Our Lord Jesus
that had no inward corruption to stir up any motion in him, cannot avoid
outward objects and persuasions to sin. But our case is far otherwise: for
suppose there were no Devil assayling us, no outward object that could be
presented to us, yet we are tempted and led away by our own concupiscence; we
need no moving or stirring, but run headlong of our selves into sin. It we had
no enemies to batter down our walls and holds without us, we have inward and
domestical rebels and traitors, which continually betray us. Where is the man
now that boasts he was never tempted, and he has so strong a faith, and is
of such holiness, as he defieth Satan, and will spit in his face, and he never
was molested by him? But pitiful is this delusion; Is thy faith stronger, thy
holiness greater than Christ's? No no, Satan is gone away with all, the strong
man has all in peace, else thou should hear of him, and tell mean other
tale. This example of Christ well considered, would teach thee another lesson,
The greatest temptation of all is, not to be tempted.
namely, like a wise man, 1 To expect temptations. 2 Learn to resist them, as
Christ did. 3 That the greatest temptation of all, is, not to be tempted: for
where Satan's malice shows not it self, there is no good thing at all.

2 Note hence, That all Satan's temptations, be they never so hellish and
violent, yet cannot hurt us, if we yield not to them. He never more fiercely
assailed any than Christ himself, yet Christ, giving no way to him, was a
little troubled and grieved, Satan may allure, but he cannot force us.
but not hurt. So all that Satan can do to us, is but to assayl and allure us,
but force our wills he cannot; for God has not put our wills in his power.
Which should teach us, 1 More carefully to resist the Devil, who never gets
advantage of us, but by our own voluntary yielding, which rolls us into his sin
and condemnation. 2 Being fallen into sin, to accuse our own cowardliness and
carelessness: many being fallen into mischief, lay load upon the Devil, Oh the
Devil ought them a spite, and he has paid it; and so lay all the blame on
him, not considering their own sin. True it is, the Devil spights every man,
and the best most; but if thou had not more spighted thy self, thou had
done well enough: the Devil did move, and gave a rise to a sin; but who bade
thee perfect and finish it? Can the Devil make thee sin without thy self? I
deny not but that thou can not lay too much blame upon the Devil, but see
thou layest not too little upon thy self.

3 Note: in that therefore Christ fully overcame, and was not touched with
temptation, because by the perfection of his holiness he resisted at the first
we must learn this wisdom; if we would not fall by temptation, to resist the
first motions, and beat back the first assault, which is a great advantage.
For, if Satan can get us to rest upon his suggestion, he presently hopes for
consent, and then hasteneth the execution forward: for the party is wonn, and
the means of executing shall not be far to seek. Hence are we commanded, to
give no place to the Devil, but to break the head of the Serpent, hit Goliath in
the forehead, tread on sin in the shell, and dash Satan's brood against the
stones while they are infants. For, 1 Satan is more easily driven back at the
first; as ill weeds grow a pace in a rank soil, so by a little continuance,
Satan's first assaults to be repelled for three reasons.
his temptation gets power, strength, and greatness. 2 Man's power is daily
lessened, and he is more unable to resist; as in the body, the stronger the
disease, the weaker the body. 3 Many habit grow to a nature, and seldom are
habitual sinners reclaimed. When saw we a Drunkard converted, (...). Arist.
or a Blasphemer, or a mock-God, or a raylor at Religion? No, the delight in
sin has delivered them into Satan's hands, to be ruled at his will. It is in
the recovery of the souls health, as in the bodies; it is more easily obtained,
if the disease be met with at the first assault.

The second point considerable is, Why Christ would be tempted. II. Why Christ
would be tempted four reasons.
For we must think, that he voluntary submitted himself unto temptations, and
was not violently subjected to them, seeing he who was able to cast out Devils
by his very word, and legions of them, could (if he had pleased) by his own
power have commanded the Devils, not once to attempt the tempting of him. And
therefore one distinguished between Christ's submission, of which this was a
branch, and subjection, which usually infertes necessity.

We may well assure our selves, that it being in his power, he would never so
voluntarily have yielded himself to such an unpleasant combat with so soul an
enemy, had there not been very weighty and urgent causes. And these we shall
see most specially respecting us rather than himself: he was incarnate, not
for himself, but for us: he suffered in our nature, not for himself, but for
us, that by his stripes we might be healed: he subdued and vanquished the
Devil, not for himself, who was never under his power, but for us; and so was
tempted, not for himself, but for us; and that for these reasons.

1 That he might through temptation win that, which the first Adam through
temptation lost, and that as our fall was begun by temptation, so also might
our deliverance; that as the Serpent by tempting the woman, bereaved us of our
happiness; so the same Serpent, by tempting this seed of the woman, might
against his will help us to our happiness again.

2 That by his temptation he should not only overcome ours, as by his death
he destroyed ours; but by his resistance to leave us a pattern how to resist
the Devil. He is the chief Doctor, who not only teaches by Precept, but by
unfailing example, how we may rise from under temptation. He might have
driven back the Devil with a word, but then had we wanted the benefit of his
example, which has both showed us our coat armor, and the right manner of
using it as he did. As a faithful Captain, he trains his Soldiers, and as
Gideon said to his Soldiers, What yea see me do, that do you.

3 That he might be more able to succor them that be tempted, Heb. 2.18.
Christ by being tempted, enabled to succor us in temptation sundry way^.
for in that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted: And Christ by being tempted was enabled thereunto sundry ways: 1
By experience he learned wherein the strength of Satan did lie, that as
Dalilah, when she knew wherein Sampsons great strength lay, did soon disarm
him; so Christ spoiled Satan of his locks. 2 He took knowledge, and felt our
misery by reason of Satan's temptations, whereas he that has not felt misery,
does little know or believe the misery that another feels; but he that has
felt the like, has a fellow-feeling of it, Heb. 4.15. We have not an
High Priest, which cannot be touched with infirmities, but he was in all
things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. 3 As he would by temptation feel
our misery, so he was more enabled to show pity and compassion on them that
are tempted: Heb. 5.2. He is able sufficiently to have compassion them that are
ignorant and out of the way, because he was compassed with infirmity. So as if
Christ had not had experience of the force, craft, instance of the Tempter, and
of the misery, danger, weakness of the tempted, so far as without sin he
could, he had not been so able to succor them that are tempted, as now he is.

4 That by his temptation he might minister sundry grounds of comfort unto us:
A ground of comfort out of Christ's temptation.
as 1 That our temptations and trials are not signs of Gods wrath, no more
than they were to Christ, of whom he had immediately before witnessed that he
was the Son of his love: but exercises, which the Lord in wisdom uses for the
good of his Children. If it had been evil to be tempted, certainly Christ had
not been tempted.

2 That we should not quail at the sight of our enemy, as all Israel ran away
at the sight of Goliath, but, although he be never so huge and strong a Giant,
yet he may be, and is overcome, and that by Christ, true man, in the flesh:
Yea, this victory over Satan, in our nature, and by our head, is the ground of
ours, to whom he will also give power to do the same. 3 That we have him a
Companion, yea, an invincible captain in our Combat, who can never be
overcome; but at the weakest, and alone, like a mighty Sampson, slew down heaps
upon heaps, and bore away his enemies gates; and his presence shall make us
invincible, that look as Daniels fellows, could not be touched with the fire,
because there was a fourth like the Son of God with them; so much less shall
Gods children by Satan's most fiery temptations, so long as the Son of God is
with them. 4 That we might see in him, what glory follows victory, and what
crowns are prepared for the Conquerours, and so comfort our selves in all
difficulties, to hold out unto victory.

Use 1. Seeing Christ was tempted, let not us be dismayed at temptations,
Motives to manful resistance of temptation.
but rather encouraged manfully to resist them: For 1 By virtue of Christ's
temptations, ours are sanctified unto us. There was nothing which Christ did,
but he sanctified the same to us, public institutions of Gods worship
speaking and hearing the word, prayer, the Sacraments; and all other private
Ordinances, meat, drink, sleep, yea, even infirmities that are without sin,
pain, sorrow, temptations, nay death, and the grave: the former, of a gate to
Hell, being sanctified for a wicket to heaven; the latter of a stinking Cave to
reserve the body for torment, altered into a sweet bed to preserve it to
eternal joy.

2 By Christ's temptation, being our head, the force, and strength, and
bitterness of our temptations is abated, so as Satan cannot now so fiercely
assault his members. Temptation may fitly be compared to a sword, which,
beaten upon a rock or stone, is so far from peircing the stone, as it turns
the edge, and makes it more unable afterward to hurt. The Devil took this
sword, and laid on with both hands upon Christ; but he, as the stone hewn out
of the mountain, bears the blows, turns the edge, and blunted his assaults,
that they can never so sharply pierce the Members. The proud and furious waves
of the Sea, beating themselves against a hard rock, break themselves and lose
all their strength: So is it here with the billows of temptation, beating
themselves against the rock on which the Church is built.

3 For our further encouragement, in that Christ was tempted, and overcame in
temptation, we have assured hope of victory against Satan, as Christ our Head
had: for he has trod Satan under his feet for us, nay, under our feet too,
Romans 16.20.

Object. Oh but we are yet mightily assailed, and in great perplexity.

Answ. God suffers Satan still to tempt and try us, and he does it busily,
because his time is short: but yet, though the Lord will have our graces tried,
and will see our courage and valor, yet he has him under his feet, and in
his chain, so as we resist a conquered adversary; and, a little exercise being
over-past, we shall also have him under our feet.

Use 2. In that Christ was pleased to be assailed with sundry temptations, let
us look up unto this Author and finisher of our faith, and set before us our
pattern of imitation, who overcame not Satan for himself, as the Saints have
done, but for our salvation, and for our imitation. The former, Look up to
Christ tempered for salvation, and imitation.

that we might draw power and virtue from him to overcome as he did, that as
the Israelites being stung with fiery serpents, looking up to the brazen
serpent, might be cured; so we being stung by the temptations of this old
serpent and dragon, looking up by the eye of faith upon Christ, through that
blessed union betwixt him and us, might receive virtue and cure against all
these fiery darts. The latter, that we might not give place to the Devil,
though he should assault us again, and again, no more than Christ did: that
we might learn of him what weapon to use, and in what manner to use it, both
to defend our selves, and offend our enemy; therefore would he not only
overcome one temptation, but many, one in the neck of another, for our
instruction and imitation: And hence we are commanded to look up to Jesus that
endured such speaking against of sinners, Heb. 12.3.

Use 3. Hence we have a notable prop of our faith, that we have an
High Priest, who would have experience of our infirmities, and in all things
be tempted like us, that he might be merciful and compassionate; therefore
let us go boldly to the throne of grace to ask help in time of need, in
temptation, in affliction, in want, Heb. 4.16. Thus Christ was typified by the
High Priests in the Law, who were subject to like infirmities with others, that
they might be ready to comfort, and pray, and offer for them. Seeing Christ
was therefore afflicted, that he might be fit and ready to comfort others,
with what boldness may we approach to him in our need, and learn to comfort
others with the same comforts that we have received? 2 Cor. 1.4, 5, 6.

HAving spoken of Christ's entrance into the w^dernesse, which is the former
part of his Preparation to the combat, we come now to the latter, which is
the expecting of his enemy: and in this there are to be considered, 1 His
furniture, or how he was appointed. 2 His company, or how he was attended. 3
His exercise, or how he was employed. The first Luke has, chap. 4. verse. 1.
he was full of the Holy Ghost. The second Mark has, chap. 1. verse. 13. he
was among the wild beasts. The third is twofold: 1 That he fasted forty
days, and forty nights, as all the Evangelists say. 2 That all that while he
was tempted with lesser onsets, as Luke has it, chap. 4. v. 2.

First, Christ went armed to the combat with Satan, He was full of the Holy
Ghost; which had formerly lighted upon him in the shape of a Dove, and had so
extraordinarily fenced him with graces of sanctification above measure, that
there was no room to fasten any temptation upon him. The vessel that is full,
no more liquor can be conveyed into it: Christ was so full of the Holy Ghost,
his nature so perfectly holy and fully sanctified, as that not a contrary
motion could once invade him.

Object. But some of the Saints, as John Baptist, and Stephen, have been full
of the Holy Ghost, and yet have been foiled by temptation.

Answ. There is a twofold filling: 1 Absolute and perfect, which is beyond all
measure; a special privilege of Christ, who must be filled for himself and
all his members. 2 Comparative and imperfect, in measure: so those holy men in
respect of themselves at some other time, or in respect of other common men,
might be said to be filled, namely above the ordinary measure: But never was
any Saint so filled but that he had great emptiness, and much room for Satan,
to frame and forge his temptations in.

When God brings his children into the wilderness to be tempted, he armeth
them with grace sufficient
Doct. When God does bring his children into the wilderness, that is, into
temptation, he armeth them with sufficient power to withstand it, 2 Cor. 12.8.
when Paul was vexed with an extraordinary temptation, he prayed thrice, or
often; and answer was given, My grace is sufficient for thee: where by grace,
is not meant the free favor of God, as in many places, but the power and
strength of the Holy Spirit, which was a gift of grace, enabling him to stand
under it. And this is that which Gods children may expect; not to be exempted
from temptation, nor from much molestation, nor from many knocks and foiles,
which bring them much sorrow: but yet at length God, whose hand is under them,
brings them through all. For so it is in 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, and
will nor suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but with every
temptation will give an issue. In which place the Apostle distinguishes of
temptations; Some are so deadly and diabolical, as a man is drowned and never
swimmes out of them: these we must pray against, Lead us not into temptation:
Others rise of humane imbecility, and are such as men can bear, by which God
tries the graces of his, and manifests their infirmity, and out of which
his grace gives evasion and deliverance, seem they never so dangerous: as for
example; What a great temptation was that of Israel in the red Sea? Yet God
brought them out of it. So for evil of sin; What strong temptations were they
that seized on Peter, David, Solomon, wherein they seemed utterly lost? Yet the
Lord held under his hand, and left them sufficient grace to raise them again
Gods faithfulness was such to David and Solomon; and Christ's prayer, that
Peter's faith did not utterly fail.

David thought this a good Argument, Psalm 86.2. O thou my God, save thy
servant, that trusts in thee. And this is Gods manner of dealing: When he
has a great work or Trial for his children, he arms them with boldness,
constancy, and courage; as Sampson, when he was to encounter many Philistims,
what a measure of strength was he endued withal? when the Prophets were to
be sent to rebellious and stubborn people, the Lord made their faces as brazen
walls, Jerem. 1.18. and as adamants, Ezekiel. 3.9: The Apostles, being called to
the great function of calling in the whole world, the Holy Ghost fell first
upon them, and furnished them with singular gifts fit for that calling. How
boldly Peter preached and professed Christ at Jerusalem to the beards of those
that had put him to death, even the Rulers and Elders, appears in Act. 4.8. but
the cause of this was, that he was full of the Holy Ghost. The like we may
observe in Elias his reforming of Gods worship; and in the restoring of
Religion by Luther, who was wonderfully gifted, 1 With undaunted courage, as
appears in his burning the Popes decrees, and his disputation at Worms: 2 With
fervent Prayer: 3 With admirable and heavenly preaching. So the faithful
Witnesses and Martyrs that are called to a hot brunt, are first armed with a
singular spirit, as that Prote-Martyr Steven, Act. 6.8, 10. who was full of the
Holy Ghost, full of Faith and power, full of wisdom and grace, that they were
not able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke. And was it not so
in Q. Mary's days, that poor Creatures were lifted up with such excellent
spirits, as that all the learning and wisdom of the Doctors, or all the power
of authority could not daunt them, God should lose his honor, if any of his
servants should be utterly overcome
but only those unmerciful Arguments of fire and faggot could put them to
silence?

2 The battle and cause is Gods, the question between Satan and us is Gods
glory and our Salvation. This was Moses his Argument why the Lord should spare
his murmuring people; see Numb. 14.15, 16. Now if the Devil prevail against us,
God shall lose his honor, which is dear unto him: But he will not suffer
himself to be so disgraced, as to let us be overcome by his enemy, neither
shall the salvation of his be prejudiced: for this were against the truth of
God, whom Satan accuses to be a liar.

3 He has armed us with his own armor, and furnished us with his own
strength, and will not have his weapons be thought so weak and insufficient as
to be foiled in it: The Sword of the Spirit is not so blunt, The shield of
Faith is not so dull, the breast plate of righteousness is not so thin, as to
receive every bullet that comes, to hurt us.

4 Christ has made us members of his own body: and when the head can with
patience suffer the members, which it is able to defend, to be pulled off from
the body, then shall the sound members of Christ be pulled away by temptation
from him: which they must needs be, if they were not conunually supported by
his strength.

Object. 2 Cor. 1.8. We were pressed out of measure, passing strength,
insomuch that we desparred even of life.

Answ. 1 The Apostle speaks of humane strength, which could never have passed
through those trials: But the power and strength of God showed them an issue. 2
The Apostle speaks according to the sense of his flesh, and what they were in
their own feeling; as it is plain in the reason of his deliverance in the next
words, That we should not trust in our selves, but in God that raises the
dead. 3 The very scope of the place is to show, not the unmeasureableness of
affliction, but a great measure of them, thereby to amplify Gods mercy.

Use. We should not be discouraged, though our trials be very great: for we
shall not want sufficient to strength to carry us through them. Yea let us
check our weakness, while we torment our selves with needless fears, that God
takes little or no knowledge of our Trials, or will withdraw his grace, and
absent himself for ever. No, he tenders the weakness of his chosen, on whom
although the Spirit fall not so visibly as upon Christ, yet by virtue hereof
they have the secret distilling, and sensible, yea, forcible working of the
Spirit in their hearts; such graces of faith, hope, patience, and boldness (in
case they keep their watch) as whereby they may as surely persuade themselves
of victory, as if they had received the Holy Ghost visibly as Christ did.

Add hereunto these considerations: Strong ^^^tives to stand to ^tions.
1 That it is impossible to be exalted to Christ's Kingdom, if thou be not
assaulted first with temptation: thou can not be victorious, unless thou
fight, nor obtain the crown unless thou be victorious, Rev. 3.21. 2 That if
thou be in great perplexity, yet think not the Lord has forsaken thee: For,
1 not to be chastised of God, is to be hated of him: 2 He hides his face but
for a season from his children, as the mother does, till the child get knocks
and falls: only to let them see their weakness, and more to depend upon him: 3
That there is a time when God makes intimation to all his children of their
election and salvation: and commonly before this, that they may be fitted with
hungring desire after grace, and make much of it when they have it, there goes
a trouble of mind, and fear, and disquiet; so as a man thinks God is quite
gone, when he is drawing graciously unto him, and that he shall never hear
more of him, when he is knocking by the Holy Spirit to have entrance into his
heart.

Therefore we may trust perfectly on this grace, and wait Gods time for his
full manifestation of it: the just lives by faith, and makes not haste: Job,
if the Lord killed him, would still trust. Remember Mr. Robert Glover that
blessed Martyr at Coventry, crying to his friend Austen, He is come, He is
come: he looked for the Holy Ghost two or three days before, and made great
moan that he came not; yet he continued waiting, and he came at length, but
not before he came to the sight of the stake.

Secondly, of the company of Christ, and how he was attended: Mark adds that
circumstance, chap. 1. verse. 13. He was also with the wild beasts. Which is
not to be passed without use, because the Spirit of God pleased to record it.
The Popish VVriters say, that the cause hereof was, that the wild beasts
should come and do homage to him their Lord, as they did to Adam. But this is
a devise of man's brain: for although Christ deserved honor and homage from all
Creatures, men and Angels, yet this is not the time and place to receive it:
yea they forget, that Christ went into the Wilderness to be humbled in a
special manner. Besides, the text mentions other business wherein Christ was
for those forty days employed, as in the next branch we are to hear.

Why Christ was with wild beasts: Four Reasons.
But the true and proper causes were these: 1 To show what kind of wilderness
this was, namely not such as that in which John preached; of which there were
many in Palestina, which were distinguished by their special names, as the
Desert of Judea, of Ziph, of Maon, etc. and such as were not altogether desert,
and without people, or incommodious for men to dwell in, but were here and
there inhabited: But this Desert, wherein Christ was tempted, not noted by any
addition, but the Desert, was remote from all company of men, and full of wild
beasts; by which it is plain it was unpeopled, and had no inhabitants but the
wild beasts.

If any ask, which Wilderness it was;

I answer, it is not determined in the Scripture; but it is not unlikely but it
was that great Wilderness, in which the Israelites wandered forty years,
called by eminence, (...), the Wilderness. And we know, that there were some
figures, which might shadow the temptation in this place; as Exodus 17.7. it is
called the place of temptation, Massah and Meribah, because of contending, and
tempting the Lord; here the Lord was contended with and tempted. Again, Exodus
16.4. this was the place wherein the Lord showed them, that man lives not by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: compare
it with Deuteronomy. 8.3. This also was the Wilderness, in which Moses and Elias
fasted forty days; and if it were not the same, it must needs be figured by
it. But it is no Article of Faith, to be stood upon, or contended about.

2 This circumstance of History is added, to show how helpless Christ was,
without all help and comfort of man, where he could look for no succor from
any earthly creature, or worldly means, nay all the means against him: 3. To
show that his power was so much the more manifest, in that when Satan had him
at the greatest advantage, and all the means set against him, yet he goes away
victor; and that none could share with him in the praise of the victory, but it
belonged to him of all the seed of women. 4 To show the power of the Son of
God, who could live peaceably among the wild beasts, who, if he had been a
common and weak man, had been certainly eaten up of them.

Quest. How could Christ live peaceably and safely among the wild beast^?

Ans. When Daniel was cast into the Den, the Lions spared him, but not through
the disposition of their nature (for presently their devoured his enemies) but
the text ascribes it to two causes: 1 To the Angel of God, that stopped their
mouths. 2 Because he believed in his God, which, besides the faith whereby he
was justified, was even a faith in the miracle, by which he was strengthened
at this time. But I take it, another reason may be given of Christ's peaceable
converse among the savage creatures, namely, because he was endued with the
perfect Image of God, and they did acknowledge him as their Lord, even as they
did Adam before the fall; which is a special privilege of the state of
innocence.

Hence observe, 1 That wicked men are worse than brute beasts, Christ has more
peace among wild beasts, than among wicked men.
they will not acknowledge Christ when the wild beasts will; Christ shall have
no peace among them. If he come in Judas his hands, he will betray him; the
Jews will accuse him, Pilate will condemn him, the common sort will beat and
buffet him, the Soldiers will crucify him. A great deal more security shall
he find in the Wilderness among wild beasts, than in places inhabited by
wicked men. And the reason seems to be, that the higher the fall, the greater
the wound; the Devil falling from such a height of glory, is most desperately
wicked against Gods Image, especially in his Son: wicked men falling from a
blessed estate of holiness and renewed reason, are desperately malicious too,
so as the poor creatures in their proportion retain more goodness in their
nature than man does in his; they still serve God in their kinds, man still
rebelleth; they fell from subjection to man, but man from subjection to God.

Use, This should both humble us, to see the little good that is left in our
nature, and also urge us to seek the renewing of it. And it should terrify
wicked men, who, resisting Christ in his word, members, graces, yea persecuting
him in his Saints, show themselves more savage than the Creatures: the wild
beasts will acknowledge him that does him good; but the wicked man spurns
against him. Daniel was more safe among the Lions than his enemies; and David
was compassed with ramping Lions, Psalm. 22.13.

Note 2. This affords us a ground of comfort, that when the state of the
Church is afflicted, led into the Wilderness, environed with men, for their
dispositions, as wild and fierce as Tygres, Lions, Leopards, Cockatrices (for
so natural men are described, Isa. 11.) yet it is in no worse state than Christ
himself once was: and as Christ was in the midst of wild beasts, and was not
hurt, so shall his members be; they may be molested and afraid of danger by
them, yea assaulted and slain, but not hurt. If the Spirit lead thee into the
Wilderness as he did Christ, thou may be secure; if for good conscience
and Gods religion thou be set upon, thou shall not be hurt, as the Martyrs
were not.

Note 3. In that our Savior now is safe enough, when all the means of safety
and comfort are set against him, we must learn to depend upon him, if we shall
come into the like case: when we have no way to help our selves, all means
fail, nay all means are against us, Christ as able to defend us as himself,
both from wild beasts and Devils.
like so many wild beasts about us, then he is able to succor us, as he was
to defend himself alone, not only from the rage of wild beasts, but furious
Devils. And this is the true trial of faith, when we have no means, yea when
means are against us. It is an easy thing to trust God upon a pawn, but we
must trust in his word, that is indeed to trust in God. When the case is with
us as it was with Moses at the red Sea, the Sea before him, the Mountains on
both sides, Pharaoh and his Host behind, then to say, Stand still, fear not,
and behold the salvation of the Lord, here is sound faith. When Aram and mount
Seir came against Jehoshaphat, and he saw no strength or means of his own, he
said, O Lord, we know not what to do, but our eyes are unto thee; and so,
though his Army was small, and his enemies like grass on the earth, trusting in
God he went away with the victory. And what a holy and faithful profession was
that of Job? If the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in his mercy.

Rules to carry our selves by faith in the outward means.

I. Where they be. 1 Faith neglects not good means where they be, 3 Rules to
keep faith in the presence of outward means.
because Gods providence has afforded them and appointed them for our good:
faithful Jacob had a good care to provide for his family, Genesis 30.30. Isaac
said to his Father, Here is the knife and wood, but where is the sacrifice?
Abraham answered, God will provide: so set us use the means, and God will
provide the rest that is wanting.

2 It has a right judgment of them, not as things to be trusted to; neither
art nor labor, expressed by the net, Hab. 1.16. nor wealth and riches,
expressed by the wedge of Gold, Job 31.24. nor friends and alliance, expressed
by the arm of flesh, Jerem. 17.5. no, nor the outward means of salvation, Ezekiel.
33.31. Faith knows it is not bread, but the staff of bread that man lives by
David looks upon his staff and bow, and says they cannot help him, Psalm 42.6.
and counts watching and building but vain, except the Lord join his helping
hand, Psalm. 127.1, 2.

3 Faith uses means, but expects no blessing from them, but by the word and
prayer. Genesis 32.9. Jacob uses good means and policy in dividing his Army, and
separating his bands, but withal gives himself to Prayer, to get Gods arm
with him. Exodus 17.11. Jos^^^ goes, and valiantly fights the Lords battle,
but Moses must be at prayer in the mount, and no longer Joshua prospers than
Moses prays.

3 Actions of faith in the absence of means.
II. Where they be not. 1 Faith trusts where means be wanting, or against
them. Though ten thousand compassed David, yet would he trust, Psalm. 3.6. And
Abraham was a notable pattern of Faith, when he had no means, but all was
against him, in himself and his wife; still he depended upon the naked word,
that God was true, and able to perform his Promise, Romans 4.9, 20, 21.

2 Faith, when it may, uses no evil means; it flies not in sickness to
sorcery, nor in extremity to the Witch, as Saul did, for which he was rejected
from being King, 1 Chronicles. 10.13. It turns not to fetches of policy, nor to
dig deep Counsels, on which a woe is pronounced, Isa. 29.15. It devises not
to smite ones betters with the tongue: it takes not advantage of men's
simplicity or forgetfulness.

3 It observes how many great things God brings to pass without, yea against
the means; to show how little he depends upon them; and therefore it will not
stint the Holy one of Israel, but frame the heart to his likeness. It sees the
walls of Jericho fall down by seven days compassing, Josh. 6.3. It sees all
Midians Host discomfited, by means of a dream of a barley loaf, tumbled down
from above into the host of Midian, Judge. 7.13. and A^hurs Host fly all away,
supposing the King of the Hittites, and Egyptians to come upon them, through a
noise of Chariots and Horses, 2 King. 7.6.

And surely this is the course, in which God often incourageth his Children,
who thrive and grow they know not how, by virtue of the promise, that God will
fill his with hidden treasures. Whereas those that will feed themselves upon
the means, and trust God no further; Gods justice often lets them see their
folly, revenging their infidelity: they eat, and are not satisfied, they earn
money for a bottomeless bag, Hag. 1.6. they go and trust in Physicians as Asa
did, and pine away: their wisdom and Counsel is turned to foolishness, as
Achitophels: They have horses, and strength, and trust to it, Psalm. 20.7, 8.
but they are fallen there where they trusted. And thus God lets men see,
that there is neither wisdom, counsel, power, or success against, nor without
the Lord.

Not to think much, if with our Lord we find men more savage than beasts.
Note 4 Christians must not think much to find men more savage than brute
beasts, seeing Christ found it so: Lazarus found Dogs more pitiful to him
than Dives; and Paul found the Beasts, to which he was condemned at Ephesus,
more merciful than the men, 1 Cor. 15.31. The like entertainment in the world
must every Christian expect.

Verse. 2 And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hunger.
Now we come to the third point in Christ's expectation of his enemy, namely,
His employment; and that out of the Evangelists is gathered to be twofold: 1
Fasting, to which he joined prayer without all doubt: this S. Matthew has,
that he fasted forty days and forty nights. 2 Temptation, by lighter onsets,
as Luke says plainly, he was forty days there tempted of the Devil, and
after that he was hungry; and then began these three temptations.

In his fast, consider three things: 1 What kind of fast it was. 2 The reasons
of it. 3 The continuance, forty days and forty nights.

For the first. Of fasts there are three kinds. Kinds of fasts, three.


1 Civil, as when men fast for the health of their body; or when men are so
intent upon their affairs, as they take no time to eat and drink: Thus Saul
fasted pursuing the Philistims, 1 Samuel 14.24. and those forty, that vowed not
to eat till they had slain Paul, so intent they were upon their wickedness,
Act. 23.14. This is voluntary; there is also one involuntary fast, when men
want what to eat and drink, as Elias fasted, 1 King. 17.5. This is not here
meant.

2 Religious, which is an abstinence from meats, drinks, and all delights, to
testify our true humiliation before God, to fit us unto prayer, and to further
and witness the truth of our Repentance. And this is either public or private,
of one or of more, for one day or longer time. But neither is this meant here:
For, 1 Christ had no corrupt, wanton, or rebellious flesh to mortify, or
chastise. 2 Christ had nothing to repent of, no amendment of life, no hardness
of heart, no want of faith to bewail, no guiltiness to confess by it. 3 He had
no need of fasting to help him in prayer: for neither needed he any grace,
which he had not by the lighting of the Spirit upon him, neither had he any
sluggishness or dullness in his nature to hinder his prayer, neither did he
ever make a prayer, which did not merit of it self to be heard, or wherein he
was not heard.

3 Miraculous, which is above the strength of man, and is sometime given to the
Saints, to commend their doctrine, as unto Moses, Exodus 24.18. and to Eliah, 1
King. 19.8. And of this kind was our Saviors fast; because no man can fast so
long, or half so long, and remain alive; and much less can a man fast so long,
and not be hungry all the while, as it is said of Christ.

Secondly, The reasons of this fast are, 1 Negative: 2 Affirmative. I Negative.
1 It was not to commend fasting, as the Papists teach: for it is no
commendation to fast when one has no stomach, or is not hungry, as Christ was
not. Besides, it is in it self no worship of God, but a thing indifferent, and
only commanded, and commendable, so far as it is an help to religious
exercises. 2 Much less that we should imitate him, as the Papists do in their
Lent-fall: For 1 it is none of the moral imitable actions of Christ, but
effected as other miracles by a power transcending the strength of men and
Angels, yea, by the same power whereby he gave sight to the blind, and legs
to the lame; he is as imitable in one as in the other. 2 If they will imitate
Christ they must abstain from all food, not only from flesh, and that for
forty days and forty nights: for Christ all this while are nothing: yea, and
they must not be hungry all the while, as he was not, Luke 4.2. 3 Christ did
not fast once a year as they do, but once in all his life. 4 There is no
proportion, no agreement between Christ's fast, and their Lenten fast: for,

1 Christ's was a total fast an utter abstinence; theirs is a mock-fast: They
glut themselves in the time of their fast with most dainty meats and drinks, in
fullness and delicacy.

Christ's fast disagreeth from Popish fasts in seven things, or eight.
2 Christ's was voluntary, theirs is forced, against the use of the Primitive
Church, among whom it was left free to every man's Conscience, when and how long
it pleased him to use it: neither were any Laws set down for the Lent-fast
yearly to be kept in imitation of Christ, till Gregory the Great, or (as other
write) Telesphorus Bishop of Rome about four hundred years after Christ; but it
was free for the time, and kinds of meats.

3 Christ's fast was for a necessary cause; theirs in times of joy, when no just
cause urges, for the times sake, for custom, and superstitious imitation, when
no public danger is to be prevented, nor any special grace to be obtained;
whereas by Christ's fast the greatest evil in the world was diverted, and the
greatest good procured.

4 Christ's was without ostentation, in secret in the Wilderness, when none saw
him; whereas in Cities and societies of men, he ate and drank: but these will
be known to fast, and with the Pharisee profess, I fast twice a week, etc.

5 Christ fasted not as counting some meats unclean, which are all good, and
ought not to be refused, as unclean; but received with thanksgiving, as
sanctified by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. They fast with condemning
of flesh, and whatsoever comes of it, as unclean for that time: which is more
Jewish than Judaism it self: for even in the Ceremonial Law, those things that
were pronounced unclean, were never to be refused as unclean in themselves,
but only in regard of the Commandment: But much more now, all difference of
meats being taken away; according to Peter's vision, Acts 10.11. may all be
lawfully used at all times for the nourishment of man: and the contrary is a
doctrine of Devils.

6 Christ fasted not without instant prayer: for even the Saints of God always
when they did fast, joined prayer, which otherwise were but a bodily exercise,
1 Timothy 4.8. And hence fasting is often put for fasting and prayer, Hester 4.3,
16. But they fast in want of extraordinary prayer, and when no need or occasion
is above ordinary.

7 Christ did not fast as placing the Kingdom of God in meats and drinks;
whereas they account the observation of their fasts a thing meritorious, to
satisfy for sin, and purchase the Kingdom of Heaven; which is their common
doctrine: wherein what else do they, than attribute the Kingdom of God to meat
and drink?

8 Let them show where the people of God ever presumed to imitate the fasts of
Moses or Elias: if they cannot, how dare they embolden themselves to imitate
Christ, and enjoin the meanest of their Disciples so to do under pain of
Damnation? for this is the boldness of Bernard, saying, As Christ forty days
after his Resurrection ascended to Heaven, so none can ascend thither that
fasteth not these forty days.

And yet here I condemn not the Lent-fast among us, so it be observed only as a
civil and politic Ordinance, and not as any religious fast or observation: for
I esteem it as lawful for a King for a time to forbid his subjects some sorts
of meat, and enjoin others as he sees most fit for his Commonwealth, as for a
Physician to prescribe a diet to his Patient, forbidding some meats, and
appointing others for the health of his body. Much less do I condemn all
fasting in general, but wish it were more observed than it is, so it be
rightly: But this fast of the Papists, in the institution, observation, causes,
manner, and end of it, is wicked and sacrilegious.

Christ fasted this fast for four causes.
II. The affirmative ends of this fast of Christ were these:

1 To prepare himself by fasting and prayer to his most weighty calling: for
although Christ was full of the Holy Ghost, and seemed not to need the benefit
of fasting and prayer to fit him, yet he took on him our infirmities with our
nature, and as man needed such help as our selves do.

2 To teach us, not rashly and headily to enter upon or undertake any calling,
but by fasting and prayer to prepare our selves, who have more need of
preparation than Christ had, and to get Gods blessing on the same: but
especially this concerns the Magistrate and Minister.

Obj. You said this fast was not for our imitation.

Ans. True, it was not in the extent, but in the end it was: in the former
Christ is to be admired, in the latter to be imitated.

3 To set out his Miracles and Divine power, for the honor and authority of
his Person and Doctrine, to show himself the Son of God.

Obj. Moses and Elias fasted this fast, and yet were mere men.

Ans. They did it by his power, he by his own: they were upheld by the power of
God, but he by his Divine power: their fasting was but a type and shadow of
this. But to make every man able to imitate this fast, obscures Christ's glory,
and this Miracle, and the Gospel it self.

4 That hereby he might bid battle, offer opportunity, and provoke his
adversary to the combat: for this was the end both of his fasting, and going
into the Wilderness, and of his hunger. Wherein also this fast of Christ may
not be imitated: for we are not to offer any opportunities or advantages to
Satan, who is ready enough to seek and take enough: as we may not tempt God, so
we may not tempt the tempter, but pray that we may not be lead into temptation
by him, and watch lest we fall into temptation, Mark 14.38. yea we must cut off
and prevent his advantages, and shun all occasions wherein he might assault
us, as knowing our own weakness.

The third thing in Christ's fast is the continuance of time, III. Christ fasted
no longer nor shorter time than forty days, for five reasons. Moses in mon^e
ante legem. Elias in itinere sub lege, Christus in deserto sub gratia.
forty days and forty nights.]

Quest. Why did he fast so long? why no more nor no less?

Ans. For these reasons: 1 To be answerable to the types. As Moses fasted
forty days at the institution of the Law, and Elias at the restitution of it,
so would Christ here at the manifestation of the Gospel. 2 He exceeded not his
number, lest he should seem too inhuman and cruel against himself: for he did
no more than Moses and Elias had done, men subject to infirmity. In our time he
is no man that cannot strain one trick above others: but Christ being in the
shape of a Servant, takes not upon him above his fellow servants. 3 He would
not fast less, because he would not seem less than the Prophets, nor unlike
them. 4 He would not fast more, because he would not have his Deity now
acknowledged by the Devil. 5 He would not give occasion to Heretics to doubt
of the truth of his body and human nature: If he had fasted longer than Moses
and Elias, he might have been thought no true man, but only in show incarnate.

Quest. Why is it added, that he fasted forty nights?

Ans. For these reasons: Forty nights added for two reasons.
1 To show that it was not such a fast as the Jews used to keep, who fasted
many days together, but ate at nights; as Daniel fasted for three weeks of
days, chap. 3. verse. 10. Nor like the Turkish fasts, who so soon as they see a
star, eat any thing on their fasting days, but that which is strangled, or
Hogs flesh. Nor yet like the Papists fast, who, though they say they fast
forty days, both to imitate Christ, and to give God the tithe of the year, yet
can feed well and fare deliciously every night.

2 To show, that Christ had a care to spend his nights well, as well as his
days, not spending them out in sleep, but in watching and prayer as well as in
fasting: for by the same power his body was preserved without sleep, as it was
without meat. Far unlike the Papists, who in their fasting-days spend the
night in gluttony, luxury, and all uncleaneness.

Doct. Fasting a most necessary duty.
This example of Christ teaches us of what great necessity this exercise of
fasting is, both for the entrance, and comfortable continuance of the duties of
our calling, both general and special. This Nehemiah knew well, when hearing of
the calamity of Jerusalem, and his brethren the Jews, he fasted certain days,
and prayed before the God of heaven, chap. 1. v. 4. And Ezra proclaimed a fast,
to seek the right way homeward, and safe from their enemies, chap. 8. v. 21.
see also Act. 13.3.

Joel 2.12. Turn you with all your heart, with fasting and weeping. 2 The grace
of prayer; for as Prayer sanctifies fasting, so fasting strengthens prayer.
Otherwise, to place Gods worship in fasting is to make the belly the God. 3 It
helps forward the knowledge of the mysteries of God and godliness: Dan. 9.3.
conferred with 20.21. as Daniel was praying and fasting, Gabriel was sent to
instruct him, and revealed to him the mystery of the seventy weeks. 4 It adds
strength and courage in the Christian combat between the flesh and the spirit;
it is as a third, that comes in to take the spirits part, and so helps to the
victory by subduing the flesh.

2 The necessity and profit of this exercise appears in respect of our
selves: for, 1 If we want public or private benefits, fasting joined with
prayer is the means wherein God will have them sought and obtained. The
Benjamites after two sore overthrows, by this means got the victory, Jud.
20.28. Annah by the same obtained her Samuel: and David fasted for his childs
life. 2 If we be in danger of public or personal judgments, by the same
means they are to be diverted: religious fasting is a chief part of the
defensive armor of the Church, as we may see in the examples of Hester,
saving her people from Hamans devise: and of the Ninivites, turning away the
destruction threatened by Jonah, by fasting and humbling themselves. 3 If we
be to attempt public or private duties, hereby we must fit our selves, and
obtain success and blessing. So did Nehemiah and Ezra; as we saw before: and
when Paul and Barnabas were separated to the work of the ministry, they fasted
and prayed, Act. 13.3. Yea, Christ himself spent a whole night in fasting and
prayer, before he chose his Disciples, Luke 6.12, 13.

3 Daily experience shows the necessity of religious fasting: for, 1 How many
men observe in themselves, that for want of this duty they grow dull in their
profession, and heavy in holy practices, yea, empty of grace, so as they may
think the Spirit is departed from them? yet when they have renewed this
exercise, they find themselves more ripe and ready, more quick and able to
good duties, as if they had new souls given them. 2 Do we not see, that the
more conscionably a man carries himself, the more busily Satan does bestir
himself against him? and had he not need so much the more fence himself with
coat armor, and fly to God for strength and protection? If a good Magistrate
or Minister be to be brought into any place, how does Satan storm and bend
his forces against him, because he thinks that then his Kingdom must down?
Therefore if a man mean to be serviceable to God in any place, it is meet he
should first sanctify it by fasting and prayer, as Christ did.

Use 1. This serves to rebuke the great want of this so needful a duty. What
Magistrate or Minister, against whom Satan most shoots, enters thus into his
calling, as Christ by fasting and prayer; but by gifts, favor, or otherwise
get livings and offices? but to God they go not; and this is the cause that so
little good is done, either in one calling or the other: as much blessing as
they seek, they have. So, what other reason can be given, that many lingering
evils, and want of Gods blessing is in so many families; but because men omit
the chief means of procuring the one, and repelling the other? Men think they
have nothing to do with this duty, but when public authority enjoins it, and
that it is only the fault of Magistracy it is so out of use; as though every
Master of a family were not a Magistrate and Bishop in his own house; or as if
that were not a means for private blessings, which is so mighty for public. Oh
deceive not thy self: that which thou can not do publicly, thou may do in
thine own house; and therefore, if thou want any grace or blessing, blame
thine own idleness that seek it not in Gods means.

Use 2. This should move us to perform so needful a duty as this is, Motives to
fasting 6.
and thereunto to consider of these reasons. 1 Consider the Promises that are
made, and have been made good to fasting and fervent prayer. Remember that one
example of good King Jehoshaphat, against whom came the Moabites, Ammonites,
and they of Mount Seir, whereupon he proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah,
and prayed earnestly, 2 Chronicles. 20.2, 17. and before they had ended their
Prayer, the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jahaziel a Levite, who by the Spirit
of Prophecy foretold the victory, saying, Ye shall not need to fight in this
battle, O Judah, and Jerusalem: Fear ye not, but to morrow go out against
them, and the Lord will be with you: and so it came to pass: for the enemies
slew one another, and the Jews gathered the spoil, and returned and praised God
in the valley of Beracha, that is, of blessing; so called ever after.

2 The ordinary prayers of Gods children have prevailed much, and much more can
their fasting and prayer bring greater blessings. When Peter was in prison,
sleeping between two soldiers, the night before he should be brought out to
death, being bound with two chains, and the Keeper before the door watching
the Prison, at the ordinary Prayer of the Church, an Angel smote Peter, saying,
Arise quickly, and his chains fell off, and he was delivered, Act. 12.5. much
more can Extraordinary Prayer, joined with fasting, prevail.

3 Many things are not obtained, but by that prayer which is joined to fasting,
Matthew. 17.14. this kind (of Devils) is not cast out but by prayer and fasting,
that is, by a most fervent kind of Prayer, to which fasting is joined as a
whetstone to sharpen it, and set an edge on it. Some things, as those that are
precious, cost a greater price; and some suits must be obtained of men, not
without long and instant supplication: so here, many things are long sought by
ordinary prayer, which being extraordinary favors, might by extraordinary
prayer have been sooner had.

4 God has rewarded the wicked, who have used this Ordinance in Hypocrisy; and
much more will he those his servants that use it in truth, 1 King. 21.21. Ahab
fasting for the destruction threatened by Elijah, humbled himself; and this fast
of his, not joined with true repentance, but only kept in the outward
ceremony, in abstaining from meat, in sackcloth, and giving some testimony of
outward sorrow, was not unrewarded, but obtained a reprieve of the execution of
the sentence, till his Sons days. How much more respect shall we obtain of
God, if we join to the outward fast the inward graces of humility, repentance,
faith, and fervency?

5 Were this exercise in request sometimes in families, it would prevent many
judgments, and many sins the procurers thereof, in governors, children, and
servants; as adultery, fornication, drunkenness, swearing, riot, and
profaneness; these might be kept out as well as cast out by this means: and
unspeakable were the good that might hereby be procured, as release from many
evils, life, health, etc.

6 We have the example of the Jews, who besides all other moveable fasts upon
special occasion, must have one set fast in a year, Levit. 16.29. 1 Because
many great sins of all sorts might be committed in a year, for which they
needed to be humbled. 2 Once a year God might show some tokens of displeasure,
public or private, that they might know that once a year they had cause to be
humbled.

Obj. That was a Ceremony?

Ans. The day was, not the thing, the equity of which binds us as well as them,
because the ends and causes bind us. And in the Gospel we have the example of
John and his Disciples, who fasted often: and Christ's Disciples must fast, when
the Bridegroom is gone, and causes of mourning come.

Beside these, we have sundry other motives to religious fasting: as,

1 Shall Christ fast for us, and not we for our selves?

2 Shall the Pharisees fast twice a week in hypocrisy, and we not once in our
lives in sincerity?

3 Can we cheerfully betake us for our bodily health to fasting, diet, or
abstinence so long as the Physician will prescribe, and will we do nothing for
our souls health?

4 Can worldly men for a good market fast from morning to evening, and can
Christians be so careless as to dedicate no time to the exercise of fasting and
prayer, to increase their gain of godliness?

5 Is not this a seasonable exhortation? has not God sounded the Trumpet to
fasting? Matthew. 9.16. when the Bridegroom is taken away, it is time to fast.
But now,

1 Sins abound, as Drunkenness, Pride, and high wickedness, and there is no
more fear of Gods wrath in the Church and Land. 2 The Word and Ministry is
more despised than ever, and less loved; Preachers and Professors of the Gospel
are scorned, as in the days of Noah; the heavenly Mannah is contemned, and the
contempt of it threatens a final departure ot the Bridegroom. 3 Papists
increase in numbers, in boldness, in pride, in power, and are so far from
being converted by the light, as they are daily more perverted and perverse,
notwithstanding the glorious Gospel of God, and the wholesome Laws of the Land.
Add unto these the swarms of Atheists, Machevilians, carnal and cold
Protestants among us. 4 Who has not smarted in the common judgments of the
Land, lingering by many years in plagues, unseasonable weather, fires, waters,
and the like, all of them forerunners of greater misery? Who can forget the
warning of Gunpowder, and the present unfeelingness of it?

And were not these public evils, how may every one of us bewail Christ's
hiding of himself from our souls? His gracious beams shine not on us with such
comfort as they might, his Word is not so fruitful in the best as it should,
dullness and conformity with the times creep in upon the best; the Sun and Moon,
great Lights in the Ministry, are darkened, and the Stars lose their light
among professors. Is it not time to awake our selves, if ever, and to betake
our selves to sackcloth and ashes, to fasting and prayer, if the Lord may be
entreated to draw nearer us, and our souls nearer him?

The second part of Christ's employment, while he expected his enemy, was
temptation by lighter onsets, which is plain, in that Saint Luke says, he was
forty days tempted of the Devil; and then records Satan's solemn onsets upon
him in these three most fierce temptations. Whence we may observe his subtilty
and policy, who has a deep fetch in it: for,

Satan by lesser temptations makes way to greater.
Doct. By lesser temptations he makes way unto greater. For, 1 As a wise
Captain sends out his Spies to see the state of the contrary Army, their number
and strength, and to view what advantages may be taken, and perhaps sends out a
wing to make a skirmish only, to try their purpose and strength; so does Satan
here: he would by lesser temptations try the strength or weakness of Christ,
that so he might plant his main forces against him accordingly. 2 He begins
with smaller things before he come with his main forces and show his blackness,
because smaller things are easily contemned, or more easily yielded unto: Is it
not a little out? and is there any great hurt in it? 3 He knows by little
things how to obtain great, easily winding himself by little and little into
the heart, as a cunning Thief, if he can find room but for the point of a
wrinch, will quickly make strong doors to fly open. 4 He will try if by small
things he can make us secure, and negligent to put on all Gods Armor to fence
us, because we easily think that smaller things need no great resistance.

Use 1. As he dealt with Christ our head, so does he with his members: Where
Satan begins his temptation, we must begin out resistance.
therefore as Christ was able enough to espy his fleight, so must we learn to
do; even where Satan begins his temptation, there to begin our resistance, and
give him the repulse at his first motion: we must resist smaller temptations,
and keep off of the first staff of the Devils ladder, and kill every hellish
Serpent in the shell. 1 We must do as wise Citizens that are besieged, and
will not let the enemy come to scale the wall, or into the Marketplace with
purpose to drive him out again, but keep them out without bullets reach. 2 We
are wise to prevent bodily diseases at the first grudgings, because we know
that d^seases get strength by delay, and are hardly removed if they be suffered
to settle. 3 Satan first lays objects and occasions, and then tempts or works
upon them.

David was first moved to look upon Bathsheba, which seemed a small thing: but
had he had his armor on his eye, his heart had been fenced from the desire,
and himself from the act. Peter was not first moved to forswear his Master, but
first to go into the High Priests Hall, or to follow aloof off and then to sit
among Christ's enemies, and then to do as they did. The Devil comes first
aloof, and seems to require but some reasonable thing at first, but at last is
impudent and importunate for greater. Do we think that Judas was at first
moved to betray his innocent Lord? No, but first Satan wrought him to
covetousness, and then offered the occasion, thirty pieces of silver, and so
struck up the matter by degrees, and in the end oppressed him with his whole
power.

Even so to draw a man from God and religion, he will begin with lesser
things; he will not bid a man hate religion at first, but first to doubt of
this point or that, or hate, not all at first, but this Minister or that; he
sets before his eyes some infirmities, which breed dislike, then he moves him
to take counsel against him, then to scorn, rail, persecute him. When Saul was
commanded utterly to destroy the Amalekites, men and cattle, and spare none,
the Devil thought it bootless to go against the whole Commandment of God, by
moving him to spare all; but he might think it reasonable to spare some, the
King, and the fat beasts, especially upon so good an intention as to sacrifice:
but this was enough to depose him from his Kingdom.

Here therefore remember these rules: 1 To give no place to the Devil, Rules of
resistance three.
Ephesians. 4.27. And seeing we give him place three ways, 1 By letting into our
hearts his suggestion. 2 By putting it in execution. 3 By not hating his
motions, and the risings of sin: we must carefully watch against him in all
these.

2 The less the sin is to which thou art tempted, the more suspect Satan's
further drift in it, which he ever hides at the first: for if he be not met in
the beginning, he makes no stay till he comes to the height of sin. An example
hereof we have in Eve, to whom Satan comes and says, Yea, has God said so
indeed? not that he did not know it, but his further drift was to make her
forsake that word, as indeed she did. So he comes to many a man, as to Peter,
and says, Go into such and such company among thy neighbors, to such or such
an exercise; which is a small thing: but he has a further drift; there thou
shall lose thy time, and thrust thy self out of thy calling, there thou shall
lose thy patience, thy charity, thy piety, and coming home shall find thy self
much worse and weaker for going abroad: He did not bid thee go and swear, and
quarrel, and scoff, or abet these things in others, but he did as bad: for
these are the fruits, yea the best fruits that come from lewd and unthrifty
company.

3 Consider, that as the least poison in quantity kills or hurts, if it be but
once taken; so even the smallest sin is deadly poison to the soul. Set open one
gate of a besieged City, and the enemies will come in as certainly, as if all
the walls were rased. One Serpent suffered to come so near as to wind about a
man's hand, is not easily shaken off. The beginning of sin is death, and a bad
beginning brings on a worse end.

The least temptation is too strong for a secure adversary.
Use 2. Let us beware we despise no temptation: to contemn a temptation is to
neglect ones armor, and the means of resistance; and no temptation but will be
too strong against a secure adversary. But let us learn to fear continually in
respect of our weakness, and let us prepare for war in the rumor of it,
before the enemy be in our necks, and will not suffer us to whet and fit our
armor.

Use 3. This teaches us what to think of them that scorn men as being too
precise: What? must we not swear small oaths? may we not speak now and then a
merry word? may we not recreate our selves? (now by recreation they mean
gaming, unthriftiness, cousenage, and the like) may we not now and then be
angry and impatient, seeing flesh and blood it so weak, and it is but an
infirmity? what need a man be so precise and scrupulous, as to stand upon such
small trifles? all which is but to plead for Satan against our own safety.

He was afterward an hungry.]

In these words is set down the effect of Christ's fast; After he had fasted
forty days and forty nights, he began to be hungry: all the while before he was
not hungry, neither did he want power to have fasted longer, and by his Divine
power upheld his human nature, if he pleased: but now the miraculous fast
being finished, he begun to hunger.

Quest. How could Christ be hungry, seeing he was able to feed so many
thousands with seven Leaves and two Fishes? Besides, Joh. 4.34. he says, My
meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Or if he
could be hungry, why would he?

Ans. Some have thought that Christ needed not to eat, sleep, etc. as we need
when our bodily strength is exhaust by labor, by fasting, and watching. And
some of the Fathers, as Ambrose, and Theophylact, upon Mar. 11.12. hold, that
Christ only by dispensation gave his body leave to be hungry when he pleased;
as though he neither was wont, nor could, nor ought to be ordinarily hungry as
other men, nor necessarily forced to eat. But we must know that Christ took
upon him a true human body, and the form of a Servant, in which he was
obnoxious to all our infirmities, only sin excepted. And the infirmities which
he undetook not, are these:

What infirmities our Savior took, and took not, in three propositions.
1 He was not to take any which might hinder the perfection of his soul or
body. Of his soul, as vices, sins, proneness to evil, heaviness to goodness.
Christ took miserable infirmities in his soul (as Augustine says) such as are,
natural negative ignorance; as of the day of Judgment, and the time of figs
fructifying; but not (...) (as Damascene says) damnable and detestable. Of his
body, because it was extraordinarily conceived and created of the Holy Ghost,
who being of infinite wisdom and power, could not e^re, or not bring his body
to perfection. Therefore he was not to be blind, lame, deaf, etc. which are
infirmities in many other men.

2 Christ was not to take all infirmities in general: Christ took not all
infirmities of every particular man, for three causes.
for 1 Some arise of particular causes, which could not be in Christ; as
namely, some hereditary infirmities and diseases, as the Leprosy,
Falling Sickness, Stone, etc. some from redundance of matter in generation have
some monstrous or superfluous part: some from defect want some part, or have
some part withered or scanted. None of this can agree to Christ's most perfect
conception of the Holy Ghost. 2 Some infirmities are acquisite, as by Surfeits,
Fevers, and Gouts by fullness: These could not befall Christ, who never
exceeded the mean, his whole life being a continual exercise of sobriety:
neither had he ever any acquisite infirmity, but voluntarily undertaken. 3
Some defects and infirmities are the fruit of some special judgment of God; as
Uzziah his Leprosy was a special stroke of Gods hand for a special sin: so
some are born fools and simple: Neither could these belong to Christ, who had
no sin, nor cause of judgment in him.

3 Christ was to take upon him all natural and indetractable infirmities (as
the Schoolmen call them) and only them: Natural, that is, such as follow
common nature, infirmities common to all men: And indetractable, or inculpable,
which detract not from the perfection of his person, nor of his grace, nor of
the work of our redemption. Of this kind are hunger, thirst, labor, weariness
sleep, sorrow, sweat, and death it self: all these are common to all men. Now
hunger being a common infirmity, incident to all men, yea to Adam in innocence
(who was hungry and did eat, as Genesis 1.39. every tree bearing fruit shall be to
you for meat: and slept, chap. 2. verse. 21. a heavy sleep fell on the man; yet
without molestation:) therefore Christ did necessarily hunger as other men do,
not by an absolute necessity (for 1 he needed not have taken our nature, or
been incarnate. 2 As he was God, he could have exempted himself from all the
abasement and miseries that he suffered:) neither by a coacted necessity; for
he willingly submitted himself to this necessity: But by a necessity ex
hypothesi, or conditionate; having taken our nature to redeem it, he was
necessarily to take on him all our weaknesses, sin only excepted; for these
reasons: Reasons why Christ took on him our infirmities, five.

Man's nature is known by defects, Gods by perfection.




1 He was not only to be like a man, and in the shape of a man, but also a very
true man, like unto his brethren in all things, except sin: therefore it is
said, Heb. 2.17. (...), to assure the truth of his incarnation against all
Anthropomorphites, and such like Heretics.

2 This was a part of his obedience, and consequently of our redemption, that
he suffered the same thing as we do, both in body and in mind: Vere pertulit
lang^ores nostros, he has truly born our infirmities, Isa. 53.4.

3 That he might sanctify unto us these infirmities, and take away the sting
of them, lest we should be wearied, and faint in our minds, Heb. 12.3. and
that we might have an example in suffering, 1 Pet. 2.21.

4 That he might be a compassionate High Priest, Heb. 2.17, 18. touched with
infirmity, yea clothed with our frail nature, that we should not doubt of his
grace, who vouchsafed to be so abased for us.

5 Himself confirms the same, in that he took not on him such a body of ours
as Adam had before sin, but such a one as he retained after his fall, so far as
it was obnoxious to all incriminal pains of sin; namely, such as was subject to
weariness, Joh. 4.6. to sorrow, tears, and weeping, as over Jerusalem, Luke
19.41. and at the raising of Lazarus, Joh. 11.35.38. and in his Agony, when he
shed tears, and used strong cries, Heb. 5.7. to sweating water and blood in the
garden, yea to death it self: from all which Adams body was free before the
fall. And by these his body was by a true necessity overcome as ours are; and
this not for a short time or space, at his pleasure, but all the time of his
life till he breathed out his holy spirit; yea, thirsting upon the cross it
self, John 19.28.

Neither was this only to confirm the truth of his humane nature, but to
fulfill all righteousness, and carry away all the punishment of our sins,
and so work a perfect salvation for us. Therefore Christ truly and necessarily
was hungry, as we use to be.

Obj. Christ's meat was to do the will of his father.
As for that place in Joh. 4.34. I answer: 1 It must be meant comparatively,
in that the execution of his calling, and doing of his Fathers will, was
preferred before his meat and drink. 2 It belongs to the hunger of the soul,
which is, to cleave to God, and obey him in his will; and so keeps not off the
hunger of a natural body. 3 Christ did as Abraham's servant did at Bethuels
house, who having meat set before him, would not eat till he had done his
message, Genesis 24.33. and yet was subject to hunger.

Differences between Christ's infirmities and ours in fire things.

Non habuit ex debito peccati. Aquin.


Quest. What is the difference between Christ's infirmities and ours?

Answ. 1 They are all punishments of our sin in us; but not punishments of his
sin in him. 2 His humane nature being holily conceived, was in it self free
from them all, and they do not necessarily attend it in respect of it sel^: But
our nature being tainted with Original sin has contracted them inseparably,
seeing by one man sin came in, and death (of which these are forerunners) by
sin went over all. 3 Christ undertook them by a voluntary necessity; but in us
the necessity is forced and absolute: will we, nill we, we must carry them.
4 In us they be the effects of our sin; in Christ effects of mercy, 5 Ours are
often miserable, acquisite, rising from particular causes, or sins; but so were
not Christ's.

Object. If Christ took not all our infirmities, what say you to Damascens
argument, Quod est inassumptibile, est incurabile? how could Christ cure all
our defects, and not assume them all?

Answ. All particular defects rise out of the general corruption and infirmity,
which Christ undertook and cured, and therein these also; even as he which
stops a Fountain in the head, stops all the streams without more ado.

Use 1. Note the wonderful Humility of our Lord Jesus, who would not only take
upon him our nature, but even our infirmities, and was not only a man, but a
servant also. If he had descended, being the Lord of Glory, to have taken the
nature of Angels, or (if of man) such as Adam was in innocence, it had been
admirable humility, and such as has no fellow: But to be a worm rather than a
man, is lower than humility it self. Let the same mind be in us that was in
Christ, Phil. 2, 5.

Use 2 His infinite love is herein set forth: he was able to feed many
thousands with a few loaves and little fishes, yet he would want Bread and be
hungry himself: he could and did give legs to the Lame, yet he would be
weary himself for us: he could fill the hearts of others with the joys of
Heaven, yet he would sorrow: he raised others from death, and yet he dyed. And
as this commends his love to us, so should it breed in us a love of him, to
express it in embracing a base estate for him, and in giving up at his call
our comforts, our liberty, our bodies, and lives: so did he for us.

Use 3. This is a great comfort for the poor, and men in want, seeing Christ
and his Disciples, not seldom wanted what to put in their bellies, Mat. 12.1.
The Disciples plucked the ears of Corn, and began to eat. Christ the Lord of
glory has sanctified thy want, thy hunger, thy penury by his: If thou be in
the world as in a barren wilderness, and live among hard-hearted and cruel
men, as so many wild beasts, think on Christ in this estate; thou art no
better, of no better desert than he, nor better loved of God than he, and yet
thou ^arest no worse than he: Oh murmur not, nor repine, but say with that
blessed Martyr, If men take away my meat, God will take away my stomach; he
feeds the young Ravens, and will he neglect me? Only turn all thy bodily
hunger into a spiritual hunger after Christ and his merits, and then thou shall
be sure not to starve and dye everlastingly, Mat 5.6 Rev. 2.17.
but to be satisfied with the hidden Mannah of God.

Use 4. Let rich men learn, that it is not good always to be full, and
prevent hunger, but to feel it, and know what it means: Christ was God, and
might have avoided it, but being man, ought not, and would not, that he might
have sense and feeling of our infirmity, and so be a compassionate
High Priest. What else is it that breeds hardness of heart in rich men, but
want of feeling of the afflictions of Joseph? Gluttonous Dives took not to
heart Lazarus his want; and where are the poor most neglected, but where there
is fine and delicate Diet every day? Especially the Ministers of Christ should
learn to endure want and hunger; as Paul had learned to want and abound, and to
be contented in every estate; else they will do but small good in their
Ministry.

Use 5 Christ is daily hungry in his members; Lazarus lies still at our gates,
and is not yet quite dead: Therefore let us put on the bowels of compassion
toward him. Would we not have relieved Christ, if we had lived when he did?
or would we not now if he should be in need? Oh yes, (we say) we would,
else it were pity we should live. Well then, whatsoever we do to one of his
little ones, we do it to himself, and so he accepts it, saying, I was hungry,
and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink. Despise not thy
poor fellow-member, and turn not thine eye from beholding his penury, nor thine
ear from hearing his moan and deep sighs: If thou should hear Christ himself
say, I thirst (as once he did on the Cross) would thou give him vinegar and
gall to drink? is that it he thirsts after? no, it is thy conversion and
compassion that will satisfy him; therefore use him kindly in his members.

Verse. 3. Then came the Tempter to him, and said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.
WE have heard how our Lord Jesus Christ entered into the place of combat, how
he was furnished, attended, and exercised all the time while he expected his
enemy: Now we come to the entrance of his adversary, and after to the onset.
In this entrance observe, 1 The Time, Then, 2 The Name of the Adversary, The
Tempter. 3 The manner of his entrance, he came.

I. The Time, Then, that is, when Christ had fasted forty days and forty
nights, and was now hungry. He was willing and ready to tempt him before, and
so he did now and then cast a dart at him, as we heard; but now supposing him
to be weak, and hungry also, he comes upon him with might and main, and
thence strengthens himself, and sharpeth his temptation.

Note hence Satan's subtilty. Who watches his opportunity, Doct. Satan ever
takes us at the weakest.
and takes us ever at the weakest. Thus he set upon Eve when she was alone,
in Adams absence: and set Cain upon Abel, when he was alone in the field, and
helpless. Thus was Dinah set upon, being alone, and was foiled. Potiphars wife
set upon Joseph alone, none being in the house but they two: and the Gospel
tells us, that the envious man sows tares while men sleep.

1 Satan by the subtilty of his nature, and long experience, Reason^.
knows our estate, our temper, our hunger, our chief desires; and accordingly
sets on us. For though he know not the heart directly, yet he knows our
corruption in general, as we are men, since the fall, and there is in it a
root and spawn of all sins. Further, by our outward behavior and gesture, he
can gather our special corruptions, as a Physician by outward signs in the
water, pu^ses, and the like, can judge of the particular disease within.
Besides, his experience gives him much light into our weaknesses, so as like a
cunning angler, he can bait his hook, so as he has experience the fish will
take; and though he see not the fish in the water, yet by his quill and cork
he can tell when he is taken: So Satan has for sundry men sundry baits, and
can tell by the eye, hand, speech, gesture, etc. whether the man be, or will
be taken.

2 The malice of Satan is such, as it aims directly at man's destruction; and
therefore to get his desire, and to have his prey, he cares not how cowardly
he sets upon us, Gen 34.15. Simeon and Levi, plotting the destruction of the
Sechemites, persuaded them to circumcise themselves, which they thought they
would do to enjoy Dinah: but even when they were sore, they came most cowardly
upon them, and destroyed them, in a cursed rage, as Jacob called it: Even so
deals the Devil, he comes when we are least able to resist.

3 Satan well knows, that though he can tempt us, yet he cannot force us, and
if he overcome, he must have help and ground from our selves, and therefore
he must observe for his advantage the time, place, person, his inclination to
mirth or sadness, to wantonness or desperation: his estate, whether rich or
poor, high or low; his general corruptions and personal sins, dealing no
otherwise than the Philistims dealt with Sampson: they intended mischief
against him, but he was too strong; now if they could watch a time when he was
as weak as another man, and know how to abate his strength, they would not miss
of their end; but this they cannot know but by himself, and none can get it out
of him but Delilah, who, if she cut off his locks, his strength is gone, and
poor Sampson is taken, his eyes put out, and sent to grind like a mill-horse.
So deals Satan.

Use 1. As Satan watches all opportunities to mischief us, so let us watch
opportunities to resist him. Shall a thief watch at midnight to rob thee and
cut thy throat, Horat.
and will thou not watch to save thy self? Now we have time to arm and prepare
our selves against the evil day: never had our fathers such an opportunity for
heavenly and spiritual things: We have an acceptable time, a day of salvation,
2 Cor. 6.2. a time of health and strength, to gather a stock of grace and
strength against the time of weakness. Is it not now a point of wisdom, if we
were as strong as Sampson, to know that we may be weak as other men, and
forecast a day of trial? Shall we not be worthily and shamefully foiled, if
in this our day, while we have means to gather knowledge, to increase in
faith, and grace, we lay not up for the day of weakness? will it not be a
gainful policy to acquaint our selves now with Satan's policy aforehand, and
with what weapons he comes against us, that so we may arm our selves with
armor of proof against his fiery darts, and learn so to resist him, that he
may fly? And, not to do this, what is it else but to become traitors to our own
hearts?

How unhappily and foolishly do men cast off all this care to the time of
weakness and sickness, wasting all the time of their health and strength in the
world or other wretched courses? Our sick and dying day most unfit for
resistance, for three reasons.
Now they have the day, the light, the word, and Gods armory open to furnish
themselves; but they cast themselves into the night, and lay all the hazard of
the combat upon the day of sickness or death; then they will send to the
Minister, and think on death. But this is the unfittest time; For,

1 When the body is weak and sick, it has other things to think on, either the
pain, or means of health, or to settle and dispose the goods.

2 It is just with God, that they who neglect the means, when they may be had,
seldom have them offered at their desire, but as it is Prove. 1.24. Because I
have called, and ye refused; ye shall cry, and I will not hear. And what
comfort can thou have, if not in thy calling upon God?

3 Then Satan, because we are at the weakest, assails us with all his strength
and cunning, even to bring us to despair: and then how shall he lift up his
head, that never provided his armor of confidence, when he shall see the
roaring Lions mouth wide open, and himself in his clutches.

Use 2. Let us learn of Satan to watch our own weaknesses, and our personal
corruptions: If the Devil so observe us, let us so much the more observe our
selves. The enemy assaulteth the City where it is weakest, and there the wise
Citizens lay most matter of defense. Here it will be fit to observe these
rules.

1 Take heed we wilfully cast not our selves into infirmities, Five notable
rules for the watch over our own weaknesses.
especially sinful, as, immoderately to desire goods or gain. The feeding of
covetousness cost Judas deer: So the immoderate desire of pleasure, or
ambitious pursuing of honor, or nourishing of wrath and anger, which is to
give place to the devil, and brings forth manifold evils, as railings,
revenges, quarrels, murder, etc. For if Satan by reason of natural
infirmities, as hunger, poverty, and the like, can take his advantage against
Christ himself, much more can he work his advantage against us by such
immoderate and unruled passions.

2 Play not with the objects of sin: it is not without danger for the fish to
play with the bait. Turn away thine eyes from beholding vanity, thine ears from
hearing lewd things, shut the doors, and keep the threshold of thy heart, make
Gods fear the Porter of thy soul, let not death enter in at the windows of thy
senses, as Eve did. Delight brings practice, and repetition a habit.

3 Watch thy natural desires with all carefulness, because in them a man is
most frequent, and most impotent, and a thousand to one thou fallest by these.
The natural desire of meat and drink is ordinary, and as Satan here lay in
ambush against Christ in them, so he does against all other men, good and bad.
See we not in the example of Esau, that being weary and hungry after his
hunting, he was so sharp set, that he made a most childish and graceless
match? even for one mess of pottage he did foregoe the birthright, whereby
he had not only title to an earthly inheritance, but to be one of the
Fathers and Patriarchs, and one of the promised seed, which profanely, and not
without too late repentance, he rejected. Nay, we want not examples of Gods
dear children, who not watching their natural appetite, have been foulely
foiled.

How did Lot suffer himself to be drunken time after time? and then how
strongly did Satan assail him, and prevail against him to commit incest with
his own daughters? It is a natural desire to seek and lay together the things
and wealth of this world; and herein how does Satan strive to bring in
inordinacy upon every man? and who is he that weakens not himself much, and
gives advantage unto the Adversary, by sinful and inordinate desires of riches?
For this is a root of all evil, and those that will be rich (says S. Paul)
fall into diverse temptations and snares. Whence our Savior advises us to
take heed, that our hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting, drunkenness, or
the cares of this life; with which many are become as drunk, as others with
beastly quaffing. It is a natural desire, for a man after labor of body or
mind, to unbend and refresh himself with some recreation or sport: but here
how does the Devil watch, either to thrust some unlawful exercise into men's
hands? or, if lawful, to use them unlawfully, wasting their time and goods,
loving pleasure and pastime, or choosing swearing, drinking, or idle company,
and then they are presently overmastred.

When did Satan set upon Peter? not so long as he was among good company, of
Christ or his fellow-Disciples, whose presence might have upheld him; but when
he runs among a company of rake-hells, and sits him down among the High
Priests serving-men by a warm fire, now he is fit to be wrought upon, and be
brought from denying his Lord, to forswear him, and from that, to curse
himself. Many such knocks are they sure to meet with, who turn themselves out
of their way and calling, and promiscuously run into all companies, and all
exercises, where God and Christ is not, but Satan and his instruments with a
whole band of temptation.

4 Watch thy self narrowly in thy outward estate, whatever it be: for in all
estates Satan has his baits laid; and indeed few there be that can use their
estate aright. God gives a man prosperity, honor, and wealth in the World:
here now is an opportunity to set forth the glory of God, to do good to others
that need, and to further his own reckoning by being rich in good works, and
laying up in store a good foundation against the time of need, 1 Timothy 6.19. but
how does Satan pervert it to be an occasion of forgetfulness of God, when he
most remembers us, to envy our betters and equals, to disdain our inferiors,
to mischief our selves by security, presumption, pride, wantonness, and all
riotous behavior?

Contrarily, God disposes a mean and poor estate unto others: here is a fit
opportunity to bring to a man the knowledge of himself, to train him up in
humility, to whet up his prayers, to urge him to make God his portion, and to a
diligent seeking of heavenly treasures; to exercise his faith, patience, hope,
diligence in his calling, and other graces. But Satan by his malice uses this
as a small opportunity to draw men to grudging, murmuring, impatience, despair,
injustice, stealth, wronging men, and blaspheming God. And all this comes to
pass, because men have no care to learn S. Paul's lesson, Phil. 4.11. to be
full and hungry, to abound and to want, to be abased and to be advanced, and in
every thing to be content. Job, when he had lost his goods and children, and
was sore afflicted, then the Devil set upon him by himself, and Jobs friends,
to distrust God.

5 Keep thy watches in the performance of the parts of Gods worship: for even
then (as here he dealt with Christ, when by fasting and prayer he had
prepared himself to his ministerial function, he set on him) he will assail
thee: he will be with thee to keep thee from Church; and if thou must come
for shame, he will come with thee, to make prayers, preaching, and all
unprofitable: he came with Judas before Christ, so that all his holy doctrine
was intercepted from his heart; the sower sowed good seed, he sowed Tares. We
shall be sure of him, not only when we are idle as David, but when we are
best occupied: which is the cause, that when we have most strictly kept the
Sabbath, and endeavored our best, in all our duties public and private, we
have much matter of humility; and this may serve as an hammer against spiritual
pride.

The Tempter]

II. The second thing in the entrance of this adversary, is his name, which is
here changed; before he was called a Devil, now a Tempter, but with emphasis,
That Tempter, (...), to distinguish him from other tempters. For,

First, God tempts man, sometimes by afflictions, which are called
temptations, James 1.2. sometimes by some special Commandment, as he tempted
Abraham: sometime by occasioning objects, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. God sends strong
delusions, that is, objects enticing and deluding. But neither is this to tempt
to sin, nor a stirring up to it, but rather a proof what is in us, and a trial
what we will do; this is, (...), not (...).

Secondly, man tempts God, when he makes trial of Gods power and justice,
whether he can or will help or hurt, Exodus 17.2. Wherefore do ye tempt the
Lord? this is by curiosity, presumption, or distrust; as verse. 7. Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God.

Thirdly, man tempts man, by seeking matter and occasion against an other, to
accuse and reprehend: so the Pharisees and Herodians tempted Christ by captious
and subtle questions, to bring him into danger: or by persuading to sin, as
Joseph's Mistress every day tempted him: But,

Doct. Satan is called a tempter by eminency, because, Satan the most eminent
and dangerous tempter.
1 He was the first tempter to sin, moving and stirring up Adam and Eve in
Paradise to sin: an old Serpent. 2 He makes a trade of tempting; ever since it
is his profession, and no marvel if he be denominated from his profession: he
spends his whole time, policy, and strength in tempting to evil, and the scope
of all his actions is to bring men to sin against God. As he begun betime, so
he will continue as long as time lasts. 3 He is the author or abettor of all
other evil temptations: for he tempts not only by himself, but by his
instruments; as Eve by the Serpent, Adam by Eve, Ahab by his Prophets. 4 He is
furnished and stored with all arts to deceive: he can change himself into an
Angel of light: he takes occasion from our selves to seduce us, and lead us
away by our own concupiscence: he has the world his faithful armor-bearer; in
it he has false doctrine, heresy, wicked counsel, wicked company, wicked
example: on the right hand, wealth, honor, power: on the left contempt,
persecution, vain presumption, and rash confidence, despair, etc. he has all
sins that are near of kin to us.

Quest. Why is Satan thus restless in tempting?

Ans. 1. Because of his infinite malice; by which, Satan restless in tempting,
for three reasons.
seeing he cannot hurt God, he rushes upon his Image in man. 2 Because of his
envy: that man should climb by Christ to that estate, which himself is fallen
from irrecoverably. He would have him everlastingly unhappy like himself. 3
Because of his special enmity against the godly: for all contraries tend to the
destruction of contraries.

Use 1. If Satan be so restless a tempter, it behooves us so much the more to
watch and pray against him: The former the Apostle Peter commends unto us, that
seeing our adversary goes about continually seeking to devour us, we must
watch and resist, 1 Pet. 5.8. If our adversary were capable of end of days, or
end of malice, we might be secure; or if he were wearied with continual
ranging, or did take rest or truce. But the Apostle tells us, that so long as
there is a world, there shall be a Devil; and so long as he is a tempter, he
will continually compass us, whatsoever we are about: if a good thing, to
hinder it; as he stood at Jehoshuah^ right hand: if an evil, to hatch,
contrive, and thrust it forward; and being done, to draw and spin out as much
wickedness from it as may be. So where ever we be, we are not without a
tempter, at home or abroad, in the street or in the field, alone or in company,
in our callings or recreations, in our eating and drinking, in our preaching or
hearing, reading or praying, the Tempter spares no attempt against us. The
latter our Savior teaches us, namely to pray that we be not lead into
temptation, that seeing our enemy is mighty, subtle, and every way furnished
for the assault, God would give us strength to resist evil, and persevere in
good ways to the end.

Use 2. It justly reproves their folly, who as if there were no tempter, are
tempters of themselves, care not what occasions and weapons they minister to
Satan; run into such company and courses, as if for want of Satan's malice, they
would lay snares and hooks for themselves, that Satan may easily draw them to
all evil. Of this sort are they that haunt Alehouses and Taverns, seekers of
excess, drinkers down of health and wealth, drowners of sobriety and honesty:
what need this man any other tempter, that sets himself to save the Devil this
labor? yet, lest he should be alone in his sin, he will fit him, and send in
before or after him some swearer, or scorner, or Atheist; and they together
shall swill in oaths, and scoffs, and impiety with their liquor, and notably
confirm each other in lewdness and profaneness.

Of this sort also are they that watch the twilight to frequent lascivious
company, or the houses of light persons, men or women; or the society of such
as are foul in their speeches, and wanton in behavior; a secret poison
infecteth the heart hereby, and this is to seek the tempter: how has he fenced
himself with watching and prayer against temptation, that thus goes out to meet
it? Joseph fled these occasions, and ran out of the company of his lascivious
Mistress. Of this sort are they that use wanton and light attire: and those that
go to Mass, and say they keep their hearts to God: and those that set up
Images before them, flat monuments of gross Idolatry.

Of this sort are they that run to Enterludes and Plays, which are the Devils
bellows, and blow no few sparks into the gunpowder of our own corruptions. It
was wont to be said, that there was no play without a Devil; but there is never
a one, but there is a great many more Devils than one, than seen; every part,
person, action, speech, and gesture almost, is a notable tempter and corrupter:
what need these be driven of Satan, that thus run before him? Of this sort
lastly are they, that seek to Witches and Sorcerers: these run to the tempter;
as Saul, when God was gone from him, took great pains to go to the Witch; yet
he went in the night; but our Witch-hunters run in the day; the tempter need
not come to them, they will find him if he be in any corner of the country.

Use 3. This is a special use to Ministers, to be careful and watchful over
their people against this tempter, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. The Apostle from this ground
provokes and testifies his care over them: For this cause, when I could no
longer forbear, I sent to know your faith, lest by some means the tempter have
tempted you --. And how jealous was he over the Corinths, 2 Corinthians. 11.3.
saying, I fear lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve through subtilty, so your
minds should be corrupt from the simplicity of Christ? and having written
against the incestuous person, that he should be delivered to Satan, to
humble him, he writes in his second Epistle, chap. 2.11. that they should now
receive him again, lest Satan circumvent us, for we are not ignorant of his
wyles. The Apostle knew there was a tempter that did mightily and continually
assay, to bring in corruption of doctrine and manners; that would hinder them
from the Word, and choke it in them; and therefore he was the more careful.

Thus should every good Shepherd watch his Flock against this ravening Wolf,
and reside and abide with them as he is sure the tempter does. How unsafe and
destitute are many people left to the tempter by the absence of them, who have
taken their charge, is plain by the Parable of the tares; that when the
Husbandman slept, the envious man sowed tares: he slept a little and
slumbred, but he was present: and if the tempter take the advantage of a little
negligence in the presence of a Pastor, how will he bestir him in his absence?
what an harvest of tares must be reaped by that? It is sure the tempter will
not be absent, neither month, nor quarter; and therefore the Pastor had need,
not only to be still present, but also watchful, to espy the state of his
people, to help them out of sin, and teach them to resist the tempter.

Use 4. Beware of tempting any to evil, or of withdrawing any from good: for
this is a Satanical practice. Our Savior Christ, when Peter dissuaded him to
go to Jerusalem, said, Come behind me Satan: in which words he shows, that
none can tempt to evil, or from good, but Satan, or one led by him. So the
Apostle Paul calls Elimas, who sought to dissuade the Governor from the
faith, the child of the Devil, Act. 13.10. because, as Christ said of the
Jews, his works he did. What a number of Devils are now in the World,
continual instruments of wickedness, alluring and drawing men from God and
goodness? yea, their Trade is to allure unto evil, as those that draw men to
strumpets, and are bawds to that filthy sin; so to Alehouses, and there
provoke them to drink, and to excess; Those that draw men to ordinary gaming
houses; such as stir up men's spirits to revenge; such as withdraw men from
Gods house, and good exercises; such as dissuade from Religion and strict
courses; such as commend only loose and disordered mates for boon companions.
In all these the speech is true, Homo homini demon, one man plays the Devil
with another. All of them are plain devils incarnate, tempters, and as the
devils company is to be avoided, so is theirs.

Use 5. That we may be most unlike unto Satan, we must be continually
provoking and moving one another to love and good works, Heb. 10.24. and exhort
and edify one another, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Every Christian must by holy example, and
holy admonition, bring one another forward in goodness: if they be weak, to
confirm them; if slow, to provoke and quicken them; if astray, to revoke and
recall them. Hereunto consider these motives.

1 Shall Satan's vassals exhort and persuade one another to evil, Four motives
to stir up one another to good, as Satan does to evil.
and be more diligent to help one another to Hell, than we to set forward
Gods work, and help one another to heaven?

2 Consider the bonds between us and our brethren: 1 The bond of nature, all
are one mold, and one flesh, and the Law of nature binds us to pity and
releeve their bodily wants, and much more their souls, if we can: If their
beast lay under a burden, thou were bound to help it up; but thy brothers soul
is under the burden of sin. A good Samaritan will not pass by the wounded man
like the Priest and Levite, but will step near him, and have compassion on him.
2 The bond of the Spirit, which yet ties us nearer: for if we must do good to
all, much more to the household of faith: this bond makes Christians to be of
one body, and therefore, as members of one body, to procure the good and
salvation one of another: they are children of one father, brethren in Christ,
who have one faith, one hope, one food, one garment, and one inheritance: will
one member refuse to impart his help, his life, his motion, and gifts to
another?

3 Consider the excellent fruit that ensues this godly care of provoking one
another to good: he that converteth a sinner from going astray, shall save a
soul, James 5.20. and the fruit of the righteous is as a tree of life, and he
that wins souls is wise, Prove. 11.30.

4 Consider these dull and backsliding times, full of deadness and coldness,
wherein we see a general decay of zeal, love, delight in the Word, sin bold
and impudent, and piety almost ashamed of her self and name. Ah we have great
cause to quicken one another; as Travellors will call forward the weary and
faint, and encourage them both to speed and perseverance; and as soldiers will
animate and encourage one another against the common enemy: so must we in our
spiritual fight against sin and Satan. The tempter is so much the more busy,
because his time is short: and we must be the more diligent, because the time
is so dead.

Came to him]

Here may a question be moved, How Satan came to Christ, being a spirit?

Satan comes to a man two ways.
I Answer, Satan comes two ways: 1 Inwardly, and more spiritually, and that
either by suggestion, troubling the heart and understanding; and thus he put
into Judas his heart to betray his Lord, John 13.2. or else by vision works
upon the phantasy. 2 Outwardly, and corporally, either by some instrument; as
to Christ by the Scribes, Sadduces, Herodians, and Peter; or else by himself in
some assumed bodily shape.

Now after what manner was Christ tempted?

I answer: Howsoever some good men think Christ's temptation was only in motion
inwardly, and not externally and visibly; yet I think it was chiefly
externally, and in a bodily shape assumed.

Their Reasons for their opinion are two: 1 Because in the words following, the
Devil showed Christ all the Kingdoms of the world in a moment, which to do in
a corporal manner were impossible; and therefore it was but in motion and
cogitation. But that is but to insist in the question; and when God shall bring
us to that place, we shall see that even this was done really, and not only in
imagination.

2 Reason out of Heb. 4.19. where it is said, that Christ was tempted in all
things like us: now (say they) our temptations be inward by cogitations and
suggestions: and therefore so was his. But this is much weaker than the former:
for if he were in all things tempted like unto us, it is plain he was
externally tempted as we be; Adam by Satan in the external shape of a
Serpent, Saul by Satan in Samuels shape; and it is the general confession of
witches, that their spirits appear in an external shape of cats, mice, etc.

Our reasons which probably conclude the contrary (for it is no fundamental
point, necessarily and stiffely to be held, because the Scripture is not plain
in it) are these:

Christ's temptation external and in a bodily shape assumed, for four reasons.
1 As Satan in his combat overcame the first Adam in a bodily shape: And
external temptation, so it is likely he came against the second Adam in some
bodily shape: And that he thus externally assaulted him by outward objects, is
probable by these things in the text: 1 He spoke often to Christ, and Christ
truly spoke and answered. 2 He said, command these stones, not stones in
general, but either offering, holding, or pointing at them being real stones,
as Mr. Calvin says. 3 He wills Christ to fall down before him and worship him,
even by bodily and outward gesture, and cites Scripture for his second
temptation. 4 He took him and led him to the pinnacle of the Temple, by local
motion; neither was the second temptation in the wilderness as the former was,
but in the holy City Jerusalem, and on the pinnacle of the Temple, as after we
shall see. 5 Christ bids him depart. 6 How could he hurt himself by his fall,
if it were only in vision.

2 The word (...), does imply a corporal access; by which these temptations
differed from the former, wherewith he was exercised in the forty days of his
fast: for they were lighter skirmishes, and lesser onsets by suggestion sent
out like scouts; but now he comes in person with all his strength, and thus he
now came, and not before.

3 Some good Divines make difference between Christ's temptations and his
members, which gives good light in this question; that whereas our temptations
are chiefly inward, because they find good entertainment in us (our
disposition being like a mutinous City, that is not only besiedged with strong
enemies without, but with false traitors within, ready to betray it)
contrarily, Christ's temptations, if not only, yet chiefly are external,
presented by outward voices and objects to his outward senses; but presently,
by the perfect light of his mind, and unchangeable holiness of his will,
discerned, and repelled, that they could not get within him, and much less to
be moved and affected with them.

4 This is an History, wherein the letter is so far to be kept as it is not
repugnant to the Analogy of faith, or true interpretation of other scriptures:
But that Satan should come bodily, or assume a shape, is not against the
Scripture, but confirmed in the example of Eve and Samuel.

If it be further asked in what bodily shape he came, here I am with the
scripture silent. Only he came not in a Monkish habit (as the gross Papists
say) because there was no such in use in the world then, nor many hundred years
after. And yet it is observable, Note.
that themselves think this habit the fittest for the Devil, as indeed it has
been since proved: for never did the devil in any habit so prevail against
Christ in his members, as in this Antichristian weed.

1 Note hence what moved Satan thus to come, Christ came led of the Spirit,
Satan comes of himself.
namely his own voluntary motion and will, he came unsent for: Christ comes
not but led of the Spirit, Satan comes of himself. And the same difference is
to be observed between them that are led by the Spirit of God, and by this
unclean Spirit. Those that are led by Gods Spirit, whatsoever they be about,
they will look to the motion, what warrant they have for it, whence it is, and
whither it tends, whether they be led, or undertake things of their own head:
they look whether the thing be good in it self, whether good in them, whether
convenient in circumstances, whether it belong unto them: and hence they do it
cheerfully, and with a blessing on it.

Whereas whom Satan carries, they look for no warrant, they set themselves on
work, and execute their own lusts, humors, and desires; yea, in the things
they do best, they look for no warrant, and therefore, if it be in any thing
that is good, every thing is begun as with a left hand; they are without
blessing and protection. See this difference between Ahab, and Jehoshaphat, 1
King. 22. Ahab says, Let us go up to Ramoth Gilead, but Jehoshaphat said, I
pray thee let us ask Counsel of the Lord; and was there not as much difference
in the issue? yes, Ahab was strangely slain, a mighty man by chance drawing a
bow, hit into a joint of his armor, and slew him: but Jehoshaphat was
marvellously delivered. And therefore look to your warrant in your actions, ask
your hearts whether you be led by the Spirit, or come of your selves: and then
you come of your selves, when either you have no word, or attempt any thing
against the word, seeing Gods Spirit and Word cross not one another, and one
never directs but by the other. So if you be crossed in your actions or
attempts, cast an eye back to that which moved you to it, or whether you went
by warrant, or upon your own head. If you have gone, and the Spirit not leading
you, what could you expect but to be crossed? Look on the seven sons of Sceva,
Act. 19.16. who would take in hand to cast out Devils in the name of Jesus; but
being not led by the Spirit, the evil Spirit took advantage on the want of
their Commission, and ran upon them, and overcame them, and prevailed against
them, so that they fled out naked and wounded.

Note 2. Observe the impudency and boldness of the Devil that thus visibly
comes against Christ. Had he not heard the voice from heaven? or had he
forgot it whilst it yet sounded? no, he begun all his temptations thus, If
thou be the Son of God. Or did he doubt that he was the Son of God? No, the
Devils confess him so to be, Matthew. 8. and he knew by all the Prophecies and
accomplishments, that Christ was he; the Scepter was gone from Judah, he was
born of a Virgin at Bethlehem, whom John went before in the Spirit of Elias;
he knew the Shepherds testimony, yea, Satan would assa^l the Son of God
knowing him so to be, for four reasons.
the Angels at his birth; he knew well he was the Son of God.

Quest. What? could it stand with his policy, so visibly to assail the son of
God?

Answ. 1 God in justice besotted him, that against his knowledge he should
encounter Christ for his own overthrow. 2 Though he knew, that Christ was he
that should break his head, and that he could not prevail against him; yet his
malice made him fearlesse, he would set upon Christ, whatsoever should be the
issue, himself could be but condemned. 3 He would against his knowledge show
his malice to God in molesting and troubling his blessed Son: for here, and
daily he sins the sin against the Holy Ghost. 4 God having him in chains,
so overruled his malice, as it should be turned against himself; and be a
means to proclaim Christ in all ages, the promised seed who had broken his head.

He which thus emboldned himself to come against Christ, will not fear to come
to thee, be thou as just as Job, yea, were thou as innocent as the Lamb of
God. It is Gods great mercy, that he comes not so bodily and visibly to us as
to Christ: we know, if God give him leave, he can possess even any of our
bodies, as appears in all those demoniaks: he can assume a body also to
terrify or delude us with all, if God suffer him, as we see in Saul's example.
So in Gods just judgment, when men give up Gods service, and undertake to be
agents for Satan, he gives power to the Devil to come to them in a bodily
shape for his better familiarity with them, as to witches, and the like. It is
Gods mercy that he comes not thus as he did to Christ, so ordinarily as he
has done in ignorant and Popish times; and we must pray, that even in visible
shapes he may neither terrify, nor delude, nor grow familiar with us. But the
light of the Gospel has forced him to come to us more secretly and
spiritually, by wicked motions and suggestions, partly from himself
immediately, and partly mediately from others.

And seeing we cannot hinder his coming to us; we must be so much the more
watchful, that when he comes, he may find us prepared against him. For as we
cannot hinder birds from flying in the air, but we may hinder them from making
nests on our heads: So we cannot hinder the flying motions of Satan, but we
need not suffer them to settle in us.

Quest. How shall I know when the Tempter comes?

Two certain rules to know when the tempter comes.
Answ. By observing these two rules: 1 Whenever thou art persuaded to any
thing that is evil, then thou may know the Tempter comes. Sometimes he
persuades to sin by extenuating it, why, it is but a little one, a grain, as
light as a feather; now comes the Tempter: Gods Spirit never persuades that any
sin is little. Sometimes by the utility and commodity of it; Oh it is
profitable, by one oath or lie thou may be a great gainer, and why
should thou be so nice? but now the Tempter is come: for the holy Spirit
commands thee not to swear at all, nor to lie for Gods greatest advantage, much
less thine own, and what profit is it to win the world with the loss of ones
soul? Sometimes from the pleasure of it: will thou defraud thy self of thy
pleasure? is it not as sweet as honey? why, thou art but young, thou may
game, and swear, and drink, and be wanton: now thou have an occasion of lust,
take thy time, thou can not have it every day. But here the Tempter is
plainly come: for the Spirit of God would wish thee to remember, that for all
these things thou must come to judgment; and that neither adulterers nor
whoremongers shall enter into the Kingdom of God. Sometimes by removing the
punishment and terror; Why, who sees? God is merciful, and easily entreated;
you are a Christian, and no condemnation is to them that are in Christ Jesus,
and Repentance wipes off all scores. Here the Tempter is come: For Gods Spirit
says, There is mercy with thee that thou may be feared: and, there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: but withal which walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit.

2 Rule. When thou art dissuaded from any good belonging to thee, the Tempter
comes; who as he can make vice seem beautiful, so virtue to seem ugly. He
can dissuade men from Religion in great friendlinesse: 1 From a supposed
impossibility; How can thou (poor weakling) bear such a yoke? certainly thou will never endure such strictness, thou may set thy hand to the plough, but
thou will soon look back, and prove an Apostate. But here is a Tempter come:
for Gods Spirit teaches otherwise, that howsoever without Christ we can do
nothing, yet it is God that begins and perfecteth his good work in us, whose
yoke is easy, and his burden light. 2 From the great trouble and small
necessity of it, from the disgrace it carries among men, and the contempt of
such as preach and profess it. Here is the tempter come: for the Spirit of God
teaches, that he that denies Christ before men, shall be denied of him
before men and Angels.

Further, he can dissuade from diligent hearing the word, and from reading the
Scriptures, because they be exceeding long, and hard to be understood. Why,
thine own business is such as cannot give thee leave ever to attain any thing
to the purpose, especially because deep knowledge of points belongs not but to
Divines; for an unlettered and private man a little knowledge is best. Here is
a Tempter come: though he should speak in the voice of an Angel: for Gods
Spirit bids private men search the Scriptures, because they testify of Christ;
and commends private Christians, because they were full of knowledge.

Further, he can discourage the practice of piety, by suggesting, that to be
strict in life is to savor of too much purity, at least it will be counted
but scrupulousness and too much curiosity: and, if thou will be singular, and
contemn, and condemn all men but thy self, so will men deal with thee: Why,
thou live as though men were to be saved by good works, and not by Gods
mercy. Here the Tempter is come: for the Spirit of Christ never quenched
smoking flax, but encouraged the care of walking in Gods ways, though it be
to walk in the straight way, and narrow path that leads unto life.

Lastly, in all outward or inward temptations, let us look to Christ, who has
sense of both, that he might be compassionate to us in both.

If thou be the Son of God, command these stones to be made bread.]

In this first and fierce assault, consider two things: 1 The ground of it,
Satan aims at four things in this first temptation.
If thou be the Son of God. 2 The inference, Command these stones to be made
bread, which is on a good ground to entice him to evil. In which temptation
Satan aims at four things directly. 1 To impugn Gods truth, and word, and that
notable oracle from heaven, testifying that Christ was the Son of God. 2 To
shake the faith of Christ: Satan knew well enough he was the Son of God, and
he makes not this a question, as though he would be instructed in it; but
that he would make Christ doubt whether he was the Son of God. And note how
cunningly he ties his policies together, as he did against the first Adam;
he calls Gods word into question, which is the ground of faith; which if he
can bring out of credit, faith fails of it self. 3 Because of his present
estate, to doubt of his fathers providence; and because of his great hunger and
want of means to supply it, to call his own Divinity into question. 4 To use
unlawful means to releeve and sustain himself.

In these particulars, stands the drift of the temptation. As for that which
the Papists generally say, that it was to bring Christ to the sin of gluttony,
by which (they say) the first Adam fell; there is no sense so to think: For 1
Christ's Answer, which was directly fitted to the suggestion, tended nothing to
the sin of gluttony. 2 Gluttony is an excessive eating of more than needs;
whereas Satan desires no more than that Christ would at his desire eat, to the
necessary sustaining of nature: it is no great gluttony to eat a piece of dry
bread in extreme hunger; belly-gods and gluttons satiate themselves with other
more pleasant and delicate dishes. Let us therefore know that the proper end of
this temptation, is distrust in God, in his word, and sufficient and due means
to relieve his present estate.

If thou be the Son of God] that is, the natural Son of God, equal in power,
the delight of the Father, as the voice pretends, then do this that I may
believe thee; else deceive not thy self, because of the voice from heaven, thou
art but a pure man.

Satan directly opposes the word of God.
Doct. 1. Note how Satan does directly oppose himself against the word of God.
God had said Christ was his Son, Satan knew it, and after confessed it; yet
against his own knowledge he calls it into question, although he had seen it
confirmed by two strange signs from heaven, of which we have spoken. The like
was his practice, when he set upon Eve, saying, What? has God said thus and
thus? why, he knew God had said it, and that in the day they should eat, they
should dye: and yet he labors to make them doubt of that truth, which both
he and they knew too well. This was ever his practice.

outwardly confirmed it by many powerful, and glorious miracles, such as the
Devil could never make show of; as raising the dead, the standing, and going
back of the Sun, the division, and standing of the Sea and rivers, and the
bearing of a Virgin: and inwardly, his holy Spirit persuades, testifies,
confirms, and seals up the Word in the hearts of Gods Children, 1 John 2.20.
2 Cor. 2. Now to make God a liar, and to show himself most contrary to the Holy
Spirit, he contradicts, and opposes, stormeth and rages.

2 He hates the word of God, because it is the greatest enemy to his
Kingdom, every way resembling God the author, and carrying his image. It is
light, and no marvel if the Prince of darkness resist it; it discovers his
subtilties, and fenceth the Christian against his policies; it discerns
spirits, that let him come as an Angel of light, he shall be uncased. As he
prevails in darkness, so he works in impurity; now here the word
resembling God himself crosses him; it is pure in it self; and a purifyer, as
Christ says, Ye are clean by my word. Further, his chief power being in the
Sons of disobedience, and in the hearts of infidels, here also the word clips
his wings, being the word of faith: and John 17.20. Christ prayed not only for
his disciples, but for all those that should believe in him by their word. In a
word, seeing he exercises his chief power in the sons of perdition, who are
given him to rule at his will, here the word is his enemy, because it
converteth sinners, and saves souls, called therefore a word of salvation.

3 He opposed Gods word through the malice he bears Gods children: for he
ever opposes true professors, casts them into prison, and would never let them
have a good day in the world, if he might have his will, and follows them with
temptations, and with outward afflictions. But this is the sword of Gods mouth,
and the sword of the Spirit, by which they cut through his temptations, and make
them forceless: it is that which comforts them, and sustains them in their
troubles, and directs them happily to heaven, so as no way he can have his will
of them.

4 It stands him in hand to oppose Gods word: for his long experience has
taught him, that so long as men hold to the word, they be safe enough under
Gods protection; and he could never win his Captain-sinners to such high
attempts in sin, were it not that he had first shaken the truth of Gods word
out of their hearts. How could he have brought Pharaoh to such obstinacy
against God and his people, as to say, Who is the Lord? and I will not let
Israel go: but that he had brought the word in Moses and Aarons mouth into
contempt, further than the sting of the miracles forced him. When Saul had once
cast off the Word of the Lord, Satan lead him as in a chain, to hunt David, to
throw a dart at Jonathan, to seek to the Witch, against whom himself had
enacted a severe law. The like of Ahab, Herod, Nero, Domitian, etc.

5 The Word of God is the sentence and rule of righteousness, which condemns
Satan; and therefore no marvel if he cannot endure it, and wish it false, and
love it no better than the bill of his own condemnation, and death eternal.

Use. It is a note of a man foiled by the temptation of Satan, and of a
devilish spirit, to call Gods Word into question; either to deny it as false,
or doubt of it as uncertain; either of which if Satan can persuade unto, he
has his wish: for he knows they are no subjects to God that will not
acknowledge his Scepter, but doubt of the rod of his mouth: he can easily
blindfold them, and lead them whither he will, that deny the light: he can
easily vanquish them, and lead them captive to all sin, if he can get them to
cast away their weapons.

Yet what a number of men has the Devil thus far prevailed with, in this
violent kind of temptation? Some call in question whether the Scripture be the
Word of God, or no; swarms of Atheists, and Machevillians, that hold the Word
but an human devise and policy; which is to open a door to all carnal and
brutish Epicurism, and to confound man and beast together. Others doubt not of
all, but of some Books: and others not of some Books, but of some places of the
holy Scripture. But we see that Satan would have Christ, but to deny or doubt
of one sentence: and what Eves calling into question of one speech of God
brought on all our necks, all we her posterity feel. And it is in our natures,
when God speaks plainly against that sin, we make ifs, and pervadventures at
it, and so turn it off. As for example:

1 Our Savior teaches plainly, that whosoever are of God hear his Word, and
his sheep hear his voice. Either men must believe it, or deny it: and yet how
few can we persuade conscionably to hear the Word? all who must plainly either
make the voice of Christ false, or themselves none of Gods, none of Christ's
sheep, for not hearing it.

2 Our Savior says expressly, He that hears you, hears me, Luke 10.16. and
that God speaks in the mouths of his Ministers, 2 Cor. 5.20. and that they
have an heavenly treasure in earthen vessels. But how few are of this mind?
never did any Heathens so despise the voice of their Priests, and the answer of
their Oracles, as Christians in general despise our voice, in which God and
Christ profess they speak.

3 Christ plainly says, this word is the immortal seed of our new birth, the
sincere milk to nourish the soul, the bread of life, heavenly food. But who
believe him? for generally men have no appetite, no desire to it, and can well
be content to let their souls languish in grace, and be starved to death. And
whereas they would go as far or farther into other Countries, as Jacob and
his Sons into Egypt, when there was no Corn in Canaan, to supply their bodies
with food, this they will not stir out of their doors for.

Well, take heed of calling Divine truths into question, No Divine truth to be
called into question, for three reasons.
stand not in them upon thy reason and understanding, which are but low and
shallow, suspect them in things thou can not reach rather than the truth of
Scripture, and make good use of these rules. 1 In the rising of any such
temptation, know, that Satan seeks advantage against thee, and would bring thee
into the same condemnation with himself, by the same sin and malice against
God. If he durst thwart so Divine a truth, so strengthened from Heaven, and
that to Christ's own face, he dares and will contradict Gods Word to thee. 2
Consider, if thou suffer Satan to wrest away the credit of any part of
Divine truth, or the Word of God, what shall become of all our religion, and
the ground of our salvation; all which is laid upon the truth of the word, or
all which our Savior says, that not one jot of it shall fail. 3 Know, that by
yielding a little to Satan herein, God in his justice may give thee up to such
strong delusions, as the Devil himself cannot be so besotted as to believe. See
it in some instances. Satan believes there is a God, and trembles, says S.
James, and yet he so far deludes a number, as their sottish hearts say, There
is no God, Psalm. 14.1. Satan knows there is a day of reckoning and judgment,
as the Devils confessed, Art thou come to torment us before the time? and yet
he so besotteth and blinds others, that they make but a mock of all, as those
in Peter, who mocked and said, Where is his coming? 2 Pet. 3.1. Satan knows,
that God is all an eye, to whom day and darkness are alike: yet in tempting men
to secret sins, he will make them say, Tush, who sees us? can God see through
the thick cloud? The Devil knows, that God is just, and will not take the
wicked by the hand; and yet he makes the sinner believe his case is good
enough, being a most graceless man; and makes one wicked man say of another, as
in Malachi, We count the proud blessed, etc. The Devil knows, that he that
goes on in sin, shall not prosper; yet he makes the sinner, who turns from the
word, to believe he shall prosper.

As this temptation aimed to overthrow the Word of God, so also the faith of
Christ in that word, namely to bring him from his assurance that he was the
Son of God. Whence we may learn, that,

Satan in all his temptations seek^ to overthrow the faith of men.
Doct. 2. Satan in his temptations against all the members of Christ, aims to
destroy their faith. This Christ himself witnesses, that Satan desired to
winnow the Disciples, but himself prayed that their faith might not fail, Luke
22.31. 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. For this cause when I could no longer forbear, I sent
Timothy, that I might know of your faith, lest the tempter had tempted you in
any sort. And hence his continual practice is to bring men to the extremes of
faith, in adversity to despair, in time of prosperity to presumption.

Tit. 1.1. and to faith is the work of regeneration ascribed, Acts 15.9.

2 All Satan's temptations tend to break off the Covenant and communion between
God and his children, and therefore must in special manner aim against faith:
for by faith we are made the Sons of God, Gal. 3.26. and God espouseth and
marries us unto himself by faith, Hos. 2.20. and by faith we are brought into
the grace by which we stand.

3 He knows that faith is our shield, whereby we both keep off the fiery darts
of Satan, and quench the same, and that faith is the victory whereby we
overcome the world: this is it that makes all his temptations forceless: for,
though we have no power of our selves to withstand him, yet faith gets power
from Christ, and lays hold on his strength, which quells all the
adversary-power of our salvation. We stand by faith, says the Apostle; and
Satan sees the truth of Christ's speech, that the gates of Hell shall never
prevail against it. He has reason therefore to labor to weaken it, and to
root it (if it were possible) out of the hearts of men, and out of the world.

4 All his temptations bend themselves to cut off and intercept the course of
Gods love, and his favors to his children: he bursts with envy at the
happiness of the Saints. But unless he gain their faith, he cannot interrupt
this; for by faith, as by an hand, we receive Christ himself given us of the
Father, Ephe. 3.17. and with him all his merits, and all things belonging to
life and godliness. We receive the promise of the Spirit by faith, Gal. 3.14.
yea the presence of the Spirit, who dwells in our hearts: by faith we receive
the hope and hold of our blessed inheritance hereafter, Gal. 5.5. And whereas
Satan's continual drift is, to estrange God and us, faith only crosses him, by
which we have entrance and boldness to the throne of grace by our prayers, to
speak unto God freely as to our Father, Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 10.22. yea, to ask
what we will, and obtain not only all corporal blessings good for us, but also
the sanctified and pure use of them; whereas the unbeleever corrupts himself in
them continually.

5 Satan well knows, that faith is the ground of all obedience, without which
the word and all Gods Ordinances are unprofitable, Heb. 4.2. without which
there is no pleasing of God, Heb. 11.6. in any thing: for whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin. Has he not reason then to assay by all his strength, to take
this hold from us? Does not he know, that the foundation being overthrown, the
whole building must fall, and the root overturned, all the tree and branches
come down with it? Sever a man from his faith, he tumbles in impiety and
unrighteousness, he is odious to God in all things, Satan tramples upon him,
and leads him at his will. From all which reasons we see, that Satan especially
in temptations aims at our faith, as he did at Christ's.

Use 1. Those who never felt any temptation, but ever believed, and never
doubted, No temptation, no faith.
(as they say) never had faith: for never had any man true faith, but it was
assailed most fiercely: never was faith laid up in the heart of any child of
God, but the combat between nature and grace, faith and frailty, flesh and
spirit, was presently proclaimed. Eves faith was won from her quickly: Abraham's
faith was mightily assailed, which because in such a combat he retained, he
was renowned and styled the father of all the faithful, and faithful Abraham:
Moses his faith was shaken, and his great sin was unbeleef: Job in his misery
was many ways assailed to distrust God, as his words import, If he kill me, I
will trust in him still: and Satan's aim was, to bring him to blaspheme God, and
dye.

Use 2. As the Devil labors most against our faith, Because Satan most
oppugneth our faith, we must most fortify it.
so should we most labor in fortifying it. Policy teaches men to plant the
most strength at that fort or part of the wall, where the enemy plants his
greatest Ordnance, and makes the strongest assault. And nature teaches us to
defend all our parts, but especially our head and heart, and such like vital
parts: the very Serpent will save his head so long as he can, by natural
instinct, whatsoever become of other parts. Our chief fortress is our faith: we
have no grace but is worth preserving and saving; yet of them all, Faith is as
it were the Head and leader, it sends the vital spirits of heavenly life to the
whole man. Let grace therefore teach us to save this grace, which is the heart
of a Christian, above all the rest, and to beware of the least prick or crack
in it, which is dangerous. A man may receive great gashes and wounds in his
arms, and thighs, or exterior parts, and recover it well enough: not so in
the heart or brain. Though thy comfort, joy, feeling, yea and fruits may fail,
take heed thy faith, thy root fail not. This is that which the Apostle Peter
exhorts, 1 Pet. 5.9. -- whom resist steadfast in the faith: wherein if a man
sit not very fast, Satan will soon unhorse him.

And of all others let afflicted and humbled souls lay hold, and make use of
this exhortation; for Satan does with so much the more violence assault them,
as he finds it easier to prevail with them: for well he knows, that howsoever
they heartily detest all other sins, and much ado he has to bring them to his
lure in other, yet their spirits being oppressed and wounded by the sense of
sin, and Gods displeasure for it, he finds them inclinable enough upon every
trivial temptation to despair; and so makes a wide breach by their
improvidence, watching narrowly all other things, but not that which they ought
most of all, and which Satan most of all impugneth.

Quest. How may I strengthen and stablish my faith?

Three general directions for the fortifying of faith.
Answ. By observing these few directions:

1 Consider the excellency of this grace: for those only that know it, are in
love with it, and will use means to preserve and increase it. And this
excellency appears in these branches.

Excellency of faith in four things.
1 It is the first stone to be laid in Christianity, called a subsistence or
foundation, Heb. 11.1. from whence also Christians are styled. 1 Cor. 1. and,
the household of faith, Gal. 10.6. of which Christ himself has undertaken to
be the Author and finisher, and has appointed all his Ordinances to breed and
perfect it in the hearts of all that shall attain the end of it, which is
salvation, namely the word of faith, Romans 10.8. the Sacraments the seals of
faith, chap. 4.11. and the Prayer of faith, Jam. 5.15.

2 It is the beginning of our blessedness, John 20.29. Blessed is he that has
not seen, and yet believes: It espouseth us to God and Christ, and
ascertaineth us of the marriage day: It honors God, as Abraham by believing
gave glory to God, and makes us witness that God is true, which is not more
honor to God than our selves, John 3.33.

3 All our strength is from faith, Heb. 11.33. by faith the Saints subdued
Kingdoms, and were strong in battle: faith is the victory whereby we overcome
the world: by faith we stand: A grain of it can work wonders, and what then
can strong faith? It draws virtue from Christ, who himself was foiled by it in
the Syrophenissa^. All things are possible to it, Mar. 9.23. Give Peter faith,
he shall not sink, but shall walk on the Sea, Matthew 14.29.

4 All our present comfort is from it; peace with God, and peace in our
consciences, Romans 5.1, 2. comfort in afflictions; it bears great weights
uncrusht, it self being (...), a sound and sure foundation. According to the
measure of faith, is the measure of all other graces and comforts. As a man
believes, so he obeys, loves, prays, and is heard. Yea, not only the
measure of grace here, but of Glory hereafter is proportioned to the measure of
faith. And is it not worth preserving and increasing?

Means of fortifying faith, four.
II. Use means to increase and strengthen it, and they be these: 1 Acquaint thy
self with the word of God, often read, repeated, preached, meditated, and
conferred on: this is the word of faith, and every thing is fed and preserved
by that whereof it is begotten; and the often hearing, reading, meditating, and
conferring of it does fix and digest it, and makes it at hand to comfort the
weary hands and weak knees. And we must not only frequent the audible, but
also the visible word, that is, reverently and conscionably use the blessed
Sacraments, which are signs and seals of Gods favor, and our Faith. Those
that say they believe, and yet neglect the Word and Sacraments, deceive
themselves, for there is nothing to save, where is no means of saving. A man
cares not greatly for an empty chest. Neither can faith stay where she sees not
her self respected. Oh take heed of Satan's subtilty, who to hold men in
infidelity withholds them from vision, and to starve men's souls intercepts
their food: And in coming to the word, consider the excellent promises that
are made to faith, and take special notice of places which may batter the
devils temptations to unbeleef.

2 Observe the tokens of Gods love and favor toward thee; and, because no man
knows love or hatred by things before him, labor to find it in spiritual
things, how much thy heart loves him, which is a reflection of his love, what
joy of the Spirit, what assistance in former trials, what strength, patience,
issue and use of them thou have. Experience of God is a strong prop, when the
soul can gather from former time a conclusion of Gods presence, and aid for
time to come: So did David, Psalm. 23. ult. and 1 Samuel 17.34, 37. and Psalm.
143.4, 5. and 77.7. to 13. Has the Lord forgotten to be merciful, and shut up
his loving kindness in utter displeasure? I said this is my death: yet I
remembered the years of the right hand of the most High, I remembered the works
of old. And how justly do some faint in trouble for want of observing the ways
of God with them in former trials and deliverances?

3 Labor to get, and keep the assurance of thy adoption: for then the gates of
Hell shall not prevail to hurt thee. The former, by the witness of the Spirit,
which will always uphold us in afflictions, if our care be not to grieve and
quench him: So long as the spirit of consolation possesses the heart, what
sound comfort can be wanting? but if he depart in displeasure, neither can
our faith or comfort be long upheld. The latter, by keeping good conscience;
for faith and good conscience stand and fall together: an accusing conscience
weakens faith, and destroies boldness, that we dare not come near unto God;
whereas contrarily our election is made sure by good works, 2 Pet. 1.5. and by
the fruits of the Spirit. It stands us in hand, if we would stand against
Satan in the day of Trial, to take heed of admitting any thing against our
conscience; which the Apostle compares to a ship fraughted with precious wares,
such as faith, love, joy, with other graces: Now if we crack our ship of
conscience, we make shipwreck of faith and the other graces, which good
conscience had preserved.

4 Faith being the free gift of God, who is the author and finisher of it; a
means to stablish it, is fervent and continual prayer, as the Apostles knew
well enough, Luke 17.5. saying, Lord increase our faith: and that good man,
Mark. 9.24. Lord I believe, help my unbeleef. Christ prays for the not failing
of thy faith, wilt not thou pray for thy own? The least faith can pray for more.
A special mark of the least measure of faith, is, that it can pray for more.

III. When thou feel Satan assaulting thy faith, and hiding from thine eyes
the love of God, then set before thine eyes Gods gracious promises made, and to
be made good to thee in Jesus Christ; both because, 1 of the generality of
them, which run without excepting thee, if thou do not except thy self; as
also, 2 Because they are built and grounded, not upon thy sense and feeling,
but upon Gods unchangeable love; as also, 3 Because he has commanded thee to
believe.

Object. Oh, but would you have me believe, when I feel nothing but corruption
in my self, and correction and displeasure in God?

Answ. Yes: for faith must be where is no feeling, and may be: one thing is
the being of a thing, another the discerning of it. Does not the sun shine,
though a cloud or some other thing be between our sight and it? Nay, then when
sense and feeling cease, faith begins her chief and most glorious work. Was it
not Abraham's commendation, that he believed against belief, and hoped against
hope? when all nature and sense was set against him, he held the word of
promise against sense and nature. Nay, our blessed Savior, in whom was no
grudgings of infidelity, but assured faith in his Father, yet in respect of his
present sense and feeling cried out, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken
me? David believed in the word of God, and not his eyes, and so must thou,
that thou hear God speak, and not that thou see. Thomas when he would
believe no more than that he saw and felt, our Savior said to him, Be not
(so) faithless, but faithful.

In the strongest encounter wait still till Christ come to case thee, he is
not far off, and commit thy self in well doing into his hands as into the hands
of a faithful Creator; say with Hester, I will go to the King, if I perish, I
perish; it may be he will reach out his scepter graciously, and I shall live;
but if I must needs perish, I will perish under the wing of my Lord and Husband.

So much of Satan's second drift in the first temptation.

In the third place he seeks to make Christ doubt of his Divinity, and call
in question whether he was the Son of God, or no, from his present necessity:
as if he had said, See thou not in what famine and need thou art? thou have
fasted here these forty days of my knowledge; What is become of thy Father,
and of his providence, whose Son thou art proclaimed? Is this the care thy
father has of thee? Does he think thou can live of air, or feed of wind, or
digest stones? Art thou (weak creature and starven) he that must prevail
against the gates of Hell? Art thou the Messiah, that have not a morsel of
bread to put in thy mouth? No, if thou were the Son of God, he would care a
little more for thee: no natural father that had a drop of affection, would
leave his child so destitute. Whence we may learn, that,

Satan's drift is to make men call in question the truth of their adoption, in
their (...).
Doct. 3. Satan seeks to make the members of Christ (as well as the Head)
call in question their adoption and salvation, for present adversity and want.
A notable instance hereof we have in Job, whom when the Devil by Gods
permission (to bring him to blaspheme God) had robbed him of his goods, had
slain his children, had afflicted his body with most painful and loathsome
botches; then he sets upon him, and sets all his friends upon him, to make him
believe that God also is his enemy, and has brought his sin upon his head. And
this he taught his instruments, the wicked rulers, or rather raylers, Matthew.
27.41. when Christ was in most extreme torments, and terrors of body and soul,
hanging on the Cross, they said in scorn, If he be the Son of God, let him come
down from the Cross, and we will believe on him: He trusted in God, let him now
deliver him if he will have him: for he said he was the Son of God. As if they
had said: Is not this a notable deceiver to say he was Gods Son, and now is in
extreme danger, ready to perish shamefully, and no hope of any deliverance? If
he were the Son of God, would he suffer him to perish? So it is his ordinary
temptation to any believer: Do thou not see thy self poor and despised, in
want and sorrow? See thou any one sign of Gods favor? Art thou not deprived
almost of all the pleasures of the world? See thou not that God cares for
beasts and fowls, which he feeds in due season, but thou art neglected?

No man knows love or hatred by all the things before him, Eccles. 9.1. but
also impeach his providence and care over his children, who whatsoever their
outward estate seem to be, are still as dear unto him, as the apple of his
eye; and when they be as most unknown, yet are they known.

2 Because of Satan's malice to piety and religion, which by this means he
seeks to chase out of the earth: for the world keeps it under, and commonly it
rises to no great matters. Now if God respect it not neither, who would be,
godly? what profit were it to serve the Lord?

3 Satan herein has much strength from our own corruptions, and ploweth often
with our own heifers: for we desire rather to walk by sense than by faith: we
hardly believe without pawns and pledges; every man trusts his own eyes, and
thinks wisdom good with an inheritance. Hence this temptation finds the easier
entrance and better entertainment.

4 Satan ever in these temptations has a further reach than he shows, namely
that he may hence persuade men by some unlawful means to releeve themselves,
and better their estate; no longer to depend upon God, who has cast off the
care of them; but to shift for themselves, and (as he moved Christ himself) to
make stones bread.

5 Satan has gotten no small advantage against Gods dear children by this kind
of temptation, and brought them to take their own ways, as if God had quite
forgotten them. Abraham thought God had left him to the cruelty of the
Egyptians, and that there was no way to help him, but by lying, and teaching
his Wife so to do also. Lot was so environed by the Sodomites, as to avoid
their fury he saw no way, but to offer his Daughters to their abuse and
filthiness. David was so hunted by Saul, as he must shift for himself by
feigning himself mad. An heart now cleaving unto God, and resting in his
assured love and providence, would have waited till God had come unto it, and
not turned it self to carnal counsels.

Use. This condemns their folly, who judge themselves and others by outward
things, which fall alike to all: who may see by this, what spirit it is that
suggesteth them. It is a delusion of Satan, and general in the world, to make
men deem themselves and others happy, and in Gods favor, because they prosper
in the world, and Gods people unfortunate, because the world crosses them for
the most part. For:

1 By this conclusion Christ himself the Son of God, Outward things make
neither happy nor unhappy: four reasons.
who had all his Fathers love poured upon him, should have been most hated of
his Father, and a most unhappy creature: He was in want of house, of money, of
friends, of food; the world had no malice in it, which was not cast upon him:
and he was not only forsaken of men, but in such distress on the Cross as he
complained he was forsaken of God. And yet all creatures were not capable of
that love wherewith his Father loved him, when he loved him least.

2 Neither the testimony of Gods love, nor the dignity of his Children stands
in outward things, nor in the abundance of worldly comforts: for then the rich
Glutton should have been far better than Lazarus; Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, who
for famine were glad to fly their Country, should be in less grace with God,
than the wicked Kings to whom they went. The Apostles, who were the lights of
the world, who were in hunger, thirst, nakedness, buffeted, without any certain
dwelling place, reviled, persecuted, accounted as the filth of the world, and
the offscouring of all things, should have been in no better account with God
than with men. The Saints in Heb. 11.36. to 39. who were tried by mockings and
scourgings, by bonds and imprisonment, were stoned, hewn asunder, tempted,
slain with the sword, wandered in sheepskins, etc. being destitute, afflicted,
and tormented, should have lost both their dignity in themselves, and their
favor of God. But they lost neither of these: For the same text says, that
the world was not worthy of them, being men of such worth, and that by faith
they received a good report, namely from God, and all good men.

3 The beauty of Gods children is inward: that which argues Gods love, is the
gift of his Son, faith, hope, a joyful expectation of the future inheritance, 1 John 3.1. Behold what love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the sons of God. In which words, the Apostle calls our eyes back from
beholding earthly dignities and prerogatives, which we are ever poring into,
and have Hawks eye to see into the glory of the world: But he would have us
behold Gods love in other things than these, Difference between the love of
God, as God, and of God as a Father.
namely in the inward notes and marks of Gods children. And here is a main
difference between that love which comes from God as God, and that which comes
from him as a Father; between that which he bestows on his enemies, and that
which he bestows on his sons; that which Bond-children receive, which are
movables, and that which the sons of the freewoman receive: for this is the
inheritance: let Isaac carry that away, and no scoffing Ismael have a foot in
it.

4 Whereas Satan from crosses, losses, afflictions, anguish, and durable
sorrows persuades that men are not Gods children, the Apostle ( Heb. 12.6, 8.)
makes a clean contrary argument, that afflictions and crosses are signs of Gods
love rather than of hatred, and marks of election rather than of rejection:
Whomsoever the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son he
receives. If ye be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are
yet bastards, and not sons. And, 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live godly in
Christ, must suffer persecution: the world must rejoice, while they must be
sorrowful, and cannot but hate them because they are not of the world. It is
the condition of Christian hope, that those who will be conformable to Christ
in glory, must be conformable to him in his sufferings.

Rules to withstand this dangerous temptation.

Rules to confirm the heart in the love of God, notwithstanding outward crosses.
Rule 1. Labor to confirm thy self in the assurance of thy adoption, which
Satan would have thee stagger in, as Christ here: and if thou be assured
thou art Gods child, it will draw on another assurance; namely, that God will
be careful of thee, to releeve thy want, and deliver thee in thy distress,
whose love surpasses the love of most natural Parents to their children; as
appears, Isa. 49.15. Can they that are evil, give their children good things?
how much more shall God our heavenly Father give good things to his children,
which he sees good for them?

Quest. How shall I confirm my self in my adoption?

Ans. By thy resemblance of God, as the natural child is like his natural
father. In Adam we lost the excellent image of God, let us labor now to find
it restored in the second Adam. Means to confirm to a man's self his own
adoption, three.


1. Examine the life of God in thee, who art naturally dead in sin: the breath
of this life is heavenly thoughts, meditations, affections: the actions of this
life are spiritual growth, and increase in grace and virtue; Christians duties
in general and special: the maintenance of this life, is the hungring and
thirsting alter the heavenly Mannah, and water of life, the Word of God: the
very being of it, is our union and communion with God by his Spirit, which is
as the soul to the body.

2 Examine the light of God in thee: for he is light, and in him is no
darkness; and if thou be his child, thou art one of the children of light.
As thou growest in understanding what the will of the Lord is, so thou growest
in this Image, and art like unto Christ thy elder Brother, upon whom the Spirit
of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and strength, the Spirit of
knowledge and the fear of the Lord does rest, Isa. 11.2. whereas on the
contrary, these two things go together; as in the Heathens, darkness of
understanding, and estranging from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. Would thou
be confirmed in assurance that thou art Gods child? then labor for this part
of his image, which is renewed in knowledge, wait at the gates of Wisdom, shut
not thy heart and eyes from the beams of this blessed light.

3 Grow up in holiness and righteousness, as God himself is not only free from
all evil, but infinite in goodness, most just, most holy: and as he lets
his light shine before men, so must thou let thy light shine before men, that
they may see thy good works, Matthew. 5.16. 2 Cor. 7.1. cleanse your selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, that ye may grow up to full holiness. This
holiness must not only fence the heart from uncleaneness, but the eye, the ear,
the mouth, the hands and feet, and all the members, when they be ordered
according to the Word prescribing rules for them all.

Rule 2. When thou feel grudgings of diffidence arise, and Satan will urge
thee how thou can think thy self respected of God, being beset with such a
world of trouble, and almost drowned in a sea of vexations, without bottom or
bank; Now call to mind and set before thee Christ's blessed example, in whom, as
in a glass, thou may see the sharpest of thy sorrows in any kind, not only
sanctified and sweetened, but mingled with admirable love of his Father. What
evil befalls thy body and soul, or thy estate inward or outward, which he has
not born and broken, and yet never the less loved of his Father? Thou want
comforts of body, House, Land, Meat, Money; he had not a foot of land, not a
house to hide his head in, not any money till he borrowed of a fish, not a cup
of cold water till he had requested it of the Samaritan, who would give him
none. Thou want friends respect in the world, yea, where thou well
deservest, yea, where thou might justly expect it: Remember it was his case;
his friends became his foes, his scholar a Traitor, the world hated him
causeless; he came to his own and his own received him not; he was without
honor in his own Country, he had evil repayed him for good, he wept over
Jerusalems misery, but Jerusalem laughed at his. Thou want peace of
conscience, can not see a clear look from God, nor feel any ease from the
sting of thy sins, thy sorrowful mind dries up thy bones, all outward troubles
are nothing to this: But remember that never was any so laden with the burden
of sin, as Christ, when his bitter torment expressed such words as these, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

3 Rule. From these crosses, by which Satan would drive thee from God, Sundry
ways of God drawing near his Saints in their troubles.
labor to see how near and graciously God draws toward thee; and thus beat
him with his own weapon.

1 The Lord helps forward our salvation by them, being sour sawces to bring
us out of love with our sweet sins, and of this evil world: plowing of ground
kills the weeds, and harrowing breaks the clods: they be the Lords sharp salves
to draw out our secret corruptions, and the Lords soap to wash foul linen
white: they be the Lords ushers to teach us his statutes; to teach by a little
smart both what thou have deserved in the life to come, and what Christ has
suffered for thee in bearing the whole punishment of all thy sins; to teath
thankfulness for contrary blessings; by poverty, sickness trouble, men learn
to be thankful for wealth, health, peace: to teach pity and compassion toward
the misery of others: to teach circumspection in our ways, and more care of
obedience to all Gods Commandments.

2 The Lord by crosses tries, and exercises the faith, patience, and
sincerity of his servants, whether they will hold out as Job: for as a man by
wrestling knows his own strength better than before, so is it here.

3 The Lord is never nearer his children than in trouble, in fire and water, in
six troubles and in seven, to support them with strength and patience, to give
a blessed issue and use^ and turn it to his own glory in their mighty
deliverance, and to their best; all things are turned to their best, to
recompense their light afflictions with an eternal weight of glory. As Christ
said of Lazarus, This sickness is not to death, but that God may be
glorified, John 11.4. so we may say, This poverty, loss, disgrace, etc. is not
to the utter undoing of a man, but that God may have glory in his deliverance
and glorification.

So much of the third drift of Satan in this first temptation: now of the
fourth. In that the Devils last drift in it is, to have Christ in his want and
hunger, to use an unlawful means of supply; note, that

Doct. 4. It is an ordinary instigation and temptation of the Devil, To use
unlawful means to help our selves is diabolical.
or a Devilish spirit, to use unlawful means in our want to help our selves.
Because Christ had no ordinary means of getting bread, he must provide for
himself by extraordinary. Genesis 25.29, 32. Esau comes out of the field weary and
hungry, and almost dead for meat: how must he supply his want? Sell thy
birthright (said Satan) and so he did. Peter was in great danger in the
Highpriests Hall: how must he help himself out of their hands? Deny thy
Master (said Satan) forswear him, and curse thy self: and thus he gat out.
Saul was in great straights, God was gone from him, he was not answered by
Urim, nor Oracle: how shall he do for counsel? he must go to the witch of
Endor: and so the Devil sends him from himself to himself, who can tell him
more than all his Vrim, his Dreams, his Prophets. Sarah wanted a Child, she
had a promise of one, but she laughed at that, Genesis 16.2. yet must she have one
another way; she gives her maid to her Husband, and she brings an Ismael, a
mocker and persecutor of the promised seed.



2 He knows how derogatory this is to the promise, truth, power, and
providence of God, who can sustain his children as well above means, without
means, yea, against means, as with them. His hand is not shortened that he
cannot help.

3 He easily draws on this temptation under of a color of necessity, which
we say has no law, but falsely. Hence is the common speech of the world, to
defend any injustice, Why? I must live, I must not put forth my wife and
children to beg, I must so exercise my calling, as to maintain my wife and
family, I must utter my wares, though I lie, and swear, and exact, and deceive:
and so under a color of good, and pretense of necessity, no wickedness comes
amiss in the course of ones trade.

Use 1. This teaches us to bewail the pitiful estate of numbers of men taken
in this snare of the Devil: as,

1 Numbers of men oppressed with poverty, because they say they must live; they
must live in an unlawful calling, wherein they be slaves and drudges to every
man's sin: such as are Players, Jesters, Wizards, Tumblers: such are Scholars,
who for preferment run into Popish Countries, and betake themselves to
seminaries, and so become Traitors. Yea, those that have no calling, must live
too: but how? by filching, stealing, or begging, as idle and roguish vagrants,
and those at home whose extreme idleness, brings poverty upon them as an armed
man. Or else by gaming, cheating, and by their wits. The whole course of all
which, is but a prentiship to the devil.

2 Others that exercise honest trades, but easily help themselves forward by
swearing, lying, facing, false weights, measures, and tricks which they put
upon men: They never stick for a penny-profit to hazard their souls: He is no
quick Chapman, if he cannot lie for advantage: neither can he be trusted
unless he swear: he must swear, or he must not sell: he must sometimes make
the best of an ill bargain, and with a little color lay it upon another man's
neck: for why should he willingly wrong or undo himself?

3 Others a number, 1 who by mis-demeanours have brought just reproach upon
themselves, and seek to salve it by lying, facing, and shifting: and perhaps by
worse means. This was the case and sin of good David, he had corrupted himself
with Bathsheba, he was afraid the adultery would come home to him, he sends
for his worthy Captain Uriah to go home to his wife, that so it might be
covered; but when it could not that way, good Uriah must be slain at David's
appointment, and so he would hide adultery by murder. 2 Like unto these are
those, who having outragiously overshot themselves in notable riots by word or
deed, and being called to account for it, lay all the blame upon drunkenness,
a sin indeed of strong burden, able to carry away many sins upon it; but never
was any sin lessened by another, but aggravated, and the excuse is a confession
of a double sin, which in all true judgment deserves double punishment. 3
Servants, or children, who having committed a fault, hide it by lying, and so
to avoid an inconvenience, run into a mischief.

4 Others, being sick and diseased, are persuaded and resolved to go to
Wizards, and Witches, cunning men and women, and so get release by breaking the
Prison. A pitiful cure, when the Devil is the Physician. Saul never went to
the Witch, till God was gone from him. And take this for a certain conclusion;
1 Whosoever goes or seeks to a Witch, in losses, crosses, etc. let him boast
as much as he will of his faith, it is but a Satanical faith, a faith in the
devil, and not in God, by which the Witch works all that is done. 2 The remedy
is far worse than the disease, severely revenged on Saul, 1 Chronicles. 10.13. and
on Asa, 2 King. 1.16. 3 The Devil has got from them, that which he could not
from Christ; namely, to use another means of release than God appointed.

Some there be that are hearers of the Word, yet if they see any person
extraordinarily visited, will give him counsel to seek out to the cunning man.
Is it because there is never a God in Israel? is this a small sin? By Gods law
they ought to dye that seek to thrust a people from their God, and drive them
to the Devil? Deuteronomy. 13.10. But this is a greater sin than that. Miserable
comforters that wish them to go to Hell for help.

Use 2. Let us carefully look to such rules as may keep us from using
unwarrantable means, and they are four.

1 Consider that all means outward and ordinary are but servants, Four
considerations to fence us from using unwarrantable means.
to which God has tied neither blessing nor providence, further than he
pleases, that our affections should not be tied to them, nor our eyes fixed
on them, but on his hand who disposes means to his own ends. It was the sin of
the Israelites to limit the Holy One of Israel, namely to means, that when they
saw no means, they saw no God: whereas a heart loosed from the means, and
rightly disposed to the Author, does not stint him neither to the measure of
affliction, nor to the time, or means of deliverance. Job will not tie God to
any measure, but commits himself wholly to him, saying, If he kill me, yet
will I trust in him. For the time of deliverance, the godly commit it to God,
in whose hand times and seasons are: the just man that lives by faith makes not
haste, Isa. 16.28. For the means of deliverance, Abraham is secure of it, My
son, God will provide: he saw no means of the Promise, if Isaac were offered,
yet he lays him on the alter, on the wood, and receives him from the dead.

2 Consider, that any good thing is then beautiful, when it is compassed by
good means. Satan ever aims at one of these two things, Satan ever seeks to
blemish that good which he cannot hinder.
to hinder every thing that is good, or, if he cannot do that, then to thrust
it on by evil and ungodly means, that he may at least blemish that which he
cannot hinder: and, if he cannot overtake us in the matter, yet to get beyond
us in the manner of doing it. We must therefore watch in both these, that what
we do be warrantable; as to preserve our selves, and provide for our
families: (He is worse than an Infidel that does it not) but withal know, that
he is no better than an Infidel, that does it by evil means, or after an
unwarrantable manner.

3 Consider, that there is no necessity, if ordinary and lawful means fail, to
use unlawful. When men say, I must live, and I must maintain my family; here
remember, that must is for a King, nay, absolute and unlimitted necessity is
for the King of Kings. It is not absolutely necessary, that thou live, but so
long as God pleases: yea, it is absolutely necessary that thou rather perish,
and not live, then break Gods Commandment: If thou perish for want of means,
thou may go to heaven as Lazarus, and exchange a miserable life with an
happy: But if to keep thee from perishing, thou loose thy soul, this is to leap
out of the pan into the coals. Thou therefore that must provide for thy self
and thine, I tell thee, thou must do it by a moderate and honest care,
warrantable by the word, and not shift and prole, as if all were fish that
comes to the net: that is all the necessity that God has laid on thee, the
other is suggested by Satan.

4 Labor to live the life of faith, which will exclude such disturstful
thoughts and practices. For the property of faith, is,

Three excellent properties of faith in want of means.
1 To believe the promises of God, when we see the clean contrary; as, when we
feel our own sins most, then most to believe our own justification; out of the
deep with David, yea out of the Whales belly with Jonah, and in darkness with
Job to see light.

2 To see things invisible, to make things absent, present; yea God absent
present, and to set him continually at the right hand. Moses feared not the
wrath of the King, because he saw him that was invisible, Heb. 11.17. Elisha
being in Dothan feared nothing, when his servant cried out; because his eyes
were open to see the Angels, as fiery Chariots protecting him.

3 Faith is never so working as in perilous times, because then there is most
need, most use of it; then it sets it self a work, and mingles it self with the
promises of God, by which it quickens and puts life unto a man, when he is half
dead, as Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy promise wherein thou have caused me to
trust: it is my comfort in trouble: for thy promise has quickened me. Now it
bestirres it self, to make Gods faithfulness and truth his shield and buckler.
Notable is that example of the three Children, Dan. 3.16, 17. who were in
present danger of their lives, and cast into an hot Furnace: In this danger now
their faith bestirres it to provide for their safety, not by any yielding, or
blanching, or buckling to the unjust command; but by furnishing their mouths
with a resolute answer, Be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not
worship this Image; and by preparing their hearts (through their confidence in
God, who was able to deliver them) rather to yield themselves to the fire and
raging flames, than to any part of that commandment. And were faith and Gods
fear working in the heart, it would destroy false fears and infidelity, which
Satan prevails in mightily, causing men to seek help by unlawful means, if
the lawful be never so little set out of sight.

Command these stones to be made bread.]

Here is an inference upon the former words, If thou be the Son of God: upon a
true ground Satan raises a dangerous consequence: Christ was the Son of God:
true. Must he therefore needs make stones bread?

Satan inferteth mischievous conclusions upon true premises.
Doct. It is an ordinary temptation of the Devil, to infer mischievous
conclusions upon true premises. God had no respect to Cains Sacrifice, as to
Abels: Whereas now Cain should have offered of the best, as Abel did; and have
brought faith with his offering, by which Abel offered a better Sacrifice, Heb.
11.4. Satan inferres upon it, Therefore kill thy brother. Saul received no
answer of God: that was true: but that therefore he should go to the Witch of
Endor, was Satan's inference, both against the Law of God, and Saul's own law.
God is a merciful God: a true premise, and the scope of all the Scripture: but,
that Jonah should therefore fly to Tarshish, and not go to preach the
destruction of Ninivie, was a Satanical inference. A man must pity himself, and
do what he can to repel evil from him, and avoid danger: but that Christ
should therefore not go up to Jerusalem to suffer, was a dangerous consequence
of Satan in Peter's mouth; whom therefore Christ calls Satan.

truths which cannot be denied. Do we think, that the Church of Rome should
have so prevailed in the world, or that Antichristian state should have been
endured, or could any Papist be suffered in ours or any well-ordered Country,
if they did not color all their abominations and false religion with some
general truths; if they should not in word and show hold and recite the
Articles of faith and principles of our religion, concerning God in unity of
essence and trinity of persons, concerning Christ, the Church, etc. were it
possible, that any Christian state could bear them, while indeed and in truth
they reverse the whole foundation of religion, and are limbs of Antichrist? No,
their deceit is a mystery, and walks in darkness, and the mask and vizards of
truth with pretense of holiness, has held the Swords of Princes from them,
which else had long since been sanctified in their overthrow.

2 Satan can do no other, who cannot speak truth for truths sake: for being a
Liar from the beginning, he loves not truth, and therefore if he speak truth,
it is to corrupt the truth, or to stablish some lie. Lying is the Devils mother
tongue, Joh. 8. 1 Samuel 28.17, 18. Lying the Devils mother tongue.
Satan in the habit of Samuel spoke many truths; as, that the Lord had rent the
Kingdom from him, and given it to David (because he had so spoken he would do
it; and because Saul obeyed not the voice of the Lord, nor executed his fierce
wrath against the Amalekites:) and that the Lord would deliver him, and the
Israelites into the hand of the Philistims the next day, etc. But all this was
to feed Saul in his delusion, and hold him in his sin, as though he were
Samuel, as verse. 17. the Lord has done it, even as he spoke by mine hand: and
verse. 19. to morrow shall thou be with me, etc. So in the New Testament we have
the Devils confessing Christ to be the Son of God, the Holy One, the sum of the
Gospel; and Paul and Silas to be the servants of the high God, Act. 16. but
both Christ and his servants put them to silence, and would not have them to
speak the truth, because it was to deprave and slander the whole truth, as
though Christ and his servants had been in league and agreement with the
Devils, and so their doctrine had been not Divine but Diabolical. Thus Satan
like a Bargeman looks one way, but ^owes another.

3 Satan sees how our nature is easily carried away through a general show of
good or truth, to take in with it error and falsehood hand over head, without
trial or discerning: For though our blessed Savior would not confound stones
and bread, yet we easily take stones with bread, and Serpents with Fishes. The
whole Masse-book is but an heap of Idolatrous prayers, and Ceremonies: but yet
because there is some show of good in it, many Scriptures, and some tolerable
and good prayers, with many devotions, it is wholly received without trial, of
millions given over to delusion.

4 Satan the Prince of darkness can transform himself into an Angel of light, 2
Cor. 11.14. and the false Prophets will be confident that the truth is with
them: Zedekiah will oppose Micaiah, and Hanani will smite Jeremy, and make
yokes against the King of Babels yoke, Jer. 28.11. The Donatists in Africa
cried out, that the sound Christians were Traitors to the holy Books, and
themselves the defenders of them. The Papists at this day cry out with
Dioscorus the heretic, I defend the opinions of the Fathers, and their whole
doctrine is condemned with mine.

Use 1. Let us learn to be wise, and try before we trust, not taking all things
in gross, but first examining and proving them: False-hood carries often a show
of truth, and truth often covers false-hood: no vice appears in his proper
color, but under the likeness of some virtue. The Romish Whore of Babylon
offers not her wine of Fornications in the bark of some poisoned plant, or
shell of some poysonful or venomous Creature, but has conveyed them all into a
cup of glistering gold, Revel. 17.4. and this has entised the great ones of
the earth, who gazed at the glister of the golden boul, but never looked what
was in it: the glorious style of Catholic Church, Vicar of Christ. Peter's
successor, has deceived such as liked not to try before they did trust: and so
has universality, antiquity, fathers, consent, and the like. Eve should have
examined the words of the Serpent, and Adam the gift of his Wife; and then
neither of them had been deceived. The builders of Babel, had they examined the
motion before they had made onset, had avoided that confusion. Abraham should
have tried the counsel of Sarah, before he had taken her Maid into his bosom.
This examination and trial by the touchstone of the Word, will show the
inconsequence of such dangerous conclusions. How lamentably are many great wits
and gifts given over in Popish Countries for want of this sound trial, taking
their religion by tradition, offering to the shrines of their forefathers,
that often they can spend their goods and lives for it, as though it were the
only truth.

Use 2. Let us labor to avoid these common darts, these falsely concluded
conclusions which Satan seeks to have us assent unto: It is a great subtilty of
the Devil, by which he overthrows many, and must the more circumspectly be
watched against. See some instances of this his Stratagem, in matters of faith,
and of practice.

False conclusions in matters of faith.
I. In matters of faith: 1 In the Scripture it is a frequent ground, that God
is merciful: true, therefore (says Satan) be bold in sin, and defer thy
repentance: thou may repent when thou list. Here is a wicked inference
indeed: for there is mercy with God, that he may be feared; and, Know thou
not that the long suffering of the Lord should lead thee to repentance?

2 It is a true ground, that Christ dyed, and that for all, i. e. elect and
believers. But Satan says, Therefore what need thou care? why should
thou be so precise? Is not Christ a sufficient play master? Yes, but he paid
for none, but for those that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
Romans 8. verse. 1.

3 It is a true ground, that a man must provide for himself and his family, or
else he is worse than an infidel. Hence Satan collects, Thou may be
covetous, thou may scrape and scratch together any thing; an Infidel is the
worst in the world: and so he persuades a man, that all is fish which comes to
net, and any wind good that brings gain with it.

False conclusions on true grounds in matters of practice.
II. In matters of practice, many ways: 1 Thou art the Son of God, then make
these stones bread, thou may be a little bolder than other. God will not be
so angry with thee. Here see a plain Satanical inference: For the child of God
must honor his Father, Mal. 1.6. and fear to offend him. If I by profession
draw near unto God, I must the more sanctify my self, and grace my profession.

2 If thou be a man, a gentleman, a man of valor, do not put up this
wrong, but revenge this quarrel: else every one will point at thee for a
dastard. Here is another devilish conclusion; for a man must not step into the
place of God, who says, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay: and a Gentleman
must be of gentle behavior, not savage, fierce, and cruel: a man of valor
must pass by offenses: It is the glory of a man to pass by an offense, Prove.
16.32.

3 If thou be an honest fellow, drink, sit bare upon the ground, and pledge
so much to such and such a friend, drink a health to that and the other boon
companion. But the inference is like the former: it wars with honesty and
civility, to drink and swill till health be drowned, and reason banished, and
the party sorted with the brute beasts.

4 If thou be a good Catholic, a true Romanist, defy these Heretics, dye
for the Romish religion; but before thou dyest kill thy Prince, cut the throat
of thy country, blow up the Parliament House, so shall thou be a Martyr
presently. But a true Catholic cannot be a limb of Antichrist, cannot be a
Traitor, cannot be the Devils martyr; though a false Catholic, a
false-hearted Romanist may be a fox, a Fa^^, an incendiary, a Clement, a
Ravilliac, a Catholic villain, or universal mischief.

5. But thou art now in danger, therefore now deny thy profession, forswear thy
Religion, abjure Christ, at least cast one grain into the fire at the Emperors
Commandment. Here is another devilish conclusion upon a true premise: for God
bids me in danger draw near unto him, and not renounce him, or go further from
him: Christ did not by any evil means avoid danger for me; and he has said,
he will deny him before men and Angels, that shall deny him in this world. And
the further from God, the nearer to danger.

6 Thou art a man of learning, and in a populous place, why, show thy learning
sometimes, and preach above the peoples capacity: thou can speak tongues, do
so, and study to be more eloquent. Here is Satan's Sophistry and learning upon
the learned: the ground is often true, the inference false and dangerous: the
Apostle Paul was a man of learning, and in a populous place, at Corinth, but
he thought nothing worthy to be known, but Christ and him crucified: neither
stood his Preaching in the enticing speech of man's wisdom, but in plain
evidence of the Spirit, and in power, and that for good reason, 1 Cor. 2.2. --
6. And can I think that Satan has any care of edifying my people?

7 Thou art a man of knowledge and understanding, why do thou hear sermons so
diligently, seeing thou know enough, yea, as much as the Preacher can tell
thee? A wicked inference of the Prince of darkness: for true knowledge empties
the heart of pride and presumption, and the more I know, the more I had need
be stirred up to practice, that my stripes be not the more.

8 Thou art an ignorant man, thou understandest not Sermons, why then do
thou follow them, or read the Scriptures? A wretched conclusion: the more
ignorant I am, the more I need use the means of knowledge; the less I
understand, the more I had need be taught. But this ignorance is one of the
chief Pillars of Satan's kingdom.

Object. These Preachers agree not among themselves, and therefore I will
believe never a one of them.

Answ. Thou must search for wisdom as for silver, and for understanding as for
gold.

9 Thou art a man of good conscience, of much integrity, above other
Christians; and if thou be so, then separate thy self from these mixed
companies of godly and profane, Come out from among them my people, lest ye
partake of their plagues; separate from their preaching and prayers, from their
fellowship and company, from civility and salutation; thou may eat their
meat, but say not grace with them; pray for them, not with them. Ah, but if my
conscience be good, I must not forsake the fellowship, as the manner of some
is, Heb. 10.25. as knowing, that such pure assemblies cannot be found under
the whole cope of heaven.

And if we would fence our selves against these wicked inferences of Satan,
we must carefully observe these rules. 1 Believe not every Spirit, but prove
the spirits, whether they be of God, 1 John 4.1. as Goldsmiths separate gold
and dross, and examine every piece of gold by the touchstone, (...),
1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Try all things. 2 Compare doctrines, and the reasons of them
with the Scripture: if a doctrine disagree from any part of the Word, it is
erroneous and dangerous; as namely that of the real presence, (...).
which impugns the article of Christ's ascension. 3 Hold fast that which is
good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. When we have considered and known truths, (...)
we must with Mary lay them up in our hearts, to be ready to serve our use.

Command these stones to be made bread.]

We have considered the scope of Satan in this first temptation; which was, 1
To impugn the word of the Father, proclaiming Christ his Son. 2 To shake the
says of Christ. 3 From consideration of his present estate, to bring him to
doubt of his Fathers providence. 4 To use an unlawful means to ^elieve himself.
We have heard also what a dangerous inference he brings upon a true ground.

Now we come to the more special handling of the suggestion it self; wherein
we shall see how cunningly Satan conveies it, Eight things cunningly
contrived in this one suggestion.
and how instantly he follows it, implying in these few words; 1 That it is an
easy thing: say the word, or Command, here is no labor: and being so easy, why
should Christ stick at it? 2 That it is now fit; here is an object ready, here
be stones, these stones. 3 That it is harmless, only a proof of the power of
the Son of God, and in reason what should Satan have gained by it? and Gods Son
cannot sin, not God be angry with his Son. 4 That it is a necessary thing: is
it not necessary for a man that is ready to starve, to eat and procure bread?
If he will live, he must eat. 5 That it is a glorious thing, to command
stones: I say not Pray (for by prayer as great things as this have been done;
the Sea dried, fire turned into water, the Sun stayed in his course, to stand
still, yea and go back) but command by thine own proper power. 6 That it is a
work of special use, not only for the releef of thy self in this want, but to
satisfy me; for if thou make stones bread, I will confess the finger of God,
and believe thy Fathers voice, that thou art the Son of God, and accordingly
account of thee: and so shall all that shall come to the knowledge of this
great and extraordinary work. 7 That it is not unreasonable: to command a few
stones to be made bread, will be no hurt to any man; and if thou will not
transubstantiate many stones, turn but one stone into bread: so it is, Luke
4.3. Say to this stone that it be bread, in the singular number; whereas it is
probable, that at first he offered him many, or all the stones in the place,
which Matthew records: if Christ think that too much, he will be content
that he turn but that one into bread, as Luke has it. 8 The Son of God should
demean himself as the Son of such a Father, who is heir and Lord of all things:
me thinks thy estate is not suited to thy person; and therefore by this
action manifest that which thy estate does not: and if thou do not, give me
leave to doubt of thy person, and take thee for an impostor.

Satan ordinarily moves men to turn stones into bread.
Doct. It is an ordinary temptation of the Devil to shake the faith of Gods
children, to move them to turn stones into bread: For as he dealt with Christ
in want, Christ was hungry, and the devil shows him stones, let him turn them
into bread if he will: so is it with men who are tempted in like manner, if
they be in want: Bread you must have, what need I tell you of so sensible a
want? and therefore shift for your self, here be stones, at least one stone in
time of need, turn it into bread, why to help your self you may use a little
extraordinary or unwarrantable means. When Satan seduced Eve, he persuaded her
to turn a stone, or rather an apple into bread: why? thou see how God envies
your full happiness, and do thou believe his word to be true? No, no, it is
but to keep you from being as Gods, which, what an excellent estate it is, you
now know not. Esau was very hungry when he came from his hunting, and he must
dye if he turn not a stone into bread: and as Satan never goes without his
stones, that is, his objects, so there was a mess of broth ready, for which
profanely he sold his birthright: I am almost dead, and what is the
birthright to me? Saul was extremely haunted and vexed, and knew not what to
do with himself; God was so far out with him as he answered him no way; and
now he must get him to another patron, and who is fittest for him, who is gone
from God, but the Devil? He must now seek a familiar to answer him, 1 Samuel
28.7. the stone is not far off, there is a Witch at Endor, and he can eat no
bread but from her hands.

There be two especial reasons or occasions, whence Satan groundeth and
follows this temptation of turning stones into bread: 1 The avoiding evil. 2
The procuring of some apparent good; both which he knows our hasty inclination
unto.

I. In avoiding troubles he lays two snares, and has two plots: Snares laid
by Satan in avoiding our troubles.
1 To turn stones into bread, by using some unlawful means. Abraham to save his
life may lie, and entreat Sarah so to do. David, thou art in danger, fly to
Achish, play the fool and dissemble, thou see no way else left, devise a way
of safety beyond Gods. Peter, thou art now in the midst of thy Masters enemies,
if thou turnest not stones into bread, and help thy self by lying, swearing,
cursing, and denying thy Master, look for no other than to dye with him. Thou
that art a poor man, see hard times as if thou were in a Wilderness, and here
is nothing but stones, no way but to turn them into bread, thou can not live
if thou do not lie, or steal, or swear, or be unjust; poverty and danger
shall come armed upon thee.

2 If we cannot thus help our selves, but the evil continues, then Satan
soliciteth us to repine and murmur within our selves, Psalm 116.11. I said in
my distress, that all men are liars, and 31.22. I said in my have, I am cast
off: and this, to bring us to disclaim confidence and waiting upon God any
longer; as Jehoram said, 2 King. 6.33. This evil is from the Lord, and shall I
attend any longer upon him? Thus he daily shows us our crosses, as so many
stones to move us to impatiency, and gain from us our affiance in God, that
hereby he may both pull and draw us from our strength, and help, and glory from
God. Both these are apparent in this dart against Christ.

II. In the purchasing of some apparent good, Numbers have learned this trade
of the devil to make stones bread.
he knows the haste of our unbeleeving hearts as well as in the former, and
how easily we are brought to turn stones into bread. In the matter of the
world, what a number of men are there of this trade, which we may fitly call
the Devils Alchymistry? Some by extortion, usury, and oppression make stones
bread; as many Landlords just of the Devils last, that by racking their rents,
would have their Tenants get bread out of stones: nay, not so merciful as he;
for no doubt if Christ had made bread of stones, he would have let him eat it;
but so will not these, but eat up bread, and sweat, and all. This is called,
bread of violence and oppression, Prove. 4.17. and because being made of stones
it is hard of digestion, it needs a cup of Wine, which is at hand too: for,
they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.

Others, by deceit and subtlety turn stones into bread, and glory when they can
go beyond their brethren, by tricks of wit, or cunning: and this seems to go a
step beyond the Devil, who would have Christ turn stones into bread, that is,
something into something; but these would turn nothing into bread, but only
live by their wits. Solomon calls all bread thus cunningly changed, stolen
bread, and bread of deceit, which seems sweet in the mouth: but that ye may
know whence it comes, he tells you that for all that, it returns to his former
poverty, Prove. 20.17. The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his
mouth is filled with gravel. Both these the Apostle condemns, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Let no man defraud or oppress his brother in any matter; for the Lord is the
avenger of all such.

In procuring health in sickness, or helping our selves to recover our losses,
he easily persuades us to Witches, Sorcerers, and to try many unwarrantable
conclusions, and enforces them strongly; persuading us else that we shall
miscarry and perish by our own negligence.

Satan never comes without one stone of other.
Use 1. This shows us that Satan never comes without stones, that is, objects
of his temptations; at least, he has one stone, which if he offer, he
seems reasonable. He has not only a Bathsheba for David, but every man
has his several Bathsheba, some dear lust or other, which Satan will still be
feeding his eyes and senses upon: Nay, as Mar. 5.5. in the parties possessed,
he armed them with stones against themselves, and made them beat themselves
with stones; so out of our own scrip he fetches stones against us, he
knows the inclination of our wills, the stream of our affections, the
constitution of our humors, the predominant desires of our hearts, and
accordingly assaulteth us. Nay, not only in evil things, but in the best of
all he wants not one stone or other against us: Even the tree of life it self
(a Sacrament of Gods Covenant of life) will serve his turn; and he wishes not
Eve to eat all the apples on it, but seems very reasonable whiles he offers
but one. In coming to the Word, and Sacraments, and Prayer, he is content if
a man bring but one stone in his heart, one sin, either hardness of heart, that
the seed may fall in stony ground; or unbeleef (for how know you that this is
the word of God?) or covetousness, which is as thorns to choke all; or malice
and envy (for then God will put none of his precious liquor into such a fusty
vessel:) or wandering thoughts, or dislike of the Preacher, or any other lust
(though but one) he cares for no more.

We should therefore never go without our fence in our own houses, or in Gods
houses, that we may escape the danger of this battry. Yea, let us watch Satan
in base and despised things, as an apple, or a stone, in idle words, or
unfruitful speeches, in the matter of a pin, or any small trifling matter: for
even in these things he can get much advantage, and sow discord between the
nearest of all, even the husband and wife.

Satan lesseneth men rather than to want bread to get it out of stones.
Use 2. This teaches us, That the scope of all Satan's proffers, is to make men
earthly-minded: he cares not how much men be addicted to seek bread, yea, he
would have them so eager of bread, as rather than want it, to get it out of
stones; for 1 He would fill the heart with these base desires, that there
might be no room for better. 2 He knows, that if he can make a man a servant
to the world, he cannot serve God: he cannot serve two Masters commanding
such contrary things. 3 He knows this runs with nature, and in the channel of
our corruption since the fall, to which we are easily persuaded, and very
hardly (if ever) recovered back again. God in his word deals clean contrary,
and every where reigns us in, where Satan spurs us forward: that calls us out
of the World, forbids us to seek, that is, immoderately, the bread that
perishes; calls us to heavenly mindedness; to converse and traffic in
heaven: and send our affections above; to seek after Christ the bread of life;
to give all diligence to make our election sure; to seek the Kingdom of God.
From whence, when we find our selves strongly set upon this World, with
neglect of better things, to scrape and gather bread, and things for the body,
we must labor to espy Satan's suggestion in it, together with our own
inclinations to swallow down all such temptations, and forthwith to cast our
eyes upon such Scriptures as may be back-biasses to our natural motion.

Satan allows his servants stones for bread.
Use 3. Note the cold comfort that Satan affords his followers: when they need
bread, he offers them stones, as with Christ here, Matthew. 7.9. What man is
there among you, that if his Son ask him bread, will give him a stone? as if
he had said. No Father that loves his child, can be so unnatural: but
Satan, who cannot but be an unnatural murderer, here for bread offers the Son
of God a stone. It is clean otherwise between God and his children: for if
Fathers which are evil, can give good things to their children, much more our
heavenly Father gives good things to them that ask him, even things according
to their need: Your heavenly father knows that ye stand in need of all these
things. If they have need of Christ the bread of life, he gives them this bread
of life: If they need the Holy Ghost, he gives the Holy Ghost to them that ask
him, that is, not only beginnings of grace, but increase of it in greater
measure, and a comfortable feeling and fruition. If they need temporal mercies,
he gives them more than they ask, as Solomon, yea above all they are able to
ask or think. Who would not think himself happy to be Gods favorite rather
than stand to the Devils wages, who for bread will reach him stones.

Use 4. The way to get bread, Gods way to get bread, contrary to the Devils, in
three things.
is not at the Devils appointment to turn stones into bread, or use unlawful
means; but, 1 To fear and serve the Lord, Exodus 23.25. If thou will serve the
Lord thy God, he shall bless thy bread and thy water: the good land and all the
fruits of it were promised to the Israelites, so long as they were Homagers to
God: no good thing shall be wanting to such, Psalm. 34.10. If we serve him, we
shall never need turn stones into bread, even as Christ here did not, who
refusing Satan's offer was refreshed of the Angels.

2 To live in an honest and lawful trade of life painfully: Gods ordinance is,
that in the sweat of thy brows thou must get thy bread: the earth brings not
forth so naturally now as at first, yet at first Adam must Till the ground.

3 In our lawful Calling to depend upon Gods blessing, which makes rich,
leaving all the success to God: and this will make us content with that estate
which God makes our portion by good means.

Verse. 4. But he answering said, It is written, Man lives not by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.
IN this answer of our Savior repelling the Tempter, four things are to be
considered: 1 The manner, 2 The affection, negative, But. 3 The matter of it, a
testimony of Scripture, It is written. 4 The parts of this testimony: 1
Negative: Man lives not by bread only: 2 Affirmative, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

The manner and quality of the answer appears in the whole answer; that it was
1 A reasonable, 2 A meek, 3 A modest answer.

First, it was a reasonable answer: our Lord did not shake off the Temper
without an answer, though he deserved none; but, to show that he did not
refuse the motion, of a wilful mind, but upon just ground, he makes him a
sufficient answer: whence our Savior would teach us, that

Doct. If we be to deal with our most deadly adversaries, Christi^^ must be
reas^^able to most ^nreasonable ^dversaries. Reasons.
suppose them as malicious as Satan to Christ, yet we must do nothing, nor
speak nothing of a wilful mind, but take the guide of reason, and the ground of
conscience with us. For, 1 The will of man not ordered by reason, is like a
wild Colt without a Rider, most untamed and untractable, most hateful to God,
and most hurtful to men: and a note of man reserved to the Judgment of the
Great Day to be punished, is, to be presumptuous and stand in his own
conceit, 2 Pet. 2.10.

2 Reasonable men must have reason for their actions at the least: for herein
is a difference between the beasts and men, they are lead by sense and
appetite, but men by reason, from which if men depart, they degenerate into
beasts, being lead with sensuality, 2 Pet. 2.1^.

3 Our Saviors example carries us further, that we should not only be lead
by reason in our affairs, but by reason sanctified and renewed, reason directed
by the word: and this not only here, but in all his course of life, Mar. 10,
40. when he refused the unreasonable request of the Sons of Zebedeus, he gave
a just reason, saying, It is not mine to give, but shall be given to them for
whom it is prepared: I must not give the chief seats in my Kingdom according to
kindred and affection, but according to my Fathers election.

When he rebuked Peter, and called him Satan, he gives a reason for such
unwonted sharpness; For thou art an offense unto me, thou savourest not the
things of God, thou would hinder man's Redemption, and Satan could have done
no more, Matthew. 16.23. Acts 1.7. when the Disciples would know of Christ at his
ascension, when he would restore the Kingdom to Israel, he denies their
request, and gives a reason, It is not for you to know this, my father has put
times and seasons in his own power: ye have another task, to be witnesses to
me, etc. intend this, look to your Apostleship.

Use. This reproves the frowardness and unreasonable wilfulness of men, and
especially in their dealings with their adversaries, taking violent courses,
not respecting conscience, religion, nor reason it self, but standing upon
their will, and saying, This I will do, let see who shall hinder me, and let
him undo it if he can. Now persuade this man, Oh, but let not passion guide
you, but show your self a man, cast away this impotent and womanish reason, to
such as are bruitishly destitute of reason, I will because I will; No, he is
an enemy to all your persuasion, his will out-runs his wit and reason, his lust
is his law, his conscience, and his religion. But if any thing can reclaim
such a man, if he be not rather an Heathen than a Christian, let him set
Christ's example here before him, who would not be wilful without reason to the
Devil himself in a most devilish motion; and will thou to thy brother, to thy
neighbor, yea to thy wife, children? etc. Either set thy self to walk in thy
Lords steps, or get thee another Master.

Five reasons of Christ's meekness to Satan.
Secondly, this answer of Christ was a most meek answer. Christ was omnipotent,
able with a book to have confounded the Devil; he might by his power have
driven him back to Hell, and made him actually know and confess he was the Son
of God; but he would not for sundry reasons:

Christians must overcome adversaries rather by patience than by power.
1 To teach us, that (as he did) we must rather overcome Satan by humility and
patience, than by power; as Christ obtained his full victory not by majesty,
but by abasement and passion.

2 To teach us, that when we suffer indignity and wrong of evil men, as Christ
here of the evil one, we should rather turn our selves to Doctrine, and
convincing them by the Word, than to revenge: so did Christ.

3 That we might hence know the power of the Word of God, a part of our
spiritual armor, even the sword of the Spirit, put into our hands by God to
foyl and vanquish him by: for the whole Combat of Christ was exemplary, nay
he sustains here our person, and wields our weapon for us.

4 Christ's humility and meekness was now a fitter weapon than power and glory,
in two respects: 1 To the greater vexation of the adversary, who thought
himself so strong and cunning, as no flesh was ever yet able to resist him,
only he knew God had him in chains; but now he is foiled by the seed of the
Woman, by the wisdom and weakness of Christ as man, and not by his Divine
power as God. 2 Christ's meekness lets him go on, and pass thorough all his
temptations, to his greater and utter overthrow and silence: for if Christ by
his Divine power had cut him short at the first, he would have said, that God
fearing his weakness would not suffer him to be tempted, or not to abide in
temptation: Now his mouth is shut, Christ the Son of man foyls him.

5 To comfort us: 1 By showing us that there is something else besides Divine
power, to overcome all hellish and Satanical power withal: for else we that
want divine power, and are weaker than water, could have small comfort: but now
we see Satan may be overcome of weak men, by the means that Christ used, as
fasting, prayer, and the Word of God. 2 By persuading us, that if Christ in his
humility and abasement could encounter and foil Satan, much more can he now
help us, being in his glory and exaltation. If he can rescue us out of the
mouth of the roaring Lion, when himself is as a Lamb before the shearer, much
more when he shall show himself the mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Hence
note, that

Doct. Christ cut not Satan here so short as he did sundry wicked men, nay,
Christ not so rough with Satan as with some wicked men, nor as with some of his
dear Disciples. Reasons.
as he did some of his beloved Disciples. Peter, how sharply was he checked for
dissuading Christ from Jerusalem? and Joh. 21.21. when he asked curiously
concerning John, what he should do; Christ said, What is that to thee? so he
might have said to Satan, what is that to thee, whether I be the Son of God, or
no? but he does not.

1 Not because he loves his Disciples and Gods Children worse than Satan, but
because the Devil and wicked ones must be let go on to the height of impiety,
as Satan here: and Judas, how patiently did Christ bear him all the while; yea,
at his apprehension calling him friend? they go on to confusion without check
or bands almost in their life and death: But he will take up his children in
the beginning, they must not be let run too far, as good Parents reclaim their
children timely.

2 God declares his power in taking the wicked at the height, as Pharaoh, Romans
9.17. For this cause have I stirred thee up, that I might show my power in
thee, and that my Name might be declared to all the world: if Pharaoh had been
taken at the first, the Lord had never had such glory of his overthrow.

3 The Lord hereby declares his long patience to vessels of wrath, Romans 9.22.
all which bountifulness and patience, because they abuse, and are not lead to
repentance by it, they are excuseless, and condemned justly, as having heaped
coals of wrath on their own heads. Who could so long have endured Pharaoh, but
patience it self?

4 The Lord hereby declares the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, whom
he has prepared to glory, Romans 9.23. for as he has prepared them, that is,
decreed to glorify them, so he daily prepares them to glorious uses. as we do
our vessels by rubbing and scouring, separating corruption from them, and the
rust of sin by his rough handling them, judging them in the world, not to
condemn them with the world.

Use 1. If the Lord be not so quick with thee in his corrections as with
others, thou had need be the quicker with thy self to judge thy self, The
greatest judgment of all, not to be judged at all.
and see what estate thou stand in, that thou be not in the upper stairs
and room of sin. Take heed of thy self, when God lets thee alone to thy self.
The greattest judgment of all, is, not to be judged at all. When a man has
cast off his Son, and lets him run his own riotous ways, as careless what
becomes of him, it is a certain sign he shall never enjoy his Land: so is it
with God, and the sinner pacing on without control in his sin.

Use 2. If Christ be thus meek and patient with Satan himself, and God use so
great patience to vessels of wrath, this commends unto us the grace of
meekness toward our brethren much more. 1 This is the Commandment of our
Savior, who was a special Schoolmaster of meekness, Learn of me, for I am
lowly and meek: He was herein testified to be the Son of God, because the
Spirit descended on him in the likeness of a meek and harmless Dove: and thus
we must testify our selves the Sons and children of God, by the lighting of
the same Spirit of meekness upon us, Gal. 6.2. 2 A meek spirit is much set by
of God, and preserves peace with men, by soft answers, and readiness to
forgive and pass by offenses.

Use 3. This reproves men of a fiery and furious disposition, men as meek as
rough Esau; right Ismaels, their hand is against every man, and every man's hand
against them; like Lamech, who if he be provoked, will revenge a word with a
blow, a scoff with a stab. But others, let them alone, offend them not, you
shall have them meek enough, tractable enough: but move such a one but a little
by a word, or the least neglect as may be, Oh he is presently as meek as David
at Nabals churlish answer, he will kill and slay, even all, presently in his
hot blood. But is this Christian meekness, to be so boisterous like a sudden
wind, which thy self scarce knows whence it is, or whither it tends? no, but a
brutish meekness; for even the beasts will scarce stir unprovoked; nay, we say
the Devil is good so long as he is pleased; and thou art good no longer. But
thou that art so impatient, and thus betrayest thy meekness toward thy
brother, what would thou do, if thou had the Devil in hand, as Christ had
here? Also this makes against railers and scoffers of others: for Christ railed
not on the Devil himself, nor would overcome him otherwise than by humility.

Christ's answer most modest.
Thirdly, This Answer of Christ was a most modest answer. Satan would have him
confess himself the Son of God, this he denies not, nor yet affirms, but
modestly acknowledges himself a man, Man lives not by bread only. The like
we may note elsewhere, being called to his confession before the Governors;
If he were the King of the Jews, Matthew. 27.11. If he were the Christ, Luke
22.67. If he were the Son of God; he did not directly affirm it, but either,
Thou say it, or, ye say that I am, not denying, but modestly assenting; and
ordinarily he called himself the son of man, not the Son of God: teaching us
by his example, when we speak of our selves, Note.
to speak modestly. Paul being to speak of great things of himself, speaks
all in another person, 2 Cor. 12.2. I know a man in Christ above fourteen
years ago, etc. taken into Paradise, etc. and John, speaking of himself, says,
And when Jesus saw his mother, and the Disciple whom he loved: and, who leaned
on Jesus at supper, chap. 19.26.

Alas! how far are we degenerate from this our pattern, who if we be but the
sons of mean men, we will stand upon it much more than Christ did upon being
the Son of God? we will pride it out, and ruffle, and brag, and bear our selves
upon our ancestors, if they be stepped but one step above the lowest: Christ,
when he had good occasion, would not scarce profess himself the Son of God,
being of another manner of spirit than that which breathed out that brag in the
temptation afterward, All these will I give thee.

II. Now to come to the second point in the answer, namely, the affection,

But Jesus answered, and said,]

The conjunction discretive shows our Saviors disagreement from Satan, and
that his Answer is negative to the temptation: for although Christ both might
by that miracle of turning stones into bread, have showed himself the Son of
God, and now needed bread being hungry, yet he would not yield to Satan.

Quest. But seeing Christ, who as God could have turned stones into sons of
Abraham, could much more turn stones into bread, so easily by his word (for if
he had spoken to the stones, as Satan desired, certainly they would have had
ears to hear him) why would he not do it? what hurt had it been?

Why Christ who could turn stones into bread would not five reasons
Answ. 1 Miracles must confirm faith in Believers unto salvation, John 2.11.
but Christ knew the Devil could not believe, if he had all the miracles in the
World. Besides, he had even now heard the Fathers voice, testifying Jesus his
beloved Son; and Christ knew, if he would not believe the Fathers voice, he
would not believe for the Sons miracles.

2 Christ would not by this miracle give the least suspicion, that either he
distrusted his fathers seasonable providence, or that he would depend for his
preservation upon the means, but upon his Fathers word: he was in his fathers
work, and lead by the Spirit into the wilderness, and therefore knew he should
not want necessaries.

3 It was an unseasonable motion, it was now a time of humiliation, of
temptation, of affliction, wherein it was fit to avoid all show of ostentation,
which was the scope of the temptation: for Satan would only have him to show
what he could do for a need, for a vaunt of his power. Now in a time of
serious humiliation to advance himself by a miracle, had been as seasonable as
Snow in harvest.

4 Christ would not give the least credit to Satan, nor do any thing at his
desire, were it good and profitable which he suggesteth: for his end and issue
is ever wicked and devilish: yea, he would show, how he contemned the will of
the Tempter; for he is not overcome, unless he be contemned.

5 Christ Jesus being the wisdom of his Father, well knew, that Satan grossy
dissembled with him: for he spoke as if he wished well unto him, and would
have his hunger satisfied: but could he indeed respect the releef of Christ?
did he desire Christ's preservation and welfare? knew he not that he was the
promised seed, that must break his head, and destroy his works? and therefore
seeing Christ knew, that Satan must needs seek his destruction in all his
attempts, he had just cause to yield to none of them all, though they seemed
never so beneficial.

In that Christ here would not make his Divinity known to Satan, neither by
word nor miracle, we may note, that

Doct. Christ will not purposely make himself known to such as he knows will
make no right use of him. Luke 23.8. When Herod saw Jesus, Christ reveals
himself only to such as make right use of him.
he was exceeding glad: for he had heard many things of him, and hoped to
have seen some miracle: But Christ would not work any sign in his presence,
because he had wrought works enough already to prove him the Son of God:
neither was it fit to prostitute the power of God, to the pleasure of a vain
man, who would have made no right use of it. Matthew. 12.39. This evil and wicked
Generation seeks a sign, and none shall be given them save the sign of the
Prophet Jonah? Why? had they not infinite signs, and miracles both then and
afterward? Yes, but they had none such as they would have: for they would have
some extraordinary sign; as Mat. 16.1. Master, show us a sign from heaven: as
if they had said, Either cause the Sun to stand still or go back, as in
Joshuahs and Hezekiahs days, or the Moon to stand, as in Ajelon, or call for
an extraordinary tempest of thunder and rain, as Samuel did, which made all the
people to fear the Lord and Samuel exceedingly, 1 Samuel 12.18. or call for fire
from heaven, as Elijah did. These and the like they thought beseeming men of
God: as for turning water into wine, restoring of sight and legs, etc. those
they saw little power in.

But why would not our Savior give them such a sign as they desired? Surely
he had just reason, the same in this our doctrine; for they did not desire it
for a good end, but (as Luke says expressly) to tempt him: not to help their
infirmity, but to feed their curiosity: neither to increase and strengthen
faith, but to nourish their infidelity. For had that been their end, had they
not beside the doctrine of the Prophets, and the fulfilling of the promises, the
blessed Doctrine of the son of God, of whom some of themselves said, Never man
spoke like him; and for the confirmation of that, many and mighty powerful
miracles, which were signs from heaven, showing that he was from heaven? And
yet for all this they believed not.

So Matthew. 27.42. the High Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees said. If he be the
King of the Jews, let him come down from the Cross, and woe will believe him.
No doubt, Christ could, but be would not; not only because it was an hour of
darkness; but because he know they would never have believed him, Psalm.
22.2^, 23. I will declare thy name to my brethren, to the seed of Jacob, to
Israel.

Matthew. 7.6. Cast not holy things to dogs, nor pearls before swine. By holy
things and pearls, are meant the things of Gods Kingdom, Christ and his merits,
etc. so called, both to show the excellency of them in themselves, being above
all pearls, Prove. 3.14. as also our duty, to prize and lock them up in our
hearts, and keep them (as we do our pearls) safely in our memories. By Dogs
and Hoggs, are meant malicious and obstinate enemies, convicted of enmity
against Gods Word, of whose amendment there is little hope: every man naturally
is an enemy to God and his Word, and so a dog and a swine; as Christ called
the Heathens and Gentiles, It is not lawful to take the children bread, and
cast it to dogs. Now to such as these we must preach and offer the Sacraments
yea Christ offered himself and came to call sinnets: but when his Word and
Miracles were rejected, and himself evil entreated, as among the Pharisees,
then says Christ, Let them alone, they are blind leaders of the blind.

2 Christ shows himself unto none but such as he loves, and love him, Joh.
14.11. and this was the ground of Judas his speech, Lord, what is the cause,
that thou will show thy self to us, and not to the world? the world sees him
not; for none sees him but to whom he shows himself; and he shows himself
to none but such as love him; and none love him, but such as love his word, and
keep it, verse. 23.

3 This was one cause, why Christ spoke so many things in Parables, that such
as would be blind might not see; and such as would not make a right use of his
holy doctrine, might not understand, Matthew. 13.13. For many that heard them, let
them go without further question in a careless manner, whereas the Disciples
of Christ inquired of him his meaning, and one learned of another; and so that
which for the difficulty drove others away, became in this manner of teaching,
much more easy and familiar, yea much more perspicuous and clear than any
other.

4 Never could extraordinary means, convert such as believed not the word, the
ordinary means: and therefore Christ never or seldom gratified the Scribes and
Pharisees with Miracles or extraordinary means, because they resisted his
Doctrine, Person, and Works: or if any wicked men saw any of his mighty Works
and Miracles, they saw not himself in them; as Pharaoh, what a number of
Miracles saw he? yet he was never the better, he would not acknowledge God nor
his servants: and in the Wilderness, they who saw Miracles every day and
moment, yet not believing the Word of God in them, were never the better; the
arm of the Lord was not made bare unto them.

Use 1, Ignorant persons, that know not Christ, nor desire to know him, are in
a woeful estate, being such as Christ counts unworthy to reveal himself unto:
and therefore he either keeps the means from them, or leaves them without grace
to make an holy use of them.

Numbers of men to whom Christ never reveals himself.
Use 2. In worse case are they that have the means, and yet no taste of them, no
reformation by them: their covetousness, their pride, their drunkenness and
uncleaneness will not be left; as many that come to Church to hear the Word,
and receive the Sacraments, and yet are no better than Dogs and Swine, and
altogether unreformed in their lives and courses. Some draw the Word of God
into question, and would be taught by Angels, or Miracles, as Satan here: but
Christ will not make himself known to them no more than to him: so says
Abraham to Dives in Hell, when he denied his request, They have Moses and the
Prophets, if they will not believe them, neither would they believe if one
should rise from the dead. Some are resolved to live as they list, let the
Preachers say what they can: whereas he that is in Christ, to whom he reveals
himself, is a new Creature: for Christ speaks to the heart, not to the ear only.

Others say, they are decreed to life or death, and therefore, do what they
can, they cannot change Gods mind, and hence never go about to change
themselves: But, had Christ showed himself to these, he would have directed
them to the means of saving knowledge, namely to the Scriptures which testify
of him, Joh. 5.29. and to faith, which unites to him, and to the fruits of
faith, which testify the truth of it, to his glory and their comfort. Others
will be saved by says alone, and by a profession of the Gospel, and so neglect
the works which justify it, and the power of godliness: whereas, if Christ in
the Ministry had revealed himself to such, he had quickened their faith, and not
left it as a Carcass: for faith without works is dead. Others, poor simple
people, will be saved by mercy alone, and never labor for knowledge, faith, or
true feeling of their own estate, and care not how sin abound, that mercy may
abound much more: But, had Christ met with them, he would let them see their
misery in the causes and effects, and teach them to hunger after mercy in the
means, and having obtained it, to go and sin no more, lest a worse thing
follow.

Others, disclaiming the doctrine of mortification, and self-denial, therefore
dislike the Word as too straight a Doctrine, stripping them of their pleasures
and profits: and hence some hold on in their lusts, some return with the Swine
to their wallowing in the mire, they cannot dye to sin, they cannot live
without laughter, mirth, and sports: Whereas, had Christ revealed himself unto
them, he would have taught them, that his yoke is an easier yoke than the yoke
of sin, Three properties of such as to whom Christ will make himself known.
and that there is no sound comfort but in mortified affections and actions.

Use 3. Whosoever would have Christ reveal himself fully unto him, must labor
to be thus qualified: 1 He must be humble: for he teaches the humble in his
ways, Psalm. 25.9. but the proud he sends empty away; as rain makes valleys
fruitful, but falls off the mountains, which are therefore barren. 2 He must
long and desire to meet Christ in his Ordinances: for Christ is the scope of
the Word and Sacraments: therefore desire to know nothing but Christ
Crucified; go to the tents of Shepherds where he has told thee thou shall
meet him. And this desire, if it be sincere, will vent it self in earnest
prayer, to be taught of God, Teach me thy statutes, O open mine eyes, that I
may see the wonderful things of thy Law. And it has a promise to be answered,
Joh. 14.21. I will love him, and show my own self to him. 3 He must have a
conscionable endeavor and industry to obey that part of Gods will, which he
reveals unto him, Joh. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know
whether the doctrine be from God or no.

III. The third part in the answer is the matter of it, a testimony of
Scripture,

It is written.]

Christ might have oppressed the Devil by his Divine power, but being as man to
be tempted, he would as man overcome. 1 To magnify man's nature. 2 To torment
Satan the more: and 3 To teach us how to overcome him. And by this his practice
he gives to understand, that,

Doct. 1. The Word is a principal weapon of our Spiritual warfare. Reasons.
The word written is a chief part of our spiritual armor to foyl Satan by; yea
indeed the principal weapon of our spiritual warfare is the Word of God.

1 Ephesians. 6.17. Take unto you the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God: and therefore, as a sword, it serves 1 To defend us: 2 To wound Satan: 3
To cut asunder all his temptations: so it did serve Christ here. Neither is it
a Carnal weapon, but the sword of the Spirit, that is, a Spiritual weapon as
the fight is spiritual, not made by man, but tempered, framed, sharpened, and
put into our hands by the Spirit of God himself: for whose Word else is it? or
whence has it power but from Gods Spirit? Revel. 1.16. It is called the
two-edged sword, which goes out of the mouth of Christ: because it is sharp
and piercing, to wound all his enemies: it pierces to the very bones and
marrow. With this sword he slayes the wicked, Isa. 11.4. with this he visits
Leviathan, and slayes the Dragon, that is, the mightiest enemies of his Church,
Isa. 27.1. with this sword he consumes Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and with this
sword he soyls the Devil here: with the same he slayes corruptions, and
Satanical temptations in the hearts of his own children.

2 This part of our armor was signified by the Shields wherewith Salomons
Temple was hanged, Cant. 4.4. and by the smooth stones, whereby David smote the
Phitist^m, 1 Samuel 17.40. here the Sons of David, and David's Lord, smites the
Goliath of Hell with a deadly wound: Saul's Armor is here refused, worldly
weapons, wisdom, and subtlety, and one stone is taken from the fountains of
holy Scripture, out of the bag of his holy memory, and by it Satan falls. Yea,
it is the armory of the Church, whence all other parts of Christian armor are
to be had.

3 All the contention and fight of Satan, is to fasten some error and falsehood
upon us: now therefore the only fence from error, is to be girded with the
girdle of truth: now the title of truth is often given to the word of God,
Psalm. 19.10. The judgments of the Lord are truth: and Joh. 17.17. Thy Word is
truth: to show, that so long as we hold to the word, we are sufficiently
armed against all falsehood and error, both in judgment and practice. And the
like may be concluded from that it is called light, discovering and chasing
before it all mists and darkness.

The word a complete armor.
4 The Word is a complete armor, covers every part of the soul, gives fence,
and direction to the mind, understanding, memory, thoughts, all the
affections, and all the faculties of the soul: it covers every part and member
of the body, teaches the eye to look, the ear to hear, the tongue to speak,
the feet to walk: It directs us in all our conversation and actions of life
toward God and men, even to all conditions of men, superiors, equals,
inferiors, poor and rich: further, it guides us in all conditions of life, in
all times, in all places, in all ages, prescribing rules to children and men,
young and old: in all exercise and use of things indifferent, as meat, drink,
apparel, recreation: in a word, in all things concerning this life, or the life
to come. So as here is a sufficient defense for all occasions.

5 Never did any man receive any hurt from Satan, or his own corruptions, or
from this evil world, but either because he did not draw out this sword, or
did not ^ightly use it. What other was the cause of the deadly wound of our
first Parents, and ours in them, but that they drew not out this sword of Gods
word, but suffered the Serpent to wring it out of their hands? How could Peter
have been so greivously wounded in the High Priests Hall, but that he forgot
the word of Christ, which had admonished him of it, the power of which was
such, as it healed his wound as easily as it had done Malcus his ear, which he
had struck off; and therefore wanted no power to have preserved him, if he had
remembered it? What a fearful wound befell Lots wife, because she cast off this
armor, and forgate the Word, charging her she should not look back? The like
of Solomon, all his wisdom could not sense him if he cast off the word of
God, which had charged him not to meddle with outlandish wives; but neglecting
that, must fall by them.

Use 1. This is a confutation of Romish Teachers, who disarm men of the
Scriptures, and wring this special weapon out of the peoples hands: Papists by
suppressing the scriptures, w^ing the weapon out of men's hands.
common people may not have the Scripture in their vulgar tongue; for this
(says Harding) is heretical. But this place is sufficient to prove the
contrary: whence I conclude thus: The weapons whereby people are senced from
Satan's temptations, are not to be taken from them; but the scriptures are the
weapons of defense against Satan's temptations: and again, if all the common
people be assaulted and wounded, and all have to do with Satan, then all have
need of this fence and cover against this most capital and deadly enemy: But
the assault is made against all, and Satan seeks without exception whom he may
devour; and therefore all without exception need the fence of the Scriptures.
And further, whosoever turn the people naked unto all Satan's temptations, and
disarm them so as they cannot but be overcome, are guilty of all the
wickedness of the people, to which Satan draws them; and also of their
destruction, unto which they be drawn: But Popish Teachers by destituting the
people of the Scriptures, turn them naked into temptation, and disarm them; and
therefore are guilty of their sin and damnation.

But this practice of theirs is, 1 Against the Scriptures: This practice, 1
against the scriptures.
for God would therefore have the scriptures written, and commended to men in
their own Language, not only for the learned, but unlearned also, that it
might be familiar to all sorts of men, Deuteronomy. 31.11.12. Thou shall read the
words of this Law before all Israel, that they may hear it, and learn to fear
the Lord: and he names their men, and women, children, and strangers.

Object. But this belongs to the Jews alone.

Answ. No, The reason is perpetual, all of all ages must fear the Lord, and
therefore have the means, the word of God, Jerem. 36.6. Jeremy commanded Baruch
to read the word of the Lord, in the hearing of all Judah, and in the audience
of the people, Joh. 5.39. Search the scriptures.

Object. Christ spoke to the learned, the Scribes and Pharisees.

Answ. But the reason of the precept belongs to all, who desire life eternal,
Col. 3.16. Let the word of God dwell plentifully in you: and 1. v. 9. he
prays they may be filled with the knowledge of the will of God, in all
wisdom, and spiritual understanding: now all the Colossians were not
Clergymen. And how does the Lord encourage all his people to understand and
obey the words of the Law? Deuteronomy. 4.6. Only this people is wise, and of
understanding, etc.

2 It is against the example of Christ and the Apostles: 2 Against the example
of Christ and his Apostles.
Christ taught in a known tongue, so the Apostles were endued with diverse
Tongues to preach to every Nation in their own Tongue, and all the writers of
holy scriptures did write them in the tongue best known, most vulgar and
common, whereby it might more easily come to every ones knowledge: for
whatsoever was written, was written for our learning, Rom 15.4
that we by patience and consolation of the scriptures might have hope: so our
Savior says, These things are written, that ye might believe: so as
whosoever must have faith, hope, patience, comfort, must be acquainted with
the scriptures: and if these be entailed only to learned men, so may they.

3 It is against common sense, 3 Against common sense.
and as if one should advise another who is to meet his enemy in the field,
that if he would drive away his enemy and get the victory, he must lay down
his weapon, or leave it behind him.

Object. But the Popish Doctors put other weapons into their hands to fight
with, as crosses, holy water, charms, and conjurations, wherewith the under
sort yet content themselves.

Answ. These are weapons of the Devils own forging; the Leviathan of Hell
accounts of these spears but as straw, and laughs at them: as if a man being to
encounter a most furious and furnished enemy, should cover himself with a
cob-web, and think he were well furnished: No, no, Satan puts these into men's
hands, to keep them from the word, which is the only charm, the only cross, the
only hallowed water, that can conjure him, which our Lord by his blessed
example has taught us to use.

4 Against the Fathers. Ad Volusianum Epist. 3 Contra Valent. lib. 3. cap. 12
4 It is against the Ancient Fathers: Augustine says, Deus in Scripturis quasi
amicus familiaris loquitur ad cor doctorum and indoctorum: The Lord in the
Scripture speaks familiarly to the conscience of the learned and unlearned.
Irenaeus says, Hac omnia contulit eis Scripturarum Dei ignorantia: The
Valentinians fell into all their heresies through their ignorance of the
scriptures: But how should Papists believe Irenaeus, when they will not believe
the Son of God, who tells the Sadduces, that they erred because they knew not
the scriptures? Chrysostom has these words, Ad Coloss hom. 9
Audite quotquot estis mundani, and uxoribus praeestis ac liberis, quemadmodum
vobis Apostolus Paulus praecipiat legere scripturas, idque non simpliciter,
neque obiter, sed magna cum diligentia, and again, Audite omnes seculares, In
Epist. ed Coloss cap. 3. v. 16. In Isa. hom. 2
comparate ^obis biblia, animae pharmaca. And Hieroms gloss is good: Hic ost
enditur (says he) verbum Christi non sufficienter, sed abundanter Laicos
habere debere, and se invicem docere vel monere. Lastly, Origin shows his
judgment in this affectionate speech, Vtinam omnes faceremus illud quod
scriptum est, scrutamini scripturas: Oh that we would all do as it is written,
search the scriptures.

5 Against learned Papists themselves.
5 It is against the Popish writers themselves. Cajetan, a very ingenuous man,
and a great scholar, says, Hinc discamus arma nostra esse sacras scripturas,
Let us take this for a good lesson, that the holy scriptures are our only
weapons. Diez a Portugal Friar says, That as Laban in the night deceived
Jacob, by giving him instead of fair Rahel, blear-eyed Leah; so Satan deceives
us in the night of ignorance, with vain traditions for divine Scripture. Yea,
and Bernard himself, whom Harding brings in as a favourer of his cause herein,
says, That at Bethlehem the common people sang Psalms and Halelujahs, yea, in
the fields as they were plowing and mowing, etc.

By all this we conclude with our Savior, Joh. 3.20. They do evil, and
therefore they hate the light: They have a long time deceived the World, by
holding it in ignorance, a principal pillar of their Religion; and labor still
to hold it in blindness, dealing no otherwise than the Philistims dealt with
the Israelites, 1 Samuel 13.19. who to hold them in base bondage and servitude,
took all their weapons from them, and left them not a Smith in Israel, lest
they should get weapons, and so get from under their power.

Use 2. If the word of God be a principal part of our spiritual armor, then
ought we always to have the Scriptures in a readiness; not only the Bibles in
our houses (which many have not, who have their corslets hanging by the walls)
but put on upon us, Ephesians. 6.17. and that is, when by diligent reading, hearing,
meditating, and study of it, but especially by earnest prayer, that God would
open our understandings to see his good pleasure in it; we have attained such
skill, as we can wisely shape an answer to the nature and quality of any
temptation.

Alas, how lamentable is their estate, that regard not the sound knowledge of
the Word, but content themselves in their ignorance, whereby Satan holds them
under the power of darkness? for impossible it is, till men come to know the
truth, that ever they should come out of the snare of the devil, and to
amendment: see 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. Many spend their days in reading fables, or
profane Histories, or cannot tell how to pass their time, but by taking in hand
the Devils books and bones, (as one calls them) cards and dice, or some other
unwarrantable exercise; all which give Satan more power over them. But the
armor of proof, against Satan and their own corruption, which is the Word of
God, lies in the book untouched, untossed, as if men were at league not to
disturb Satan at all, but let him blind them, bind them, and lead them at his
pleasure. Others will defy and spit at Satan's name, but they have no word
against him, but do as a foolish and inconsiderate person, that will quarrel
with a man of might, and defye him, as though he could make his party good,
but being without any weapon, carries away the blows, the smart of which makes
him feel his folly, which formerly he could not see.

Others are enemies to such, as would teach them the use of this weapon: men of
valor and strength will pay liberally such as take pains with them, to teach
them the skill of their weapon, and willingly take their directions: but such
cowards a number are in this field, that as they dare not look an enemy in the
face, so have may resolved, never shall weapon come in their hands; they are
enemies to such as would furnish them. Others would fight with Satan, and with
the Word, but in the wicked abuse of it, making charms and exorcisms of sundry
words of scripture, highly taking Gods name in vain: some write the
Lords-prayer in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: some the words of some of the
Gospels; some the names of God and Christ: But all this is sorcery and Magic,
and a fighting for the Devil, yea, a shooring in his own bow. Others will have
the Scriptures to resist with, but they be not ready nor at hand, they bear
many blows before they can recover their weapons: when they get a Scripture
against him, for want of exercise and experience it is but as a sword in a
child's hand, who can neither well help himself, nor yet much hurt another more
than he is like to hurt himself.

Doct. 2 Thou the Word of God is used aright, The right skill of Gods word, is
to cut off temptations by it.
when a man has skill thereby to cut off temptations, and contain himself in
his duty: Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy promise in my heart; that I might not
sin against thee: Prove. 2.10, 11, 12. When Wisdom (that is, Gods Word)
enters into thy heart, and knowledge delights thy soul, then shall counsel
preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, and deliver thee from the
evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things.

1 The Word of God is the Law of God: now what is the use of a Law,

2 It is called, A light to our feet, and a Lanthern to our paths: now what is
the use of light, but to show a man the right way, and direct him to avoid the
wrong, and keep him from falling?

3 It is called the Oracle or testimony of God, wherein he testifies what he
allows, and what not* and then we life it aright, when we straiten all our
paths according to this rule.

Use 1. Therefore let us keep us to Scriptures in all Satan's temptations:
whereof we may say as David said of Goliahs sword, 1 Samuel 21.9. Oh give me
that, there is none to that: put off all Satanical suggestions with, It is
written. Now it will not be amiss, to show in some Instances how a Christian
may by the Word furnish himself, and cut asunder by this Sword every
temptation, though Satan be never so instant in tempting him.

These instances are four: 1 Temptations to despair: 2 To presumption, or
profaneness: 3 To pride and ambition: 4 To injustice and wrong.

1 In temptations to despair, Satan overthrows many who want this sword of the
Spirit, In temptations to despair, how the word senceth.
by these motions which we must by it resist.

Object. 1 What have thou do to do with God, or God with thee? how is he thy
Father as thou professest? see thou not his hand against thee, yea, his wrath
upon thee?

Answ. Yet it is written, that even when the whole wrath of God (such as I
cannot bear, if I had all created strength) was laid upon Christ, he remained
the dear Son of God, and could say, My God, my God; and Romans 5.8. God sets
out his love toward us, seeing that while we were ye sinners, Christ dyed
for us, much more now, being justified by his blood, shall we be saved from
wrath.

Obj. 2. Satan being thus put off, goes on, and says, Thy sins are infinite
in weight and number, thy debt is above ten thousand talents, how can God save
thee? thou have not a farthing to pay: what? is it justice, think thou, for
God to remit so many sins without satisfaction?

Ans. It is written, Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that puts away thy sins for
mine own names sake, and not remember thine iniquities for ever: and again,
Where sin has abounded, grace has abounded much more: and the Parable says,
that the Master forgave all the debt to the hopeless Servant.

Obj. 3. Well, if thou have thy sins forgiven thee, where is thy joy and peace
of reconciliation? the Kingdom of God is peace and joy, but alas poor fellow!
thou art pensive and melancholy, and God has left thee without comfort.

Ans. It is written, Psalm. 97.11. that light is sown to the righteous, and joy
to the upright of heart: and, they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

Obj. 4. What speak thou of joy? why, thy cross is imolerable, sickness and
diseases eat thee up, poverty pincheth thee, and reproach every where meets
thee.

Ans. But it is written, Heb. 12.6. whom he loves, he chastens: and that no man
knows love or hatred by all that is before him, Eccles. 9.2.

Obj. 5. Thine are tedious afflictions, durable and listing ones, thou have
prayed thrice, yea a long time to have them removed, and art never the bitter:
why will thou go on, and still lose all thy labor? why, thou know not,
whether, or when thou shall be heard?

Ans. It is written, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I
will hear thee, and deliver thee: and Hab. 2.3. If the vision stay, wait: for
it shall surely come, and shall not stay: and, The just shall live by faith:
and, He that believes, makes not haste.

Obj. 6. But were thou not better to go to this wise man, or that cunning
woman? thou should quickly recover thy health, or stolen money, or things
that are lost: thy loss is great, and thou must use means for thine own.

Ans. It is written, Levit. 20.6. If any turn after such as work with Spirits,
or after South-sayers, to go a whoring after them, I will set my face against
such a person, and will cut him off from among his people: and it is written,
that Saul was cast off for this practice.

II. The second sort of instances, is in motions to presumption or profaneness.

Obj. 1. But it is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is there in his
ways? Word cutteth off temptations to presumption.
the worse the man is, the better is his estate; and the more godly, the more
crossed in the world.

Ans. It is written, It shall be well with them that fear the Lord; not so to
the wicked: and again, that the light of the ungodly shall be put out, when the
light of the godly shall rise brighter until perfect day: and the end of the
just is peace.

Obj. 2. What need so much fear of Condemnation, seeing there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus?

Ans. It is written, that such must walk after the Spirit, and not after the
flesh: and, that such must work out their Salvation in fear and trembling.

Obj. 3. But if thou be predestinate, what need thou care? and if thou
be not, all thy care will not avail thee.

Ans. It is written, that I must study to make my election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
and, that I must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and bring forth fruits
worthy amendment of life.

Obj. 4. But what need thou be so strict? shall none come to Heaven but such
strict persons, think thou? why, God requires no such strictness.

Ans. It is written, that the Master is a hard man, who will stand strictly for
justice: and, that we must walk precisely, Ephesians. 5.15.

Obj. 5. But why should thou respect these Preachers so much? do thou not
see how they take upon them to disgrace thee for such and such courses? and
they are men as well as others, no better, many of them worse.

Ans. It is written, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Have them in singular love for their works
sake: and that our Savior said, He that hears you, hears me: and that the
least Minister in the New Testament, is greater than John Baptist, who yet was
greater than any Prophet, Matthew. 11.11. and, that God did send two Bears, and
destroyed forty two of those wanton children, that mocked and reviled the
Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 2.23.

Obj. 6. But thou art young, thou may swear, and game, and swagger, and be
wanton; these are but tricks of youth, and sowing the wild oats, etc.

Ans. It is written, As a man sowes, so shall he reap: and, remember that for
all this thou must come to judgment.

Obj. 7. Oh, but think thou, that God sees or takes notice of every thing?
or if he should, he is merciful and easily entreated, and thou have time
enough to repent.

Ans. It is written, that all the ways of a man, are before the eyes of the
Lord: and to him day and darkness are alike: and, that to abuse the patience of
God, is to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.

Obj. 8. Oh but thou have now a fit opportunity, and occasion to take thy
delight; the Husband is gone a far journey, Bathsheba is at hand, and now it
is twilight, why should thou deprive thy self of thy pleasure? take thy time,
thou can not have it every day.

Ans. It is written, Prove. 5.3, 8. The end of a strange woman is more bitter
than wormwood: and, keep thy way far from her, and come not near the door of
her house: and, that neither fornicators nor adulterers shall enter into
heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. and Ephe. 5.3. but fornication, and all uncleanenesse, and
covetousness, let it not once be named among you, as becomes Saints.

III. The third rank of instances, is in motions to pride and self-conceit, The
word cutteth off temptations to pride.
wherein sin has great strength.

Obj. 1. You are a man rich and high, well friended, well monied; why should
you stoop to such a one? this were a base thing indeed: let him seek to you, or
do you crush him.

Ans. It is written, God resists the proud, 1 Pet. 5.5. and, in giving honor,
go one before another: and pride goes before the fall: and, that the haughty
eye is one of the six things which the Lord abhorrs, Prove. 6.17.

Obj. 2. But you are a man of knowledge, wise, and learned, what need you be so
diligent in hearing Sermons, especially of such as are far your inferiors?
you can teach them, not they you.

Ans. It is written, Isa. 5.21. Woe be to them that are wise in their own
conceits: and Christ has said, He that despises you, despises me, Luke
10.16. and that Job despised not the counsel of his maid, much less must I of
the least Minister: and that we know but in part, and are to consider not who,
but what is spoken: and that the same Spirit is mighty in one, and in another.

Obj. 3. But you are a man of gifts and authority, and these will carry you
through all, and you may rise and tread such and such under your feet, who dare
say any thing to you?

Ans. It is written, Matthew. 18.6. Whosoever offends any of these little ones
that believe in me, it were better for him that a Millstone were tied about his
neck, and he cast into the midst of the Sea: and, He that does wrong, shall
receive according to the wrong that he has done; and, there is no respect of
persons, Coloss. 3.25.

Obj. 4. But you may follow the fashions of the world, in strange apparel,
ruffian behavior, monstrous tyres; who may else? how else should you be known
to be a gentleman, or a gentlewoman?

Ans. It is written, 1 Pet. 3.3. That even women's apparrelling must not be
outward, as with broydered hair, and gold, etc. but the hid man of the heart
must be incorrupt: for Sarah, and other holy women trusting in God, did so
attire themselves: and again, Fashion not your selves according to this world,
but be renewed in the spirit of your mind: Be ever of the newest fashion
there.

Obj. 5. But it is a small matter, and of great credit, to swear, and curse,
and speak big words: it is away to get reputation, and be respected as a man
of spirit.

Ans. It is written, Levit. 24.16. He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord
shall be put to death, all the Congregation shall stone him: and Jam. 5.12.
Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor earth, nor any
other oath; but let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay.

IV. The fourth instance is in motions to wrong and injustice.

The word cutteth off motions to injustice.
Obj. 1. Thou art a great man, thou have Tenants, thou may and must live by
them; they are thy Servants, and thou must enrich thy self by them: rack their
rents, bind them to suit and service, they cannot resist thee. Or, thou art a
Master, keep thy Servants wages from him, make thy use of it, weary him, poor
Sneak what can he do? pay him at thy pleasure, he will endure any thing
rather than lose thy work.

Ans. It is written, Jam. 2.13. Judgment merciless belongs to them that show
no mercy: and those that grind the faces of the poor, shall one day be ground
under the millstone of Gods heavy displeasure: and, Levit. 19.13. Thou shall
not robb thy neighbor: the Work-mans hire shall not abide with thee till the
morning. The reason is in Deuteronomy. 24.15. Lest thy Servant cry against thee to the
Lord: surely it shall be sin unto thee.

Obj. 2. But thou may make the best of thine own commodities, by hoysing the
prices, and diminishing or corrupting the quantity or quality. No man can force
thee to sell thy own in dear times, unless thou will; and much less to give
it away to the poor and needy: then shut up thy heart, live to thy self, let
others shift for themselves as thou do for one.

Ans. It is written, that covetousness is the root of all evil, and that it is
Idolatry: and the Lord has sworn by a great oath, even by his own excellency,
Amos 8.4. that he will never forget any of their works, that swallow up the
poor, and make the needy of the Land to fail; that were weary of the Sabbath,
because it hindered their setting of Wheat to sale, that made the Epha small,
and the shekel great, and falsified their weights, and sold corrupt corn, that
is, took all courses for gain. Besides the fearful fruits of covetousness in
Achan, Gehezi, Ahab. Judas.

Object. 3 But thou lendest thy money too freely: ten in the hundred thou
may take by Law; but if by cunning tricks and devices thou can get twenty
in the hundred, thou shall grow rich the sooner.

Answ. It is written, Luke 6.35. Lend freely, looking for nothing again: and
Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother, and Exodus 22.25. If
thou lend money to my people, thou shall not be an Usurer: and Levit. 25.36.
Thou shall take no usury nor advantage, neither lend him money nor victuals to
increase: and, What shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his
own soul?

Object. 4. But thou art a poor man, and defraudest thy self of profit; thou
may by an oath, or a lie, or a little cunning and slight get good gains:
and why need thou be so nice?

Answ. It is written, Prove. 22.2. The rich and the poor meet together, and the
Lord is the maker of them both, that is, in their persons, and in their
estates: and Levit. 19.11, 12. Ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither
defile the name of the Lord thy God: and, That the curse enters into the
house of the swearer, and thief: and, Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor
lie one to another: and, that all that love abomination and lies, shall be
kept without the gates of the holy City, with dogs, Rev. 22.15. and, that I
must not lie for Gods glory, much less for my own profit.

Object. 5 But thou may revenge thy self upon thy enemy, and make him know
whom he has in hand: broach some untruth or other upon him, and thou shall at
least disgrace him: and if thou le^st him go with this, every one will scorn
thee.

Answ. It is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord: and,
Thou shall not bear false witness: and Matthew. 7.12. Whatsoever you would that
men should do to you, the same do you to them: and, It is the glory of a man to
pass by offenses.

Object. 6. But the cause is good, the Catholic cause, it is but a title of
rebellion, or treason, indeed it is a meritorious work, and thou shall be
Canonized a Romish Martyr, if thou shall kill a King, or Queen, or Prince that
is an Heretic; but above all, if thou can by one terrible blow, not only
kill the King, Queen, and Prince, but also the whole Council, all the Lords,
all the Judges, all the Laws, all the Lawmakers, yea, and blow up the whole
Parliament House, and with that three heretical Kingdoms together.

Answ. Here we can hold no longer, but, in such a temptation as is so direct a
worship of the Devil, with our Lord, say, Avoid Satan, be packing foul Devil,
for It is written, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
and 1 Pet. 2.14. Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of man: and the
fearful judgment of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their accomplices, betide
such Catholic rebels, as dare lift up their hands against the Lords anointed,
not to cut off his lap, but his life, which is the life and breath of all his
people.

Use 2. The scripture the hammer of heresies. Instance in justification by
works.
The like use has the Scripture in the right use of it against all errors and
heresies: as we may see in these instances.

1 If the Papists would teach us justification by works;

Answ. It is written, Romans 3.20. By the works of the Law shall no flesh be
justified: and the like in Gal. 3.3, 4, 5. And Paul had as many merits as any,
yet he would not be found in his own righteousness, Phil. 3.9. and, our
righteousness is but as filthiness, or filthy clouts: and, after our best
endeavors we are but unprofitable Servants.

2 If they urge us with transubstantiation and real presence;

Answ. It is written, that after Christ had given the Sacrament, In
transubstantiation.
he went into the garden, and suffered: which he could not, if he had been
eaten before, and not being glorified: and 2 remembrance is of things absent: 3
He continues in heaven till his coming to judgment, Act. 3.21. 4 The Fathers
are the same Sacramental bread, 1 Cor. 10.3. and yet Christ was not then in the
flesh: 5 There is no alteration in the sign of Baptism; and there is the same
use of the sign of the Lords Supper.

In the seven Sacraments.
3 If they object unto us seven Sacraments,

We reply against their five bastard ones; as in that of Matrimony for the
rest, thus: 1 It has no sign instituted by God; when he brought Eve to Adam,
here is matrimony, but no sign: the ring which they make a sign, is not. 2 It
is not proper to the Church, as Sacraments are, but common to Jews, Turks, and
Infidels. 3 Every Sacrament belongs to every Member of the Church: but
matrimony belongs not to their Priests and Votaries. 4 All Sacraments serve to
confirm faith: so does not matrimony. Adam in innocence had no need of says,
but he had need of matrimony.

In orig nal sin after baptism.
4 If they tell us, that by Baptism Original sin is quite washed away,

We Answer: No, true Baptism takes away the guilt, but not the being of sin:
and it is written of David, Psalm. 51.5. that he confessed he was still in
Original sin: see also Romans 7.7. and Jam. 1.13.

In absolute necessity of Baptism.
5 If they would thrust upon us the absolute necessity of Baptism:

Answ. It is written, that Circumcision (being the same in signification and
use with Baptism) was omitted in the wilderness forty years: and, that David
doubted not of his uncircumcised child's salvation: and, that children are holy
through their believing Parents 1 Cor. 7.14.

In communion in one kind.
6 If they will administer the Communion but in one kind;

Against this their sacrilegious practice, we have Christ's institution, and
the example of the Apostles, besides the Primitive Church.

Use 3. This mighty effect of the Word in the right use of it, shows the
Scriptures to be of God, and the authority of God, and not of man (as the
Papists teach us) not of the Church of Fathers, Counsels, Popes in Peter's
fictitious chair, or the company of Cardinals. What writing of man can have
authority over men's consciences as Gods Word has? Or who will believe the
Church, that will not believe the Scripture? Is not the Word Truth, and all men
liars and subject to error? Now shall that which is not subject to error, be
subject to that which is subject to error?

Use 4. Whatsoever writing does indeed confirm error, is not Canonical
Scripture: for this confutes all error, in practice and in judgment: therefore
Apocryphal Books are not Canonical and divine Scripture; 1 because in every of
them there is some repugnance to the Scripture: 2 because they were not written
by any Prophet, nor in Hebrew; not 3 given to the Jews as Gods Oracles, as all
the Old Testament was, Romans 3.1, 2. 4 because Christ and the Apostles cited not
any of them. This I speak not against the books (which contain in them many
good Morals, and, in my judgment, m^^^ of all humane Histories be best used)
but against the Papists, who would thrust upon us Invocation of Saints, and
Prayer for the dead, etc. from their authority.

Use 5. See hence the Reason, why Satan and all his instruments were ever
enemies to the true Preaching and professing of the Word; namely, because in
the right use it is the only hammer of the Kingdom of darkness. He storms
not at frothy and foolish delivery, or at professors that are loose and ungirt,
and can take liberty for any thing they list. Only faithful Preachers and
Professors, that rightly preach and profess, bear the burden of Satan's and the
Worlds malice: Christ's innocence, and the Apostles power could not fence them
from it.

Use 6. Lastly, acknowledge it a singular privilege of the Church so beset
with enemies, to have so sufficient and perfect a word, 1 written, that all men
might have the benefit of it: 2 Preached, and rightly divided according to
every man's particular necessity. It is a great comfort, that poor as well as
rich, base as well as noble, have a share in it in an equal large manner. The
chief privilege of the Church of the Jews, was, to keep Gods word in the
letter, Psalm. 147.19, 20. and Romans 3.2. but it will be our pre-eminence above
them, if we lock up the true sense of it in our hearts, Job 22.22. and Prove.
22. It is a sure stay, and a shield to them that walk uprightly. No thief, nor
robber can steal it, no it cannot be taken away with our lives; It is Mary's
good part, which was never taken from her, neither can be from us, being a
perpetual freehold.

IV. Now follows the fourth thing in this allegation of Christ, to wit, the
parts of the Divine testimony: 1 Negative, Man lives not by bread only: 2
Affirmative, But by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

First. Of the sense of the negative part. Man] that is, a mere common and
ordinary man, and much less I that am the Son of God.

Lives not] that is, preserves not the natural life of his body.

By bread] is meant all necessary and ordinary means of meat, drink, rest,
sleep, physic, recreation: for so it is also used in the fourth petition of
the Lords prayer:

Onely] here bread is not opposed to other means of sustenance, as flesh, fish.
etc. but to Gods blessing, without which it cannot sustain our bodies.

But by every word] that is, every thing, a common Hebraisme, verbum for ^es,
and more specially for the decree and ordinance of God, appointed to sustain
man: so the words following imply.

That comes out of the mouth of God] that is, whatsoever God has decreeed,
commanded, or promised, that it shall preserve life.

Now the sum of Christ's answer, in more words, is this: Thou say I must now
have bread to satisfy my hungry, or else I cannot live: but thou speak like
thy self: If my Fathers word be to sustain me without this means, I shall
live thereby without bread, my Father is not tied to ordinary means for
preserving of life, who is all-sufficient, and Almighty, and does what and how
he will. And this cannot be doubted of, seeing it is written in Deuteronomy. 8.3. by
Moses, that when the Israelites were in the wilderness, as I am, hungry, and
having nothing to eat, no more than I have, he fed them with MAN forty years,
to teach them that man lives not by bread only (for they had none) but by
every word and means which himself appointed. Besides, if I should distrust my
Fathers providence, and turn all these stones into bread, yet, if his word come
not to give virtue and life unto them, all this would not help, all this bread
would be no better than stones, as it was before, And therefore I will still
expect his word, and not turn stones into bread at thine.

The negative part affords us this lesson, that

Doct. Outward and ordinary means are not of themselves sufficient to sustain
and preserve the life of man, Luke 12.15. man's life stands not in abundance.
Outward means not sufficient to sustain the life of man.
If we make an induction of all the chief means, either of the being or well
being of man's life, we shall easily see their insufficiency.

1 Bread is a special means appointed to strengthen the heart, Psalm. 104.15. 1
Bread.
but yet there is a staft of bread, which is another thing than bread, and this
being broken, we shall not be strengthened, but fade in the midst of bread.
Hence is the sentence accomplished against many, Lev. 26.26. Ye shall eat, and
not he satisfied: The Lord gave the Israelites Quails in the wilderness,
enough to maintain six hundred thousand footmen for many days: but a secret
poison was in it, that the more they had, the more they dyed, as of an
exceeding great plague; so as the place was called the graves of lusting, Numb.
11.33. Yea, although our bread did not grow out of the earth, but fell from
heaven as Mannah did, yet our Savior says, Job. 6.49. Your Fathers did eat
Mannah in the wilderness, and are dead.

2 Clothes are a special means to preserve a man in natural heat: 1 Cl^thes.
but yet raiment of it self cannot keep him warm, Hag. 1.6. Ye clothe you, but
ye be not warm: and of David in his age it is said, that they covered him
with clothes, but no heat came to him, 1 King. 1.1.

3 Physic.
3 Physic is a remedy appointed by God to regain health and strength,
distempered or decayed: but Asa goes to the Physician, and pines away for all
that, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.

4 Money.
4 Money is a good means to provide necessaries for the sustenance of man's
life; and therefore men labor, and take much pains for it. But, both labor is
in vain, except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.1. and, thou shall earn
money, and put it in a broken bag, or a secret rust shall consume it, Hagg.
1.6.

5 Strength.
5 Strength is for the war, and a good means for the defense of life and
right: but strength alone is weakness: Psalm. 20. An horse is a vain thing in
battle: and therefore David goes against Goliath, not with a sword or a bow, but
in the name of the Lord, that was his strength.

6 Counsel.
6 Counsel and policy is for a State both in peace and war: we see how soon
Rehoboam ran through ten parts of his Kingdom, by the bad counsel of the young
men. But yet there is no counsel nor policy that can prevail against the Lord.
Many are the devices of man's heart, but the counsel of the Lord shall stand.
The counsel of Achitophel, which was like unto an Oracle of God, was turned
into folly.



2 God has prescribed means of life, and tied us unto them, but not himself:
he is able to do whatsoever he will, and his providence is of equal extent and
latitude with his power, which cannot be restrained to means, these being
finite, that infinite. And hence it is, that means are ordinarily necessary,
but not absolutely, seeing God in his absolute power can feed us with stones,
as well as raise men out of stones.

3 If means alone could sustain a man, how comes it that the same wholesome meat
that feeds some, should poison others? How comes it that men using means, as
men in a Consumption eat as much as others, and yet pine away, and are
famished? that men labor and toil, and get money, and yet thrive not, but
their state is in a Consumption still? How comes it that they who are best fed,
as great Personages, are less lively and healthful? Poor day-labourers, who
fare hard and coarse, laugh at rich men for maintaining Physicians, and yet are
still sick: poor men's Children thrive better, and look fairer, with Daniel and
his fellows, feeding only of coarse pulse, than many that fare daintily with
the Kings Children. See we not the Fathers before the Flood, living some seven
hundred, some eight hundred, some nine hundred years and above, of greater
strength and stature by far, and they carried near a thousand years upon
their backs, more lightly than we can carry half an hundred? and yet they lived
upon herbs only: we have also flesh and fish, of all sorts. with the best and
most exquisite Cookery: so that if our Lives were pinned upon the means only,
where they lived near a thousand years, we should by our means live many
thousands.

4 God is the God of life, it is he that continues our lives, and not the
means; and all means are in his hand, to be either blessed, or blown upon at
his pleasure. What can an Hammer or Saw do, without the Artificers hand? no
more can the means, which in Gods hand are as a Tool in the Work-mans, whose
hand can do many things without tools, but they nothing without his hand.

5 What means that Petition, which every man must daily use for daily bread,
even he that has the most, but because he may have bread, and want that in
bread which may do him good and help?

Use 1. Learn hence how to conceive of means aright, Means not to be set above
their own place
namely as things not to be trusted to, because by one blast of God, they may
become unprofitable and unsuccesseful, especially when men are loath to raise
their thoughts beyond them. Asa his Physic shall not help him, because he
trusts in the Physicians. Israel shall dye of that flesh, wherein they thought
their life was. And it is just with God, that when the means step up into his
place, and men ascribe that virtue unto them, which only Gods blessing adds
unto them, he deprives men either of the means, or of the right and comfortable
use of them. And were not the means too too much magnified, and set above their
own place, men would not so spend their days in carking cares for them, with
such instance and neglect of all things else, as if they were ever to live by
bread only; not so wise as the Fool and Churl in the Parable, who when he had
goods enough for many years, would have his soul take his rest; but these men
having bread and means enough for many ages, are as restless and insatiable, as
ever before; their life stands in seeking and holding abundance.

Use 2. Let us learn to trust God without the means; which the worldling cannot
do. In plenty, in health, when the barns be full, and the chests ready to
break with treasures, the most earthly churl can be content, and praise God
for all: but in poverty and sickness his heart lets him down, as though God is
not as able and willing to help in one estate as in another. But now faith were
it present, would most show it self: it is a dead faith, that withdraws it self
from the living God, and sets it self on dead things.

Use 3. Learn we to moderate our care for the things of this present life, as
such who value them according to their right estimate, without which a
superior virtue can do us no good: for what is food, apparel, and the like,
but base things without Gods blessing, which men of thousands enjoy abundantly,
and yet by a secret curse either upon the wicked getting or holding them, want
the comfort that many poor men have, whose portion is but a mite to the others
superfluity? And what is the reason, that men bury themselves alive in the
graves of their lustings and earthliness, but that they falsely conceive of the
means, and place them above their worth or work? What says the worldling? is
it not my living? and must I not look to that? I tell thee no, it is not thy
living, unless thou live by bread alone, or have that animam triticiam, that
wheaten-soul of the rich man in the Gospel, who thought he must now live many
years, because he had wheat enough.

Obj. But you speak as though we were to expect Miracles for our maintenance,
or to cast off our Callings, to neglect the means, and live by the Word of God.

Ans. 1. Miracles are ceased, and yet if God bring us into an estate wherein
all means fail us, God remains as powerful and able, as merciful and willing,
to help as ever he was, and rather than his children shall miscarry, he will
save them by miracle. 2 Our callings and means are not to be neglected,
because, 1 Christ denies not but that man lives by means, but not only by them.
2 They are a part of that (every word of God) whereby man lives; and if
ordinary means be offered, we may not trust to extraordinary, without some
special promise or revelation. 3 It is a tempting of God, to pull poverty on
our selves, or cast our selves into danger, and is a breach of his ordinance,
who injoyns every man to get his living in the sweat of his blows. But one
thing is a Christian care, another a carking care for the things of this world:
one thing is the care of the world in Mary, who especially minds the one thing
necessary, another in Martha, who distracts her self with many businesses,
neglecting the good part which should never be taken from her: one thing to
possess the world, another to be possessed by it: one thing to use means,
another to trust in them.

More care must be had of Gods blessing, than of means.
Use 4. If man live not by means alone, be more careful for Gods blessing than
for the means; be more thankful for that, than for these: else he that made
bread, and gave it thee, can break the staff of it; else he can make thee great
and rich, but lay a sensible curse on thy person and estate, either in thine
own time, or in thy heirs. And as for thanksgiving, Christ never used any means
but by prayer and thanksgiving, and taught us to pray for daily bread, The
comfort of the creatures, a greater mercy than the creatures them selves.
i.e. for a blessing upon bread. It is a greater mercy of God to give us
comfort of the creatures, than the creatures themselves: Yet a number, as if
they lived by bread only, come to their tables as the hog to his trough, or the
horse to his provender, without either prayer or thanks. A wonder, that every
crum choaks them not: for without Gods blessing it might.

But by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.]

On ^ the word yet every word of God prefer^eth the life of man.
Doct. This affirmative part of the testimony, alleged by Christ, teaches us,
That, It is only the word of God, and every word of God that preserves the
life of man. But first we must distinguish of man's life, which is either
supernatural or natural; and also of the word, which is put forth either for
the life natural or supernatural. The former is a word of Gods power and
providence, creating and governing all things according to their natural
courses, called in the Text, a word that goes out of the mouth of God: for no
word of the creature, can produce the being or well-being of any other. The
latter is the word of Truth, whereby he does quicken the soul, and repair it
to his own likeness: and this word proceeds not only out of the mouth of
God, but of his Prophets, Apostles, and Pastors: and this word begets and
preserves a supernatural life in man, as the other does a natural, Jer. 15.19.

Now our Savior means here the natural life of the body, and the word of
Gods power and providence, generally sustaining the being and life of all
creatures: How the soul lives by the word of God.
and not that a man can live by the written word without meat and drink. It is
true, that the soul of man lives by Gods Word of Truth: for, 1 He is begotten
a Christian by it, and born of this immortal seed, Jam. 1.18. 2 He is
nourished by it, as by sincere Milk, 1 Pet. 2.2. 3 As bread increases the body
in all dimensions, so the Word strengthens the soul in faith, patience,
comfort, hope, love; as children grow by Milk. 4 Bread strengthens the heart,
and all the strength of a Christian is in the word; it preserves the natural
heat, and the word makes his heart burn within him, and keeps it in a readiness
to every good word and work.

But yet this is not the proper meaning of this place, neither can it agree
with the meaning of Moses, who plainly speaks of the bodily hunger of the
Israelites, and the feeding of them with Mannah, that they may know that man
lives not by bread only: nor yet with the mind of our Savior Christ; nor
with his present condition; nor with the drift of Satan's temptation; nor with
the sound repelling of his dart, which was, that Christ for the appeasing of
his bodily hunger, after his forty days fast, would turn stones into bread.

How man lives by every word of God.
And now, we knowing what is meant by the Word of God, even the powerful word
of Gods providence, in creating and governing all things; we are further to
consider, that our Savior adds an universal particle, every word: the reason
is, because this word is twofold, ordinary and extraordinary. Ordinary, when
God changes not his ordinary course, but by means proportioned unto the ends
(which are a part of his ordinary word) preserves and maintains the life he
has given; as daily bread, sleep, and the like. Extraordinary, when by his
word and decree, he pleases to preserve man either above, or without, or
against all means.

I. Above the means, sundry ways; 1 Above all that man can expect: The word
sustaineth, 1 Above all means three ways.
thus God gave the Israelites Mannah in the wilderness, and water out of a
Rock: thus he tied a Ram to be sacrificed in stead of Isaac: thus he brake
the cheek-tooth that was in the jaw, and water came thereout for Sampson, Judge.
15.19. and by his word provided a gourd to come over Jonas his head to shadow
him, and deliver him from his grief, chap. 4.6. thus he fed Elias by Ravens.

2 When he makes a little means go beyond themselves, as Christ made seven
loaves and two fishes, to serve seven thousand persons, and much left: thus he
made a few clothes serve Israel forty years, so as their shoes did not wear
out: Thus the Word of God made a little meal and oil serve the Prophet and a
widow a long time; 1 King. 17.14. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, the meal
in the barrel shall not be wasted, nor the oil in the cruse diminished, till
the time that the Lord send rain: and so it was, though they are nothing else
all the while. 2 King. 4.42. Elisha had twenty loaves sent him, and some ears
of Corn: he commanded his servant to set them before the people: Oh (says he)
what are these to an hundred men? but the Prophet said, The Lord has said,
they shall eat, and yet there shall remain: and it came to pass according to
the word of the Lord.

3 When the means are not so small in quantity, as base in quality, and yet
have by this word an extraordinary blessing; as the coarse fare of Daniel.

II. Without means Gods word causes man to live; as Moses, Elias, II. Without
all means.
and Christ himself, who had immediately before seen the word of God preserving
him already forty days and nights, and could further if he pleased.

III. Against means, as the Disciples sent out, III. Against all means.
were promised if they drank any deadly poison, it should not hurt them: so
fire burnt not the three children, though cast into it, when it burnt their
enemies, and their own bands. All this is meant by that our Savior says,
every word: and thus most aptly he returns the temptation; Man lives not
only by bread, that is, the ordinary means; but by extraordinary also, even
above and beyond means, yea, without and against means; And therefore, where
thou say I must have means, Gods word says, there is no absolute necessity
of them: my Fathers word can still sustain me without bread, as he has done
these forty days already.

1 The word of God is it, Psalm. 104.30. If thou send forth thy spirit, they are
created. By Spirit, here is not meant the essence of God, but a power and
secret virtue proceeding from God, all one with this word of God, by which
things were not only created at the first, but are still renewed, and that
daily, and yearly, as it were again created. Joh. 1.3. In that word was life,
that is, not only inherent in the Son of God himself, but as an efficient to
communicate life to all living things.

2 The Word of God is as it were the prop and stay of the world, without which
all things would fall into confusion. Every man knows by nature, that God
maintains and preserves all things; that it is he that stretches out the
heavens like a curtain; that he sends forth the winds out of his treasure; and
raises the waves of the Sea like mountains; which are great things: but
nature teaches not, how God does these things, by what means: only the
Scriptures teach that he does all this by his word; that as in the creation
God said, Let there be light, and there was light, and so of all other things
Gods word was his work: so in upholding and preserving it, he does it by his
word, as Heb. 1.2. who upholdeth all things by his mighty word; which word when
God calls in, the Creature falls to nothing. Act. 17.28. In him we live, and
move, and have our being.

3 The same word of God, which gives virtue and force to the Creatures in
themselves, does also sanctify them unto us: every creature is sanctified by
the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.6. the word shows how to get them, how to use
them, and prayer obtains of God a right tenure, and a pure use, which indeed is
the blessing or sanctification of them.

4 The same word carries them beyond the strength of their nature to do us
good: Bread and Wine in their own nature can but nourish and feed the body,
but Gods Word in the institution of the Sacrament, makes them feed the soul to
eternal life.

Quest. But how may we conceive of this Word, whereby God does govern and
preserve the creatures?

Ans. By Gods Word we must not only conceive his decree and will, but a
powerful Commandment, and effectual, to which all his Creatures yield free and
willing obedience. This commanding word was put forth in the Creation, Psalm.
148.5. He commanded, and they were all created. Men when they attempt, and
perform any great matter, because their power is small, must use great labor,
and many instruments and helps: But by the word of the Lord the heavens were
made, Psalm. 33.9. He said the word, and all things were done. This commanding
word is put forth in the daily government of God: Psalm. 147.15. He sends out
his Commandment upon the earth, his word runs very swiftly: that is,
nothing can withstand and hinder the power of his word: here the Word and
Commandment are all one. The senslesseness and deadness of the Creatures,
their vastness and fierceness hinder not his word, but without delay, yea with
mavelous celerity and swiftness they execute his word: Psalm. 148.8. If God
speak to the Heavens, they shall hear, and cover themselves with darkness at
noon day, as in Christ's passion. If he command the Sun, it shall hear his
word, and go back, or stand still: If he command the Winds or Sea to be
still, they shall be still; and presently there shall be a great calm: If he
send forth his Word, the Mountains of Ice shall melt, Psa. 147.18. If he
command the VVhale, he shall set Jonah on dry land, cap. 2. ver. 10. If he
command the solid and senseless earth, it shall hear, and rend to swallow up
Corah, Dathan, and Ab^ram. If he command the fire not to burn, it shall hear,
and not burn the three Children. If he command dead men, they shall hear, and
come out of their Graves, as Lazarus, etc. and all men at the general
judgment. But as God can see without eyes, and reach without hands, so also
does he speak without a tongue, as the Light, the Firmament, the Heavens, and
other his Works can hear his voice without ears: neither wants he a means to
make his mind known, and his pleasure manifest, to the most senseless creatures.

Use 1. This should teach us to depend upon this Word of God, for our lives,
and means of maintaining them: for so our Lord Jesus did in this barren
wilderness; he would not sustain himself but by Gods Word* Do thou want
means of living and maintenance? Consider, that man lives not by bread alone:
The word of God made the (...) light without the Sun, and the earth fruitful
without the rain.
This word can make the Air light, without and before either Sun, Moon, or
Star, Genesis 1.3. This word can make the earth fruitful, before the rain had ever
fallen upon it, Genesis 2.5. Want thou bread? God has not locked up thy life
in bread, it may be he has another word, which if thou hear with Moses and
Elias, thou shall live without bread. Asa, when he was in a great straight, 2
Chrp. 14.11. (for he was with five hundred and fourscore thousand, to encounter
with an Army of ten hundred thousand, and three hundred Chariots) he looked up
to this word of God, and said, that the Lord could save, by many, or few, or by
none. Have thou means of living? yet depend on this word, thy life stands not
in bread, or in abundance: if God withdraw his word, neither restorative
Quails, nor heavenly Manna, if thou had them, shall preserve thy life. How
often does God blow upon the second means, to bring us to this word?

Use 2. The faith of this truth does fence the heart with sound comfort, when
all outward means do fail: if the heart can say to it self, What if God do
not give me my desire by this means or that? Faith in this word strengthens
the heart many ways.
I know God has more words than one, more blessings than one, and man lives
by every word. And faith strengthens the heart,

1 By setting before the eye Gods power in this word; how that one word of his
mouth is enough to help us: one word is able to create innumerable armies of
Angels and Creatures; one fiat is enough to make all Creatures, and all this to
come, or go, or stand still, as most dutiful servants to their Master: Matthew.
8. the Centurion coming to Christ for the health of his Servant, desires him
not to come within his roof (for he was not worthy of that favor) nor to send
him any receipt or physic to do him good, but only to speak the word, and he
was sure his servant should be healed: A strong faith, in a strong word. It is
but a word with God; then how easily, how presently, how certainly will God do
me good, if he see it good for me?

2 By assuring the heart, that his will is as ready to do us good, as his word
is able: and it sets the promise before us, that nothing shall be wanting to
them that fear God. The former, in the example of the Leper, Matthew. 8. Lord, if
thou will, thou can make me clean: and in the next words, to show he is as
willing as able he says, I will, be thou clean; by which word proceeding out
of the mouth of God, his Leprosy was instantly cured: his will was his word,
and his word was his work. The latter in the example of Abraham, whose faith
set before his eyes Gods promise, that in Isaac his seed should be called, and
that by Isaac he should be a Father of many Nations, and therefore when at Gods
word he went out to offer Isaac, and Isaac asked him where was the Sacrifice,
he answered, God will provide: One eye was on Gods word commanding him to slay
his Son; another upon this other word, that God was able to raise him up from
the dead, whence after a sort he received him; and that he also would do so,
before his promise should be frustrate.

3 By setting before the Christian heart, the blessed issue and success of
unwavering confidence in the word of God.

The Israelites going out of Egypt, and wandering in the Wilderness so many
years, by the appointment of Gods word, he did supply all their wants by his
Word, and it became all things unto them, which their hearts could desire: 1 He
paved them a way in the Sea, and suddenly made the waters a wall unto them. 2
He gave them bread from Heaven, even Angels food, and that (in our text) was by
his word. 3 He gave them water out of a rock, and that by his word; he bade
Moses speak to the rock. 4 Having no means for clothes, his word kept their
garments for forty years from waxing old. But what need we go out of our text;
in which the example of our Head and Lord may best confirm us? for, wanting
bread in the Wilderness, he would not turn stones into bread, but waited on
the word of his Father, till the Angels came and ministered unto him: even so
the adopted Sons of God treading in the steps of our Lord, shall by virtue of
the same word, always find relief one way or other.

Who would have thought, that ever Job should have swum out of that misery,
having lost all his Cattle, substance, and Children? but because, when the Lord
was a killing him in his own sense, he trusted in him, the Lord raised him and
doubled the wealth and prosperity he had before. Who would have thought that
ever Daniel should have escaped the Lions den and teeth, being cast in
amongst them? or that Peter should have escaped Herod's sword being bound in
Chains, and watched of Soldiers, to be brought out to death next day? But
trusting in the Lord, this word shut the mouths of the Lions; and opened the
Prisons iron doors, and brake in sunder the chains, and so both of them were
wonderfully delivered.

Surely this Doctrine well digested, is full of comfort and quietness, and would
set the heart at rest, and make all outward troubles easy. If a man could once
get his heart to trust in the word, as David did, Psalm. 119.42. it would
sustain the soul in many troubles, and bring in so sweet a contentment as the
world is a stranger unto. On the contrary, whence is it that men's hearts fail
them, and they sink in their troubles, but because they trust to the means, and
not to the Word of God, at least not to every word of God? If God cross them
one way, they think he has no other way to do them good.

Use 3. If man live by every word of God, then take heed of making that a means
of living, which God has never warranted; but see that what thou live by,
proceed out of the mouth of God. How does he live by every word of God, that
gets his living either in whole or in part contrary to Gods word?

Obj. But we see, such as use no good means, but maintain themselves in good
estate by robbing, stealing, oppressing, usury, gaming, false wares or weights;
it seems that even these creatures have a word of God to sanctify them, and
put virtue in them to such persons; or else they could not live by them.

Ans. We must distinguish between the things themselves that are gotten, and
the unjust manner of getting them. The creatures themselves are by a general
word of God sanctified, and set apart by God to feed and maintain good and bad,
as well the wicked as honest getters of them, even as the Sun and Rain shines
and falls upon the just and unjust: And the unrighteousness of particular
persons cannot alter Gods general decree. But if we consider the special
manner of getting such goods, that is not sanctified, but condemned by the word
of God: 1 Because the person is not in Christ, who restores our right unto us,
and then he is but an usurper and a bankrupt, who builds his houses, goes fine
in apparel, decks up himself and his, and spends most liberally, but it is all
with other men's money: He that knows not this, thinks him a rich man; but he
that does, knows that he is not either thrifty or wealthy: the Creditor
comes, and casts him into prison, and makes his bones and body pay the debt. 2
As his person, so his course is accursed: for the only way to get a blessing
from God on the means, is to use his own means: who has commanded first to
seek the Kingdom of God, and then other things; and has accursed all that
wealth and maintenance of the body, for which a man does hazard or lose his
soul. 3 When a man does live by bread, against the word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God, it is rather a death than a life; his bread becomes poison,
and as Rats-bane in his bowels, because he has it without a promise, and
without blessing.

Obj. I see no such thing.

Ans. Many poisons are long a working, but the end of such is death, and the
more slowly they work, the more slily and certainly they kill: And if the Lord
do not invert the order he has set in nature, by cursing the particular
creatures be sure he has in his justice reserved a curse for the unjust
person, and he shall not avoid it.

This doctrine specially applied lays hold upon sundry sorts of men, who live
contrary to the word. They are these:

I. Such as live out of lawful callings, which are one part of the word of God,
that we should get our living in the sweat of our brows: and so long as we are
in our way, we have his word we shall be provided for. And the word proceeding
out of the mouth of God, is, that he that will not labor, must not eat,
because he eats not his own: and such as will not live after this word, by Gods
word they ought not to live, because they are idle and unprofitable burdens of
the earth; who 1 abuse Gods providence, who ties the ends and means together: 2
infringe that good order, which God has established for the avoiding of
confusion in Church or Commonwealth, namely that every man should serve God in
the service of man, in some warrantable and profitable civil calling: 3 As he
is no better than an Infidel, that depends only on means, seeing man lives by
every word of God; so he that in a lawful course of life provides not for his
family, is worse than an infidel. Of this sort are our knots of companions, of
drinking, and gaming company, and wandering rouges and beggars: I knit them
together, because they are all of a strain, and either are Beggars, or shall
be. These commonly come not to Church, to hear their duties, and therefore they
must be taught by correction and discipline of those that are the executioners
of justice.

II. Such as think they live well enough, and yet it is by deceiving others by
stealing, oppression, extortion, lying, swearing, and falsehood in buying, and
selling: and why (say they) may not a man help and shift for himself? But
consider, 1 What a poor help it is, when a man will use unlawful means, and to
shift out of one evil by another: He does, as the Prophet speaks, avoid a
Lion, and a Bear meets him. Pilate would keep his place by unlawful means, the
delivering of Christ to be crucified: but, besides that he brought innocent
blood upon himself, he lost his place, and flew himself. 2 Consider, That if
Gods Word of blessing go not with the means, his word of curse does: and so the
Prophet Zachary says, that the curse enters into the house of the swearer,
and of the thief, chap. 5. v. 4. and this curse shall remain in the midst of
his house, and consume the very timber and stones. This curse often scatters
ill-gotten goods as fast as they were ever hastily gathered, if not in his own
days, yet in some unthrifty heir after him. 3 Consider, how God crosses the
vain conceit of unjust persons; they think all that is any way gotten, to be
gain and profit; but the word is, Prove. 10.2. that treasures of wickedness
profit nothing, they cannot help a man from the hand of God; nay, when the evil
day comes, they are gone, and leave a man alone to grapple with death and
judgment, and turn a man naked to the sentence of condemnation for his wicked
getting and holding of them.

III. Another sort of men, who live not by the Word of God, Vel minimu^ fructus
ex pecunia pe^cip^ non potest sine Dei offensione and proximi inju^. 2. Calv.
Epist. 226.
but against it, are Usurers, who pull themselves out of all lawful callings,
and set up a trade for the public evil, and their own private good; which,
were there nothing else against it, proves it not to be of Gods devising: for
every calling of Gods devising, is helpful to men in general; but the Spirit of
God has given this a name from biting and hurting. But we have the Scripture
most expressly against it, whether it be manifest, as is a contract for gain,
as for ten pound to pay eleven at the years end; or covert, whereby men find
devices (which they call mysteries) to defeat the laws, and seem to contract,
and either not to lend, or not for gain.

The word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, says, Exodus 22. v. 25. If
thou lend money to my people with thee, thou shall not be an Usurer, thou shall
not oppress him. Mark how usury and oppression is all one. And, Deuteronomy. 23.19.
Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother, the usury of money, meat, or any
thing that may be lent. But the Usurer that will live by his money, and not by
Gods word, says, Yea, but of the Gentiles they might, though not of a brother:
To which I say, that now the partition wall is taken away, and neither Jew nor
Gentile remains, all are our brethren in Christ; and therefore of no man must
usury be expected, unless thou be worse than a Jew. Let the Usurer answer
this if he can. Again, those Gentiles were of those nations of the Canaanites,
Ab hoc usuram e^ig^. quem non sit crimen occultic. Amb.
which they were commanded to destroy, and usury was as teeth given them, and
allowed by God to eat them up withal. See thou a man, whom thou may
lawfully kill? take use of him, but not of thy brother.

Object. I will not take usury of the poor, but of the rich.

Answ. But the text is, Thou shall not take usury of thy brother, be he poor
or rich: though the rich be better able to suffer wrong yet thou art not by
any word enabled to offer it.

The word, which proceeds out of the mouth of God, says, Psalm. 15.5. He
that gives not his money to usury, shall dwell in the Lords Tabernacle, and
rest on his holy hill: and, Ezekiel. 18.17. He that has not received usury and
increase, etc. wherein it is plain, without all tricks, that either to give
out, or take in usury excludes out of heaven.

Object. He means, to oppress a man with usury.

Answ. Every usury is oppression, and every Usurer fears not God. Levit. 25.36.
Thou shall not take usury, but fear the Lord.

Object. But that Law was judicial, not moral.

Answ. That is false, for our Savior renewed in it the Gospel, Luke 6.35. Lend
freely, looking for nothing again: Therefore it is moral. Besides that, usury
is condemned amongst the great transgressions of the Moral law, Ezekiel. 18.13.

Object. We may do as we would be dealt by, and it is charity so to lend as
another may benefit himself.

Answ. No man in need would borrow but freely, unless he were madd; neither
is it charity nor humanity to take money for a duty, the nature of which is to
be free. Charity seeks not her own, and much less other men's; but of these
sorts of wicked men the speech is true, Their mercies are cruel. As charitable
as that Usurer is, so conscionable is he that follows: His conscience will not
suffer him to take above the law, not above ten in the hundred, and that he
hopes he may according to the wholesome laws of the Land.

Answ. Where were his conscience, if the Law of King Edward the sixth were
revived, whereby it was utterly forbidden, according to the Canon of Gods Word,
and the ancient Canons of the Church? but for the Statute now in force, enacted
Eliz. 13. c. 8. 1 I say, it allows no usury, but punishes the excess of it.
2 The title of the Act is, An Act against Usury. How then is it for it? 3 It
calls usury a detestable sin: how then can it secure thy conscience? 4 All
usury above ten in the hundred is punishable by the forfeit of the usury. 5
What if the Laws of men should permit what Gods Law condemns? is it not plain,
that this conscionable man flies Gods law to shelter his sin under man's? as
though the Laws of man were the rule of conscience, and not Gods laws; or as if
the law of an inferior can dispense with the law of the superior; or as if
Moses permitting one evil in the Jews (namely, the putting away of their wives,
for preventing a greater) did allow thereof, or warrnnted the sin to the
conscience of the hard-hearted Husband.

We conclude then, that the Usurer lives not by any word of God, but against
it. And to these add the bands of this sin, the Brokers to Usurers, that live
or raise gains by letting out other men's money: I will say no more to them, but
if he be shut out of heaven that lends his money to usury, be shall hardly
get in, that is his Agent. And humane Laws condemn thieves and accessaries. It
is a Statute of Henry the 7. Anno. 3. that all such Brokers for usury, shall
pay for every default twenty pounds, and suffer half a years imprisonment, and
be brought to the open shame of the Pillory. It is just with God, that Saul
and his armor-bearer should fall together, and dye on their own swords.

IV. Such live not by any word of God as encroach upon the Sabbaths of God, by
laboring either in themselves, or in their servants, as, 1 by buying or
selling wares, Neh. 13.18. 2 By works of the six days, whether in harvest or
caring time, Exodus 16.29. and 34.21. and Neh. 13.15. 3 by traveling for gain
or pleasure. For the Sabbath was made for our spiritual profit: it is a day to
give and collect alms, and not gain. Manna it self must not be gathered on
the Sabbath, much less must more ignoble sustenance: if it be sought, it
shall not be sound.

Object. 1 May I not do a little to set forward my work for the beginning of
the week?

Answ. No: Manna might not be sought, though early in the morning, and though
it was but a little way off, and required little labor.

Object. 2 May I not take a fair day when it comes, the weather being uncertain
and catching?

Ans. Thou may as well say, May I not take a purse when it comes? will thou
be a thief, and rob God of his due? Should not ill weather and Gods judgments
rather force thee to Repentance and obedience, than to sin?

Object. 3 It lies me upon a bond, my estate, and many poor men depend upon me.

Answ. First, pay thy bond to God; says, and obedience never brought loss
with it; and better were it to loose a little commodity, than Gods favor, and
a good Conscience; nothing is so heavy as Gods curse for this sin.

V. Common Gamesters, and such as make a gain of play, live not by any word of
God; it is a common theft, and they come directly under the eight Commandment,
and that Precept of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more,
but rather labor with his hands. And as they live out of a calling, so their
course is an unjust taking into their possession, that which no law of God or
man does warrant them by any manner of lawful contract; See August. Epist. 54.
and the Civil law and Fathers condemn that gain which is gotten by play. In
the same rank of thieves, are they that live by keeping dice-houses or gaming
houses, and such places of lewd resort.

Use 4. Let us take some rules, whereby we may comfortably pass our lives
according to Gods Word, and avoid all these sins against it. There are three, 1
Concerning our calling: 2 our states: 3 Our maintenance of life.

The first Rule concerning our Calling is this: The carriage of our calling
according to Gods Word, is a special part of that word of God by which man must
live.

Quest. How may I carry my calling according to Gods word?

Answ. By these means: 1 We must make choice of such callings for our selves
and ours, as be profitable for the Church or Commonwealth: there be many
vain and newfangled inventions, which rather maintain sin, than bring any good
to the Church or Commonwealth. But God therefore bestows variety of gifts,
to furnish men to the variety of callings, all for the common, and every ones
private good. 2 Seeing not the having of a Calling, but the right use of it
glorifieth God, we must use our callings with the practice of sundry virtues.

1 In faith and obedience to God: Faith makes our persons, obedience makes our
actions approved of God; yea, every duty of our calling ought to be an
obedience of faith, looking at the commandment and promise; the Commandment
keeps us within the compass of our callings, the promise secureth us of good
success. A good action not warranted by a calling is sin.

2 In diligence, not wilfully neglecting, but serving and redeeming the means
of Gods providence: Every man must abide in his calling, and keep him in his
way, for so long he is sure to be provided for: thus be avoides idleness and
destruction, and maintains the order and rank wherein God has set him.

3 In cheerfulness, not carking or excessively careful, but doing the labor
and leaving all the success to God. Some are heart-lesse in their calling,
because it brings in so little profit and return; and labor as the Ox, who
must go out his journey, but without cheerfulness or heart, which God looks
for in all our duties. Such should consider, 1 That Callings were not only
ordained to get money, but help us cheerfully through our way, and contain us
in a course wherein to please God. 2 That the goodness and worth of a calling
is not to be measured by that profit it brings in to us, but by the public
benefit, and as it is rightly used: God may be served as well in the basest,
as in the best. Others see no likelihood of doing any great good, and so either
draw back from their calling, Jer. 20.9
or else heavily and uncheerfully go on. But we must renew our strength and
courage, and know that our labor shall not be lost, Isa. 49.4.5.

4 In holiness, which 1 sanctifies our callings by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy
4.5. 2 Subordinateth all earthly and special things, to the general and
heavenly things of the Christian Calling; yea, it makes us express our
spiritual calling, in the use of the Civil: it will make a man sometime for
religion sake, hear the word in the six days, unless some other necessary
occasion come between, ever preferring the more necessary business. 3 It
keeps in the heart, 1 a love to God, aiming at the preferring of his glory
above all: it suffers not a man to esteem his calling a preferment of himself,
or a reward of his service past; but a means of advancing Gods glory in further
service. 2 A love of men, who partake in the benefit of our labors, with whom
we must exercise charity, justice, meekness, etc.

The second rule concerns our wealth and maintenance, namely, not to content
our selves, that we can live by such or such means, unless we can say, Gods
Word does warrant me, that this is my meat, my drink, my apparel, my money,
my house, my land, etc.

Quest. When can a man say this?

Answ. 1 When a man having nothing of his own, nor right to any thing, becomes
a believer, ingrafted into Christ, and so owner of that be has. A man may
have warrant and title from man, that his house and land is his, and he is a
robber that shall defeat him of it. But all men and Angels cannot give me a
possession, and true title before the living God, but only his Son, who is Lord
and heir of all. First, know thy self a member of Christ, and then his right is
thine. 2 When the manner of getting them is lawful, and that is,

First, When it is just, when a man has used no indirect means, but they are
either lawfully descended, or else by faithful and painful walking in an honest
calling, God has added them as a blessing of a man's labor.

Secondly, When it is moderate and retired, when a man so provideth for earth;
as he especially storeth up for heaven: first, seeking Gods Kingdom, and the
one thing necessary, without covetousness, and the love of this life; nay,
accounting all things dung in comparison of Christ.

Thirdly, When the manner of using them is warrantable, that a man shows
himself a good steward in the holy dispensing of them, using them as
furtherances of piety, as pledges of love toward men, and as testimonies of
sobriety in himself, and every way making them servants to his christian
calling, Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy riches.

4 When his affection is indifferent, both in the having and holding of them,
that a man may say. These be mine, I am not theirs; I have them, they have not
me; I am their Master to command them, they command not me. And why should we
not draw our affections from them, seeing, 1 The wicked are as rich, yea richer
in these things than the best? at the best they make not their Masters better:
2 They be no inheritance, they be but movables, changing their Master as the
giver will; and while we have them, they are but lent us: 3 We are but
Stewards, we sit not in our own, but have a large account to make: yea we are
very Pilgrims and Travelers, and shall go lightlier and less laden: 4 We
must not measure or tie God unto them, nor esteem of his love by them.

Thus a man may use the mercies of God with comfort, for his necessity and for
his delight in the days of his pilgrimage: thus may he dispose them to his
heirs as the right owners, with hope of Gods blessing to stand with them:
nothing of which can be expected in goods ill gotten, or spent, to which
nothing but Gods curse is intayled.

The third rule concerns our health and sustenance, namely, that it is far
better to want means, than to procure them by any other means, than that which
proceeds out of the mouth of God. Yet numbers will maintain their lives
health, and estate not by Gods word, but directly against it: for example, they
that seek to Witches and Sorcerers for health, or goods lost, or stolen, or
upon any other occasion whatsoever. Whereas the word proceeding out of the
mouth of God, Levit. 18.10. is this, Let there be none sound among you that
uses Witchcraft, or is a regarder of times, or a Sorcerer, Charmer,
Soothsayers, or that counsels with spirits.

Obj. But Gods Word and Ordinance is with them to do us good; and much good
they do, which none else can do.

Ans. God has a twofold word: 1 Of Blessing. 2 Of Judgment: the former
proceeds out of the mouth of God, who is goodness it self; the latter
sometimes he permits to proceed out of the mouth of the Devil, giving him
power to work lying wonders, that the seekers of him might believe in him to
their final destruction. Thus the Devil, who can do nothing against Gods word,
does what he does by Gods word spoken in Judgment and Justice. Whence I
conclude,

1 It were better for a man to want cure than have the Devil his Physician:
better for a man to want health of his body, than procure it with the death of
his soul: Better had it been for the Israelites to have wanted Quails, than
procuring them, by murmuring, to be choked with them: Better for a man to want
the world, than win it with the loss of his soul: Better had it been for Ahab
to have wanted Naboths Vineyard, than to lose the whole Kingdom for it: Better
for Judas to have wanted the thirty pence, than to hang himself for them: for
Ananias and Saphira to have wanted the third part of their possession, than to
dye for it.

Rule 2. Better it were to want the means of health and maintenance, than not
to use them according to the word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, as
food, apparel, physic, health, and life it self. Had it not been better that
Asa had wanted Physic, than be struck with death because he trusted in
Physicians? Better had it been for Gehazi to have gone in rags, than to
apparel himself by lying and deceit, which apparelled himself and all his
posterity with Leprosy. Whether was the state of Lazarus (that dyed for want
of means) or of Dives better, that sared deliciously every day? Less have men
to answer for, who have no meat to strengthen nature, than those that have
abundance, which they pervert to strengthen themselves in sin, sacrificing
their strength to the service of the Devil, and to their lusts. We our selves
know numbers in all corners, who were better continually to be bed-ridd, and
sick, or maimed, than to abuse their health and lives in such ryotous and
ungracious courses, to the destruction of themselves and others. Nay, as our
Savior said of Judas, it had been good for him he had never been born; so may
we say of numbers of graceless persons, better they had never seen the Sun, or
enjoyed life, than so to have consumed their lives in the service of sin, and
Satan's temptations.

Use 5. Lastly, If we live by every word of God, then let us be thankful to God
for our lives, and for his word of blessing upon the means: and seeing our
lives hang upon his word, to prolong them, or cut off the thread of them, we
must labor to live to him and his glory. It becomes the just to be thankful.
A great unthankfulness were it to rebel against him, by whom we hold our lives,
and all the comfort of them: See we not how those that hold Land in Copy, are
willingly bound to suit and service to the Lord, who is often but a mean man?
The Sidonians would not war against Herod, because they were nourished by his
Land: and shall we be in war against our Lord, by whose hand and word we
live, move, and have our being? And even this thanksgiving is his gift also:
for as the matter which, so the grace by which we are thankful, is all from
him; so as we must depend on him both for blessings, and for grace to be
thankful.

Verse. 5. Then the Devil took him up into the holy City, and set him on a
pinnacle of the Temple:

6. And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it is
written, etc.


WE come now to set down and expound, by the assistance of God, the second
onset of the Devil upon the Son of God, by a violent and hellish temptation,
nothing inferior to the former, in the furious, malicious, and cunning
contriving of it.

In the entrance whereof, we must remove one rubb by the way, concerning the
order of this temptation, wherein the Evangelists seem not to agree among
themselves: for whereas St. Matthew makes this the second, St. Luke makes it
the last, and puts the last in St. Matthew, into the second place. And herein
some learned men have stumbled, and have devised simple shifts to reconcile the
two Evangelists. Some think, that they write not the same History, nor of the
same temptations, but of temptations urged at sundry times. These are confuted
by the very matter, phrases, and words, which are in both the same, and need no
other conviction.

Others think (and they of the learned Papists) that in some ancient Books, St.
Luke observes the same order in the temptations with St. Matthew, and that the
difference crept in by the heedlesness of some Writer: which is a needless
devise of them, who strive to prove the Canonical Scripture to be corrupted in
their Fountains, that so their corrupt Latin Translation may prevail; but both
impeaching the watchfulness and care of God over the Scriptures, as also the
diligence and faithfulness of the Church, which is pretended to suffer her self
wholly to be abused, by the carelessness or unfaithfulness of some one Scribe.

But the truth is, that it does no whit prejudice the truth of the Evangelical
story, that the Evangelists do not stand so much upon order, where it is not
so necessary, as upon the matter, and the things themselves done, which they
faithfully report, and in which they jointly accord and agree: as oftentimes
they stand not upon words, nor sometimes upon sentences, but one delivers the
same fact in one style of speech, another in another form; but so, as one is so
far from crossing another, as he gives thereby more light and certainty unto
the other.

Quest. But whether of these observed the right order, as the temptations were
passed?

Ans. I am out of doubt, that Matthew sets down the right order as they were
done: 1 Because he passes his story by such particles as imply an orderly
consequent: as, Then the Devil took him, then he took him again, then the Devil
left him, etc. whereas Luke used the particle and, in his passages, (...).
which notes no certain order, as the former does: his care was to relate the
whole matter, but was not so accurate for order. 2 The coherence and dependence
of this second temptation with the former shows, that Matthew observes the
right method: for Christ having by a testimony of Scripture confirmed himself
in the confidence and trust in his Father, Satan immediately seeks to make his
advantage of Christ's words, and seeing he will needs trust his Father, he
would have him trust him too much; If he need no bread being hungry, he needs
no stairs to go down from the pinnacle of the Temple; the last temptation does
not so fitly cohere with the former, as this second does. 3 After Christ had
bidden Satan avoid, Matthew adds, Then the Devil left him, as being obedient to
his word; plainly showing, that that was the last temptation. Luke has it not
in such dependence, but thus, And when the Devil had ended all the tentation,
he departed.

In the Combat note two generals, 1 The preparation to it. 2 The temptation it
self. The preparation contains such necessary circumstances, as by which the
temptation might more easily prevail; as, 1 the time, Then. 2 The place, first
general, the holy City; secondly special, a pinnacle of the Temple. 3 The manner
how Christ was conveyed thither, The Devil took him up, and set him on the
pinnacle. The temptation consists, 1 Of the assault. 2 Of the repulse.

The assault has three things: 1 The ground of it, If thou be the Son of God.
2 The scope or aim, namely, the sin or sins to which he was tempted, Cast thy
self down. 3 The argument or persuasion to enforce it, For it as written, He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, etc. The repulse of our Savior is by
another testimony of Scripture, not contrary to that which Satan alleged, but
expounding it, that he might in the right sense of it, sense and secure himself
from the temptation, as after we shall see.

First, of the preparation: Then] This particle shows not only the time of this
temptation, but also the order as I noted: Satan having no success in the
former, renews his assault, and would assay another way. He had been kindly
and gently used of Christ, who had answered him courteously; nay, he had
convinced him by Scripture, that he had nothing to say against it, and yet he
goes on in his malice, as though he had had both great provocation and
advantage. Whence,

Doct. Note the property of wicked men ruled by Satan, who by no means can be
brought to lay off their malice toward Gods children. Deal gently with them,
they are like Nettles, the softlier touched, the sharper they sting: Deal
plainly with them, and convince their consciences by the word, that they have
nothing to say for themselves, yet being convinced they give not over, no more
than Satan here, but proceed in mischief. And what are the reasons?

1 Because the godly in their courses do oppose themselves to the darkness of
this world: now there is no fellowship between light and darkness, no way to
reconcile them, as we may see in the example of the wicked Sodomites against
Lot: first he resisted their wickedness, when they came about his house to
abuse the two men; he gives them fair words, I pray you my brethren; he
convinces their consciences, Do not so wickedly; and out of his weakness he
offers them his two Daughters: but, being a righteous person, whose soul was
daily vexed with their uncleaneness, neither his piety, nor humanity, nor
entreaty, no nor his weakness and sin could please them, but, Away with him
hence, he is a stranger, shall he judge and rule? now we will deal worse with
him than with them, Genesis 19.9.

2 Christ gives another Reason, Joh. 8.44. You are of your Father the Devil,
for his works ye do. In that Chapter Christ plainly teaches the Jews, that
he is the light, verse. 12. they tell him he bears record of himself, and
therefore his record is false, verse. 13. he tells them he shall go from them,
and carry the light with him, and they shall seek him, and not find him: what
(say they) will he kill himself? verse. 22. he tells them, that he that
keeps his word, shall never see death: then said they, Now we know thou have
a Devil, verse. 25. He tells them, before Abraham was, I am: and they take up
stones to stone him. Here were the Children of the Devil, who was a manslayer
from the beginning: And of these Christ said, Ye go about to kill me, a man
that has told you the truth, verse. 40. and, Ye do that which you have seen
with your Father, and not only seen, but felt him moving and stiring in their
hearts: so he works mightily in the sons of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.

3 The more light and grace the Lord manifests in any of his children, the
more must the darkness of wicked ones fight against it. It is not their
innocence, their holiness, their wisdom, their peaceable course of life, that
can fence them; nay, these bring all the malice of the wicked on them, and lay
them open to their rage. Stephen, a man full of faith and power, whose enemies
were not able to resist the Wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke, Act. 6.8.
yet drew they him to the Council, and subordened false witness against him:
where what should he do? They might, and did see his face thine as the face of
an Angel, verse. 15. In his Apology he begins as a person at the bar, with a
loving and moving speech, Men, Brethren, and Fathers, hearken: afterward in the
course of his speech, as a faithful servant of God, and true teacher, he
freely reproves them, chap. 7. verse. 51, 52. calls them resisters of the Holy
Ghost, betrayers and murderers of the just, he could convince them out of all
the Scriptures, as Christ did Satan here: But the more full of the Holy Ghost
he was, the more were they filled with devilish fury, like so many Devils, or
furies, their hearts brast for anger, they gnashed with their teeth, more like
fell and savage beasts, than men; they shouted with a loud voice, stopped their
ears, upon upon him, cast him out of the City, and stoned him.

4 The incestant malice of the wicked against the children of God, is a running
stream from this of the wicked one, against the natural Son of God: the Devil
would still, if he could, tempt and molest Christ himself in his own person,
but that he cannot, he will therefore be sure to molest him in his servants:
he would obscure the glory of Christ in himself, but seeing he cannot do
that, he will do what he can by himself, and all his members, to extinguish
that glory of Christ in those beams, wherewith his servants are graced and
honored: And this makes this war so irreconcilable.

Use 1. Therefore let us not marvel, when we see good things, and good men
resisted, nor condemn that presently which we may see opposed: but 1 Turn our
eyes upon that natural enmity which is between the seed of the woman, and of
the Serpent. 2 Upon men's stubbornness against the truth, and malice, by which
the sinner given up by God to Satan is obfirmed and hardened. 3 Upon the
powerful work of Satan in men of great gifts, that being convinced in
conscience, even against that light, can resist godly and innocent men. 4 Upon
the love of men's sins, profits, and pleasures, which sets on forward this
hatred against their conscience. What could Christ himself do to conciliate
Judas his favor? Did not he know that Christ was the Messiah? did he not
preach him? did he not work miracles in his name? did not Christ make him one
of his family, and prefer him to be the Steward of his house? did he not warn
him of his sin, and bear him most patiently? Yet his heart being upon
covetousness, for a small commodity he will betray Christ, and that against
his conscience. 5 Other personal and private occasions, may force men of great
gifts to malign and hate (against their consciences) most innocent persons.

The Jews knew that Christ was the Messiah, that he was most powerful in
Doctrine, and most holy in his life; yet they loved their own praise, and
therefore thrust down Christ; If we let him alone, all will believe in him.
They thought themselves so much dishonored, as Christ was honored. Sometime
fear of great men, or some loss, or check, may cause this obstinate opposition.
Pilate knew Christ was an innocent man, he washed his hands, and would have no
hand against him; he pronounced him innocent, saying, I find no fault in him:
his wife being troubled in a dream, sent him word, he should have nothing to do
against that just man. Yet against his conscience, and his own words, he
proceeded to condemn him. Why? how could he be so blind and wicked? surely it
was fear of Caesar, and of some cheeck: for he had heard them say, If thou let
this man go, thou are not Caesar's friend.

Use 2. It should teach us to go on undaunted in our godly course, making no
account of all the malice that the Devil or his instruments can create us, and
never offer to shake hands with them; we shall never have done if we go about
to please them; we can not do it unless we will be as bad as they, if we
retain our favor of goodness, it does but provoke them.

Use 3. Many men may hence see what spirit rules them, who when they hear
Scripture against their sins and unwarrantable courses, they go on still as a
chafed colt, that cares neither for pale nor hedge, but flings over. These men
would be loath to be compared to the Devil, but we shall see them for worse,
and the Devil not so bad as many of them. When he hears Christ allege
Scripture, he says nothing against it, but was silent, he replies not, and
much less rails on him as a fantastical or precise person. But reprove the
Swearer, the Drunkard, the Gamester, the unjust courses of men in their trades,
Sabbath-breaking in Masters or Servants, and do it out of the Scripture, as
Christ did; we shall have the same measure that he had returned from the
Scribes and Pharisees, who railed outright on him; He is too precise and
severe, we can do nothing for him; or, What has he to do with our
Government, or Trades? or, He might find other things to speak of.

Thus if Paul speak against Diana, or whatsoever the craft-masters live by, all
the City is in an uproar against him. It seems men are loath in their callings
to meddle with the word of God, or the directions of it, else we should have
to deal with them. It were too much to sit down silent, and go on in sin
against the Word: but to resist the word in terms, or to rail upon the
Preachers thereof, goes one step beyond the Devil.

Use 4. Take knowledge of the secret working of the Devil against the light and
truth, in such as spurn against it. They cannot abide that truth and innocence
should acquit it self; but though they see nothing but meekness patience, and
innocence, yet will side against it, as though they had the greatest advantage
and occasion. What is the cause, that men will take part with most abject and
base persons, and bring the curse on themselves, in condemning the innocent,
and justifying the wicked in their horrible riots and misbehaviour, but the
hatred they carry against goodness? Why did the Jews band themselves for
Barrabas, and seek to acquit him? Was it because there was any cause of love in
him? knew they him not to be a murderer and a Rebel? Yes, It was hatred of
Christ that made them stick to him: and why hated they Christ, but because he
was the light? Some there be of that Jewish generation lest, to whom, if
Christ be weighed with Barrabas, he will seem too light; Barrabas shall carry
the credit and defense from him; Not him, but Barrabas.

Into the holy City.]

We come to the second circumstance in the preparation to this second assault,
which is the place that Satan chooses; set down, 1 In general, the holy City. 2
In special, a pinnacle of the Temple. What holy City this was, Luke expresses,
chap. 4.9. He brought him to Jerusalem, here called the holy City.

Jerusalem is called the holy City, not because of any holiness in the place:
for no place as a place is more holy than other. It is true, that we read in
Scripture of holy ground, as Exodus 3.5. Mount Horeb where Moses stood is called
holy ground, and Moses must put off his shoes. But this was no inherent
holiness in the place, only for the present the presence of God appearing after
a special manner, makes a special holiness to be ascribed unto it. Neither is
it called holy in respect of the people and Inhabitants: for the faithful City
was long before this become an Harlot, Isa. 1.21. and Christ not long after
this Combat, cries out against Jerusalem, That she had killed the Prophets,
and slain such as were sent unto her, and proclaims a speedy desolation
against her. But it was so called,

1 Because God had made choice of this City to put his name there, 2 Chronicles.
7.12. I have chosen this place for my self. Hence was it called the City of
God, and Gods holy Mountain, Dan. 9.16. and the holy Hill of Sion; because God
had chosen it, and sanctified it for himself, wherein himself kept residence,
and made it eminent above all the places of the earth.

2 Because of the holy things which were there established, even all the holy
worship of God; it was not lawful for the Jews to sacrifice or eat the
Passover any where but in Jerusalem.

There was the Temple built on mount Moriah, wherein, I. There was the Sanctum
seculare, the utter Court of the Jews, and Salomons porch, which did rise up by
fourteen stairs, wherein Christ preached often, and Peter healed the lame man,
Acts 3.3. and probably, where Peter converted three thousand souls at one
Sermon. In this porch was the great brazen Altar for whole Burnt-offerings, on
which Altar the fire (which at Aarons first offering in the Wilderness fell
from Heaven, Levit 9.2^, 24.) was to be kept perpetually before the Lord; the
which when Aarons sons neglected, and offered with strange fire, they were
burnt with fire before the Lord. In this Court was the great brazen Sea,
wherein the Priests washed themselves, and the Beasts to be offered on that
Altar, especially their feet, because they were to minister barefoot before
the Lord. Both of them holy representations of Christ; the former of his
Sacrifice, who gave himself for a whole Burnt-offering; the latter the fruit of
it, he being the Laver of the Church, by whose blood we are washed from the
guilt and power of sin.

II. There was the inner Court, which was called the Sanctum, or the Sanctuary,
or the Court of the Priests, whence the Jews were barred. There was here. 1
The Altar of Incense for sweet perfume, wherein the Priests were evening and
morning, to burn the holy Incense before the Lord, as a sweet smelling savor
unto God, and no strange incense might be offered thereon, Exodus 30.9. While
Zachary stood at the right side of this Altar, offering incense to God, the
Angel Gabriel stood and foretold the birth of John Baptist. This was an holy
type of Christ, who offered himself on the altar of the Cross* a sacrifice of
sweet smell to God his Father, and through whom God savoureth a sweet smell
from all our duties. 2 In this Court was the golden Candlestick, with seven
Lamps, and seven Lights, which were ^ed with most pure holy oil, night and day,
to lighten the whole inner Court. And this was an holy type of Christ, the
light of the world, enlightening all his elect with spiritual and heavenly
light. 3 In this Court was that golden Table, on which the holy Shewbread was
ever to stand, even twelve Loaves, which were to be made of the purest flower
of Wheat, and were to be renewed every Sabbath, the old Loaves converted to
the Priests use: a holy type of Christ, in whom alone the Church, and every
member, setting themselves continually before God, are nourished and preserved
unto eternal life. 4 In this Court was that costly and precious Veil, of blew
silk, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined Linen, made of broydered work
with Cherubims, the use of which was to separate the Sanctum from the Holy of
Holies: this veil at the death of Christ was rent from the top to the bottom. A
notable representation of the flesh of Christ, which hid his Divinity, but
being rent asunder by his passion on the Cross, the way to Heaven was laid open
unto us.

III. There in the Temple was the Sanctum Sanctorum, and in it the Oracle,
called the inner house of God, into which only the High Priest went alone once
a year, and that in the Feast of expiation, wherein all the Jews must fast and
afflict themselves. A most notable type of Christ: for as it was called an
Oracle, because God thence gave answer in doubtful cases; so who is the Fathers
Oracle but his Son, who is the word of his Father, by whom he speaks to us, by
whom we speak to him, and through whom the Father hears us? In this Holy of
Holies was the Ark of the Covenant, and in this holy place stayed the Ark
almost four hundred and thirty years, signifying Christ the author of the
Covenant between God and us. In which Ark or Chest were kept three things: 1
The Tables of the Covenant, written with the finger of God, signifying Christ,
who is the fulfilling of the Law. 2 The Rod of Aaron which had budded, a type
of the Priesthood of Christ, who in the world seemed a dead branch and dry, but
after his Death and Resurrection began again to flourish, and bring fruits of
life to Jews and Gentiles. 3 The Pot having Manna a holy type of Christ the
bread of life, and that Manna that came down from heaven, Joh. 6.35.

In this Holy of Holies over the Ark was the holy cover, called the
Propitiatory, prefiguring the Lord Jesus, whom the Father has made our
Propitiatory by faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. Here also were the two glorious
Cherubims, set like Angels on either side the Ark, looking upon the Ark,
figuring the holy Angels ministering to Christ, and earnestly desiring to look
into the mystery of our salvation, 1 Pet. 1.12.

These were the chief holy things established in the Temple at Jerusalem, but
not all: for there were besides these, the observation of all holy Rites
appointed by God, the Chair of Moses, and in it the Law read and expounded:
there were the holy persons, the High Priest with all his holy garments, with
Urim and Thummim, and on his forehead, Holiness to the Lord: there were other
the holy Ministers of the Lord, who had the Lords holy Oil upon them, of Gods
own composition, with straight charge, that no other should make or use it out
of this use. Yea, here had lived the ancient Kings and Prophets, David,
Solomon, Josiah, Hezekiah, who were special types of Christ. In which regard
Jerusalem the seat of God and Gods worship, is called the City of perfect
beauty, the joy of the whole earth.

3 It is called an holy City by comparison unto other great Cities of the
neighbor Countries, wherein Idols and Devils were worshipped in stead of God,
as Babylon; or whose worship was the devise of man's brain, and no institution
of God, as Samaria, Cesarea, and others, 2 King. 17.33.

4 It is called holy in type, two ways. 1 As it was a type of the Church
militant, of which the members are holy in part, at least in profession. For
the whole Church of God was gathered together three times every year before the
Lord; at the feasts of Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, Psalm. 122.4.
Thither the Tribes of the Lord go up, and appear before the Lord. 2 As it was a
type of the Church triumphant, even that Celestial Jerusalem which is above,
that new Jerusalem into which no unholy thing can enter, but is the eternal
habitation of the holy God, the Holy Angels and Saints.

5 It was called holy, or the holy City, because it was the fountain of Gods
holy Religion, which being first seated there by God, must be derived thence,
and sent out to all other Nations. Micah 4.2. The Law shall go out of Sion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: Therefore was it the Metropola and mother
City, the heart of the earth, placed in the midst of Nations by Gods own
confession, Ezekiel. 5.5. Nay, there must the precious blood of the holy Son of
God be shed, which must stream and run out to the salvation of all Nations, and
himself Preached the King of the Jews, upon the Cross as upon the theater, in
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and that in the time of the Passover, when there
was a concourse of all the people of Jews, and other Nations. There the
Apostles must give their first witness of Christ, and thence must carry it
into Judea, Samaria, and all nations to the utmost parts of the earth, Act.
1.8. And 8.1. the Church of the New Testament was first gathered at Jerusalem,
and thence by persecution scattered into all Nations. In this regard it was
called (...), the Holy City: for all the holiness of all other Cities was
derived thence.

Doct. 1 We learn out of this title, what it is that makes places and persons
holy, even the presence of God, of his word, and worship. Thus the ground was
called holy, Exodus 3.5. and the place where Joshua stood, when the captain of
the Lords Host appeared unto him, chap. 5.15.

1 Whatsoever was in the Law separated to God and his service, was called holy:
the Sabbath was holy, the Priests Garments holy, Exodus 28. Thou shall make holy
Garments for Aaron thy brother: Holy, both because they were peculiar to the
holy Priesthood, (for none else might put them on) and because they were to be
used in the holy place (for when they came forth of the Tabernacle, they must
put them off:) and thirdly, consecrate to holy uses, and to be an holy type of
Christ's righteousness, a precious robe wherein all our Sacrifices are offered.
The flesh was holy, which was offered to the Lord in sacrifice, Hag. 2.13. For
places, Bethel was an holy place, when Jacob saw the vision of the Ladder
there; and the Temple was holy. For people, the Jews were called an holy
Nation, and Christians, an holy Priesthood, and Saints by calling, 1 Pet. 2.9.
For persons, some are sanctified in the womb to some special service, as
Jeremy, chap. 1.5. and John Baptist. Yea, every faithful man's heart, is as it
were an Ark of God, in which are kept the Tables of the Law, yea, the
Tabernacle of God, and the Temple of the Holy Ghost, where he pleases to
dwell. And thus was Jerusalem an holy City, so long as it continued in the true
worship of God.

2 This appears by the contrary, seeing his holiness was no further annexed to
this place, than God tied his presence to it; for when as the Jews had
crucified the Lord of glory, both the Temple and City, as profane were
destroyed, and delivered into the hand of the Romans, and are now in the hands
of the Turks a nest of unclean and Idolatrous beasts, most savage enemies of
Christ, and Christian profession.

3 That place must needs be holy, where the Lord dwells as a master in his
house; teaching, ordering, and supplying all necessaries: where Christ the Holy
Son of God walks in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks, being
conversant among the flocks of Shepherds: where the Holy Spirit of God is
present to pour out his treasures of wisdom and grace, by means of the word
and Sacraments, which are his chariot, and which, not accompanied with the
Spirit, are but dead and ineffectual to regeneration: where the Holy Angels are
present to assist the ministry, to repel hindrances, to behold our order; but
especially desirous to look into the mysteries of our salvation: where the Holy
Saints upon earth, are met together to seek and see the face of the Lord,
joining together in all the parts of his pure and holy worship, in hearing his
holy word, receiving his holy Sacraments, preferring publicly their holy
prayers, greatly by this means glorifying God, and enriching their own selves:
Surely, this is Bethel, the house of God, and the gate of heaven.

Use 1. This teaches us not to despise our Assemblies, nor to think out
Churches unholy for some corruptions. Look upon Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37. you
shall see the eleven Tribes were Apostates, there were in it dumb dogs, Isa.
56.10. there were Scribes, and Pharisees, hypocrites; nay, at this time the
Doctrine of the Law was corrupted by the false glosses of the Pharisees, and the
Temple almost a den of Thieves, full of buyers and sellers. Yet for all this,
the Evangelist calls it the holy City, even when it had more corruptions in it,
than the Church of England has at this day. Why? 1 Because there was the
service of the true God set up in the Temple, the word preached, and sacrifices
offered, and the meetings of the Church of God. 2 Because as yet they had not
received a bill of divorcement. Have not we the Word truly Preached, and the
Sacraments for substance truly administered? And for discipline, I will say, I
wish we had the execution of so much as the Church allows. Or, when did the
Lord give us a bill of Divorce? Or, what Church has convinced us, that we
cannot be acknowledged for a true Church? If they say, they of the Separation
have; I answer; 1 They have labored to discover some errors, but none
fundamental in us, nor without as many in themselves. 2 We may well doubt
whether they be a Church, or no, seeing by the profession of some of their
Teachers, they will not join themselves to any Church at this day upon the face
of the earth, and so renounce all Communion with all the parts of the Catholic
Church in the world. But we must not think much, if some unstable persons
forsake our Communion, seeing in the golden and flourishing age of the Apostles
themselves, some such there were, Heb. 10.25.

As for our selves, we may strengthen our selves against them by these
conclusions. 1 We know, that the word of Truth is truly preached amongst us,
which appears by the daily conversion of thousands, whereas never was man
converted by a word of error, Jam. 1.18. 2 We know, that our Ministers are of
God, because by them so many are begotten to God: Our Savior thought this a
good reason, when he said, Believe me that I came out from the Father, for
the works sake. The blind man had good insight into this matter, Joh. 9.30.
saying, If this man were not of God, he could do nothing: and a wonderful thing
it is, that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes. So
may I say to the separatist, Do thou not know whence that Minister is, who
has opened thine eyes? 3 We know that our meetings are holy meetings: 1 Our
people is outwardly called by an holy calling, and to an holy end: 2 They
profess faith in Christ, which is an holy profession, and in charity, (if we
see no open reigning sin) are to be judged Saints: 3 Congregations are called
holy in the Scripture from the better part, not from the greater, as an heap of
wheat, mingled and covered with chafe, yet it is called wheat, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Now ye are sanctified, washed, and justified: but in Epist. ^. chap. 12. I
fear, that when I come among you, my God will humble me, and I shall bewail
many of them that have sinned, and have not repented of their uncleanness, and
fornication, and wantonness which they have committed. Diverse other abuses
there were, yet among Saints, and beloved ones. 4 Mixed Congregations are holy
in Gods acceptance, esteeming them not as they are in themselves, but as
members of Christ. When Israel was at the best, it was a rebellious and
stifte-necked people: yet Balaam said, He saw no iniquity in Jacob, nor
transgression in Israel, not that there was none, but that none was imputed.

4 We know that we have no warrant to separate from holy things, neither for
some defects cleaving to them, nor for ill men either handling them, or
communicating in them. The Prophets never made any separation in times of
greatest corruption, even when they cried out of their wickedness, 1 Samuel
2.24. Do so no more my sons (said Eli) ye make the people trespass: how? By
making them loath the service and sacrifice for your wickedness, verse 17. And
when many abuses were among the Corinths in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
yet a man that did carefully examine himself, might communicate of it with
comfort; yea, our Savior Christ was often in the Temple, teaching and praying,
and so were his Disciples, though it was a most corrupt place.

Object. 1 How may I pray with an evil man, seeing God hears not sinners?
Nay, his prayer is abominable.

Ans. 1 The speech in John 9.31. is not universally true, for God heard the
poor Publican confessing himself a sinner. 2 Though God hear him not for
himself, yet he hears him for the people; as Balaam blessing Israel, being
both a wicked man, and speaking against his heart, God heard him for the
people, Numb. 23.

Object. 2 But how may I communicate with a wicked Minister, or with what
comfort?

Answ. The wickedness of the Minister may somewhat lessen the comfort, but
neither diminish the perfection of the Sacrament in it self, nor hinder the
efficacy thereof to us, seeing the efficacy depends only upon the promise of
God, and the faith of the receiver, and is no more to be refused than the gift
of a King, though the conveyance be drawn by a wicked Lawyer.

Object. But how can he be a means of conveying grace to me, that is a
graceless man?

Answ. Grace is compared to water: now may not water that passes through a
wooden or stony channel, which it self is so undisposed that it cannot receive
or have any benefit of it, make a whole garden fruitful? It is Augustines
simile. Besides, I would ask, whether any could with comfort refuse Judas his
Baptism. John 4.2. even when he was a Devil incarnate? If it be said, They
knew him not so to be, then belike a man may receive the Sacrament fruitfully
of a secret profane man or infidel, and the wickedness of a Minister (if it
be secret) pollutes not the Sacrament; and then it must follow necessarily,
that no comfort and truth of the Sacrament can depend upon any Minister; for
then none could have any assured comfort, that they have ever received a
Sacrament, because no man can look to the sanctification of any man's heart, and
cannot certainly without revelation know who is indeed truly sanctified.

Object. 3 But what say you to a dumb Minister? he is no Minister, and
therefore he can perform no ministerial action: his Baptism, is no Baptism;
his Sacraments, no Sacraments; his prayers, no Prayers.

Ans. 1 For themselves, I say their Ministry is unlawful to themselves, and
without repentance a certain matter of destruction. 2 I cannot blame those, who
with their own peace, and the Churches avoid them. 3 We must distinguish
between such a man, and a mere private man: for although they be no good and
lawful Ministers of God, yet because they come in the room of Ministers, by the
election of the Church, to whom God has given power to ordain, they are now
public persons, and Ministers, though no good ones. 4. Being thus enabled by
the Church to give what they can, and bound by being in the place of a Pastor,
though he come never so inordinately to administer Sacraments, we may receive
from him what he can give. 5 We must distinguish between a calling, and the
execution of it; for it proves not he has no calling of a Minister, because
he executes it not. A Magistrate cease not to be a Magistrate, or to want
Office, because he does not duly execute it.

Obj. But the Magistrate is an able Magistrate, so is not this Minister.

Ans. A Magistrate is a Magistrate, who for the ignorance of his place may be
called an Idol-Magistrate: the substance of a lawful and good Magistrate, is to
be able to judge of Causes, but not of a Magistrate simply, who is chosen by
election of people, or by course: so it is of the substance of a good and
lawful Minister of God, to be able to preach, but not of a Minister simply. And
as a Magistrate not able to weild martial affairs, and so defective in a
special part of his Office, yet no man refuses the good that he can do for
peace: even so, endeavoring in the mean time for a sufficient Ministry, and
groaning under this burden, which private men cannot cast off, I take it, the
good things which they can give, may be taken at their hands.

Obj. But by communicating with them, we communicate in their sin.

Ans. He that receives the Sacrament at the hands of a Minister, who is an
Adulterer, neither makes him an adulterer, nor partakes of his adultery. If we
either made him Minister, or communicated with his insufficiency, which our
souls groan under, some part of the guilt would stick to our fingers. But we
communicate only in the Lords Ordinances, so far as he is able to administer,
and justify not the lawfulness of his calling, but that he only is in the room
and place of a Minister, whom we cannot avoid, unless we will put away the
Lord in refusing his Sacraments.

Obj. Hos. 4.6. Because thou have refused knowledge, thou shall be no Priest to
me: therefore ignorant Ministers are no Ministers.

Ans. 1. True; no lawful, no good ones, approved of God, to me. 2 The Prophet
rather gives a rule in election and deposition of such, then shows how far
they may be used while they stand: So we deny not but such ought not to be
chosen Ministers, nor that such ought not to be deposed: but, that nothing
ought to be received of them while they stand, we deny, especially seeing we
well know, that in ancient Churches there were Deacons, who were assistants to
Pastors and Presbyters in reading, administering Sacraments, Baptism, and the
Eucharist, yea and in Catechizing, who had not the office of Pastors. All which
I speak not to maintain this foame of the Church, which she has been too long
in scumming off; but to remove causless scruples of weak consciences, who are
ready to deem all their actions nullities, and utterly reject Sacraments at the
hands of such unpreaching Ministers.

Obj. 4. But how may I partake where open sinners are tolerated to receive the
Sacrament? do not I partake of their sins?

Ans. Christ entered into the same Temple with wicked persons, and ate the same
Passover with Judas, and was undefiled: the Prophets lived in the midst of a
polluted people; and joined in the public exercises of religion: and those few
of the Church of Sardi defiled not their garments among a multitude of wicked
persons.

Obj. Isa. 52.11. and, Revel. 18.3. Come out of her my people, touch no
unclean thing, etc.

Ans. If we compare the Prophets precept, with his practice, we shall easily
see he means not of any Schismatical separation: he calls Gods people out of
that wicked multitude, but where read we, that himself did bodily separate? and
therefore, this must be a coming out, and departing from their evil, not local,
but moral: q. d. 1 Have no fellowship with their unfruitful works. 2 Do not
countenance them in their evil. 3 Reprove them. 4 Touch no unclean thing, that
is, consent not to any wickedness among them. But, 1 It is one thing to touch
the holy things of God, another the uncleaneness of men. 2 Separation from the
wicked in body is impossible, except we will go out of the world. The Disciples
could not be rid of Judas, unless they would depart from Christ himself. 3
Unless they can prove an established Idolatry among us ripe to the plague, as
in Babylon, they cannot prove a separation in body and mind. 4 Of this
separation a reason is given, not because they cannot partake in any holy
thing, while the wicked are in presence; but, least ye be partakers of her
plagues.

Qbj. 1 Cor. 5.11. If any be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one eat not. A little leaven leaveneth
the whole lump.

Ans. 1 The place is meant of private familiarity and amity, so far as a man
is not bound, or tends to the countenancing of his sin. 2 It implies that he
ought to be excommunicate, if he hear not the Churches admonition, (as the
whole context will show) and so cut off from Christian communion for the time.
3 If a man were excommunicate, some were bound to eat privately with him, as
his Wife, Children, and Servants: for these are necessarily bound, and do not
countenance him. 4 A man may and must eat sometimes with notorious wicked
persons; as suppose a man in the same ship, or prison, or army, and can have no
meat but among vile wicked persons, here a man may not refuse it, lest he
famish himself. So at the Lords Table: such as admit wicked persons, having
power to repel them, communicate with their sin and countenance them therein:
but a private person, whose soul is vexed with their sin, and does what he can
to redress it, but cannot, is not polluted by them; he is forced to eat with
them, he may not starve his soul.

As for that, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, the Apostle speaks it
to the Governors not to suffer such wicked persons, and provokes only private
persons, the pieces of that lump, to be the more watchful over themselves, but
not to refuse Gods Ordinances for them: And as neither that Church of Corinth
ceased to be a Church for suffering that wicked man (for the Apostle honors
them with that style while he checketh that sin,) so neither do particular
members cease so to be for that such are suffered, much less. Look to thy own
soul: the Apostle wishes every man to examine himself rather than others.

Object. 5. But how can I hear the Word with profit from a wicked man?

Ans. 1. A wicked man may preach salvation to another, and damnation to
himself; as Judas, and the builders of Noah's Ark. A statue may point another
the way, but it self stand still. 2 An instrument has all his efficiency from
the first mover, who is God himself: a Knife with motion will cut if the hand
will use it. 3 The Word is like the Light: now as the light of the Sun is not
defiled, though it pass through the dirtiest places, so the Word is not
polluted through awicked preacher. 4 Look to thy own disposition, that thy soil
be good as the seed is good, take the benefit of the Sun and rain, and it is no
matter whether the hands be clean or foul that cast and disperse the seed. 5
Let Preachers consider what a bar it is to all their labor to be scandalous,
covetous, disdainful, envious, noted for Gamesters, companions, etc. how their
example does more harm than their teaching can do good; with how little power
or prevailing he can point his finger to other men's sores, which every one can
point at in himself; what an odious thing it is to make Gods people to loath
Gods Ordinances, because of him; and what a woeful case is it that Paul
intimates of such teachers, who preaching to others, themselves by disobedience
become cast-aways, 1 Cor. 9.27.

Rules to avoid entangling and seduction by Separatists persuasions.

1 Labor for wisdom to discern between main truths in doctrine, and inferior
in discipline; as knowing that Jerusalem was the holy City before Nehemiah
builded the wall of it: between the person and the place, not condemning the
place for the person; between the thing and the use, and condemn not the use
for the abuse; between Offices and Executions, substance and circumstances; the
being of a thing, and the wel-being of it.

2 Labor to reform thine own heart first, for that is in thy power to amend;
and then thy own family; and, if it be in thy power, go further to the house
of God: but if thou be a private man, and this be not in thy power, thou
must turn thee to prayers and tears; and yet so strive in seeking the wel-being
of things, as by unthankfulness thou lose not the comfort of the things
themselves.

3 Be low in thine own eyes, suspect thy own judgment, condemn not, much less
contemn those that are not every way as thy self. Pride and contention of
spirit are inseparable; and it is folly to look that men who have a different
measure of grace, should not differ in judgment, and though they walk in the
same way, yet not after the same manner.

4 Testify thy self a sound Christian by the badge of Christ, which is love:
by this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
Study to be quiet (says the Apostle) and follow things that concern peace.
Love will make the best, even of bad things, and give a charitable construction
of things doubtful, and pity and pray for such as err howsoever, and much
more if they err of ignorance.

Use 2. This doctrine teaches us, that the way to sanctify a man's person or
family, is to set up the Worship of God in his heart or house. 1 Thy heart must
be the Temple of God, yea as the Ark within the Sanctuary: In the Temple God
was daily worshipped, there were daily Sacrifices offered, the Scriptures read
and expounded, and prayers preferred unto God from his people. Thou must get
proportion in all these, if thy heart be Gods Temple: thou must privately, yea
secretly apart daily worship God with personal worship, daily offer the
sacrifices of praise and thanks for personal blessings and deliverances, daily
prefer thy personal prayers, daily apart read and apply the Scriptures to thine
own use: for thus must it be in Gods temple. And further, thy heart must be as
the Ark, wherein were kept the Tables of the Law, written with Gods own finger:
endeavor in obedience to all Gods Commandments, entreat God to write his Law
in thy heart, that thou may never depart from it. Thy heart as the Ark, must
keep the pot of Manna, a type of Christ the food of life; close Christ within
thy heart, and hold him as thy life never to part with him: for that figured
the Sacraments, in which Christ is propounded the food of the soul. Thy heart
as the Ark, must contain Aarons rod that had budded, signifying the discipline
and government of Christ, unto which thou must subject thy self: let this rod
flourish in thee, and stoop with reverence and fear to this scepter.

2 Thy house and family must be sanctified also, by setting up and preserving
Gods worship there. We read of some of the Saints, who had Churches in their
Houses: Every Christian professing holiness must have the like care and
endeavor in such Family-exercises as God has prescribed: as,

1 In diligent teaching and instructing the family-partly in reading, and
partly in delivering precepts out of the word. It is Gods Commandment, Deuteronomy.
6.7. to whet the law continually on our children, and train them up even from
childhood in the Scriptures. The benefit whereof shall be, 1 To fit them for
the public Ministry: 2 To cause the word to dwell plentiously in them: 3 it is
a notable means for their growth in godliness, and to contain them in good
order.

2 In calling them to account for things delivered, by catechizing, pitifully
neglected in families, who yet would be thought to be Gods people. This is the
driving of the nail to the head, to stick the surer. It works care in those who
easily reject good means. It hinders vain thoughts, words, and exercises. It
banisheth much folly and ignorance, that is bound up in the hearts of children
and servants.

3 In applying the works of God past or present, on our selves or others, to
move them to confidence and trust in God, by the works of his mercy, and to
fear to offend by the works of his justice: and by this means, the seeds not
only of true Religion, but of good conscience, shall be sown in them betimes:
this was holy Abraham's practice, for which God would not hide his secret works
from him, Genesis 18.19.

4 In daily private prayer with the family, at least every morning and evening
solemnly on our knees, making confessions of sins, and requests to God,
together with thanksgiving. Psalm 55.17. Evening, and morning, and at noon,
will I pray and make a noise. Daniel three times a day prayed, and praised God
in his house, as he was wont, chap. 6. v. 10. The excellent use of which, is
the opening of the door of Gods treasury to the family, by which it is enriched
with the best blessings of God. Besides, the Lord shall hereby have some
honor, that is due to his mercy upon the family.

5 In edifying the family with Psalms and melody to the Lord, as it is Col.
3.16. In these daily duties does the sanctification of a family consist.
Whereunto we may be persuaded by these motives: 1 In that they are the
practices of men fearing God, such as Joshua and his house, Cornelius and his
household. 2 In that by these exercises the family shall not only be sanctified,
but also blessed; as Obed Edom and his house for the presence of the Ark. 3
What madness is it, to reject and banish Gods word and worship out of doors,
and yet think God is there? Nay, where found grace comes, there is the Spirit
of Prayer and Supplication in every family apart, Zach. 12.14. and where the
worship of God is not set up in families, there is nothing but a conspiracy of
Atheists, and a wicked brood bringing Gods judgments on themselves, and the
business passing through their hands.

Use 3. Jerusalem is called holy, being once sanctified to the Lords use; which
teaches us, that we should reverently both conceive and speak of all such
things as are set apart to the Lords use.

1 Some persons are consecrate to the Lord, as the Tribe of Levi, of whom the
commandment was, Thou shall not forsake the Levite all thy days. And the
Prophets: Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. So in the
New Testament, The Minister that rules well, is worthy of double honor: Yea,
if the widows which were set apart to inferior offices about the poor, must be
honored, 1 Timothy 5.3. much more the Minister that stands in Gods place and
stead, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the oversight of you. Thus Cornelius
reverenced Peter, and the Eunuch, Philip. Nay, not only the Minister, but
every believer is separate to God, and sanctified to carry the Covenant, and
has the anointing of the Spirit; which the Lord acknowledges on them, and
speaks reverently and lovingly of them, calling them his holy ones, yea, the
apple of his eye. They see not this, who can persecute and revile them for
hypocrites, and count them as the Apostles (whose doctrine they profess) the
scum of the world.

2 Some places are for their use to be accounted holy, because God is there
present in his worship, as the places of our meetings; not that any inherent
holiness is annexed to the place, or cleaves to it out of the action of Gods
worship; but while God is present in his Worship, we must account it holy
ground, and the house of God. When God appeared in Bethel to Jacob, he said,
How fearful is this place? surely it is no other than the house of God. We
must therefore put off our shoes with Moses, that is, our base and vile, our
sinful and sensual affections, yea, our lawful (if earthly) thoughts, when we
come to this holy place. Look we bring no thoughts with us unbeseeming the
place where God is, separated from other common places to holy uses. Look that
in this place we use no gesture or behavior, unbeseeming a man that has
business with God being present. To sit talking, or sleeping, or laughing, or
gazing, suits not with this place. And further, if God please to account the
very places holy for the use, and presence of God in this use; what shall we
think of them that conceive so basely of them, as they would love a Parish
better, in which is no Church? Others profane them with base practices, and
unconscionably suffer them to fall or decay, and will be at no charge to make
or keep them handsome, sweet, and beautiful. Styes were fit for such swine: As
their affection is, so is their devotion.

3 The holy Ordinances of God must not be touched but with holy respect and
reverence: of which it is said, It is not safe to play with holy things: 1 The
word must be received, read, heard, spoken, as the holy word of God. To make
jests of Scripture is a wicked practice. God looks graciously on him that
trembles at his word, Isa. 66.2. as good Josiah, whose heart melted, hearing
the words of the Law. So the names and attributes of God, are never to be used
in frivolous admirations; but every knee must bow unto him, Phil. 2.10. Neither
ought we to laugh at Gods judgments on others.

2 An Oath is one of the holy Ordinances of God; and to swear in common talk
vainly, is not to show reverence to this holy Ordinance. Swear not at all, that
is, uncalled, Mat. 5.34, 35. neither being called, but in truth, justice, and
judgment: for an Oath is appointed to decide controversies, which other means
cannot. How few consider whether the matter be worth an Oath, or whether they
be called to it, or whether it might not have been better passed by Yea or
Nay, or by a bare asseveration? A wicked man is described by being a Swearer,
Eccl. 9.3. but a godly man not only not swears, from which a man by education
or civility may abstain, but also fears an oath, in what company soever he is,
or what occasion soever he has.

3 A Lot is another special Ordinance of God, to decide a controversy from
heaven by God himself, when all means on earth fail. Therefore Lots must not be
used without great reverence and prayer, because the disposition of them
comes immediately from the Lord, Pro. 16.33. and not but in great matters,
not for recreation: for it is said, to cause contentious to cease among the
mighty, Prove. 18.18. neither do we read that it was ever used, but in very
great things, as the dividing of the land of Canaan, the election of High
Priests and Kings, and the surrogation of Matthias into the place of Judas.
Hence it follows, if dice and cards be Lots (as I think they be) that all
play by them is unlawful.

4 Some times are sanctified above other, as the Sabbath day, all which must
be passed holily, with much reverence and respect, both remembering it before
it come, yea, rejoicing in the approach of it; and when it is come, to sanctify
it; 1 In our hearts: for external observation of the Sabbath, without inward
holiness and affection to the duties of Gods service, is hypocrisy. 2 We must
not meddle with any part of the duties of our ordinary calling: for that is no
holy thing. 3 Much less travel to Markets or Fairs: but every man must stay in
his own place, Exodus 16.29. Neb. 13.15. to 19. 4 Least of all must we set any
part of it apart to our recreations: these be no holy things: sports are
inferior to our lawful Callings, which are to be laid aside, far from holy
things, and unsuitable to the Lords Holy Day. The like (if not more) may be said
against pampering a man's self and others, by feeding or feasting, and of
drinking, or any such wicked passing away the Sabbath. The same also is to be
spoken of a day of Feasting, of public Thanksgiving, which have the reason of
a Sabbath.

Of these, and all other Gods holy Ordinances, we may say as the voice said to
Peter, What God has sanctified, pollute thou not.

Doct. 2. A place is no longer holy, than God and his Worship is present. Was
Jerusalem a holy City? how then is the beautiful City become an Harlot? how is
it, that this City which was the seat of Gods worship, and the habitation and
collection of the Saints, is now an harbor of Turks and Infidels, overrun
with Turcisme or Idolatry? Surely, because the cause of this holiness ceased;
the worship of God was corrupted, the Son of God despighted, the Gospel of God
rejected, the Saints of God murdered, the day of Visitation neglected. And
therefore, they being infinitely departed from God, and his pure worship, God
departs from them; and God being gone, the place cease to be holy; Bethel,
while the vision of the Ladder lasted there, was an holy place, and so long as
Gods Worship continued there: but when it adm^tted the pollution of Idolatry,
it must be called Bethel no more, but Beth-aven. When the Congregation of
Israel brought the Ark from Gilgal, and set it up in Shilo, then was Shilo the
standing house of God, the seat of religion and justice which God had chosen,
Josh. 18.1. but for the sins of this place, the Lord rejected it; as Jer. 7.12.
Go now to Shilo, into my place where I set my name in the beginning, and
behold what I did unto it for the wickedness of Israel: if we will know what,
look 1 Samuel 4.4. when by the villainy of Elies Sons, and outrage of the people,
the Lord was provoked, he gave Israel into the hands of the Philistims, there
were thirty thousand Footmen slain, the Ark was taken Hophni and Phineas
slain, Eli the High Priest brake his neck; then did the glory depart from
Israel, and the Ark never came at Shilo more.

So the Temple at Jerusalem was holy, the City holy, so long as they continued
in the true Worship of God; but after they crucified the Lord of life, both
City and Temple as profane were destroyed; so as Jerusalem, although the holy
City of God, if her filthiness be found in her skirts, she shall be had in
derision, Lam. 1. the most beautiful rod, if held out against God, shall be
broken: yea, the Temple of God, if it become a den of Thieves, God will
depart from it. For what is it that can tie God to any place, but his own
worship, to which he has tied himself by promise?

Use 1. Let not the vain Romanist boast of the pretended chair of Peter, from
which God cannot possibly depart. Can God depart from Shilo for the sins of
Priest and people, where first he put his Name, and can he not depart from
Rome? Can he depart from the holy City, where he promised he would rest, and
can he not be driven from the great City of the Whore, to which he never made
any such promise? Can he depart in displeasure from her, whose foundations were
laid among the holy Mountains, Psalm. 87.1. and can he not depart from the
Whore, Revel 11.8
that sits upon seven Hills? Shall Bethlehem where Christ was born, be
forsaken, and cannot Babylon where Christ is daily Crucified? Nay, the Lord is
long since departed from her, and her final confusion is at the door.

Use 2. And if Jerusalem, once the holy City, but now a Cage and Nest of
unclean Saracens and Turks, be left of God, what a superstitious error
prevailed in former times, wherein such bloody Battles were fought for the
recovery of the holy Land, most superstitiously putting religion and holiness
even in the place it self, after all the holy things were profaned, and God
himself departed? The evil success of such Battles ever showed, how God was
offended with such superstitious wars: and another mischief by them oppressed
the Christian world to keep it in blindness: For the Pope making his advantage
of this blind devotion, if any King or Prince in Christendom stood between him
and his proceedings, one way or other he would send him out of his own Country
in expedition for the Holy War, and there hold him till he had effected his
own designs in that Princes Country, and so strengthened himself in all Lands,
as Histories manifest.

Use 3. Let us not bear our selves as though we had God so sure, as the Papist
thinks he has him in a Box, or pretend any vain privilege that we have to
exempt us from danger: True it is, we have the word with peace, liberty, and
protection: but the fear is, that our security and deadness of heart, with
dissoluteness and profaneness in behavior, will forfeit all. God sends
Jerusalem, to Shilo, saying, Trust not in lying words, saying, Jer. 7.4, 12
The Temple of the Lord; but amend your ways, and I will let you dwell in this
place: but if you will not, go to Shilo, and see what I did to it, and look
for the like. So now God sends us to Jerusalem, that we may consider what he
did to it, being once the praise of the earth: and if the same sins be found in
us as were in Jerusalem, the Lord will do no other with us, than he did with
it; even as he threatened, 2 King. 21.13. he will stretch over us the line of
Samaria, that is, bring the enemy in our necks; and the plummet of the house of
Ahab an Idolater; take away his holy things, and exchange them with filthy
Idolatry, and wipe us as a man wipeth a dish, even turn us upside down. What
were the sins of Jerusalem but pride, idleness, fullness of bread, and contempt
of the poor? In all which England does equal, if not go beyond Jerusalem: and
yet we charge our selves as little with our sins as Jerusalem did. And if we
look to the immediate causes and forerunners of Jerusalems overthrow, and
compare them with our Land, we shall see it high time to look about us: for,

I. In general, Jerusalem had grievously sinned, and therefore was had in
derision, Lam. 1.8. Her sins were great, many, of long continuance, with
treasured wrath; and all this in a place of such means and light. Now no place
in the world has more means than we, we are far beyond Jerusalem in means,
and therefore far beyond her in sins.

II. More specially: 1 They did not hear the words of Gods servants the
Prophets, nor obey them; therefore the Lord made that house like to Shilo,
Jerem. 26.6. and hence Jerusalem afterward had time enough, but too late to
charge her self with rebellion, Lament. 1.18. and to acknowledge the righteous
judgment of God against it. Never were the Oracles of Heathens despised so
amongst them, as Gods holy Word is generally of our people; no man almost lets
it come near his heart, a manifest argument that God will one day speak so as
he will be heard. A Jerusalem would not take knowledge of the day of her
Visitation, as appears in Luke 19.43. and Matthew. 23.37. therefore her
habitation was made desolate. As little know we the worth of our blessed means:
but perhaps we may know it better in the want of them. 3 Jerusalem remembered
not her latter end, therefore she came down wonderfully, Lam 1.9. she was
careless and never considered the account she was to make of her liberties, and
so hardened her self in sin, and grew to contemn the good means she had,
through the daily custom of them. This also was the immediate forerunner of
Ninivehs destruction, Zeph. 2.13. This is the rejoicing City, that dwelt
careless and said in her heart, I am, and there is none beside me. How is she
made wast, and the lodging of beasts? Every one that passes by her, shall hiss
and wag his head. And the reason is, she bore her self upon her privileges,
her holy things, her strength, wealth, populous and flourishing estate,
specially upon the Promises of God, which they perverted, being all made with
condition of obedience, which they had long before forfeited: yea, so likely
and constant an estate she had, as none in the world would have believed, that
the enemy should have entered the gates of Jerusalem, Lam. 4.12. so as he came
unlookt for. The same is our conceit, we think our staff so strong that it
can never be broken, we remember not what is the end of security: when men
cry, Peace, Peace, comes sudden war.

4 Jerusalem had two sorts of Prophets in her: First, False Prophets, which
flattered them, and sought out vain things, false prophesies and causes of
banishment. Lam. 2.14. Such was Hanani, who opposed Jeremy, and said the Lord
would within two years break the yoke of the King of Babel, Jer. 28.2. and
Ahabs false Prophets would bid the King go up to battle against Gods
Commandment, and prosper. This was one cause of her ruin, Lam. 4.13. for the
sins of her Prophets and Priests: not that the people had not sinned, but when
Leaders, and such as should preserve purity of Religion and manners, are so
corrupt, it argues a general corruption running down from the head to all the
members, which must needs bring the whole to a consumption. A second sort were
faithful and sincere, and the entertainment of these was such in Jerusalem, as
God most severely revenged. Jeremy was cast into the dungeon, Micaiah into
prison, nay, our Savior challenges Jerusalem of such cruelty against the
Prophets, as did bring all the righteous blood upon them from Abel unto
Zachariah, Mat. 23.37. But of all cruelty they filled their measure in
crucifying the Lord of the holy Prophets. Matthew. 21.38. the Householder sent his
servants to receive fruits, but they evil-intreated them, and beat some, and
slew others; at last he sent his Son, saying, They will surely reverence my
Son: but they said, This is the Heir. Come let us kill him, and the inheritance
shall be ours. Now what will the Householder do? He will certainly destroy
those wicked men, and let out his vineyard to others. Expressing plainly in
this parable, Gods dealing with Jerusalem, and theirs with him, and what was
the immediate cause of their destruction. A dangerous thing it is to wrong the
faithful Ministers of God: Do my Prophets no harm, says the Lord: and to
persecute Christ in his members, shall not be unrevenged.

5 Jerusalem had many warnings before their utter overthrow. It was besiedged
by Pharaoh Necho, by Senachetib in Hezekiahs time, in Rhehoboams time, by
Shishac King of Egypt, it was sacked and overthrown, 1 King. 14.26. It was
subdued thrice by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, twice under Joakim, and the
third time under Zedekiah, the City was wasted, the Temple burnt, and the
people captivated into Babylon, 2 Kin. 24. and 25 After seventy years, when by
the permission of Cyrus King of Persia, the Temple was builded by Zerubbabel,
the City by Nehemiah, and the law restored by Ezra, and the Lord came again to
his Temple: yet being again provoked, some years after it was taken by
Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria, the Law burned, the Temple profaned, the
daily sacrifice removed, the sanctuary of strength polluted, and the
abomination of desolation set up, as Daniel had foretold, chap. 11. v. 31. and
made a wonderful effusion of blood. After this, the City and Temple was
re-edifyed by Judas Assomanaeus, and began to flourish: but it was not long,
before it was again taken by Cu. Pompeius, a Roman Captain, whom Aristobulus
called to help him against his brother Hircanus, for the Priesthood. All these
were fair warnings, whence they might perceive, 1 How righteous the Lord was in
not forbearing their sins: 2 With how little reason they could stand upon any
outward privilege, if they would go on in provoking the Lord: 3 How loath the
Lord was to reject them utterly, if by any means they could be reclaimed. But
when no means would do them good, the Lord gives them to utterdesolation by
Titus and Vespasian, who ruinated the City, defaced the Temple, and left not
one stone upon another, as Christ prophesied, Matthew. 24.2. And since that time
it has ever been profaned, and in the hands of the greatest enemies of God
and man, next Satan himself; polluted with most horrible idolatries, the Jews
driven from thence into all Lands, and in all Lands Vagabonds, the blood of the
Son of God lying upon them and their children till this day.

Oh the patience of God toward us! the many warnings and threatenings that we
have had, by many treasons, conspiracies, sundry open and secret practices of
our enemies, by Sea and by Land! (Remember 88. and 1605.) by sundry plagues of
many kinds, and every day renewed, renews some warning or other: And yet, how
fall we back more and more? how strong are the Papists? how bold? how
malicious and furious, as mastives that have been long in the chain? Oh that
we were so wise, rather to take example by others, than to be made examples
to others; and to take warning by others harms to prevent our own! Why should
we think our selves so safe from the touch of this doctrine, or exempted from
the lot of all Churches and Lands? Where was there ever a more holy place, a
more holy City, a more holy Temple, than at Jerusalem? yet by security
departing from the Lord, the Lord left them. What Church in all the World,
whose flourishing estate has always lasted? Cast we our eyes upon the
Churches planted by the Apostles themselves, that of Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, the Churches in Asia: they had their times, but knew it not till it
was too late: now all are become dens of thieves, and sunk down into the deadly
poison either of Mahometisme or Antichristianisme.

It was the oversight, and overthrow of the most renowned Churches, never long
to prize their liberties in the presence of them, but had leave a long time to
bewail their absence. Time was when Jerusalem had God near them, his Prophets,
his Law and Oracles, her Nazarites purer than snow: But not long after, there
was never a Prophet left, never a sign, her Nazarites blacker than a coal, the
ways of Sion forsaken: Oh now for one Prophet more! Time was, when they had
the Son of God among them, and his Apostles, and the sound of the blessed
Gospel was first offered to them: But not long after, Christ and his Apostles,
the note was altered, and the case changed: for the sons of peace, and the
Ministers of peace, they hear of Titus and Vespasian, of wars, and bloodshed,
of famine and death meeting them a thousand ways.

Now time is, we have God near us, and Christ his Son, and the Ministers of
reconciliation, and we know not our happiness. Time may come, when we may
wish one good Minister in a Country, one Sermon, one holy Sabbath spent as we
have seen many with too much neglect: A Lent may come for this long ope-tide.
The Lord knows how little we desire the day of vengeance, neither can we
prophesy; but blessed is that man that sees the plague and hides himself,
where as the fool must go on to punishment.

THE second thing in this second circumstance, is the special place, namely The
Pinnacle of the Temple.

The Temple was the highest place on the Mount Moriah, and the pinnacle was the
highest place of the Temple, to wit, a battlement above the top, to keep from
falling down, Deuteronomy. 22.8. called pinacles from their sharpeness, as our
pinacles are the sharp tops of our buildings, or spires.

Satan makes choice of this place; 1 As fit to his temptation, the scope and
aim whereof we shall see afterward. 2 Beginning a new temptation, he changes
his place, to see if thereby he can change Christ's mind: so did Balaam, to
see if any place would serve him to curse Gods people, shift from place to
place. And it is not unlike but our Dicers and Gamesters have learned this of
the Devil, when the play runs against them, to shift places for better luck,
as they say. 3 The place was full of danger to stand upon, and much more for
the height to fall from. 4 The Temple was an holy place, dedicated to Gods
worship and service; what has Satan to do there? but he takes upon him, as
though he had to do every where, and can stand among the Sons of God, against
the sons of God. It may be Christ will think himself privileged there, as the
Pope in his chair, that he cannot err what ever he do. Or if he can abuse
the Temple, to make it a means of the overthrow of the Son of God, he shall
with one work both dishonor the Father so much the more, and destroy the Son.

Doct. Satan either fits his temptation according to the place where he finds
a man, or draws him to a place fit for his temptation: Both which we see here
against Christ; being in the wilderness hungry, Satan fits his temptation to
the place, to make stones bread; and now being to assail him with another kind
of temptation, he draws him into a place fit for his temptation. This subtlety
of Satan we may observe in the first temptation of all: there was but one
forbidden tree in Paradise, and there Satan fits his temptation to the place,
to eat of that. So he finds Peter in the common hall, there he tempts him to
deny his Master, a place most fit for it, where all else denied and abused him;
and, if he should not do so, he should be in like danger: Nay, he not only
fitted the temptation, but also drew Peter to the place.

1 Satan does not use all temptations in every place, but such as he will have
some advantage in by the very place it self: he knows it were bootless, if the
place as well as other circumstances be not fitted to him. It had been in vain
to have tempted Cain to stay Abel in his fathers house: but he drew him into
the field after him, and so prevailed. He knew Joseph was a most modest and
chaste man, and it had been in vain to have moved him to uncleanness, so openly
as he did Zimri and Co^bi at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
or as openly as Absalom, who defiled his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all
Israel: and therefore he sets upon him in a secret chamber. He knew it was no
fit place to tempt Noah in the Ark, in the midst of the waters, when there
seemed but a step between him and death: but, sitting under the vine, in his
vineyard, he was easily overcome with it. While David was in his flight before
Saul, in Caves and Wildernesses, it was bootless to tempt him to folly, he had
no leisure, his thoughts were taken up in holy Prayers and Consultations with
God; but when he was on his Pinnacle, on the top of his turret, the place was
fit to spy Bathsheba, and have her fetched to him, and so the sin was finished.

2 Satan knows, that sins are of diverse sorts, and though all be works of
darkness, and so should fly the light, and walk in solitary and private places,
as extremities on the left hand, thefts, murders, Adulteries, etc. yet some
other are best brooded in the light and places of public resort, as Pride,
Prodigality, and a number of riots and open disorders: for example; Herod swore
an Oath to give Herodias whatsoever she asked, to half his kingdom: when she
asked John Baptist head (which was an heinous murder of them both upon an
innocent man) the very fitness of the place brought it forth. Great men often
swear hundreds of Oaths in a day, and forget them presently, if they were made
privately: But because Herod had sworn amongst the people, for his credit sake,
and for them that stood by, John must presently lose his head.

3 The largeness of Satan's Commission gives him leave to make choice of what
place he list, and thence to make his best advantage; no place is privileged,
for he compasses the earth, and is the Prince of the air, and stands
sometimes in the presence of God, to get leave to afflict the children of God;
so as there is no desert so solitary, no Pinnacle so high, no City so holy, no
Temple so sacred, but Satan dares, and can even there watch Gods People a
mischief: Nay, in Paradise he tempted Adam, and Judas at Christ's own Table.

Use 1. This may advise us to keep our selves so far as we can from places of
probable danger, which Satan has after a sort fitted for temptation. Some
places are dry and barren, no goodness is there exercised, or to be had, nor to
be done: in these places the evil spirit walks, there he haunts (as we see
in the parable) and therefore our rule must be this: Where we can neither do
good, nor take good, those be no places for us. Many civil men's houses, how is
the time eaten up in vain and idle speech, and the most tolerable talk is
worldliness, and the talk thereof is endless.

Object. What hurt is in that?

Sol. Yes, it is a dry place, and it cannot be answered, when even this shall
shoulder out better speech. Other places are not only empty of good but filled
with evil, that as hardly shall a man come safe out of them without some poison
or corruption, as out of a plaguey or leprous house: For how can a man be safe
where Satan's throne is? as,

1 Places of Idolatry, where a man must either show his dislike, or else give a
secret consent. Men can go into places where the horrible Idol of the Mass
stands, and keep their hearts to God: but commonly God gives such unwarrantable
boldness a check, and experience shows what a tang it leaves after it, 2 King.
16.10. Ahaz went upon another occasion to meet Tiglah Peleser King of Ashur, at
Damascus, and only seeing an altar there, he was so in love with it, as he
sent to Uriah the Priest the pattern of it, and the fashion, and whole
workmanship of it, to have another like it in all points against Gods
Commandment. And how has a secret infection poisoned a number of our
Travelers, who falling in love with Romish Idolatry, have brought the fashion
and pattern, and workmanship of it over with them, and that because they run
unwarrantably into places of danger? So how dangerously do men run into great
Papists houses, where there are a thousand allurements, and inticements, pure
Religion scorned, belied, and all to be besmeared with shameful lies, and
opprobry, and the contrary magnified and extolled as the only truth; yea, the
Scriptures themselves not less abhorred than the Theif hates the Gallows, and
thrust down under men's devises and Popes Decrees, yea, the word of Salvation
condemned and burnt (as they were of old by Antiochus and Maximinus) as the
books of Heretics; and the godly professors scoffed under the style of
Scripturers and Bible-bearers? Men think it no danger to be familiar in such
places, to be Servants to such Masters; which is to lead themselves into
temptation. Alas, what Communion is there between light and darkness, between
Christ and Antichrist?

2 Not only places of spiritual whoredom, but also corporal: If Satan get a
man into such a place, he has his snares and bands her lips are snares, her
hands as bands, her words are cords to draw a man in as an Ox to the
slaughter. How can a man avoid the unclean spirit in such fowl sinks as such
places be? Prove. 5.8. My Son, keep thy way far from her, and come not near the
door of her house: and Chapt. 6.32. he that goes into her, besides that he
destroies his own soul, he finds a wound and dishonor, and reproach that
shall never be put away. And the same Commandment, that has forbidden any
evil, has forbidden also all the occasions of evil.

3 We must avoid Drinking-houses, Gaming-houses, and places of such rude and
hellish resort. How suddenly are minds corrupted in bad company? what quarrels
and causless blows? what vain and ribaldry speech, which corrupts good
manners? what expense of precious time? what riot of goods? what wast of wit,
and loss of reason it self is commonly in such places? so that a good mind
sees himself in a little Hell while he is there: and where lodges Satan, if
not in such houses, which are servants to every man's sin, and where are baits
and snares, which are enemies not only to Christianity, but even to civility
and humanity it self? There Satan has one room filled with Swearers, another
with Scoffers, a third with Drunkards, a fourth with Gamesters; and all his
rooms are full of idle and disordered persons, who for the time have cast up
their callings, and are at leisure for any work of the flesh which their master
the Devil will now employ them in.

4 Add hereunto the places of Stage Plays, and Enterludes, places of as great
danger as any of the former, Satan's School-houses: There you shall hear Oaths,
and Lies, and Scoffs of base Varlets against not only their betters among men,
^ud^ scenici spectacula turpitudinum, and licentia vanitatum, Aug de civit.
Dei. l. 1. c. 32.
but of God himself, and his holy Religion: There you may see sin acted and
represented, which ought not to be named among Saints: There you shall see men
wearing women's apparel, and perhaps women men's: There you shall see men
traveling of child, as one said of Nero being an Actor in a Tragedy, to which
his part called him; and all kind of adulterous behaviors, Scipio propter
animorum cavendam pestilentiam, ipsam scenam construi prohibebat. Aug. ibid.
Magister non erudiendorum, sed perdendorum puerorum. Cypt.
and such shameful gestures and actions, as the light of Nature has descryed
and condemned. What shall I speak of that lewd and wicked dancing of young men,
in the habit and gestures of women, like Herodias: which what an incentive of
lust it is, may easily be conceived in Herod's example: and the poison of
amatory kissing of beautiful boys, is unto lust as fire to flax, or oil to
fire. And least you should think I did wrong them in calling these places the
Devils Schools, Cyprian does no less, accounting the Stage Player (teaching
boys to be effeminate, by instructing them how to play the women, and to
express wanton gestures) to be the Devils Usher.

All these are places of certain peril, where no man can miss the Tempter: if
he can draw men into these places, he will not fail to fit them with
temptation. Let us therefore make a covenant with our eyes, not to behold such
vanities and lustful spectacles; and with our feet, not to wander into such
bypath; and with our selves, to avoid the very appearance of evil. It will
sort well with our weakness, to avoid temptation, to pray against it, to watch
our selves lest we be overcome, rather than to follow, and much less to go
before the Tempter.

Use 2. But if we must needs come in such places, as are fitted above others
for temptation, then must we fence our selves more strongly against such
temptations, as the custom of the place offers.

Quest. How may we do so?

Ans. By observing these rules.

1 In all places put we on our Christian armor, without which Christian life
cannot stand. When a man goes among thorns and stubbs, had he not need to have
his shoes of the Gospel on, if he would not be pricked and peirced to the
heart? Or if a Christian want his sword, how should he cut the bands of sin in
sunder? How should a Soldier stand in the hours of skirmish, without his
Corslet and Breast Plate? or how should he quench or repel the fiery and furious
darts of Satan and his Instruments, if he want the shield of faith? That man
that puts on this armor of God, shall overcome all difficulties, and stand
where many have fallen: for he has with him the victory that overcomes the
world.

2 In all places lay hold on all opportunities to do good, as Satan does to
do evil. He that has goodness in him, shall come in no place but he may find
some fitness to communicate it. If in places of good resort, men may and ought
to make gain of that occasion. Can good men meet, and not be better one for
another, whereas the wicked cannot meet but be worse? Here a man may 1 Observe
Gods graces in others, to be a pattern to himself. 2 Draw out understanding of
them by godly and fruitful questions, or conference: Prove. 20.5. 3 Stir up
others to diligence in going forward, and to greater love, Heb. 3.13. and
inoffensive walking. Others may be ignorant; and here is occasion for thee to
pity them, and open thy lips with wisdom to feed them, Prove. 10.20. Others may
be dull and slow in Gods ways, and these must be provoked and encouraged.
Others by infirmity may be going astray, and thou perhaps may be a means to
turn him, and win a soul. Others may need an exhortation, an admonition, a
loving and brotherly reproof, or may need comfort: A wise man may now watch
occasion not only to prevent Satan's baits, who would keep Christians from doing
the good they can, but also to acquit himself in all places to the good of
others, and his own comfort.

3 In places of bad resort, or scorners, if our calling lead us into them, let
us take with us the exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.17. Take heed ye be
not plucked away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own
stedfastness. And besides, 1 Let us grieve, that we are fallen into such
company. 2 Let us think of some good or special work of Gods mercy or
judgment, fresh in memory. 3 If there be apparent evil, either give apparent
token of dislike; or in a wise and peaceable manner, so speak as Gods honor be
not by our silence trodden down. 4 If there be no opportunity or place for
good, depart with all speed, Prove. 14. verse. 7. and beware of falling into the
like company again.

Took him up, and set him on the pinnacle.]

The third circumstance in this preparation, is the manner how Christ was
conveyed to Jerusalem; Then the Devil took him up into the holy City, and set
him on a pinnacle of the Temple. Some of great Learning and Piety hold, that
Christ's presence in the holy City, and on the Pinnacle, was only in Vision, and
not corporal. Their reasons are these: 1. Some of the Prophets thus are said in
vision to go from place to place; as Jeremy must go to the river Perath, and
back again, chap. 13.4. and Ezekiel. 11.24. The Spirit of God took me up, and
brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea: and, 8.3. And took me
by an hairy lock of my head, and the Spirit lift me up between the earth and
the heaven, and brought me by a Divine vision to Jerusalem. 2 Because the
Evangelists say, that the temptations were in the Wilderness, and therefore
could not be actually in the holy City, or on a pinnacle, but in vision. 3
Because Luke says, that the temptations being ended, Christ returned into
Galilee, namely from the wilderness.

But it seems, Christ's being in Jerusalem, and on the Pinnacle of the Temple,
was not in vision, but in deed and in truth; and the reasons well considered
are too weak to prove the contrary: because, 1 It overthrows the end of the
temptation, which was to cast himself down headlong, for the Angels would keep
him without hurt. How could he hurt himself by an imaginary fall? or what
needed he the Angels help? Neither could he cast himself down, if he were
still in the plain of the wilderness. 2 It seems not to stand with the holiness
of Christ, seeing every vision, which is a work of Satan, intending by it to
delude man, is either a deceiving of the outward senses, (whereby he makes a
man think he sees, hears, or feels something, which indeed and truth he does
not: as the Witch of Endor made Saul believe he did hear and see Samuel, when
he did not, 1 Samuel 28. And after the same manner, if it were a vision,
supposing that Christ was awake, he must not see the ground of the Wilderness,
where they say he was, but upon that ground the City Jerusalem, the Temple, and
Pinnacle, and himself standing on the top of it, when indeed it was not there:)
Or else, a vision presented by Satan must be an illusion of the mind, whereby
he makes a man think that of himself which is not true; which can far less
agree with the holiness of Christ, whose imagination could not be so far
abused, as that he should think he was carried, when he was not carried; or to
think himself to be there, where he was not: for this were contrary to that
unmeasurable wisdom, which was with him. And if Satan had had such power over
the superior part of the mind of Christ he might likewise have persuaded him
he had not fallen when he did fall, or he did not worship him, if he had done
so.

As for the Objection taken from the example of the Prophets;

I answer, Great is the difference between the visions of God, and visions from
Satan. They knew their visions to be Divine, and not to delude or deceive them,
they knew the Spirit of God took them up in Divine visions; but here it is
said, The Devil took up Christ; and the text mentions that theirs were
visions, so it does not here.

For that which is objected out of the Evangelists, that the temptations were
in the Wilderness, and if it were not in vision, only the first should be there:

I answer, 1 The Evangelists say, that Christ went into the Wilderness to be
tempted, but none of them say, that all these three were in the wilderness. 2
If they should have said, that the temptations were in the wilderness, it had
been true: for (as we have heard) Christ was tempted with other temptations
than these in that place within the forty days.

Whereas it is further said, that Christ returned after the temptations into
Galilee, and therefore the last temptation was in vision upon the Plain, and
not on the Mountain:

I answer, 1 No one Evangelist says, he returned from the Wilderness. 2 That
the Evangelist has reference to the last temptation, which perhaps was
finished in the Mountain, either in that Wilderness, or near it, after Christ
was led back from Jerusalem, and there the temptations ended.

And now, seeing that his presence in the holy City, and upon the Pinnacle was
real and local, not in vision and mental, the next question is, How the Devil
took him up, and set him on.

Ans. It must necessarily be one of these two ways; either Satan must lead
him, or else must carry him.

The former, that Satan took him as a Companion, or a Leader, seems not so
probable: 1 Because Christ of his own will would not go; for (as we have
heard) the Spirit led him into the Wilderness to be tempted; and he would not
of himself go elsewhere, because the Spirit of God called him thither, and no
whither else. 2 Christ would not do it at Satan's instigation, whom he knew to
be the Tempter: for neither must we do any thing at Satan's request, be it
never so lawful: for whatever we do, we must have a word of God to do it in
faith. 3 If Christ had yielded to be lead as a Companion, he might have seemed
to have sought temptation, and been a Coworker with Satan against himself: but
it was enough to yield himself a Patient in it. 4 The distance of the holy City
from the Wilderness, which was (as those say that make it the least) twelve
miles from Jerusalem, admits not that Christ being hungry and ready to
faint, should follow Satan so many miles.

The latter therefore seems to be the right manner of Christ's conveiance,
namely, that he was carried by Satan through the air, who by Gods and Christ's
permission, took him up, and transported his blessed body to Jerusalem, and set
him on the battlements of the Temple, For, 1 The words, he set him on the
Temple, signifies he set him down, who had formerly taken him up; and if he had
power to set him there, why should he not also have power to carry him thither?
And, if he had not carried him thither, but Christ had followed him the
Evangelist would have said, When they came to the pinnacle of the Temple, and
not set him on the pinnacle. 2 This was the hour of the power of darkness,
wherein Satan was allowed to take all advantages to further his temptations:
and he might think this violent transportation a means, either of shaking
Christ's faith with terror and fear what might become of him, being now
delivered into the hands of Satan; or else to make him swell with pride and
insolency, that he was able to fly in the air, or to be conveyed in the air
from place to place, without hurt, which an ordinary man could not: and this
would well fit the scope of the temptation ensuing.

Quest. But how could Satan carry the body of Christ, being a spirit? Or if he
could, why should he?

Answ. He is a Spirit, 1 Of wonderful knowledge and experience, to dive into
secrets of Nature, to work strange and hidden things. 2 Of exceeding great
power, to shake the Earth, move the mountains, and confound the Creatures, if
God should not restrain him. 3 Of Admirable agility and quickness, proceeding
from his spiritual nature, whereby he can speedily convey himself, and other
creatures, into places far remote and distant one from another. 4 He knows to
apply himself to the creatures, and to move them, not only according to their
ordinary course, but with much more speed and quickness. 5 He is able to
appear in the form of a creature, or any person, not by deluding senses, but by
assuming to himself a true body, and move it by entering into it, and to utter a
voice in a known Language, as he did in the Serpent, and so he can in other
creatures, which have instruments of speech. And thus it is not difficult to
him to transport a body.

Witches and Wisards have been often by their own confession transported into
remote places by wicked spirits, which they call familiars. Besides, good
Angels (being in their nature Spirits as Satan is) are able to transport men
hither and thither, as Christ was in the air. Act. 8.39. The Spirit of the Lord
caught away Philip, and carried him from Gaza to Azotus, which was about thirty
six miles. Some understand it of an Angel of the Lord, as Mr. Beza notes. But
if God by himself miraculously did that, the additions to Daniel (to which as
much credit is to be given, as to any History, which is not Scripture) affirm,
that the Angel of the Lord carried Habbakkuk out of Judea into Babylon by the
hair of the head.

Now, why must Christ be thus carried by Satan?

Answ. 1 It was not against the will of Christ, but willingly he puts himself
into the hands of the Devil, to pluck us out of his hands. 2 It was not
impotency or weakness of Christ, but power and resolution, who would not
recoil, nor shun any place where Satan would appoint for his assault, or would
carry him, being as well the God of the Mountains as of the Valleys. Here
therefore we must not admire the power of Satan, but the patience of Christ,
that suffered himself to be carried of the Devil, being it tended to the
greater confusion of Satan, and the glory of his own victory. 3 Our blessed
Lord would be tempted in all things like unto us, that as a careful Head he
might sympathize with his members. God for the trial of his children, sometimes
suffers Satan to have power even over their bodies: and therefore Christ to
sanctify this affliction to his members, would suffer even his own blessed body
for a while in the hands of Satan. 4 What marvel if Christ suffered himself to
be carried by the Devil to temptation, that suffered himself to be carried by
his instruments to execution? How was he haled and carried by the Devils limbs
from place to place, from Annas to Caiaphas, from him to Pilate, from him to
Herod, from him to Pilate again, and from him to the place of execution? Satan
in himself might as well carry his body into Jerusalem to be tempted, as his
limbs carry it out of Jerusalem to be crucified; and as well might he suffer
Satan to lead him into the mountain, and tempt him, as his instruments to lead
his body unto Mount Calvary to kill him.

Use 1. Consider the wonderful love of God to mankind, who would give his only
Son, and the Son of his love, to such abasement, to deliver him not only into
the hands of Satan's instruments, to mock, to spit upon him, to buffet, yea, to
condem and kill, but to deliver his blessed body into his own hands, to carry
and recarry at his Pleasure. Add hereunto the wonderful love of the Lord
Jesus, who was a willing patient in the hands of the Devil himself. He knew it
was the will of his Father, and therefore submitted himself unto it. He knew
it was a part of that whole Righteousness, which he was to fulfill, and
therefore he resists not. He knew it to be as great an indignity as never
could be the like; yet for our sakes he is well content with it.

Now as Christ was content, because he loved us, thus to be tossed of Satan
here, and of his instruments afterward, so let us show or return our love to
him. If we be tossed by Satan, or by his instruments, for Christ's sake, as the
Saints have been, from Prison to Prison, we must be contented: our Love to
our Lord must help us to swallow it, and not shrink from him. Consider, we may
be in the hands of the Devils instruments, but he was in the Devils own hands
for us: this would make us shrink.

Use 2. Observe hence, That the work of our redemption, though free to us, yet
cost Christ dear. He must be not only in the hands of Judas to betray him,
of the Jews to scoff him, of Pilate to condemn him, and of the Soldiers to
crucify him; but personally in the hands of the Devil to tempt him. And had not
Christ been thus, and worse than thus, in the hands of the Devil, we had never
been gotten out of his hands. Here take we notice of the execration of our
sins, and the woefulness of our estate: our sins put him into Satan's hands, he
must put himself in our place or stead, before we can berescued.

Use 3. Observe The wonderful power of our Lord Jesus, that being in the bands
of the Devil, can come out safely: nay, his mighty power shines herein, that by
his own coming into Satan's hands he brings us out, an unlikely and contrary
means, but such as by a divine power prevails for himself and all his members.
Could any other but he work Satan's greatest disadvantage by offering him the
greatest advantage? Here is omnipotency to work by contraries, to kill death by
dying, to shut the grave by entering into it, to remove hellish pains by
suffering them, and to pull his members out of Satan's hands by putting himself
in. The Philistims desired but to get Sampson into their hands, and prevailed:
but here is an invincible Sampson, his enemy cannot hold him.

Use 4. Hence we see that Satan may have power over the bodies of men, God
permitting him, to carry them as he lists, and grievously to afflict them,
as we see in Job. That Satan can transport the bodies of Witches, all
Histories record. That he can bewitch the bodies of unbeleevers, none deny.
But our example teaches, that even the godly themselves may be bewitched; as
Jobs body was, and the woman of Canaan her daughter, a daughter of Abraham,
Matthew. 15.22. For if the Devil has power here over the Body of Christ himself,
he may also over his members. Many presume upon the strength of their faith
and graces, that Satan can have no power over them, and they defye him: But
have thou more strength of Faith and Grace than Christ had, over whose body
Satan had power for a time to carry and recarry.

Object. Witches have assaied to bewitch such and such, but have confessed
their faith to be so strong as they could not prevail.

Answ. They allege a false cause to feed the former delusion: for the true
cause of their not prevailing is Gods restraint, not the strength of faith.

Use 5. Here is a ground of comfort, if the Lord permit the bodies of his elect
to Satan's disposal, it is no argument (suppose a man be bewitched or possessed)
that a man is not then the child of God: For 1 Christ was as dear unto God now,
being in the Devils hands, as before. 2 Christ was safe enough now in the hands
of the Devil, and so are all they that are in Christ. He was no less in his
fathers hands now than before. 3 He was not left in the hands of the Devil, but
permitted for a time of trial and temptation: So it is no argument of final
delivery up to Satan, when the child of God is for a time delivered into his
hands to exercise him. 4 It is rather an argument of Gods child, and conformity
with Christ, to be maligned of Satan and vexed by the Devil. Satan may winnow
and sist Gods children, but their faith through Christ's prayer shall not fail,
and the gates of Hell shall not prevail.

Verse. 6. If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: For it is written,
etc.
NOw after those three former circumstances, which contained the preparation to
this second temptation, we come to the temptation it self; which consists of 1
The assault; 2 The repulse. The assault contains, 1 The ground of it, If thou
be the Son of God. 2 The matter and scope of it, cast thy self down. 3 The
argument enforcing it, For it is written, etc.

1 The ground (If thou be the Son of God) is the same with the former: which
shows, 1 Satan's importunity and violence, 2 His subtilty: by often making
question of it he will see if he can yet bring Christ to make it a question. 3
His malice against Christ, laying still his greatest forces against his says,
which was the greatest moat in his eye: dealing herein like an experienced
Soldier, who seeing a Town or Fort in any hope to be won, will not away at
first repulse, but will assay it again and again with new assaults. Whence we
may learn, that,

Doct. Satan will not stick to urge the same thing often, if thereby he may
advantage himself, or disadvantage us. With how many new messages and devises
did he urge Balaam to curse the people of God? Still he changes places, but
all is one temptation, to curse the people of God. By how many means did Satan
by himself, by Jobs friends, and his Wife, seek to withdraw him from his
confidence in God, bringing a number of several arguments, and all to prove him
an Hypocrite? For that was the foot and burden of all their discourses.

1 It may be the circumstances of time or place may yield him some advantage,
as here he thought the Pinnacle fitter than the Wilderness: Balaak thought the
top of Pisgah more commodious perhaps for Balaam to curse Israel in, than the
high places of Baal, Numb. 23.14. compared with 22.41.

2 Sometimes our disposition is more secure and remiss, especially having
out-stood and overcome a temptation; and then Satan comes again, and by the
same temptation (not finding us the same men) suddenly surprizeth us. Wherein
he deals with us as David with the Amalekites, who having took a great spoil
from him and his wives, they fell to eat, and drink, and dance, and lay
scattered because of the prey; In this security David comes upon them; and
recovered all, and they lost more than they had gotten. So deals Satan with us;
when we grow secure (after we have prevailed) he wins more than before we
had gotten.

3 Sometime the thing, which Satan would win from us, is so necessary, so
excellent, as if he get not that, he can gain nothing at our hands. This
makes him renew the same assault, as here; the faith of Christ had been a sweet
morsel, and, if he gets not this, he gets nothing: So our faith is so
precious, as he still aims at it, because he knows if he overthrows this,
we are as branches without a root, withering and dead, soldiers without a
shield.

Use 1 Look for the same temptation again and again. The fencer having had a
shrewd wound, will not easily lie open in that part again. The Citizens, who
have stood out a siege, will survey the places most battered, where the enemy
had his strongest hope of entry, and will most fortify them against another
time.

Use 2. Where we are most tempted, know that there is some special grace to
be kept or lost. A thief will not hanker after an empty chest: but if he know
where Jewels or treasure is, he will haunt there.

Use 3. Abandon all doctrine of doubting as Satanical, which Satan is much and
often in, both against Christ and his members: And no marvel, seeing doubting
warreth against says, by which only Christ is apprehended, and heavenly life
and heat kept in us. But of this before.

Cast thy self down]

II. Now follows the matter and scope of the temptation, and the dart it self
which is thrown at Christ. The scope of Satan is, 1 To bring Christ to
presumption, that seeing he will needs trust in his Fathers providence and
care, he assaies if he can make him trust too much; and seeing he will be
so confident, if he can bring him to vain confidence: as if he should say, If
thou, because thou art the Son of God, can live without bread; upon the same
ground thou can go down without stairs. And both Satan's allegation of
Scripture, and our Saviors answer, show that this was the principal aim of the
Devil.

2 To fasten upon Christ vain glory, as well as vain confidence: as if he
should say, Thou shall have great honor, and every man will believe, if thou
by this miracle show thy self the Son of God: to this purpose I have fitted the
place where is greatest resort, and where the Son of God ought especially to
make himself known: For where should the Son be made known, if not at his
Fathers house? Satan knew he had overcome the first Adam by a temptation of
vainglory, and now he assaulteth the second: Ye shall be gods: and Thou
shall be known to be the Son of God, if by flying in the air thou can come
down without hurt.

3 To bring him to tempt God, and try whether he be so powerful as to save
him in such an attempt, whether so true of his word, as to keep him, and
whether the Angels did diligently watch him, and bear him up, as their
commission was.

4 Satan intended directly to kill him, being a manslayer from the beginning.
For every way the dart intended his destruction, if he should cast himself
down; for thus Satan thought, If he cast down himself, and kill himself, then
he is not the Son of God, and so I shall gain him: Or, if he cast down
himself, and not kill himself, yet shall I make him both disobey God in
tempting him, as also obey me. Thus either way Satan makes sure of his prey.

5 Satan had yet a further fetch, which made him so bestir himself, seeking in
Christ's downfall, our utter ruin, disgrace, and destruction. Strike off the
head, all the members with that blow are slain. The bent of all Satan's
temptations against the Head, is against all the Members. Out of the same
ground Satan raises a clean contrary temptation to the former. In the former,
he moves Christ to diffidence and despair; in this, to presidence and
presumption. In the former, he would have Christ use unlawful means; in this,
to reject all means, even lawful. In the former, he persuades him to distrust
where God had promised; in this latter, to trust where God had not promised. In
the former, that bread was absolutely necessary; here, that a ladder and means
of going down, were not necessary at all: as if he should say. Thou say
that God is able to uphold thee being his son, without means; go too, let us
see how true that is. If he can ordinarily, and extraordinarily preserve thee,
then, Cast thy self down headlong from this pinnacle: for being the son of God,
thou shall be sure to be preserved safe without hurt.

Doct. Whence Observe, That the Devil in tempting men, labors to bring them to
extremes: And when he cannot prevail in one, he would fasten on them the
clean contrary sins. If he can get Christ, because he is the son of God,
either to contemn his Fathers providence, as in the former; or to presume on
the same, as in this temptation, either will please him, 2 Cor. 2.10. the
Apostle shows, that this is one of the wyles and stratagems of Satan, by
clean contrary ways to destroy the Church: either by too much lenity, which
let fall the censures of the Church, so as the incestuous person was not at all
corrected; or when they began to use too much rigor and severity, forgetting
the rules of Christian meekness and charity. And in the incestuous person
himself, it will please him well, either that he go on without all remorse of
his sin, and the Church not meddle with him; or that by the severity of the
Church, he be swallowed up of sorrow. In regard of both which the Apostle
says, We are not ignorant of his wyles. Act. 14.11.19. when Paul and Barnabas
came to Lycaonla, to preach and publish the Gospel, observe Satan's wyle in the
people; either they must receive them as Gods, and sacrifice unto them out of
blind zeal and devotion, at which the Apostles rent their clothes; or else
they must take them and stone them, as they did Paul, and drew him out of the
City, supposing he had been dead, ver. 19. Matthew. 21.9. when Christ came
riding to Jerusalem, multitudes flocked after him, spread their garments in the
way, cut down boughs to strew therein, and cried Hosanna, he was the son of
David, the blessed one that came in the Name of the Lord; The people said, it
was Jesus, the Prophet of Nazareth, and all the City was moved: But before
night, Satan had them in another extremity: such was the envy of the Scribes
and Pharisees, that Christ was either glad to fly the City that night; or the
fear of the people, that none durst entertain and lodge him: verse. 17. so he
left them, and went into the Town of Bethania, and lodged there. And within few
days after, all cried, Crucify, Crucify.

1 This comes to pass, because Satan is contrary to himself; Cor. 11.14. He
appeared in the shape of a serpent to Eve, in the shape of a Prophet to Saul.
Sometime this crooked serpent can deny Christ to be the Son of God, as here;
and sometimes preach him so to be, Mark 1.24.

2 His dexterity and sliness is another cause, whereby he can make one ground,
and that a good and true one, to serve to rear up two extreme evils, in such
cunning manner, as he was in hope to deceive the wisdom of God himself
thereby: for here out of Gods word, that Christ was his Son, he infers two
contrary conclusions, both contrary in themselves, and both contrary to Gods
word.

3 He knows, there is but one good and strait way to heaven, that the Lord
has commanded us to walk in that way without turning to the right or left
hand, that he has placed the virtue in the mean: and the refore he cares not
in which extreme he can thrust us, so as we keep out of that mean appointed.
He hates nothing but virtue and grace, which God loves.

4 He knowing the propensity and inclination of our corrupt nature (which
desires to know no mean, but is rather disposed to any vice in extremity, than
to rest in obedience unto Gods Commandment) fits us according to our
inclination, and casts us first in one extreme, then in another, and holds us
there where we best please our selves. Hence we account extremes virtues.

5 Many are the by-waies that lead to hell on all hands, there being but one
truth: and the Devil carries such incessant malice to man, that he cares not
in which of them a man come to hell, so he come at length.

Use. Beware then of Satan's subtlety, of his contrariety and extremities. In
matters of Gods worship, his scope is to make a man either profane, and cast
off all care of Religion; or if men will not be drawn from some devotion, then
he seeks to make them superstitious, in which extreme he holds the blinded
and devout Papists, who worship, both false gods, and the true God with a false
and vain worship. Act. 17. the Apostle having charged the Athenians with
superstition, he adds this reason, because he saw an Altar to an unknown
God. The same of those, who will worship God in devices, which he never
commanded, and place it in things which indeed hinder it. And so some hate
Popery, but not profaneness. Satan aims also at the Minister, to make him idle
and negligent in preaching, and is well pleased with that; because where vision
fails, people perish. But if he cannot hold a man in idleness, then he seeks
to get him to Preach, either of pride, or envy, or flattery, or for preferment,
or vainly and unsoundly; and then the more he preaches, he likes him never
the worse; or maliciously against good men, and good ways; and then he
preaches nothing else but what Satan (if he must needs preach) would do.

In hearing the word, he would first have men slack of all conscience of doing
or obeying, that hearing their Masters will, and not doing it, their stripes
may be the more. If he cannot do that, but sees a man make conscience of his
ways, then he will make him scrupulous, and make needless questions of every
thing; and to hinder his peace, he will make more sins than ever God made.

In judging of ones own estate, he will make a man believe that God never
elected such a wretch as he, he never had truth of grace, all is hypocrisy,
God never loved him; so many sins, so great falls, such unworthiness as never
was in any child of God. On the contrary, if faith withstand this temptation,
then comes pride in stead of former dejection, and makes him think his election
so sure, as though he take all unlawful liberties, he shall be saved; oh the
Son of God cannot do amiss, nor the Father hate him.

Sometimes to destroy boldness of faith he will suggest, that sin is so great
in such and such circumstances, as it cannot be forgiven; now the heart is
heavy and lumpish, and has no cheerfulness in God. But this being a little
blown over, he will bring the same man by degrees, to think what a fool he was;
for his sins now are not so great, so dangerous, as others be, nor himself so
great a sinner: and now the sadness of sin being shaken off, he grows merry,
and too too light, forgetting all his former heaviness.

In the course of life, he gets beyond many in these extreme courses. In
spiritual things, numbers of men are held in a profane and wicked scorning of
religion, of Preachers, and Professors, whose names they cannot abide. Some of
these are sometimes called out of the snare of the Devil, and then Satan is in
a contrary corner, he will have them zealous, but not according to knowledge:
If the Master will not send his servants to pluck up all the tares before
harvest, they will stand no longer in the field of the Church, but grow
resolute in schism and separation.

In Civil things, how many examples of men have we extremely covetous in their
youth, but prodigal and voluptuous in extremity in their age; and so on the
contrary, and in diverse other instances?

Rules to avoid these extremities of Satan.

1 Look we still to the word, which points us our way for the warrant of our
actions, and the manner of doing them, and says, This is the way, walk in it,
Isa. 30.21. 2 Watch we the fickleness of our nature, which may be seen in the
Barbarians, Act. 28.4, 6. who accounted Paul a God and a Murderer, at one time.
3 Consider we what it is that we are eagerly set upon, and suspect it, because
our nature is to be in extremes, and Satan's hand is likely in it to set it
forward. Never are we so violent for Gods Kingdom, as for the world.

Cast thy self down.]

In the scope of this temptation, which was to presumption (for the allegation
following would persuade him, that God would preserve him whatsoever he did,
though he threw himself from the pinnacle:) we learn this point of instruction,
that,

Doct. Satan does incessantly labor to draw men unto presumption, and
vainglory, as here he did the Head. And this presumption in a word, is nothing
else but a vain confidence, that we are this or that, or can do this or that,
without any word or ordinance of God. A vain hope, without warrant, is the very
being of presumption.

1 Samuel 4.3. Israel went to war against the Philistims, and were slain about
four thousand men: but they would make another onset more warily, (as they
thought) than before: they would send for the Ark from Shilo to save them; and
when it came into the Host, all Israel gave a shout, that the earth rang of it,
presuming that now they were safe enough: But all this was done of their own
heads, and without warrant; and therefore God discomfited them with an
exceeding great slaughter of thirty thousand footmen; and the Ark (wherein
they were so vainly confident) was taken, the Priests Hophni and Phineas slain,
Eli breaks his neck, and such a confusion there was, that the Ark never came at
Shilo more.

Numb. 14. After the men were sent to search the Land of Canaan, and had
returned and told the Israelites, that the Land was good and fat, but the walls
reached up to Heaven, and there were Sons of Anak, Giants, then the people
murmured and distrusted: But, the sentence of the Lord passing against them,
that they should wander forty years in the Wilderness, according to the forty
days in searching, till that age were all wasted, none of which should come
into the Land, except Caleb and Joshua, verse. 40. then they up betimes in the
morning, and they were ready against the Word of God to go; Moses forbids
them, tells them God was not with them; yet forty four presumed obstinately to
go, and were pitifully consumed.

2 King. 14.10. Amaziah King of Judah, having gotten a notable Victory against
Edom, presuming of Gods hand and help with him, but not asking God counsel,
would also make war against Israel, but unhappily, as such attempts prove;
for he was overcome, and Jehoash King of Israel took Amaziah, and broke down
Jerusalems wall, and spoiled the house of the Lord, and the Kings house of all
the Treasure there. Josiah a good King, presuming of Gods assistance without
his word, undertook an unwarrantable war against the King of Egypt: he
might have thought God would help him, who sought the Lord with all his heart
against an open Idolater; but not seeking the Lord in this, he was mortally
wounded, and left his Kingdom in great trouble and confusion, 2 King. 23.

David was overthrown, presuming of his own strength, when he forced Joab to
number his people. And those whom he could never shake with distrust, he has
quite overthrown with presumption.

2 Satan knows, that of all temptations, this is most agreeable to our corrupt
nature. It is pleasing to us, to conceive of Gods mercy and power toward us in
any course our selves affect: whereas temptations to despair are irksome, and
grievous to the flesh, and have not ordinarily so much help from the flesh to
set them forward as this has; and therefore the Devil is sometimes, but not
half so often in them. Again, he knows it goes with our nature and stream, to
presume of our own goodness, strength, and virtue. Peter and the rest of the
Disciples, presumed they should not be offended at Christ, nor forsake, or deny
him: but yet not long after, even they who professed they would dye with him
rather than deny him, lest him, and fled away, Matthew. 26.33, etc.

3 He knows, that presumption is an extreme of faith and hope, and does no less
extinguish faith, than despair, nay more often does foyl it, seeing a man in
despair is more fearful, more watchful, but a presumptuous man is fearless,
careless, and will easily thrust himself upon any adventure, as fearing no sin.

4 Satan knows that presumptions are great sins, prevailing sins, Psalm. 19.13.
a tempting of the Lord (as the answer of our Savior implies) when we leave
his way and means, and will try our own, a sin which does much provoke God to
displeasure: we see it in Peter, who fell fearfully above all the Disciples,
Ubi dixisti, sufficio, ibi desecisti: ubi tibi placuisti, ibi periisti. Aug.
because he was most presumptuous of all; of whom Augustine says, When thou
beginnest to say, I have enough, thou beginnest to fayl; when thou have an
overweening opinion of thy self, thou art undone.

Quest. What may we think of Jonathans action, who himself alone with one man
his Armor-bearer, went out against a whole army of the Philistims? Was it not
a strange tempting of God, and a great disorder in time of pitched battle? 1 Samuel 14.

Ans. It may seem so at first; but indeed it was not temerity in him: for, 1 He
was guided by a secret and strong instinct of Gods Spirit. 2 He had a general
promise, that so long as his people feared God, one should be able to chase a
thousand, and two ten thousand; and therefore took no more with him than one,
being fully assured that God would go out with him, and fight for him, against
Gods and his enemies. 3 He set God before him, with whom he said it was not
hard to save with many or with few, ver. 6. Besides, he knew they were Gods
enemies, saying, Let us go to the uncircumcised. 4 The event was a singular
deliverance of God in that needful time: for God sent a fear among the enemies,
and an earthquake, etc. and armed Jonathan with such a spirit and power, that
the enemies fell before him for fear, even at the sight of him.

Object. But the instinct of the Spirit is strong, and not doubtful, as this
was, verse. 6. It may be the Lord will be with us.

Ans. The first instinct drew him to the place where he was to receive a sign
of confirmation from God: as verse. 9, 10. If they say, Come up, we will go:
(a sign they were lazy:) If they say, Tarry till we come, we will not; that
was a sign of their courage. And this was a certain sign, which strongly
assured him, verse. 10, 12.

Quest. Is it lawful now for any so to do?

Ans. No: it was a singular fact, not to be drawn into example, unless a man
can allege a new promise; seeing all the ordinary promises of Scripture join
the means and end together.

Use 1. We must conceive all this doctrine of Christ's temptations above an
ordinary History, not only relating a thing done, but belonging also to us to
make our use of it, as of other Scripture. And hence let us learn to beware of
these temptations to presumption, which are many ways darted against us, both
in things spiritual and temporal.

I. In spiritual things: 1 When men cast aside the known Word of God, they dare
swear, and curse, and blaspheme; they dare adventure to break the Sabbath, dare
lie, and be unjust, against their conscience; they dare do any thing against
the Justice of God, though they know his will to be contrary: and all because
they presume of Gods mercy, which in their conceit has eaten up all his
justice. But in Job. 19.11. Christ inlargeth the sin of the Jews and Judas,
because it was against their conscience, He that delivered me, has the greater
sin: he was warned, he heard my Doctrine, saw my Miracles, and so did you. And
thou that know thy Lords pleasure, and dare go against it, shall know how
fearful a thing it is to fall into his hands. It thy Conscience condemn thee,
God is greater than thy conscience.

2 Others are persuaded that Christ dyed for all, and therefore they may be the
bolder in their sins; grace has abounded, what though sin abound much more?
Christ has blood enough, and merit enough, what need they fear? But here is
presumption without warrant. For in Christ's death, before it can be fruitful to
us, there must be two things, 1 An actual accomplishment; 2 An effectual
application to the soul in particular. Physic, though never so sovereign, if
it be in the pocket unapplied, does the Patient no good: And if the death of
Christ be applied to thee, it works the death of thy sin: Christ dyed to
abolish sin, and destroy the works of the Devil.

3 Many others are carried along in their presumption, by a deceitful
supposition, that they can come out of their sin, and repent, when they list.
But here is a vain hope without warrant, or else bring me a word that promises
repentance ^o morrow, if this day thou neglect it; this is thy day, thou
know not what the morrow may bring forth. Now thou have life, health, the
world, ministry, and memory; perhaps this is the last day thou shall enjoy all
these. Oh, but I hope to repent: But show thy warrant, else Satan has thee in
the bands of presumption. Besides, it is just with God, that he who will not
take Gods time, should never come to his own. And dangerous it is to put our
souls to adventure till the last hour.

4 Others feed a conceit, that howsoever God deal with others, he will not grow
into such displeasure with them, they are further in his books than so; as
Satan here intimates, that Gods Son may do what he list. But it is a practice
of wicked men, to make covenants with death, and secure themselves, that when
the sword passes through the Land, it shall not come near them, and to cry
Peace, Peace, when the trumpet has sounded war. Again, tell me, thou that
presumest so far to sin, art thou further in Goods Books than Adam in
Paradise, yea than the Angels in Heaven? Do thou excel in holiness those
Worthies of the world, Moses, Aaron, David, Hezekiah? yet these could not
escape when they sinned. Shall the whole world (sinning) be drowned, and shall
thou avoid the deluge? No, no, the highest mountains in the world shall not
save thee: nay, if thou could climb into Heaven, the Angels were cast thence.

5 Others presume of the end, and fly over the means; hope for salvation, but
neglect the means, the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. Oh, but they use means,
they know God and their duty, as well as the best. But it is a presumptuous
knowledge; they think they need no more, they profess they know God, but in
their works deny him, Tit. 1. ult. Yea, they believe all the Articles of
Christian Faith, if we believe them; but it is a dead and vain faith, without
works of Piety and Charity, such as shall profess great acquaintance with God
in the day of judgment, but to whom he shall say, Depart from me ye workers
of iniquity. Yea, but they come to Church, and pray to God as others do, and
hope to be saved in their Religion what ever it is, so long as they mean well:
and what need men be so precise and curious? But these prayers are
presumptuous and abominable, if thou turn thine ear from hearing the Law: and
so long as thou live in thy lusts, and walk not precisely with God in all
his Commandments, (though thou fast, and pray, and afflict thy self never so
much) God will not hear, nor help. Therefore never presume of an harvest
without a seed time; as a man sows, so shall he reap.

6 Others (and a common presumption it is) think themselves in the high way to
salvation; their names are written in the book of life, never to be rased out;
they are beloved of God, and therefore they may do what they will, and leave
undone what they list; they may enjoy their pleasure and liberty, their
salvation depends not upon their works, but upon the election of God that
shows mercy. And thus out of a vain presumption, they are idle and unfruitful
in the work of the Lord, and sometimes grow Libertines and scandalous, and
still God is the same (they say) and loves them. But what can be a more
evident note of Gods displeasure, than to be given up to such a delusion? as
if the goodness of God would not lead his to repentance; or as if mercy were
not with him to be feared. But thou, out of the hardness of thy heart which
cannot repent, treasurest wrath against the day of wrath.

II. In things of this life Satan prevails exceedingly, with this temptation
of presumption.

1 When men conclude of Gods love by temporal things, all which are common to
good and bad. By which sorcery, when they are most cursed, they think
themselves the happiest men under the Sun. Whereas none knows love or hatred
by any thing before him; and as God begins his love at things within, faith,
fear, uprightness of heart, and the like; so must we begin the knowledge of it.
And if we compare Dives estate with Lazarus, Pharaohs with Moses, Simon Magus
with Simon Peter, who said, Money and gold have I none, we shall easily see
what little ground the Scripture affords for such presumptuous conceits.

2 Many of our great men venture to travel into places of idolatry, and think
themselves strong enough against any such temptations as they meet withal but,
I were there zeal indeed, there would be also witness-bearing against such
horrible idolatry; whereas, if they do not act idolatry, they consent to those
that do. We read of some noble and Heroical spirits, stirred up by the motion
of God, to disgrace and witness with their blood against that horrible Idol of
the Mass. 2 It is a just judgment of God on many, who perhaps against their
purpose, are caught in the snare of Popery, and infected with the poison of
their heresies, because they are given up to delusion for want of just
detestation of it.

3 Others are bold-hardy, to run into places infected with the plague without a
just warrant, or sufficient calling, only pretending the strength of their
faith: which is temerity and rashness, often paid home with much sorrow and
bitterness. Has not God tied his care over us, with our care over our selves?
Has not he in ordinary course tied our safety with the means? Act. 27. Except
these abide in the ship, they cannot be saved: and so some upon boards, and
others upon planks, came safe to land. Yet I condemn not that presence with
infected persons, which charity and conscience requires: but in way of ordinary
visitation, it is as unsafe for us to go to them, as for them to come amongst
us, and a tempting of God.

4 Some are so bold-hardy, as to venture upon the dangerous places which are
given by God to be possessed of the Devil, and (as if they were Exorcists)
will adjure the Devil, and out-dare him: and this they think to be strength of
faith. Which is indeed a folly, and extreme presumption, often repayed as it
was in the sons of Sceva, Act. 19.16. who undertaking to adjure the Devil
(wanting a calling, commission, and every thing but presumption) were driven
away, rent, and wounded. Others are of mind, they can never be bewitched, nor
all the Devils in hell cannot touch them, their faith is so strong. But that is
a presumption, seeing no man can absolutely assure himself he shall be free
from Satanical molestation. Christ could not be free, whose faith is as strong
as thine.

Cast thy self down:]

Here be in these words three things further to be considered: 1 The action,
which the Devil would effect, the casting down of Christ. 2 The agent, not the
Devil, but Christ himself must do it, Cast thy self. 3 Luke adds, from hence,
where means of safety were.

Doct. 1 All the travel of the Devil, is to cast down Christ, and in him all
mankind. The estate of the Church is militant while it is here below, and the
battle is maintained between Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his
Angels, Rev. 12.7. and therefore as in a battle, the contrary part by all the
power and policy it can, seeks to cast down and overthrow, not the Captain
only, but all the adversary power, and discomfit the whole Host: so is it here.

To clear this point, we must know there be three estates from whence Saan
has ever sought to cast men down.

1 From the estate of innocence and grace created. Adam was no sooner set up in
this happy and glorious estate, but Satan cast him down. And from this pinnacle
we are all cast down in him. The second Adam himself was sundry ways assayld
in these temptations, and sundry others, to be cast down also from the same
most innocent estate: which had been the casting of us all, not out of the
earthly Paradise with Adam, but a casting down from heaven unto hell.

2 From the estate of regeneration and grace renewed. Satan's continual labor
is, either to keep men under condemnation from the state of grace, or to cast
them down (if it were possible) from that estate, to which they are by Christ
restored. He works effectually in the sons of disobedience, by hardening
their hearts, blinding their minds, and leading them hood-winkt at his
pleasure to damnation, 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be now hid, it is hid to them
that perish, in whom the God of the world has blinded their minds, that the
light of the glorious Gospel, which is the image of God, should not shine unto
them. And for the elect, he sets upon them false Prophets and seducers: he is
incessant in most malicious tentations, by which he soileth them often in foul
manner: and if he cannot cast them down from their estate in Christ, yet he
often casts them down from the comfort of it, both by inward and outward
sorrows and persecutions. Rev. 12. the Dragon, when he cannot kill the woman,
and her seed, he will cast out of his mouth waters like a flood to drown them:
and if that prevail not, he will stir up war with the remnant of the seed,
which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

3 From the Pinnacle of their outward estate or office, which they hold in the
Church or Commonwealth: for so he did here with Christ; when he had gotten
him to the Pinnacle, he thought to get him down easily: At least he will do
his best to cast him down, for he should fall with witness.

First, If he see a man on the Pinnacle of the Temple, a teacher in the Church,
listed up above others, in gifts or place, he will leave no stone unturned to
cast him down: for he knows, that (as if he had here cast down Christ, he
had cast down with him all his members, so) if he can cast down an eminent
Teacher, he casts down with him as many as depend upon him. And here no
Teacher can secure himself, if he were in place above all the ministry of the
New Testament: nay, the higher the pinnacle, the more slippery and dangerous to
fall. Judas his place was an higher place than any ordinary minister of the New
Testament stands upon: but yet how fearfully was he cast down by the Devil,
who put it in his heart, and prevailed first for the betraying of his Master,
and then the hanging of himself? how did the Devil seek to winnow as wheat,
the rest of the Disciples, that stood on the same battlements, who had as
certainly been cast down, but for the power and prayer of their Master, Luke
22.31.

How strongly may we clear this truth, if we observe one experience, which
all the ages of the world have confirmed? namely, that the Devil has ever
striven to set men on the Pinnacle of the Temple, to cast them down, and the
Church in them. How has he by wicked means, as flattery, money, and
corruption, advanced them into the highest places and pinacles of the Church,
whom he might use as his chief Agents to ruinate and bane the Church? as the
false Prophets in the Old Testament, that would ever with the Squirril build
and have their holes open to the sun-side, ever keep in with Princes, and sing
sweetly to the present times; As also the false Apostles that would suffer
nothing for Christ, but under a color of preaching Christ, abolish Christ and
his doctrine, taught and maintained by the true Apostles. How does the Church
complain, that she was never so wounded as by the watchmen who also robbed
her, and took away her veil from her? Look into the Records of fifteen hundred
years and we shall not read almost of any persecutions of the Church, but
raised and with all heat pursued by proud, persecuting, and Antichristian
Bishops, who kept the chief places in the Church. And ever since the Bishop of
Rome has been by the Devil lifted up into the highest Pinnacle of the Temple
his casting down and fall into so many monsters of doctrine and manners, has
been in this Christian World the ruin and downfall of so many as whose names
are not written in the book of life. All this comes to pass by the malice of
the Devil, whose tail draws the third part of the stars of Heaven, and casts
them to the earth, Rev. 12.4. Against these stars and lights of the World he
bends his forces: If he can cast them down to earthliness, or service of any
lust, he has his desire.

Secondly, If he see a man upon the Pinnacle of his own house, he will (if he
can) cast him down thence, and for this purpose will lay his plots and objects.
David walking on his battlements, was soon cast down thence by the sight of
Bathsheba. Especially if a man be a Magistrate or Governor, standing on the
pinnacle of authority, the Devil will cast him down, if by any means he can:
His example will cast down a great many with him, he stands high, many eyes
are upon him, and so many see him. If Rhehoboam commit Idolatry, all Judah will
sacrifice under every green hill. If the Magistrate be fearful, negligent, or
any way noted for vice, those under him will take it for a License.

Rev. 12.13. When the Dragon saw that he was cast out into the earth, he
persecuted the woman. He would have and hold every man under his own
condemnation.

2 Because of the extreme corruption of his nature, who is pleased with desire
of hurt and mischief, hating God and his Image with deadly and perpetual
hatred, a Murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8. that is, the first Murderer,
and the author of murder, clean opposed to God, who is the first goodness, and
author of all goodness, life in himself and in his creature. It cannot be
showed, that ever God erected any good or excellent thing in the Church or
Commonwealth, but Satan out of the abundance of his wickedness, did one way or
other seek (even in the beginning of it) the corruption or destruction of it.
He presently destroyed Gods Image in our first Parents, presently corrupted
Gods worship in Cain, and in the rest of the posterity of the Fathers before
the flood, till all flesh had corrupted their ways. When God had given his Law,
and set up his pure Worship, he presently cast his people down within forty
days before the Call, and after before other Idols of the Nations, which was
their destruction. So soon as ever Christ was called to his Office, he must
either cast himself down from the pinnacle, or cast himself down to worship
Satan, as we shall see in the next temptation. And as a Serpent never vents any
thing but poison, so Satan never speaks in other language but the issue and
effect is, Cast thy self down. From this corruption of his nature, he is called
(...), the wicked one: and he that can fill his agent with wickedness (as
Elimas was called the Child of the Devil, Quod efficit tale, Illud ipsum est
magis tale.
because he was full of subtilty and mischief, Acts 13.10.) must needs be full
himself.

Use 1. Seeing then Satan's whole drift is to cast us down, note what a
wonderful mercy of God it is, that we stand and are upheld, especially such as
stand upon higher pinacles and places than other, against whom he redoubleth
his forces. Ye stand by grace, says the Apostle. It is not the goodness of
nature, yea if it were clothed with innocence, that can support us, no if it
were Angelical: It is the grace and strength of our invincible Captain, that we
are not every moment cast down to Hell, seeing there wants neither skill, nor
malice, nor diligence in our adversary, no nor advantage or inclination in our
selves. Let us therefore acknowledge, that by the grace of God we are that we
are, and say with the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.12. I thank God, which has made me
strong.

Use 2. We must learn from this incessant industry of the Devil to cast us
down, to be so much the more watchful against him.

Quest. How shall I do this?

Ans. By observing these rules. Rules.
1 Take heed thou suffer him not to lead thee to a Pinnacle: for although our
Lord and Savior, being filled with the Spirit, and lead by the Spirit, gave
him leave to set him on the Pinnacle, yet must not thou follow him thither, who
art not so fenced or furnished. For he never sets any on a Pinnacle, but (as
Christ here) to cast him down. And then the Devil sets the man on a Pinnacle,
when by wicked or base Arts, a man rises to wealth, or honor, or any public
place in the Church or Commonwealth: he will willingly lend his help and hand,
thus to exalt and set up men, but as the Hangman helps the Thief up the
Ladder, to turn him off with a break-neck. Haman was advanced to great honor;
but was it not to his greater ruin and downfall? Did not he help up Herod by
pride and ambition, almost above the Pinnacle? when he spoke, Oh, it was the
voice of God, and not of a man. But was it not to cast him down lower than all
his people, to be presently eaten with Lice. He sends up Nebuchadnezzar to the
pinnacle of his Palace, and that was great Babel which he had built for the
honor (not of God, but) of his Kingdom; and by the might (not of God, but) of
his own power. But the issue was to be cast down among beasts, and not a sit
companion for Princes or his people, till he knew who the Lord was.

From Princes to Counselors. Achitophel was on an high Pinnacle, when his
counsel was accepted as an Oracle of God: but the end was, that when it was
despised, he should cast himself down, and hang himself.

From them to their inferiors, but rich and great. David saw the wicked man in
great prosperity, on an high Pinnacle, strong, spreading like a green Bay Tree:
but suddenly he was cast down, and he could not find where he had been, Psalm.
37.35. The like of the rich man in the Parable, Thou fool, this night shall
they fetch thy soul, etc.

From these to great Churchmen. Judas was set in the Apostleship, Satan
finding him there, cast him down to Hell* he went to his place, so woeful a
spectacle as beseemed the son of perdition, and the betrayer and murderer, of
the just and innocent Son of God. How many examples of men have we, who out of
pride, and ambition, flattery, and corruption, have advanced themselves into
chief places, and as the times called on them, against their consciences were
cast down into horrible practices against the Church, and after into woeful
outward misery, as Cardinal Poole, Gardener, Bonner, and the like? Compare
their lives with their deaths.

Others raising themselves by multiplying, chopping, and engrossing of Livings,
have been cast down from their gifts, their reputation, their profiting of the
Church, from their sobriety and civility; and some from the outward Wealth they
so lay about them for so eagerly, and dyed Beggars.

-- Lucri bonus est odor ex te Qualibet -- Juvenal.
Other ordinary men are raised by Satan to a great state of wealth, as Usurers,
Oppressors, and unjust persons, that think all savor of gain sweet, though it
be never so filthy, on Gods Sabbaths, out of Laborers lives and bellies. But
Satan has cast them down already into the Curse of God, and only the execution
of the sentence awaiteth them. Others stand upon the pinnacle of Pride, and
Satan sets every man upon this pinnacle if he can, as knowing that pride goes
before a fall. Did not he suggest to our first Parents, that they should be as
Gods, if they are the forbidden fruit? that by lifting them up in their own
conceit, he might cast them down from their happiness? It was the same
suggestion, which he would here fasten upon the Son of God: If thou will here
cast thy self down, all Jerusalem must needs confess thee to be the true and
undoubted Son of God, and honor thee accordingly.

Tim. 2.1. My son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. Train thy
self to humility; for God gives grace to the humble, and ever humbles his
children that he may exalt them. Waters stand in valleys, not on mountains.
Joseph was raised out of Prison to be the second man in the kingdom. David was
by little and little raised, from a Shepherd to a Warrior, from thence to a
Kings Son, from thence to a Kingdom. Mordecai was first in danger of his life,
and in great distress, and afterward his head was lifted up. This humility, 1
will not suffer a man to affect pinacles, as seeing their danger, but content
himself in a mean estate, which is safest: 2 It will make a man rejoice rather
in Gods humiliation, than in Satan's advancing; the former tending to
exaltation, the latter to ruin and downfall.

plummets of a Clock, by their own weight ever tending downward, and Satan
often hangs his weight upon them; and therefore we must every day be winding
them up. 4 By fostering, nor quenching the motions of the Spirit.

Thy self]

Quest, Why does not the Devil cast Christ down? Did he want power, who had
now carried and set him on that dangerous pinnacle, or did he want will to
throw him down?

Ans. There wanted no will in Satan any way to mischief our Lord, to which
purpose he strained all his wits in these temptations: but, 1 He wanted power
and strength, being bound in chains, and bridled by God, so as it is as far
as he can now go, to tempt Christ to cast down himself. His Commission went no
further than to carry his holy body to the pinnacle, and there set it. 2 For him
to have cast down Christ, and Christ to be a mere Patient, had not furthered
him a whit in his drift and scope: he intended to bring Christ to sin, and if
Christ cannot be gained to be an Agent, or a voluntary Patient, he cannot sin.
Besides, he specially intends to bring Christ to the sin of presumption, in
throwing himself down, which he could not effect by his casting him down,
unless himself (bearing himself upon his Fathers protection) can be brought to
cast himself down. 3 Although afterward Satan had power by his instruments to
put our Savior Christ to death, yet now he could not by casting him down the
pinacles do it, no more than the people could, when they attempted to cast him
down the hill: for his hour was not yet come, he had not yet done that great
work, which he came into the world to do, and the hour for the power of
darkness was not yet. Hence he is a suter to Christ to cast down himself.

Doct. 2. Satan can tempt and persuade us, but he cannot force us to sin: or,
He cannot cast thee down, unless thou cast down thy self. He sets Christ on
the pinnacle, he cannot throw him down, but persuades him to throw down himself.
He crammed not Eve with the Apple, nor gave it into her hand, but persuaded her
to reach and eat it. He did not kill Saul himself, but persuaded him to cast
down himself upon his own sword. He did not put the halter about Judas his
neck, nor was his Hangman, but was of his counsel, and made his own hands his
own executioners: therefore it is said, Acts 1.18. (...), factus praeceps, he
threw down himself from an high place, not only of his Office, but from off the
Tree whereon he hanged himself.

1 This comes to pass by Gods restraining power,

2 No man is hurt but from himself, Dico peccatum non esse, si non propria
voluntate peccetur: August. contra Forum. Manich.
and out of the voluntary inclination of his own mind unto evil; which Satan
knows well enough, and therefore he ever works on our corruptions, and cannot
poison us, unless either he get us to drink of his cup, or entoxicate us by
our own.

3 God has made the will of man as a fountain of all humane actions, whether
Natural, Civil, Moral, or Divine: and herein has given a man a kind of power
under God over himself, by investing every man's will with this natural
property, that his will is free from co-action and force: for a man to say,
Voluntas cogi non potest. Arist.
the will can be forced, is to speak a contradiction, and as much as to say,
that the will in the same time and thing can be willing and nilling; which if
it could be forced, were true.

To understand this better, we must know, that there be only two ways to
move, change, or bend the will. First, from an internal agent or principle, and
this is twofold: 1 God himself the Author of all natural faculties, in whose
hand the heart of Kings, and all men, be to turn as he pleases, as the
River^. 2 The man himself to whom God has committed this will, who has power
to dispose it to this or that object: as Adam in innocence had freedom in
things Divine and Humane, and now we his posterity in the latter. Secondly, by
external movers; and these are either, 1 The natural object of the will, which
is some good so apprehended in the understanding* and strongly urged upon the
will; or 2 some passions, Lusts, Affections, and Appetites, which incline the
will this way ^or that.

Quest. How then is it said, that the Devil filled Ananias his heart to lie to
the Holy Ghost, Act. 5.3. and of Judas, that the Devil entered into him, and
put into his heart to betray his Lord, if he cannot move the will?

Answ. It is not denied, but that something besides God, can move the will: but
the Question is, of the manner. God moves it by his own and absolute power,
even without our selves, and against our selves, as when he changes an heart
of stone into an heart of flesh. But others without us cannot move our hearts,
neither by any proper power that they have over them, nor yet without our
selves first gained unto them; but then they move our wills, when they can
either make us apprehend and understand some Object, or move passion or
appetite, whereby to incline our wills. Thus the good Angels may and do
propound divine truth and good unto our understanding, and move our wills to
embrace it and choose it, but not always with effect, because the power is not
in them, but in our selves. A good Angel admonished Joseph in a dream, by which
his will was bended to provide for Christ and himself. Thus also the Devils and
wicked Angels move the will, by working upon the phantasy and imagination; as
in many Melancholic persons to hurt themselves and others: sometimes by
setting good colors upon evil, so that the understanding apprehending evil in
the case and color of good, may bend the will to it; as Peter in denying his
Lord, thought it good and safe for the present sometimes by raising up
passions, and working in them; as Saul in a passion to cast his spear to kill
his good Son Jonathan, a barbarous and unnatural fact; yet the Devil gau^ed his
will to it, having first raised a cloud of dusty passion to darken his
understanding: and the other Saul in his fury and hot mood to waste and
persecute all that called on Christ: sometimes by stirring up lust and
concupiscence; as David being inflamed with lust, the Devil working on this
corruption, gained his will to those foul facts, which above all blemished him.

As for the examples alleged; thus Peter says, that Satan filled Ananiahs
heart; not that he brought any new wickedness into his heart, but, that which
he found he stirred up, and persuaded his will to play that dissembling part,
for he should carry it away closely and cautelously enough. And thus the Devil
put treason into the heart of Judas: he knew him to be a Covetous wretch; and
had often watched him how he was deceitful in the administration of his
Masters money: now his affection being troubled, and stuffed with Covetousness,
Satan uses this as a means to persuade his will for money to attempt this soul
and barbarous treason.

In all which we see, that our wills are not under the power of the Devil, who
deals with us as wicked men, who when they persuade any evil, infuse none of
their wickedness into us, but only by their speech stir up that which is in our
selves, and persuade us thereunto.

4 It is not enough for Satan's malice and cruelty to bring mischief on the
bodies of men, but the thing he aims at is, to bring guiltiness on their
souls: as our Savior here, I doubt not but he would willingly have killed
him, if it had been in his power to cast him down, as it was to carry him up:
but he had far rather that Christ should do it himself, and so have an hand in
his own death. In Job, Satan was not contented to cast him down, in bringing
misery upon his body and estate, but the thing he aimed at, was Jobs casting
down himself by blaspheming God, that so he might bring guiltiness upon his
soul. And Satan knows, that when he can bring a sinner to give up his will to
his persuasion, his sin is so much the more sinful, because to a voluntary sin
is added, 1 A deliberation. 2 An election of evil, and a preferring it before
good: and 3 A willing execution of that which a corrupt understanding has
embraced, and a corrupt judgment and will preferred for some corrupt end.

5 Satan's sliness and usual subtlety in his temptations, shows that his
strength lies in inward persuasion, and not in outward violence: He
insinuates like a Serpent, and pretends great good will, as he, Thou shall
show thy self the Son of God; as though he in earnest sought the honor of
Christ: and, as if he would have bettered Adams estate, he said, Ye shall
be gods. He transforms himself into an Angel of light, and ordinarily deals
with us as with Saul, who, when he saw the Devil himself, he made him believe
he saw Samuel, Gods worthy Prophet.

Use 1. This Doctrine serves to comfort us, considering the impotency of our
enemy. He is a weak enemy, and cannot overcome him who is not willing to be
overcome. He can egg us on to evil, compel us he cannot. Ad malum h^r^^^i
potest, ^ ge^e non potest. Chrysostom.
And as Christ said to Pilate, Thou could have no power over me, unless it
were given thee from above; So Satan can have no power but from God; not over
beasts, Matthew. 8.31. not over wicked men: Ahab a wicked King could not be
deceived, nor set on to ma^e a needless war, till the Lord sealed Satan's
Commission, 1 King. 22.21. And much less over the godly, as we^ see in Job,
till God said, All that he has is in thing hands; till then, neither has nor
any thing he had was in Satan's power. Nay, not an hair of our head falls to
the ground without the providence of our Heavenly Father. And another sound
ground of comfort in, that as he cannot hurt us without the will of our
heavenly Father, so he cannot without our own will: for if he could he would
never be resisted in his temptation whereas we see in Joseph, Job, and by
experience in our selves, that some hellish temptations are by grace, and the
watch over our hearts, repelled and resisted.

Use 2. Hence we see that nothing can do us harm but our own sin: death
without sin is but a gate to life, the Devil a great and cruel enemy, but
nothing so dangerous as our own sin, this slaies us without him, he hurts us
not without this. What reason have we to be in love with sin, while we
profess we hate the Devil, who can do us no such harm? Which must stir up our
watch against our own corruption: for if he plow not with our he^^er, he can
get no advantage.

Use 3. Many having sinned lay the blame on the Devil, who (they say) ought
them a sought, or a shame. But as the Lord said to Cain, so say I to thee, If
thou do evil, sin lies at thy door: and, it is thy sin, not the Devils.

Object. Oh but he tempted me.

Answ. So he did Christ here and had not thou cast down thy self, he could
not have done it. It was indeed the Devils sin, that he beguiled the woman,
and he had his judgment for it: But it was her sin that she was beguiled, and
arraigned, and judged by God for it. It is the Theefs sin to steal thy money,
and he shall be hanged for it: but i^ thou leavest thy money without doors,
and never look after it, it is thy fault and folly, and what could thou
look for else? The Devil is a slye Thief and robber: but he commits not his
robbery as other Thieves and Burglers, he will not break open the door, nor
draw the latch; but, where he finds the door open, and an house prepared and
swept, there he comes and makes spoil, Luke 11.25. And if a man know a rank
Thief, were not he worthy to be robbed that will open his doors, and give him
entertainment! Oh let not us extenuate our sin, or lay the blame on the Devil,
who cannot hurt us without our own weapons. He cannot make us swear, or curse,
or drink, or kill, or break the Sabbath: All that he can do is, to stir up our
corruption, present objects, stir up passion to trouble the judgment, and
persuade or solicit. He can suggest, he cannot force. And therefore do as
David, taking all the blame of our sins upon our selves: when the Devil stirred
him up to number the people, and he came to see his folly, he thought not his
sin less, because Satan moved him, but said, I have done very foolishly: Alas,
these silly sheep what have they done?

Use 4. Take heed of Satan's voice, which is ever to cast thy self down: every
temptation to sin has this voice in it, Cast thy self down: and too too many
hear and yield to the same. Some cast themselves down, by casting themselves
back from God and his truth, forsaking the right way. Thus every Apostate has
cast himself down, and has need of that counsel, Remember from whence thou art
fallen, and do thy first works. Others cast themselves down by falling into a
puddle of base uncleanenesse, as covetousness. drunkenness, swearing, lying,
etc. unbeseeming the place, name, and honor of Christians. Were it not too too
base a dejecting of himself, if a Noble man should sort himself to lie in a
Barn among beggars; or any man to lie in a stye among swine? So for a Christian
to demean himself like a worldling, or Epicure, or Atheist, is as great a
debasement. Others cast themselves down into the pit of despair, when any
sorrow or trouble extraordinary presses or pincheth them. If God cast them
down a little, they cast themselves down immeasuredly, as Cain, Judas: nay,
Gods servants think sometimes, that God has forgotten them, and will not
remember seasonable mercy.

But do thou in all temptations answer Satan thus; No Satan, I know thou can
not cast me down, God (to whom the honor of it is due) be praised for it; and
I will not cast my self down: if God cast me down, I shall rise again, who
only can and will turn his humiliation of me to my exaltation. Psalm. 119.71.


From hence:]

So Luke adds: that is, from the Battlement, which God had straightly
enjoined as a means to keep men from falling, and to prevent danger, Deuteronomy.
22.8. When thou buildest a new house, thou shall make a battlement on thy roof,
that thou lay not blood upon thy house, if any man fall thence. And this was
the manner of the Jews buildings, to build their houses not ridged as ours, but
with a flat roof, as most of our Churches be, and battlements about; and their
roofs thus made, served them to many good purposes, as Josh. 2.6. Rahab brought
the spies up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the stacks of flax
which she had spread upon the roof. Act. 10.9. Peter being in Joppa in Simons
house a Tanner, went up upon the house to pray. Of this kind seemed that house
of the Philistims, which Sampson at his death pulled down, upon the roof of
which, stood three thousand persons to behold while Sampson was mocked.

Doct. 3 Satan seeks especially to draw such to sin, who have most means
against it. As Christ was not set on a pinnacle, which had no stairs to go down
by, but where were stairs: and he must notwithstanding them, cast himself down
headlong. So dealt he with Adam in his innocence, who having all perfections
his soul and body were capable of, yet must he needs reach at the bettering of
his estate: had Adam known any misery yet, his sin had been so much the less,
if he had been enticed unwarrantably to mend his estate; but he did (as the
Parable speaks) set an old patch upon a new garment, which was both idle and
disgraceful. And the means of his sin, was as idle as the end: for, had he not
all the Trees of the Garden, and fruits of Paradise to eat upon? and were not
all else means enough to keep him from one forbidden fruit? If God had
restrained all but one, he had not wronged him: he had furnished him with all
strength against temptation, if he would have used it: he had no manner of
discontent in his estate: yet if he had been overcome in that supposal, to have
enlarged without God his own allowance, his sin had not been in that degree,
and so out of measure sinful, as the having of all these means made it. Who
must deny our Savior Christ, but one of his Disciples? who must betray him but
another? both of them abounding with means to the contrary, having been
advanced by Christ into the high Offices of Apostleship, to be next attendants
of Christ, who heard his Doctrine, saw his Miracles, and were eyewitnesses of
the integrity of his life, yea both specially warned by Christ of those
particular sins, and Peter had professed to dye rather than do it.

1 The malice of Satan is such, as he is not content that men sin, Exodus 32.31.
when Israel had made a Call, Oh says Moses, this people have sinned a great
sin. It was a great, 1 In the kind. Idolatry. 2 In the manner, being against
such means: it was not many days before that, that Moses had received the Ten
Commandments, which themselves heard delivered in such Thunder, Lightning, and
terrible Voice, as made them profess what ever the Lord should command them by
Moses, they would do; and besides, the Ten Commandments thus uttered and
delivered, Exodus 20. in the two and twentieth verse a special addition was
annexed, Ye shall make you no gods, of silver or gold, etc. They had
immediately before received an extraordinary food by Manna, which then they
enjoyed: Moses was in the Mount with God, to receive more Laws for their good:
Aaron was with them to advise them. But against all these and many more means,
they worship a Calf, and so highly provoke God, as after a great slaughter of
men, three thousand in number, 2 Samuel 12.^
Moses hardly obtained pardon for the residue. David's sin was so much the more
heinous, in that he had many Wives of his own, as Nathan in the parable
shows, and makes himself to confess. A rich man had many Sheep and Oxen, and
the poor man had but one Lamb, which ate his morsels with him, and slept in his
bosom, (which was Bathsheba in Uriahs bosom:) and the rich man refused to dress
any of his own Sheep, and slew and dressed the poor man's Sheep. David himself
hearing it, before he knew it to be his own case, could say, As sure as the
Lord lives, he shall dye that has done this: and Nathan said, Thou art the
man. etc. And this sin so provoked the Lord, that the sword never departed from
his house, and his repentance could not cut off that part of the sentence, but
his own son Absalom must defile his Fathers Wives, in the sight of all Israel.

Hence it was also, that our Lord answering Pilate, aggravated the sin of Judas
Joh. 19.11. He that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin: he knew he
delivered an innocent to death, he was warned, he was a friend and familiar,
his sin was a great sin: and so great as God took him in hand, and laid the
burden of it presently upon his soul, and he found no ease but in hanging
himself.

2 Satan knows these sins more trouble and wound the Conscience than other,
because this circumstance lays the sin directly upon our selves, and takes away
excuses; God was not wanting to prevent such; a man cannot say he could not
remedy it, no good means was wanting to him, only he was wanting to himself
and the means. And thus the Lord reasons with his people to bring them to the
sight of their own corruption, Isa. 5.4. What could I do more to my vineyard
which I have not done?

3 Satan knows, that to sin against means is a compound sin, and like to a
complicated disease, hardly cured: for besides the sin, to which a man is
drawn, there is, 1 A neglect of a man's own good: 2 There is a base estimation
of Gods great kindness in offering the means of our good, and consequently, God
himself is despised in the means; yea, there is an unthankful rejecting of
grace offered. And what is further to be done, but to leave such a one as
remediless?

4 Well knows Satan, that God has denounced and executed greater plagues upon
these sins than other, where means were not present. He punished Adultery in
the Law with death, not simple fornication, because one had means to avoid the
sin, the other wanted it. So for Theft, Prove. 6.30. If a Thief steal to
satisfy his soul, because he is hungry, men despise him not; a restitution may
be made, he must not dye; comparing the sin with adultery, in which no
restitution must be made, they must dye the death. Capernaum, which was lifted
up to heaven in respect of the means of Salvation, neglecting those stairs,
cast her self lower into hell than 7 yrus and Sidon, which never had the like
things done in them. Nay God, whose nature is to be merciful, in this case
takes pleasure, and delights himself in severity, Prove. 1.22. Ye have despised
all my counsel, and set my correction at naught, therefore will I laugh in your
destruction.

This doctrine is of great use through the whole life.

Use 1. If where more means be to hinder sin, there sin is aggravated: how
heavy be the sins of our age, who in the means are lifted up above all the
ages of one thousand five hundred years before us? How may the Lord complain of
us, as Hos. 8.10. I have written to them the great things of my Law, but they
have counted it a vain thing? The means that we have, do set our sins in a
far higher degree than were the sins of our fathers. Theirs were in the
night, ours in the day; theirs were ignorances in comparison, ours are
presumptions, of knowledge and set purpose: theirs were errors and sins, ours
are rebellions and obstinacy: they could scarce do any other, we will not:
their ignorance invincible, ours affected. And as our means be greater, so our
judgment and account shall be straighter: for, to whom God gives more, of them
he requires more, Luke 12.48.

Use 2. Content we not our selves, that we have stairs or means, as many who
say they come to Church, hear the Word, receive the Sacrament, have some
measure of knowledge, and be able to speak of religion: seeing the presence of
the means brings Satan more fiercely upon thee, and threatens thy greater
danger, if thou growest not in soundness of Christianity by them. Consider
whether the Scripture be not true, saying, 1 Not the hearers of the Word, but
the doers thereof shall be justified. 2 Knowers of their Masters will, and not
doers of it, shall be beaten with more stripes. 3 Many seem to be partakers of
grace, who are perverters of it, and turn it into wantonness, who are of old
rolled or billed unto condemnation. 4 Many in the day of Judgment shall say
and allege for themselves, We have eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou
have taught in our streets; to whom the judge shall say, I tell you, I know not
whence you are: depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

The Jews had the Ministry of John, of Christ and his Disciples, the Gospel
of the Kingdom preached, which was as Jacobs Ladder, to rise up by the stairs
and staves of it unto heaven: but for all this, because they walked not worthy
of these means, Christ tells them plainly to their faces, that Publicans and
Harlots should go into Heaven before them. And the same shall be said of every
formal Christian, contenting himself with an outward show of goodness, and not
answerable to the means he has, without any inward, or constant change by them.

Use 3. Let us beware of Satan's wyle, neither to neglect means, nor yet to sin
against them.

I In spiritual things, the means of salvation are stairs to Heaven: 1 If thou
be not a member of the Church, and abidest in the ship, thou can not be
saved, Acts 27.31. 2 If being overrun with the disease of sin, thou waitest
not at the Pool wherein and when the Spirit moves and stirs the waters,
thou can not be cured, Joh. 5.4. Refuse the Word and Sacraments, thou
perishest. 3 If God have showed thee, oh man, what is good, and what he
requires of thee, surely to do justly, to love mercy, to humble thy self, and
walk with thy God: if thou cast thy self off these stairs into injustice,
unmercifulness, pride, and profaneness, by this fall thou do break the neck
of thy soul. So when the Lord affords many gracious means within a man and
without: without, the exhortations and precepts of his Word, and the warnings
of his correcting hand; then, 1 Suffer the word of exhortation gladly, let the
word rule thee, sin not against the word by which thou art to be judged. 2 Let
the rod open the ear that was sealed, and correction be thy instruction: it is
a note of blessedness to be chastened, and taught in Gods Law. The Lord is
glad to add this means to let in the former; and if men still fall back more
and more, the Lord casts such persons off.

So when he inwardly uses either checks of Conscience, or else the motions of
his Spirit, sin not against them: for, 1 The voice of thy Conscience must thou
hear one day, therefore suffer it not to go on in accusing thee, but still it
by casting out the core of sin, that makes it so restless and painful. 2 Quench
not the motions of Gods Spirit: for this grieves him, and makes him go away in
displeasure, and then all thy sound comfort is gone with him.

II. In temporal things, sin not against the means. He must eat that must live,
he must work that will eat, sow to reap; he that would avoid a strange woman,
must love his own wife; all the Soldiers and people in the Ship must come safe
to land, but then must they not cast them into the sea, but abide in the ship.
Isa. 37.33. the Prophet in the Lords name tells Hezekiah, that Sennacherib
shall not enter into the City; but if hereupon Hezekiah, should have bid them
set the gates open, would not the Prophet have told him he had betrayed the
City? For a rich man to be an Usurer, or an oppressor, is a greater sin than it
is taken for, because it is against the means: yet who are Usurers else? who
oppressors else? who grind the faces of the poor, who detain the wages of poor
Servants, but they? For a man to break the Sabbath for gain is a great sin, as
appears in the poor man that went out to gather sticks: but how great then is
it in rich men who need not, having much means beyond the present necessity?
and yet they, or their Servants and Workmen, must be gathering sticks to burn
themselves withal in Hell. Who sees not the malice of the Devil here, who will
have the Lords day worldly and wickedly spent, wherein God has set up the
special means to draw men from it?

For it is written.]

HAving spoken both of the ground of this assault, and also of the scope and
matter of it, we come to the third consideration in it, namely, The enforcing
or urging of it by a testimony of Scripture. Satan had persuaded the Son of God
to a most foolish practice: would any mad man or fool cast himself down from an
high place, and pash himself all to pieces at any man's persuasions; and cannot
now the Son of God, the wisdom of his Father, discern danger in this motion?
Satan is too black here, and lales his snare in vain before the eye of that
which has wing. But to hide his blackness, he draws a fair glove over a soul
hand, and assaies to make the case without all danger or absurdity: He has
that to say which the Son of God cannot refuse: He has Scripture to persuade
him; for no reason is comparable to this, to assure the Son of God who must
hear the word of his Father, that there is neither danger, nor unreasonableness
in this motion; nay, there is much good in it: 1 He shall show himself to be
the Son of God: 2 He shall show his affiance in his Fathers word, which has
fully assured him of his Fathers protection: as if he should say, Thou being
the Son of God, may without danger cast thy self down hence; but do not take
it on my word, which perhaps thou may suspect, but take it on thy Fathers
word: If that has any truth in it, there is no danger in my motion: And
because thou shall not think that I speak without book, It is written in thy
Fathers Book; If I had a Psalter here I could show it thee, that he has given
his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee, that thou dash not thy foot against
a stone: and though thou cast thy self down, they shall bear thee up, and save
thee harmless. And if they should fail of their duty, thou being the Son of
God, can sustain thy self by thine own proper power and virtue.

Here consider two things, 1 The general consideration of the allegation, It is
written. 2 The special matter of it, He will give his Angels charge over thee,
etc.

Doct. The Devil can and does allege Scripture to further his wicked
purposes: as here. In his tempting of Eve he made the ground of his temptation
Gods word, Has God indeed said ye shall not dye? In the deluding of Saul, be
took the help of Samuels prophecy, 1 Samuel 28.17. The Lord has done even as he
spoke by mine hand. So his instruments, the false Prophets, pretend the word of
the Lord, as Hanani, Jer. 28.2.

David's voice, nay, the voice of the Spirit of God, speaking in the written
word. He would fain persuade Christ that he is a lover of the Truth, and under
a testimony of Scripture would hide his horns.

Regula cred^ndorum and age^dorum.
2 As hereby himself dissembles holiness, so he would color the matter to
which he tempts us, to be just and lawful: for is not that lawful, which the
word allows? seeing it is the rule of faith and manners.

3 He frames himself according to the disposition of parties with whom he is
to deal: Christ stood much upon Scripture, and would do nothing without
Scripture, and if he cannot draw him by Scripture he shall prevail nothing,
and thus he deals daily with tender consciences, he can bring them to any
thing by a Scripture of his own mis-shaping.

4 This comes to pass by reason of his malice, 1 Against the Scripture which
he seeks to abuse to a contrary end, seeing the Scriptures are written that
we might not sin. 1 John 2.1. 2 Against the godly, to overcome them with no
other than their own weapons: Christ had made the written word his shield, his
sword, he will therefore assay with his own weapon to wound him; and so he
deals with his members.

5 Here is not only Gods permission, but his overruling power: for hereby the
father of lies, against his heart and nature, gives witness to the truth, and
strongly argues it to be the strongest weapon, that has strongest power over
the conscience.

Quest. How does Satan allege Scripture?

Answ. He is Gods Ape; and as God alleges Scripture three ways: 1 by his
Spirit and inward motion, as to Abimelech in a Dream, Genesis 20.3. 2 By his
Ministers and Servants, Angels or men. 3 By his own lively voice, as to Adam:
So can Satan, 1 By suggestion, 2 By his Ministers, who transform themselves as
if they were the Ministers and Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. not
only delivering the word, but also truly. 3 By voice in some assumed body, as
undoubtedly he did to the first Adam, and here to the second.

Use 1. Seeing then this wicked Spirit can and does allege Scripture against
us, it behooves us to try the spirits, whether they be of God or no, 1 John
4.1. not to believe every one that can allege Scripture; for so we might
believe the Devil himself, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. our commandment is to prove all
things, and hold only that which is good. Our president is in Act. 17.11. the
Bereans, when they heard the Apostles, searched whether the things spoken were
so. We take no coin without due trial.

Quest. How shall I try the spirit that brings a sentence of Scripture?

Answ. 1 By diligent study and reading of Scripture, diligently searching out
the truth: for the determination of every truth must be by scripture: Dubiu^^.
and though scripture seem to be opposed to scripture, we must not with
Papists draw determination of matters from scripture: so says the Apostle in
Ephesians. 4.14. Let us not be carried about as children with every wind of doctrine:
how should we do other? but follow the truth in love. Examine the places,
circumstances, antecedents, and consequents, confer with other scriptures to
all which it must agree. 2 Follow and frequent the Ministry, as not content
with the knowledge of the scriptures without the true understanding of them:
Non in legendo, sed in intelligerdo. Hieron.
for they consist not in the bare letters, but in the pithy sense, said the
Father. And this true understanding will help us to lay it to the Analogy of
faith, whereunto it must be agreeable, and will make our senses exercised in
the word. 3 Add hereunto prayer, which procures the spirit to lead us into
all necessary truth. David never ceased to Pray to be taught, as we may see
through the whole 119. Psalm. 4 Consider the end and scope of the scripture
alleged. If it lead thee into an action condemned by the law of nature, or
against other direct scriptures, or principles of religion, it is of the Devil
the father of Lies: for Gods Spirit never alleges scripture but to lead us
into the knowledge and practice of some truth.

This is Moses his rule, Deuteronomy. 13.1. If a false Prophet rise up, see what he
aims at: if it be to draw thee from the Lord, his worship, or word, take
heed of him: so if Satan, by any instrument of his, shall bring the word, and
pretend great zeal, if the end be to draw thee to superstition, Idolatry, or
Popery, beware of him, his scope discovers him. If a doctrine or scripture be
alleged to nourish any fleshly delight, or to hold men in sin, though the
words be Gods, the allegation is the Devils: as, At what time soever a sinner
repents, etc. and the Thief was saved at the last hour; and therefore, if
thou can say two or three good words at thy death, all shall be well: here
is the Devil, saying, It is written: for all scripture truly cited by Gods
Spirit aims at mortification, and the furtherance of Repentance. If a Scripture
be alleged and urged to threaten and discourage such as fear God. and show
forwardness in good ways, or to animate the sinner, promising him peace and
life, it is Satan's allegation: for if Gods Spirit allege scripture, that word
is good and comfortable to him that walks uprightly, and the threats of the law
are fit provision for impenitent persons.

Use 2. This teaches us not to content our selves to know the Scripture, and
be able to speak of it, or to allege it: for the Devil knows the word, and
can allege it readily, yea, he is expert in it. Many men deceive themselves
in their estate, and think themselves sure of salvation, if they can get a
lirtle knowledge of the scripture above others: as though Satan could not
allege it, or as though the wicked could not preach it, as Judas did, or
ungodly men profess it, who take the word into their mouth, and hate to be
reformed, Psalm. 50.16, 17.

Use 3. But let us take heed we come not behind the Devil himself, while we
thus highly conceit our selves: for, 1 Are there not a number of ignorant men,
almost as ignorant as if the scriptures had never been written? and shall not
the Devil condemn these, who has gained so much knowledge in the word, which
contains not one word of comfort for him, but judgment that makes him
tremble? Yet these, whom they would make wise to salvation, and to whom they
offer the joys and comfort of life eternal, are utterly ignorant of them.

2 Many read the Scripture, but as Satan, not to inform or reform themselves,
nor to make themselves better, but both themselves and others far worse, as not
only Heretics and learned Papists, who bend all their knowledge to suppress
and hide the truth, but all such as by the scripture se^k to maintain their own
errors and sins, which they will not part with: And these are no better than
the Devil.

3 Others will read Scripture, and hear, and know it, but without all special
application and grace in the heart, wherein they should differ from the Devil
and wicked men, who know the word, but affect it not, do it not, nay, cannot
abide the special application of it to do them good: and this does nothing but
increase sin and judgment: sin] Jam. 4.17. to him that knows to do well, and
does it not, it is sin, a great sin, without excuse or cloak. Joh. 15.22.
judgement] for such shall be beaten with many stripes.

4 Others brag of their knowledge; they read the Bible, at least David's
Psalms, and they know as much as any Preacher can tell them. But stay, the
Devil reads the Psalter as well as thou, and can quote David's Psalms more
readily than thou, he can read the Bible, he knows as much, yea, more than
any Preacher can tell him: what say thou more of thy self, than the Devil
can do of himself, and more truly? And what have thou gained by all this
challenge, but thine own conviction of great sin, without excuse, but not
without witness? Is not thine own mouth thy judge, who professes so much
knowledge, and so little grace, love, practice? To sin wilfully and
presumptuously, against the light, is an extraordinary conformity with Satan.

Rules of reading, and hearing the word religiously.

1 Consider the excellency of the Word above all precious things, and how
dangerous it is to take Gods name in vain; which is then, when the word is
frustrate of his right end. 2 They are called holy Scriptures, not only in
regard of that holy truth contained in them, (...).
but because they are instruments, by which the Elect are sanctified and made
holy, John 17.17. and therefore are never to be used without holy affection,
nor without endeavor to grow up in holiness. (...).
3 They are the Word of faith: therefore we must mingle the Word with faith,
and lay up the precepts and promises thereof to believe it. 4 The Scriptures
being the rule of life, we must submit our whole man to the obedience and
practice of it, with all sincerity and constancy. Hereby we shall go beyond the
knowledge of the Word in Devils and ungodly men.

NOw for the place it self, we must consider it two ways; 1 As abused by
Satan in his allegation. 2 As we find it holily set down by the Spirit of God.

In Satan's abuse of this Scripture, we may see many particulars: 1 He wrongs
the words of God, when he urges them spoiled of the right sense of the holy
Ghost.

2 He perverteth the right order of Gods spirit in his allegation: for whereas
Gods Spirit first suggests the word, and then frames the heart to obedience of
it (for the property of the sheep of Christ is, first, to hear the voice, and
then to follow, Joh. 10.27.) Satan first will have men to conceive opinions, or
attempt practices pleasing to him and themselves, and then afterward seek out
some Scripture to justify them. Thus Johanan and the Captains were resolved to
go into Egypt, but sent for Jeremy to see if they might have the word of God to
go with them, Jer. 42.3. compared with verse. 20.

3 He wrests the right end: for whereas all Scripture is written that we
might not sin, 1 John 2.1. he abuses this part of it to draw Christ to sin:
and whereas all the precious Promises of God, should hold us in the awe and
fear of God, this Promise must occasion Christ to presume upon an unlawful
action.

4 He willingly mistakes the persons: for whereas that Psalm, and the great
Promises of it, hold true in Christ our Head, yet notwithstanding it was
principally written for the godly members of Christ, and the adopted Sons of
God: neither can every thing in that Psalm be so fitly referred to Christ in
himself, as in his afflicted members. Besides that, the Angels minister
otherwise to Christ himself, than to his members: Christ by his own power bears
up himself, and Angels, and all things, Heb. 1.3.

5 He falsifies the text, by adding partly to the words, partly to the sense.
To the words he adds, lest at any time, which adds no small strength to the
temptation, including even that time wherein he should be jumping between the
Pinnacle and the pavement. To the sense, thrusting his dart into the sense of
the place, as if that place said so much in effect to him, Cast thy self down;
which Chrysostom has well observed, saying, Cast thy self down, Homil. 5. ex
va^^^ in Matthew.
was not written, but was the poison of the Serpent, cunningly mingled with the
sweet comfort of the Scripture.

6 He puts out and conceals that which most makes for Christ, and against
himself, namely, those words [in all thy waies] which most warreth against this
headlong casting down of himself: for it is not the way of a man to cast
himself from such an height, but to seek the stairs, or the ordinary way. And
these words were not unawares omitted, but maliciously and purposely: for if
Christ shall hear him speak of his ways, and consider that this casting down
of himself pertained not to his way, one piece of his own argument had
overthrown the whole.

7 In this allegation he commits the sallacy of division, intending Christ's
overthrow, by dis-joyning the things which God has coupled together: for
whereas the words of that Text in the right sense, consist of two parts,
namely, 1 A promise of protection, and preservation: Satana^ promissionem
objicit Christo, conditionem, vero abjleu. Par. in locum.
2 The condition of keeping a man's self in his ways, without which condition
no promise of God belongs unto us (for godliness has the promise of this life
and the life to come) Satan rejects the condition wholly, and divorceth it from
the promise. This is Mr. Junius his observation.

8 From every part and word of a most excellent Text, he can urge his most
hellish temptation, and make all fair weather when he intends nothing less: as
if he should say, If thou be the Son of God, cast down thy self, I do assure
thee, nay, the written Word assures thee of protection and safety: for in such
a Psalm, namely the ninety first, verse. 11. thou have the word of thy Fathers
promise: yea, in one promise, a number of promises: for,

1 If thou will know the parties that shall support thee, they be Angels,
Creatures swift, mighty, and powerful. 2 If thou doubtest of their will, they
must do it, they can neither will nor choose, it is their charge, they are
commanded so to do. 3 If thou ask the manner how, they must bear thee up, that
if thou would, thou can not fall. 4 If thou doubtest of their cheerfulness,
or willingness, or diligence, there is no fear; for they must do it as Mothers
or Nurses (as the word signifies) who out of their tender love bear, and carry,
or lead the infant with great watch and circumspection, that it fall not, and
so come to hurt. 5 If thou think there is any limitation of their
Commission, there is none; for they must bear thee up at all times. 6 To take
away all suspicion of fear from thee, they must save thee, not only from great
danger, as breaking thy bones or neck, but from the least danger, thy foot,
the lowest and basest part shall not stumble or be hurt, much less thy head,
thy self.

Thus subtly intending to hold with the Hound, and run with the Hare, Satan
has picked out a place which seems forcible enough to persuade any reasonable
man to his purpose. Hence note, that

Doct. A principal wile of Satan, is, to assay (if he can by no means else) to
overthrow men by the overthrow of Scriptures. Genesis 3.1. Has God indeed said
ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? It were strange and mavelous
he should say so, seeing he knows it would better your estate. In this his
first temptation, of all other he chooses to make Gods Word a means of their
and our overthrow, thinking it not an easy thing to destroy Gods Image in the
soul, unless he could first destroy the word of God out of their heart, 1 Samuel
28.15. when the Devil would delude Saul, and hasten his death, he lays the
ground of it in Gods Word, and taking on him the person of Samuel, says, The
Lord has done even as he spoke by my hand; abusing and alleging that
Scripture in 1 Samuel 15.28. The Lord will rent the Kingdom from thee this day,
and has given it to thy neighbor, who is better than thou. Mar. 1.23. the
Devil comes to Christ, and tells him he knows him well enough, Thou art Jesus
of Nazareth, even that holy one of God, that holy One that was promised,
figured, and expected, even that Redeemer and holy One of Israel, Isa. 41.14.
Even that holy One foretold by the Angel, Luke 1.35. And all this was by
Scripture, to overthrow both Christ himself, and the faith of believers, as
though there were some secret compact and familiarity between him and them: and
perhaps hence arose that speech, By Beelzebub he casts out Devils.



2 His malice sets him clean contrary to God in his proceedings. God has given
his Scripture to save men by, and therefore it is called, a word of salvation:
now Satan would herein cross the Lord, in perverting the word to men's
condemnation. The Scripture is in the Church as a Law to the Commonwealth, to
contain men in the compass of faith and godly life; whence it is called
Statutes, and precepts, and judgments. But Satan seeks to enforce it as a Law
to thrust men from faith and obedience. The Scripture is a word of truth, of
holiness, of wisdom, every way resembling God the Author: Satan therefore,
being the greatest enemy to Gods Image, is the greatest enemy to the
Scriptures, and desires to pervert them, by establishing by them Errors,
Heresies, false Doctrins, wicked and foolish opinions and practices.

3 His subtilty and policy is not inferior to his malice: for, 1 He has a
special slight and trick of his own, by pretending truth to impugn it, and with
Scripture to fight against Scripture; which he has taught his special
Factors, Heretics, and Seducers: for why else did Christ forbid the Devil to
witness to him, but that even that truth he speaks, ever tends to destroy the
truth? And in the text, why cites he the truth, but to draw Christ into an
error? 2 He will gain to himself some credit by this practice: for seeing
speeches and testimonies depend much upon the credit of the speaker, by his
quoting of Scripture he would be taken, as if the truth of Scripture depended
upon, or needed his witness.

4 Satan must do thus, if he will prevail against Christ, or his Servants:
for Scripture in the true sense of it, is no patron of sin, nor ever stands on
the Devils side.

Use. Of all temptations beware most of them which come armed with Scripture:
for hardlier can we espy the subtilty and danger of these, than those which
are directly against the Scripture. And by temptations of this kind, Satan
mightily prevails in points both of doctrine and practice; which it shall not
be amiss to give some taste of, and in both we shall observe how Satan does
not so much use as abuse Scripture.

I. In matters of doctrine. 1 For the establishing of the Head-ship of the
Church in the Pope, the ordinary Papists have found a Scripture in Joh. 21.16.
where Christ says, Feed my sheep. I answer: First, that place speaks not of
any Head-ship, or Spiritual government, but of feeding by the Word and
Sacraments, which the Pope never does: Secondly, it is a commandment not given
to Peter alone, but to all the Apostles, who were equally Apostles with him,
but applied to Peter specially, not to note any Primacy, but secretly to check
him for his threefold denial, whereby he made himself unworthy to be a
Disciple.

Obj. But Peter says he has two swords, and therefore the Pope has both
Spiritual and Temporal jurisdiction.

Sol. This is a place of Satan's alleging, when that which is spoken
literally, is wrested into a figurative sense. And where Peter is commanded (
Act. 10.13.) to kill, and eat, the Pope may kill, and slay, and eat up whom he
will or can, Prince with people. But this is a place literally to be taken, and
one part of the argument hangs with another as the dream of a sick man: for the
Pope, if he be Peter's Successor, must feed the sheep, nor feed on them. But
Bellarmine, who would make the world believe his wit is thinner, has devised a
far more sufficient place, 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold, I put in Sion a chief corner
stone, elect and precious; that is, the Pope: In his Preface to the
Controversy, De Romans Pontif. and lib. 4. cap. 5. But what may we think to
reap from him, that dares begin his Controversy with so high a blasphemy? and
lest we should think it fell inconsiderately from him, he takes it up again.
For does not both Paul and Peter teach, that this stone can be meant of none
but of Christ? does not both of them add, He that believes in him, shall not
be ashamed? must we now believe in the Pope? And who is this living stone that
gives life to all that are built upon him, besides Christ himself? None can
arrogate it to himself, or attribute it to another without high blasphemy.
Therefore I conclude this point, boldly affirming that the Devil could not more
impiously abuse this place, than has blasphemous Bellarmine.

2 For the point of Justification by Works, is alleged that place of James,
2.21. wherein they add unto the text, 1 A false gloss, by works of the Law. 2
A false distinction, saying, that they justify as causes; whereas we grant that
as effects they justify, that is, declare a man to be justified: So did
Abraham's works declare him to be just: and this is not the justification of the
person, which is only by faith, but of the faith of the person, which is
manifestly dead without them.

3 In that great sacramentary controversy they allege, This is my body:
wherein Satan has taught them to abuse Scripture, in taking that literally
which is figuratively spoken, as often to writhe that into a figure which is
spoken literally: and whereas they exclaim against us for denying the words of
Christ, as Heretics, we are far from denying Christ's words, but disclaim
their false meaning, which destroies the Scripture, seeing Scripture stands not
in words, but in sense.

4 To establish the false Doctrine of Free Will, they furnish themselves with
that place in Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and
whose hope the Lord is. But what do they else but imitate the Devil, in cutting
off that part of the Text which makes against them? for in the next verse it
follows, The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it?
showing, that man in himself is utterly destitute of all grace.

5 For the Jesuitical trick of equivocation, or mental reservation, they have
Scripture and Example.

Joh. 1.21. they asked John if he were a Prophet, he said, No, whereas he was
one: for Zachary called him the Prophet of the Highest, and Christ said that
there was not a greater Prophet than John: therefore John equivocated.

Answ. Whatsoever was the true meaning of the Question, that John answered
plainly unto. If they meant to ask him if he were that singular Prophet, whom
they fancied to come together with their Messiah, he truly answered, No. If
he were any of the ancient Prophets, who were long before Christ, he truly
answered in that sense, No. If he were a Prophet by his proper office, he
truly answered, no. For howsoever he was by grace and power a Prophet, being
sent of God to reprove and convert sinners; yet by ordinary office, he was no
Prophet, neither did he prophecy.

But what is this to those mental reservations; Are you a Priest, Garnet? No,
says he, meaning not a Priest of Apollo, or Jupiter. Were not you in England
at such a time? No, not as the Sun in the firmament, or as a King in a
Kingdom. A strange madness, that men professing knowledge and zeal, should so
dally with lies and oaths: which tricks of theirs, were they justifiable and
sound, we should have little use of Magistracy or tribunals, especial where
matters are determined by men's oaths: he were a very block that would suffer
any thing to be fastened upon him. The murderer might swear he never slew
man, namely, with the jaw bone of an Ass as Sampson did. The Drunkard might
swear he drunk never a drop, if he can inwardly conceive of water, or aqua
coelestis, or the Poets nectar, or what he can feign. The Adultress might
swear she was never touched, if she can inwardly conceive of any creature, as
of a Bull, or a Swan, as the Poets feign of Pas^ph^^ and Lada. And were it
lawful to dally with God, and men's Consciences, after this manner, we could
pay them home in their own kind: for suppose a man were in their Inquision,
and were asked if the Pope were Supreme over all Kings; if a man were disposed
to equivocate, he might say and swear, yea; reserving his secret meaning, not
by right, but only in his own proud and ambitious desire; and thus delude them.

II. In matters of practice, you shall have no sinner but he has a Scripture
reached to him, to lie safe under in the holding of his sin, but robbed and
turned out of the right sense. The Atheist, that cares for no Scripture, yet
has one text for himself, Eccl. 7.18. Be not just overmuch, nor overwise: and
so he has enough to cast off all care of knowledge, and conscience. The
Image-munget has a Text, to let nothing be lost: he has a good use for his
Images; if they cannot serve to worship, they may serve for ornament. The
Swearer has a Text in Jeremy, Thou shall swear in truth, righteousness, and
judgment: therefore he will swear so long as he swears nothing but that
which is true. The Sabbath-breaker has his Text, The Sabbath was made for man,
and not man for the Sabbath. The Murderer and Adulterer think themselves safe,
seeing they find David in both these sins, and yet commended of God. The
Drunkard has his lesson, Drink no longer water, but a little wine for thy
stomach, and often infirmities sake. The Covetous person knows, that he that
provides not for his family, is worse than an Infidel, which through many men's
wickedness, is a ground of much covetousness. The lazy Protestant has his
Text, We are saved by grace, and justified by the blood of Christ freely: what
can his works do? what need they? The idle person has his Text, Care not for
to morrow, let to morrow care for it self. The Usurer has his plain place,
Matthew. 25.27. -- That I might have received mine own with Usury. The Thief,
has the Thief on the Cross, repenting at the last. The carnal Gospeller cares
not what sin he venture on, because where sin has abounded, there grace has
abounded much more. The careless Libertine is predestined to life or death,
do what he can, and do what he list, he cannot change Gods Decree: and so he
will do what he list. The obdurate and hardened sinner says, At what time
soever a sinner repents, God will put all his sins out of his remembrance, and
therefore he will not repent till he be dying.

Lastly, the unjust person he has his rule in the unjust Steward, who was
commended by Christ: who was indeed commended for his providence, not for his
injustice. In all these thou may hold this for a good rule, It is the Devils
divinity, to confirm thy self in any sin by whatsoever thou hear or read
in Gods book; all which in Gods meaning is direct, and the only preservative
against all sin.

NOw we are to consider this comfortable Scripture in the holy use of it, not
as we have it wrested and mangled by Satan, but as we find it set down by the
Holy Ghost, Psalm 91.11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to
keep thee in all thy ways: They shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt
not thy foot against a stone.

In which words the godly are secured, and assured of safety in danger, not
only because the Lord himself is become their refuge and protection, as in the
words going before, but in that to his own fatherly care and providence he
has added a guard of Angels: to whose care also he has committed the Godly.
Wherein for explication, we will note these particulars,

1 What is the ministry of the Angels, namely, to be the godly man's keepers.

2 Who seals their Commission, He has given them charge.

3 The limitation of it, In all thy ways.

4 The manner, They shall bear thee up in their hands.

5 The end, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. Which is a borrowed speech
taken from Mothers or Nurses, who lead or carry their tender children in their
hands, that they stumble and fall not to hurt or endanger themselves.

The word Angel, is a name not of nature (for so they be spirits) but of
office, ministering spirits, to God, to Jesus Christ, and to Gods Elect His
Angels] that is, the good and Elect Angels, called his, 1 By Creation: for they
had not being of themselves. 2 By more immediate ministry, they assist him,
and stand before his face; whereas the wicked Angels are cast down from Heaven,
from enjoying his presence. 3 By grace of perseverance: for they fell not from
their estate, as the wicked Angels did, and are now confirmed by Christ that
they cannot fall: and hence is Christ called the Head of men and Angels, in
whom all things in heaven and earth consist, Coloss. 1. v. 17. that is, are
preserved, sustained, and governed, whether visible or invisible; and
consequently a mediator of the Angels in respect of special grace of
confirmation, by which they inseparably adhere to God, although in respect of
that mediation which is restrained to redemption, the Angels have no need of it.

Charge] This charge is not a general Commandment over the Church in general,
but a special charge over every godly man, over thee. And the charge is
directed to many Angels to keep one man; for the word affords us more comfort,
than that Popish and ungrounded conceit, of every man's having his particular
Angel.

Quest. Why does God give this charge to the Angels? or why does he use their
Ministry?

Answ. Not for any necessity (for he by his word and beck does sustain Heaven
and Earth, and without them can keep his own) but out of his good will to us,
he declares his love and care of us, who has so abundantly provided for our
safety, and made far more glorious natures than our selves our keepers.

To keep thee] This custody of the Angels stands. 1 In observing and watching
their persons, souls, bodies, and estates, and therefore are called watchmen,
Dan. 4.10. And I saw a watchman, and an holy one come down from Heaven. 2 In
propulsing and averting evil: so here, There shall no evil come near thee, for
he will give his Angels charge over thee. 3 In defending them in good, as
Elizeus and his servant being compassed with enemies. 4 In comforting them in
trouble, as Hagar, Genesis 21.17. and Jacob, Genesis 32.1, 2. and Christ in this
place.

In all thy waies] Namely, in such courses as God has appointed, and in all
these, in all times, and in all places, in all estates and conditions. In the
way into the world, in birth, and infancy, the good Angels keep Gods little
children, Matthew. 18.10. In the way through the world they keep us, as the
Israelites in the Wilderness, Exodus 33.2. In the way out of the World, their
charge is to keep us, as we may see in Lazarus, who when he dyed the Angels
carried his soul into Abraham's bosom. In all our ways, by day and by night*
they keep us so long as we are in our callings.

They shall bear thee in their hands] This is a borrowed speech: for Angels
have no hands, nor bodies: sometimes they assume bodies in their ministry to
others, but these bodies are not theirs, neither were they naturally and
hypostatically united unto them, but for the time created and assumed: but,
from what beginning they were taken, or into what end after the ministry they
were resolved, it is idle to inquire. Here hands are ascribed to them, as
elsewhere wings, both improperly; one shows the speediness of their motion, the
other their fitness and tenderness in our keeping: For their charge is not
only to foresee danger and admonish us, but they must be actual helpers, to
bear us up from ground, when we are ready to fall, and get knocks; as a tender
mother or nurse, if they see the little child falling, will haste and catch it
before the head comes to the ground.

That thou dash not thy foot against a stone.] That is, that thou hurt not thy
foot against any rub or occasion. Angels are nurses, we are as infants in
spiritual matters, on every occasion ready to fall into sin, and by it into all
dangers, spiritual and temporal. Now the Angels keep us not only from hurt by
others, but from bringing hurt on our selves, even the least; they keep us from
hurting our Head, yea our Foot.

Object. But how do the Angels perform their charge, when some of Gods children
not only stumble, but fall spiritually, and bodily, and take great harm?

Answ. The reason is, because no man keeps his way so diligently and uprightly
as he ought. If we did never fail, God would never fail us, no more would his
holy Angels; nay, such is their love, as they would not have us to take the
least hurt in the world, while we walk faithfully in the ways and
commandments of God.

Doct. The Angels of God are the tender keepers of Gods children in Gods ways,
that no hurt can beside them. Genesis 32.5. When Jacob was in great fear of his
brother Esau, the Angel of God met him to comfort and defend him. When Sodom
was to be destroyed; the Angels came to Lot to forewarn and haste him out of
that wicked City. Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his tents round
about them that fear the Lord, and delivers them.

1 Because of Jesus Christ our Head, things in Heaven and Earth, Angels and
Men, Col. 1.20. In our selves and our own vileness we could not be endured by
these blessed spirits, but now Christ becomes our head, and for him they tend
us as his members.

2 Their love to us is another ground of their custody of us, manifested in
that they are compared to Nurses: neither can they but love those whom they see
God loves; now they see God loving us so dearly, that he spares not his own
Son, but gives him to the death for us, and therefore they dearly love us and
our good, they desire our salvation and promote it, they rejoice that our
salvation is wrought, and are glad of our repentance, by which we lay hold on
it.

3 And specially this charge and commandment of God is the cause hereof; so as
now it is not out of curtesy, or the goodness of their nature only, that they
do us good, but by virtue of this charge and commandment of God, whom they
love as their chief good, and to whom they are bound in absolute obedience by
the eternal law of their nature; so as although they are charged by God, yet
are they not forced or co-acted, but out of their perfect love of God they
watch over us for our good.

Use 1. This doctrine affords a use of great consolation: for when we consider
our own weakness and impotency on one hand, and the multitude, power, and
policy of our enemies on the other, when we see a whole Army of sins
besiedging us, and a whole legion of dangers behind them to oppress and
swallow us; now this Doctrine touching Gods providence in the ministry of
Angels, will be able to support us; when we shall consider, not only that Gods
protection is as a wall of fire round about us, but that he has set and
pirched his Angels round about us as a guard, of whom we may say with Elisha
for their multitude, They are more that are with us, Ordo gratiae praeponderat
ordini naturae, Th. Aqu.
than they that are against us; and for their power, they are called the Angels
of Gods power, far stronger than the wicked Angels and Powers that are
against us.

And when we shall consider, that God has given a charge, and that not to one
or two Angels, but to the whole blessed company of them over every godly man,
how can we but assure our selves, that we shall be defended and protected? If
a man were to pass by ship over a dangerous sea, full of gulfs, sands, rocks,
and robbers, if the King should give him letters of safe conduct, it would much
comfort him and help him through his voyage: but, if this King should send a
great Navy to conduct him over, yea, and should not only go in his own person,
but call out all his men of war to see him safely arrived, this were so
comfortable as he could not wish more. But thus does the Lord with his
children, not only himself going with them through the world, but guarding
them with his holy Angels, who willingly afford their ministry, because of
their love to man, but in respect of Gods word and charge much more willingly,
that of Gods Angels they become our Angels, Matthew. 18.10.

What an unspeakeable comfort is it, that when we lose the watch over our
selves many ways, through sleep of soul or body, the Angels watch over our
safety? Matthew. 2.13. Joseph was a sleep, and thought not of that danger which
was even upon him, by means of Herod's cruelty: but even in that sleep the Angel
watched and admonished him by a dream; both of the danger, and the means to
escape.

How great a comfort is it, that when we see such difficulties between us and
our desires, as we can never overcome, then we have Gods Angels present to do
it to our hands? Mark 16.3. when the good women that came to imbalme Christ's
body, were very much troubled how to come to his body, and asked who shall roll
away the stone, for it was a very great one, when they looked, they saw the
stone rowlled away, and it was done by the Angel, as Matthew has it. Gods
Angels roll away all stones and impediments, and make our way smooth to all
good duties.

No less comfort is it, that when Satan begins to insult, and makes as if he
would trample upon us, we have a stronger guard about us, any one of the
Angels being as able to shut the mouth of this roaring Lion, as they were to
shut the mouths of those hungry Lions, into whose den Daniel was cast.

And for the further strength of our faith and comfort in this Doctrine, the
Scripture notes three things further concerning Angels, worth observing, 1
Their wisdom and providence in pitching about us, so as we lie open no where,
Exodus 14.19. when Israel was gone out of Egypt, the Angel of the Lord who went
before them to lead them out, now removed and went behind them, because now
Pharaoh and his people pursued them. The power of the Angel was no less if he
had stayed before them as he was, being Christ himself, but for the comfort of
Israel, and our instruction, the Angel changes his place, and stops between
them and the danger. 2 Their uniting of themselves, and strength for our
safety; one of them readily will help another in helping us: Dan. 10.13. one
Angel being resisted by the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, Michael one of
the chief Princes came to help him: who whether he were an Angel, or (as it is
more likely) the Prince and Lord of the Angels, even the Angel of the great
Covenant Christ himself, it is every way full of comfort. 3 Their patience
toward us, who if they should be gone from us, as often as we by sin provoke
them, we should perish every moment. But as God is long-suffering, so has he
charged his Angels to be: and therefore they wait still for our return, and
rejoice in the repentance of sinners, Luke 15.10. and abide in their charge and
ministry still.

Use 2. Again, this doctrine is a ground of manifold instruction.

1 Has God afforded us the Ministry of Angels? then note the privilege and
pre-eminence of Gods children, whose nature being assumed by the Son of God,
gives it dignity above the Angels, who are the ministers of our humane nature
in the head and members. Angels are indeed called the Sons of God, but that is
by creation. Christ never gave them this honor to call them brethren. Nay,
there is a nearer conjunction between Christ and us, than between Christ and
the Angels, which conjunction does privilege us with their attendance. 1 By
reason of his conception and incarnation, taking on him the seed of Abraham,
and not of the Angels, by which he becomes flesh of our flesh. 2 By reason of
his Spiritual contract, taking us to be one with himself, by which we become
flesh of his flesh, and so nearly set into him, as the Angels cannot be, who
are not members of this Head, as the elect be. Christ indeed may be called
their Head, but as a Lord and Commander, nor by such Spiritual union as is
between Christ and the Christian.

Herein we may see the love of God in setting his Angels to be our keepers. The
more noble, potent, numerous, and diligent the custody is, the more is the care
and love of the thing kept. How great thanks therefore owe we unto our God,
who notwithstanding he is daily offended with our sins, yet affords us the
ministry of his Angels? Who, and what am I, that God is so mindful of me, that
he should give so many glorious Creatures charge over me, that he should give
me such a privilege, that even the holy Angels (whose dwelling is in Heaven,
and see the face of God, who are all spirit and no flesh, who are free from all
sin and misery) should so narrowly attend me a lump of earth, a piece of flesh,
compassed with so many sins and miseries, as I can look no way either before or
behind them! David in the eighth Psalm burst out into the praise of God, when
he considered that God had afforded man the use of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes: O
Lord, says he, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, and have preferred
him over the works of thy hands! How much more should we, when we see our
happiness by the ministry of the glorious Angels?

2 Let us learn hence to look to our conversation, because of the Angels, 2
Cor. 11.10. for they are our keepers and observers, they see all the good and
bad we do, and we do not speak any thing without many witnesses. Sin makes
God take away our hedge, Isa. 5.5. it grieves the Angels of God, and lays a man
naked to all his Judgments. Shall we willingly offend them, from whom, under
God, we receive so great and daily comforts? If we did believe, or weigh this
doctrine, we would not: but because we see not God, nor his Angels, we love
neither, nor fear to offend either.

3 Let us beware of wronging the Children of God, even because they have the
protection of the Angels. To rise up against any of them, is to rise up against
the Angels their keepers. Offend none of these little ones: for their Angels
behold the face of their heavenly Father, and thou provokest the Angels against
thee. It the Sodomites rise up against Lot, the Angels will save him and
destroy them. It Balaam will go to Curse Gods people, he shall have an Angel
against him with a sword drawn ready to kill him.

4 Learn we to give God the honor of our salvation and safety, when we have
avoided any danger, public or private. It is not by chance, nor by our
providence and policy, but Gods charging his Angels to save and keep us. Daniel
did rightly ascribe his deliverance to God, by the ministry of the Angel,
chap. 6.22. My God (says he) sent his Angel, and shut the Lions mouth.

5 To be partaker of all this comfort, these means are to be used: 1 Become a
godly man, Psalm. 34.9. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his tent round about them
that fear the Lord. Heb. 1.14. They are ministering Spirits to the heirs of
salvation. 2 Hold on in a godly course, keep thee in thy ways, in the duties of
thy Calling, general and special; for thus long the charge of the Angels stands
in force. 3 Pray (not to Angels, but) to the God of Heaven, to send his Angel
before thee, to direct and assist thee in thy duties and ways. For what God
has promised, we must pray for, Genesis 24.7. Abraham tells his Servant, that God
will send his Angel before him to take a wife for his son: and this Angel
prospered his Journey, verse. 40. And that this was the practice of the Church
in Egypt, appears by Moses his message to the King of Edom, Numb. 20.16. being
ill entreated in Egypt, we prayed to the Lord, and he sent an Angel, and
brought us out of Egypt. I doubt not but this duty, were it more faithfully
practiced, would bring home much more success and comfort, than many men find
in their labor, who scarce know whence or how their prosperity comes unto
them.

Obj. If God should send his Angels in humane form, and as familiarly to
converse with us as anciently they did with the Patriarks, we should believe
this doctrine: but now there is certainly no such thing.

Ans. 1. Christ is now in Heaven, where our conversation ought to be by faith,
rather than by the visible apparition of Angels. 2 The beginnings of the Church
needed such heavenly confirmation, but now the Word is sufficiently confirmed
by the Son himself from Heaven. 3 The Scriptures are perfect, and fully and
plainly reveal unto us Gods will in every particular, as if the Angels should
come and teach us daily. 4 The blessed Spirit is more abundantly given in our
hearts, and supplieth their absence in bodily shape and apparition. 5 We must
labor to get the eyes of our souls open, and then we shall with Eloshaes
servant see their comfortable presence, notwithstanding they take no bodies to
appear in.

Verse. 7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God.
NOw follows the repulse of our Savior to this second temptation, wherein
are two things, 1 His resistance: 2 His reason, drawn from a testimony of
Scripture.

Jam. 4.5.
I. Christ resists, and yields not, albeit he hears Scripture alleged.
Why? If ye were of God (says Christ) ye would hear his word: neither does
Scripture speak any thing in vain. But the reason is, 1 Because our Lord
perceived that the Word was wrested and abused by Satan: and 2 That Scripture
abused, binds not to obedience: 3 That Scripture turned out of his right sense,
is not Gods Word, but carries something in it besides Scripture: and then if an
Angel from Heaven should bring it, we must be so far from receiving it, as
to hold him accursed: 4 For our example, that we should not take all
allegations hand over head (but as Christ here) try whither they tend; if to
cast us down, refuse them.

II. Christ resists, but not without reason, but by Scripture, and opposes
Scripture to Scripture, not as repugnant one to another, but by way of
collation and conferring one with another, that the right use of one, may
overthrow the abuse of the other: not in way of contrariety, but of commentary.

Quest. But why did not our Savior shut his mouth by telling him how wickedly
he had abused the text he had alleged, by adding, detracting, and wresting it
to a contrary end and meaning?

Ans. This might indeed have confounded him sufficiently: but our Savior his
Combat is not only victorious for us, but exemplary; and therefore we are
herein trained in our fight and encounter: 1 To hold close to the Scripture in
answering the Devil; It is written again: which word of our Savior notes how
he buckled the Scripture to him, both as a Buckler to defend him, and as a
Sword to foyl and wound his enemy: and so must we, who are not so able to
dispute with Satan about the true meaning of a place, as our Lord was. 2 To
inform us, that the best and only way to discover the abuse of Scripture is
Scripture, it being the only rule and judge of it self, and all the
controversies rising out of it. And therefore the Devil, no sooner heard this
testimony, but his mouth was shut, as well knowing how the wisdom of the Father
had discovered his subtilty. The best Commentary of Scripture is Scripture;
every man is the best interpreter of himself, and so the Author of the
Scriptures is the best interpreter of them. 3 To let us see, that although
Satan had abused the Scripture, yet he nor we must overcome by no other
weapon, and that the abuse of a thing, takes not away the right use of it; nor
good things to be rejected, because they are abused by them that can use them
aright. If Christ had been of the Papists mind, he would have condemned and
shut up the Scriptures from common men, because the Devil had abused them: for
so do they, because Heretics his instruments do abuse them, the Laiety may
not meddle with them.

But it is plain, that in things necessary, no abuse in one, takes away the
right use in another. As for example: A murderer uses a sword to kill a man;
may not another use a sword, or that sword in his own defense? And are not the
Scriptures, the sword of the Spirit, more necessary? A Drunkard, a Glutton, a
proud person, abuse meat, and drink, and apparel, to surfeiting, drunkenness,
riot, and excess: shall we therefore cast away meat, drink, apparel, and
refuse the necessary use of it? And is not the Word a more necessary food?
Because a Wolf comes in sheeps clothing, must the sheep cast away their
fleece? No: the Prophets did not refuse the Word of the Lord, because the false
Prophets did say, The Word of the Lord, as well as they.

Obj. Then it is no good argument, that we must reject such and such things,
because the Papists have abused them.

Ans. If they be good, and necessary, it is not; as are the Word, Prayer,
Sacraments, Churches, and whatsoever stands by Gods Ordinance in Divine or
Civil use. But in things unnecessary, that we might be as well, or better
without their use, it is a good consequence; Idolaters have abused them,
therefore we must forbear them, as Bishop Jewel speaks.

Doct. The infallible Judge, and speaking-decider of all Controversies in the
Church, are the holy Scriptures in the true sense of them. Our Lord here gives
the true meaning of one Scripture by another, in this his Controversy with the
Devil. Deuteronomy. 17.9, 10. In any matter of difference, the people must come to the
Priest or Levite, and they must judge and determine all differences according
to the Law; and all the people upon pain of death must stand to that judgment.
Now this Priest was a type not of the Pope, but of Christ, on whose mouth all
must depend for the decision of all Controversies. Josh. 1.7. the Book of the
Law was given to Joshua, to decide all matters among the Jews, from which he
must not depart to the right hand or left hand: He was an eminent type of our
Jesus or Joshua, whose voice speaking in the Scripture (the Book of the Law) we
must attend unto in all things. Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures: and our
Savior said to the Sadduces, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, plainly
affirming that the Scriptures rightly known, were a sufficient fence from all
error. Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear them.
Matthew. 19.4. Christ by Scripture refuted the Pharisees abuse of that Scripture
of Moses, for putting away their wives. Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the
Testimony.

1 This is true by reason of the perfection of the Scripture: Psalm. 19.7. The
Law of God is perfect, so perfect, as man and Angel are accursed that shall
add unto it. Prove. 30.5, 6. Every word of God is pure, a shield to those that
trust in him: put nothing unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar. It is a perfect Canon or rule, which as a straight line shows the
crookedness of that which is not strait. It is a touchstone and trial of all
truths. It is a perfect Law, which is an universal Judgment, to direct all,
and for all to be led by which live under it. It is perfect in the effect, 2 Timothy 3.16. It is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and instruct in
righteousness, and to make the man of God perfect.

Obj. The Apostle says, it is profitable, but not that it is sufficient alone.

Ans. We say not it is therefore sufficient, because he says it is profitable;
but, because it is profitable for all purposes of teaching, improving, and
making the man of God perfect, therefore it is sufficient and perfect.

2 In the Scripture we have the voice of God speaking from Heaven, than which
voice no voice of man or Angel can be more clear or manifest, Prove. 2.^. Out of
his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. His wisdom in the Scripture, is
above Salomons, in answering all dark and deep questions; and no ca^e can be
propounded, which has not there his satisfaction and determination.

Object. But the Scriptures are a dumb Judge, and cannot determine
Controversies.

Ans. 1. We give earthly Kings leave to give definitive sentence and judgment
in cases by their writing, by which, numbers who never heard their voice but
read the writing, understand their meaning: and shall we now call them ^^mb
Judges? or shall we deny this privilege to the King of glory, to determine by
writing, but we must blasphemously account him a dumb Judge?

2 The Scriptures are not a dumb Judge, but a speaking Judge: Romans 3.19. That
which the Law speaks, it speaks to them that are under the Law. Heb. 12.5.
(...)
Ye have forgotten the consolation which speaks to you as children. Joh.
7.42. Does not the Scripture say? and what says the Scripture? so as it is a
speaking Judge, and gives to it self a mouth, and a voice, and that a loud one,
(...). Romans 9.27. the Apostle quoting the Prophet Esaias, says, Esaias cries out
concerning Israel, etc. 3 How does their Speaking-Judge determine all Causes in
Christendom delated unto him at Rome, but by Writing, and Bulls, and Breves?
and yet he scorns to be counted a dumb Judge.

3 That is the noble and infallible Judge of all Controversies, to which all
flesh must stand, which has his authority of himself, no way delegate: but the
Scripture is (...), for it self to be believed, because it is (...), inspired
by God, from whom lies no appeal, whose judgment can by no means within or
without it self be corrupted, whose voice alone cannot err or be led by
passion, affection, or respect of persons, but is an unchangeable truth as God
himself is, the Author of it. In every Commonwealth, the fittest decider of a
Controversy in the Law, is the Lawmakers, the King himself: the same is also
true in the Church.

4 Christ himself decided all Controversies by Scripture: so did the Apostles:
so the ancient believers brought all their doubts to the Scriptures, after
their example.

Use 1. This serves to discover the wickedness of the Church of Rome: who, 1
That they may be Judges in their Causes, and 2 To avoid the light of Scripture,
which they see so direct against them; fly the Scriptures as an incompetent
Judge of the Controversies of Religion between us: and in stead of the
Scriptures, they appoint us four Judges, the authority of all which is
superior (by their doctrine) to the authority of Scripture.


I. The first Judge is the Church: for that (say they) is to judge of the
meaning of Scripture; and but for the authority of the Church, we could not
know which were Scripture.

Ans. 1. We ask what they mean by the Church: They say, the Catholic Church.
But that is impossible to be Judge upon earth, because it is a company of all
the elect in Heaven and Earth, which never was on earth at one time. Then they
say, the visible Church. But what if the Church be not visible sometimes, as
in Elias his time, or be in the Wilderness? Then they say, the Roman Church,
which has ever been visible these fifteen hundred years. Now we know our
Judge, and how our cause is like to go, in which it is a party. But,

1 It is not the Catholic Church, unless a finger can be an hand, or an hand
the whole body, or a part become the whole, and falsely and ridiculously call
themselves Catholics. 2 That is no true Church, which disagreeth from Christ
the Head, as Augustine says, and is fallen off Christ by many fundamental
errors; as Idolatry, Justification by works, and the like; which yet are
maintained by Romanists. 3 We hold that the Orthodox and true Church is, 1 A
witness and keeper of the Scriptures: but a jewel has his price and
excellency from it self, not from the keeper. 2 Having the Spirit of Christ,
the Church can discern true Scripture from false and supposititious writings;
but this by the help of Scripture: as a Goldsmith by the touchstone can
discern gold from other metals; but he makes it not gold, but only tries it
so to be. 3 It is to publish and declare the truth of Scripture, without
adding, or diminishing, as an Herald or Crier manifests the Kings pleasure, but
it receives no authority from him. 4 The true Church is a ministerial
interpreter, as having the gift of Prophecy, but tied to interpret and judge of
Scripture by Scripture; Christ is a magisterial interpreter.

But that the Church on earth should have authority over Scriptures, is too
unreasonable. 1 It is to prefer men's voice and testimony above Gods, 1 John
5.9. If we receive man's testimony, the testimony of God is greater, Joh. 5.
ult. If ye will not believe Moses his writings, how will ye believe my
sayings? as if he should say, If ye believe not Scriptures, my testimony will
do you no good. True it is, That our Savior said, I receive not testimony from
man; that is, I need no man's testimony: for John gave witness to Christ: no
more does the Scripture in it self. For Christ was the light, whether John
witnessed to it or no: so is the Scripture the Word of God, whether the Church
be witness or no. But we admit the Church to give witness but not authority:
see it in a familiar example: A man owes me money, I have a bond, and
witnesses, he denies it, I produce the bond, and the witnesses, that clear the
matter, and affirm the bond to be his act and lawful; do these now make the
bond true, or the debt good, or only clear it so to be? for if they should
not witness, the debt and bond were true: Even such is the witness of the
Church to the Scripture. 2 The voice of the Spouse is inferior to the voice of
the bridegroom, and howsoever a man may be moved by the Church to hear the
Scripture if he be unconverted, as Augustine being a Maniche, yet a man
endued with Gods Spirit, and the gift of faith, esteems the Scripture for it
self above all the words of all men, as Christ himself at length was of far
more authority than the woman of Samaria, when the men thereof said to her, Now
we believe not for thy word, but because our selves have heard him. So as when
we have the Papist asking us (as every one of them does, when the Word has
put them to their shifts:) But how do you know Scripture to be Scripture but
by the Church? we must answer, by the Scripture, taking with us the help of
the Church, and especially by the Spirit of God revealing the truth unto us:
for the sheep of Christ hear his voice, and follow him. And when we ask the
Papists, how they know the Church to be the Church, or where it is, some say
it is here, some there, some hold us off with one mark, some with another; but
at last they come to know the Church by Scripture; and that is the Church which
the Scripture says is the Church: so in all other questions, that must be the
determination which the Scripture determines.

3 The Church cannot be judge, because it must be judged by Christ's voice,
and not be a Law unto it. Commonwealths must receive Laws from the Prince,
and not the Prince from his people: and as it is in bodies politic, so in the
mystical body of Christ. And as in the natural body the head rules the
members, not contrarily, so is it here.

4 How absurd is it to affirm, that that which is subject to error, must be
judge and superior to that which is free from it? But the Church may err,
even the true Catholic Church on Earth, may err, and does when it departs
never so little from the Scripture, although it cannot depart from the
foundation, nor incorrigibly err: for every man may err, and therefore that
which consists of every man: even the Apostle was compassed with infirmity.
Besides, the main difference between the Church militant and triumphant, is,
that one may err, the other is quite freed from error.

II. The second judge and decider of controversies, appointed by the Church of
Rome, are the Doctors and Fathers: but how corruptly? for, 1 They consent not
among themselves, and seldom agree in the same sense. 2 They borrow all the
light and truth they have from the Scripture, as the stars from the Sun. 3 All
their doctrine must be judged of by Scripture, and only so far received as they
agree with it. 4 They all present their writings to be examined by Scripture,
and so, many things in them are truly judged erroneous, even in the best of
them. If I speak, let none hear me; but if God speak, woe to him that hears
not. It must not go for current, This says Augustine, Aug. Epi^^ 48. ad
Vincent. Donatistam.
or that says Donate, but, This says the Lord. 5 The Interpreter of Scripture
must be divine and infallible as it self is, and certain: but the
Interpretation of Fathers is humane, infirm, sometime according to passion, or
contention: so as often (even by Bellarmines often confession) they speak minus
caut^; the best of them wrote Retractations, and other things being old, than
they did being young. Seeing therefore there is no stability in Doctors, let
Christ be acknowledged of us the chief Doctor of his Church, Matthew. 23.8. One
is your Doctor, even Christ.

III. Their third judge and decider of controversies are Councils, which (say
they) is the Church representative: but these are as unfit to be Judges of the
Scripture as the former: For, 1 Even the general Councils disagree among
themselves in interpreting Scripture, as might be seen in a number of places.
2 The Popes Canon Law it self affirms, that all the Councils (except the four
general, namely the Nicen, Anno 332. Ephesius, Anno 450. of Chalcedon, Greg.
lib. 2. Ep^st. 210.
Anno 456. and of Constantinople, Anno 386.) may err: and although it
blasphemously equal the four Councils to the four Evangelists, yet we know
that even these have erred. For that Nicene general Council determined, there
should be at any case but one Bishop in one City, which is against the
Scripture, Act. 20.28. Philip. 1.1. The twelfth Canon of that Council condemned
all kind of war among Christians. The thirteenth Canon holds the necessity of
the Eucharist, as the necessary viaticum, or provision of a Christian at his
departure. Also it erred in the matter of Ministers marriage, stayed by
Paphnutius. And the Constantinopolitan Council gave all equal honor and
authority to the Bishop of Constantinople with the Bishop of Rome which the
Papists themselves generally hold to be a great error, and yet perhaps was
none. Aug. lib 2 de baptism contra Donatist. c. 3.
And the consent of Ancient Fathers is, that Plenaria Concilia universal and
Ecumenical councills may err and be mended by later Councils.

3 There was a true sense and interpretation of Scripture in the Church before
any of these general Councils. The first general Council was the Nicene,
wherein were three hundred and eighteen Bishops gathered by Constantine the
Great against Arrius, but this was not till the three hundred twenty eighth
year after Christ: and was there not all that while the gift of interpreting
and judging of Scripture, that now we must seek a new means, erected so many
hundred years after the Apostles?

4 The Councils themselves determined by the Scriptures of the Scriptures as
the first Nicene general Council, where Constantine enjoined, and accordingly
they determined all according to Scripture. It seems in those days the
Scriptures were above Councils: and since Councils and Decrees of men got wings
to fly above the Scriptures, it was never well, as one of themselves speaks.
Well may we now say with Nazianzen, who therefore avoided all meetings of
Bishops, quod nunquam ullius Concilii bonum and foelicem exitum vidisset; yet
he had seen some which the Papists stand unto.

And we also, seeing the gross errors of Councils (as that ancient Council of
Carthage under Cyprian, appointing rebaptization to such as were baptized by
Heretics: the second, Ephesin Council, in which were more than three hundred
Bishops, is called by Leo himself, living in Theodosius his time, Conciliabulum
latrouuns, a den of Thieves: the second Nicene Council appointed Images made by
man's hand to be worshipped: a most gross error and Idolatry. The Roman Council
under Pope Stephanus, condemned Pope Formosus, and all his Decrees: and the
Council of Ravenua condemned Stephanus, and restored Formosus. One of them must
needs err. The Council of Constance appointed a number of gross errors, as
that the Cup should be taken from Laickes, that faith given to Protestants,
under the Emperors promise and seal, is not to be kept, etc. and it condemned
a number of John Hus his Articles, which were orthodox and consonant to
Scripture. The Council of Trent was a sink of all Antichristian errors:) now
we, I say, seeing such gross errors of Councils, may not or ought not we with
the ancient Fathers, appeal from Councils to the holy Scripture?

Jerome on Galath. 2. says, The doctrine of the Holy Ghost is that which is
delivered in Scripture, contra quam si quid statnant concilia, nefas duco: If
Councels determine any thing contrary thereunto, I account it abominable. Aug.
l. 2. de bapt. cont. Don. c. 3.
And Augustine, being pressed by the authority of the African Council, at which
Cyprian was present, appealed from it to the Scripture; with this reason, We
may not (says he) doubt of the Scripture, of all other we may doubt. Nay,
Panormitan, the great Popish Canonist and Lawyer, says plainly, Plus credendum
est simplici la^co Scripturam proferenti, quam toti simul Concilio; We must
more believe one poor simple Layman that brings Scripture, than a whole
Council. I will add nothing of the Romish trick of falsifying the Books of
Councils, and corrupting, changing, adding, and detracting from the Canons;
which makes them yet more uncertain and insufficient to rule the Scriptures by:
this might be instanced in the Nicene and Milevitan Council, and others; but
the further dispute hereof belongs to the Schools.

IV. The fourth Judge to decide all Controversies is the POPE himself: for they
have but fumbled all this while, and now they deal plainly: for when they
pretend the Catholic Church, Doctors, Councils, they mean all Romish: for,
with the Rhemists the Catholic and Roman faith is all one. Rhem in Romans cap.
1. verse. 8
Gregory de Valentla, says, By the Church, we mean her head, the Roman
Bishop. Bellarmine has these words, The Pope himself, without any Council, De
Christo. lib. 2. cap. 2^
may decree matters of faith. And the Canon Law says, that all his rescripts
and decrees are Canonical Scripture, and that he may dispense, 1 Against Gods
Law. 2 Against the Law of Nature. 3 Against an Apostle. 4 Against the New
Testament.

Now that the Pope cannot have authority at his pleasure to judge the
Scripture, is plain: 1 Because a Council is above the Pope, Gerson. A^neas Sylv.
as the most and ancientest of Papists believe, and two general Councils, of
Constance and Basil decree, and that the Council has power to restrain, yea
and depose him, and so has done. And yet a Council (as we have seen) wants
this authority over the Scriptures. Bellarmine would not believe or approve it,
but for the observation of the Church, and common opinion. Now the Sorbonists
of Paris deny it.

2 Because we know the Pope can err in his Chair in matters of faith, and
interpretation of Scripture. As for example, Romans 8.8. They that are in the
flesh, cannot please God: Pope Sirycius thus interpreted it, To be in the
flesh, is to be married, therefore the Priests must not marry. John 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you: Pope Innocent 1. thence determined the absolute necessity of the
Eucharist to salvation, and therefore it must be given to Infants. Luke 22.38.
Behold two swords here: Pope Boniface 8. interprets it of the temporal and
spiritual sword delivered to the Pope. Nay, they have not only erred many of
them, but been gross and wicked Heretics.

Liberius Pope about the year 350. was an Arrian, and subscribed to the unjust
condemnation of Athanasius, and afterward as a obstinate Heretic was deposed.
Honorius the first, Anno 626. was an Monothelite. held that Christ had but one
will, and so but one nature: and for this Heresy was condemned in three general
Councils. In the year one thousand four hundred and eight, at a Council held at
Pisa, consisting of a thousand Divines and Lawyers, two Popes were deposed at
once, to wit, Gregory the twelfth, and Benet the thirteenth, the tenor of whose
deprivation calls them notorious Schismatics, Heretics, departed from the
Faith, scandalizing the whole Church, unworthy the Papacy, cut off from the
Church. What? must we obey in error, scandal, and Heresy? or can the Pope
alter the nature of that which is false, and make it true?

3 When there were two or three Popes at once, and none knew which was the
right Pope, or the chief Pastor, whither should men go for their determination
of controversies in Religion? or when themselves disagree in interpreting
Scripture, how can we know which of them to lean unto? See an example, Matthew.
16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church: Some Popes
understand it of Peter's person, some of Peter's Chair, which they say is at
Rome, some of Peter's Confession. We have all unerring Popes, maintaining these
several interpretations; how shall we choose the best? what, upon a Popes word?
every one of them has that. Therefore there must be a superior Interpreter,
and more infallible, namely, the Spirit of God in the Scriptures.

4 How know we he has any authority over any other Bishop, seeing the
Scripture gives him none? How may we know he is not carried by affection,
seeing he is a party in the Churches controversies, and by Canon cast our from
being a Judge? How know we no appeals lie from him, seeing the Fathers have
appealed from Councils which are above him? How can we know that he sits in
Peter's Chair upon earth, Cathedram in coelo habet, qui intu^ docet corda. Aug.
seeing the Father has taught us, That he sits in Heaven, who inwardly
teaches men's hearts?

Therefore we renounce all such corrupt Judges, and lean to the incorrupt
Scripture.

Use 2. Secondly, seeing the Scriptures are the best Commentaries of
themselves, and the Judge and decider of all Doctrines and Controversies;
Ministers that would stablish truth of Doctrine, must be careful to prove and
justify all their collections of Doctrine out of Scripture: for thereby they
settle the faith of their people upon a sure ground of faith and manners: all
other foundations are sandy, all other proofs liable to exceptions. Why then
should Protestant-Preachers, who defend against Papists the sufficiency of
Scripture to make Gods people perfect, and hold it the rule and square of all
doctrine, cross their judgment by their practice? for every place of Scripture
alleging a dozen or twenty testimonies of Doctors, Fathers, Councils, nay,
profane Poets and Heathens; all which are darkness it self, and without light,
further than they borrow from the Sun in the Scripture.

I am not so nice, as that I think not there may be a sparing and sober use of
humane testimonies in Sermons; sometimes in cases of Grammar; sometimes in
matters of great controversy, to show the consent of the Ancient Church,
especially dealing with an Adversary that will claim all antiquity for him;
sometime by way of conviction, to shame Christians by the heathen, as the Lord
did the Jews by Chittim and Kedar, and the sluggard by the pismire. Neither am
I an enemy to Learning, but would have a man well seen in natural Philosophy,
in humane literature, in the writings of Fathers and Schoolmen, and be as a
good householder stored with things new and old. But needlessly, and for
ostentation, to give tongues unto dead men, and in the message of God, to put
to silence the voice of God, speaking in the Scripture, to set up Hagar the
handmaid above Sarah her mistress, is a fearful sin against God and his Word,
and a crying sin of these days; wherein for a man to tie himself close to the
Scriptures without such flourishes, and to scorn to send a rich Jewel to the
Painter, is to bring a blot on himself, that he is a man of no learning. For
what means else that common cry, that no man is against this manner of
preaching, but they that cannot use it? Well has he learned his art that can
most hide it here, that God may have all the glory: for he is not commended
here, whom men praise, but whom God allows.

The Apostolical teaching of Christ was not in words which man's wisdom
teaches, but Gods: he is the best Scholar that can teach Christ plainliest:
and for my part, if I would set my self to be idle, I would choose that kind
of preaching which is counted so laborious. The same I say for disputations and
controversies in the Church and Schools: never can we look for an end of them,
till we tie the determination of them to the Scripture alone, the right Judge.
A stratagem of Satan for Antichrist to fly the Scripture which should soon end
controversies, and hide his poison in the infinite windings of Fathers,
Councils, Traditions, etc. Well I know, that God has a secret work in
punishing the unbeleeving world, by the continuance of the man of sin till his
time come: but having well thought of the props on which he stands, yet in
the days of such light, there is none that does him more service, than this
hiding of his mystery in such a thicket of uncertainties, wherein it is
impossible to come to any end or issue. We may follow the fox from one
borough to another, and from hole to hole, because we are forced. But
whosoever looks to come to an end of controversies, by following him from
Father to Father, from Council to Council, from one Decree to another, from one
Tradition to another, with infinite labor examining and scanning the words and
syllables of ancient and latter times, he shall fall short of his expectation:
For all this while the determiner of the Controversy is not present but set
aside.

And what other Reason can be given, that whereas the chase and pursuit of
that beast of Rome has been continued with extraordinary speed and strength
for above these hundred years last past, and he has been followed into every
hole wherein he hid himself, yet the controversies so beaten and canvased, are
in man's eye as far from composition or determination as at first, not one of
them yielded up on either hand? I say, no other better reason can be given,
but that we are not agreed of the Judge of the cause, and so long as they can
hold them off the Scriptures, they will not be set down by any other authority.

Use 3. Thirdly, This Doctrine must provoke us to the diligent reading and study
of the Scriptures: for hereby we shall come to be stablished in the truth,
and able to discern the abuse of Scriptures: by conferring them with
themselves: this is the best way to keep us from errors and sects, and to find
out the true sense of Scripture.

Object. But do not our adversaries read the Scriptures as diligently as we?
and are not they as skilful to compare Scriptures, and yet abide in error and
heresy?

Ans. Here we must consider, 1 The person that must read. 2 The rules to be
observed in reading.

1 The person must be a religious and rightly affected person, that must read
the word with understanding.

Obj. So the Papists say, that only religious persons ought to read the
Scriptures.

Ans. Every Christian ought to have the Book of the Law with him, as the Jews
had before their eyes, and in their hands continually, Deuteronomy. 6.10. every
Christian ought to have the word of Christ dwell plenteously in him, Col. 3.16.
every one ought to be ready to give a reason of the faith he professes, to
every one that will ask 1 Pet. 3.15. every one ought to attend to the sure
words of the Prophets and Apostles, as a light shining in a dark place: for so
the Apostle Peter writes to all Christians, and not only the Clergy.

Yet no Christian ought to read unprepared, neither can every one read to
profit, but such as are qualified, 1 With humility in the sense of our own
simplicity and infancy in heavenly things, becoming fools in our selves, that
we may subscribe to Gods wisdom in the Scripture, and captivating all our own
thoughts to the obedience of Christ. Psalm 25.9. God teaches the humble. Matthew.
11.25. Thou have hid those things from the wise, and revealed them to babe^.
And what is the reason that Heretics, Sophisters, and Papists of great
learning, read the Scripture but understand not, but because they give not up
their reason and human wisdom, which is enmity to God, and scorn to be
children, delivered to be taught and formed by our heavenly Master?

2 With desire and love of Christ, and his Truth: the scope of all the
Scripture is Christ, and thou must desire to know and advance nothing but
Christ crucified. Prove. 4.13. Love wisdom, and she shall keep thee. When men
come prepossessed with opinions to set up men's devises, and traditions, and
wicked opinions, according to which they must interpret Scripture, and not
examine them by the Scripture: or if they bring a purpose to magnify the Pope,
and advance his religion instead of Christ's, no marvel if like the Images they
have eyes and see not, read and understand not. They love not Christ, nor will
have him to rule over them, but his Vicar, neither love they the truth in the
Canonical Scripture further than it will stand with their Popish Canon Law. Or,
if a man come to read out of custom, and coldly without fervency and love,
experience will tell him, though thus he read much, his profit shall be but
small.

3 With repentance, and faith, and a good heart, 2 Cor. 3.14. when the heart of
Israel shall be converted to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away: this veil
is natural ignorance, and infidelity. Where the former is, no marvel if the
word read and known be not understood, as a blind man cannot see the Sun
shining in his strength. Where faith is absent, and is not mingled with the
word, it must needs become unprofitable. Impossible it is that the wisdom of
God can dwell in a wicked heart; no man puts precious liquor into a fusty cask.
This is the cause, that men of great learning want sound understanding, because
they want sound conscience. Hos. 14.10. The ways of God are right, but the
wicked fall in them.

4 With a purpose not only to know, but to practice, Joh. 7.17. If any man will
do my will, he shall know whether my doctrine be from heaven. The scope of the
Scripture, is not only to believe in the Son of God, but to walk in the
obedience of faith. Now if men read over all the Bible an hundred times, either
for knowledge only, or for vainglory, or to advance themselves into
preferments, or to oppose the truth, as Heretics and Papists do, no marvel if
they never attain the true sense of them.

5 With prayer for the Spirit to lead us into all truth, because the Scriptures
were inspired by Gods Spirit at first, and the same Spirit is only able to
acquaint us with his own meaning. If any man want wisdom, he must ask it of
God, Jam. 1.5. so did David, Psalm. 119.18. Open mine eyes, that I may see the
wonderful things of thy law. Is it any marvel, that they who fly the judgment
of Gods Spirit, and stand to the Church, Pope, Councils, and only swallow that
sense which they give, and never look after Gods Spirit, should miss of the
true meaning of the Holy Ghost, and fall into and tumble in a number of errors
and heresies?

To these might be added meditation, diligence, keeping of order and time,
special application, and the like. These things let them be brought to the
reading of Gods Word, and no man shall lose his labor, he shall be taught of
God, who has promised to reveal his secret to them that fear him.

So much of the qualification of the person.

II. Now follow some rules, which a person thus qualified must learn, and keep
by him, to try when a Scripture is wrested or no.

first is that in our text, conference of Scripture: there the Spirit of God by
plain places expounds those which are more difficult. Thus Nehem. 8.8. Ezra
opened the Scripture, by comparing it with it self, and so made the people to
understand, as Junius notes out of the original. So the Bereans having heard
the doctrine of the Apostles, searched the Scriptures; that is, compared their
doctrine with the doctrine of the Old Testament. Thus the Apostles themselves,
teaching Christ's resurrection, Acts 2.16. prove it out of the Old Testament:
viz. Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. And to
prove that those words cannot be meant of David himself, he appeals to another
testimony in 1 King. 2. where it is said, that David slept with his fathers,
and lay buried in his Sepulcher, and so saw corruption. This is a special way
whereby the Scripture gives wisdom to the simple, Psalm. 19.7. And for this
purpose the Lord has in great wisdom tempered the Scripture with some hard
places, to exercise men's senses, and try their diligence in comparing of
Scripture, whereof there were no need if there were no hard places. How comes
it that many pervert, the Scripture to their own destruction, but because they
confer not one part with another, which would lead them into the right sense?
How come the Arrians, when they hear Christ say, The Father is greater than I,
and other such sayings, to hold to the death that Christ is not true God,
co-essential and coequal with his Father, but that they do not compare this
with other places? as Job. 1.1. That word was God; Philip. 2.6. He thought it
no robbery to be equal with God; Romans 9. -- which is God blessed for ever. And
consequently, that the former place speaks of his Human nature, the latter of
his Divine nature.

How could the Papists suffer shipwreck of faith, and Heretically err in the
foundation of Religion, teaching justification by the works of the Law out of
Jam. 2.21. Was not Abraham our father justified by works? but that they
confer not other places to help them into the right sense? as Romans 4.2. and
3.20. We are justified by faith, without the works of the law: and, Tit. 3.5.
Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his grace
he saved us. Which places being compared show, that one speaks of justification
before God, as Paul; the other of justification before men, as James; the
former of justifying the person, the latter of justifying the faith of the
person.

When they read such places as these, Awake thou that sleep, and, Turn you,
turn you, O house of Israel; hence they conclude, man has free will in his own
conversion. Whereas, would they compare these with other places, as Genesis 6.5.
The whole imagination of man's heart is only evil continually; and, it is God
that works both the will and the deed, etc. the reconciling of such places
would force them to see, that till God work us, we are mere patients, and
after that, acts agimus, being moved we move: for his grace must not be idle
in us.

The lewd and disordered Libertine, when he reads that we are justified by
faith without works, casts off all care of his conversation: What can his works
do? what need they? But he could not thus pervert the Scripture to his
destruction, if he compared it with such Scriptures as say, that faith without
works is dead: and, that faith works by love. The reconciling whereof would
teach them, that although works be excluded from justification, yet not from
faith: they must be in the person justified, though not in the justification
of his person.

This conference of Scripture, is either in places parallel and like, or in
such as seem to be opposed, and unlike.

The conferring of like places brings great light to the reader. As for
example: 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing.
If we would understand what is meant by this nothing, compare we it with Gal.
5.6. In Christ Jesus neither uncircumcision avails any thing, nor
circumcision: where nothing is, to avail nothing, and is not referred to
Circumcision, or uncircumcision it self, but to the person, it is nothing to
his salvation. So Psalm. 110.1. Sit at my right hand till I make thy enemies thy
footstool. If we would know whom this is meant of, compare it with 1 Cor.
15.25. For Christ must reign till he have put all his enemies under his feet.
Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: this place is
explained by the like, Heb. 1.5. For to which of the Angels said he at any
time, Thou art my son, etc. Psalm. 97.7. Worship him all ye Gods: What is meant
by Gods, and whom must the Gods worship? see Heb. 1.6. When he brought his
first born into the world, he said, Let all the Angels of God adore him.

Concerning unlike places we have this rule, That they speak not either of the
same thing, or manner, or time; and by wary observation of the circumstances,
this will easily appear in examples.

1 John 16.13. The Apostles after the gift of the Spirit were led into all
truth, and freed from error. Yet Peter greatly erred after that, Gal. 2.11.

Answ. The Apostles were led into all truth of doctrine, and erred not, but
were not free from all error in life and conversation: now Peter's error was not
directly in doctrine, but in conversation with the Gentiles. So as the
opposition is not in the same thing.

2 Isa. 59.21. My word shall not depart from thee, nor from thy seeds seed for
ever, says the Lord: yet Matthew. 21.43. the Kingdom shall be taken from you.

Answ. The Prophet speaks of the whole true Church of God, which shall be
perpetual upon earth: our Savior of the Nation of the Jews. So as the seeming
opposition is not in the same.

3 Luke 17.19. Thy faith has made thee whole: here Faith is greater than
Charity: but in 1 Cor. 13.13. Charity is greater than faith.

Ans. They speak not of the same faith: the former place speaks of justifying
faith considered with his object Christ, which not absolutely as a quality, but
relatively as apprehending Christ, is greater than Charity: the latter of
miraculous faith, which is less.

4 Romans 7.22. Paul delights in the Law of God: yet, verse. 23. Paul resists
the Law of God.

Ans. This is indeed an opposition in the same person, but not in the same
part: Paul stands of spirit and flesh: according to the former part, he
delights in the Law, according to the later, he rebelleth against it.

5 Luke 10.28. Life is promised to the worker, This do and live. Romans 4.3. Not
to him that works, but to him that believes, is faith imputed to
righteousness.

Ans. Both speak of the word, but not of the same part of the word, which
stands of two parts; the Law, and this promises life to the worker; and the
Gospel, which promises life to the believer.

6 Joh. 5.31. If I give testimony to my self, my testimony is not true. Joh.
8.14. If I testify of my self, my testimony is true.

Ans. Consider Christ's testimony two ways: 1 As the testimony of a singular
man, and thus considering himself as a mere man, he yields to the Jews, that
his testimony were unfit, and not sufficient in his own cause, because by the
Law, out of the mouth of two or three witnesses every word must stand: but 2
Consider him as a Divine person, coming from Heaven, and having his Father
giving witness with him, thus his testimony is infallible, not subject to
passion or delusion: And of this later the place speaks.

7 Matthew. 10.8. Freely ye have received, freely give. Luke 10.7. The workman
is worthy of his wages.

Ans. The places speak of the same persons, but not of the same works; the
former of miraculous works, which are not to be bought and sold for money (the
use of them being only to forward their ministry:) the later, of the Function
of Preaching, and labor in building the Church: equity requires that he that
labors in the Ministry, should receive recompense for his labor, Gal. 6.6.

8 Hos. 13.9. God is not the author of evil. Amos 3.6. There is no evil in the
City which the Lord has not done.

Ans. It is not the same evil; but, that the evil of fault, this the evil of
punishment.

9 Prove. 20.9. Who can say, my heart is clean? Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure
in heart.

Ans. 1. A man absolutely considered in himself is all impure; so the former
place speaks: but relatively considered in Christ, he is pure; so the later.
2 No man is pure in respect of the presence of corruption, but the godly are in
respect of the efficacy and rule of it.

10 Mark ^^.15. The Apostles must go out into all the world. Matthew. 10.5. They
must not go into the way of the Gentiles.

Ans. Distinguish times, and the Scripture will be consonant enough: the
former place is meant of preaching after Christ's time; the latter, w^i^e he
was living on earth. Both are true, because the times are diverse.

11 Joh. 3.17. God sent not the Son to judge the world. Joh. 5.27. The Father
has given all judgment to the Son.

Ans, The time of his abasement, at his first coming, when he came not to
judge, but to be judged, must be distinguished from his second coming in Glory
and Majesty, to judge the quick and the dead: of this the later.

12 Exodus 20.15. Thou shall not steal: Chap. 11.2. Rob or spoil Egypt.

Ans. A special Commandment of God never opposes a general, but is only an
exception from it. So of Abraham's mental slaying of his son. If a man of
himself should steal or kill, it is sin; but if God bid, it is not.

13 Malac. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not: yet it seems he is changeable,
Jer. 18.7.

Ans. The Scripture speaks not in the same respect: God changes not in
himself, but in respect of us: he is changed (as the Schools speak) non
affective, sed effective, in respect of his work, not of his affection: for so
there is no variableness or shadow of change in him.

14 Psalm. 18.20. Judge me according to my righteousness. Psalm. 143.2. Enter
not into judgment with thy servant.

Answ. There is a twofold Righteousness, one of the cause, another of the
person: by this later he will not be justified by himself, but in the other
he desires to be justified: his cause was good, there was no such thing as
they laid to his charge. If Job would dispute with God, his own clothes would
make him unclean: but when he deals with his calumnious friends, he says, I
will never let go mine innocence till I dye.

15 Luke 1.33. -- Of his Kingdom there shall be no end. 1 Cor. 15.24. He
shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father.

Answ. Luke speaks of Christ's Kingdom in respect of it self, the Apostle in
respect of the administration of it. In the former respect it shall never be
abolished, Christ shall always have a people to rule, always a Lordship and
Headship; but he shall give up his Kingdom in respect of the manner and means
of administering it, he shall not rule as now he does, by Magistrates,
Ministers, the Word, Sacraments, and other Ordinances.

16 Isa. 64.6. All our righteousness is as filthy rags. Ephesians. 5.27. The
Church is called glorious, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but
holy and without blemish.

Ans. Both are true: the Prophet speaks of the Church militant, the Apostle of
the Church triumphant.

17 Act. 15.10. Circumcision, and such like rites, are called heavy yoaks,
which neither the Apostles nor their Fathers were able to bear. 1 John 5.3, To
them that love God his commandments are not grievous, and his yoke is an easy
yoke, Mat. 11.30.

Answ. They were intolerable in respect of the rigor wherein Moses propounded
them, to be fulfilled: but not in respect of imputation (of Christ's
righteousness) inchoation (of inherent righteousness) and acceptance, God
accepting the will and faith, for the deed: Christ stood between those heavy
burdens and us, and carried away the curse of the law.

18 Act. 15.27. Circumcision is abrogated: yet Paul circumcised Timothy, chap.
16. v. 3.

Answ. True, it was taken away as a Sacrament, but it was not yet honorably
buried, and therefore it remained only as a ceremony.

19 Mat. 9.6. The Son of man has power to forgive sins. Luke 23.34. Father
forgive them, they know not what they do: why prays he thus to his Father if
himself might forgive them?

Answ. Though all the Persons in Trinity forgive sins, yet not in the same
manner: the Father bestows, the Son merits, the Holy Ghost seals up, and
applies remission of sins.

20 John 10.29. None of my sheep, no elect shall perish, none shall pluck them
out of my hands. Judas was elected, Mat. 10.4. and yet perished, was the Son of
perdition, Joh. 17.12.

Answ. Election is twofold, either to life eternal, whereof John speaks,
chap. 10.29. and so Judas was not elected: or to the office of Apostleship, and
from this he fell.

21 John 1.8. He was not that light. Joh. 5.39. He was a burning and a
shining light.

Answ. It speaks not of the same light: John Baptist was not the Sun of
righteousness, the Messiah, that light that brought light in the world; but he
was a light, and gave a notable testimony to that light.

22 Mic. 5.2. Bethlehem was little among the thousands of Judah. Mat. 2.6. Thou
art not the least.

Answ. The Prophet speaks of it as it was in his time, in it self, as it was of
a little circuit and compass: but the Evangelist as it brought forth Christ the
Son of God, the Messiah: in this respect it was great, which in it self was but
of small estimate.

23 Genesis 2.18. God said, It is not good for man to be alone. Paul says, It is
good for a man not to touch a woman, 1 Cor. 7.1.

Answ. God speaks so, 1 Ratione medii, because of propagation: 2 Remedii, to
avoid fornication, and wandering lusts: 3 Mysterii, because marriage should be
a type of the union between Christ and the Church: 4 Et adjutorii, because man
wanted a fit helper. But the Apostle speaks not simply, but comparatively; it
is not so good as not to touch a woman: or it is good, that is, commodious in
these times of persecution, when all the world raged against Christians, not to
touch a woman; it is not fit to have the burden of a family in such times.
Again, he speaks of such as himself is, such as have the gift of continency.

24 Joh. 10.27. Reach hither thy finger; and thy hand, and thrust it into my
side: yet verse. 17. he says to Mary, Touch me not. Why so?

Answ. Because Thomas must believe, and have his faith helped, who professed
he would not believe, unless he might touch him: but Mary believed, and did
not need this indulgence, she would hold him with her, and have the comfort of
his bodily presence.

25 Romans 14.9. -- That he might be the Lord of the dead and living. Matthew.
22.32. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Can God be the God of
the dead, and not the God of the dead?

Answ. Christ speaks not simply, as the Apostle does, but in the sense of the
Sadduces, and by an hypothesis of their surmise: as if he should say, God is
not the God of such dead, as you surmise shall never rise again, but because
they are indeed to rise again, God is their God.

Rule 2. Another Rule to be observed in Reading, to get the true sense of
Scripture, is this: If any place seem to uphold sin directly, it must be
expounded by a figure; as, 1 King. 18.27. Cry aloud, for he is a God, either
asleep, or in a journey, or pursuing his enemies. Here is a manifest Irony.
Mat. 26.45. when Christ took his Disciples asleep the second time, after he had
commanded them to watch, he says, Sleep on; which was a sharp reprehension of
their dullness. The like may be said of these places, Judge. 10.14. 1 King.
22.15. Eccl. 11.9. Mark. 7.9.

Rule 3. In all doubtful places, let us ever receive that exposition, which is
according to the Analogy of faith: Romans 12.6. If any man prophesy, that is,
have a gift of interpreting, let him interpret according to the analogy of
Faith: So that if the letter of a Scripture cross the Analogy of Faith, that
is, agree not with the sum of the Doctrine of Faith, contained in the Decalogue,
Creed, and Lords prayer, it must be understood by a figure. As for example:
Where the Text says, This is my body: seeing the literal sense fights with
the Article of Faith, by which we believe that Christ is ascended into Heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God, till he return to judge the quick and
the dead, it must be understood in the figure, usual to Sacraments, by which
the thing signified is put for the sign: and contrariwise. So, Luke 7.47. Many
sins were forgiven her, for she loved much: to gather hence merit of Remission
for our works of Charity, with the Papists, is against the ground of faith, by
which we believe remission of sins, which is directly opposite to merit.

Rule 4. Great diligence must be used to discern the right scope of the place
doubted of; which being neglected, makes way to manifold errors. See an
instance: The good Samaritan showed mercy to the man that fell among Thieves,
and was left half dead, and wounded. Now to gather hence, with the Papists,
that men are but half dead in sin, and being a little helped by grace^ are able
to work out their salvation, is to miss the cushion, and wander beyond, and
beside the scope of the place; which is, to show who is our neighbor, and what
Charity binds us to, and not what we can do of our selves. Besides, being a
parable, it proves nothing besides the main scope. Else one might hence prove,
that of all men Priests and Levites are most unmerciful, and that there is
chance.

Rule 5. If a doubt rise out of a promise or threat, know that they are all
conditional, although the condition be not expressed. Yet forty days, and
Ninivey shall be destroyed; with a secret condition, except Ninivey repent. So
a Promise of long life is made to the godly, and yet they often dye young:
therefore a secret condition must be understood, thus, unless God see it
better for them to take them away young from the evil to come. Isa. 38.1. See
thy house in order, for thou shall dye, and not live: yet Hezekiah lived
fifteen years afterward: Therefore there must be understood the condition of
Gods Will, which was concealed. Genesis 20.3. God said to Abimelech, Thou shall
dye for the woman, yet he dyed not: the exception was, unless thou restore
her. See this rule at large in Ezekiel. 33.13, 14.

Rule 6. Neither stick too fast to the letter, nor yet insist too much in
allegories or metaphors. The Jews greatly sinned in the first, and are yet held
from their conversion by this plot of the Devil. For as the multitude of them
in the Prophets time, while the Ceremonial Law stood in force, stuck to the
outward Ceremony and Letter, and offered Sacrifices and Beasts, and did such
things as were commanded, but went no further; they washed the outside, but not
the inside; they offered the blood of Beasts, but rose not so high as the blood
of Christ's they killed the Bullocks and Sheep, but not their sins, nor took
notice of that mortification of corruption, which these would have put them in
mind of: So at this day, reading the Prophecies of Christ's spritual Kingdom,
set out under the types of most flourishing temporal Kingdoms, they stick in
the Letter, and lose the sense, denying the Messiah to be come, because they
see not that flourishing estate, and temporal happiness, which they grossly and
carnally imagine.

This was the judgment of God upon Origin, who was in such extremities in both
these, that although his wit served him to turn all the Scripture almost into
allegories, yet he stood most absurdly to the very letter: as in that of
Matthew. Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib. ^. cap. ^.
19.12. Some have made themselves chaste for the Kingdom of Heaven: he
foolishly interpreted the place, and made himself be made chaste by men, not
discerning Christ's distinction; who speaks of three sorts of Eunuchs, some so
born, some violently cut and made so by men, some voluntarily by repressing
their lusts, abstinence, temperance, etc. this last he confounded with the
former. And he might as well have plucked out one of his eyes, because Christ
says, It is better to go into Heaven with one eye, etc.

So on the contrary, many Heretics have defended their Heresies only by
translating of Scriptures into Allegories. The Apostle speaks of such as
denying the Resurrection of the body, turn all the Testimonies of the
Resurrection into an Allegory, meaning thereby only the spiritual Resurrection
of the soul from sin. Of which sort was Hymencus, and Philetus, who destroyed
the Faith of certain, saying, The Resurrection was past already, 2 Timothy 2. v.
17. And of this sort are the Familists at this day.

The Papists denying the Marriage of Ministers, hearing the Apostle say, that a
Bishop must be the Husband of one Wife, turn it into an Allegory (I had like
to have said a jest:) He must, they say be the Bishop of one Bishopric; as
though his children must not be governed in his own house, which is plainly
distinguished from his Diocese, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. Thus they defend the Sacrifice
of the Mass, by Genesis 14.18. where it is said, that Melchisedech brought forth
bread and wine to Abraham, and he was the Priest of the high God: with them
this must needs signify, that the Priest offers Christ to God for the sins of
quick and dead.

Rule 7. In every small diversity and difference in numbers, which are
historically mentioned, we must not suspect error in the Scripture, but our
own ignorance. Act. 7.14. All the souls which came with Jacob into Egypt, were
seventy five: but in Genesis 46.27. They were seventy souls. Here are five odds.
Some say, Luke follows the translation of the Septuagint, which was famous, and
of great authority, and would not bring his History in disgrace for so small a
difference. I doubt not but Luke, and Stephen, and Moses agreed. Mr. Junius
thinks, that Stephen mentioned the four wives of Jacob, and his two sons, Er
and On^^ that were dead, excluding Jacob himself, but they came not into Egypt,
Calvin and Beza think there was some error in the Writers: which is not
unprobable, seeing in writing the Greek, the word (...), signifyng five (being
in the margent) might easily creep into the Text for (...), which signifies
all. And thus both Moses, and Stephen, and Luke may be reconciled, who both
likely wrote seventy.

But howsoever, according to our rule, the Spirit of God often in setting down
numbers, uses the figure Synecdoche, a part for the whole, and in a diverse
respect puts down a greater or less number, As for Example:

1 King. 9.28. Solomon sent his servants, who took from Ophir four hundred and
twenty talents of Gold: 2 Chronicles. 8.30. He took thence four hundred and fifty
talents of Gold. Here is thirty talents odds.

Answ. They received of King Hiram four hundred and fifty which they brought to
Solomon, partly in substance, as the four hundred and twenty, partly in
account, much being spent about the charge of the Navy, even the thirty talents.

1 Samuel 13.1. Saul reigned two years over Israel: whereas he reigned forty
years, Act. 13.21.

Answ. He reigned two years well, de jure, lawfully: but being rejected from
being King, the other are not numbered. Junius upon this place proves this
interpretation by four arguments.

Matthew. 17.1. Christ took Peter and John the sixth day after: Luke 9.22. Eight
days after.

Answ. Both are true in a diverse respect: Matthew accounts only the
intermedial days, not the two extreme pieces; Luke accounts them all.
Sometimes some numbers are cut off for brevity, and to make the number run more
full and round: as in Judge. 20.46. Of the Benjamites were slain five and twenty
thousand; here wants an hundredth, as appears verse. 35. for the aforesaid reason.

2 King. 15.33. Jotham was twenty five years old when he began to reign, and
be reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: yet it is said in the 30. verse. in the
twentieth year of Jotham the Son of Vzziah.

Answ. The former text speaks of the years that Jotham reigned for himself: but
he had reigned twenty years in his fathers time, being struck with leprosy for
meddling with the Priests office; and all the years he reigned in his Fathers
life time are counted to his fathers reign; for he was not Rex for that time,
but prorex.

The like rule also we must observe in diversities of names and places, if we
would not stick in the sand. As in this example: Matthew. 27.9. It was fulfilled
which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremy: whereas it was spoken by Zachary, chap.
11.13. and not by Jeremy. Many learned men trouble themselves more than needs
in reconciling this place. 1 Some say that Saint Matthew joins together both
one place in Jeremy, chap. 18.1, 2, 3. of the potter, and this of Zachary,
11.13. But there is little or no agreement between them. 2 Some say, that it is
not in Jeremies writings that are Canonical, but in some Apocryphal writings of
Jeremy, which the Jews had, and which Chrysostom confesses he saw, wherein
these words were. But it is not likely, that the holy Evangelist would leave a
Canonical text, and cite an Apocryphal; or give such credit to that, or seek to
build our faith upon it. And by our rule that Book should be Canonical, 3 Some
say, that Matthew forgot, and for Zaehary put down Jeremy: but with more
forgetfulness, that holy men writ as they were moved by Gods Spirit. This error
Erasmus takes hold of, from Augustine, who in his third Book concerning the
consent of the Evangelists, Chap. 7. defends and excuses this error. 4 Some
think it the error of heedless Writers, who might easily so err: but all the
oldest Copies, and the most ancient Fathers have the name of Jeremy. 5 Some
say, that Zachariah being instructed and trained up with Jeremy, did deliver it
by tradition from Jeremy, and so Jeremy spoke it by Zachariah: which might be
true, because it is said in the text, As was spoken by Jeremy, not, written.
But 6 The most compendious and likely way of reconciling is this, that Zachary
and Jeremy was the same man, having two names, which was very usual among the
Jews: as Gedeon was called Jerubaal and Jerub^sheth; Solomon was called
Jedidiah; Jethro was called Hobab and Revel; Jehoiacim, Ieconias, and Coniah;
Hester was called Edissa; Simon Peter, Cephas and Bar-Jona; Matthew was called
Lev^; Jerusalem, Jebus and Salem, etc.

4 These are such rules as not only the Learned (who besides these have the
benefit of Arts and Tongues, the knowledge of Phrases, the benefit of
Disputation, and the like) but even the simplest may make good use of: 1 To
understand the Scripture aright, and so discover the subtilty of Satan, and
seducers. 2 To convince error, and let others see their errors, and so gently
lead them back into their way again. 3 They be great means to justify the
truth, and glorify God. 4 Practisers of them have comfort in themselves, that
they are lovers of the truth, and desire to find it, even with much labor and
industry. 5 The want of this diligence and study of Scripture, is the very
cause, that so many stagger and doubt of our religion, and are so indifferent
that they cannot tell whether to lean to Papists or Protestants, and so hold
doubtful to their death. Yea, and many go away and fall off from us, and
depart to Antichrist: which is a just judgment of God upon them, because they
were so far from receiving the truth in the love of it, as they would never
take pains to search into the Scripture, which witness of the truth.

WE are now come to speak of the allegation it self, and the force of the
reason, taken out of Deuteronomy. 6.16. where the Israelites are forbidden to tempt
the Lord, as in Massah. How they tempted him in Massah, is set down in Exodus
17.7. being in want of water, and distress, they contended with Moses, and
said, Is the Lord amongst us? 1 They doubted of his power, and so would try
whether he could give them water in this their want: for the word nasah,
properly signifies to make trial; as David is said to have tried and proved
before to go in armor, 1 Samuel 17.39. where the same word is used. 2 They
doubted of the truth of his promise, not believing him to be amongst them, as
he had promised, unless he would show them in all haste some sign of his
presence, in present supply of their necessity; and therefore they say, I^ God
amongst us?

Now mark how aptly and wisely our Lord and Savior applies this place.

I. In his choice: he is now on the pinnacle, and in a dangerous place, and well
knows that this prohibition was a fitter place to study and meditate on, than
those large promises in that most comfortable Psalm. For howsoever all
Scripture is profitable and Divine, yet some Scriptures fit some persons, and
some occasions, better than other. It is a true and comfortable promise, Isa.
1.18. Come, let us reason together, though your sins were as red as scarlet,
etc. But for a man not truly humbled, the threats of the Law are fitter to
meditate on: neither does the Lord so invite the Jews till they be humbled. It
is true, God hears not sinners: but such a place is not so fit to be meditated
on, and applied by such as are seriously beaten down already in the sight and
sense of sin. He that provideth not for his family, is worse than an Infidel: a
true and holy speech: but if a covetous man apply it, it hurts him, he has
other places to study on; as, Beware of covetousness; and, covetousness which
is Idolatry, is one of the sins which shuts out of heaven. The holy heart of
Christ could equally meditate and apply all Scripture; but by this his choice,
he would teach us to make choice according to occasions.

II. In direct meeting the Devils drift, which was to move Christ to vain
confidence, and make trial whether he was the Son of God, or God his Father, by
throwing himself down. Comparing this place with the former, he shows him,
that it gives him no leave to cast down himself: for this were not to trust
God, but to tempt God, as the Jews did in Massah: but I doubt not of my
Fathers power, and therefore I need not try it. I distrust not the truth of his
promise, and presence with me, what need I make trial of it? I have a
Commandment, which I must not separate from the promise, as thou do. Thou
pretendest a promise, but no promise extends to the breach of any Commandment,
but has his ground and dependence upon some Commandment or other. Thou
would have me cast my self down, and promisest help, but no promise can
secure him, that attempteth that wherein he tempts God, as this action would.

In the words are, 1 The person that must not tempt, Thou: 2 The person that
must not be tempted, The Lord thy God: 3 The action of tempting, not tempt.

I. The person, Thou. Some think that the pronoun [Thou] is to be referred to
Satan; and [the Lord thy God] to Christ himself; as though Christ had said,
Thou shall not tempt me. But, 1 It was never written, that Satan should not
tempt Christ: if it had, it had been false. 2 It is a negative Commandment of
God, directed to his people, which binds all persons, at all times, in all
places; and not to be restrained to this occasion. 3 Satan was irrecoverably
fallen from the Covenant of grace; and so, although Christ was his Lord in
respect of his power, yet not his God in respect of the Covenant of grace,
which those words have special respect unto. 4 Satan proceeds to tempt him
still, and therefore that is not the meaning. 5 Christ in this humble estate
would not manifest himself, much less call himself Lord and God.

II. The person who must not be tempted, The Lord: if he be a Lord, he must
be feared, obeyed, honored, not tempted or provoked. Thy God: though he be my
God and my Father, I must not presume, I must not abuse my Fathers goodness and
providence where no need is. A loyal subject will not presume upon the clemency
of his Prince, to break his Laws, or a loving child upon his fathers
goodness, to offend him.

III. The action of tempting. To tempt God, is to prove and try God (out of
necessity) what he can do, or what he will do, and whether he be so good, so
merciful, so just, as his word and promise say he is: so Heb. 3.9. Your Fathers
tempted me, and proved me, and saw my works. The mother of this sin is
infidelity and unbelief, 1 Of Gods power, as if his arm were shortened: 2 Of his
goodness, as if he were not so careful of his chosen as he is. For else what
need I try that which I were assured of? The issue of it, or the branches that
shoot from this root, are put forth, 1 In judgment. 2 In affections. 3 In
counsels and actions of life.

I. In judgment and matter of doctrine, to prefer our own conceits above the
Word of God, whereof the Apostle speaks. Act. 15.10. Why tempt ye God, to
impose a yoke upon the Disciples necks, which neither our Father no^ we can
bear? as if he should say, Why do you of the Circumcision, vainly swelling and
trusting in your own strength, falsely conceive and teach without warrant, to
anger the Lord with, that by the fulfilling of the Law ye can attain
salvation, binding up the power of God to the Law as necessary to save men
thereby? what an intolerable yoke is this, which no man is able to bear? What
shall we think then of the Papists doctrine, who lay the same yoke upon men's
shoulders? what is their whole Religion, but a plain tempting of God, and a
provoking of his anger, while they lay on men the yoke of the Law? This is the
sin of all other Heretics, who like the Pharisees, let the Word of God behind
their own inventions, and properly and directly fight against Faith, which
leans it self wholly upon the Word of God. Faith looks at Gods constitutions,
it suffers not judgment to arrogate above Gods judgment; it beats down humane
wisdom and reason, and brings the thoughts and reasonings into the obedience
of God. It teaches not impossibilities, as they of the Circumcision, and
Papists do at this day.

II. In affection: 1 By di^^idence and distrust, Psalm. 78.18. They tempted God
in their hearts, in requiring me at for their lust. Here were many sins in
one: 1 A murmuring and grudging at their present estate. 2 A tempting of Gods
power. Can God prepare a Table in the wilderness? verse. 19.3 A denial of his
presence; If God were amongst us, he would prepare us a Table. 4 Making haste,
and appointing of time, and place, and the manner of helping them; he must now,
in the wilderness set up a Table: 5 Wantonness, having sufficient and
necessary Mannah and water by (...) immediate hand of God, they must have meat
for their lust. 2 By Curiosity, when men vainly desire extraordinary things,
and neglect ordinary, and must have ^^ch signs as they list, either out of mere
curiosity, as Herod would have a sign only to please himself in some rare
sight; or in pretense of ^^^firming them in the truth, as the Jews, when Christ
had sufficiently confirmed his heavenly Doctrine with powerful miracles, they
rejected this, and must have a miracle from heaven Mat. 16.1.

Quest. Is it not lawful to ask a sign? did not Gedeon, Judge. 6.17. and
Hezekiah ask a sign, and Moses, and it was granted?

Answ. Yes, it is lawful in four cases. 1 When God offers a sign, we may
require and ask it, as he offered one to Hezekiah: and not to require it is a
sin, as in Ahaz, who when the Lord bad him ask a sign, he says, He will not
ask a sign, nor tempt the Lord, Isa. 7.11. But he tempted the Lord now not in
tempting him, and greived him much, v. 12.

2 When an extraordinary Calling and Function is laid upon a man, he
considering his own weakness, and the many oppositions which he shall meet
withal in the execution of it, may for the confirming of his Faith, demand a
sign: and this was Gedeons case, who of a poor man of the smallest Tribe of
Israel, was extraordinarily called to be a Judge and Ruler. Or when such an
extraordinary work or calling is to be made manifest to the World to be from
God, for the better prospering of Gods work, a man may desire a sign, as Moses
did, Exodus 4. and Elijah.

3 When God gives an extraordinary promise to his Servants, of effecting
something above all they can see or expect, he pleases to condescend to their
weakness, and for confirming of their Faith he bears them asking a sign: as
Hezekiah being extraordinarily restored, seeing 1 His own extreme weakness;
and 2 The Word of God passed, Set thy house in order, for thou shall not live
but dye, required a sign: and God afforded him an extraordinary one. The Virgin
Mary had such an extraordinary promise as never was, to be a Mother without
the knowledge of man; she asked how that could be: God gave her a sign,
saying, Thy cousin Elizabeth has conceived, and shall bear a Son, and so shall
thou.

4 When anextraordinary testimony to a new form of Doctrine is requisite,
extraordinary signs may be required. As for example: The Gospel at the first
publishing of it, was joined with the abolishment of all the Ceremonial Law,
and all the Ordinances of Moses, and bringing in a new Religion (in respect of
the manner) through the world, against which both Jews and Gentiles could not
but be deadly enemies. Now the Apostles did desire and obtain the power of
working many signs and wonders, of healing, killing, raising the dead,
commanding Devils, and the like.

But to ask a sign out of these cases, is a provoking and tempting of God: as
1. Out of diffidence or malice, as the Jews bad Christ come down from the
Cross, and they would believe him, assuring themselves he was never able to do
that. 2 For curiosity and delight; as Herod desired to see some marvail; or for
satisfying our Lust, as Israel. 3 For our own private ends, not aiming directly
at Gods glory, and denial of our selves; as the Jews followed Christ, not for
his Miracles, but for their belly, and the bread: and the Virgin Mary herein
failed, requiring a Miracle of Christ, rather for a prevention of scandal for
the want of wine, than the manifesting of Christ's glory; for which Christ
checked her: for it was a private and light respect, to which miracles must not
be commanded, Joh. 2.4. 4 For confirming of that Doctrine and Authority, which
is sufficiently confirmed already, Joh. 2.18. Show us a sign, why thou do
these things, why thou whippest out buyers and sellers out of the Temple. He
shows them none, they tempt God herein; was not the whipping of them out, and
the Authority he had shown, sign enough of his divine authority? did not he
solely and alone overthrow and turn out a number of them without resistance?
did not he by his word, challenge the Temple to be his Fathers house, and
himself the Son of God? Having thus confirmed his authority by this sign, he
would show them no other.

Thus the Papists as a Pharisaical seed tempt God, looking for more miracles to
confirm the same Doctrine, which Christ and his Apostles have sufficiently
confirmed by many and powerful Miracles. When they prove that we teach another
D^ctrin, we will show them other miracles.

III. To tempt God in action, is thus: 1 To enter upon any thing without a
Calling: for that is to step out of our way, when we do that which we have
neither Word nor Promise for: this is in the Text. 2 To walk in a course of
sin, and live in our wickedness, especially when the Lord by blessings moves
us to repentance. Mal. 3.15. They that work wickedness be set up: who be
they? in the next words the Prophet shows, saying, They that tempt God are
delivered. So as all wicked persons are Tempters of God. 3 To presume upon
extraordinary means, when ordinary means may be had: Thus the three worthies
of David tempted God, that went for water in danger of their lives, whereas
they might have had it nearer in safety, 2 Samuel 23.15. but when they brought it
to him, he considered how they had sinned to satisfy his sinful desire, and
would not drink it. And this is the tempting of God intended in this place, to
fly down, refusing the stairs. 4 To run into places, or occasi^^ of danger, in
soul or body, is to tempt God, as to run into wicked company, or exercises.
Peter, notwithstanding Christ foretold him of his w^akness, yet trusted on his
own strength, and went into Gaiaphas his Hall, and seeking the Tempter found
him, and himself too weak for him.

Our Savior would here teach us what a dangerous sin it is to tempt the Lord,
it being so absolutely forbidden the people of God, not only in the Old
Testament, but in the New. 1 Cor. 10.9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of
them also tempted him.



2 It is a manifest argument of infidelity, and hardness of heart. When a
friend promises me to do me good at my need, or to stand by me in time of
danger, I will feign a need or danger, to try whether he will be as good as his
word or no; what does this but imply a suspicion in me, that my friend will not
be as good as his word, therefore I will try him before I need him? And thus he
deals, that will needlessly tempt God.

3 No relation between God and us may encourage us to tempt him. He is our
Lord, a strong God: do we provoke the Lord? are we stronger than he? 1 Cor.
10.12. Let not the Princes of the Philistims dally with Sampson, for he is
strong, and will revenge himself by pulling the house over their heads: the
Lord is strong and mighty, Sampsons strength was but weakness to him, therefore
let us not tempt him, lest we go away with the worse, as the Philistims did.
He is our God, even a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. it is no safe dallying with
fire. He is our Father, therefore we must fear him, as Jacob knows Isaac is his
father, yet is afraid to go to him disguised, lest (said he) I seem to my
father to dally or mock.

4 The greatness of this sin will appear in the greatness of his punishment. It
cost good Josiah his life, 2 King. 23.29. He would try what he could do
against Pharaoh Necho, when he was admonished of the Lord, not to go against
him. For this sin the Lord swear that not one of the Israelites above twenty
years old should enter into Canaan. It cost the lives of six hundred thousand
men, besides women, who for tempting God, were destroyed of the destroyer, 1
Cor. 10.9. Good Zachary for not believing the Angel, which came with tidings of
a son, was struck dumb for requiring a sign. Even the best, if they tempt God,
shall not carry it clear away.

Obj. Psalm. 34.8. Taste, and see how good the Lord is: and Romans 12.2. prove
what that good and acceptable will of God is.

Ans. There is a twofold knowledge of Gods goodness: 1 Speculative, by which
we know God to be good in himself and to us: 2 Experimental, in some thing not
revealed. The places alleged speak of the former, only this later is a
tempting of God.

Use 1. This serves to discover unto us, our failing against this doctrine, and
that every of us cannot so easily put off this sin as we think for.

1 Is it not ordinary amongst us that read the Word, and of Gods power therein?
we hear his promises, we taste by experience how good and bountiful God is, and
yet in any straight, in every danger, we can be ready to tempt him, as in
Massah, saying in our hearts, Is God with me? Does God regard me? Am I not
clean cast out of sight? Can I ever be helped, and swim out of this distress?
Thus the unbelief of our hearts is ready to make God a Liar. When there was a
mavelous great famine in Samaria, and Elisha said, To morrow at this time two
measures of barley shall be at a shekel, and a measure of fine flower at a
shekel: a Prince answered, If the Lord would make windows in Heaven, could it
be so? he answered, Thine eyes shall see it, but thou shall not eat of it. And
he was trodden in pieces in the gate for his unbelief. 2 King. 7. verse. 19.

2 How generally are we in love with our sins, which out of Malachi, we have
showed to be a tempting of God? God has poured abundant mercies upon us the
people of England, yet we go on to provoke and tempt him; the more his
mercies, the more our sins: how can this abusing of goodness but heap up wrath
against our selves. Can there be a greater tempting of God in his justice,
than to go on and trade in sin without repentance, presuming that God will not
punish us? What a number of notorious wicked persons are resolved to add
drunkenness to thirst, and sin to sin, and yet at last mean to be saved?

3 How hardly can we be kept from wicked companies and occasions? Though we be
warned by Christ's voice speaking in the Word, as Peter was, yet we thrust into
Caiaphas his hall, and the Players Hall, which is the Devils School, and will
not avoid occasions, till the end of sin bring sorrow and bitterness incurable.
How easily do men lose the watch over themselves, against their own
resolutions, and the motions of Gods Word and Spirit? when they might redeem
their precious time, gained from their special calling to the general, in
reading, meditating, prayer, etc. presently the Devil thrusts them out of both
callings, to gaming, drinking, or bowling, or such unprofitable exercises. O
when God lays you on your Deathbed, this one sorrow (if God ever give you
sense of your estate) will be ready to sink you; that you have loosely and
unfruitfully parted with your time, and now you cannot buy an afternoon to
bewail the loss of many in, with all your substance.

4 How prone are we to venture and rush upon any thing without a calling, or
without a warrant? as when men cast themselves into unnecessary dangers, hoping
that God will deliver them. Many run on an head into unlawful contracts,
without care of any word to guide them. Others strike the hand, and undo
themselves by Suretiship. Others cast off profitable callings, and betake
themselves to unprofitable and hurtful; as Usurers, and their Bawds; and
keepers of Smoke-shops. And some will run upon ropes for praise or profit. In
all this men are out of their way, and in a course of tempting God. Would a man
cast himself into the Sea, in hope he should never be drowned; or on a
persuasion he should never be burnt, cast himself into the fire? We having
stayrs, are prone to leap down: Christ our Lord would not do so.

5 How common a thing is it both in matters of soul and body, to sever the
means from the end, which is a plain tempting of God, as our Savior here
calls it? Every man hopes to go to Heaven, but never seeks the way.

I. What a number will be saved by Miracle? for means they will use none:
faith, repentance, knowledge, mortification, sanctification, they are
strangers, yea enemies unto. God fed the Jews miraculously in the Wilderness,
not in Canaan, not in Egypt where means were. Christ fed many people by
Miracle in the Wilderness, but being near the City, he bought bread, Joh. 4.8.
God will never feed thee with the heavenly Mannah by Miracle, where the means
are to be had, but are neglected.

How many will either be saved as the Thief was on the Cross, or they will
never be saved? they make their salvation but an hours work, and make as short
a matter of it as Balaam, who would but dye the death of the righteous. What a
tempting of God is this, as if a man would add his Oath unto Gods, that he
shall never enter into his rest? Christ has sufficiently set forth his Divine
power by that example of him on the Cross, he need not, nor will not do it
again, in saving thee by miracle. It is a better argument, Christ saved the
Thief at the last hour on the Cross, therefore he will not so save me, than
otherwise. What a common sin is it to neglect the means, and despise the word,
as a weak and silly means, as the Preachers be silly men? Oh, if we had
greater means, some man from the dead, or some Angel from Heaven, or some
miracles, we could be better persuaded. A great tempting of God: as though his
wisdom had failed in appointing sufficient means for the faith of his people.
Christ reproved this infidelity, Joh. 4.48. Except ye see signs and wonders,
ye will not believe. Notably Luther: If God should offer me a vision, I would
refuse it, I am so confirmed in the truth of the word. How commonly do men
stand out the threats of the Word, plainly denounced against their sin, even in
their own consciences; which is nothing but to tempt God, and try whether he
will be so just and strict?

II. In the things of this life men tempt God many ways.

1 Idle persons are tempters of God, that for working might releeve themselves
and theirs, but they will not, and yet hope to live: whose presumptuous
tempting of him, God revengeth either by giving them over to stealing, and so
they fall into the Magistrates hand, or he hardens men's hearts against them,
that they find not that good in an idle and wandering life which they expected.
These must have water out of a rock, and be extraordinarily fed, thrusting
themselves out of the ordinary course which God has put all flesh under: viz.
By the sweat of thy brows, thou shall get thy bread.

2 The omitting of any ordinary means of our good, or over-prizing of any
means, is a tempting of God to take them from us, and a revenging of the abuse.
Hezekiah, though the Lord say he shall live fifteen years, must not omit means,
but take dry figgs, and lay to the apostem. Asa must not trust to Physic: for
then he shall never come off his bed.

3 In our trials, when we murmr, grudge, make haste, or use unlawful means,
we tempt God, and incur this great sin. So as none of us can wash our hands of
it, but it will stick with us: and we had need daily to repent of it, because
it daily thrusts us under the displeasure of God.

Use 1. Labor we to nourish our confidence of Gods power and mercy, which is
an opposite unto this sin, and strive against it.

Quest. By what means?

Ans. By observing these rules: 1 See that in every thing, thou have Gods word
and warrant for what thou do: say not, I hope I may do this or that; but I
know I may do it. If thou have a word, thou may be bold without tempting
God: that is the ground of faith, and tempting of God is from infidelity. Acts
27.34. when Paul was in extreme peril, he tells the Mariners, they should come
safe to land. Why, what was his ground? even a special word; the Angel of God
told him that night, that none should perish.

2 Walk with God, as Enoch, provoke him not by sin, then may thou pray unto
God, and secure thy self under his wing in danger without tempting him. So long
as a man has a good conscience with Paul, and an upright heart with Hezekiah,
he may be bold with God, and rejoice in himself, and assure himself that Gods
power and justice is his; he will not sink in trouble, not say, Is God with me?

3 Use the means conscionably, which God has appointed for the attaining of
good ends. Paul had a word, that they should all come safe to land; yet they
must not cast themselves into the sea, nor go out of the ship. Never did any
promise of God make the godly careless in the means. Daniel had a promise of
return out of Babylon after seventy years, and knew they should return: and
turning the Book, and finding the time expired, he uses the means, and is
diligent with fasting and prayer, that God would accomplish his word, Dan. 9.2.
Jacob had a promise of God, that he should return into his Country, he knew
all the Devils in Hell could not hinder the promise; yet seeing his brother
Esaus wrath was a stop or bar, he uses means to remove this let; he goes to
God, and wrastles with him by prayer, then he sends his presents, and orders
his droves with all the wisdom he could; and by this means prevented the
danger. Christ himself having stairs, will use them. Remember for spiritual
life and natural, he must eat that would live: for spiritual war and temporal,
he must carry his weapons that would overcome: for earthly and heavenly
harvest, he that would reap must sow. The sick needs the Physician. In our
earthly or heavenly travel, let us with Jacob prevent whatsoever lets would
hinder us from our Country, or the end of our way.

4 Whether thou see means or no, subject thy will to Gods in all things. If
he kill thee, yet trust in him still. David in the want of means of comfort,
said, Behold, here am I, let the Lord do whatsoever is good in his eyes. The
three Children seeing no means of escape, answered the King thus, Our God is
able to deliver us; and if he will not, yet we will not worship thy Image:
we are sure of his presence, either for the preservation of our bodies, or the
salvation of our souls.

Verse. 8 Again, the Devil took him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and
showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the Glory of them:

9 And said unto him, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and
worship me.


NOW are we come by Gods assistance, to the third and last Temptation of our
Lord and Savior, which at this time he sustained, and powerfully vanquished.
For although our Savior had twice repelled his violence already, yet
notwithstanding Satan continues his assault.

Again]

Doctr. Whence we may note, the importunity of Satan against Christ and his
members, in temptation to sin. That he is restless herein against Christ,
appears, in that he dares set upon him here again, and again, and the third
time, even so long as he has any leave given him. And after this our Lord
himself lead not a life exempted and freed from temptation, for: Luke 4.13.
Satan left Christ but for a season. And for his members, we may see in Job,
how many Armies of Temptations he would have oppressed him withal: one could
not finish his tale of dismal tidings, till another came and overtook him; even
as one wave in the Sea, overtakes another. And in Joseph, how did he stir up
the hatred of his brethren against him? not content with that, they must cast
him into a pit; and there he must not rest, but be drawn out either to be
slain, or at least sold to the M^dianites: being in Potiphars house, how was
he every day tempted by his wanton Mistress? refusing that folly, how was he
hated of her, and cast into a dungeon by his Master? and there he lay a long
time, till the time came that Gods word must be verified for his advancement.

1 Because he is eagerly set upon the destruction of mankind,

2 He hopes at least by importunity to prevail, and by continuance of
temptations to break those whom at first he cannot foyl. Well he knows, that
instance and multiplying of temptations, may drive even strong Christians
sometimes to be weary and faint in their minds. And the rather, because he
knows the state of Gods children is not alike, but as often in their bodies, so
the strength of grace in their souls is sometimes weakened and abated.

3 His policy is oftentimes to make one temptation a preface, and step to
another; and a lesser way to a greater. For, 1 Considering Christ's hunger, it
seems small to make stones bread: 2 But a greater sin than that, to cast
himself down where there is no need: 3 But the greatest of all, is plain
Idolatry, Worship me.

4 If one kind of Temptation will not take so well, he turns to another: as
here, If Christ will not distrust, let him presume; if neither, let him be
covetous.

Use 1. To teach us to beware of security, seeing Satan takes not any truce,
but as a raging powerful enemy, desperate, and yet hopeful of victory, will not
be repulled, but assail us again and again. Yea, though we have once and
again overcome his temptations, as Christ had done, yet must we stand on our
watch still: for he will set afresh upon us. And why? 1 This is the Apostles
Counsel, 1 Pet. 5.8. because Satan is a continual enemy, therefore we must be
sober and watch. 2 Where he is cast out, he seeks re-entry, Matthew. 12.24. 3
Though God of his grace often restrain his malice, it is not to make men
secure, but to have a breathing time to fit themselves better for further
trial. 4 Security after victory in temporal war, has proved dangerous, and
has lost more than all their valor had won; as the Amalekites having taken a
great spoil of David's, 1 Samuel 30.16
and burned Ziglag, sitting down to eat and drink, and make merry, were
suddenly surprised and destroyed by David's sword. But in the spiritual
combat, security is much more deadly. 5 It is the wisdom of a wise Pilot in a
calm, to expect and provide for a storm, and in a troubled Sea, after one great
billow to expect another in the neck of it: Even so, while we are in the
troubled Sea of this World, it will be our wisdom to look for one temptation
in the neek of another.

And seeing it is with us as with Seafaring men, who by much experience have
learned, that in the trouble of the Sea, the greatest danger and tossing is
toward the Havens, where there is least Sea-room: therefore let us toward ou^
end, in sickness, and toward death, look for Satan's strongest assaults, and in
the mean time prepare against them. Yea, let us learn to prepare against all
kinds of temptations, as our Savior here resists all kinds in these three
general ones, and herein teaches us so to do: for, shall Satan dare to renew
so many temptations against our Lord, and will he spare any of his members?

Use 2. Here is a ground of Comfort for Gods people, who, when temptations come
thick upon them, are often dismayed, as though God had forsaken them, and so
grow weary of resistance; yea, and not seldom they grow into words of
impatiency. Never were any so molested as they Good David said once, This is my
death, and, all men are liars, even all Gods Prophets that told him he should
be King: there was no way but one, he must one day fall by the hand of Saul.
But be of good comfort, and possess thy soul with patience: for 1 No
temptation takes thee, but such as b^^^lleth man, 1 Cor. 10.13. and the same
afflictions are accomplished in thy brethren which are in the world, 1 Pet.
5.9. 2 Thou have the natural Son of God most restlesly assaulted by the
Devil, and pursued with all kinds of temptation, to sanctify all kinds of
temptation to thee. And herein thou art not only conformable to the Saints of
greatest grace, but even to thy Lord and Head. 3 The more assaulted thou art,
the surer argument it is thou art not yet in Satan's power, but he would win
thee. Thou have more cause to fear, if all be quiet with thee. When an enemy
has won a City, he assaults and batters it no more, but fortifies it for
himself. If the strong man have possession, all is at peace: but if there be
any resistance never so weak, he has not won all. Therefore resist still,
stand thy ground, and saint not, and if thou do any time faint, desire to
resist still, and thou still resistest.

Use 3. See here an express Image of the Devil in wicked men, who are restless
in their wickedness: no Child so like the Father, as they like their Father
the Devil in this property. Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to
blood, Prove. 1.16. yea, they are so restless, that they cannot sleep till they
have done some mischief, chap. 4. verse. 16. and the more they be resisted and
opposed, the further are they from desisting, but grow more violent, as Satan
here. See this restless disposition in the wicked Sodomites: they came about
the house of Lot to abuse the Angels, they cannot sleep till they have done
their villainy, they are all the night about it: when Lot persuades them to
desist, they are further off, and more violent, now must Lot take heed to
himself: when the Lord from heaven strikes them small and great with blindness,
and resists them, yet they will not give over, but sought the door still.

The like restlesnesse we note in the Jews, the wicked enemies of Christ, who
were so thirsty of his blood, and nothing else could serve them, and no means
could hinder them, but they consult in their Hall, how they may apprehend him,
they send out in the night to apprehend him; being come to catch him, he with
a word struck them all to the ground, yet they go on: having apprehended him,
they keep him all night in Caiaphas his Hall, and at the break of the day,
Caiaphas the High Priest, the Elders, Scribes, and Pharisces, held a solemn
Council to put him to death: And when his gracious words confounded them, and
they saw his innocence shine out, when they heard the Judge clearing him, and
saw him wash his hands from his blood, yet they grew more violent, and called
his blood upon them, and their children for ever. Exodus 32.6. when the
Israelites would sacrifize to the golden calfe, they rose up early in the
morning. We shall ever see wicked men in their wicked courses make more haste,
than good speed: and the more opposed, the more violent. Aaron durst not resist
them. How restless was Judas till he betrayed his Lord, and earned that price
of blood, both his Lords and his own? and how far was he from desisting,
notwithstanding the gracious means he had to hinder him?

There are three special things, wherein men do most expressly imitate Satan and
manifest his image upon themselves.

1 In incessant malice against God, and his Children. Satan was a manslayer
from the beginning, and so in the beginning was his Son Cain, who hated his
brother, and slew him, because his works were good, and his own evil, 1 John
3.12. Of this progeny were the cursed Jews that went about to kill Christ, Joh.
8. and all those that hate and malign the Children of God.

2 In slandering and false accusing: Rev. 12.10.
for Satan is called the accuser of the Brethren, and so are they, 2 Timothy 3.3.
Calumniation is the constitutive form of Satan, and the Jews had an express
Image of it upon them, Mat. 26.60. How do they compass their malice against
Christ? thus, they sought false witness, and thereby played the Devils: first,
they desired to have two witnesses, but they would not serve; then two more,
but they also would not serve (and mark by the way, it seems they examined them
apart;) at last some came that accorded, and upon their word they condemned
Christ. All the while they will seem to take a course of Law, justice, and
equity: but all is but a color. 1 Though, according to their plot, they must
put Christ to death unjustly, yet themselves do not devise slanders, but only
are willing that any should come in and speak against him in somewhat, they
will have two witnesses: it was enough for Magistrates to receive witness, not
to be judges and accusers themselves. Besides this, they will not deal
underhand, but have witnesses, and witnesses that must agree, and they ask him
what he answers to them: and all in public, to show that they did not
devise slanders in corners, but dealt as men that would justify their
proceedings, and stand to their doings. Yet for all these fair and colorable
pretenses, their Plot is to pronounce the sentence of condemnation upon him.

3 In boldness and impudency in sin: no age, nor ours want numbers of examples
of wicked persons sold over to sin, who are as naturally carried to wickedness,
as sparks to fly upwards, and as busy as Bees in contriving their wicked
purposes; night and day is too little to spend in the confusion of their lusts.
As violently are they carried into their riots, drunken matches, adulterous and
silthy meetings, murtherous and revengeful plots, cursed and blasphemous Oaths,
rotten and poysonful language, wicked and diabolical courses, as the swine were
hurried by the Devils into the lake. And if Devils were incarnate, and should
put on men's shapes, we cannot devise how they could otherwise carry themselves
more to corrupt humane society, and more to heap up their own and others
damnation. And let the Magistrates or Ministers use means to reclaim, or (if
that be hopeless) to restrain and hinder their malice, Oh they are so far from
giving up their courses, as they rage and storm so much the more, they will not
be so wronged, as be at every man's command; they did swear, and will swear;
they were drunk, and will be drunk; and to justify any thing that they have
wretchedly done, they will repeat it.

And do we not in all this see the express Image of the Devil of Hell in these
earthly Devils, that are as restless and unweariable in mischief as he, and as
far from laying aside their wickedness (even when they cannot compass it) as
he?

Use 4. Let us learn a good lesson from the Devil, and his Imps: they will
hardly be repelled from mischeivovs attempts, no not by Christ himself; so we
on the contrary must as hardy be driven from good purposes and practices.
Which is the rather to be learned, because we have that within us, which will
make us easily daunted in good things; as Peter himself, after he had been
long with Christ, was so daunted with the voice of a Damosel, as he easily
forsware (...) Master. All Satan's instance in evil, it to bring us from
instance in good, against whom we must every way fortify our selves.

First, In the subdoing of any sin or corruption, how will nature recoyl? how
stirring will Satan be to keep his holds? how many baits and objects will he
present unto thee? how many fears, and losses, and crosses (as rubs) will he
cast in thy way, and all to drive thee from the field against thy sin? But now
is a time to make use of this Doctrine: Are wicked men so constant to the Devil
at his instance, and must not I be constant for God at the instance of his
blessed Spirit? I will hold out by Gods grace, and if I be foiled once and
again, as the Israelites in a good cause against Benjamin, I will renew the
battle the third time, I shall at length carry away the victory: this sin is
one of Satan's band, like the captain, and I will not be driven out of the
field by such a Craven that will fly, if he be resisted.

Secondly, The graces of God are as so many precious jewels locked up in the
closet of a godly heart, the Devil is instant to rob and bereave us of these,
we must be as hardly persuaded to give up these, as to be spoiled of our
earthly treasure and riches.

1 Our faith were a sweet morsel to Satan: but we must resist him, steadfast in
the faith. Job will hold his faith in spite of the Devil: let him lose his
goods, his health, his friends, his children, he will hold his faith, and
profess if the Lord kill him too, he will still trust in his mercy. 2 He
would steal away our love of the Saints, and with it the life of our faith, and
therefore he sets before us many infirmities of theirs, and suspicions of our
own, and some fear from others: but notwithstanding, out delight must be in
the Saints that excel in virtue. Jonathan will not be beaten off the love to
David, though in all outward respects he had little causes only because he
saw God was with him. 3 He lays siedge to our sobriety and temperance, and
lays many baits: but Joseph will not yield to the many assaults of his
Mistress. 4 He would make us weary of prayer, which is our strength; and i^ God
delay, he tells us he hears us not, we lose our labor: But we must wrestle by
prayer, as Jacob, till we obtain, and as the woman of Canaan, beg once and
again till Christ hear us; if he call us dogs, so as we cannot sit at table,
let us beg the crumbs (as whelps) that ^all under the table. 5 He would make us
weary of our profession, is uncessant in setting the malice of the world upon
us, yea great ones, multitudes and all: But the Disciples by no whips, mo^ks,
threats, or persecutions could be daunted, but rejoiced in them, and went on
more cheerfully. 6 He would have us weary of well-doing, and beginning in the
Spirit to end in the flesh: But as Nehemiah in building the Temple and wall,
said to his crafty Counselors, Should such a one as I fly? so let every
Christian say, Should I lose all my labor, and that crown of life that is
promised to all them that are faithful to death? No, I will not do it.

The Devil took him up into an exceeding high mountain,

In this third temptation, we are to consider two things: 1 The assault. 2 The
repulse. In the assault, two things: 1 The preparation: 2 The dart it self. In
the preparation, 1 The place. 2 The sight represented. The dart consists of, 1
A profer; All these will I give thee: 2 A condition; If thou will fall down and
worship me: 3 A reason, for they are mine, and to whomsoever I will I give them.

First of the place: and in it, 1 what place it was, 2 how Christ came thither,
3 why Satan chose that place.

I. The place was the top of an exceeding high mountain. What this mountain
was, we cannot define, and the Scripture being silent in it, we may be sure
it is no Article of faith. Some think it was mount Ararat, on which the Ark of
Noah stood in the flood, the highest mountain in the world But without all
reason: for that was in Armenia, another part of the world, Genesis 8.4. And there
were a number of great Hills round about Jerusalem fit enough for this purpose.
As,

1 There was mount Moriah, where Abraham offered to sacrifize his Son Isaac,
where Solomon built his Temple, and wherein Christ stood in the former
temptation. But the text is plain, he was carried from thence into an higher
mountain by far. 2 There was mount Ghi^n, 1 King. 1.33, 34
where Zadok and Nathan at David's appointment anointed Solomon King: But this
was too low. 3 There was a mountain over against Jerusalem, called mons
offensionis, the mountain of scandal, where Solomon in his age (deceived by
outlandish wives) built an high place for Chemosh, and Molec, the abominations
of the children of Ammon and Moab, 1 King. 11.7. which high places (so hard it
is to thrust down superstition once set up) continued standing three hundred
sixty three years, and were destroyed by Josiah. 4 There was mount Calvary,
where Christ suffered: but that was not so high as this mount spoken of. 5
There was mount Olive^, a famous mountain, about six furlongs from Jerusalem:
here David wept, flying before his Son Absalom: here Christ often watched and
prayed, and wept over Jerusalem: for it was so high, as that from the top of it
(as Josephus reports) one might discern all the streets of Jerusalem, and see
afar off to the dead sea. 6 There was mount Sion, higher than all these,
which was called the Mountain of the Lord: for those that have written
concerning this City, know that the foundation of it is among the holy
Mountains, and among them all mount Sion was far the highest, and therefore
David made a Fort there, called the City of David. 7 There were besides these,
without Jerusalem, mount Nebo, from the top of which Moses stood and beheld all
the Land of Canaan, and was commanded to dye. This is generally held to be the
Mount, to which Christ was carried: and so could I think, were it not that it
was quite without Palestina, and not in the Land of Canaan: for Moses only
there did see the good Land, but must not enter into it. 8 There were within
Palestina, besides these, mount Basan, and mount Hermon, very high Hills, in
comparison of which Sion is said to be a little Hill, Psalm 42.6. and 68.16.
Now it is very probable, that this temptation was upon one of these Hills: but
we must not be curious to determine where the Scripture does not. Which soever
it was, the text says, it was an exceeding high one.

II. How came Christ thither?

Ans. After the same manner that he was formerly transported unto the top of
the pinnacle, as we have showed in the former temptation. 1 The more to humble
and abase Christ. 2 To terrify him, if it might be, to see himself so carried
and tossed by Satan.

III. Why did Satan make choice of this place?

Ans. 1. Because it best fitted his temptation, and furthers his purpose: for
if he had stood in a valley, and made a show of the world, and the glory of it,
Excelsa pro mittit in excel^o.
it might more easily be discovered to be a delusion and deceit. But here is a
brave prospect. 2 He is to promise mountains and great matters, and therefore
brings him to a mountain, there to view his commodities which he would barte^.
3 Some say, he chose a mountain in way of imitation of God: or rather we may
say in exprobration of him, who in the mount Nebo let Moses see all Canaan: but
Satan does more: 1 Moses must go up that moun^, God carries him not, but the
Devil carries Christ 2 God lets Moses see only the Land of Canaan, the Devil
lets Christ see all the Kingdoms, and glory of all Countries. 3 God will give a
small Country, to a Company of people to possess, so long as they give him his
worship, and service: but the Devil will give all the world to Christ alone, if
he will but once fall down and worship him.

Hence note, Satan had Christ in the Wilderness, a low and solitary place, he
could do no good upon him; he raises him extraordinarily to the pinnacle of
the Temple, and Christ is too good for him there; now he thinks him not yet
high enough, but if he can get him to the top of an exceeding high mountain, he
despairs not but to obtain his purpose against him. This policy of Satan
teaches us, that,

Doct. Those that are in highest places, are in greatest danger of falling. And
when he uses one temptation against a man in the Wilderness, in a low and mean
estate, he doubles his forces, and secondeth his assaults against a man set
aloft, and in the mountain, as his practice against our Savior teaches. Saul
while he was in a low and private estate, was dutiful and humble; but, being
raised into the throne of the Kingdom, how did Satan prevail against him till
God utterly rejected him? Nay, David himself, while he was in the valley, was
holy, full of vows, prayers, watchfulness, he was meek and merciful; but being
set in the chief seat of the Kingdom (as it were in the mountain) how ^oul,
bloody, proud, became he by Satan's malice; as in adultery, murder, and
numbering the people was manifest?

Hezekiah in his sickness could pray, weep, and be humble eno^gh, but no sooner
recovered he his mountain, but he prides himself in his wealth and treasures.
David confesses of himself, that in his prosperity he said, he should never
be moved, because God had made his mountain strong, Psalm. 30.7. Thus easily
does vain confidence creep on him that sees himself stand on a mountain, though
otherwise his heart be according to God. No marvel then, if ease stay the
fools, and the prosperity of the foolish destroy them, Prove. 1.32. If Satan
have them in the mountain, he needs no more, their own state will overthrow
them.

2 Satan, as he desires men in the mountain, that is, in high place, to sin; so
he desires that every sinner were in a mountain or high place, because as the
place it self will draw forth that corruption which is within, so it will hold
them in their sin: For great men commonly are not more licentious than
incorrigible; hardly are they reclaimed, and who dares call them to account?
And besides, their sins are more infectious and scandalous: for all the eyes of
inferiors are upon them. A man that stands upon an high mountain, is a fair
mark, and may be seen of millions at once. So as if in the Commonwealth,
Rehoboam commit Idolatry, all Judah will do the like under every green tree,
and under every green hill, 1 King. 14.22. In the Church, if the High Priest
contemn Christ, the people will buffet him, and spit in his face, Matthew. 26.67.
In the family, if the Fathers eat sour grapes, the Childrens teeth are set on
edge. Commonly the Proverbs are verified: Like Prince, like subjects; Like
Priest, like people; Like Mother, like daughter. Nothing can lie on the
mountains, but it easily slideth down into the valleys.

3 Satan herein directly opposes God in his course and proceedings: for the
Lord advancing men, and carrying them into these mountains of the Church,
Commonwealth, or Family, he therefore raises them, that they should be
greater instruments of his glory, and man's good. Now Satan mightily strives to
have these the greatest instruments of Gods dishonor, and hurt of humane
society. Well he knows, that the punishment of such men's sins cease not in
their own persons, but descends on the valleys round about them. If Ahab make
all Israel to sin, all Israel shall be scattered as sheep without a shepherd.
David numbers the people, all his people are plagued: he sins with the sword,
and the sword shall never depart from his house: good Josiah met with that
threatening four hundred years after. The Devil cannot bring a greater mischief
into the earth, than by throwing down such as stand in high places of the
Church and Commonwealth.

Use 1. Therefore let prayer be made especially for all in authority and
eminency, 1 Timothy 2.2. Not only in respect of the burden of their calling, and
the hazard and peril of their persons; but especially because of Satan's
special malice against them, and the multitude of their temptations: the place
is slippery, and dangerous to fall. How do we puff up our selves, when our
small things go well with us? How could we be easily carried away with the
tickling of vainglory and pleasure, who scarce taste of them? Of how much
strength therefore may these be conceived in Kings and Princes, who have a sea
in comparison of our drops? Which forbids us to marvel, when we see the most
excellent Kings, David and Solomon, altogether impotent to withstand the waves
of temptation.

Besides, the Devil keeps not only in the Country, but in the Court, and his
malice against us, stirs up his rage against our chief Rulers: as when the
Devil had a malice to Israel, he set upon David to number the people. Which
one consideration should stir us daily in our prayers to be mindful of our
Prince and Governors, that as our provocations bring temptation upon them, so
our petitions for them may help them through all.

Use 2. Such as are in any eminency or place above others, must be so much the
more watchful; and let this meditation be as an antidote to expel the poison,
swelling, and inflammation of pride, that the higher thy hill is, the more is
Satan's malice and plots against thee. If a man stand upon the top, or any part
of Mount Sion, that is, be a Teacher in the Church, he must know that he is a
light set upon an hill or mountain, all eyes are upon him; and therefore Satan
that stood at Jehoshuahs right hand, will not be far from him: let him make
right steps to his feet, lest he treading awry, many be turned out of the way.
Let such as are eminent in profession above others, be more watchful than
others: Satan is more busy with thee because thou shall open many mouths
against thy profession, and he will wound many through thy sides, he will
make many ashamed because of thee, and because of thee he will make Gods
enemies to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. Thy slip or fall shall make all Gath and
Askelon ring of all thy profession; for they are all alike; never a good one of
them all, etc. Such as are carried into the mountain of earthly prosperity,
must labor for more strength and wachfulnesse, than if they were in a lower
estate: else Satan will make this condition as the dead sea, in which no grace
can live. Show me one (excepting our Lord Jesus) that ever came better from
the mountain, that is, was the better man for his prosperity. Numbers there are
that have come out like Gold, brighter and pu^^er out of the fire of
affliction; but so dangerous it is to stand upon this mount, as the Lord once
and again forewarned and charged his own people, that when they should come
into the good land which he had given them, then to beware that they waxed not
fat, and forgetful, and rebellious against him. We know that the Moon being at
full is furthest from the Sun, and commonly fullness and abundance withdraw us
from our Sun of righteousness, whence we have all influence of light and grace.

Use 3. Let this point work contentment in our hearts, and cause us to prize a
mean and comfortable estate, wishing no mountains but that holy mountain of
God, where we shall be free from all gunshot, and safe from all temptation.
Here is an holy ambition to affect and aspire to a Kingdom, wherein we shall
reign as Kings. In the mean time, if we desire superiority or command, let us
labor to overcome sin, the Devil, our selves, and our Lusts, let us depose
them from reigning in our mortal bodies. And if at any time we begin to admite
our selves and others, for outward prosperity and greatness in the World, let
us turn our eyes another way, and esteem Gods Wisdom and fear above all
outward happiness. This was the Wisdom of Solomon, with which God was so well
pleased, that having it in his choice to ask Riches, or long Life or Victory,
he asked Wisdom before them all, and God gave him b^^^ that and them. Let
this ever be our wisdom, to affect goodness not greatness, this brings Satan
upon us, that drives him away from us.

The second thing in the preparation, is the sight represented, in which
consider these things: I what was the sight, All the Kingdoms of the World,
and the glory of them. 2 How Satan represented them, he showed him. 3 How long
this sight lasted, in a moment, says Luke.

I. The sight was all the Kingdoms of the earth, both the Kingdoms
themselves, and the Majesty, Beauty, Glory, and order of them; yea, their
wealth, and whatsoever was in them, by which the mind of our Savior might be
rapt into the admiration of them, and after to desire them. For the end of his
temptation is Idolatry, and his means is covetousness.

Quest. But were there not many sorrows, vexations, and tumults in the World?
why does Satan show none of these?

Answ. 1 His policy and subtilty would not make show of any thing, which would
hinder his temptation, but did all to further it. His scope was to bring Christ
into love with the World, and for this purpose he must make it as lovely as
he can, as a cunning fisher must hide the hook, and show nothing but the bait.
2 He knew that by this very trick he overthrew the first Adam; to whom he
showed nothing but the fair side of the Apple, and benefit and bettering of
their estate, how by eating of it they should be as Gods; but hid all the
inconvenience, that it was a breach of Gods Commandment, and that the issue
was death. And so he goes about to circumvent the second Adam.

II. The manner of this sight, And showed him] Some think in a Map. But he
needed not have carried him into a Mountain for that. Neither in a vision,
illuding his mind and phantasy; because this he might have done in the
Wilderness, or on the Pinnacle, if it could agree so well to the perfection of
Christ's mind. But I take it, he offered the images and representations of them
all sensibly and actually, after a wonderful and strange manner, making their
Images to appear to his senses. And if a man by his Art can represent to the
senses in a glass, any person or thing so lively, by which he that sees not
the thing it self, discerns a notable image of it; how much more may we
think, that Satan by his Art and Cunning can represent to the sense, the Images
of things which are not indeed present? A lively confirmation whereof appears
in his lumber, I mean Sorcerers and Juglers, who by the Devils help most
cunningly delude the senses. But Christ did indeed see the Images, and most
glorious representations of the World, and the Kingdoms of it: the which that
he might think to be the things themselves, and the better to persuade him
that he saw the things indeed, he set him on an exceeding high mountain;
notwithstanding he knew, that the highest mountain of the World could manifest
but a small part of the whole; and if it could, yet the strongest eye of man
could reach but a little way, and were not able, at least in so small a time,
to distinguish the particulars thereof.

III. The time how long this sight lasted; In a moment, (...). In accurate
consideration, a moment is the fortieth part of an hour, for a point of time is
a quarter of an hour, and a moment of time is the tenth part of a point of
time. But I think we are not to take the word so strictly, which here notes a
very short time, much shorter than the fortieth part of an hour: and with
Chemnitius, I think it to be the same with that in 1 Cor. 15.52. (...), in a
moment; and explained in the next words, (...), in the twinkling of an eye,
which is indeed no time, but the beginning rather of time, seeing there is no
distinction between time past, and time to come. Howsoever, we must take it
for a very short space of time, and that the sight was gone before Christ could
well consider of it. For so the like phrase is used concerning Sodom, that it
was destroyed in a moment: for the Sun rose very fair, and before ever they
could consider of such a storm, the Lord showred down fire and brimstone.

Now the reason why the Devil used such a speedy and quick representation, was,
to ravish Christ suddenly, and stir up his affections by the absence of it, to
desire to see it again: dealing with Christ as we with our little children;
when we would make them earnestly desire a thing, we let them see it, and
hide it again, give it them into their hands, and suddenly take it away again.
So did Satan. Secondly, Satan might have another trick in it, to disturb the
mind of our Savior: for as a sudden flash or light does dazzle the eyes of
the body, so does a sudden flash or sight of this or that object, easily dazzle
the eyes of the mind, and instead of pleasure with it, at least it brings some
trouble and perturbation. However, he thought it would fit and bring on his
temptation. Thirdly, shadows will abide no looking on, no examining, and
therefore the Devil is so quick in taking them in.

Doct. 1 It is an old practice of the Devil, to let death into the soul, by the
window of the senses, and especially by the sight: for here he would overcome
Christ by the sight of the World, and the glory of it. Thus he had gained Eve
to sin by the sight of the apple, which was beautiful to the eye: by hearing
that she should be as God, if she did taste it: by touching, tasting, and
pleasing all her senses with it. The sons of God saw the daughters of men that
they were fair, and took them to them for wives: which was the cause of the
deluge. Ahab saw the vineyard of Naboth lie so conveniently to his demeans, as
he must needs compass it by murder.

David sees Bathsheba, presently affects her, his violent affection blinds his
judgment, he must have her company though it cost Uriahs life. I saw (said
Achan) among the spoil a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred sheckels of
silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels; and I coveted them, and took
them, Josh. 7.21. How was Adam otherwise deceived by Eve, but first in his
affection, and then in his judgment?

2 As Satan lays his baits in all the Senses to steal the heart, so especially
in the eyes, dealing as the Chapman that would vent his wares, he lays it forth
on the stall that men may see it, and oftentimes the very sight of it, without
further offer, draws on the buyer to a bargain. He knows he loses not all, if
he gain but an unlawful look: because there is sin begun, though not perfected.

3 The Sense is to the Soul as a door to the house: A man that would come in,
or send any thing into an house, must go in and send it in by the door. Even
so, although the Devil by his spiritual nature, can and does apply himself to
our spirits without our senses, yet other tempters cannot reach the soul so
immediately. Eve could not work Adams heart directly, but by the outward senses
of hearing, and seeing especially sent in the temptation. Poisons cannot reach
the heart, unless by the senses they be drawn in. So wicked Mates cannot
convey their corruption one into another, but by the outward senses; hearing
their wicked and incentive speeches, and seeing their graceless and infecting
actions. But besides this, so full of malice is our spiritual adversaty, that
he would not only immediately take up our hearts, but fill up all our senses,
and by them continually sends in burning lusts, and by the same door covetous
desires, and by the same ambitious and aspiring thoughts, and by the same
revengeful intentions, and such like, till the house be full of wickedness.

4 Satan knows that God has appointed the senses for the good and comfort both
of body and soul, especially the sight and hearing to be the senses of
Discipline, to furnish the mind with knowledge of God, with faith which is by
hearing, with hope of his gracious promises, with heavenly meditations, and
contemplation of his great Works which our eyes behold. Now Satan would cross
all this gracious constitution of God* and make the lights of the body, be
means to blind the mind: he would fill up the senses, and take them up with
such objects, as shall not only corrupt the heart, but keep out those means of
grace, which the Lord would by them convey into the heart: so that the soul
should be further poisoned by the same means, which the Lord has prepared as
an Antidote, by which natural poison and corruption should be expelled.

Use 1. This doctrine enjoyneth a diligent custody of the senses. A good
Householder suspecting Thieves and Robbers, will be sure to keep his doors and
windows fast. And we knowing that our senses are the doors and windows of our
souls, must look to these doors, lock them, bar them, bolt them fast, that
the Devil enter not this way. True it is, that the inside must first be made
clean: for out of the heart proceeds an evil eye, Mark 7.22. But whosoever is
resolved to keep his heart in any rightness, must think it his next care to
shut out, and keep out whatsoever might be let in, to decline it and turn it
from God again. What made the holy Prophet, Psalm. 119.37. pray so earnestly,
that God would turn his eyes from beholding vanity, but that he knew, that
even a good heart (such as his was) could never hold out, unless the outward
senses, especially the eyes, which by a Synecdoche are there put for the rest
(both because they are special factors of the soul, and because of the
multitude of their objects, and in regard of the quickness of sight above all
the rest of the senses laid together) were well safe-guarded? Can the heart or
Marketplace of a Town or City be safe from the siege of the enemy, if the
Gates be cast open, or the Wall demolished, or the Ramparts bared of their
sense and munition? Why did Job make such covenants with his eyes, but that he
knew that without such a sense every object would be as a snare to entrap his
soul? Job 31.1. Nay, let an heart never so seasoned with grace, suffer the
senses to leak, the soul is in danger of shipwreck. Was there ever heart of
ordinary man or woman more innocent, or more filled with grace, than Eves in
her innocence? And yet when as Satan let upon her senses, he sent in by them
such poison, as wrought death unto all her posterity.

Rules for the ordering of our senses aright.

1 Beware of the life of sense, which is a brutish life. 2 Pet. 2.12. the
Apostle speaks of men led by sensuality, even as the brute beasts, who follow
sense and appetite without all restraint. Thus did the Gentiles, who were
therefore given up to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.24. And the danger of this
estate Solomon notes, Eccles. 11.9. when he bids the young man walk in the
sight of his own eyes, and after the lusts of his heart; but withal, Remember
that for all this he must come to judgment. Let such think hereon, that think
it is free to give up their senses to feed themselves upon every object
themselves please.

2 Consider that God made the senses to minister to a right ordered heart, and
not the heart to follow the senses: and therefore the heart must be watched,
that it walk not after the eye, which is to invert Gods order. And what a
deluge of sin over-floweth the soul, when the understanding is buried in the
senses, and the heart drowned in sinful appetites? David gives his eye leave to
wander, and look lustfully after Bathsheba: and what ways of misery one
overtaking another did he bring into his soul? And what marvel then if natural
men neglecting their duty, in taking off their eyes from unchaste objects,
never rest till they come to have e^es full of adultery? 2 Pet. 2.14. not
ceasing to sin, according to our Saviors speech, Matthew. 6.23. If the eye be
evil, all the body is dark, yea and the soul too.

3 Keep the parts of Christian armor upon thy senses, that thou lie not open
there. A valiant Captain knowing that the enemy is easier kept out, than beaten
out of a City, has great care to plant his Garrison about the gates and walls;
there he sets his most ^aithful watch and ward, there he plants his chief
munition and ordnance. Had David kept his armor on his eye, he had not been so
foiled by Bathsheba: If on his ear, he had not been so injurious to
Mephibosheth, by means of slandring Zaba, 2 Samuel 16.3, 4. Solomon wishes us,
Not to look upon the color of the wine in the cup, that is, with too much
pleasure to stir up desire. He would have us keep our sense upon our ears,
not to give ear to a flatterer or whisperer, but brow-beat him, and drive him
away with an angry countenance. The Apostle Paul would have our ears shut
against evil and corrupt words, which corrupt good manners. Daniel desires not
to taste of the Kings dainties, nor will pollute himself with them, chap. 1.
verse. 8. And so we must fence our whole man, as we may not touch any unclean
thing, and yield nothing to the course of waters.

4 Feed thy senses with warrantable objects: 1 God: 2 His Word: 3 The
Creatures: 4 Thy Brethren: 5 Thy self.

First, our eyes are made to see God himself, here below as we can in his
back-parts, hereafter as we would, face to face. And therefore a base thing it
were to fix them upon the vain pleasures and profits of this life: This is
fitter for brute beasts, that have no higher object.

Again, what fairer or fitter object can we choose for our senses, than himself
that made them with all their faculties, and gives us so much comfort by them?
Prove. 20.12. The hearing ear, and seeing eye, God made them both: and both of
them, as all things else, he made for himself. Further, where can we better
place ou^ senses, than upon him from whom all our help comes? How ought our
eyes to be continually lifted up in holy and servent prayers and praises,
considering both our continual necessities and supplies? So David, I lift up
mine eyes unto the hills from whence my salvation comes, Psalm. 121.1. and, As
the eye of the Handmaid is lifted up to the hand of her Mistress, so are our
eyes unto thee, Psalm. 123.1.

Lastly, how can we place our senses better, than upon him who is the most
pleasant and durable object? To see God in Christ reconciled, to hear and know
him become our Father, is so ravishing a sight, as the Saints have run
through fire and water to apprehend it. And for the continuance, it will feed
the senses everlastingly; yea when the senses themselves decay and wax dull,
this object shall feed them, and be never the less sweet. And therefore as
Solomon advises, Eccles. 12.1. while thou have thy senses, fix them upon this
object; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before they be dark
that look out at the windows, etc. If a man set his senses and feed them upon
any outward object, wealth, honor, pleasure, buildings, and the like, we may
justly say to him, as our Savior to his Disciples, when they gazed upon the
beautiful workmanship of the Temple; Are these the things your eyes gaze upon?
verily, the time comes, when one stone shall not be left upon another
undemolished. The like may be said of all earthly objects whatsoever. Only
this object shall grow more and more glorious and desirable.

Secondly, God made our senses to be exercised in his holy Word, which leads us
to himself. Heb. 5.14. the Apostle requires, that Christians should have (...),
senses exercised in the word: Prove. 2.2. Let thine ear hear wisdom. 1 Hence
comes faith, which is by hearing. 2 Hence we draw the comforts of the
Scriptures, which are the consolations of God in our trouble. 3 Hence are we
admonished, directed, and wholsomly corrected. Prove. 15.31. The ear that
hears the rebuke of life, shall dwell among wise men. 4 The danger of neglect
is great: 1 He that turns his car from hearing the law, his prayer is
abominable: 2 Uncircumcised cars resist the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. 3 Itching
ears that turn from the truth, do (by Gods just judgment) turn unto ^ables, 2 Timothy 4.3. 5 It is a sign of a man that has given his heart unto God: for he
that gives his heart, will give his senses too, knowing that God requires both.
Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes, that is, thy
senses, delight in my ways. And our Savior says, He that has an ear to
hear, let him hear. Seeing therefore that this is so notable a means of guiding
our senses, let us more carefully give up, and take up our eyes and ears with
the sight and sound of Gods Word upon all occasions, in the hearing and reading
of the Scripture. I would ask the most carnal man that is, whether this in
sound judgment be not a better object for our senses, than Bowls, or Tables,
and fitter for all times, especially for the Sabbath.

Thirdly, God made our senses, to profit our selves by his Creatures, that by
them we might glorify him their Creator, and not by them corrupt or ensnare
our selves. Isa. 40.26. Lift up your eyes aloft, and behold who created all
these things. This use David makes, Psalm. 8. When I see the heavens, the
earth, and the works of thy hands, then said I, Lord what is man that thou art
so mindful of him? and concludes the Psalm thus, How excellent is thy name
through all the World? And why? 1 The invisible things of God, his Power, and
Divinity, and Eternity, were made visible to the very Gentiles by things
created, Romans 1.20. And shall we either not look on them, or so look upon them
as they to make us inexcusable? shall we only enjoy the natural use, and no
spiritual or Divine use from them? 2 Consider that God, for this purpose, has
made the Countenance of man, not as the Beasts grovelling on the Earth, but
erected unto Heaven: and he has made the eye of man not as the Beasts, but (as
Anntomists observe) has given it one muscle which they want, whereby he can
turn his eye directly upwards with admirable quickness, that it should not so
fix it self upon any thing below as the Covetous eye does, but by occasion of
things below turn it self upward to their Creator. Yea, he has compassed our
eyes with brows, and lids, and fences from dust and earth, that though we look
sometimes on the earth, yet the least dust or earth should not get into them. 3
Let us labor to use our senses in beholding Gods works, as they in Joh. 2.23.
that saw the works of Christ of whom it is said, Many believed in the name of
Christ, seeing the works that he did. So let the works which we see God has
done, be at least inducements to believe him so much the more.

Fourthly, God made our senses in respect of our brethren, both to benefit
them, and our selves by them. 1 Our eyes to behold their misery, to pity them,
to releeve them. Turn not thine eyes from thine own flesh. Herein the
unmerciful Priest and Levite were condemned by the pitiful Samaritan. Our ears
to hear the cry of the poor, Prove. 21.13. He that turns his ear from the cry
of the poor, himself shallery and not be heard. Numbers never make this use of
their ears: but God has a deaf ear for them. 2 Our eyes to see the good
example of our brethren, to imitate them, to glorify God for them. Our ears to
hear their Godly Counsels, Admonitions, Reproofs, and so be bettered by them.
3 Our eyes to see and consider their danger, to pull them out of their
infirmities, the fire, and to cast out the more of their eyes. Our ears to hear
what is fit to be spoken of them, to defend their good names if they be
traduced. For God has given us two ears, not rashly to receive every
information, but to reserve one for the party, lest he be condemned unheard,
unconvinced.

Fifthly, and Lastly, God made our senses in respect of ourselves, not only to
be faithful keepers of the body, but diligent factors and agents for our own
souls: as 1 That our eyes should ever be looking homewards, and to the end of
our way, as quick and expedite travellors, and not fix themselves upon
everything we see here below. This is done by heavenly conversation. 2 Our
ears should be bored to the perpetual service and obedience of our God, as our
Lord himself was, Psalm. 40.7. Thou have bored mine ear: alluding to that
Ceremony in the Law, Exodus 21.6. If a servant would not part from his Master,
his ear must be bored and nailed to the Post of the house, and thus he became
a perpetual Servant, he was nailed and fixed to that house and service; So we
must yield an obedient ear, as Solomon calls it, unto the Counsels, Will, and
Commandment of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

3 Our eyes were made to be Conduits of tears, for our own sin and misery, and
for the sin and wretchedness of other men. Psalm 139.136. David's eyes gushed
out rivers of tears, because men keep not the word: how wept he then for his
own sins, that wept so for others? Good Lot his righteous soul was vexed in
hearing and seeing the unclean conversation of the Sodomites. Thus should our
senses be so far from conceiving pleasure in sinful obects, as these must be
the continual grief of our souls. And can we indeed look upon our selves, and
not see something which is a brand of our sin? or can we behold any Creature,
and not see some express Prints and marks of our sin, and vanity upon it?
Surely this one meditation would be effectual to keep us from casting our eyes
upon unlawful objects, and so from making our selves a prey to the Devil.

Use 2. This serves to reprove such as fail in this watch of the senses: for
who does not? yet some far more dangerously. Such as have in their houses
Popish Pictures and Images, which are alluring harlots, corrupters of the
heart, which is an opening of the door to the Devil, a sign of a man willing to
be seduced. Experience shows, that when a man is in love with such Images, he
easily falls out with Gods Image in himself, and Gods Children. 2 Such as
delight in lascivious Pictures, and filthy portraytours of naked men or women,
in whole, or such parts as may stir the corruption of the heart, which should
be beaten down by all means. We need bring no Oil to this flame. Yet the
Devil has gotten such pictures in request in this wanton age, wherein every
thing is almost proportional. 3 Such are far from this watch of their senses,
as so attire and disguise themselves, or lay open their nakedness to ensnare
the senses of others. Let them not say, they think no hurt in it, unless they
can be sure that no other think hurt by it. 4 Such as like the Images have
ears and hear not, eyes and see not; care not to hear the Word or read it,
never taste Gods goodness in it, neither does the breath of heavenly life ever
pass through their noses. 5 Such as frequent wicked company, and delight in the
ungracious actions and speeches, that they hear and see, or can digest them
without reproof or dislike manifested. The Devil has a thorow-fare among such
companies, who are conspired against God and goodness. Add unto these such as
read or have in their houses, Lascivious and wanton books, teachers of
lewdness. Add also Stage Players and their beholders, that cast open all gates
and walls to the Devil. 6 The Covetous eye, whereof Solomon says, Ecc. 4.4.
his eye is not satisfied with Riches, neither does he say, For whom do I thus
labor?

In that Satan would draw Christ to the love of the World, and thereby makes no
doubt but to ensnare and cast him down, we learn; that,

Doctr. 2 The love of the World easily makes a man a prey and spoil to the
Devil. Satan well knew, that if he could get Christ to fall down to the World,
he would easily fall down to him.

Where by the World, I understand not the goodly Workmanship of God in the
frame of the Heavens and Earth, which we must love and admire: but all the
Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Profits, and Allurements of it, without God, or
before God: as when men are willing Servants and Slaves to Worldly Desires and
Corruptions. 1 Timothy 6.10. The desire of money, is the root of all evil, a
fruitful mother of much mischief. There is no sin so impious, so unnatural and
barbarous, that a man in love with the Profits of the World will stick at. And
more plainly, verse. 9. They that will be rich, fall into manifold Temptations
and Snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in
perdition and destruction: which in sense is all one with this. That such a one
makes himself a willing spoil and prey to the Devil. Hence they are called
deceitful Riches, because they easily lead us out of the right way. Matthew.
13.22. and Job 18.8. The wicked walks upon snares, and the grin shall take his
heel.

Jam. 4.4. Know ye not, that the amity of the World, is enmity to God?
Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the World, makes himself an enemy to
God: now what sin will an enemy of God stick at? And the Apostle John plainly
divorceth these two which can never agree in one, 1 John 2.15. If any man love
the World the love of the Father is not in him. And if the love of God ^way not
the heart, Satan will easily incline it to any sin.

2 Where there is the love of the World, that heart has already renounced God
in Heaven, and given it self to be possessed, ruled, and commanded by the God
of the World. For look what a man chiefly loves, he not so much possesses it,
as is possesses by it. Whence the Apostle is not afraid to call Covetousness,
Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. and, Coloss. 3.5. not only because the chief love, but the
chief trust, hope, and confidence, goes with them. They say to the wedge of
gold, thou art my hope. And further, as the Heathen Idolaters worshipped and
served gods of Gold and Silver, so these serve and obey their golden and silver
god, wherein they take up their chief desires and contentment. Now having
denied the God of Heaven, and thrust himself out of his protection, a man
becomes to be in the power of the Devil, and ruled at his will.

3 The love of the World spoils us of our armor and strength, by which we
should be fenced from Satan's subtleties. For, 1 Whereas our chief fence is in
Gods Word, it First intercepteth the Word, and estrangeth the heart from it, as
Ezekiel. 33.31. They sit before thee, and hear thy words, but their hearts go
after their covetousness: Secondly, it choaketh the Word, that it becomes as
seed cast among Thorns, which choke it presently: Thirdly, it scorns the Word,
as may appear, Luke 16.14. These things heard the Pharisees which were
Covetous, and mocked. Now is not such an one easily snared by the Devil, who is
thus disaffected to Gods Word? Is not he easily bound, that wants, yea,
scorns his weapons? 2 The love of the World, whether the Pleasures, Profits, or
Glory of it, as a Thief, steals and robs our graces, which are another chief
part of our strength. Good Hezekiah a little tickled with vainglory, made
himself and his Land a prey and spoil to the Enemy. Wise Solomon loved too much
the unlawful pleasures of the World, and how did it rob him of his Wisdom? The
Disciples, while yet Christ was with them, were stirred with love and debate
for superiority and greatness, which did much hinder them, and took up their
thoughts, when they might have attended to better things. How many for love of
the World and Preferment, fall from their first love, abate their zeal, become
cold and indifferent, as the times are?

4 The love of the World, where it is rooted, delivers a man so far into the
hands of Satan, as he easily falls from all show of goodness, and dangerously
revolts from all the goodness that seemed to be in him. The young man that
came to Christ with many good shows and desires, hearing of selling all, and
giving to the poor, goes away heavily, and we hear no more of him. Demas,
once a Companion of Paul, but easily forsook the truth, when he embraced the
present World. Judas an Example, almost without example, a Disciple at Christ's
elbow, endued with excellent gifts Apostolical, of Doctrine, of Miracles, etc.
having his heart glewed to the World, for a trifle fell from his place, from
all the affection he had sembled to his Master, from the society of his fellow
Disciples, and stood with them that betrayed him.

5 Experience shows, how when Satan has thrust the love of the World into a
man's heart, he has power enough; 1 To bind that man's hands from the works of
Piety and Mercy. He is a bad Tenant; the more land he holds, the less homage
he does unto God. And as for works of Mercy, he will not part with his crumbs,
like the rich man in the Gospel. And as he lives altogether unprofitable to
others, so to himself; he has no care of his salvation: Thou fool, This night
shall they take away thy soul. 2 As he has no power to do any good for God or
man, so he will suffer nothing. A man loving the World, flies affliction for
Christ: Matthew. 13.21. when the Sun rises, he withers: when persecution comes,
he is offended, and falls away to the hinderance of many. They that mind
earthly things, are enemies to the cross of Christ, Phil. 3.19.

Use 1. Oh therefore, Love not the World, nor the things in the World, 1 John
2.15. A necessary exhortation to us, to whom it is as natural to love the
World, as for water to run down a Hill. And who can hardly affect it, without
being infected with it? Hereunto lay hold on these motives. 1 Consider how hard
it is to love God, and the World too: even as hard as to look with the same eye
(says Augustine) up to Heaven, and down to the Earth at the same time. The
more love a Woman bestows upon a stranger, the less she loves her Husband:
whence S. James is bold to call worldlings Adulterers and Adulteresses, chap.
4.4. whom the Lord will not endure to dally and sport, Ephesians. 2.3
and go a whoring after the World; Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

2 Consider that a course lead in lusts, is fitter for the Gentiles, than those
that profess the teaching of Grace; Tit. 2.11. For the grace which has
appeared, teaches us to deny worldly lusts. Our relation to Christ, of whom
we are called Christians, must draw our affections out of the World: for, 1 He
has chosen us out of the World, so that now he professes of us, They are not
of the World, Job. 15.19. 2 He gave himself to deliver us out of this present
evil World* Gal. 1.4. 3 No man has benefit by Christ's death, but he that with
the Apostle, is crucified to the World, and the World to him, Gal. 6.14. 4 The
World as it has no part of his death, (for he dies not for the World) so no
part in his intercession; John 17. I pray not for the World. 5 In the entrance
of our profession, we have not only renounced the World, but proclaimed and
vowed war against it: and therefore shall prove no better than runnagate
Soldiers, yea, Apostates, if we sight not against it. The love of the World is
a leaving of Christ's colors.

3 Consider what cause there is in the World to love it: 1 In respect of God;
it is contrary to his nature: He is Holy, Pure, Righteous; the World lies in
unrighteousness. It is contrary to all his Commandments: He commands Holiness
and Sanctification; it incites to all uncleanness in soul and body: He
commands Truth, Sobriety, etc. It teaches to Lie, Swear, Curse, Slander, and
Circumvent. He commands all fruits of the Spirit; it injoyns all the works of
the flesh. He commands to give our goods to the Needy, it wills us to get our
Neighbors. 2 In respect of it self: it is changeable, variable, inconstant:
and will thou affect that which thou can not hold or enjoy? 3 In respect of
thy self: is it not madness, excessively to love that which does thee so much
harm, pricks as thorns, and pierces with so many sorrows, crosses, losses,
persecutions? which if thou be good, will fight against thee, and pursue
thee with mortal hatred, and only slays those which resist it not.

4 Consider we what strangers and pilgrims we are in the World, and so be
moved to lay bridles upon our affections: which is the Apostles argument, 1
Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, as pilgrims and strangers abstain from earthly
lusts. Let us estrange our affections from this World, and deal as wise
Traveller^, that make the greatest Cities but thorow-fares to their own home.

Use 2. Let this Doctrine moderate our affections in seeking and having, yea,
and not having the things of this life. This is the common error, that men look
altogether upon the Beauty, Glory, and fair side of the World, and wealth of
it; but never look upon the inconveniences of them, and how strong they are to
pull us away from God, or how apt to make us a spoil to Satan: which one
consideration would somewhat abate our heat, and affection toward them. How
ambitiously do many affect promotion and great places, not considering in what
slippery places their feet are set? How eagerly do they desire wealth, as
though it had no power to draw the heart from God, and the wealth of Heaven?
How unsatiably do they pursue pleasure, not considering how the Devil insnares
them, and makes them lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God?

Surely were men acquainted with their own hearts, they would not suffer them
so to rove in these desires. Oh, says one, if I were a rich man, how liberal
would I be to the poor? But alas, he knows not what spirit he is of: the Devil
would make no doubt to change his mind, it his state were changed, and make of
this liberal man either a Prodigal, or an Usurer, or an Oppressor, and do much
more mischief than he can in his low estate. Oh, says another, were I in high
place, I would right wrongs, and set things in order. But so said Absalom, and
yet who did more wrong than he, deflouring his fathers Concubines, and deposing
(if he could) his father himself? And such right would many do, if they were
in higher place. All which is an argument how open we lie to Satan in such
estates.

To conclude this point, observe these few rules: 1 Put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and care not to fulfill the flesh. 2 Use the world, as not using it,
Romans 13.14.
1 Cor. 7.31. 3 Count all things dung for Christ, as Paul did, Phil. 3.8. whose
blood is set against and above all corrupt things. 4 Pray that thy heart may be
set upon Gods statutes, and not inclined to covetousness, Psalm 119.36. First
seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, etc. 5 Whether thou have the
world or no, show not thy self a lover of it, by increasing thy wealth, or
bettering thy estate, by swearing, lying, deceiving 1 rejoice in no part of it,
which God reaches not to thee by good means: desire none but that on which
thou may crave a blessing, and for which thou may return praise: hold
none but with moderate affection and mind to forgo, when God calls for the
whole or any part to good uses: use none but with sobriety, as not using it,
and that ever to Gods glory, and the good of men.

Verse. 9. All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me,
NOw after the preparation, standing in the choice of a fit place, and
presenting a glorious Vision, we come to the dart or temptation it self: in
which there is, 1 A profer: All these will I give thee. 2 A reason: For they
are mine, and to whomsoever I will, I give them. 3 The condition: If thou will
fall down and worship me.

And first of the profer. Before he had showed his Wares, now he tells the
price.

All these] here is no pinching, nor parting of the matter: but 1 Christ shall
be an absolute Monarch, none shall share with him: There is the extent of the
profer, he will part with all. 2 The quality of it; All these, the glory,
beauty, wealth, and all that can be desired in the world: all that he saw, and
nothing else: he would give him unmixed and unblended glory and honor, without
sorrow, trouble, shame, or vexation: for he saw none of them. 3 I will give
thee: but he will not barter or sell these so dear to Christ as he would to
another, but he will deal kindly with him, he will as good as give them to him,
if he will but make a leg, and thank him for them.

Doct. Note here the nature of all the Devils promises: they seem to be liberal
and very fair, whereas indeed they are miserably foul and deceitful. Who could
expect more frank and plain dealing than is here pretended? but look a little
nearer, we shall see it vanishing into nothing but deceit and mischief. For 1.
What is this great all that he makes profer of? A great catch, just nothing,
but shadows and representations of things, in themselves nothing at all but the
show he had made. 2 As this great all was but a show, so it was but for a
moment: for shadows cannot continue: and what were Christ the better if he had
been put in possession of the things themselves, if they so suddenly vanish
away before he can give a sight of them? 3 His best and largest promises here
are but in the transitory Kingdoms of this life, which all pass away as a
shadow, so as if he had offered and could have performed the things themselves,
it had been no great matter: he never offers and makes good any sound grace, or
the things of Gods Kingdom, which are things only worth harkning after. 4 Will
he give all the Kingdoms, and all the glory of them to Christ alone? why, what
righteousness or justice could be herein? Will he rob and spoil all other
Kings, and Rulers in the world, of their right and sovereignty, which God had
invested them in, and this all at once, and in a moment? 5 Whereas he pretends
a gilt, he intends a dear bargain: and offering nothing but pure and unmixed
glory, he would rob Christ our Head and all his members at once of all joy and
happiness both external and eternal. Of this kind are all his promises: he
promised to Eve Deity; but it proved mortality and misery: he promised Cain
respect and love, if he could make Abel out of the way; but it proved the
casting of himself out from the face of God, and his Fathers family.



2 H^s enmity and hatred of God, and man's salvation, makes him large in his
promises: he knows how slily temptations on the right hand steal into the
heart, and that no enemy is so dangerous as he that comes in pretense of
kindness. When he seeks to draw man to Hell with him, he takes on him to teach
him how to become a God. When Christ was to suffer he would have him to spare
himself, to hinder man's salvation: he will offer Kingdoms, all Kingdoms, with
all the wealth and pleasure of them. Satan herein deals as Jacobs sons with the
Sichemites: they made very fair promises, that if they would be circumcised,
they would give their Daughters, and take their Daughters, and dwell together
as one people, Genesis 34.16. But they talked deceitfully, verse. 13. intending
only revenge upon them, as they did when the Males were sore by means of their
circumcising. Satan can promise a Victory to Ahab, but it is to chase him
before his enemy to confusion.

3 He knows man's credulity and folly, who is easily taken with fair words which
make fools fain, their eyes being wholly upon things before them. Besides,
howsoever our blessed Lord here was fenced, that the least inordinate affection
could not fasten upon him, although he had all the objects in the world to move
him, yet he commonly finds men and women fitted for his turn, doting upon the
world, and needs no such large offers as here are made to Christ, but for less
commodity and glory than that in one Kingdom, will fall down and worship him.

4 Satan is so much the larger in his promises, to imitate God, whom he sees
encouraging his servants by making covenant with them, and promising them all
the good things of this life and that to come, as to Abraham, All that thou
see I will give thee. Now to draw men from Gods Covenant, if it were
possible, and to disgrace the same, Satan seeks to get men in league with him,
by larger promises of the world than ever God made to one man, because that
carries their whole desires: and as God for the ratifying of his Covenant has
appointed Sacraments and Seals, so the Devil has certain words, figures
characters, ceremonies, and charms for the confirmation of his league with
them, and their faith in that league.

Use 1. Hence observe a difference between Gods promises and the Devils.

1 They differ in the matter. Satan profers earthly shadows, earthly Kingdoms,
things that glance through the sense, worldly things which may be perceived,
and thrust into the eye and senses all at once, the best of which is but a
fantasy; as Paul calls the great pomp of Agrippa and Bernice, Acts 25.23
things of a moment for continuance, that last as long as the fullness of the
Moon, scarce seen but vanishing. But the matter of Gods promises is the
Kingdom, not of Earth, but of Heaven, and the glory thereof, to which all
earthly things are but appendices: things which cannot be shadowed: for the eye
cannot see, nor the ear hear, neither can it enter into the heart of an earthly
man, to conceive what God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. The
great promises of God are matters of faith, not of sense; and for continuance,
he promises a Kingdom unshaken, eternal, reserved in the heavens; a glory not
withering or fading, unlike the glory of flesh: of all which the Prophet says,
it is like the flower of the field, Isa. 40.6.

2 They differ in the scope and aim of them. Gods promises all serve to
provoke and encourage men to lay hold upon the Covenant of life, to draw men
nearer God in faith and obedience: 2 Cor. 7.1. Seeing we have these precious
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and
grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God. But Satan's promises tend to fix
men in the world, as here he would make Christ the greatest worldling in it,
to withdraw men from God and their Covenant with him, to pull them from the
service of the God of Heaven, to worship himself, or serve their lusts, or
embrace the world, or bow to any thing but the true God.

3 They differ in the accomplishment, God is ever as good or better than his
word: Tit. 1.2. God who cannot lie has promised. To David (as Nathan
witnesses in his reproof, 2 Samuel 12.8.) he gave his Lords house, his Lords
Wives, his Lords Kingdom, and if that had been little, he would have given him
more. To Solomon he promised long life, or wealth, or wisdom, and in the
accomplishment he gives him both life, and wealth, and wisdom. But Satan is
never so good as his word, but a Lier in all his promises. For, 1 He wants
power to perform, when he promises that which is none of his, as the Kingdoms
of the world. Or, 2 He wants purpose and will to perform his promise: For, had
he a purpose and mind to have given Christ the Kingdoms of the world, if he had
had power? Does not he envy to every man the fruition of any creature of God?
Can he willingly afford a good man a good moment? And did not he more malign
Christ's good and comfort than all other, because he exceeded all other in grace
and Gods Image? Or, 3 Wherein he has power and purpose to be an honest Devil
of his word, it is with a far more mischievous purpose: as here, if he could
have given the whole world, he would for Christ's overthrow: for what cares he
for the world, or what use can he make of it, but to make it a bait and train
to catch man by it into his own destruction. The ground hereof is this; As
every promise of God is a testimony of his love, so every promise of Satan is a
token of his malice.

An example of the Devils faithfulness we have in our own Chronicles: In the
reign of Edward the first, when the Welch-men rebelled, their Captain resorted
to a Conjurer for counsel, whether he should go on in the intended war
against the King, or no: yes (said the Devil) go on in thy purpose; for thou
shall ride through Cheap Side with a Crown on thy head: and so he did indeed,
but it was cut off, and he was carried in triumph as a prey to the King.

This may justly reprove and shame many professed Christians, that will scarce
give Gods promises of grace and life the hearing, though they are founded in
Christ, in whom they are all yea, and amen, flowing from his love, and tending
to our eternal happiness with himself. Many will not be brought to hear them;
many hardly when they have nothing else to do; and many hear them as things not
concerning themselves; for then would they take more delight in them. But if
Satan promise any earthly Kingdom or profit, he has our ears, our hearts at
command, all our speech runs upon the World, our desires and hopes are for
earth and earthly things: and being thus earthly-minded, how expose we our
selves to Satan's assaults, and offer our selves to be won by his most
treacherous promises?

Use 2. This teaches us what to think of that Doctrine and Religion, that
teaches men to be Promise-breakers: what may we think of it, but to be a
treacherous, unfaithful, Diabolical Religion? But such is the Romish Religion,
as we may easily see in two or three instances.

1 In that Article of the Council of Constance, That Faith is not to be kept
with Heretics, that is, Protestants: and so brake promise with John Hus, who
had not the Emperors only, but the Popes safe conduct. Against the Examples
of good Joshua, who kept Promise (though rashly made) with the Gibeonites, and
with the Harlot of Jericho; and of David, who kept Truth and Promise with
Shimei, a seditious and cursing wretched Traitor.

2 The Church of Rome teaches by the Doctrine of Equivocation, to break the
Promise of a lawful Oath, before a lawful Magistrate, and teaches the
lawfulness thereof. But the Scripture condemns a double heart, and the
deceitful Tongue: and proclaims woe against them that trust in lying words,
In lib de fide cum haretic is servanda.
Jer. 7.8. and that make falsehood their refuge. Yea, Molanus, a great and
learned Papist, concludes, sincere faedera and juramenta sunt intelligenda, all
leagues, and especially Oaths, are sincerely to be understood, and condemns
plainly such mockeries and dalliance with Promises and compacts, by one or two
instances; as of him that made truce with his enemy for thirty days, and
wasted his Enemies Country and Camps only in the night: and of Aurelianus the
Emperor, who coming before a Town Tijana, and finding the Gates shut, to
animate his Soldiers, with great anger said, I will not leave a Dog in the
Town: they hoping for the spoil, beestirred themselves to Ransack the Town; but
being won, he would not give them leave to spoil it, but bad them leave never
a Dog in it, and let the goods alone. This was but a dalliance, condemned by
the Papist himself; and yet had more color of truth than Popish Equivocation
can have.

3 The Romish Church teaches men to break Promises and Oaths with lawful and
Christian Princes, exempting subjects from obedience, and putting Swords, Dags,
Daggers, Powder, and all deadly plots into their heads, and hands, against the
Lords anointed. A treacherous and Devilish Doctrine.

Use 3. We see also what house treacherous and deceitful persons descend of,
such as care not how much they promise, and how little they perform, men most
unlike unto God, and resembling their Father the Devil, who is most lavish and
prodigal in his promises, when he knows he has neither power nor purpose to
perform; men of great tongues, which swell as mountains, but of little hands,
not performing mole-hills. Of these Solomon speaks, Prove. 25.14. He that
glories of a false gift (that is, speaks of great things that he will do
for his Neighbor, but fails in the accomplishment) is like a cloud and wind
without rain. A Cloud seems to offer and promise Rain, but the wind takes it
away, and frustrates a man's expectations. And the same is true of all windy
Promises. Which we must carefully avoid, and use these rules against
slipperiness in promise.

1 If a man would be like God, who cannot lie in his promises, he must strive
against it. But Satan is a Liar from the beginning, and the Father of Lies and
Liars. 2 Faithfulness in contracts is the sinew of humane society, which Satan
would have cracked, that he may bring all to confusion. 3 The Heathens that
were given up by God to a reprobate sense, are branded with this mark, they are
truce breakers, Romans 1.31. 4 It is a mark of a man in the state of grace, who
has obtained remission of sins, that in his spirit is no guile, Psalm. 32.2. 5
A note of a man that shall dwell in Gods holy and heavenly mount, is this, he
speaks the truth from his heart, Psalm. 15.2. and Revel. 14.5. They only shall
stand on Mount Sion, and sing before the Throne, who have no guilt in their
months.

Especially we must be careful of two promises, whereof God and the
Congregation have been witnesses: as 1 That of Baptism, which we must have a
special care to look unto: for, if we fail in keeping touch with God, no
marvail if we fail with men. 2 That of Marriage, which the Prophet calls the
Covenant of God, Mal. 2.14.

THE second thing in this profer, is the reason annexed, Luke 4.6. For it is
delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it.]

The Devil, like a desperate man, that is sure in this bout to kill or be
killed, lays about him with all the skill and strength he has, yea, he is
put to his shifts, so as no base or mischievous devise comes amiss, by which
he may either in fair combat, or cowardly attempts oppress his adversary: and
that which he cannot do by strength and power, he will attempt by falsehood
and lies; which he heaps up here together most like himself, the Father of
lies that stood not in the truth.

And here he challenges the power and glory of the World to be his, 1 In
Possession: 2 In disposition.

First, He affirms it to be his, but not directly, but indirectly: by Gift,
It is delivered unto me. But this is a most notorious lie: for the earth is
the Lords, and all that therein is, the world, and all that dwell therein,
Psalm. 24.1. and Deuteronomy. 10.14. Behold, the Heaven of Heavens is the Lords thy
God, and the earth, with all that therein is. And where read we that ever he
committed these into the hand of the Devil?

Object. 1. Joh. 14.30. He is called the Prince of the World; therefore he
speaks true.

Answ. 1 He is called the Prince of the World, not simply, but as it is
corrupted: the Prince of this World, says the Text; which world? this, which
lies in malice and hostility against the Son of God, and the means of
salvation. 2 He is not so a Prince, as having any right unto any creature: for
he cannot possess a Pig without leave: but by tyranny he forceeth and
commands as a Prince, the wicked World unto his obedience: for the World
departing from God to his Adversary, God in justice gives Satan leave to
prevail, and rule in the Sons of disobedience. But will it follow, that because
he rules in the world by sin and death, being the prince of darkness, and
having the power of death, therefore the parts of the world must needs be his?

Object. 2 He is called the God of the World, 2 Cor. 4.4.

Ans. True, not in respect of dominion over things created; but, 1 In respect
of Corruption: for he is the God of the evil in the world, the Author,
Ringleader, and Nourisher of all evil. 2 In respect of Seduction; for he is
bold to use all earthly things, which are made to Gods glory, to serve to set
forward his temptations, and wicked men's lusts, and so to set up his own
kingdom. 3 In respect of opinion or estimation, because the people of the world
make the Devil their God. But this no more proves him to be indeed the God of
the World, than an Idol is proved to be a true God, only because Idolaters so
esteem and make it.

Secondly, The Devil affirms it to be in his disposition, that he may give it
to whom he will; which must needs be another lie, because it is not his in
possession: for nothing can give that which it has not. 2 The Scriptures
ascribe this to God, as a perogative, and peculiar to him; By him Kings reign,
Prove. 18.15. All powers that are, are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. He makes
low, and he makes high. It is the most high that bears rule over the
Kingdoms of men, Dan. 4.22. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, Job
1.21. 3 Another notorious lie is, that having them to dispose of, he will
dispose them to Christ, which is impossible, seeing Christ had them already
disposed unto him, and had received them of his Father, so as he only could
say, Matthew. 11.23. All things are given to me of the Father: and, Joh. 3.35.
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands. Therefore
the Devil offering him the Kingdoms of the World, must needs lie. Psalm 2.8.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. If then Satan say, All this
power will I give thee, it is a lie: for all power was given him in Heaven and
in earth of his Father, Matthew. 28.18. So as in this profer he belies the
Fathers gift, and the Sons right, and derogates from the glory both of the
Father and of the Son. 4 Another lie is his false boasting, making himself Lord
and Casar of all, when he has not one foot of all he speaks of, like
Solomon's Bragadocio, There is one that makes himself rich when he has
nothing, and when he pretends his unjust usurpation in the World, to be a
just possession and title to the World.

And thus we have examined the substance and truth of this Reason, and have
found neither substance, truth, nor reason in it. Here note; that,

Doct. Bad causes must ever be thrust forward by bad means. Satan had a
naughty matter in hand (as no better can beseem him) namely, the overthrow of
the Son of God, and all the salvation of mankind; and the means by which he
would effect his purpose is suitable, lying, and falsehood, and boasting: and
he is no changeling, never a true word comes out of his mouth. 1 King. 21.
Jezabel had a wicked end to bring to pass, namely, the dis-inheriting of
Naboth, and setting Ahab into his possession: and what means does she use but
bribery, perjury, and murder of Naboth and his Children; and all this under a
color of Religion, and revenge of Gods cause, a fast being proclaimed before
it. Matthew. 26. the Jews had as wicked a cause as ever was undertaken, viz. the
oppressing and murder of the Son of God: and what means must they use? for
what had the just man done? They must accuse falsely, and suborn false
witnesses, and deprave his words, and make him speak what they list. And what
other means used they to falsify and suppress the truth and glory of his
resurrection? In this place, Satan aims to bring Christ to Idolatry, and the
means is covetousness. Peter had an ill cause in hand, to hinder Christ from
being apprehended, and his means was bad, unwarrantable striking.



2 In respect of Satan, who seeks to make every action as sinful as possibly
may be: he knows that all instruments of falsehood are hateful to God, and
therefore the more wicked means are used, the more detestable and damnable the
action is.

3 In respect of men themselves: for those that make no conscience of bad ends,
ma^e none of the m^ans; as we may see in David himself, whose conscience being
so sleepy as to take another man's wife, he will make no bones to hide it by
murder of his faithful Captain.

4 In respect of the means themselves which are near enough at hand: bad means
are easily sound and attempted. What might be more difficult than to pick
matter against the Son of God, to bring him not only under disgrace, but unto
death? Yet the Jews could easily find a Law, by which Law he was to dye: or if
they had had none, they could easily make one. If they wanted true witness,
they could suborn false. If they wanted witness from others, they could make
use of his own, We our selves have heard him, what need we any other witness?

Use 1. This teaches us to suspect those causes and actions that are brought
about by bad means: as, 1 When men run out of Gods Ordinances, and will not
live by some honest calling and means of life, but by Cards, Dice, Bowls, Bets
Cousnage, and such instruments and means of injury and wrong, they are
convinced to live a lewd and wicked life: for a good and honest life is blessed
by God, and carried by good, and lawful, and honest means, such as these be
not. 2 All such goods as are gotten by lying, swearing, deceiving,
Sabbath-breaking, overreaching, or helping forward sin in any man, are here
not only to be suspected, but condemned, and sentence passes against them, as
such which the Devil has taught to bring them in by evil means, both of them
accursed by God, and the gainer for them. 3 All actions which are brought to
pass by unwarrantable means, are likewise to be suspected not to be of God,
who orders due and lawful means to good and lawful ends, and has as many
pipes to convey good unto us, Zach 4 2.
as eyes to provide for it.

Saul must needs know his condition was unhappy, and his business unprosperous,
when he must run to the Witch to help himself. So their cause is worse than
naught that run to the Wizard for help in diseases and losses: G^d is gone from
them, and the remedy is far worse than the disease. Yet h^w common is, not to
seek to them by night as Saul did, but even by day, as not ashamed of it? Herod
he would not break his oath, no, that was not for his credit: but he might well
know it to be a wicked one, which could not be kept but by murder of John
Baptist.

Obj. Why, what would ye have him forsworn?

Ans. He had brought himself into such a snare, as either he must be forsworn,
or a murder: Now of these, to have broken a cruel and wicked oath, should have
hindered murder, which is a sin in an higher degree against God and man; and to
keep a wicked oath is worse than to make it. This is rather to be thought of,
because even godly men themselves are too ready to effect good things by bad
means: as Jacob will get the Blessing by lying, Rahab will save the Spies by a
lie, Lot will save his Guests by prostituting his own Daughters: In which, how
ever the Lord sometime commends the fact and faith of the parties, yet he never
commends the manner, which blemished both the doers, and the actions. The rule
that we must walk by, is in Romans 3.8. We must not do the least evil, for the
greatest good. Therefore let us take heed of these base tricks of the Devil, to
effe^t our desires by wicked means. Many condemn good men, because they stand
nicely upon some small things, which if they would yield unto, they might do
themselves and others great good; but they have learned another lesson, not to
do the least thing against their Conscience to procure themselves the greatest
good. God need not their error to glorify himself, and do his people good by.

4 That religion which is set forward by bad and wicked means, is to be
suspected and condemned: true religion was ever maintained by truth,
simplicity, humility, patience, mercy, love, meekness, etc. But the Church of
Rome must needs defend a bad cause, the means are so extremely wicked, as
violence and power, treachery and subtilty, fire and sword, murders and
Massacres, King-killing and Powder-plots, lies and equivocations, and what not?
It was once said, Omnia venalia Romae, at Rome all things are saleable; and now
it may be said, Romae omnia venialia, at Rome all things are pardonable.

One demonstration for memory sake: That religion which upholds it self, 1 By
ignorance, as the Mother of devotion. 2 By disgracing and reproaching the holy
Scriptures, abhorring them no less than a Thief does a pair of Gallows, and
warning men to take heed of them. 3 By upholding Images and Image Worship. 4
Perjury, by freeing subjects from the Oath of Allegiance. 5 Disobedience, yea
rebellion to Princes and Parents. 6 Murder, and Massacres of all Princes and
people, Kings and Kingdoms, by sword, fire, poison, powder, poniard, openly or
trecherously. 7 Adulteries and fornication by their Stews and
Sheet-punishments, yea with large revenues by them. 8 By Lies, Legends, lying
and Straw-miracles, notable tricks and collusions, as once in the Images of the
Heathens the Devil often spoke; but the Priests in stead of the Devil speak
through Images, and make them move, sweat, nod, etc. to deceive simple people.
I say such a religion cannot be of God, because the means of advancing it are
from the Devil. But the Romish is such a religion: therefore, etc.

Use 2. Here is a glass for liars and boasters to see their faces in, and their
resemblance to their father the Devil. He promises an whole world, when all
ptoves but a shadow and image. He takes upon him to dispose all things in the
world, as though they were his, whereas we must go to our heavenly Father, the
Father of lights, for every morsel of bread. Wherefore whosoever would any way
advantage himself by lying or deceiving, it is manifest the spirit of the Devil
rules in him. And therefore cast off lying as a ragge and relick of natural
corruption, and speak every man the truth to his neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25.

It is a received opinion in these days, that Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit
vivere, No dissembler, no man, and plain-dealing is a jewel, but he that uses
it shall dye a beggar, and some men are too honest to thrive in the world: such
common speeches argue the common breach of this Commandment. But know: 1. How
far are we degenerate from our forefathers: they lived simply by their hands
according to Gods Ordinance: but now many live by their wits; whence it is that
Trades are called Crafts and Mysteries, because more live by craft and the sin
of their trade than the trade it self. 2 The Lord is the avenger of all such
wrong by secret cousnage and lying: for he sees that thou deceivest him that
trusts thee; and because it is hidden from men, his own hand must revenge it.
3 What a shame is it and slander to Christian profession, that men professing
salvation by Christ, should so carry their trades as a man that comes to deal
with them, must come so suspitiously as if he were to fall into the hands of so
many Thieves; and having dealt with them has just cause to say, that he might
find more just dealing with Turks and Infidels? Whereas if this vice were put
off, a child might traffic in the dark without delusion.

The same of Boasters, who brag of things they have not. As Job speaks of the
Leviathan of the Sea, so may we of the hellish Leviathan, He is the King of all
the sons of Pride. As, 1 Many bear themselves out in fine apparel and bravery,
when indeed nothing is their own, if their debts were paid. And if every Bird
had his own feather, they might well go naked. 2 Others, to raise themselves,
make no bones to lie and magnify their estate, as the often experience of the
world shows, that Widows and Widowers promise great things of themselves, and
much wealth, whereas the greatest wealth prove debts. 3 But if you will see the
very natural portrayture of the father the Devil, if ye will hear his very
voice, look upon the Bishop and Pope of Rome. For,

1 He has engrossed all the Kingdoms of the earth into his own hands, saying,
All these are mine, yet not directly, but in ordine ad Deum. 2 I give them to
whom I will, I can set up and thrust down, I can bind and loose subjects from
their obedience at my pleasure. 3 I will give thee all these, if thou will fall
down and worship me; if thou will be my vassal, and a sound Catholic, let my
Laws bind thy Conscience, and persecute with Fire and Sword these Heretics,
thus thou shall hold thy Kingdom, else not. 4 But this is a small thing to
challenge the Kingdoms of the world, and therefore he challenges to be Lord
of Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory, to open and shut at his pleasure, as his three
Crowns imply. Here is a brag that puts down the Devil quite: never was the
Devil overmatched in boasting and lying but by the Pope his eldest son, that in
him we might have a plain demonstration of Antichrist, whom the Papists
themselves say must be begotten by the Devil.

If thou will fall down and worship me.]

NOw follows the condition of Satan's large and prodigal profer, which is the
third thing considerable in the dart. In it are two things: 1 The matter he
requires, Worship. 2 The manner, fall down and worship me. The thing he
desires is worship and honor due to God: for so our Saviors answer implies,
that he must worship God only. And for the manner of this worship, he must
outwardly bow and bend unto him, or prostrate his body in way of homage unto
him. Wherein we see mavelous cunning and malice combined. 1 His cunning, in
making it appear so small a moat: for being a worship proper to God, as we see
by comparing our Saviors answer with it, 1 He would make it in show and
appearance, but a bowing of the body, a small thing, a gesture which God
greatly regards not; as if he had said, as Bathsheba to her Son, 1 King. 2.10.
I have a small suit unto thee, deny me not: which small suit if Solomon had
hearkened unto, it had cost him the loss of his Kingdom. And the same did our
Solomon by his wisdom discern in this place. 2 In making it so necessary a
thing to worship him: me, with emphasis: me, of whom thou must have the world
if thou have it: me, who am so able and willing to reward so small a service
toward me: God does not so reward his worshippers.

2 His extreme malice: in that, 1 He would rob and deprive God of his honor,
which is due to him alone, and to no Creature else. 2 He would have it
conferred upon himself, Gods greatest enemy. 3 He would have none do it him
but Jesus Christ the Son of Gods love, thus to wrong his Father the more:
whereas God expects no other of his enemies, (...). 4 He implies how little God
regards or rewards his worshippers.

The Connection of this condition with the premises shows; That,

Doct. 1. Satan's profers are never free, but upon some wicked condition or
other. He said he would give all the world and the glory thereof to Christ, but
now he adds a condition, which makes it a dear bargain. He offers freely, he
will give all the world, and the glory of it, but the condition is dangerous;
if Christ will fall down and worship him. The Devil offered to put our first
Parents in possession of further knowledge, and no less a gift than Deity: he
makes as though he would out-give God, but all upon this dangerous condition;
if they would eat the Apple which God had commanded them not to touch. He would
help Cain to the favor of God, and all the love of his Parents; but upon
condition, he would kill his brother Abel: for when there was none else to be
loved, or to do sacrifice, he should obtain all. Judas comes to the High
Priests, and says, What will ye give me? Matthew. 26.15. and they appointed
him thirty pieces of silver: but upon his own condition, to betray his Lord and
Master: an heavy condition for so light a sin. Petiphars wife proffe^ed Joseph
great honor and rewards, but upon a foul condition, of committing whoredom
with her.

Solomon says of the Harl^t, She hunteth for the precious life of a man, so
does Satan incessant^y, and therefore can give nothing freely: for a free g^^^
is a pledge of love between parties; but he carries a mortal hatred toward
mankind, seeking by all means to devour us, 1 Pet. 5. v. 8. Seeing therefore
(...) love is like that of a ravening Lion to a Lamb, no marvel though he
bestow nothing freely.

2 The end and scope of all Satan's gifts is discovered in our Text viz. to
pluck men from God, and so bring them to damnation; and indeed they are not
gifts, but wages paid for doing some work. 2 Pet. 2.15. Balaam loved the wages
of unrighteousness. Now, if we look into the History, Numb. 22.17. these were
great gifts and honors promised, upon condition of cursing the people of God.
So as by the judgment of the Holy Ghost, all (...) taken upon such dangerous
conditions, are wages of unrighteousness. And as a General never gives pay but
to such as fight under his colors, so Satan never gives pay of worldly
preferment, but to such as fight his battles.

3 Never man gets any thing from Satan, but by way of contract or bargain where
the conclusion shall be for himself: and being the arch-enemy of all charity,
he will never make an exchange but for the better. He gives Adam an apple,
but it was dear bought with the loss of Gods image, and all his happiness. He
offers the second Adam the whole earth, but with such a condition, as he must
for it forsake heaven.

Quest. But is there any man so extreme wicked, that will contract with the
Devil, or receive any thing upon any condition at his hands?

Answ. The Devil will do nothing for any man but by virtue of a compact, and
why should he be at any man's command, but in hope of his reward, no more than
any man would be at his, but in the same hope? But this compact is either, 1
more open: 2 more secret.

A more express and solemn contract is that of Witches, Conjurers, and
Sorcerers, wherein there is a mutual promise of service between the Devil and
the Witch. And this promise is not only made by solemn words, but by deeds and
seal^; as some diabolical signs figures, or Ceremonies, for the ratification
of this league and compact. And this is evident by the confession of all
Witches at this day, and by the Scripture. Of this kind was this in out Text;
Satan offers to compact with our Savior Christ, and there wanted nothing but
the free consent of our Savior to the condition.

But the more secret compact is the more general, and no less dangerous, though
Satan be less seen in it. And of this kind the Devil makes many Covenants in
the World, and innumerable persons contract with him underhand, perhaps not
thinking they do so. And this two ways, 1 By a secret Faith in the Devil. 2 By
a secret consent unto the Devil.

Secret faith in the Devil is when a man uses any superstitious or diabolical
means for the effecting of his desire, which he knows, neither in themselves,
not from Gods institution, have any such power to effect things, but from the
power of the Devil: a^ the use of Charms, or spells, figures, character,
An^^ie^, S^^atching of a Witch, or the like: which having no power in
themselves, not by Gods Ordinance, can do no good, but by a secret says in the
Devil, who by Gods permission puts power in them to heal men for their delusion.

Secret consent unto the Devil, is yet more common than the former, though the
former be the common cure of common people: namely, when Satan secretly
suggesteth and offers to make a Covenant and bargain with a man, without any
express form of contract, but by inward temptation puts the motion into the
heart (as of Judas) that if he will use such an unlawful means, or upon such a
condition, he will effect his purpose, which he earnestly desires to attain:
now the party blinding his own judgment by the eagerness of his affection,
gives his consent to Satan, and accepts the condition: which mutual and silent
consent of party with party, is a real bargain and covenant. Satan solicites
the heart, and the heart consents to Satan: here is a secret compact, by which
numbers of men are in league with the Devil, that would be loath to be
thought so to be. Yea, numbers there are that receive the greatest part of
their earthly portion at the hands of the Devil, by virtue of this compact,
secretly believing or consenting unto him.

Use 1. This serves to let us see the difference between Gods gifts and the
Devils, in four things: 1 Gods gifts come all from Grace and Love, he freely
bestows his blessings: for his love is everlasting before our own being, and
our inheritance is eternal above our merit, and in the Heavens above our reach.
But Satan's gifts proceed out of his endless hatred, and are wages of
unrighteousness. 2 Gods gifts are derived to us by good and warrantable means,
diligence, labor, prayers: Satan's, for the most part by wicked means. Gods
conditions are profitable and safe: Satan's hurtful and dangerous, by the breach
of some Commandment, by impiety or injustice. 3 Gods gifts are first bestowed
upon us, and then obedience is required as a testification of Thankfulness, not
as merit: Satan's are after our work, as a merit and wages of sin; first fall
down and worship me, and then I will give thee all these things. 4 Gods gifts
are in mercy, for our salvation and comfort, and encouragement in his service:
Satan's, to draw us from his service, and to drag us to destruction.

Use 2. Let this Doctrine make us afraid to receive any thing from the hand of
the Devil, and accept of nothing but God offers. For, 1 God is more able and
willing to do us good than the Devil is, unless we think with those wicked
ones, that it is in vain to serve the Lord. 2 An enemy is never so dangerous as
when he flattereth and fawneth: he never kisseth but kills, with Joab, or
betrayeth with Judas: his gifts are dear bought, his conditions are
intolerable: he will have a better thing for it, even our precious souls. 3 A
little from Gods hands is far better than if we could receive all the World,
and the glory of it, at the Devils: for this comes with blessing, with Promise,
with Contentment, with good conscience; so does not the other. Therefore be
the just man's portion small or great, it is ever precious: it has no sorrow
added to it, as Solomon speaks.

Quest. How may I know I receive any thing from the Devil?

Answ. When any thing is gotten by the breach of any Commandment of God, as by
Swearing, Lying, Deceit, Oppression, and the like, this is a gift of the Devil,
and the wages of unrighteousness.

Use 3. Note here how like the Usurer is to the Devil: the Devil says, he
will give, so the Usurer says he will lend, which should be free as gift:
but then comes a condition of ten in the hundred, which is more than the
lending is worth. Satan is an enemy to all charity, and so is he. The like may
be said of Covetous men, who will do no good, but where they look for return
of the like or more, as like the Devil as may be, and altogether unlike to
God, who does good where he can receive none, sowes where he reaps not.

Use 4. See the misery of men who accept of Satan's profers. 1 Such as are in
open league with him, as Wizzards, who bind themselves to renounce God, and
their Baptism, and Redemption by Christ, and to believe in the Devil, to expect
aid from him, and give him Body and Soul for that help; which is the substance
of the solemn Leagues made by such limbs of Satan; he is of the sure side with
them, they can gain nothing by him, unless he gain themselves first. And such
by Gods Law ought not to live. 2 Worldly-minded men, with whom he deals as
with Esau, he gives them a mess of pottage, but on condition to sell their
birthright; a silly match is made presently, an exchange of Earth for Heaven.
3 Men impatient in Losses or sickness, who run to the Witch, as not knowing
what to do with themselves. But Satan never eases the body of temporal pains,
but to cast the Soul into eternal. 4 Ambitious and discontented persons, that
take preferments of Satan upon base conditions: Absalom shall have a Kingdom,
on condition he will rebel against his own Father. Zimri a Captain under
Baasha, 1 King. 16.10. shall have the Kingdom of Israel, if he will rebel
and slay his Master. Discontented Papists shall divide the Land among
themselves, if they will blow up the Parliament House.

Now if we would avoid the dangerous compacts with Satan, let us observe these
rules. 1 Beware of profaneness, which is a sin, where men carelessly lose
Heaven and the joies thereof for these lower and earthly things, as Esau to
satisfy his lusts despised the blessing, Heb. 12.16. Let there be none such
amongst us. 2 Believe the truth of Gods profers and promises, to rely on them,
and thou shall be senced from Satan's lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. 3 Consider how
easily men pour out themselves for Balaams wages: Covetousness carries away
their whole heart, and yet in the end they are deceived as he was: instead of
his reward he was slain in his return homeward, Numb. 31.8. 4 Consider how
little joy there is in that which is received at the Devils hand: neither Ahab
nor his posterity enjoyed Naboths Vineyard. Judas brought back his thirty
pieces, and hanged himself. According to that of Solomon, The wicked rests
not that which he takes in hunting. 5 Moderate thy affections, not to desire
the Kingdoms of this World and the glory of them, but a far more glorious
Kingdom in the World to come, and all these transitory matters only to help
thee forward to that.

The condition of Satan's profer teaches us further; that,

Doct. 2. All his drift in his temptations, is to draw men from Gods service to
his own. An example whereof we have in Saul, whom he drew from his hope and
trust in God, to seek and sue to himself for help. He entered also into Judas
to draw him from his Masters side and service to his own, to make him a Leader
and Captain against Christ, Luke 22.3. Neither fails he of his purpose and
scope, but effectually prevails in the World, and in the Children of
Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. For if we look to that part of the World, which is
indeed the World, not visited by the light of Grace, and the Gospel, they in
general are vassals to Satan, and profess homage and service to him in
Ceremonies and Rites, as Gods people to God himself. 1 Cor. 10.20. Those things
which the Gentiles sacrifize, they sacrifize unto Devils, and not unto God:
Which is spoken not in respect of the intention of the Worshippers, but of the
mystery in that Idol Worshipped, which indeed tended to the Worship of the
Devil, the deviser and setter forward of the same. And at this day in those
newfound Countries, experience shows, how those Heathenish and barbarous
people, not having the true knowledge of the true God, do therefore esteem the
Devil as God, and the Devil appearing to them in visible shapes, they fall down
and worship him, and offer many services and sacrifices unto him; upon this
ground, because God is merciful and amiable, and will not hurt them, Non est
nocent natura Deus. Cic.
and therefore they need not be so obsequious to him, but the Devil is
terrible, and fearful, and churlish, and therefore must be pleased and
worshipped, No noceat.

Nay, Gods own people and children are often drawn from the worship of their
God, to the worship of the Devil, in the most base and submiss kind of worship.
The Jews themselves offered unto Devils, and not unto God, Deuteronomy. 32.17. and
what did they offer but their dearest things? as Psa. 106.37. They offered
their sons and daughters unto Devils: A mavelous high wickedness, wherein the
Israelites themselves imitated the barbarous Heathens, among whom Satan had
brought in this unnatural cruelty, to kill their little children, and offer
them to Molech in the valley of Hinnom, verse. 38. Thus they shed innocent blood
by a Diabolical fury, and polluted their Land at the Devils instigation. Thus
it was in the time of Ahaz, and of Manasseh; against which the Lord showed
great indignation and vehemence, Jer. 7. and 19. and Ezekiel. 16. And the rather,
because it was against a special Law enacted for this purpose (which we would
think Gods own people should not need) Levit. 17.7. They shall no more offer to
Devils, after whom they have gone a whoring; and the sanction follows, This
shall be an ordinance for ever. Yet Gods people forgot Gods institution, and
natures instinct, and so put off all religion and natural affection.

the Prince of the world, and the god thereof, Joh. 14.31. 2 Cor. 4.4. will be
worshipped by the world as a God, and takes upon him as if he were so indeed:
whereas he is so only by his own usurpation and affectation, and the wickeds
delusion and acceptance.

2 Because of his malice to God, to whom he is most contrary. God has by the
Law of Creation, of Nature, the Moral Law, yea by the law of faith, and all
other bonds, tied man to his own service: now Satan seeks contrarily to deprive
God of his due homage, and draws men from the knowledge and practice of Gods
Will, that he may rule them after his own will, 2 Timothy 2.26.

3 Because of his hatred to Mankind, to draw men into the greatest offense and
displeasure of God. It is an evil thing and bitter, to depart from God and his
service: but to give this to Gods deadly enemy, is a sin most hateful and
dangerous.

4 It is all the business that Satan has in the world, for which he leaves no
stone unturned, no means unattempted, to set up his own kingdom above and
against Gods Kingdom; a compendious way whereof is to hinder, corrupt, or
destroy the true worship of God. 1 Thessalonians. 2.18. Satan hindered me: namely, the
true worship which Paul sought to establish. He corrupted the worship of God
among the Sons of God by the Daughters of men, Genesis 6. And he sought to
destroy all Gods worship in the posterity, by destroying Abel.

Quest. But is it possible that Satan can so prevail to draw men to worship
himself in stead of God? And what means uses he to effect it?

Ans. Yea it is plain and usual, as we shall easily see, if we consider, 1 The
ways that a man worshippeth the Devil: 2 The means how he brings men
thereunto.

I The ways are laid down in these four conclusions:

Conclus. 1. Whosoever worshippeth for God that which is not God, he worshipeth
the Devil for God. Deuteronomy. 32.17. They offered unto Devils, that is, to gods whom
they knew not. In all Divine worship, whatsoever is not performed to God, is
performed to the Devil, there being no mean between them in worship. But how
has the Devil drawn Pagans and Heathens to set up and worship false gods,
Devils indeed, Mars, Jupiter, etc? yea and Gods own people to worship Dag^n,
and Baal, and Molech? At this day all the Eastern people of Turks and Saracens
worship Mahomet, a god of their own making. And the Papists all give Divine
worship to Stocks and Stones, the work of men's hands, to Rags and Relics, to
their Breaden and baked god in the Sacrament; as base an Idolatry as can be
found among the Heathens: in all which they have fallen down to the Devil, and
worshipped him.

Conclus. 2. Whosoever worshippeth God in any other means than himself has
appointed, he worshippeth the Devil, and not God. If the manner of Gods worship
prescribed by himself in the Scripture be refused, that cannot be Gods
worship, because the manner is devised by the Devil. Thus do they who profess
the true God distinct in three Persons, but worship him according to their own
devises and humane traditions; as the Papists that worship God in Images,
Pilgrimages, and a thousand devises, mere strangers to the Spirit of God in
Scripture, thrust in by Satan for his own service.

Conclus. 3. Numbers will not be persuaded they worship the Devil, when indeed
they do. For as then we worship God actually, when we serve and obey him, so
then men worship the Devil, when they do the works of the Devil, Joh. 8. He
that is a slave, a vassal to the Devil, is an apparent worshipper of him. Yea,
so near a service is between them, that the Devil is said to beget many sons in
the world, Joh. 8.41. now every son honors his father. Thus do all they that
are subtle to pervert the straight ways of God, as Elymas, therefore called by
Paul the child of the Devil, Acts 13.10. because he sought to hinder the word
and work of God. Thus do all those tares, the children of that wicked one,
Matthew. 13.38. which grow up in Gods field to the molesting and anoyance of the
Lords wheat. Thus do all they who when they should spend the Lords Sabbaths in
his worship, they worship and serve the world in buying and selling, or the
Devil in play and gaming in their own houses, falling down to the worship of
the Devil, when true worshippers are in Gods house, performing their homage and
service to him.

Conclus. 4. Satan prevails against numbers, by drawing the affections of their
hearts from the true God, to something besides him, to love, trust, and follow
it more than God: as the voluptuous person, that makes his belly his god, and
so is a lover of pleasure more than of God: and the covetous person making his
wealth his god, whom Paul therefore calls an Idolater. All these and many more
are worshippers of the Devil, and fallen down to him, and cannot possibly
worship the true God.

II. How and by what means Satan does thus prevail. And the means are these:

1 He has often the Secular arm, and Human authority, 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Rehoboam
ordained Priests for the high places, for the Devils, and for the Calves that
he had made. Thus Antichrist, the Beast of Rome, Revel. 13.16. by power made
all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to receive his mark in
their hands and foreheads. So he did in our Country by fire and faggot in
Queen Mary's days. 2 Sometimes he draws men to his own worship by policy; for
he can transform himself into an Angel of Light, he can preach Christ for a
need, to overthrow the preaching of Christ, Mark 1.34. he can be a lying spirit
in the mouths of four hundred false Prophets, 1 King. 21. at once: and can put
on the shape of Samuel, being still a Satan. 3 Sometimes by fair promises, as
in our text, he will give a whole world to bring Christ to one sin: Thou shall
have case, pleasure, wealth, credit; in a word, thy hearts desire, if thou will
fall down and worship me. 4 By persuasion, that it is a vain thing to serve
God, Mal. 3.14. no joy for the present, no recompense hereafter: thus he
carries with him innumerable companies with things present, not considering the
time to come. 5 By threatening of crosses, losses, disfavour, as Balac said to
Balaam, Thy God has kept thee from preferment. By violent persecutions, Revel.
12.13.15. the red dragon persecuted the woman which had brought forth the
Man-child; the Serpent cast out of his mouth waters like a flood, to cause the
woman to be carried away. 6 By effectual delusion by means of Signs, Wonders,
false Miracles and slights, which Satan puts forth to give credit to false
worship, as it is spoken of the great Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. that he
shall come by the working of Satan, with power, signs, and lying wonders, and
in all deceiveableness of unrighteousness among them that perish: and thus
shall the beast deceive all those, whose names are not written in the Book of
life.

Thus many are deceived in Popery, by the juggling and crafty conveyances of the
Priests, and often by Magic, making their Images appear to sweat, to nodde, to
roll their eyes, to pass voices through them, and make blood appear in the
Host; which they would have their people believe: and thus Satan mightily draws
them to the worship of himself.

Use 1. Here let us learn to bewail the misery of men seduced by the Devil, and
thrust from their God, whether more openly, or more secretly: as, 1 Such as
join to Popery, renouncing the worship of the true God, and fall down to the
Devil to worship him. Revel. 13.4. and they worshipped the Dragon and the
Beast: noting that the worship of the Beast, is the worship of the Dragon. Now
they worship the Beast that give him power over the Scripture, over the
Consciences of men, to make laws to bind them, to pardon sins, to open Heaven,
Hell, Purgatory, and receive his Bulls and Canons before the Canonical
Scripture. A lamentable thing, that Satan gets such great ones daily to fall
down, and worship him.

2 Such as get livings by bribery, symony, chopping and changing, and such
indirect courses: here the Chaplain has fallen down to the Devil, and
worshipped him, and he has bestowed the benefice.

3 Such as seek to Witches for help, or cunning men and women: a plain and open
service of the Devil, by virtue of a league and compact, at least secret.
Should not a people seek to their God? or can all the Devils in Hell remove the
hand of God?

4 Such as by flattery, dissembling, injustice, lying, swearng, or breaking the
Sabbath, obtain wealth, or profit. All this the Devil has given thee, because
thou have fallen down and worshipped him. Whatsoever a man does against the
Word, against his Oath, or Conscience, is a falling down to the Devil, and a
worshipping of him.

Use 2. Take heed of coming under the power and service of the Devil: and to
that end observe these rules: 1 Hold thee to Gods Word and Will in all duties
of piety and justice, both for matter and manner. For we must not only do our
Masters will, but also according to his will. 2 Hear and foster the motions of
Gods Spirit, which are ever according to the Word. It is a note of a man given
up to Satan, to have continual disobedience breathing in him, Ephesians. 2.2. The
foul spirit savours nothing but the flesh. 3 Renounce the world daily, be not a
servant to any lust, neither take pleasure in it. For when Satan finds a man
serving pleasures, he halters him with them, and clogs him with cares of riches
and voluptuous living, Luke 8.14. 4 Walk in the light, love it and such as walk
in it. It is a sign of a man in Satan's snare, to despise them that are good, 2 Timothy 3.3. to make a show of godliness, denying the power thereof, ver. 5. Satan
himself pretends light, but walks in darkness, and leads such as he rules in
the same path. 5 Contend for the faith, Jud. 3. and Gods pure worship, stand
for God, be at war with thy sin, keep an inward conflict and combat; for,
not to be tempted of Satan, is to be possessed by him: Luke 11.21. When the
strong man keeps the hold, all is at peace.

Verse. 10. But Jesus answered and said, Avoid Satan: For it is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
NOw we come by Gods assistance, to the answer of our Lord to the D v^^ third
da^^. In which consider three things: 1 The denial and resistance, But Jesus
answered, and said: 2 The manner of it, Avoid Satan: 3 The r^ason, For it is
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God etc.

First, our Savior would not yield to Satan's temptations: 2 nay he repel^ it
with great vehemence. 3 He has just reason so to do.

I. Christ would not yield to the temptation, no not for a world.

Quest. Why, what hurt had been in it?

Answ. 1 He had taken the honor of God, and given it to Satan: whereas the
Lord has said, I will give mine honor to none other. 2 He had consented to a
Lie, viz. that the World was Satan's in possession and disposition. 3 He had
partaked and abetted all that injustice and wrong which Satan would offer to
all the inhabitants of the earth, if he had yielded, or accepted any thing
from him. 4 He had impeached his own right, and present possession of all
things, whereof he was right beir, already invested by his Father. 5 Although
the worship required was external, yet it was Divine; and so in giving it to
Satan, it had been idolatrous, which had entangled the Son of God in sin, and
unfitted him to the redemption of mankind. So as in respect of God, of Christ,
of us, and the whole Church, it had been every way woeful and dangerous, as
Satan, yea, our Lord well knew.

Doct. Hence we learn, From the example of our Savior Christ, to esteem and
prefer Gods glory above all the World. Christ could not be corrupted with
Gold, nor Silver, nor Kingdoms, nor Glory, but as a good Physician sees all
Diseases and Eye-sores, without contracting hurt to himself: the Glory of his
Father in his eye, is an antidote to preserve him without infection. And no
marvel, seeing he had formerly preferred the Glory of his Fathers mercy in
man's salvation; above the glory of Heaven it self, which he left, and became a
man of sorrows, and was numbered among the wicked to that purpose. Here is an
example for us, which we cannot attain, but must look on a far off for our
imitation, to come as near it as infirmity of flesh will afford us.

Moses, That man of God, so preferred the glory of God before the world, that
he made a strange choice, viz. To suffer with Gods people, rather than to
enjoy the treasures and honors of Egypt, Heb. 11.24, 25. Nay, he was so set
for Gods glory, as he preferred it before his own part in the book of life,
Exodus 32.32. Rather than thou should not glorify thy mercy in thy people,
and rather than thou shall give the enemy cause to blaspheme, rather blot my
name out of thy book, let me^ have no part in Heaven. The Apostles also
following the steps of our Lord, for Gods glory, and the Gospels cause, did
Glory in the Worlds contempt, and rejoiced that they were counted worthy to
suffer for Christ. Act. 5.41. Paul bare in his body the marks of Christ, Gal.
6. v. 17. and was a prisoner, Ephesians. 3.1.

Romans 9.22, 23. and so it ought to be of ours, 1 Cor. 10.30. Whatsoever ye eat,
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. An earthly child
honors his Father when he imitates him in good: so do we honor our Heavenly
Father in this imitation. The first thing in Gods intention, must be the first
in ours.

2 The practice of this duty is a fruit of Faith, and a support of Faith, Heb.
11.24. By faith Moses refused to be called the Son of Pharoahs Daughter. The
consideration of Gods faithfulness in promising and performing better things;
makes these inferior things small in our eye: as Moses therefore preferred the
rebukes of Christ before the treasures of Egypt, because he looked at the
recompense of reward. And that the sight of Gods glory, worthy to be set above
all things, takes the part of faith to foil temptations, is apparent in our
Text, by the practice of our holy Savior.

3 In the Lords Prayer the first Petition is, that Gods Name may be hallowed,
set before the desire of daily bread, yea, before remission of sins, because
all these are but means tending and serving to the main end of all, which is
Gods glory. All our good-spiritual and temporal, are, or ought to be means
tending to that end.

4 Gods Glory is the dearest of all things to himself, of which he is most
jealous, and so ought to be to all his children, as we profess our selves to
be. And what can more rejoice the heart of a gracious and ingenuous child, than
the honor and high respect of his Parent?

5 According to out estimation of God himself is our respect of his glory, and
so much as we esteem his glory, so much we esteem himself. It is true that
Gods glory is eternal, and so abides in it self not capable of our addition or
detraction, and God will be ever most glorious, though we never had been:
neither need he our help to make him glorious. The Sun would shine in his
brightness and glory, if all Creatures were blind and no eye saw it. But yet
he will try how much glory we will ascribe unto him, and how we prize it,
and how industrious we are to magnify and exalt it: not that he can get any
good by it, but we our selves reap the fruit: even as the fire is not hotter,
because we stand by it, but we are hotter; so while we glorify God, not God
but our selves are become better and more glorious. God loves his glory as he
loves himself; and we, as we love himself, so we love his glory.

6 This is the perfection of Christianity and Grace here, and of our glory and
immortality hereafter, to prefer his glory above all the World. The Spouse
(Cant. 2.18.) calls Christ her best beloved, which he could not be, if she^
loved any thing better than him. And our Savior cashiereth him as unworthy to
be his follower, that does not at least in affection and full purpose, forsake
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Goods, and Lands for his sake.
This perfection of grace the holy Martyrs attained, who rather than they would
dishonor God in yiedling the least show of Idolatry, refused the whole World,
yea, their lives. And the perfection of glory in the life to come is, that
nothing else occupy or distract us from being wholly taken up in the immediate
glorifying of God, without either satiety or ceasing.

Use 1. Let us learn to be of the same mind with our Lord Jesus; in whom we
have a worthy pattern of constancy and heavenly resolution, in that all the
world and the glory of it could not move him, no not by a gesture to impair his
Fathers glory. The Heathen man could say, if he would forswear himself for any
thing, it should be for a Kingdom. Absalom for a Kingdom would kill his own
Father. Jehu for a Kingdom makes no end of Murders: One says of him, What
was a basket full of heads to a Kingdom? 2 King. 10.8. Herod for a Kingdom
kills all the male Children. Nay, it were to be wished, that only Kingdoms
could draw men to mischief: for then should not Ahab murder Naboth f^r a
field, nor Judas betray his Master for thirty pence, nor Christians and
Protestants lie and swear, and forswear, and transgress for a piece of bread.
How many executions have we for thirty pence, or thirteen pence? Which shows
how degenerate men are from Christ, whom all the kingdoms in the world, not the
greatest things in them could move in the least manner, and as it were
indirectly, to dishonor his Father. Nay, what shall we say of them, that
profess, they not no man else can trade, and buy, and sell, to live without
some lies, and dissembling sometimes? These may carry the name of Christ, but
the mind of Christ is far from them.

Others think, and say, What need men be so nice to stand upon so small
scruples, as not to accept so good offers and promotions in the world, which
have some condition or other annexed, which their Conscience cannot without
offense swallow? What, may not he call a little evil good; and a little good,
evil: that so he may raise his own estate, and do himself, and others much
good? And thus he is every where accused of indiscretion. But to these we
object Christ's example, who would not be moved with all the world to do that
he was not warranted for in the Scripture. And for the imputation of
indiscretion, we allege Moses example, who when he was at age (says the text)
refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and chose rather to suffer
with the people of God. And to all such alledgers we say in one word, Either
was Christ far wide in refusing so great an offer, or else are they.

Use 2. As we must prefer the glory of God above the world, so we must promote
it by our best means: The Magistrate by procuring and stablishing that whereby
God may be most glorified, not administering justice by affection or reward, or
sparing Offenders by a cruel mercy, who should be made examples to others, or
not encouraging the godly: All this dishonours God highly. The Minister must
use his gifts, not for any private end, but for Gods glory, as a good servant
that gains all for his Master. And every private man must so carry his course
of life, his trade, his speeches, as God may be honored in all things: his
light in all things must shine, that our heavenly Father may be glorified:
therefore in every thing whether it will carry the commendation not only of
truth and honesty, but of Christianity and religion.

To stir us up to this duty, see some motives:

1 All Creatures in their kind do glorify God, and keep their standing, the
Sun, the Stars, the heavens declare the glory of God. Psalm. 19.1. The Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass the master of his crib, Isa. 1.3. The Crane
Swallow, and Turtle know their times, Jer. 8.1. What a shame for Israel then
not to acknowledge their Benefactor, but come so far behind the unreasonable
Creatures? What a shame for Christians to come behind the Israelites, who
partake in far greater mercies and means than they did?

2 Hereby we manifest our selves to be the servants of God, in resisting the
dishonor of God, and standing out for our Lord, against Satan, wicked men,
hypocrites, whose whole desire is to obscure and darken the glory of God, and
as far as they can with violence to tread it under foot: Especially having
vowed in our Baptism so to do. He is a Coward that seeing the readiness and
alacrity of the enemy, is not by it provoked to stout resistance, especially
standing in a good cause, and sure of victory. Can a child endure his father to
be dishonored and wronged by word or deed, and put it up? Can Gods child,
seeing a son honors his father?

3 Our time is but short, we are in our last conflict, the time of our full
deliverance and introduction into heavenly glory is at hand, the Crown is in
our eye, almost upon our heads already: and therefore let us encourage our
selves a while to be instant for the glory of God, which is our last scope and
chief expectation: even as a Traveller that sees the Evening come upon him, is
so much the quicker till he attain the place he desires; so we having the
evening of our life approach, and our last hour, should set our selves forward
with more speed and alacrity toward our home, holding on our right way, which
is the glorifying of God in all things.

4 We have a cloud of examples before us: 1 Of holy men, who have endured
Martyrdom, and rejoiced in the flames, that they were worthy by their so
exquisite torments to glorify God, as Christ told Peter, that by such a death
he should glorify God. 2 Of holy Angels, who spend all eternity in magnifying
Gods holiness and glory: Isa. 6.3. one cries to another, Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord: the whole world is full of his glory: and, Luke 2.14. Glory be to God
in the highest heavens. And shall not we approach to the Angelical life, which
is the happiest of all creatures? 3 Of the blessed Son of God our Head, whose
whole life was nothing else but a seeking of the glory of his Father: And
should not the members imitate the Head? Have we so many faithful guides in so
dangerous a way, and should we be so cold and slow in the imitation of them?

5 Our glorification is individually knit to our glorifying of God: as, 1 Samuel
2.30. Him that honors me, will I honor. Yea Christ claims his glory on no
other condition but this, but that he had glorified his Father on earth, Joh.
17.4. As among men, great benefactors are well pleased with small testimonies
of thankfulness, where ability wants to perform much: so the Lord accepts our
small obedience and study of glorifying him, that he plentifully remunerates
it.

Means to come to glorify God in some good measure.

1 Pray for wisdom, and a sound judgment. Phil. 1.10. That ye may discern
things that differ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness, to the glory
and praise of God. For every thing will not please and glorify God. 2 Renounce
thy own glory in doing things. Joh. 8.49, 50. How can ye which receive honor
one of another, seek the honor that comes of God? Certainly Christ sought not
his own praise, but the praise of him that sent him. 3 Observe Gods wisdom in
his Word and Works; his Power, Justice, and Mercy; his benefits and corrections
on thy self and others; in all things praise him: He that praises me,
glorifieth me, Psalm. 50.23. 4 Honor God in an honest and Christian
conversation: gracious speeches, and an unspotted life, honor the Gospel:
hereby stop the wickeds mouths, and glorify God, 1 Pet. 2.12.

II. The manner of this answer of Christ; Avoid Satan] which differs somewhat
from Christ's other answers, being more plain and sharp than they, as appears,
1 In the title he gives him, Satan. 2 In the commandment, Avoid. First, he
calls him Satan, which is the third name given him in this History: for he had
before been called a Devil, that is a false accuser, and a Tempter, and now he
is called a Satan, signifying an adversary or enemy: 1 To God directly: 2 To
man, both in his person, whom he often possesses and vexes, Mat. 4.24. and
also in his estate, which he does often endamage and impoverish, as we see in
Job.

And Christ does now so term him, 1 To show him that he takes better notice of
him than before: for he called him by no name before, though he was called by
the two former terms by the Evangelist. 2 That we should see further into his
nature, the more to beware of, and detest him. 3 To show us how we may detect
an adversary, and smell a Devil; namely, when he sets against and opposes the
grounds of religion. 4 To teach us that he is no friend, that offering us
wealth and honor, would draw us from God and religion. The greatest kindness
here is the greatest cruelty.

Avoyd] 1 This is a word of indignation, as we say to a Dog, avaunt: for Christ
was much offended and angry against this temptation, when he saw and heard
Satan so impudent and blasphemous. So Christ gives this as a reason of the same
speech to Peter, Avoid Satan; for thou art an offense unto me. Christ shows
indignation, because Satan shows his blackness. 2 It is a word of rebuke and
castigation of Satan's importunity and impudency, who would not be satisfied at
the first and second assault, but still renews more hellish and horrible
temptations. Thus Luke expresses it, Hence behind me, as one not worthy any
longer to behold his face. 3 It is a word of dismission, or sending him
packing, and carries in it the force of a Commandment. An Heretic (says the
Apostle) after once or twice admonition avoid, Tit. 3.10. Thus deals our
Savior with Satan here, who is Haereticorum haereticissimus: An Arch-Heretick:
as a great man talking with a wrangling fellow, whom no reason will persuade,
commands him away, he will hear him no longer.

Quest. Why was our Savior so angry at this temptation above the former,
wherein he exercised Meekness and Patience?

Answ. 1 His Wisdom knew how far he was to bear Satan at this time, and how
much to suffer from him, and then how his mouth must be stopped, which
Meekness and Lenity would never do: there is no hope to win or overcome a Devil
with kindness, nor to shake him off that way; nay, rather this will more
invite on his malice, he will go so far as he is suffered. 2 Christ thirsted
after man's salvation; and his love to us and our redemption, made him so angry
with the Devil, who sought by all means to hinder it: for had he been defiled
with sin, the work of redemption had availed us nothing. 3 To note the
hatefulness and detestation of that sin of Idolatry, whether it be covert or
open, that if our dearest friends should solicit unto it, even the Wife of the
bosom, we should pursue them to death, and so show our deadly hatred against
it, Deuteronomy. 13.1.6. 4 The two former more concerned himself, but this concerned
his Fathers Glory directly: he hears him claiming all to be his, quartering
the Arms and Royalties of God, making himself a God, and challenging worship
due to God: this he could not bear: his tenderness and zeal to his Fathers
glory, would not endure so vile a creature to carry away, no not to challenge
any part of his worship.

Doct. Gods causes must ever more affect us than our own. How full of lowliness
and meekness was our Lord and Savior in all his own causes? He did not strive
nor cry, neither was his voice heard in the streets: He would not break a
bruised reed, nor quench a smoking flax, Isa. 42.3. Matthew. 12.20. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again: When he was called Glutton Drunkard, a friend
of Publicans and sinners, Matthew. 11.19, 28. in stead of returning rough
Language, he calls, saying, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will case you. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and opened
not his mouth: when they accused him of capital things, knowing that his
answers would not be taken, he answered not a word. Now he was in his own
cause. But when he takes his Fathers cause in hand, how does he cloth
himself with zeal, which even consumes him? Joh. 2.15. in purging his Fathers
house, he lays about him, and whips out the abusers of that holy place. Moses
in his own private cause was the meekest man upon the earth; being
contumeliously worded by Miriam and Aaron, he presently pardons it, and
prays for Miriam, and gets her cured of her leprosy. In Exodus 32. that
froward people was ready to stone him: yet when God begins to be angry with
them, he forgets all, and prays God rather to put his name out of his book,
than not to pardon their sins. But, seeing the calf, his calm spirit is
vanished, and he breaks the Tables of stone that were in his hand. The Apostle
Paul every where provokes Christians to meekness, patience, and laying aside of
revenge, and stirringness of spirit in private causes: yet ( Act. 17.16.) when
he saw the idolatry of the Athenians, his spirit was stirred up in him.

1 The Religion which we profess, Augustine notes the word either a
religando, or a relinquendo, that where religion is, it will leave all for God.
And hence is self-denial enjoined, as a necessary preparation, to him that will
profess Religion.

2 Gods Glory is preferred by himself above all his Creatures, as being the end
of them all; and therefore must so be of us, even above our selves: for of
him, and through him, and for him are all things. We see in the Commonwealth
how the instruments of public Justice, if any service be commanded from the
King, must lay aside their own business and ease, and execute the Kings
pleasure before their own. Such a good servant for his Lord was Paul, saying,
My life is not dear unto me, so I may finish my course with joy.

3 Our Lord Jesus has more affected our cause than his own: what an infinite
love showed he in descending from his glory, to work the great and painful
work of our redemption? what infinite misery did he sustain to help us out of
it? what an happiness forsook he to recover us to that which we had forsaken?
what a dear price did he pay for our ransom, when we were lost? Is it not fit
now, that we should be earnest in the cause of such a friend? May not he
well disdain, that any thing in the World (never so much concerning us) should
be preferred before him, yea, or equalled with, or loved without him.

4 Do we know that God himself is the chief good, and should not we cast our
eyes beyond our selves, sinful lumps and heaps of dust, that all the springs of
our affections might run into this main? Shall we bestow the pitch of our
affections upon lower things (as earthly-minded men do) when we may satiate
them with God himself, and the things of his glory?

5 There is no loss in neglecting our selves for God, but great advantage: for
his eye is upon us to be a speedy, faithful, and royal rewarder of us. The
preferring of our Lords cause above our selves, is the preferment of our selves
in the end. He that loses his life for my sake (says Christ) shall find it.
And therefore as Caesar's eye made his Soldiers prodigal of their blood; so
Gods eye upon us should make our selves small in our own eyes, that his glory
may be maintained and reserved wholly to himself. Moses preferred Gods honor
before his own: for he looked for the recompense of reward.

Use 1. The Use hereof belongs to such as are specially set forth to set up
Gods causes. The Magistrate is not now a private man, to seek himself, or to
set forward his own designs, or to show his heat in his own private causes, but
to prefer Gods causes before all men's, his own or others. David a King, how
calm was he in his own case, when Shimei traitorously railed upon him, and
Abishai would have fetched his head, Oh no (said he) God has bid him rail,
etc? But when Gods cause was in hand, Oh then, away from not ye wicked: and, I
will have no wicked person in my house, I will timely destroy the wicked from
the house of God. Good Nehemiah neglects his own allowance, and departed from
his own right for the peoples sake, chap. 5. but cha. 13. how zealous is he
for God? he will not let God lose his right: not one whit of the Sabbath must
be allowed to any use but Sabbath-duties. Such a courage for God and the
Truth, ought the Magistrate to have, as neither for fear of men, nor any man's
favor or affection, he neglect any thing which God would have him do,
especially for the house of God, and the Offices of it. Alas, how many
Magistrates are of Gallios mind, to think religion but a matter of words, as
if God made them governors of men only, but not of Christians? keepers of the
second Table to preserve Peace and Justice, and not of the first to preserve
Piety and Religion? and if they be so, why are not Blasphemies, and horrible
Oaths, and innumerable prophanations of the Sabbath severely punished? why are
not Popish and profane persons compelled to come into the house of God? Shall
a pilferer of a trifle of a man's goods know, that the Magistrate bears not the
Sword in vain, and shall not he that robs God of his Glory, by Cursing,
Swearing, contemptuous breaking of the Sabbath know the contrary?

The calling of a Minister is more specially to promote the causes of God,
which therefore must affect him above all his own respects. How earnest was
Christ in his Fathers work, when his Parents came to seek him at twelve years
old? he rebuked them for interrupting him; whereas in all private converse he
gave them reverence, Luke 2. When his Disciples brought him meat, he neglected
that also, saying, It is my meat and drink, to do the wilt of my Father. And if
preferring Gods causes will not suffer us to respect our selves, much less will
we be hindered by others: we cannot tune our songs to men's ears, but must
deal faithfully and plainly, though we displease men. How zealous was Christ
against the Hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23. though it
created him much envy and malice? When he saw the invincible hardness of
Heart in his hearers, how did he mourn in his spirit, and looked angerly about
him? Mark. 3.5. Surely if we go about to please men, or set up our selves in
the World, Gods causes will affect us slenderly: Therefore it shall be our
happy portion to set the top of our ambition the glory of God, and in our
judgments and practice, prefer the winning of souls before the winning of the
World.

Use 2. Let every man learn to consider what business God has put in his hand
to do, and not be hindered in that; for that is Gods work. Gods cause, upon
which depends some part of Gods glory. And whatsoever he may glorify God in,
for which he can warrant his calling, let him set that forward, and let no
respect hinder him: let him not suffer God to be dishonored in his family,
nor where he can hinder it: let the spirit of patience swallow a number of
private and personal wrongs; but, when God comes to be wronged, let him stir up
the spirit of zeal and courage.

Use 3. Here many are reproved, who fail against this Doctrine: as, 1 Men that
follow nature, abandoning religion, hot and fiery in their own quarrels, not a
word can be sooner uttered against them, but they are ready to draw, and to
stab: Their own names may not be mentioned without all due respect: But for
Gods causes and quarrels, let others look to that. How h^t was Cain in own
cause? but so much the cooler in Gods causes and service. Haman, how busy in
his own private quarrel to bring Mordecai to death, yea, to destroy the whole
Church, had not his gallows caught himself? Oh beware by these examples of more
zeal in thine own cause, than in Gods; in thy own name; than in God. 2 Such
Ostriches as can digest any high contempt of God, without indignation or
reproof, and can suffer men to swear and curse by God and Christ, his blood,
wounds, and tear him to small pieces. It would be thought disloyalty to hear
the Kings Majesty's name or title contumeliously spoken of, and not bring the
party to condign punishment. It was an old Law among the Romans, that if any
man did swear by their God Janus, it should be death, unless the Senate
approved it, or it were made before a Priest: why? that it might be either
punished or reproved. It were well if we had such a Law amongst us. 3 When
care of our own houses eat up the care of Gods house: Things shall be neat and
convenient at home, no care how Gods house lies. When base trifles are
preferred before Gods Word, and the good settling of it; as stage-plaies and
enterludes. When Gods Sabbaths and time must give place to our callings, or
recreations, or are passed away in Gods Worship, more heavily than holy days,
or work-daies. Here is a man affected more with his own sin, than the highest
causes of Gods glory.

III. The reason of our Saviors denial: For it is written, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Our Savior had sharply reproved Satan's impudence in his bold onset this third
time; but yet because it is not sufficient to thrust off an adversary with heat
of words and sharp reproaches, unless there be added also a direct answer and
satisfaction to the matter in hand: he therefore most fully answers by the
Scriptures, even the Devil himself, not contenting himself by his power to
repel him, which Satan now begins to feel, unless also by the power of the
Word he convince him, and thereby award the dart, and break the temptation
into pieces.

Which must be our rule in dealing with vain and jangling adversaries; not to
answer them according to their foolish disposition or provocation, not to be
like them in frowardness or stiffness, in heat and perverseness, but to answer
them with words of Wisdom, with sound matter, and moderation, both to convince
them, and beat down self-conceit in them; which is the meaning of those two
Precepts, Prove. 26.4, 5. which seem contrary: but are easily reconciled by the
due respect of persons, places, times, and other circumstances. Ever remember
one rule, that no adversary (suppose the Devil himself) is to be answered by
affection or passion, but by judgment and sound reason: Yea, if we have no
hope to win our adversary, or do him much good, as Christ had none of the
Devil, yet we must testify to God and his truth for the confirmation of our
selves and others.

The testimony alleged is out of Deuteronomy. 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God: thou shall serve him: and Deuteronomy. 6.13. An universal and affirmative
precept, by which every creature is bound to his Creator, and him alone, to
perform Divine worship unto him. And it is aptly applied by Christ to this dart
of Satan: For it implies, 1 That he himself, as now standing in this conflict
with Satan, is a creature of God as he is man, though otherwise as God he he
equal to his Father. As man he is subject to the Law, and to this precept
among the rest. 2 That Satan is not God, as he pretends by his unjust
claims, nor any way equal to God. 3 That therefore neither must he being a
creature, give the least divine worship from God, nor he that thus claims it,
can by any means be capable of it. 4 That the Scriptures of God reserve unto
God his due worship, and forbid that any creature shall share with him. Christ
stands not to dispute whether the sight presented were a shadow or substance,
nor whether he would give it him or no, but holds him to the Scripture, which
upholds his Fathers right.

Quest. But why does our Savior change, and add to the text of Scripture, as
not regarding that terrible woe denounced against such as add or take away
from the word and contrary to that, in Deuteronomy. 12.32. Here our Savior, 1
Changes: Moses says, Thou shall fear: Christ says, Thou shall worship: 2
Adds: for Moses has not the word only, which is of Christ's putting to that
text.

Answ. 1 Here is some difference indeed in words, but not in sense, and
therefore it is no corruption of the Text, nor letting out the life of it,
which stands not in the words, but in the true sense.

2 Our Lord both in great wisdom changes the word fear into Worship, and just
cause: for, 1 Moses uses fear, which is a general word, in which is contained
all such Divine duties as godly men ought to perform unto God: and our Savior
mentions one special, which is included in that general; which thing Moses
speaks as well as he, in the general; as he that commands a whole, commands
every part, inward and outward. 2 Hereby our Savior aptly meets with Satan's
temptation, If thou will worship me; he uses the same word, not tying himself
to Moses his words, but keeping the sense, but to Satan's word: and, 3 He notes
the nearness and undividedness of Gods fear and his worship; as where the cause
is, there will be the effect, so true fear and worship go together; where one
is, there will be the other: and for this cause one is put for the other, not
here only, but elsewhere, as Isa. 29.13. Their fear toward me was taught by the
precept of men: Christ alleging it, Mat. 15.9. says, You worship me in vain.

As for the word only added, which is not in the Law, it no way adds any
contrary or diverse sense to Moses, but only expounds or gives a fit
commentary to the text, and speaks that plainly in one word, which Moses does
in more: as Deuteronomy. 2.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
walk after no other gods: which is all one with our Saviors, Thou shall serve
him only. As he that says, The King is the supreme Governor, and none but
he; says in effect, The King is the only supreme Governor.

3 Christ and his Apostles had a privilege in alleging Scriptures without
error, and were in^a^^ble expounders as well as alleadgers.

4 This alteration of words is made by Christ, to warrant us, that Scriptures
alleged by teachers according to their right sense (although with alterations
and additions) are to be taken as true expositions and allegations, we being
not tied so strictly to words as to sense: For otherwise, all our Sermons and
Expositions, which serve to beat out the true sense of Scriptures and apply it
to several uses, might be condemned as idle additions to Scripture; which is
blasphemous.

5 To warrant us, that Principles of Religion expounded by warrant of Scripture
are truly interpreted, though the Scriptures in so many formal words express
them not. As for example: In the Doctrine of Justification by faith, we say we
are justified by faith only before God; here the Papists exclaim on us as
accursed Heretics, because we read not the word only, in all the Scripture.
But we read it in effect, and in true sense, Romans 3.28. and, Ephesians. 2.8. By
faith without works; which exclusive is all one as to say, only by faith, as
our Savior interprets the exclusion of other gods by the word only. As if I
should say, I did such a thing without help; is it not all one as to say, I
only did it? If Christ's interpretation be true and warrantable, so must ours in
the point of justification. And if the Devil himself had not yielded to Christ's
allegation, he might have said, Thou thrustest in the word only, and addest to
Gods Word, and therefore art not the Son of God. But the Papists deal more
impudently with us, than the Devil did with Christ, who said no such thing, but
yielded to evidence of truth, which they will not.

In the precept it self are three things: 1 The person: 2 The matter: 3 The
object. 1 The peson, thou] the whole man and person, which consists of a body
and soul: thou, any reasonable Creature that challengest God to be thy God. 2
The matter shall worship and serve. Worship is twofold, Civil, or Divine.

I. Civil, is a prostrating or bowing of the body, or any outward testification
of an high and reverent respect of man. And this is due to men two ways. 1 Of
duty, when men are to be reverently acknowledged for something wherein God
has preferred them before us, as for years, gifts, graces, authority: or such
as are set over us, as Parents and Fathers of bodies and souls, of Church, and
Country. And this is required by the fifth Commandment, and Romans 13.1, 7.
neither does the Gospel and Christianity take away, but teach civility. And
performed by the godly, both in speech, as Daniel said, O King; and Paul to
Festus, O noble Festus: and also in outward behavior and gesture, as Jacob
bowed seven times to Esau; and Joseph taking his Sons from the knees of his
Father Jacob having blessed them, did reverence to his Father down to the
ground, Genesis 48.12. David inclined his face to the earth, and bowed himself to
Saul, who pursued his life, 1 Samuel 24.9. The like of Ruth to Boaz, chap. 2. and
of Abigail to David, 1 Samuel 25.23. she fell on her face, and bowed her self to
the ground, and fell at his feet. 2 Of courtesy, which is a fruit of humility,
when a man to his equals and inferiors shows reverence and respect; as
Abraham to Lot, Genesis 13.8, 9. and to the Hittites his inferiors, cap. 23.12.
he bowed himself before the people of the Land: Far unlike the surliness and
stiffness of proud and conceited persons, who being void of all good nature,
nurture, and religion, know not to bow to any, neither their betters in the way
of duty, nor equals in way of courtesy.

Divine worship is twofold, 1 Inward, the sum of the first Commandment,
standing in fear, love, and the like: 2 Outward bowing or reverence, the sum of
the second Commandment. The former binds the soul, and the will, and
affections, and the whole inner man: the later the outward man, to give God his
worship and service, and to give no part of that to any other: For the word
only, only mentioned in the latter branch, must be extended and referred to
the former too. The latter of these is here meant: (...)
for the word properly signifies to kiss or adore, by some outward gesture to
manifest a veneration. 1 Because this was it which Satan required of Christ,
namely, to fall down or bow unto him: but Christ aptly refuses it. 2 This
worship proceeds from an inward fear and apprehension of a Divine excellency
and power, not communicable to any Creature, which Satan well know: for even by
this bowing he would have Christ to acknowledge in him a power to dispose of
all earthly things, which is proper to God.

And him only shall thou serve.] By service is not meant the inward service of
the heart: for the words in Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord, and serve
him, will not bear it: the first thereof betokening the inward service, the
second the outward, following the former as the effect the cause. Neither would
our Savior invert the order, in setting the stream before the fountain.
Therefore this word serve, serves to expound the former, as an addition,
signifying nothing else but the outward service of God; so that Christ here
shows, that it is not enough to give God outward reverence, but that we must
(as servants) perform duties according to his will: so the word signifies,
being taken from servants, (...).
who perform service to bodily Masters in bodily actions.

3 The person to be worshipped and served is God only. Him only] whom we call
the Lord our God, according to the speech of Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.3. Direct your
hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only: for his glory will he give to no
other.

Quest. Must we give outward worship to none but God? Must we not bow our knee,
and uncover our heads, to our King and Rulers? Must we not rise up to the
hoare-head? Levit. 19.32. Must we not serve one another in love? How then must
we outwardly worship and serve God only?

Ans. We must not deny any civil worship to any man, to whom God has made it
due: but external religious worship must not be given to any Creature, man or
Angel.

Quest. How may we know the one from the other?]

Ans. They differ greatly: 1 In the kind, one is servil, the other social; the
former due to an absolute Lord and Commander, the latter due from one
fellow servants to another. This distinction is grounded in Revel. 19.10. where
the Angel refused the worship done him by John, upon this ground, because he
was a fellow servants, and one of the brethren: for John being overcome with the
greatness of the Angels glory and splendour, out of humane infirmity ascribed to
him more than civil honor, and mixed some religious worship with it, which
only was due to God.

2 Another difference is in the intention of the mind in worshipping. Religious
bowing is, when a man inwardly apprehends a Divine power proper to God, and
incommunicable to the creature; or, when godhead or divine properties are
conceived in the thing bowed unto. As for example: in falling down to an Image,
uncovering the head, praying, etc. the mind now conceives a Divine power in the
image of knowing ones thoughts, hearing, helping, and the like; at least that
God has tied his presence and grace to such a place where such an Image is set
up. But the civil bowing to the King, or superior, or to the Chair of estate,
is a mere token of civil subjection, without any conceit of deity in the mind,
only because we see in them excellent gifts of God, or in place above in the
Church, Commonwealth, or family. For the same gesture may be civil and
spiritual, according to the intention of the mind of the worshipper.

3 The end distinguishes them: the one is to exercise godliness, the other to
express civility: the one (...), the other (...): one done as a man is a member
of Gods Kingdom, the other as he is in the rank of an earthly Kingdom. As for
example: Kissing of the Popes feet, is a worship done to a man, and so seems
civil; but, being tendered to him as to the Vicar of Christ, as one that can
pardon sins, and cannot err, this religious end makes it a religious worship,
and therefore none of his, being not offered to any other Prince or Emperor
upon the earth.

4 Some difference may be taken from the common estimation of the thing
worshipped, as if it be generally esteemed or reputed Divine, and deity
ascribed to that which in it self has it not: The Host (as they call it) is
generally held to be Christ's very self: now for a man (suppose a Protestant,
that knows it to remain very bread, and that no such deity or change is in it)
to bow down before it, to uncover his head, or use gestures of adoration to it,
is an external religious gesture, and is unlawful, although his intention be
not to worship it, but because in common estimation he ascribes a kind of
Godhead to the creature as others do. And whereas adoration is a sign of
subjection to the thing adored, and a note of inferiority in deed, or in will;
by this gesture this person makes himself inferior to a Creature, and gives
worship and pre-eminence to that which in his knowledge has neither life nor
sense, which is senseless, and against common reason.

5 A plain difference between Civil worship and Divine, is, that all Divine
worship is absolute and immediate; which is plain in this instance: God in all
his Commandments must be absolutely and simply obeyed, with full obedience,
never calling any of them into question, never expostulating or reasoning the
matter with God, seem they to us never so unreasonable. As Abraham against the
Law Moral, and even against the Law of Nature, without all reasoning, rises up
early to kill his own son, when God bids him, who will be simply obeyed for
himself. But all obedience to men is respective, to God, in God, and for God,
and as far as God has appointed them to be obeyed, and no further. God must
be obeyed against the Magistrate, the Magistrate not against God, but so far
as his Commandments are agreeable to Gods. Man as man is not to be obeyed, but
because God has set him over us in the Church, Commonwealth, or Family.

Whence we see, that Civil worship has his rise and ground in the worship of
God; and what is the cause, that so little reverence is given to superiors,
whether Magistrates or Ministers, Masters or Parents, in these dissolute and
unmannerly days, but because Gods worship decays, and is not laid in the hearts
of inferiors, the force of whose Commandment would force reverence to
superiors? What other cause is there, that inferior impudent persons of both
sexes take such liberty (without all respect of conscience, truth, or manners)
to chatter against Gods Ministers and the Kings, toward both whom God has
commanded more than ordinary respect; yea with all bitterness to scoft, rail,
curse, threaten, with horrible, damnable, and incessant Oaths, more like
Furies than men, even to their faces? but that Gods fear is utterly shaken out
of their hearts: and where Gods fear is absent, how can we expect any fear of
men? The Heathen Priests were honored, because Heathen gods were feared: which
shall condemn Christians, among whom neither Gods Priests and Ministers, nor
the Ministers of the King, Gods Vicegerent, and consequently, not God himself
is feared and honored.

Doct. All religious worship, whether outward or inward, is due to God only.
For inward worship, it is most express, Joh. 4.24. God being a Spirit, he must
be worshipped in spirit and truth: And it might be proved in all the parts of
inward worship; as 1 Love: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and all thy soul. 2 Fear: Isa. 8.13. Let him be thy fear and dread: Fear him
that is able to cast both body and soul into hell. 3 Trust and confidence:
Prove. 3.5. Trust in God with all thy heart. 4 Faithful prayer: Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the time of trouble: and, How can they call on him in whom they
have not believed? But of this there is little question. As for outward
worship, if religious, all of it is his due only. Psalm. 95.6. Come, let us
kneel before him, and bow down to God our Maker: Whence it is manifest, that
all the gestures and signs of religious worship, as bowing of the body, of
knees, lifting up of eyes, or hands, and uncovering the head with religious
intention, is not to be yielded to any but the true God.

1 A reason hereof is in the text, because he only is the Lord our God: our
Lord, of absolute command, and we his servants, whose our souls are, and our
bodies also, to be at his beck in religious use, and none else: and our God, by
the Law of Creation, and daily preservation, as also by the Covenant of Grace
and Redemption: he has not only created, but preserves, ye redeemeth our
souls and bodies also, and no Creature has any right unto us, (as David
says.) Christ refuses here to bow to the Devil, not only because he is a
Devil, but because he is a Creature.

2 In our text we see, that Satan will yield God is to be served, but not
only, he would have a little service too. Nebuchadnezzar would be contented
God should be served, but he would be served too: if they would but fall down
and bow to his Image, he desires no more. Let Christ be as devout toward his
Father as he can inwardly, Satan desites no more but a little outward
reverence. But the three fellows of Daniel tell the King, they will worship
their God only: and Christ tells Satan the chief Idolater of all, that he must
serve God only, even with external and bodily service.

3 If outward religious worship were due to any Creature, then to the Angels,
the most glorious of all: but they have refused it, and devolved it only to God
as his Prerogative. Judge. 13.16. Manoah being about to worship the Angel that
appeared to him, the Angel hindered him, saying, If thou will offer any
sacrifice, offer it to God. And Paul condemns an outward humility in
worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. Revel. 19.10, the Angel refused John's
worship: and chap. 22.8. when he fell down at his feet to worship him, being
amassed, and perhaps not knowing whether he might not be the Lamb himself, of
whose marriage he was speaking: and the reason in both places, why he refused
even that outward reverence, was, 1 Taken from the Angels condition, he was
but a fellow servants. 2 Because it was proper to God, Worship God: who is there
opposed to all Angels good and bad.

4 Idolatry may be committed only in the gesture, neither can we set our
bodies (which ought to be presented as living and reasonable sacrifice^ to
God) before Idol-Worship without the crime of Idolatry: no external dissembled
honor can be given to an image with safe conscience: for which cause Origin
was excommunicated by the Church, for offering a little incease to an Idol,
though he were forced thereunto by a sudden fear.

5 Some things must be had alone, and admit not of a second. No man can serve
two Masters. One woman cannot have two husbands at once: her Husband is jealous
of any partner or corrival. Now God alone is our Master and Husband, and
therefore he alone must have religious honor.

This serves to confute the Popish doctrine and practice of their image and
Saint-worship, and of giving (many other ways) Gods peculiar worship clean
away to the Creatures, not only bowing to images of wood, and stone, and
metal, but invocating them, vowing unto them, offering gifts unto them, lighting
candles before them, offering incense, dedicating days, fasts, feasts unto
Saints departed, etc. Wherein they commit most horrible idolatry, against this
express Commandment, which commands the service of the true God only. As
we shall see further in these grounds.

Grounds against image Worship.
1 No image may be made of God: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
image of any thing in heaven or earth: for, Thou saw no image, only thou
heardest a voice, Deuteronomy. 4.12. And what will ye liken me to, says the Lord?
Yet this was a rude people, and needed all the books that might be.
Consequently, God is not to be worshipped in any Image. 2 He is dishon^ured
when any corruptible thing is conceived to be like him, Romans 1.23. 3 God is
uncircumscriptible and infinite: therefore an Image of him is a lie. 4 God is
every where present: therefore every Image is vain. 5 Gods curse is on him that
makes a carved image, and puts it in a secret place, Deuteronomy. 27.15. 6 God will
not be worshipped in any Image, but of his Son, Joh. 5.23. All men must honor
the Son, as they honor the Father. Let Imagemungers show us what Images God
will be worshipped in besides Jesus Christ, the engraven form of his person,
and we will worship as many Images as they can. 7 It is vain and very
inconsiderate to make an Image, and worship it, the makers thereof want common
sense, and are blockish as the Images themselves, as appears by the Prophets
Ironical narration, Isa. 42.19. and 44.19. No Man says in his heart, Half have
I burnt, or eaten, or warmed my self withal, and shall I worship the other
half as a God?

Are not as good blocks as this every where? and as good stones in the
pavement? Is not one as worthy to be worshipped as the other? How has one
deserved to be burnt, and the other to be reserved for Adoration? The same
folly is in the Church of Rome: one piece of the Host they eat, another they
set up to be worshipped, and want consideration to say, Was not the piece that
is eaten, as worthy to be Worshipped as this? Is this better than that? So
that that of the Prophet is verified of these Idolaters, They that make them
are like unto them, even as blockish as the very blocks: which if they could
reason, would surely say, Am not I as worthy to be worshipped as my fellow? am
I baser than my equal?

Obj. 1 But they have gotten a late distinction, by which they put on a cloak
to hide the filthiness of their Idolatry. Worship (say they) is either that
high and great worship proper to God, which is called (...), or less and
inferior Worship called (...), or service: the former they cannot without
Idolatry give to Angels and Saints, the latter they may.

Ans. 1. But, 1 God cannot be deluded by a distinction of words, seeing the
thing it self is Idolatry: let them call it what they will, to delude the World
and themselves withal, the thing is as gross Idolatry as ever was among the
Heathens, let them lessen it as they can, and call it a less worship,
consisting in external reverence, and inferior to that which is given to the
sampler. For so long as they bow to Saints (which they cannot for shame say is
for civil reverence, unless they had eyes to see them) they go directly against
the Commandment, which says, Thou shall not bow down to them. And the Lord
hereby distinguishes his true worshippers from Idolaters, I have reserved
seven thousand which never bowed the knee to Baal. And so long as they invocate
them, vow unto them, swear by them, knock their breasts before them, creep unto
them, etc. do they think they have ears and hear not? nay, do they not ascribe
the seeing of their hearts and wants, omnipotence and power to help them? Are
they not in the midst of that woe of them that say to the wood, Arise; and to
the dumb stone, Come and help us? And so long as they imitate the Heathen in
erecting Temples, Altars, statues; in appointing them religious days. Feasts,
Falls, several worships, etc. can they by an idle word put out all men's eyes,
so as we can see nothing beyond civil worship in all this, because they call
it douleia? what is there now in all Gods worship, which they cannot do to them?

They say, we may not sacrifize to them, that is due to God only, but invocate
them we may.

Answ. 1 A silly shift, as though all Gods proper worship were in sacrifices. 2
What are Prayers but sacrifices of the New Testament? 3 What is it but to offer
sacrifice to them, to offer them Candles, Incense, and the like?

2 The newfound distinction argues their gross ignorance, both in the
Scriptures, and in other secular learning, if not wilful blindness; the words
both of them in both being used for the same, and promiseuously ascribed both
to God and men.

I. For the Scriptures. They may (say they) give douleia to men and Angels: but
then may we give all the service due to the Lord Jesus to them, for under this
word is it all comprehended, Romans 16.18. They serve not the Lord Jesus, (...).
And the Apostle condemns the giving of douleia to things which by nature are no
gods, Gal. 4.8. (...). Act. 20.18. serving the Lord with all modesty, and many
tears, (...): here is douleia proper to God, which their distinction makes
peculiar to man. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. having turned from Idols, (...), to serve the
living and true God. Col. 3.24. (...), for ye serve the Lord Christ. And might
they not in the Scripture observe how the Angel refused douleia, Rev. 22.7.
because he was (...), a fellow Servant? Yet they say it is due to Angels and
Saints. And that latreia is not only taken in Scripture for Worship due to
God, but for works belonging to men, is plain by Lev. 23.7. (...), Thou shall
do no servile work.

II. For s^^^lar learning, Ludovicus Vives a learned man of their religion, in
his commentaries upon August^ne de civit. Dei, has proved out of Suidas,
Xenophon, and Valla, that these two words are usually taken one for another.
And yet upon this confused distinction, stands all the frame of their confused
Idolatry at this day.

3 This distinction fights not only against antiquity, but against
themselves. Jerome against Vigilantius says, Nos non Angelos, non Archangelos,
non Cherubim, non Seraphim colimus and adoramus. And Augustine epist. 44. Scias
a Christianis Catholicis nullum coli morinorum, No Christian Catholic
worshippeth any of the dead. And some of themselves, as Holcot and Durand,
write, that no worship at all is to be given to an image, neither is it lawful
to worship it. And yet Aquinas and others say plainly, that the Crucifix and
Image of Christ must be adored with the same honor as himself is; yea, that
honor, stays in the very image: which I hope is more than doule^a that is
given to the image of Christ.

But enough of this idle distinction. They must, as the Midianites, fight
against themselves and one another, that fight against God and his glory. And
we must fight against them, and take part with our God for his right, and as
soon join our selves with Pagans and Infidels, as with Papists, one of their
worships being every way as Idolatrous, as the other. I know there is
difference in the persons whom they represent in the image, between Peter and
Paul, and between Jupiter and Mercury: But in the thing there is no difference,
divine worship given to an image of the one, being as hateful to God as that
which is given to the other.

Object. 2 We worship not the image, but God in the Image, nor the Saints
themselves, but God in the Saints; honor done to Gods friends is done to God
himself. So the Rhemists say: As the worship of Image of Antichrist is the
worship of Antichrist himself, so the worship of the image of Christ is the
worship of Christ himself. In Apoc. 12.6.

Answ. 1. I answer: 1 After the same manner the Gentiles maintained their
Idolatry, who instituted idols, ut admoneamur divinae naturae, to put them in
mind of God. 2 It is false which they say: for they worship the images and
Saints themselves, as appears evidently in their forenamed services. 3 God
will be honored in such signs and means as himself has appointed, and not
condemned; neither has he more condemned Image Worship, than his worship in
an Image. Besides, whatsoever the Rhemists say, God has appointed what honor
to give to his friends, and has denied to give this honor to any of them,
Isa. 42.8. All will worship is condemned, Col. 2.23. No Worship pleases him
that is not commanded in his Word, Matthew. 15.9. 4 Thus might they defend the
most gross Idolatry as ever was: as for example: Jehu Worshipped God, and was
zealous for the Lord of Hosts, 2 King. 10.16. but he Worshipped God in the two
calves at Dan and Bethel; for it is said, v. 31. he departed not from the sins
of Jeroboam. He might with Papists have said. Why? I Worship no Calves, but
God in the Calves. Yet he was an Idolater.

The Samaritans and Assyrians in Samaria feared God, and served their Images, 2
King. 17.28.33.41. that is, served God in images: But they were not thereby
freed from horrible Idolatry, for which God cast them out. Judge. 17 Micha
worshipped the true God in an Idol, and could say as much as the Papists, I
worship not the Image, but God in the Image: for verse. 3. the silver was
dedicated to the Lord to make an Image: and verse. 13. now the Lord will be
merciful unto me, seeing I have got a Levite in my house. And yet he was a
gross Idolater. Exodus 32. the Israelites worshipped not the Cal^, but God in
the Call: for, 1 They proclaimed holy day to Jehova, not to the Call, ver. 5. 2
The thing they desired was only some visible presence of God to go before them
now in the absence of Moses, verse. 1. 3 They could not be so senseless as to
think that an Idol, which had eyes, and did not see, and feet, but could not
walk, could go before them, but that God represented thereby and reconciled
unto them should go before them. 4 When they said. These be thy Gods, Oh
Israel, which brought thee out of Egypt, could they be so blockish as to think
a dead Idol, made but the day before, could be that God which brought them
many weeks before out of Egypt, when it had no being? Therefore by a figure of
the sign put for the thing signified, it is thus meant, This is in honor of
the God that brought thee out of Egypt.

Obj. They forgot God, Psalm. 106.20.

Ans. It cannot be meant of all memory of God; but, that they forgot their duty
and obedience to God, together with Gods express Commandment to the contrary.
Yet was this condemned by God, and revenged by Moses, as an high Idolatry.

5 It is false which the Papists say, that they worship not the Image, but God
in the Image; their common practice is to invocate Images, to trust for good
from them, to vow, offer, and go in Pilgrimage to them, and make sure of
protection from them. This is the honor of Images, to the great and high
dishonor of God.

6 The Papists themselves after all their flourishes, are glad to leave this
practice, as which they had rather hold by way of dispute to toil the
Protestants, than in sound judgment to help themselves. Exam. Council. T^id.
part. 3.
Chemnitius writes of George Gassander, that after long dispute and strife to
varnish over invocation of Saints, he concluded thus, Ego in meis precibus non
soleo Sanctos invocare, sed invocationem dirigo ad Deum ipsum, idque in nomine
Christi: hoc enim tutius esse enistimo: I for my part use not to call upon the
Saints, but direct my prayers to God himself, and that in the name of Christ:
for I take this to be the safer course. And Hofmeister a great Papist, after
he had heaped up many opinions about invocation of Saints, concludes in the
words of Augustine, (if that Book De visitatione infirmorum was his) Tutius and
jucundius. loquor ad meum Jesum, quam ad aliquem sanctorum spirituum Dei, I
speak more safely and with more comfort to my Jesus, than to any of those
blessed Spirits that are with God. And to those that do not thus, may be
applied that in Jer. 2.13. This people has committed two great evils, they
have left the fountain of living waters, and dug to themselves wells that
will hold no water.

I will conclude with the concession of E^^ius in his Euchiridion, wherein he
shows that invocation of Saints was not delivered by the Spirit of God in the
Old Testament, neither in Doctrine, nor Commandment, nor promise, nor example,
for two reasons: 1 Because that people was so prone to Idolatry. 2 Because the
Fathers were in limbo before Christ's passion, neither had the blessed vision of
God. Neither was it delivered in the New Testament, for two reasons more: 1
Because the Gentiles were very prone to return to their old Idolatry. 2 Lest
the Apostles should seem to teach their own honor after their death.

Let us take this Doctor at his word, and his reasons as they are (though
better might be given:) and only hence infer thus much; If the Doctrine of
Invocation of Saints, be found neither in the Old nor New Testament, with what
conscience do they urge it on the simple, under pretense of Scripture? If it
be said, This perhaps is but one Doctors opinion, to him consents Asotus a
great and learned Jesuit, who tells us plainly, Non doceri in scripturis, sed
insinuari Sanctorum invocationem, that the invocation of Saints is only
insinuated in the Scripture.

Mark the force of truth in these two great points, of Justification granted by
Bellarmine, and of Invocation of Saints granted by all these great Papists.

Use 2. Our doctrine condemns the presenting of ones body at the external Divine
worship of any thing which is not God: and consequently, a man may not be
present at false worship to give it the least allowance, no not in gesture.
Whence they are convicted of dealing false with God, who present their body at
the Mass, with a conceit that they can keep their hearts to God well enough.
For, 1 Might not our Lord for a whole world have found by all his wisdom such a
present help for him, and by such a policy have overreached the Devil himself,
who required only external bowing, keeping his heart still unto God? No: our
Lord knew well, 1 That body and soul make but one man, who must have but one
God, one Lord, one Faith, one Worship. 2 That our bodies are the Lords as well
as our souls, 1 Cor. 6.20. created for his service as well as they, redeemed by
Christ's blood as well as they. 3 That he that requires the whole heart,
requires also the whole strength which is of the body. 4 That the soul cannot
be in Heaven, if the body be in Hell; neither can he bow the knee of his heart
to God, that bows the knee of his body to Satan. 5 That there can be no
agreement between Light and Darkness, God and Belial: the Ark and Dagon cannot
stand in the same Temple, and the heart cannot at the same time be the Temple
of God and of Idols.

2 This is the difference between the Church of God, and the Synagogue of
Satan, that the one is a chaste wise and spouse of Christ, and keeps her to her
husband alone, and does not admit others to the use of her says: the other
plays the harlot with many Lovers, and keeps not her says and confidence to
God alone, but permits others to be fellows with him at the same time. Now no
man can take her for a chaste and undefiled Spouse, that will give the use of
her body to a stranger, though she plead never so confidently that she keeps
her heart to her husband. The case here is the very same.

3 Here is a number of sins infolded in this one action. 1 Here is a manifest
appearance of evil, which we should fly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. 2 An occasion of
offense to others, to draw them in by our example, and, so far as we may, a
destroying of him for whom Christ has dyed, Romans 14.15. 3 A fight against
faith, and an allowance of that which a man condemns. Romans 14.22. Blessed is
he that condemns not himself in that he allows. His body allows that which
his heart condemns. 4 Here is a denial of Christ, whose faith he ought to
confess and profess with his mouth; which he would do, if it were in soundness
hid in the heart. 5 Here is a dastardly joining with his Lords enemy: for he
that is not with him is against him. 6 Here is not only an approbation, but a
communication in Idolatry; a touching of pitch, and a defiling of a man's self;
a most present danger of infection, and defection from God. 7 Here is an
hypocritical show of that which the heart abhorres; a divided man, and divided
manner of worship, which God hates who requires the whole man. 8 Experience
shows, that such as give up their bodies to Idols, God in justice for the most
part gives up the heart to horrible delusions.

4 If we must avoid an Heretic then much more an Idolater. We must not only
hate the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, but avoid it. Many say they hate the
Mass; but I say, then they would avoid it: for we separate our bodies, not only
our hearts, from the things we hate. And the commandment is, to get out of
Babylon. We read in the Ecclesiastical History, how St. John fled from
Corinthus the Heretic, and Polycarp from Marcion: And, those whom we may not
bid God-speed, or whom we may not invite to our own tables, may we join with
them in polluting the Lords table?

5 Such persons keep not their hearts to God, that present their bodies at
Idolatry: neither present they their bodies only; for the Soul governs the
Body, the Will leads the Action, the Understanding the Will, and the Affections
attend the Understanding. Now where there is understanding, judgment, will,
and affections, given to the Idol-worship, is not more than the body given,
even the chief and highest faculties of the soul? Of which we can reckon no
better than plowing with an Ox and an Ass, or sowing the same field with
diverse seeds, which the Lord in the Law forbids, and therein refuses the
mixture of warrantable and unwarrantable rites in his worship. God is a Spirit
and truth, and will not be worshipped in spirit and falsehood. A dissembled
worship is a mark of a true neutral, of a plain Laodicean, neither hot nor
cold, a Cake half baked on the hearth.

Quest. But is it not lawful on some occasion to be present at Mass?

Ans. In some cases a man may be present, and not sin: as, 1 When he is there
by violent compulsion, being bound and cast in as into a prison, so as he
cannot resist: this is not his sin, but theirs; and it may be said as of
Lucretia, Two in the sin, but one adulterer; she resisted and was forced, so
was he. 2 If in travel a man be in a fit place to see and observe their folly,
so as he show no reverence at all, or approbation by bending his knee,
uncovering his head, or otherwise. Thus the Apostle Paul went into the
Idol-temple at Athens, as he passed by, not to approve, but to take occasion to
confute their Idolatry, Acts 17.23. 3 A man may be amongst Idolaters to reprove
and reprehend them, as 1 King. 13.1. a Prophet came to the Altar where Jeroboam
was, to cry out against it. And Elias stood by Baals Priests mocking them,
while they danced and launced themselves, 1 King. 18. And the three fellows of
Daniel stood by Nebuchadnezzars Image, Aderant, sed ^on adorarunt. Pet. Martyr.
to protest that they would never worship it, Dan. 3.1. 4 Some hold that in
politic employment, a man's calling necessarily requiring it, he may present
his body at Idol-worship: as a Protestant may carry a sword before a Prince
into the Temple of an Idol, with two caveats; 1 That neither by word nor
gesture he give any approbation of the Idolatry: 2 That public protestation
be made by word, or writing, that he presents not himself for religions sake,
but civil obedience.

I will say nothing against this last case: for my part, I like a great deal
better that practice of the Protestant Princes at Augusta, who brought Charles
the fifth their Emperor along as he was going to the Mass, but lest him at the
Church-door, and every man by his departure showed what he thought of that
service. Also when Valentinian brought Julian to the Temple of his Idols, he
that kept the door sprinkled his gown with the Idols-water, as the Heathens
used: whereat Valentinian gave him a box on the ear. If we should thus present
our selves, what tumults and stratagems should we make?

Obj. That was heath ^nish service; but the Mass is more Christian, and has
good things in it.

Ans. 1. That was the Mass from which the Protestant Princes departed. 2 The
Mass is as gross Idolatry as ever any was among the Gentiles, being made up of
Judaism, Gentilism, and shreds of Christianity. 3 Let them tell us a difference
between the bodily adultery of Heathens and Christians, and we will observe
the same in the spiritual whoredom which is Idolatry.

Obj. 1. But what say you of Naaman the Syrian, who requested leave to go into
the house of Rimmon with the King his Master; and the Prophet bade him go in
peace? 2 King. 5.18.

Ans. 1. Some think he spoke only of Civil and Politic presence, that his
Master the King might lean upon him before his Idol; he in the mean time
protesting that he would never worship other god but the true God: to which the
Prophet condescendeth. Which is the answer of Mr. Perkins upon the second
Commandment; and Mr. Zanchius on Ephesians. 5. But, howsoever the gesture it self
is indifferent, to stand when the King stands, and bow when the King boweth,
etc. yet this gesture being clothed with such circumstances, seems to me not
approved by the Prophet, to do this, 1 In the Church: 2 Before an Idol: 3 In
the time of public service: 4 By one professing the true God: this seems not
so warrantable. And indeed both those famous Divines departed from this answer,
and gave a sounder in their latter works, as appears both in Mr. Perkins his
Cases of Conscience, and Mr. Zanchius his Book De redemptione.

2 Some think he speaks in the time past! as if he should say, Herein that I
have bowed, etc. the Lord be merciful to me: to which the Prophet said, Go in
peace. But there is no need thus to wrest either the tongue or the text.

3 The best answer is, that Naaman professes it a sin to go in to bow with his
Master in the house of Rimmon, and therefore prays twice for mercy for it,
professing he will never now worship any but the true God: neither does he only
pray against sin past, nor for leave for sin to come; but in sense of his own
weakness and infirmity desires mercy, that he may not be drawn from his
purpose, and withal stirs up the Prophet to pray for him for grace and
strength, and for pardon if at any time he should against his purpose be
drawn into his former sin: and in this sense the Prophet bids him go in peace:
as if he should say, I will pray that God would keep thee in thy godly
resolution, and for strength and mercy if thou should be drawn aside; and
so farewell.

Now out of this example, how can they defend that not to be a sin, which
himself confesses a sin, and desires grace and mercy for, and strength
against? Besides, Naaman might seem to plead his calling for his warrantize, if
it were not: but what calling can they plead, but only newfangledness, and rash
running out of their way and calling?

Obj. 2. But Daniel worshipped the Image which Nebuchadnezzar set up: else he
should have been punished as his three fellows were?

Ans. A silly argument of desperate men, blaspheming the holy Prophet, who
before had been cast into the den of Lions, for sticking unto God. But if they
fall to conjectures, we may easily refell them in their own kind, thus: 1
Perhaps the Image was not near Daniel. 2 If it were, he might not be
observed. 3 If he were, it may be the Chaldes durst not accuse him, for his
great grace and place with the King. 4 Or if they did, it may be the King would
not hear them, nor draw him to death, for the great love he bare him, or the
great service he did in his Kingdom.

Oh therefore let not us that are Jews, that is, the Israel of God, meddle with
these Romish Samaritans; Joh. 4.9
let us not enter into their Cities, nor turn into the way of the Gentiles: let
them be unto us as Publicans and Heathens. Oh that our young Gentlemen would
not go into this way, to perform even the basell services of the Mass, but
hear the voice of Christ, Matthew 10.5.

Use 3. In all our service of God this precept requires that we give him
religious reverence, and express it in reverent and seemly gestures, especially
in prayer and praise to bow our bodies, and compose the parts thereof to seemly
behaviors: True it is, that religion stands not in gestures, neither does the
Scripture expressly tie us to this or that in particular, but only in general to
such as beseem holiness and humility.

See it in the example of the Saints. 1 King. 8.54. when Solomon had made an
end of all his prayer, he arose from kneeling on his knees, and stretching his
hands toward heaven. Good Jacob being not able to bend and turn his body for
age, yet in worshipping God, he would lean on the end of his staff, being in
his bed, and bow as well as he could, Heb. 12.21. He might have thought the
age of his body and weakness, might exempt him from outward adoration, yet he
makes a supply of his weakness by the help of a staff. 1 Chronicles. 29.20. the
whole Congregation of Israel, in blessing the Lord, bow down their heads, and
worshipped the Lord. And our Lord Jesus himself before his Passion, fell on his
face, and prayed, Matthew. 26.39. All to teach us, how reverently to demean our
selves in our Lords service; yea if we can convenien^ly, with Ezra. (chap. 9.
verse. 5.) to fall on our knees, and spread our hands to the Lord. 1 To testify
our humility, and that our souls are cast down with our bodies. 2 This is a
profession of the high Majesty of God before whom we are: the greater the
person is among men, the more reverence is to be used in speaking to him, or
in being spoken unto by him: but God is the greatest of all, The Lord our
Maker, Therefore let us kneel before him, Psalm 95.6, 7. 3 Our reverent and
humble gestures greatly help us against our own weaknesses: the lifting up of
our eyes and hands, help us to get our hearts lifted up to God. 4 It
manifests our care to glorify God in our souls and bodies, as we are
commanded, 1 Cor. 6.20. and that we acknowledge them both to be his, and both
to depend upon him. 5 That we set not light by his Ordinances, in which he
gives us leave to approach unto his throne of Grace; before whom the very
Angels are said to cover their faces. 6 Hereby we give good example to others,
and provoke them also to reverence.

All which much condemns the profaneness of many, whom when Satan cannot
hinder from Church, he prevails against them there; and in hearing the Word,
receiving the Sacraments, and Prayer, they manifest their contempt of those
Holy Ordinances, casting and rolling their eyes here and there, gazing idly,
or laying themselves to sleep and take a nap some part of the Sermon, or
sitting unmannerly in prayer-time without all reverence, that should they come
so and behave themselves toward their Prince, they should be taught a lesson
for their rudeness. Is this to confess a man's own baseness, and the humble
conceit he has of himself? Is this the fruit of acknowledging Gods infinite
Majesty? Surely that soul which feelingly sees it self to deal with God, will
make the body either kneel as a Petitioner, or stand as a servant ready to
hear, and know, and do the will of his Lord.

And him only shall thou serve]

Doct. God must not only be worshipped, but also served. The distinction is
easily observed. For a man may in heart and gesture honor another, to whom he
owes but little service. And this word in the Hebrew, is taken from Servants,
who besides inward reverence, and outward worship, owe to their Masters their
strength, labor, and service, yea, frank and cheerful Obedience. And suppose
any man have a Servant, who will be very Complemental, and give his Master cap
and knee, and very good words, yet when his Master commands him any thing, he
will not do it, here is honor, but no service; and denying service, he
plainly shows that his honor is but dissembled and hypocritical. So as this
service to God (as to earthly Masters) stands, 1 in fear, and reverent inward
affection: 2 in dutiful and ready obedience, in all holy and civil actions. For,

1 These two God in the Scriptures has every where joined together, Deuteronomy.
5.29. Oh that there were in them such an heart to fear me, and to keep my
Commandments. Josh. 24.14, 15. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in
uprightness; else choose you: for I and my house will serve the Lord. Eccl. 12.
ult. Let us hear the end of all, Fear God, and keep his Commandments: which is
all one with fear God and serve him.

2 This service is a fruit of fear, and a true testimony of it: for fear of God
is expressed in service: and if a man would make true trial of his fear, he
may do it by his service. It is a note and branch also of our love unto God:
all which the holy Prophet Moses declares, Deuteronomy. 10.12. when he expresses,
that walking in all Gods ways, is a consequent of fear, and the service of the
Lord a fruit of love: And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of
thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to love him,
and to serve the Lord thy God?

3 He justly calls for our service, in regard of the relation that is
between him and us, as he is the Lord our God and Master, and has authority
over us, to whom we owe simple obedience, and we are his servants, to whom
we owe of right our whole strength and service. Now he becomes our Lord, and
we his servants, not only by right of Creation and prese^vation, but by
express Covenant, that as the Jews servants were said to be their Masters
money, so we are not our own, but bought with a price, 1 Corinthians. 6.20. Our
wages are set, and our Promise passed, our earnest-penny received, and no other
Lord can lay claim unto us.

4 There is no Creature exempted from the service of God: all Creatures in
their kind serve him, and much more ought man, to whom he has appointed all
creatures to serve him, and has exempted him from the service of them all, to
serve himself alone. All the Saints ever gloried that they were the Servants of
God. The honorable mention of Moses is, that he was faithful in all the house
of God as a servant. And David says often, Lord, I am thy ^ervant, keep thy
servant, etc. Paul, Peter, Jude, the servants of God. The Angels profess
themselves our Fellow Servants, and are called Ministering spirits sent forth
for the heirs of Salvation. Adam in innocence was not exempted from this
service, but must serve God in dressing the Garden, as a servant his Lord and
Master. Nay, Christ himself the second A^am, was not only styled the beloved
Son, but the righte^us servant of God Isa. 53.11.

5 Our Talents, our gifts, our strength, our work, our wages, all are his,
received from him, and for him, and therefore must be returned again unto him
in his service.

Quest. What is this service which God requires at our hands?

Answ. The service of God is either Legal, or Evangelical. The former stands in
a perfect conformity with the whole Law of God, when the creature can present
unto God a personal and total righteousness. Of this kind is the service of the
blessed Angels. Of the same kind was Adams in innocence. Of the same was
Christ's service, when he was made obedient to the death, that by the obedience
of one, many might be made righteous. This is that by which we shall serve
God in heaven, when we shall once again recover perfect sanctification, and
the whole Image of God, which we have now lost. This now we cannot attain
unto; yet we must ever carry it in our eye as our scope and aim.

Evangelical service is, when the heart being regenerate by Gods Spirit, and
purified by Faith, has Christ's obedience imputed unto it, which is accepted as
its own perfect obedience, and now endeavors to obey God sincerely in all
things. In a word, that is Evangelical service, which is perfect in Christ,
begun and inchoat in us; in him complete, in us sincere, and upright, which is
Christian perfection.

And to know this service the better, we will set down the conditions of it.

I. It must be willing and free, a free will offering: for hereby it is
distinguished from the service of Devils, and wicked men, who are all subject
unto the power of God, and do him service in executing his will, whether they
will or no: but one thing it is to be subjected, another to subject ones self:
the one is f^^^an inward principle, even the Spirit of Go^, which renews the
will and makes it of unwillingly willing and pliable: the other is only by
some outward force. The service of the godly resembles the Angels in Heaven,
who are said to have wings, by which their will and readiness is figured in
doing the bests of God. David had not such wings to fly swiftly, yet he would
run in the way of Gods Commondements so fast as the burden of flesh would
suffer him. This condition our Lord and Savior commends unto us in his own
example, when he professes it is his meat and drink to do the will of his
father.

2 It must be hearty and sincere. Romans 1.9. whom I serve in my spirit: not in
body and ostentation, but in soul and sincerity; not in hypocrisy and
coldness, but in soundness and fervency; not co-acted or compelled, but
cheerfully and without dispute. The Apostle requires love out of a pure heart,
1 Timothy 1.5
and a good Conscience, and faith unfeigned. And when the Lord bids David seek
his face, David's heart answers, I will seek thy face, Psalm. 27.8. Those that
serve bodily Masters, must not serve with eye-service, but as the servants of
Christ, Ephesians. 5.6. how? doing the will of God from the heart: and ver. 5. (...),
in simplicity of heart. What man can abide a servant that deals deceitfully
with him, if he know that he outwardly pretends service, but his heart is not
with him, but he dissembles Love, Truth, Faith, and Reverence? No more can God.
Men cannot see into the hearts of their servants, but the Lord does, and cannot
be deceived. The fountain of all our Obedience must be a pure and sincere
heart, or else, if the wellhead be corrupt, share all the waters that issue
thence.

3 It must be ruled and squared by God himself: Hinc obed^re ad audire.
for God must be served as he will be served, and not as we think good: for
God knows what is best, and what pleases him best. All Obedience is to go by
rule, not our own, or others, but Gods. As the eyes of the handmaid is upon
the hand of her Mistrisse so in our service must our eyes be upon Gods
direction, Ps. 123.2. which is employed in that phrase. Luke 1.75. That we
should serve him in righteousness and holiness before him all the days, of
our life. An earthly servant must not take up his own work, nor do other men's
business, but depend upon his own Masters mouth and direction.

Now God rules his whole service in respect of the 1 matter, 2 manner, 3 end.

I. For the matter. Whatsoever I command, that do only, says the Lord. Thou
shall not do that which is good in thine own eyes, but what I command thee. And
so we are taught to pray, Thy will be done.

II. For the manner, It must be 1 Absolute: 2 Total.

I. Absolute, without all condition on our part; whereas all service to men
must be conditional. The reason hereof is, because God being holiness it self,
can command nothing but what is most just and holy, but men may.

II. Total, both objective and subjective. 1 It must be total in respect of
the object; all Gods Commandments, all which call for our obedience. Partial
and delicate service, when we list, or at leisure, as the retainers of great
men on feast-daies, is not that which likes him, but a constant diligence in
all his Commandments, and a conscionable endeavor in all. General service was
holy David's aim, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be confounded, when I have
respect to all thy Commandments. Not that we can perfectly serve him, unless
we were perfectly sanctified, but, that we must make conscience of all Gods
Commandments, even the least. 2 It must be total in respect of our selves: we
must be wholly employed in his service, in all our parts and powers, the whole
heart and all the strength is here challenged. Wherein there is a notable
difference between the service we owe to God, and that to men: We are to be
serviceable to men only in part, not wholly; for the soul and Conscience are
not subject to men, which God especially takes up and looks for: Gods
privilege it is, to be the father of spirits: for although we take our
bodies from our Parents, yet our souls are immediately from God: Men therefore
have no power and authority over our souls, but God has power both over soul
and body, and is the Lord of our conscience and spirit: and therefore of due
must we subject our selves wholly in his service.

III. God rules his service in respect of the end, which is twofold,
intentionis and termini. 1 The proper aim and end of our service must be, 1
Gods glory directly. If all our service of men must be for God (as we saw it
must) much more must Gods immediate service. 2 The good of our brethren and of
Gods Church, which we must not scandalize, but build up: for God will be served
in our service of men. 2 We must serve our God without end: he requires such
an heart in his people, as to fear him always, Deuteronomy. 5.29. and 6.13. Thou shall
serve the Lord, and cleave unto him. We allow not our servants to cast up our
work, and make holy day at their pleasure: much less most Gods servants think
it lawful at any time to give any service to Satan, Sin, Lust, the World, or
any Creature, against the Will of the Lord.

Use. This should provoke us to tender unto God this service with heart and
good will, thus squared by God for the matter, manner, and ends of it. The
Apostle ( Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7, 8.) persuades servants to obey their Masters
according to the flesh, by three arguments, all which are much more strong to
persuade our service to our Master in heaven: First (says he) it is the will
of God; Gods institution, and the ordinance of Christ. It is enough for a
servant to know that such a thing is the ordinate will of his own Master. The
second reason of the Apostle, is taken from the honor of their service, that
in serving men they served the Lord Christ, which was an honorable thing. Now
we serve a great Lord, and as good as great. If a servant were bound to a
wicked and froward Master, he must obey him in all lawful things: How much more
are we to yield service to so good a Lord, who can command nothing but that
which is most just, holy, and honorable? He sets us not about any base or
ignoble service, to work in brick or clay, as Pharaoh commanded the Israelites,
but our work is the practice of piety and righteousness, of prayer and praise.
And besides it is most beneficial to our selves: for, what gains he by our
service? our goodness reaches not to him, to add a grain to his perfection.
Psalm. 50.9, 10. I will take no Bullock out of thy house: for all the beasts of
the forest are mine, and the sheep on a thousand mountains: If I were hungry, I
would not tell thee. But it is our honor and profit; as when a noble man takes
a poor Sneak near him to serve him, such a mean man is more honored and
pleasured, than the noble man to whom he retains. The third reason of the
Apostle, is drawn from the expectation of reward or wages, which, if their
Masters should fail, God would not fail to repend unto them: knowing, that
whatsoever good thing any man does that same he shall receive of the Lord. Now
if the Lord so liberally reward faithful service done to mean, and even wicked
men, how rich and royal a reward gives he to the faithful service of himself?
It gifts then may move us to serve God, the Lord truly says, All these do I
give thee, and more also, my Christ, my Spirit, my self, and life eternal. No
man gives such wages, no servant ever had such a play master.

To these might be added sundry other motives: as, 1 To serve God, is to reign,
and to be a King over the world, fleshly lusts, etc. and to suit with Saints
and Angels. 2 God hereby becomes our protector, maintainer, and revenge^, a
David often prays, Lord, save thy servant, teach thy servant, revenge the
cause of thy servant, etc. 3 Servants of unrighteousness meet with the wages of
unrighteousness. 4 All our comfort in crosses and afflictions stands in our
service of God, and a good Conscience, or else we have none. 5 To fear and keep
his Commandments, is the whole duty of a man, and that which makes him f^lly
happy.

Notes of a good servant of God.

1 Labor to know the will of the Lord, which he has revealed in his Word, as
David prayed, Psalm. 119.125. For in the Scripture he has laid but our work
for us: and let us expect our calling to every business there: let us be ready
to hear, not lightly absent, nor present for custom, but conscience. 2 Let us
serve him in affection, and be glad to do any thing to please him, and grieve
when we fail either in doing that we should not, or in not doing that we
ought, or not in that manner that may please the Lord. 3 Be ever employed in
his work: How know I a man's servant, but by his laboring in his Masters
business? Ye are his servant to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16. and Joh. 15. Ye are
my Disciples, if ye do whatsoever I command you. If I see a man spend his
time in the service of sin, of lusts, of games, pleasure, the world, etc. I
know whose servant he is; certainly he is not in the service of God, he is not
in Gods work. 4 Intend thy Lords profit and glory. A good servant knows his
time and strength is his Masters, and he must be profitable to him, and seek
his credit. It will be with every servant of Christ as with Onesimus, Phileus.
11. being converted: howsoever before grace he were so unprofitable and
pilfering, as he was unfit for any honest man's house, and much more the house
of God, yet now he profits the Lord, and credits him, and takes not his meat,
and drink, and wages for nothing, 5 A good servant sets forward his Masters
work in others, he will provoke his fellow servants, and not smite and hinder
them, as the evil servant did: he will defend his Lord, he will venture his
life for him, he will stand also for his fellow servants, while they are in
their Masters business; he will be a law to himself, if there were no Law, no
Discipline; he will not idle out his time; his eye is upon the eye of his
Master, his mind upon his account, his endeavor to please him in all things.

Verse. 11. Then the Devil left him, and behold, the Angels came and ministered
unto him.
HAving by the assistance of God now finished the two former general parts of
this whole History, which stood in the 1 Preparation, and 2 The combat it
self: we proceed to the third and last, which is the issue and event of all,
which affords us the sweet fruit and comfort of all our Saviors former
sufferings from Satan, and of our labors and endeavors in opening the same.

In this issue two parts are to be considered: 1 Christ's victory. 2 His
triumph.

His victory and conquest, in that the Devil left him.

His triumph, in that the Angels came and ministered unto him.

In both which shine out notably the marks of his Divine power, which even in
all his lowest abasements did discover it self to such eyes as could see it,
and gave show of a person far above all that his outward presence seemed to
promise: as for example: His conception was by the Holy Ghost: His birth as
mean and base as might be, but graced with a Star, and the testimony of Angels:
and his Circumcision with Simeons. His Baptism performed by John in Jordan, but
graced by his Fathers testimony, and the Spirits descent in a visible shape of
a Dove. His civil obedience causes him to pay tribute, but he sends for it to
a Fish. His person was called Beelzebub, but Beelzebub confesses him to be the
Son of God. At his Passion, what greater infamy than to be hanged between two
Thieves? What greater glory than to convert and save one of them? At his
apprehension, they that took him fell backward to the ground, Joh. 18.6. In
death he trod upon Deaths neck: and being shut up in the Grave, he opened it.
So here he is carried and recarried in the hands of the Devil, but as one weary
of his burden, he is forced to leave him on the plain field, and to give up
the bucklers? because a stronger than he is come. This is the great mystery of
God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.

In the victory of Christ consider three things. 1 The time when the Devil left
him, Then. 2 The manner, he departed from him. 3 How long he left him, and
that is in Luke, for a season.

Then] This particle may have reference to three things, 1 When the temptations
were ended, says Luke, namely all those which his Father had appointed him to
endure at this time in the Wilderness. For as the Son of God knew how much to
suffer, so Satan would not give over till he had spent all his powder, and had
exercised all his malice in these most hellish Temptations, wherein he used
all his skill, strength, and malice, if he might possibly in this seed of the
woman overthrow all the Sons of men, and in the Head kill all the members.
Whence we may

Doct.
Observe, The obedience of the Son of God, who stood out resolutely, and
departed not the field at all, nor expected any rest, till all the Temptations
for this time were ended. Christ could have confounded Satan in the beginning
of the temptations, and so have freed himself from further molestation: but he
continues, and abides all the trial to the end. And why?

David was most proper to this Son of David, Behold, here am I, let the Lord do
with me, even as he will. In his greatest agony he said, Not my will, but
thy will be done. For, he that loves God, his Commandments are not grievous
to him.

2 His love to his Church made him stand out the uttermost peril in this
dangerous combat. Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved his Church, (...), and exposed
himself for it, and made himself liable to all wrongs and dangers for it, as a
loving Husband steps between his Wife and danger.

3 He persisted in the Combat, to teach us to hold out after his example in
temptation, and to expect freedom from temptation when we have endured all,
but not before. It is absurd to expect the Victory before the field be won.

4 To comfort us his members, in that he has broken asunder all Satan's
forces, and blunted for us the edge and points of his most fierce temptations.
For if this Serpent had had more poison and venom in him, if he had a sharper
and more deadly sting, no doubt our Lord should have been assailed therewith,
and out of doubt he set all his seven heads on work how to cast him down: But
Christ out-stands all, and the Prince of the World sound nothing in him.

Use 1. Learn from Christ's example, willingly and cheerfully to obey God in the
greatest temptations and trials, even to the end of them. For, 1 We profess
we are followers of Christ, and herein he has gone before us in example,
which is of more force than many precepts. 2 We pray that there may be but
one will between God and us, Thy will be done. These trials shall not be
always; yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come: They be not so
long as the Devil will but as God has appointed. 4 The Temptations of the
godly are best at the end: We have heard of the Patience of Job (says the
Apostle) and what end God gave him. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, Jam. 1.12.

Use 2. This also reproves such as make more haste for their peace than good
speed. They would have Canaan before the Canaanites be subdued, nay, before
they step into the Wilderness: whereas the Crown is not given before the
strife, but to those that strive lawfully. Who be they to whom Christ promised
a Kingdom, to eat and drink at his Table, and sit on seats with him, but to
those that continue with him in temptation? Luke 22.28. and Rev. 2. all is
promised to him that overcommeth: and Be faithful unto the death, and I will
give thee a crown of life.

We are in the Church militant, beset with our enemies so long as we live,
and can we expect victory without blows? or think we our selves safe and
free, when we have stood out one skirmish, or two, seeing our enemies are
alive, and ever renewing the assault? No: let us resolve to the contrary with
the Apostle, and say, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid up for me a crown of glory, which
the righteous judge shall give me at that day. Wages are given at the end of a
work, and an earnest only in the beginning.

Use 3. Let us hence comfort our selves: for so soon as the temptation is
ended, we shall be delivered. When Abraham had a bloody knife in his hand,
and was stretching it out to kill his Son, Genesis 22.10. God bids him stay, he
had been tempted enough, now his comfort returns, his Isaac, his joy is
preserved. There is but an hour for the power of darkness, and after that comes
light. Be content when God ecclispeth thy light, and thou seeest thy self
beset with darkness, wait a while, make not haste, though the Lord tarry, he
has not forgotten thee, nor his promise: the patient abiding of the just,
shall not always be forgotten. Matthew. 8.26. when the Disciples had been long
tossed with waves, and the ship was full of water, and they expected present
death, then Christ awakes, and rebukes the storm, and there was a great calm:
but he had no sooner rebuked the winds, but he rebuked their diffidence.

Use 4. Lastly, as Christ's temptation shows what condition we are subject to,
so his Victory assures us of ours, and shows what shall be the end of our
temptations. In men's battles the Victory is doubtful, here it is certain; in
them the stronger for the most part overcomes, here the weaker, because they
are armed with the same power as Christ was. Here is a difference between the
godly and the wickeds temptations: God leads the wicked into temptations, and
then leaves them; he leads the godly in, but he leads them out also.

II. Then the Devil left him] namely, when he had been every way resisted,
when he could fasten nothing upon the Son of God, when neither penury and
want, nor temptation to vainglory, nor to Covetousness could move him, then
he gives over. Whence observe, that,

Doct. The way to make Satan fly, is strongly and stoutly to resist him. Jam.
4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you: 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Your
adversary the Devil goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour,
whom resist steadfast in the Faith: Ephesians. 4.27. Give no place to the Devil.

1 That which has been in the head perfectly fulfilled, John 16. ult. Be of
good comfort, I have overcome the world; which had been but a cold comfort to
them, had not they shared with him in his own victory. Which is also infinite
in power, and in time.

2 The promise of God is, that if we resist Satan, he shall fly by virtue of
which promise the Devil is overcome and put to flight, by the weakest member of
Christ, manfully resisting him: for it is not the strength or worthiness of
our resistance that can daunt the Devil, but because God has promised to tread
down Satan under our feet, Romans 16.19. therefore by resisting we must tread
upon him, not that our resistance is a cause, but only a means, in which God
gives Victory. God promised Israel the land of Canaan, and power to subdue all
those Nations then possessors of it; by virtue of which promise, if five Kings
at once rise up against Joshua, he must tread upon all their necks: it was not
their power that did this, though they must use means, and raise all their
power against them, but Gods promise: Say not in thine heart, By my own hand,
or strength, or wisdom, have I taken this good land: no, it was because God
loved thee: It was the land of promise. So here.

3 Satan cannot but fly if he be resisted, because he is a conquered enemy,
spoiled of his weapons which were most mortal: and not only conquered in
Christ our head, but in us his members: for, to whom was that promise made, but
to the Church, that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head? so
as his head is broken to mystical Christ, whole Christ both the head and the
members; let him now nibble at the heel, and hiss, and gape, and fly upon
them, he cannot hurt them, because his sting is taken away. Now what can
conquered enemies do if they be still resisted, but fly?

4 The battle which we fight is the Lords, wherein he will not be overcome:
the strength is the Lords, who is mighty in battle. What was the strength of
David to Goliath? but when he comes against him in the name of the Lord, a
small and weak resistance overthrows him. Our armor is the Lords; Put on the
armor of God. And it is armor of proof: It were a disgrace to his workmanship
if it should ever be found slight or insufficient. Our cause is the Lords, a
contention for the faith: Fight the good fight of faith, which shall prevail
against all the gates of Hell. Our Captain was never overcome, nor can be, nor
any one of his fellows: for they are all members of that body, whereof he is
the head; and can a Head able to save the Body, suffer it self to be
dis-membred of any one member? Our Aiders and Assistance that come in to help
us while we resist, are the Angels, who have a charge to keep us in our ways,
and give us strength and victory: they be too strong for Satan and all his
powers, and they be more that be with us than they against us.

Object. But are not many of Gods Children not only sore thrust at, but even
overcome in temptation? Nay, and does not experience show, that the more the
child of God resists, the more Satan assaulteth him? And does not another
experience teach us, that the less he is resisted, the sooner he flies, and
is less troublesome?

Answ. God in great wisdom suffers Satan to molest his dear Children, and
infest them with long and strong temptations, and many times to foil them, and
to renew his temptations, and the battle day by day: 1 For their humbling and
exercise, the Lord destroyed not all the Canaanites before Israel, but left
some people to hold them battle, lest they should grow secure, Judge. 3.1. and
to teach them battle: And Paul must be buffeted by Satan, lest he should be
exalted by the multitude of Revelations. 2 To make them more watchful of their
Graces, and keep close their Faith, Hope, Love, Patience, etc. as when Robbers,
and Pilferers are abroad, men shut up and lock their goods within; so here. 3
To magnify his own glory, who manifests such power in such weakness, and
seasonably sets in for their safety and victory, when in their sense they are
utterly lost.

But, 1 Satan never overcomes him that resists; he may foil him, and beat
his weapon to his head, Ne^^l i^ non vin^^, n si qui vince^e no^u^t. Erasmus.
yea, he may send him halting away with Jacob so long as he lives; yet at
length he shall overcome, if he hold on his resistance.

2 Satan indeed often assaulteth where he is much resisted: for he will still
renew the battle: Sometimes in strong Christians, whom the Lord presses forth
as the Leaders in his battle, for, strength is for the war. Job resisted, but
was still assaulted, because his measure of strength was such as was to be a
pattern to all ordinary men. Our Lord had resisted Satan once and again, but
till now he flies not, because he was to be the General of the field, on
whom all must look as an example, and for direction. But the issue is, that
Satan shall fly at length; and the longer and stronger his temptations are,
the more God glorifieth himself both in the victory of his servants, and
confusion of the Devil, as we see in both the former examples.

Sometimes he fiercely assaileth weaker Christians, who are easilier pulled
from their holds for want of knowledge, judgment, or resolution: these he
thinks will be tired out with importunity, and he hopes to force them to
yield at length. And surely many weaker ones invite Satan's temptations
unawares, which toil them worse than death, because they are so flexible; Satan
sometimes hears them speak in his own Language; Thou art an Hypocrite, a great
sinner above all men; sometimes he sees them use his weapons against
themselves, and so give way to the Adversary in stead of resisting, whereas
stout and manful resistance would speedily procure their peace: sometimes for
want of judgment they are not able to distinguish of Satan's sins from their
own, but carry themselves as they would take upon themselves the Devils
reckoning. Alas! All this invites him, and makes him welcome. But here let the
weakest Believer know, that if he resist lawfully, he shall carry away the
victory, let his resistance be never so weak; and this shall make for Gods
greater glory, and Satan's greater confusion, that he is not able to stand out
the field against the weakest of them, whom he may seem to scorn. It was a
great confusion, that Satan was not able to stand against Christ himself: but
that he shall not be able to stand against a sinner, a worm, which turns again
in the name of Christ, is greater confusion than the former.

3 Whereas Satan seems quiet where he is least resisted, it is no marvel, his
Kingdom is not divided against himself. What need a Captain bend his Forces
against a Town, which has delivered up it self into his hand? What need he
set bul-warks and Canon-shot against those Walls and gates which are willingly
set open? When the strong man keeps the hold, all things are at peace. But a
miserable peace it is, to run from under the colors of the Prince of peace, to
go so peaceably and gently to the dungeon of eternal darkness?

Use 1. This may comfort the child of God, that he shall out-stand all his
temptations: it is not only possible for him to overcome the Devil, and put
him to flight, but also certain. For, The just man falls seven times a day,
but rises again, Prove. 24.16. And why? 1 Because Gods election is eternal, and
unchangeable, and his foundation sure. 2 Because of Christ's prayer, that our
faith might not fail. 3 Because the godly man has built his house on a rock,
against which the winds may blow, and the floods beat, but it shall stand: and
he is set into that head, who overcame the Tempter, that he might overcome
him also. 4 Because of the promise that God will not forsake his Child
overlong, but supply strength for the combat, and give a gracious issue. And
temptation prevails only when God adds not a second grace, but stands afar
off.

Object. But was not David overcome with temptation?

Answ. Yes, justly, when he remitted of his watch and resistance; but this was
neither totally nor finally. The reason is, because God puts a man into the
hands of the Devil two ways: 1 Absolutely: 2 With limitation. Absolutely, 2 Timothy 1.16
as when his justice gives up a wicked man to be wholly ruled at his will, and
carried headlong to destruction. With limitation, when a man is put into his
hand to prevail over him to a certain measure, as Job, and our Savior to be in
these temptations carried and molested, to a certain measure of time and
vexation. Thus the Lord sometimes for a time leaves his own Children into the
hand of Satan, so as he may tempt them, and prevail over them to the committing
of fearful sins, as we see in David and Peter, which sins often blind and
harden them, and damp their conscience, that for a time they see no displeasure
of God, but lie secure and impenitent, as David well-nigh a year.

But all this desertion of God was to a certain measure: at length the cloud
was gone, the mist dispersed, the light returned, Satan resisted, and forced to
fly away. And this is the ground of that prayer of David, and the Saints, Lord,
forsake me not overlong: not fearing that the Lord would quite take away his
grace from him (as the violent Lutherans teach) but that he should not
withdraw his second grace over-farre, or overmuch: Which prayer is grounded
on a promise of God, by virtue whereof we may conclude, that the battle of
Believers is not for the overthrow, but the exercise of their faith.

Use 2. This should stir up the Christian to cheerful resistance, which is the
condition of Satan's flight.

Obj. Alas, he is a spirit, I am flesh: which is great advantage. He is a
legion, I am but one man, he can oppress me with number. He is a principality,
as strong as a roaring Lion, I am a weak Worm. He is subtle as a Serpent, I
am foolish and unwise. He is cruel and fierce, how can I have any heart to
resist him?

Answ. 1. There is in every Christian a Spirit stronger than he, Joh. 4.4.

2 There be more with us than with him, 2 Chronicles. 32.7. fear him not.

Satan potens, omnipotens Christus, Callidus serpent and sapiens, Christus
sapientia.
3 He is mighty, but what can a strong man being disarmed do?

4 He is subtle, but in our Lord are treasures of wisdom, and he is made
wisdom to us of God, 1 Cor. 1.30.

5 He is cruel, but what hurt can a Lion do being in Chains, or a Grate?

Secondly, in thy resistance strive lawfully: How? Two ways, 1 By good means. 2
In a good manner.

First, the means of resisting the Devil must not be such as are of the Devils
own devising, as Crosses, Relics, Holy Water, Exorcisms, nor seeking to
Witches and Sorcerers, which is to cast out the Devil by Beelzebub: but by
means appointed by our Captain, who was best acquainted with this war; as,

1 The Word of God, the holy Scriptures, by which Christ made the Devil fly,
and so must we: 1 John 2.14. I write unto you young men, because ye are
strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the Devil:
which plainly shows, that not by Spells and Charms of Scripture, but by the
abiding of it in the heart, to rule and order the life, Satan is overcome.
Satan is subtle, but the word gives wisdom to the simple, which overcomes
his subtilty.

2 Faith in Gods promises, 1 Pet. 5.9. -- whom resist steadfast in the faith;
Christ here sets himself steadfastly in the word of his Father, and so conquers
the Devil. The victory that overcomes the world, is by faith to lean on the
promises of God. Faith keeps in sight Christ our victorious Captain, and sets
the crown of life in our eye, which is laid up for them that are faithful to
the death.

3 Prayer joined with fasting and watching. Christ entering this combat armed
himself with fasting, watching, and prayer, for many days together. David when
Goliath drew near, took a stone out of his scrip, and smote him in the forehead
that he fell down: This stone that overthrows the hellish Goliath, is prayer.
While Moses hands are lifted up, all the Armies of the Amalekites fly before
Israel. And St. James in his Epistle tells us, that if we would resist the
Devil, we must draw near God, chap. 4. verse. 8. and never do we draw nearer
God, than in effectual and fervent prayer. Let the Disciples use any means
without this, the Devil will not fly; whereof if they ask the reason, Christ
tells them, the Devil is not cast out but by fasting and prayer.

4 The practice of true godliness, and resolution against all unrighteousness.
Righteousness is called a breast plate, Ephesians. 6.14. which is not only that
imputed righteousness of Christ, but that inherent righteousness of our selves,
which is the study and endeavor in a godly life: and the Apostle James among
other directions, in resisting the Devil, chap. 4. verse. 8. gives this for
one, Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering
minded: and the reason is good, seeing by every sin and lust being nourished,
Satan is let in, and the yielding to any corruption is to give him so much
ground, in stead of beating him out of our borders. He that is in a fight,
abstaineth from whatsoever would hinder him, 1 Cor. 9. and therefore from sin,
which presses down, and hangs fast on. Let us meditate on that Law, Deuteronomy.
23.9 When thou go out against thine enemies to fight, abstain from every
evil thing. For this weakens us, and turns God against us, and drives his good
Angels from us.

5 Gods Spirit: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: our own
strength will easily be turned against us, our own counsels cannot but cast us
down. God resists the proud, and assisteth the humble. As therefore Moses
said to Israel at the red sea, being naked and weak, not knowing what to do,
so may we in this case, Stand still, fear not, behold the salvation of the
Lord: Grieve not the Spirit, nor quench his motions, who is the Spirit of
power, of wisdom, of fortitude, and counsel, of strength, and direction: and
go forth in the boldness of that Spirit, as Jer. 20.11. The Lord is with me
like a mighty giant, therefore mine enemies shall be overthrown, and shall not
prevail, but shall be mightily confounded.

Secondly, the good manner of resisting the Devil that he may fly, is this:

1 Resist the first temptation, and break the Serpents head, dash the heads of
Babylons brood against the stones. Wise men will not let the enemy come near
the walls, or the gates, much less into the Marketplace. It is a great
advantage to give the foyl at the first onset. Give no place to the Devil,
give sin no room in thy heart, or if Satan inwardly suggest any, there close it
up, let it dye and never come out, as a man that has a Serpent in a vessel,
stops it up, and there it dies.

2 Resist the least evil motion, contemn not the least temptation, for Satan
can tell how by one grain of poison to kill the soul, and by one dead fly to
corrupt a whole box of ointment. The weakest man, yea or woman, is strong
enough to kill a sleepy Sisera, The weakest temptation is too strong for a
careless and secure adversary. Eve should have resisted Satan in an apple, and
Lots wife in a look. No sin is so light and venial, that is not worth
resistance. For Satan can use small sins as the Fisher uses small hairs to
hold the Fish as fast, or faster, than greater tackling, and secret sins to do
more harm in the soul than open.

3 Resist stoutly and manfully: if he pull one way, pull thou the other, for so
does he that resists. If he tempt thee to pride, incline thou so much the more
to humility. If he move thee to revenge, provoke thy self to meekness and
patience. If he tempt thee to earthliness, bend thou thy self so much the more
to heavenly-mindedness: and thus thou shall beat him with his own weapons, and
take off Goliahs head with his own sword, and all his gain in tempting thee,
shall be to set thee faster and nearer unto God.

4 Resist constantly to the last: though thou be sore assailed, and ready to
forsake the field, yet resist still though never so weakly. Consider that
Christ promises a place on his Throne only to him that overcomes, Revel.
3.21. and that there is no safety in flying, no piece of armor appointed for
the back, If thou be greatly straightned, send Satan to the ctoss of Christ,
there he shall receive an answer: but rather dye manfully than fly cowardly. By
flying thou losest the victory, by dying thou can not.

5 Resist after victory, when Satan seems not to resist; hold on thy harness,
and expect the enemy when he seems absent; perhaps her feigns himself foiled,
when he is but renewing his assault, or as a Pirate hangs out a flag of truce
to board us, or dissembles a flight to draw us out of our holds, and then has
an ambushment against us; and this is his sorest fight: or he will seem of
yield the victory to them, whom he knows cannot tell how to use it, but either
they will grow proud of it, or secure, and lay off their watch, and then, whom
he could not in war overcome while he was resisted, in their peace he spoils
them, when they think he needs no resistance.

Use 3. This reproves the idle conceit of men, who think to be safe from the
Devil without resistance; as, 1 Many ignorant men, who will spit at the mention
of the Devil, and bless themselves from the soul Fiend, and yet are sure enough
in his power: these never knew what it meant to resist the Devil; they want
knowledge in the word, and are willingly and wilfully ignorant; they want
faith, and never inquire after it: they live according to Nature, and the
fashion and custom of the times, are ordinary Swearers, and Sabbath Breakers,
and worldlings, and they think it was never well since there was so much
preaching. And for the Spirit of God, if he were not present to restrain them
with common grace, it were no living near them; but for the renewing of the
Spirit, to set them out of Satan's power, and the corruption of their own sins,
he is so far from them, as they may say truly with John's Disciples, Acts
19.2. We know not whether there be an Holy Ghost or no. Alas, how pitiful is
the state of these men, who think Satan is fled from them, when he is their
only counselor and familiar, ruling them at his pleasure?

2 Many that think to resist the Devil, but they are loath yet to disease
either him or themselves; yet a little while they will hold their sins, they
would fain provide for their wives and children, and rise to such an estate
before they give up their covetousness, usury, deceitful and injurious courses:
they will leave their voluptuous and adulterous courses, when they are old,
that is, when these sins must needs leave them; they will repent of their sins
when they dye, they would be loath to carry them to Gods Judgment with them;
but so long as they live, their sin shall live with them. Fie upon such
madness: Are old decrepit men fit for the field? Is a man upon his deathbed a
fit man to master a Giant? Shall a man so be-fool himself, as to think that
then he can easiest resist the Devil, when his power is least? No, no: Satan
will now triumph and trample upon his spoil; he knows well, that not one of ten
thousand lets his sin live so long with him, but his repentance dies with him
also.

3 Others dream of a victory over the Devil, and they are safe, but they are
not so strict as not to yield some equal conditions to their adversary, they
care not to give a little place unto him. They are no great swearers by great
oaths, but now and then they may forget themselves, and say by God, or faith
or troth, etc. Nor great gamesters that live by gaming, but now and then sit
out a number of hours together, to spend and pass away their times.

Not great drinkers, but only give Satan advantages by running into such
Company and Houses as they may be provoked to drink a little more than they
need. Nor open contemners of the word and Prayer, to speak against it, and make
their minds known; but they cannot abide this strictness at home. Is not the
Church the house of Prayer? Nor known Adulterers, they are honest of their
bodies, but their eyes are full of Adultery, and their mouths full of obscene
filthy speeches, yet they say they think no hurt. This is to dally with the
Devil, as friends at foils, that have caps on the points of their rapiers for
fear of hurting one another. Here is no spirit ruling, but he that rules in
the World. The Devil flies not for such a resistance.

III. Then the Devil left him.]

Namely, when Christ bad him be gone. Whence we may note: that,

Doct, The power of Christ is such, as all the Devils in Hell are not able to
resist. If Christ bid the Devil avoid, even then at his word he must be
packing. Mark. 9.25. he charged the unclean spirit to come out, and enter no
more into the man, so as the Devils cried for grief and anger: Mark. 1.34. a
whole legion of Devils submissively entreat him not to torment them. And this
was not only so in it self, but in the knowledge of all the Jews, who brought
all that were possessed with Devils, and he healed them: Matthew. 15.28. the
Canaanitesh woman seeking to Christ for her Daughter, that was possessed,
acknowledged thereby that his power was above all the Devils: and our Lord most
notably in that story manifested his power over them, who being absent from the
maid, and did not so much as speak to the Devils, yet they obeyed his will, and
could as little withstand his power being absent as present.

Now more distinctly to know this power of Christ, we must understand that it
is either twofold: 1 Of his essence, called (...): or 2 Of his Office, called
(...). The former, is the omnipotency of Christ, as he is God equal with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost: for as his essence (us the Son) is the same, so is
his power, an absolute, creating, sustaining, and commanding power, ruling all
Creatures, and overruling in all things. The latter, is the power of his
Office, as he is Mediator and King of his Church: and this power differs
from the former: 1 in that it is a power received, Matthew. 28.18. All power is
given me in heaven and in earth: Phil. 2.9. God has given him a Name above
all Names: whereas Christ's power, as God, is not received, but his own proper
power being God.

2 That power is essential, infinite, and incommunicable to any creature: this
is personal, communicated by dispensation of grace, after a singular manner,
unto Christ, as God-man, and our Mediator.

3 That power is immutable, unchangeable, everlasting; this power shall after a
sort be determined: for he must give up his Kingdom to his Father, 1 Cor.
15.24. not that Christ shall ever cease to be a powerful head of his Church,
nor that he shall cease to reign with his Father for all eternity: but look as
the Father now does not rule the Church, namely, as Mediator, but the Son; so
the Son shall not then rule his Church in the manner as he now does, as
Mediator, but in the same manner as his Father shall. Now he rules and puts
forth his power in fighting against his enemies, but then all his enemies shall
be trodden under his feet, and made his footstool. Now he manifests his
power in gathering a Church by the Word and Sacraments, but then all the elect
shall be gathered. Now at his Fathers right hand he puts forth his power in
making intercession for us, but then he shall intercede no more (...) us. At
the end of the World, he shall declare his mighty power, in raising all the
dead, and sitting in judgment on them; but then there shall be no more need
of this power, when death shall be swallowed up into victory, and a final
sentence is given on all flesh. So as Christ shall not reign as now he does,
but as his Father.

Whence it follows, that the power by which Christ subdueth the Devils, is
not only that essential power of his Divine nature, but the power of his
Office, whereby even in our nature and flesh, he subdueth them. And this power
may be distinguished according to the subjects, into two kinds: first, that
power by which he sweetly rules the Church, as the head the members, or a
King his Subjects: and this is either directive, or coercive. Secondly, that
coercitive and judiciary power which he exercises against his enemies, wicked
and ungodly men, as a King against rebels and foes to his state and person.
And this power is properly raised against the Devils and his instruments,
against which they cannot stand.

bruise the Serpents head; which prophecy plainly shows, that Christ as
Mediator in our flesh, must disperse all Satan's forces planted against us; and
for this end the Son of God appeared, to destroy the works of the Devil: and
the work does properly and singularly belong unto Christ, although the fruit
and benefit of it by communication of grace flow unto the Church, as the body
of Christ.

Object. But did not others beside Christ command the Devils? Act. 8.7. when
Philip preached in Samaria, unclean spirits crying came out of many: and Act.
16.18. Paul turned about, and commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the
maid.

Answ. 1 Christ did it by his own power, they by his. 2 The power of Christ is
one thing, faith in his power is another; they did it not so much by power, as
by faith in this power: whence S. Paul charge the foul spirit, In the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ to come out: 3 Common men were able to discern a
difference between Christ's power and others in casting out Devils: Mar. 1. and
Luke 4.36. fear came on them, and they said among themselves, With authority he
commands foul spirits, and they come out; that is, by his power and divine
authority, and not as other Exorcists did. 4 He did work his as a person that
was God, other his Disciples as persons with whom God was, working and
confirming the doctrine with signs and wonders that followed, Mar. 16. ult.

2 All things are given him, and put under his feet. Joh. 3.35. The Father
loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand. Heb. 2.8. Thou have
put all things in subjection under his feet. And as if that were not plain
enough, he sets in the next words a large Comment upon it. And in that he
has put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing that should not be
subject, only except him which did put all things under him, as it is 1 Cor.
15.27. So as it is plain, that excepting God himself, nothing is not subject to
Christ as Mediator.

Now this may be enlarged by a special induction of all things. Angels are
subjected to his word: 1 Pet. 3.22. -- to whom Angels, and Powers, and might,
are subject: with a reason, For he is the Lord of the holy Angels, and set far
above all Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 1.21. Unreasonable Creatures hear his
word, and obey him: Luke 8.25. Who is this that commands the winds and the
Seas, and they obey him? Diseases obey him: to the Leper he says, I will, be
thou clean: and he is clean immediately, Matthew. 8. To the Lame man he says,
Take up thy bed, and walk, and he does so, Matthew. 9.6. He meets a blind man,
Joh. 9.7. and bids him go wash in Siloam, and he comes again seeing. Yea,
death it self hears, and departs at his word, Joh. 11.44. At that word
Lazarus came forth, bound hand and foot: and the time comes, when they that
are in the graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and come forth. In
one word, the Apostle ascribes to Christ, that he is able to subdue all things
to himself, Phil. 3.21. All Creatures, all Enemies, sin, Satan, the Grave,
Hell, Death, Damnation, and whatsoever resists his glory in himself, or any
of his members.

3 Christ's Kingdom must be set up against, and above all the Kingdoms of the
World. Dan. 2.45. The little stone cut out of the Mountain without hands,
breaks in pieces the Clay, the Iron, Brass, Silver, and gold: that is, the
Kingdom of Christ shall break all those great Kingdoms; and the God of Heaven
raises a Kingdom to his Son, which shall never be destroyed: And therefore
for the upholding of this Kingdom, he must be invested with power, which
neither the Tyrants of the World, nor the god of the World can ever prevail
against. For never were all the Kingdoms of the World so opposed by the World
and the Devil, as the poor kingdom of Jesus Christ: but this power of Christ
is as an hook in Nebuchadnezzars jaws, and a chain in which he holds
Leviathan, limiting him how far he shall exercise malice against the Church,
and no further.

4 Christ as Mediator was to perform those works, which no other creature
could ever do, and therefore was to be endued with such power as no other
creature could be capable of. Hence he proves himself to be from God, Joh.
15.24. If I do not such works as no other man ever did, believe me not. Where
he speaks of his Miracles, which, in respect of the manner and multitude,
never man did the like in his own name, nor so many. To which add those great
works, of raising himself by his own power from the dead, Romans 1.4. Of
satisfying Gods justice for man's sin, a work above the reach of men and Angels.
Of meriting eternal life for all the elect, which must be an action of him
that is more than a Creature. Of applying his merit, to which end he must rise
from death, ascend and make intercession. Of sending his Spirit. Of begetting
faith, and preserving his people in grace received. Of leading them through
Death and the Dust into his own Glory. These are such things as all power of
mere creatures is too weak for. All the Angels in Heaven cannot do the least of
them. All the Devils in Hell cannot hinder them. And hence Christ is styled the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Michael, the mighty God, King of glory, etc.

Use 1. This may be a terror to all Christ enemies: for such is his power as
shall make them all his footstool. Do we provoke him? are we stronger than
he? 1 Cor. 10.21. Psalm. 2.9. those that will not be subject to the rod of his
mouth, shall be crushed with a rod of Iron. Therefore take heed of being an
enemy to Christ, or his Word, or Servants: else thou shall be revenged even in
that wherein thou sinnest; with the breath of his lips he shall slay the
wicked; one word of Christ, one lie shall turn them all into Hell. Is the power
of Jesus Christ such in his base and low estate, as all the Devils in Hell are
not able to resist it, but if he speak the word they give place? how
desperately do wicked men go on in sin, as if they were able to make their part
good against him? Joh. 18 6. when Christ but said, I am he, presently his
apprehenders fell to the ground. Rev. 17.14. they shall fight against the Lamb,
but the Lamb shall overcome.

Use 2. This is comfort also to the godly, in that Christ as Mediator in our
flesh is armed with power above all our enemies, so as nothing shall hinder our
salvation: Not Satan: for the Prince of this World is cast out; he may have us
in the Mountain, or on the Pinnacle; but he cannot cast us down. Not sin:
Christ has powerfully triumphed against it on the Cross, has fully satisfied
for it, and perfectly applied that satisfaction to the forgiveness of sins.
Not death: Christ has powerfully foiled him in his own Den, and trampled on
him, saying, O death I will be thy death. Not Temptation: Christ sits in
Heaven as a merciful High Priest, tempted once as we are, that he might be
able to succor them that are tempted. Not corporal enemies: He by his power
rules in the midst of his enemies. Laban shall not speak a rough word, nor
Esau hurt Jacob, nor Saul hit David; for he orders the thing otherwise. Not
the grave: for we have the assurance of a glorious resurrection by the working
of his mighty power, whereby he is able to subdue all things, Phil. 3.21. Not
hell it self: Rev. 1.18. I have the keys of Hell and of Death. In one word, not
any thing present, nor to come, nothing shall separate between Christ and us:
none shall pluck us out of his hands: for he has purchased for us, and
maintains a mighty salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Use 3. This teaches us to submit our selves to this power of Christ, or else
we are worse than senseless Creatures, who all obey him, yea, than the Devils
themselves who did obey him. And then is a man submitted to it, when is eyes
are opened to see what is the exceeding greatness of his power in himself,
believing as the Apostle prays, Ephesians. 1.19. Therefore labor to find Christ's
saving power in thy soul.

Quest. How may I find it in my self?

Answ. 1 If thou can find the work of faith in thee, a work of great power,
a supernatural work, beyond, yea, against the strength of nature. What a work
of omnipotence is it to raise the dead? yet greater power is here, to bring in
this life of God into him that is dead in trespasses and sins, resisting his
own raising: for so the Apostle implies in that place, Col. 2.12.

2 If thou can find in thee the work of sanctification, which is a work of
great power: 2 Pet. 1.3. according to his Divine power he works grace and
glory. This second creation of a man goes far beyond his first in power: There
was nothing to begin with, no more is here; no life of God till God call the
things that are not, as though they were: but there was a bare privation, here
is a resistance and rebellion, stiff necks, and hearts of adamant. Hence
regeneration is called a creation, and the regenerate, new creatures: But a
difficult work, which God works not alone, but God and man made one person, and
not of nothing, for nothing, as the former, but of worse than nothing, and for
a price, even the precious blood of the Son of God.

Labor to find this change in thy self by faith and holiness. Christ did never
more manifest his power, than by raising himself from the dead: and thou can
not have a surer argument of Christ's power prevailing in thy soul, than by
getting daily out of the grave of sin, and moving according to the life of God.
So soon as Christ had called Lazarus out of his grave, he bad loose him and
let him go; and if thou find the bands of death, thine own sins loosed,
forsaking thy own evil ways, it is a sign that Christ by a powerful word has
quickened thee. Therefore put on S. Paul's mind, Phil. 3.10. who counted all
things dung to know the virtue of Christ his death.

3 A mighty work of power in Christ is, to gather his Church out of all peoples
and nations, and to bring them within one roof, though they were never so
dispersed and alienated from one another, and to knit them by faith to himself
the head, by love one to another, and by his own discipline to conform them to
his own government. It never cost all the Monarchs in the World so much
strength and power to settle their Kingdoms and people in peace under them.
Do thou then find thy self brought into the number of Gods people? Do
thou love them entirely for Gods image and goodness? Art thou serviceable to
every member, and that in the Head? Here is a power put forth that has
reconciled the Woolf and the Lamb, Isa. 11.6, 7
the Child and the Cockatrice. But it thou carest not for Christ's Ordinances
and discipline, his Laws are too strict, thou must have more liberty than he
affords, if thy affections be rough and stirring against Gods children, thou
have not yet subjected thy self to Christ.

4 A mighty work of power in Christ was, that he was able to soil temptations,
and stand out against all hellish powers, so that the Devil found nothing in
him: Now find thou the power and strength of Christ in the spiritual
combat? Do thou chase Satan before thee, and the whole band of his
temptations? Would thou refuse a whole world rather than sin against God, or
gratify Satan and thy self with the least displeasure of him? All the power of
Christ was set against sin, and Satan's Kingdom: And if thou have part in this
power of Christ, it abolisheth sin in thee, and strengthens thee with full
resolution against all sin.

5 A mighty work of Christ's power is, to enrich his children with all necessary
graces tending to salvation, and to lead them into the fruition of their
eternal inheritance. It cost Joshua some labor before he could bring Israel
into the good Land that abounded with good things: it cost our JOSHUA more.
Find thou this fruit of Christ's power, that thy face is set toward Heaven?
and is it with thee as with those that entered into that good Land, who tasted
of the fruits aforehand? Have thou received the first fruits of the Spirit?
Do thou grow in grace? Do thou with patience expect the promises, and
begin the heavenly life already? Have thou hope, joy, love of God, zeal for
God, constancy in the truth? for these are purchased by this power of Christ.
Then here is a creating virtue put forth, a fruit of Christ's mighty power,
magnify this grace of God, and hope for the accomplishment and finishing of
the same work by the same power, the which shall preserve thee to salvation.

6 A mighty work of Christ's power was, the perfect fulfilling of the Law.
Whether do thou partake in this power? art thou perfect in the way?
sincerely obeying God in all his Commandments? Do thou subject thy self to
the Law as the rule of thy Law? Do thou aim at the perfection thereof?
Christ loved his Father with all his heart, and his Neighbor as himself, yea
above himself: and if this power of Christ prevail with thee, this will be the
scope and aim of all thy actions. For though the obedience of the Law be not
necessary to Justification, yet it is requisite to Sanctification,

7 Another work of Christ's power was, that it set him free from all corruption
and infirmities, which he undertook for us without sin. Labor to find this
power of Christ in thy soul, daily freeing thee from the corruption of thy sin,
and daily infirmities. If the Son set you free, you are free indeed: not only
the reign of sin is thrust down, but the corruption of sin is lessned. David
desired the Lord to give him again his free Spirit, Psalm. 51.10, 11. he well
knew, that where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, that is, not only
a redemption from Damnation by our justification, but from corruption and vain
conversation by our sanctification.

8 Christ's power was mighty in ruling and ordering his own powers and
faculties; his understanding was able to see God perfectly, his will only just,
right, and wise, never bowing from the will of his Father, Not my will, but thy
will be done. His memory could never forget any good thing, but he retained his
whole duty ever before him. His affections were ordered according to right
judgment. His appetite never exceeded the bounds of sobriety and moderation.
His speech was gracious, his actions all exemplary, no spot in him from top to
toe. And this same power of Christ is in some measure manifest in all his
members: this power enlightneth the minds of believers, formerly blind, to see
God in part, and persuades the will, and boweth it to obey Gods will, which
before was captivated to the will of the Devil: it inspireth godly desires and
gracious resolutions, and strengthens the memory to retain good things, being
before as rimy as a five: it guides and alters the affections, making the
believer to love good things, and good men, and whatsoever sets forward Gods
glory, and to hate zealously the contrary. Christ's power in the soul, orders
the appetite to sobriety in the seasonable and thankful use of outward mercies,
makes a man speak the language of Canaan, and his whole course savor of Christ.

Whence it is plainly concluded, that ignorant persons, malicious persons,
Libertines, intemperate Drunkards, Gluttons, filthy talkers, Swearers, loose in
their behavior, open enemies to this power of Jesus Christ, not submitting
themselves to the rod of his mouth, shall be laid under his rod of iron.

Use 4. This teaches us to go on fearlesly in good duties, seeing this power
of Christ is with us, and for us. He is of power to protect us against enemies
and dangers. Of power to strengthen us in our duties; when we are weak and
feeble he will perfect his power in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12.8. Of power to make
us invincible in our sufferings, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through him
that inableth me. Of power to reward our least labor of love undertaken for
him. Of power to answer our prayers, and to do abundantly above all we ask or
think. Of power to perform all his gracious promises, which shall be made good
to us in due time. Of power to supply us with all good means in his service;
he can give wealth, and make the latter end better, as he did to Job: the
Divine power gives all things pertaining to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. Of
power in death it self to keep that which we commit unto him till the last
day. Of power to rebuke Diseases, and command Death, and after death to raise
our bodies to eternal life, being clothed with corruption, and wrapped with
deaths garments: 1 Cor. 6.14. God has raised up the Lord Jesus, and shall
raise us also by his power.

Use 5. Lastly, this doctrine assures us of our perseverance in grace begun,
Christ by his power lays such fast hold on us: no seducer is able to deceive
the elect, nor pluck them out of his hands: for the weakness of God is stronger
than men, 1 Cor. 1.25. and when we cannot comprehend him so fast as we would,
he comprehends us, and preserves us by his power to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.
Neither does this Doctrine maintain any security but the security of faith,
which is ever attended with the fear of God, and fear to sin.

The Second thing in the victory of our Savior is the manner of Satan's leaving
him: (...), says St. Matthew; St. Luke more plainly, (...), which implies a
bodily departure and sensible, as we have formerly showed his presence to be.

Quest. What kind of departure was this? it seems to be a willing and voluntary
subjection to Christ: he bids him depart, and he is gone.

Ans. Indeed it seems obedience, but it is nothing less than true obedience:
for, 1 He came of his own motion, but went away by Christ's, who spoke a
powerful word, which he could not, nor durst resist. 2 He goes when he can
stay no longer, his commission for this time was now expired, his liberty was
restrained, the temptations were ended, God permits him now no further, and now
he leaves the Son of God: and so left he Job in the same reason, when he had
vexed him as much as he could obtain leave to do. 3 Satan could not change his
wicked nature, in leaving Christ he leaves not his malice against him, only
he leaves the exercise of it for the present. 4 He returns again afterward,
and sets upon our Savior with new assaults, which is a plain argument he went
now against his will.

Doct. To do that which God commands, and to leave undone that which he
forbids, is not always a sign of true grace. The Devil is commanded to give
over tempting of Christ, and he gives over; is commanded to be gone, and he
goes; yet this is no argument of true grace; and that which is incident unto
the Devil, cannot be a sign of grace in any man, but as there is a forced and
feigned, obedience in Satan himself, so in all his instruments, which proceeds
not from any true grace, let them flatter themselves in it never so much. Cain
offers Sacrifice as well as Abel, and brings a show of obedience, but his heart
being filled with murderous thoughts, was void of all grace. Balaam was
commanded not to curse the people of God, and he professed, that if Balac
would give his house full of silver he would not do it; as if he had made
great conscience of Gods Commandment; but it was much against his will: for
having received an answer from God, not to curse them, he would not be
answered, but went again and again to know the mind of God, not content to test
in that answer, with which he was not pleased. And after that, he gives balac
wicked counsel, to send his people to Sittim to offer to their Idols, where
Israel was likely to fall in love with women, and so commit fornication with
them: by which he brought the curse of God amongst them, whereby numbers of
them were destroyed. Here was a seeming obedience, without any grace in the
heart.

Exodus 8.19. Jannes and Jambres, and the rest of the Enchanters of Egypt,
stood out in resisting Moses and Aaron so long as they could, and then gave
over; but not of any conscience, but because in the plague of the Lice they saw
the finger of God, against which they could not prevail. The like was the
obedience of the Jews, when they desisted from persecuting the Apostles, Acts
5.35. because Gamaliel a Doctor of the Law perceived, that they did fight
against God. Add hereunto the example of Judas, who after his sin of betraying
his Lord, made a fair show of repentance, confessed his sin, restored the money,
bewailed and justified his Master; but all this without all grace in his heart;
for he went away and hanged himself.

1 A man only by repressing and restraining grace, Haman refrained himself from
Mordecai, Hest. 5.10. though his heart was full of wrath, chap. 3.5. Many other
things might hinder him from the present execution of his rage against
Mordecai, as that Mordecai was as in a Sanctuary, the Kings gate, that he was
the Kings servant, that it was better to reserve him to a shameful death, and
effect it by a kind of form of Law, than to embrue his own hands in the blood
of the Kings servant, and so endanger himself. But the chief cause is Gods
restraint of wicked men's fury, that they cannot execute what they can determine
against his Church, though he use sundry means to restrain them. Nay further,
a wicked man may be restrained from some evils, which the child of God may fall
into: he affects an outward form and credit, and glory of an outward profession
sometimes, and to attain this end in which he notably deceives himself, he
cannot enjoy the pleasures of sin with greediness; not because he conscionably
hates these sins, but he is bridled with the credit of his profession.

2 Obedience proceeding from true grace is so qualified, Conditions of sound
obedience ^our.
as neither Satan nor any wicked man is capable of it. For, 1 it is an effect
of the love of God, and of goodness. Deuteronomy. 30.20. Choose life, by loving the
Lord, and obeying his voice, and cleaving unto him: Josh. 22.5. Take heed to
the Commandment and Law, which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you,
that is, that ye love the Lord your God, and walk in all his ways, and keep
his Commandments, and cleave unto him. Love excludes all coaction and
constraint. Now wicked men resembling their Father the Devil, cannot love God,
nor goodness, but notwithstanding all their pretenses, are haters of God, and
enemies of righteousness; they care not for his favor above life, they love
not his presence, nor to be with him, nor his Image in his Child, nor his will
in his word, nor his house, nor his holiness to resemble him, nor his glory,
but are more troubled at the loss of a grain of their honor, than all his.

2 This obedience is a daughter of faith: for without faith it is impossible to
please God: whereas wicked men have nothing above corrupt nature, much less
such a supernatural indowment as faith is, which so uniteth unto Christ, as it
makes him more precious than all the World.

3 It proceeds from a man wholly renewed and changed: such good fruit must
come from a good tree; which is the work of sound grace only. 1 The
understanding is enlightened to discern between good and evil, according to
Gods Word. 2 The will is sanctified and made willing. 3 The heart is purified
by faith, and made a good treasury, to send out good speeches and actions. 4
The conscience is purged, and being persuaded of the love of God in Christ, it
seeks to preserve it self good and pure, and in all his ways out of Conscience
endeavors in the good that God requires, and avoids the evil which he
forbids. 5 The affections are renewed, and are sweetly persuaded by Gods Spirit
to hate all evil, and cleave to that which is good, to grieve they can do no
more glory to God, but are at their best very unprofitable. But wicked men are
never a whit changed, but are all impure, even their minds and consciences,
and out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks, the hand works,
neither can a bitter fountain send out sweet waters.

4 Sound Grace within sends forth an obedience which is cheerful; 1 In the
undertaking: love makes labors light, and nothing is hard to a good will. 2 In
the manner of doing, it is not forced but lead, ruled by the word, rather than
overruled by power; it lays by all dialogue, dispute, murmuring, and desire
of dispensation. 3 In the measure of doing, it will endeavor in all the
Commandments, and all duties: no man so wicked, but he can do many things, as
Herod, but he cannot yield to all. 4 In continuance and conclusion of that he
does, it holds on in doing things purely for a good end, for Gods glory, and
not by fits and starts, but perseveres to the end, and the crown of the work.
In all which a wicked man comes short; for whatsoever is forced or feigned must
be heavily entered on, and more heavily ended: besides, whatsoever is from
such an one, is joined with reigning sin, which hales and tugs him backward,
and toils him out before he be half way in any good work.

3 How often does the Lord reject the sacrifice of the wicked, their oblations,
their fasts, their prayers, their temporary, yea, miraculous Faith, their alms
and charity, yea, their confessing and Preaching of Christ, as in the last
judgment? all which had they been fruits of sound grace, they had been
acceptable. But God looks not so much to the matter of the work, as the person
working, the manner of working, and the end of the action.

Use 1. Well, as Satan goes away when he can stay no longer, and so his
obedience is forced, so does sin from most men when they can keep it no longer;
and so that which seems obedience in them, it is no better than the Devils
obedience in this place.

Use 1. Many refrain many sins for fear of Hell, and the curse of God, they
dare not hold their sin any longer, whereas they are as much in love with it as
before: as Moses his Parents kept him so long as they durst, before they
exposed him to the waters: so dearly love men the children of their own
corruption. What thank is it for a Robber or Felon, to leave robbing and
stealing for fear of hanging? If there were no Law, nor Magistrate, he would
to his own calling again, because he is no changeling. So what thank is it for
a man to avoid sin, because of damnation? here is no fear of God, but fear of
evil; no love of God, but self-love. And yet this is the restraint of most men,
whom Conscience no whit bridleth. Why do men abstain from open wronging of men,
by Robbing, Stealing, Murdering? they will say for Conscience. But then the
same Conscience would keep them from all secret deceit, lying, and cousenage:
and then the same conscience would keep them from all other sins also, as
swearing, drinking, dicing, carding, gaming, pride, wantonness, and the rest. A
good conscience in one thing, is a good conscience in all.

2 The like is the obedience of many sinners, that are still in league with
their sins. Many filthy unclean whoremongers and harlots have left their sin,
but it is because it has lest them, they have broken their strength, and
either age or diseases in their bodies hinder them; oh now they will pretend
Conscience. But they can as filthily speak, and as merrily remember their mad
pranks, as ever they acted them; they want only a body, no mind, will, or
affection, to commit over the same things again. Many Prodigals have left their
sin, because their wealth has left them, and poverty feeds upon them. Many
quarrellers and swaggerers have left off such furious courses: why? perhaps
they have gotten some maim, or mischief, or perhaps they fear whether they can
do so again safely, or no: and this is all the conscience that has calmed and
quieted them: but what obedience is this? Is that an obedience to God, for a
Dicer or Gamester to forbear play (or rather, as it is, his theeving) when he
wants money to stake?

3 In Gods service, what makes men come to Church, to hear, and Pray? Every man
says, Conscience. Yea, but good Conscience works powerfully upon the Will:
what then means the unwillingnesse of men, and heaviness, who are so far from
apprehending their week-occasions, as if they ask their own hearts, they must
tell them, that on the Sabbaths of God, were it not for fear of law, and shame
of men (both which are often forgotten) they would not come at all. Here is
obedience, much like the Devils, because they are of the Devils teaching. The
like of many servants and Childrens obedience, whose coming to Church to hear
their duty, is merely forced by the compulsion of Masters and Parents; and has
as little comfort in it as the Devils obedience.

4 The like is to be said of late Repentance at the time of death: when the
sinner has held his sin so long as he can, then he would be rid of it.
Indeed his sin leaves him, but not the curse of it: but he is so far from
leaving it, as were he to live over his days again, he would put as much
life into his sin as ever before. Late repentance is seldom true, ever
suspicious. Why do many rich men never do good while they live, but live as
unprofitable and hurtful, as swine till they come to the knife; but then when
death is binding them, they will give somewhat to good uses, to the Poor, for a
Sermon, etc. Why? what moves them? Conscience, they say. But it is an accusing
Conscience, crying out, against their oppression, usury, wrong, cruelty, and
deceit; and now this wicked Conscience would stop its own mouth, by offering to
God some trifle of that he has robbed. For were it a good conscience, why
does he not leave some part of his wealth for God, before it wholly leave him?
Were it a free-will-offering, why comes it so late? why does he not good,
while he has time? Gal. 6.10. Surely, God likes a living Christian: for any
man will be a Christian dying. Neither is it thank-worthy to give that which a
man cannot keep. And commonly such gifts do more good to others than the giver
himself. Which is not spoken to hinder men from doing good at their deaths, but
to provoke them to do good before that time. And yet better late, than never.

Let us examine all our obedience by this ground, and be sure that it differ
from the obedience of Devils and wicked men. And that by these rules: 1 God
loves truth in the inward parts, and refuses all that obedience which follows
not sanctification of the Spirit: duties without must flow from graces within.
Examine now thy inward change: we are his new creatures, created to good
works: join that in thy actions which the Devil divorced, the inner man with
the outward* the subjection of the soul with the obedience of the body.

2 Examine thy love in thy obedience, that because the love of God constrains
thee, thou do what he commands, and whether thou preferrest the
Commandment of God, which is ever-joyned with his glory, above all the World,
and thy obedience above thy profit, credit, case, pleasure, men's favor or
dis-favour, whether thou can obey God against all these. This was Abraham's
love to God in so difficult a Commandment, as the killing of his Son. But
Satan here went away, not for love of God, but for fear, and being forced.

3 Examine thy manner of obeying, whether it be a willing and ready obedience.
If I do it willingly (says the Apostle) I have a reward: and Romans 6.17. Ye
have obeyed from the heart, or heartily. And such obedience, 1 Repineth not as
giving God any thing too much, though the dearest things of all. 2 Devises no
excuses, as Saul when he did but half the commandment, pretended sacrifice,
and the peoples instance. 3 Seeks no delays: I made haste, and delayed not
to keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 1 19.

4 Do thou obey in all the Commandments? 1 The commandment of faith in the
Gospel, as well as the actual obedience of the Law? for one is as acceptable as
the other. 2 Obeyest thou the Commandment as well of doing good, as of
abstaining from evil? for, the Devil here abstains from this evil of tempting
Christ, but can never do any good: he joines not these Commandments in his
practice, as Gods Spirit does in his precept, Isa. 1.16, 17. 3 Make thou
conscience of the least commandment as well as of the greatest? for, all of
them have a stamp of God upon them: make thou conscience of small oaths, vain
words, roving thoughts? 4 Do thou obey constantly? for, love is strong as
death, and much water cannot quench it. But alas! much obedience is like that
of David's false friends, Psalm. 18.44, 45. strangers shall be in subjection to
me, but they shall shrink away.

For a season.] Luke 4.13.

III. The THIRD point follows to be considered, namely, how long Satan left
our Lord; not for ever after, but for a while: and surely he stayed away but a
little while. For if we look into the holy story, we shall see the whole life
of Christ almost to be a continual temptation, and how Satan from time to
time, partly by himself, and partly by his Ministers, assailed him. This we
shall see how sundry ways Satan molested him and tempted him, 1 in his
ministry, 2 his life, 3 his death.

1 In his ministry, he was tempted both in his Doctrine and Miracles. For his
Doctrine: the Scribes and Pharisees often sought to catch advantages against
him, as in the case of the Bill of divorce, Mat. 19.1. and of the woman taken
in adultery, Joh. 8. which by Moses Law should be stoned; but Master what
say thou* The Sadduces also tempted him in the case of the woman that had
seven Husbands, whose she should be in the resurrection, Matthew. 22.23. And
the Lawyer concerning the great Commandment of the Law, verse. 35. As for his
Miracles the seal of that Doctrine, they tell him to his face that he cast out
Devils by Beelzebub, Mat. 9.34. and 1.2.24.

2 In his life and civil Obedience. The Pharisees take Counsel together how
they might entangle him in his talk about paying tribute to Caesar, Matthew.
22.15. And when he ate meat in Matthews house, Matthew. 9.11. they asked* why
he did eat meat with Publicans and sinners, and therefore he was one of them.
Simon the Pharisee seeing Mary Magdalen anointing Jesus his feet with precious
ointment, and washing them with tears, and wiping them with her hairs, said,
Surely if this man were a Prophet, he would know that this woman is a sinner,
and not let her meddle with him. How often did they murmr at him, and lie in
wait for him, and take up stones to stone him, and rail upon him, with most
despightful words, calling him Beelzebub, a Samaritan, a glutton, a loose
companion, running up and down with noted sinners? in all which Satan was the
chief agent.

3 But above all other temptations those were most fierce and furious, with
which he was afflicted, torn, and tormented about the time of his passion, and
on the Cross. For then, as himself witnesses, the Prince of the World came
upon him with all his train, Joh. 14.30. he came in himself, and whole Legions
of wicked Angels with him, as the Apostle plainly implies, Coloss. 2.15. He
spoiled Principalities, and Powers, and triumphed over them on the Cross. Now
or never Satan must win the field, this is the last act, Christ was never so
beset with misery, Satan never had him at such an advantage before; now Gods
whole wrath is upon him, and now the Devil and his Angels set upon him so sore,
that in his Agony in the Garden he sweats drops of water and blood, and on the
Cross he cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Those were more secret temptations of Satan and his instruments: but let us
see with what hellish darts they pierced him openly upon the Cross, not to
speak of those which he endured all the time he was in examination,
condemnation, and leading to execution. For,

1 They hang him between two thieves, as an arch-rebel, and of all sinners the
greatest, and dart against him the same temptation with that in all this
History, that he was not the Son of God, If thou be the Son of God, come down
from the cross: certainly God would not let his Son hang there, but thou art a
deluder, an arch-seducer of the people.

2 They tempted him with fear of death, Matthew. 27.42. he saved others, himself
he cannot save; this is a wise Savior indeed, he cannot escape death in
whose hands he is sure enough, and even overcome already of death, and yet he
will be a Savior.

3 They tempted him with utter rejection from God, as the most damned reprobate
that ever was, He trusted in God, now let him deliver him if he will have him:
but he can neither deliver himself, nor God will have none of him, he abhors
him, and will cast him presently to Hell. These and a number of the like was
our Savior molested and tempted withal, secretly and openly, even then when
the wrath of his Father seized upon him. So as truly the Evangelist might say,
that Satan left him but for a season.

Doct. Christian life is but an intercourse of quiet and trouble: sometime
Satan leaves Christ, but he comes again and renews his temptation: so it is
with the members, who have much war, but some peace, many troubles, but some
breathing-time. This truth we will a while discover both in the state of the
whole Church of God from time to time, as also in some particular members
thereof.

What a night seemed to oppress the Church in the cradle, when wicked Cain slew
righteous Abel, so as all religion and true worship seemed to be destroyed in
all Adams posterity, having only Cain left? But shortly after God gave Adam a
Seth, in whom the Church was restored and preserved, and pure religion
propagated. In Henochs time how was the worship of God profaned, when the Sons
of God married the daughters of men, which was the cause of the flood? but
afterward it was restored by Noah and Sem, and by him continued to Abraham. Now
the Church, as it was in the Ark, so was it like the Ark of Noah, against which
the waters had a time to increase and a time also of decreasing.

What a night of trouble was the Church in, all the while it was in Egypt a
stranger for four hundred years, especially when they were oppressed with
burdens, and had their infants drowned in the river? but a change came, God
sent and saved a Moses, by whom he will deliver his people, but so as they
must be acquainted with this continual enterchange in their estate: they must
be no sooner delivered out of Aegyps, but be chased into the bottom of the Sea,
but there God makes them a way: and no sooner out of the Sea, but into the
Wilderness, and from thence the good Land takes them: and in that good Land
they never rested in one estate, but sometimes had the better of their enemies,
and sometime for sin their enemies had the better of them, as all the History
of the Judges witnesses.

In the time of the Kings, how was the Church troubled and wasted, in the time
of Ahab and Jezabel, when all Gods Prophets were slain, and true religion was
quite trodden down? But what a sudden change was there? even when things were at
the worst, did the Lord bring a strange alteration by Elijah, who slew all the
Prophets of Baal, and restored true religion. How great misery suffered the
Church in the time of Manasseh and Ammon? but how happily was it changed by the
piety of good Josiah, in whom God made his people more happy than formerly
miserable? But who would have thought but that the Church had been utterly
wasted in the seventy years captivity, wherein it sat in the shadow of death?
Yet it was happily restored by Cyrus. But when his godly Decrees concerning the
building of the Temple were hindered by Cambyses his Son, God stirred up Darius
who favored the Church, and commanded the continuance and perfection of the
work; but not without many vicissitudes of storms and calmes, even after their
return, as appears in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah.

What a raging storm was that, wherein our Lord and Head of the Church was put
to death? now the whole Church lay bleeding and dead with him. But what a
change was there the third day by his glorious resurrection? In the Apostles
days, how was the Church wasted when Saul had letters from the High Priests to
carry bound to Jerusalem, whosoever called on the Lord? but when he that
breathed out nothing but slaughter and threatening, was once converted, then the
Church had for a while rest and peace, Act. 9.31. After the Apostles, what a
continual storm aros^ against Christians, which lasted three hundred years
under the ten monsters of men, those bloody men, Nero, Domitian, Trajan,
Antoninus, Severus, Max^minus, Decius, Valerianus, Aurelianus, and
Dioclesianus, whose rage was such, as a man could not set his foot in Rome, but
tread upon the graves of Martyrs?

But after this night a fair Sun rose up in the East, Constantine the Great,
who chased before him that horrible darkness, and brought a blessed calm. But
this lasted not long, but his second Son Constantius (far short of his Fathers
piety) with all his strength set up and maintained that Arrian heresy, which
his good Father had condemned in the Nicen Council: by which as bloody
persecution sprung up in the Church as ever was before, which lasted almost
eighty years, until Constance the youngest Son of Constantine for up again the
Nicen faith in the Western part of the World, as Italy, Greece, Africa,
Illiricum, and banished the former poison. After this, what a black darkness
of Mahometisme possessed the Eastern part of the World, under which it lies
sunk at this day? And as pitchy and palpable darkness of Antichrist and Popery
occupied the Western part of the World. But what a light did the Lord raise up
in the midst of Popery, his zealous servant Luther, since whom, the light has
mightily prevailed, to the blasting of Antichrist, and the consuming of him
upon his nest? Yet not this without a cloud: for,

To speak of our own Church: After the long darkness, like that of Egypt, had
prevailed and covered for many hundred years the face of our Country, it
pleased God that the light of the Gospel should peep into our Land in the days
of King Henry the eighth, but yet much clouded, and opposed almost all his
days. In his Son Edward the sixth, Englands Josiah, it began to shine more
brightly, and a more thorough reformation was undertaken. But this Sunshine
lasted not long, but in Queen Mary's days the truth was again cast into the
fire, and the bodies of Gods Saints pitilesly destroyed. God in mercy for his
Elec^s sake shortened those days, and raised up our late Queen Elizabeth, of
blessed memory in all posterities, who was semper cadem in the maintenance of
the faith, and left Christ sitting in his Kingdom, and the truth triumphing
over Popery and Antichristian falsehood, which by Gods mercy we enjoy under
our gracious King. This has been the changeable estate of the Church from the
beginning; and, cadem est ratio totius ac partium, the same truth discovers it
self in the particular members.

As for example. Abraham now a poor man in Egypt, presently enriched and made
heir of the Land of Promise; now rejoicing in his Isaac, and a while after
stretching out his hand to kill his only Son; who also herein was a notable
type of the Church, now bound, and presently loosed, and raised up after a sort
from the dead. Jacob was now afraid of Esau, when he came in warlike manner to
meet him, with four hundred men at his heels; but in a little season God lets
him see a sudden change, who had inclined his Brothers heart to do him no
harm, against his often former purposes to slay him. Joseph is now hated of his
brethren, after a season honored of them: now sold as a slave to the
Ismaelites, afterward made a governor of Potiphar a Princes house: now accused
by his Mistress, and cast into Prison, but after fetched out by Pharaoh, and
made ruler of all his Princes, and the whole land of Egypt. David sometimes
cast down, and, God has forgotten him; a while after so confident in God, that
he will not fear to walk in the vale of the shadow of death: sometimes pursued
by Saul as a traitor and rebel, sometimes by Saul acknowledged his good Son,
and more righteous than himself: and when Saul is dead and cease his
persecution, his own son Absolons shall rise against him, to depose him from
his Kingdom. And Jobs messengers of evil tidings still overtook one another.
And to spare further examples, our own experience can teach us, that for the
most part, we have not rid our selves out of one temptation, but another
insueth; such are our changes in this present estate. And why?

1 Satan goes for a while from Christ himself,

2 He goes but for a season, because of his invincible malice, who cannot
afford us a good hours rest, if he may have leave to disturb us, because he
maliceth our Lord and Savior with an inveterate and deadly malice; so that
although he be in himself out of his reach, yet he still continues to tempt
him (being in heaven) in his members upon earth. This deadly malice in his
nature our Savior notes, in Matthew. 12.44. The unclean spirit when he is cast
out, seeks to re-enter, and return again, and where he finds a fit house, he
brings in seven Devils worse than himself. He is diligent to watch our
mischief, and if he cannot prevail at one time, he will assay another.

3 God sees it good to stir us out of our security, who are ready to expose our
selves to temptation, especially after we have out-stood a temptation, and
never are we easier made a prey for Satan, than when the pride of heart
tickles us, and so we grow secure, because we have out-grown some temptation.
If our estate of corruption did not necessarily require changes and a^mies of
sorrows, we should find the Lord not delighted in afflicting the sons of men:
but he sees how prone we are to surfeit of fullness, and as a field of Corn,
the rancker it is, the easier it is laid down with every storm, and violent
wind of temptation: and therefore he changes hurtful prosperity with wholesome
(though bitter) potions of afflictions, and like a good Physician prescribes us
a thin diet, and abstinence, after our surfeit and excess. 2 God sees these
changes good for us, to season and stir up our prayers: In affliction we can
seek the Lord diligently. Isa. 26.16. Oh Lord, in trouble they have visited
thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. He knows his
Church is never so fitly disposed to fervency and efficacy in prayer, as when
the cross is on her shoulders; whereas in her peace she is sleepy, cold,
negligent, roving, and remiss in her seeking after Christ. Psalm. 55.19. 3 God
sees these changes good for us, to lift us up from this evil world: for were
our prosperity not interrupted, we would dote too much upon the World, and
would wish no other Heaven than this upon earth: for, if we be so hardly and
heavily gotten out of so miserable a World as is full of sorrows and
heart-griefs, how hardly, or rather impossibly should we get out of an
unchangeable earthly happiness, though to enjoy our heavenly inheritance?

4 God sees it good for us to bring these changes into our estate, and to
entermixe with afflictions, comforts and breathings, to help our patience and
perseverance; for else all our sorrows would exceed our strength if they were
without intermission. The Lord will not have us swallowed up of sorrow, and
therefore does so temper and blend our estate, as we be not quite tired out
with the instance of our skirmishes and conflicts; but after our skirmishes
retires us for a while, where we may breath and refresh our selves, and recover
our strength and fitness for further service, whenever our great commander
shall employ us.

5 God sees these changes good for us, that by them we might prize his
mercies, to praise the giver: does not the night make the day more delightful?
would we so prize and praise God for health, if it were not sweetened with
sickness? plenty is endeared by want, and an honeycomb has no sweetness to a
full stomach; whereas he that has been pinched with penury and need knows
what a benefit abundance is.

4 God for his own great glory brings these changes into our estate, thereby
manifesting, 1 His Wisdom, in upholding his Church by contrari^s, which fight
one against another, as the frame of the World standing on four contrary
Elements. 2 His power, that brings to the grave, and back again, 1 Samuel 2.6.
that supporteth his Children to stand under so great burdens without fainting,
thereby magnifying his omnipotent power in such weakness. 3 His goodness, in
suffering his children to be afflicted on every side, but not drowned in the
waves of them; to be persecuted, but not forsaken; to be cast down, but not
to perish; yea, to be killed, but not overcome, 2 Cor. 12.9. and 4.7. Nay, his
goodness is such, as turns all these changes to good, bringing good out of
evil, sweet out of four, life out of death, and his own order out of earthly
confusions. 4 His glory, in the strange and miraculous deliverance of his
Church in its most desperate estate, and in the powerful overthrow of his
enemies. And of all the persecutions of his Church it may be said as of Lazarus
his sickness, It is not to death, but that God may be glorified.

Use 1. Then let us not dream of so stable a peace in our Church and Land, as
men's security every where has seemed to lay hold of, looking at the peaceable
disposition of our gracious King, at his hopeful Successor, at our union among
our selves, at our league with all other Nations, at the continuance and
undisturbed estate and liberty of the Gospel for these sixty years. For, 1. God
sees not good to give any Church on earth an unchangeable estate: that is the
Churches expectation in Heaven.

2 Our peace has brought in a general security, profaneness, intolerable
pride of all fashions and colors, beside modest and white, a deluge of
drunkenness daily drowning the brains and souls of thousands, a weariness of
this Mannah, a dangerous Apostasy from the first beginnings of the Gospel, and
a falling back of many great ones into the professed Idolatry of Antichrist,
and in the most a contempt of religion, yea and of a formal profession that
denies the power and life of godliness. Add to these execrable swearing
unpunished, soul adulteries unrevenged, or slightly punished, the Sabbaths of
God horribly and generally violated and profaned, by games and practices
unlawful upon any day. And now will God continue a peace to so unthankful a
people, that do put it to no other use than to arm themselves against God, and
fight against his grace and glory?

3 Consider how God dealt with his own people: they had as long peace, under
David and Solomon, as wise and excellent a King as ever was, being an eminent
type of Christ; yet we see what long ease and peace brought him to, which was
the overthrow of his Kingdom, and the renting of ten parts of twelve from him
to his servant: he was a King of peace, as his name imported, had posterity,
had made a league with all neighbour-nations; yet God being provoked, brings a
woeful change on him, and his Land. So may it be to us.

4 Consider how God has threatened us of late years to bring in woeful changes,
to remove the Gospel, and give away our Kingdom, Liberties, Freeholds, and
lives to strangers. Remember that admirable year of eighty eight, and that no
less admirable threatening and deliverance in one thousand six hundred and five;
forget not the raging and devouring plague, in which there was no peace or
safety to him that went in and out. Remember the furious fire in many great
places of the Land, burning up whole Towns and Villages: the general diseases
and distempers in men's bodies, which have been as universal as our provocation
has been: the change of our seasons, the breaking out of waters drowning the
earth, the infection of the air, many barbarous Conspiracies against the life
of so innocent and merciful a King, and the hot contentions of many brethren in
our own Church. All which are remarkable signs of Gods displeasure, if not
forerunners of a lamentable change. But he that considers how all these
things are forgotten and worn away unprofitably, without all wholesome use or
reformation, cannot but think that the Lord (if timely repentance hinder not)
will take some other course, and so speak as he will be heard: for the truth
never fayls, which you have heard at large; one Judgment is ever a fore runner
of another, unless repentance cuts them off. O that God would put it in the
hearts of high and low, to seek the continuance of our happy peace, in our
seasonable seeking of God by repentance, and not seeking still to provoke him
by wilful impenitency.

Use 2. Let us not expect an end of temptation and trial, while we are here
below, seeing Satan goes away (in respect of temptation and molestation) but
for a season. If Satan be gone, he will return: yea, although he cannot
prevail, he will not cease to be an enemy: and the longer our peace has been,
let us think our change the nearer. None of Gods children, but the Devil is
sometimes departed from them: but the experience of them all shows, that he
never stayed long away from any of them: and therefore let us be wise, although
God^ goodness have kept him a great while from us, not thereby to grow secure,
but as fore-casting his coming again, aim our selves for him.

1 Not mistaking our present estate, which is a pilgrimage, and not a paradise
of ease and pleasure. 2 Considering, that evils foreseen lose a great part of
their bitterness; and they are so much the weaker against us, as we are
stronger by our providence and foresight of them. 3 Neither may we think much,
that after one, or two, or three assaults, Satan has not done with us, but
comes again, as he did against our Lord: for we servants are not better than
our Master, nor better than our fellow servants, who have been often assaulted;
as David, first to Adultery, and after that to Murder, and after that to pride
in numbering the people, and after that Satan came again and again. And Paul was
often bulleted by Satan, yea after he had prayed thrice, he got no release,
but a promise of sufficient grace. 4 Neither may we conceive it strange, that
after some sleighter temptations, we should be urged with fouler: for Satan
commonly keeps his strongest till the last, as he did to our Lord.

Many say, never were any so foulely tempted, not so often as they: their flesh
trembles, and their hair stands an end, to think what foul temptations Satan
suggesteth with great instance: But, can there be a fouler temptation than to
worship the Devil himself? yet the Son of God was tempted to it. Therefore
resist as he did, and the sin is not thine, but Satan's, who shall be damned,
but thou shall be saved in the day of the Lord. Satan still comes with more
malice, and worst at last, contrary unto God, who is best at last.

Use 3. In that Christian life is mixed with peace and trouble, learn we not
to fix both our eyes upon any present prosperity, nor use it as a perpetuity,
but hold it as a moveable, which passes and moves from one to another. We
have now a sweet sense of God, but this may be over-cast, he may hide himself,
and we be troubled: we may now have the joy of our faith, and presently our
souls be clouded with unbelief, distrust, and dreggs of infidelity. All Gods
graces are still in sight, often soyled by their contraries. And for temporal
things, our health is conflicted with sickness, our good name wounded with
disgraces and defamations, our friends mortal, and were they not so, yet
mutable, often becoming our greatest enemies; our wealth winged, and leaves us
when we have most need of comfort, our life it self commutable with death,
which is the turning of us out of all that we loved dearest, excepting God
himself. Let us therefore fix our eyes upon those eternal good things, and that
eternal peace, and that Kingdom which cannot be shaken: For the things which
are seen, are temporal, but the things not seen are eternal. And then,
whatsoever I lose, it is but a moveable, my inheritance is sale and sure.

Use 4. Hence we may see how like wicked men are unto their father the Devil
in their courses: Satan seems to go from them, but it is but for a season, and
so do their sins, but for a season, by a counterfeit repentance: As we may see
in two or three instances.

1 Some upon some good motions and exhortations by Gods Word and Spirit, are
stru^k with some sense of their estate, their conscience is checked, and they
resolve to take a new course, and perhaps enter upon it, as the Devil were
quite gone: But he comes again, he went but for a season, and sets them as deep
in their usury, deceit, gaming, and wicked fellowship as ever before: the dog
returns to his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire: the evil spirit
that seemed to be gone, is returned, and has brought with him seven worse
Devils, because he found his house fit for him.

2 Some about the time of receiving the Communion are very devout, will make a
show of religion, of prayer, of repentance, of charity, and love; they will not
swear much that day, perhaps not play, but read, and (it may be) sing Psalms:
A man would think (for so do they) that the Devil is quite gone. But it is but
for a season, their righteousness is but as a morning dew, their
unrighteousness returns, and they become as disordered in their courses, as
malicious in their lives, the next day, as ever they were before. A fearful
case, that with Judas they receive the sop and the Devil withal.

3 Others in the time of sickness are very penitent, will confess all, promise
amendment, plead for pardon, crave good prayers, and vow to God, if he restore
them, to become new men and women; and now the Devil (they hope) is quite gone.
But no sooner their sickness breaks, but the Devil comes again, and brings all
their former sins back again, and they are well contented, against all their
vows, promises, and resolutions, to admit them into firmer favor and league
than ever before; and, being of near kindred with Satan, will then go away when
they can stay no longer. The most hard-hearted Pharaoh can do all this, to get
out of Gods hands, but he must not so carry it at length.

Use 5. Lastly, let us comfort our selves in our trouble: for this also is
changeable: our Lord knows we have need of a refreshing, and we shall be
refreshed: The rod of the wicked (yea of the wicked one) shall not always rest
on the lot of the righteous, lest they put forth their hand to vanity. And
although it may seem hard, that Satan goes but for a season; yet is not this
without much comfort: For although it were a great mercy for Satan not to come
unto us, yet to come and go away foiled, is a far greater, as he does from all
the members of Christ, who in expectation of this joyful and seasonable event,
may encourage themselves to hold out with patience unto the end.

And behold, the Angels came, and ministered to him.]

In these words is laid the triumph of our Lord Jesus Christ after his victory,
which is set down not without a star or note of special observation, Behold,
being held over this point following for special purpose. For this particle
notes, 1 Sometimes a strange thing, as, Behold, a virgin shall conceive and
bear a son. 2 A long-desired thing, and much expected, as, Behold, oh Sion, thy
King comes, etc. 3 An excellent thing now set before the eye, and present, as
Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: and
so it is a note of admiration. 4 A true and certain thing: so it is set before
many promises and threats. 5 It is ever a note of attention, and argues
intention and weight in that matter where Gods Spirit has prefixed it. It has
all these uses in this place, noting a strange triumph, such as never was met
withal in all the monuments in all the world besides.

It was but shadowed in that strange triumph sung to David, 1 Samuel 18.7. when
David had returned from the slaughter of the Philistim, the women came out and
sang by course, Saul has slain his thousand, but David his ten thousand: why?
he slew but one man. True, but in that one enemy he did as much as if he had
slain ten thousand others. But here in one enemy, this Son of David, has slain
his legions and millions, not ol men, but of Devils* not Philistims but hellish
powers, which had defied the Host of Israel. This note also calls us to behold
as expetible, certain and excellent a triumph, as all the notes of attention,
which are in the Scripture, all the Selahs in the world are too little to gain
sufficient attention, or set out the greatness of this Divine mystery. It
calls us as the parenthesis of our Savior, Matthew. 24.15. speaking of the
certain strange signs of Jerusalems overthrow, Let him that reads consider;
so, Let him that reads behold, that is, consider, meditate, remember, prize
this great and most glorious work of the Son of God. And it checketh and
rebukes our heaviness, dullness, and want of affection, in the beholding and
due regard of so material and comfortable a point of heavenly doctrine, so
nearly concerning out selves.

But what must we behold? Two things: 1 the coming of the Angels unto Christ:
2 their ministering unto him.

In the coming of the Angels, note, 1 when they came, 2 to whom, 3 the manner
of their coming.

I. When, in the first word, namely, when the Devil had left him, and not
before. For, 1 The good Angels have little joy to be where wicked Angels and
Devils are, especially whiles their Commission stands in force to molest the
Children of God. 2 They were ready enough to attend upon their Lord, but Christ
permitted them not for the time of temptation: 1 Lest their presence should
have driven Satan away before the temptations had been ended: 2 He had no
assistance of man or Angel, but alone in the wilderness sustains all the brunt
of the temptation: he must tread the wi^e-press alone, as none must share with
him in his conquest and victory. 3 Satan's mouth must be stopped, who would have
said he had overcome by their aid, if they had been present. 4 The Text says
not, the Angels came in to help him in the time of temptation; but, when the
Devil had left him, they came to minister to him.

II. The person to whom they came, to him, now plainly manifest to be God and
man; man tempted by the Devil, like us in all things except sin; God who had
overcome the Devil, and now riding in a Chariot of glorious triumph: man in the
hands of Satan carried and recarried at his pleasure; God to whom the Angels as
Ministers and the Squires of his holy body, do homage and attendance.

III. The manner of their coming, (...), they now came in unto him, standing
before a far off, as in war, when the enemies are scattered, the friends come
in with joy: for so it was when David had foiled and slain Goliath, the men of
Israel and Judah arose, and shouted, and applauded that noble victory.

Quest. But how did they come in?

Answ. 1 By moving themselves from the place were they were, to that place were
Christ was, and they were not before: for the same Angel cannot be in two
places at once, because 1 His essence is finite, and therefore limited: 2 They
are definitively in place, although not repletively: for the Angel is in a
place only by applying his virtue to the place, by which virtue he rather
contains the place, than the place him, as it does bodies. But when a Legion of
wicked Angels are said to be in one man, it is necessary that spirits defined
to be in one place cannot at the same time be without that place, till they
be moved thence into another. Good Angels are not in heaven and earth at once,
much less every (...)

Now whereas they are truly in place, and truly moved in place, both without
bodies, as also in assumed bodies, it would make much for the clearing of the
Angels manner of coming to Christ, to know whether they came in a bodily
shape, or without bodies at this time.

I answer, I doubt not (and yet I will not contend about it) but that they came
in bodily shapes.

Quest. Have Angels bodily shapes to appear in?

Answ. No, not proper to their nature, being mere spiritual substances, without
corporal matter, or physical composition: But yet they have bodily shapes, 1
ascribed to them by way of description, for our capacity: 2 assumed by way of
dispensation, for our consolation.

I. For our comprehension: Isa. 6.2.
the Angels with two wings cover their face and feet: this signifies that
their nature is hid and removed from the knowledge of man. And with twain their
bodies are covered, Ezekiel. 1.11. to signify the same. And their hands are under
their wings, by which is meant, that their powerful and secret operation also
cannot be discerned with bodily eyes. Therefore has the Scripture expressed
their nature under diverse shapes, and ascribed unto them many parts both of
men and other creatures, in which we may see and understand their work and
office: as Ezekiel. 1. Angels are described by four beasts; not because they are
no more in number (for, thousand thousands sit at his right hand) but because
they do the Commandments of God in all the four quarters of the world. These
beasts have four several faces: 1 The face of a man, to note, that all of them
are reasonable and understanding creatures, as man is. 2 The face of a Lion, to
signify, that every Angel is strong, and powerful, and courageous, as the Lion
among the beasts. Psalm. 103.20. Praise the Lord ye Angels strong in power. One
of them is stronger than a number of men, yea than a number of Devils. 3 The
face of an Ox, to note their patience, assiduity, and unweariableness in their
service and ministry, as the Ox is a beast most patient, and constant, and
profitable in his pains. 4 The face of an Eagle, to note their swiftness and
alacrity, seeing a fair off many hidden things, as the Eagle; flying strongly
and swiftly, that is, unresistably as the Eagle; holding out, not fainting, but
renewing their strength as the Eagle.

By the same Prophet they are described, chap. 10.22. by the shape of Cherubs;
which were the faces of little fair boys with wings, noting unto us under that
resemblance their nature, to be void of deceit as a child, simple, innocent,
not proud, or arrogant, not envious or malicious. Having wings, to note their
readiness and expedition in their ministry: and these wings in their four
sides, to show that their ministry extended to all the four sides of the world.

II. By way of dispensation they have often assumed bodies that were true,
immediately created of God, not imaginary or fantastical, as Marcion thought,
whom Tertullian refuted, neither generated nor born as man's body is, nor
hypostatically united to the Angels as constitutive parts, as our body is a
constituting part of us; but taken upon them for the time of some special
service, and laid down again, even as we do our apparel, to the end they
might familiarly confer and converse with men, till that special service were
performed.

Thus did they visibly appear unto Abraham and Lot: thus was the Angel of God
seen like a fourth man in the Furnace, which the three Children were cast into:
and in this humane shape, I doubt not but they came and appeared to the Son of
God in this place. My reasons are these: 1 If the Angels came often in bodily
shape to the servants and adopted children of God, why should they not much
more to the natural Son of God, being clothed with the same flesh? 2 We have
formerly proved, that the Devil came in assumed bodily shape, the more to
molest and terrify the Son of God, and therefore the Angels came to him also
in bodily shape, the more to comfort him. 3 The present estate of Christ
required it, who was man, and subject to many infirmities, and therefore the
Angels came corporally to comfort him. 4 The phrase of the text implies a more
sensible and peculiar manifestation of them than before: as in his agony an
Angel appeared to him, (...), Luke 22. verse. 43.

In this coming of the Angels, note an happy change in the estate of our Lord
and Savior: for in stead of the Devil his deadly enemy, come the Angels his
friends and household servants: in stead of one Devil many Angels; for all are
his to attend him: in stead of sharp hunger for forty days together, now he
has bodily food and comfort in a moment.

Doct. God may hide his comforts for a time, but at length they shall shine out
upon his servants, as the Sun from under a cloud. All the time of the
temptation Christ was without food, without Angels, nay he endured sharpness of
hunger in his body, and of Satanical vexation in his soul: now the Lord
comforts him, not only in removing evil from him, but restoring to him his
whole former peace, besides the glory of a most victorious conquest. And the
same is his dealing with his servants: Psalm. 73.1. David being plunged
exceedingly with a grievous temptation of Atheism; not whether there was a God
or no, but whether this God were just and merciful, seeing things fell out so
cross to good men, and so prosperously to the wicked; at last breaks out into a
settled resolution, Yet God is good to Israel. He was in the temptation as a man
cast into the Sea, souzed in one billow after another, at length he descries a
shore, and with extreme toil and peril he gets thither, and crawls up, and
says, Yet I have escaped drowning. Or as a man in a pitched field, that in the
thick of his enemies had escaped many blows and deadly thrusts, being set
beyond the danger says, Yet I am alive. So the Lord, though in temptation he
seem to stand far off, yet at last appears with strength and comfort. The
same David being in great distress a long time, hunted as a Partrich by Saul,
but strangely delivered from him and Achish, concludes, Psalm. 34.19. That how
great soever the troubles of the righteous be, yet the Lord will at length
deliver them out of all. To this purpose Solomon says, that though the just
man fall seven times a day, namely, into affliction, yet he rises again.

Abraham in his great trial saw nothing but sorrow and vexation for the loss of
his Isaac: yet in the third day, when the case seemed desperate, God was seen
in the mountain; as if he had not seen God till he came into the mountain.
Whence his posterity used it as a proverbial speech, In the mount God will be
seen: at the farthest he will be seen there, if not before. Job assured
himself, that after darkness he should see light; and according to his faith,
we see howsoever Satan set upon him, with all his might, to blaspheme God, and
his friends would needs prove him an Hypocrite; and which was worst of all, God
not only stood a far off from him, but came upon him and against him, as one
that strove against the Almighty, and one that reproved his Maker, chap. 39.
verse. 35. Yet at length he steps out for him, acquits him, and rebukes his
friends, and accepts his servant, and turns his captivity, and gives him
twice as much as before he had, chap. 42.

Psalm. 112.4. To the righteous arises light in darkness. No darkness or misery
can keep God and the comforts and strength of his Spirit from his children. Yea
hereby the Lord knows how to bring light out of darkness, as once he did in
the Creation, Romans 8.28. we know that all things are turned to the best, to
them that love God. His wisdom and power turns things, not only good into good,
nor only afflictions and trials, but even their sins and infirmities, like a
good Physician that tempers poison to a remedy, and of the Vipers skin makes a
remedy to heal the Vipers sting.

2 This is the godly man's privilege above wicked ones, to find God sweet to
their souls, either in afflictions, or in the ending of them: 1 Because their
persons (whatsoever their estate is) are accepted with God, whereas the other
are rejected. 2 They are sealed with the earnest of Gods Spirit, and can go
unto God in fervent prayer, whereas the other want the Spirit, and cannot pray
to be heard, Psalm. 18.41. They cried, but there was none to save them, even to
the Lord, but he answered them not. 3 They have the grace of repentance, which
removes sin the cause of affliction, and are come out of Babylon though they
live in Babylon, being as so many Lots in Sodom. Whereas the other are
impenitent, and never removing the cause, the effect lies ever upon them, and
grows every day heavier than other. 4 They have peace of conscience, and can
sing the new song to God and the Lamb, having a set of sweet Music in their
souls; and with peace they have patience, supporting them unto Gods seasonable
deliverance. Whereas the wicked are as the raging sea, and has no peace nor
patience, but a senseless unfeelingness of his estate; their hearts being either
ignorant, ascribing all their smart to Fortune, or Constellations, or fatal
necessity, or secundary causes, being not able to ascend so high as God the
Auhor, or descend so low as their own sins, the just meritorious causes of
their evils; or hardened and feared, or senseless, as Nabals, whose heart was as
a stone dead within him.

3 It is one end of Gods extreme humbling and afflicting his children, not to
sink or forsake them, but that at the last the powerful work of God may be
showed on them, both for his glory, and for theirs. The poor blind man, ( Joh.
9.3.) carried his misery a great while, from his birth to his man's estate, and
yet our Savior witnesses, that it was neither for his sin, nor his parents,
but that the work of God might be showed upon him, in the miraculous cure of
him, when all the power of Nature and Art could do him no good. Lazarus was
extremely humbled, dead, buried, lying in the grave stinking: who would have
thoughr beyond Mary, that he should ever have been raised till the last day?
and yet our Savior says, that even that death of his was not unto death, but
for the glory of God. Yea, the Lord never brings any evil upon his children,
wherein he intends not in the end to show them some great good: as, Deuteronomy.
8.16. The Lord tried, humbled, and proved his people in the Wilderness, that he
might do them good at the latter end: Job 23.10. He knows my way, and
tries me: and what was the issue? I shall come forth like the gold. And the
Apostle affirms, that the trial of our faith, which is much more precious
than gold, shall be sound to our praise, and honor, and glory, as t^ appearing
of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7.

4 God hereby manifests his care and faithfulness in his promises: for he has
promised, how ever he suspend his comfort for a time, to return in due season:
neither can his mercies come to an end, nor himself leave his mansion finally.
Therefore it is that sometimes he fore-tells his children of evils to come,
that they should not come suddenly on them, neither distrust his care in them,
nor be ignorant of a good issue out of them. Sometimes he numbers them out, and
tells how many, and how long they shall be: Dan. 9.25. There shall be seven
weeks, that is, thirty nine years, and there shall be sixty two weeks, that
is, four hundred thirty four years, and then the Messiah shall come, etc. And
always he that sets the setting of the Stars, and the bounds of the Sea,
sets much more the period of our troubles, and the furthest limits of his
childrens trials: which suppose they reach even to death it self, they can
follow them no further, but then is a rest from their labor, a reaping of the
fruits of their sufferings, a joyful harvest of a sorrowful seed-time, wherein
the Lord meets them with a full and final deliverance, and puts them in full
possession of all his most glorious promises.

Use 1. Let the godly consider of their privilege, to provoke their patience
and constancy in their greatest trials, which cannot make them unhappy. For, 1
The godly man's present estate is the best for him, be it what it can be: the
Furnace is the fittest place for gold. 2 His trial shall be turned to good,
because God has the disposing, tempering, and moderating of it. 3 His trial
shall be but light and momentany, not in respect of the present sense, but
because the time of temptation shall be swallowed up by the time of victory. 4
The end of it shall be happy: and all is well that ends well: here shall be a
most blessed issue. And therefore let drossie Christians fear the fire, who are
sure to be wasted in it, whilst the godly rejoice in tribulation, and with
David walk fearlesly in the valley of the shadow of death, because God who led
him in, was with him to lead him out.

Use 2. Let the godly judge of themselves, not always according to their
present estate or feeling, which may occasion their feet almost to step, but
look to the happy end of their trials. And though the smart continue long, yet
let them be assured that the Lord keeps all their bones, so that not one of
them shall be broken. Neither let us be weary and faint in our minds: for
although God seems not to hear us, yet he hears us well enough. And though he
seem to stand afar off us, it is but a delay, no denial of our request. And
though he seem to neglect us, let us not neglect him, but hold on in the prayer
of faith.

V^e 3. Let this serve as a ground of comfort and encouragement to us, that
when with Israel we stand as it were on the Sea-brink, beset with dangers, then
we may be still, and expect the salvation of the Lord. For as the Prophet
speaks, ( Hab. 2.3.) The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the last
it shall speak, and not lie: if it tarry, wais; for it shall surely come, and
shall not stay. Let us not make haste, nor limit the Lord in prescribing him a
time and means, but leave all that to his wisdom, lean upon his arm, rely
upon his word, he has a mind to do us good, and that when it shall be most
for his glory and our salvation. We are not yet perhaps in the deep, nor at the
mountain, not so destitute but we find some supports. But were the case with us
as it was here with our Lord, if we were in the world, as in a wilderness, our
food nothing but stones, our company wild beasts ready to devour us, no friend
near us, but the Devil tossing and tumbling us with his temptations, we should
assuredly see the Lord extraordinarily providing for us, and working out for us
unexpected comfort: our extremity would be Gods opportunity.

God sent not Moses to deliver Israel from under Pharaoh, till their burdens
were at the heaviest, and their oppressions intolerable. God might have sent
his Angel to preserve the three Children from being cast into the fire, but he
did not till they were in the flames; this was Gods time, wherein he was more
glorified, his children more gloriously delivered, and his enemies more
mightily confounded, than if the Angels had come before. Even so, when this
Land was like that fiery Furnace, made seven times hotter than ever before, to
consume the bodies of Gods Saints, in Queen Mary's days, in the midst of those
flames God sent that happy Queen (now a blessed Saint) to quench those fires,
and deliver our whole Church from that tyrannical and Papal oppression. Thus
the Lord himself waits, and stays for the fittest time of our deliverance; and
so must we. Never shall the faithful soul fail of a day of refreshing.

And ministered unto him.]

We have spoken of the Angels coming: Now the last thing considerable in this
History, is their ministry unto Christ; wherein are two things: 1 How they
minister to him: 2 Why they minister.

I. 1 They ministered in adoring the Son of God, the only conqueror of the
Devil, and honoring him as the victorious destroyer of the Prince, and
Commander of all hellish powers: For the Angels rejoiced in Christ's victory, in
the Devils overthrow, and the salvation of the Church of God. The goodness of
their nature carries them wholly to the glory of God, in all their actions and
motions, and the good of the Church; as at the birth of Christ they sung, Glory
to God on high, on earth peace, and good will to men. And there is no doubt but
now upon this victory, they did much more honor him, and congratulate his
glorious triumph.

2 They ministered to him in comforting him, being in his soul extremely
afflicted and molested with Satan's temptations: for how could the Son of God
but utterly abhor, and with fiery zeal detest such blasphemous temptations, as
that he should not only distrust his Fathers providence, but even fall down
and worship the Devil himself, with which temptations a sinful man yet in his
corrupt nature, would be exceedingly distracted and disturbed? It is no doubt
therefore, but as in his Agony before his Passion, the Angels came to comfort
him, so likewise in this conflict and perturbation, so soon as they might, they
came in to the same purpose.

3 They ministered to him in releeving his body, which was now broken with
hunger, and watchings, having already fasted forty days and forty nights; and
brought him food to allay his hunger, spreading as it were a table for him in
the wilderness. For, if they neglected not the servant of God Elias in the
wilderness, being ready to starve for food, but provided him a meal, in
strength whereof he went forty days and forty nights, 1 King. 19.5. much less
would they neglect the Son of God, who was now in the same necessity.

4 They ministered to him, standing about him, and giving attendance, waiting as
it were at his table, and ready to be employed in any further service he had
to command them: Psalm. 103.20. Ye Angels ready to execute his will. Whence in
Ezekiel. 1.11. the Angels are described with wings stretched upward, noting their
propensity and readiness to the Commandments of Christ.

II. Why the Angels do thus minister to Christ.

Ans. Not for any necessity of his (for 1 He was able to have sustained
himself, and held out for ever against the Devil: 2 He was able to have
confounded the Devil: 3 He was able to have created food in the wilderness
without them, which they could not do: for, although they could fetch food
elsewhere provided, yet could they not create any,) but, 1 It was their duty to
attend him as their Lord, called the Lord of the holy Angels. 2 Christ would
now use their ministry, and did not help himself by Miracle, as he might, if
he had pleased. But we read not that he used his power for himself or his
Disciples: Himself being hungry and weary at Jacobs Well, he created not food,
but sent his Disciples into the City to buy bread: And when his Disciples were
faint and hungry, they were fain to pluck ears of Corn, and eat it: But yet he
used not his miraculous power. For Miracles were wrought for the edification of
others, and commonly done in the presence of many, whose faith was to be
strengthened, as the Disciples was in part already. 3 This was so for our
instruction and consolation, that we also in our wants, standing in the Lords
battles, may expect the presence and comfort of the Angels.

Doct. The privilege of Christ, whereby he is exalted above all creatures,
hence appears, in that the Angels minister unto him. Heb. 1.6. the Apostle
proves Christ's divinity, and eminency above all things, out of that testimony
of the Psalm, And let all the Angels of God worship him. For, he must needs be
greater than all, who must be honored of all. Job. 1.51. Christ himself
proves himself the Son of God, because, notwithstanding he is the Son of man,
which plainly notes him to be, 1 A true man, and 2 A weak man: yet they should
see the Heavens opened, and the Angels ascending and descending upon him, as
was figured in Jacobs Ladder, Genesis 28.12. For Christ is the Ladder, and only
way by which we ascend into Heaven. It reached from earth to heaven, signifying
his two Natures, God of his Father in Heaven, man of Jacobs loins in earth.
Angels ascending and descending, are the ministering spirits attending him: for
in that phrase is meant their sending out, their emission, and commission to
their office, descending to their work, and ascending to give account of it.
Now according to this Prophecy of Christ, two of his Disciples saw the heavens
open upon him in his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.1, 2. In his resurrection,
those keepers of the Sepulcher saw the Angel of the Lord that descended from
heaven, and had rolled away the stone from the door, and sat upon it, so as
they were afraid, and as dead men, Matthew. 28.4. The women also saw the Angel
and talked with him, that had attended him in his Resurrection, verse. 5. And in
his Ascension all his Disciples saw the Heavens opened unto him, and two Angels
standing by them, who attended him, Acts 1.



2 The Angels are in Scripture every where spoken of, as the excellency of the
Creatures; so as when the highest praise of any thing is to be given, it is
taken from the excellency of Angels. Manna is called Angels food, Psalm. 78.25.
that is, if Angels should need food, they could not wish more excellent. 1 Cor.
13.1. If I should speak with the tongues of Angels, etc. that is, excellently.
Yea, the most happy and glorious estate that our selves look for after the
resurrection, is hence extolled, that we shall be (...), like Angels. Now all
this advancement of them, is not so much in respect of themselves, with whom we
have no commerce, but for the advancement of Christ, the Lord of the holy
Angels; and that in their glory we may behold the glory of Christ, to whom they
are servants.

3 The truth hereof was shadowed in the Ceremonial Law, Exodus 25.20. The
Cherubims (signifying the Angels) must lift their wings on high, as attending
upon God, and their faces must be to the Mercy-seat, which lively resembled
Christ, on whom their eyes must be still cast, as the eye of the handmaid to
the hand of her Mistress. And, chap. 26.31. the vail of the Tabernacle which
covered the most holy, (expressly signifying the flesh of Christ, which hiding
his Divinity made way for us to Heaven) must be made of broydered work with
Cherubims, not without Cherubims: for these noted the multitude of Angels
serving Christ, even as man: for being in his lowest estate, and apprehended to
the death, he gives this as a reason to Peter to put up his sword, because, if
he would, he might pray to his Father, and have twelve legions of Angels to
rescue him.

Obj. But this seems not Christ's privilege, to have the Angels his ministers,
seeing all the godly have them ministering spirits for their good, Heb* 1.14. as
Abraham, Lot, Elias, Daniel.

Ans. True, they had, but this impeacheth not Christ's honor, because they
serve not us after the same manner they serve him: for 1 Their service is due
to Christ, as their Creator and Lord, of duty: to us, as Creatures, of charge.
2 Their service to him is immediate, as the Head of the Church, to us mediate
only, as members of the Head. 3 Their service is proper to him, and invested in
him, as his own right: to us given by virtue of our communion with him. 4 To
him as the author and preserver of all the gifts and graces they have; and
equal it is, that whatsoever is excellent in any kind, be wholly ascribed to
the author and giver of it: to us only so far as the owner has put them in
trust to employ those gifts for our good. Faith in Christ interests us in this
Ministry of the Angels, who love the members because of the head. They are his
Angels, and so called by special propriety: Matthew. 16.27. when the Son of man
shall come in the clouds, and all his holy Angels with him, because by special
prerogative they do him homage and service: And our Angels by special
commission and direction from him. 5 They never ministered to man, but for the
honor of Christ. Rev. 22.9. Worship God.

Use 1. Let us imitate the Angels. Do they honor Christ by their ministry,
and shall we refuse his service? especially seeing he took our Nature, and
bound us straighter to him than the Angels. They are most expedite and ready,
having wings to fly withal: Let their wings speed us in his service. They are
unweariable in performing obedience, and shall we be so heavy and shrinking,
as to account every thing too much that we do for him? They are in all things
ruled and moved by his Spirit? Ezekiel. 1.20. Whither the Spirit led them, they
went: Let us also give up our selves to the leading of his Spirit, not running
of our own heads in any business, unsent, without our warrant. They rejoice in
all good things, and in Christ's victory, the benefit of which redounds to us
more than to them, and that men by the same are set out of the Devils power:
And why do not we more rejoice in this victory of Christ? why do we rejoice in
evil, which is the Devils sin, in sinful courses and company? Why do we hate
and scorn those, who most partake in this victory? How unlike is this to the
Angels?

Use 2. If the Angels be servants unto Christ, then we see herein both his love
to us, and our own honor, who has vouchsafed us his own special servants to
attend us: For he has not only charged them with the safety of Abraham, Jacob,
Lot, Elias, Daniel, and other extraordinary holy men, but their commission is
general: Psalm. 91.11. they shall keep thee in all thy ways, that is, not only
Christ himself, but every member of Christ: for this honor have all the
Saints. And what a comfort is it, that we so weak Creatures, and so beset with
spiritual and invisible enemies, have appointed to us by the Lord so many
spiritual, invisible, and more powerful ayders, and assisters? What a comfort
is it, that no temporal enemy can so soon wrong us in our persons, estates, or
names, but the Angels of God are ready to turn it off, and keep off the peril,
and then return to God to complain of the wrong-doers? What a care should we
have not to forfeit our privilege, to keep us in our ways, and walk warily
because of the Angels, not grieving them by sin, nor driving them from about
us, whose protection under Gods is more safe than if we lay under shield and
spear, Psalm. 91.4. with 11. And if our Lord himself received comfort from them,
how great may be our comfort from them?

Use 3. Hence we are to ascribe the glory of Power, Majesty, and Kingdom unto
our Lord Jesus, who if he be able to command all the Angels in Heaven, much
more all the Devils in Hell, who are far weaker than they: All power is his
in heaven and earth. And now we are no longer to esteem of him according to his
base estate, in the Wilderness, in the World, but according to his surpassing
power manifested through all this History in vanquishing the Devil, and in
receiving the Divine honor from the most glorious Angels. To this great
Michael, who even without his Angels has in pitched battle overcome the great
red Dragon and all his Angels, be ascribed all power, might, victory, and
triumph, of all men, Saints, and Angels, in earth, and in the highest Heavens,
for all eternity. Amen. Amen.

(...).
AN Alphabetical Index OR TABLE, Pointing To the Principal Points in this
Exposition.
A
IN Christ's lowest Abasement sparkles of Divinity fly out: sundry instances.
page 233 Actions brought forward by bad means, to be suspected: sundry
instances. page 201 Accusers mouths how to be stopped, four rules. page 19
Against false accusation, seven rules. page 17 Adversaries must be overcome
rather with patience than power. page 72 Adoption called into question by Satan
for present adversity, five reasons. page 58 Allegories must not be stuck too
fast unto. page 170 Christ's Allegation of Scripture with some addition and
change of words, five reasons. page 217 Angels called Gods Angels, three
reasons. page 151 Angels tender keepers of the godly, three reasons. page 153
Concerning Angels, three observations. page 154 Angels come not in unto Christ,
before the Devil is gone from him, four reasons. page 258 Angels cannot be in
two places at once, why: ibid Angels have bodily shapes by way of 1.
description: 2 dispensation. page 259 Angels minister unto Christ, and how.
page 262 Christ was more Angry in the last temptation, than in the two former
four reasons. page 214 Apochryphal books not authentical, three reasons. page
86 In the Ark were three things kept. page 105 Assemblies in the Church of
England holy meetings, four reasons. page 107 Avoid signifies three things.
page 213
B
BAd causes are thrust on by bad means, four reasons. page 2^0 Behold,
signifies five things in Scripture. page 257 Blame thy self sinning, more than
the devil. page 139 Blessing more desirable than means. page 90 Blind and
bloody battles for the holy land, more for the Popes profit than Gods glory.
page 115 Boasters resemble the Devil. page 303 To get Bread out of stones,
three ways. page 70 Gods way to get bread, contrary to the devils, in three
things. page 71
C
TO live out of a lawful calling wicked, three reasons. page 94 Calling to be
well carried, two rules. page 97 Special Calling, requires the practice of four
virtues. page 98 Christ was locally carried to the Pinacl^, four reasons. page
123 In Christ, Satan would have cast down all mankind. page 133 Satan would
have us cast down our selves. why. page 139 Causes of God must affect us above
our own, five reasons. page 214 Changes here good for us, five reasons. page
254 To be cheerful in trials, four motives. page 10 Chair of Rome a frivolous
pretense. page 114 Christ subject to temptations, notwithstanding his
perfection of 1 nature, 2 grace, 3 power. page 5 Christ chose to be tempted in
the wilderness, four reasons. page 13 Christ's going into the wilderness, no
ground for Popish Eremites four reas. page 15 Christ would be tempted, four
reas. page 11 Christ by being tempted, succoureth us four ways. ibid. Christ
after among wild beasts than wicked men. page 29 Christ not so rough with
Satan, as with some wicked men, no or with his own disciples four reasons. page
73 Christ reveals himself only to such at will make right use of his
knowledge four reas. page 75 Christ as able to defend us as himself, from wild
beasts and Devils. page 29 Christ's privilege above all Creatures in the
ministry of Angels, three reasons. page 263 Christ's combat exemplary as
victorious. page 15^ Christians must he reasonable even to most unreasonable
adversaries, three reasons. page 71 Church no competent Judge of Controversies.
page 158 Church has no authority over Scripture, four reasons. page 159 Church
of England not to be separated from for some corruptions, four conclusions.
page 108 Comforts for weak Christians in temptation, four grounds. page 5
Circuit of Satan is the compass of the earth. page 13 Comforts from Christ
being tempted, four grounds. page 24 Comfort of the creatures a greater
blessing than the creatures themselves. page 90 Comfort in that Satan cannot
overcome him, who is not willing to be overcome. page 139 Comforts from the
custody of Angels. page 154 Comforts of God bid for a time, but at length shine
out upon his children, four reasons. page 260 Bad Company worse than
solitariness. page 15 Comforts when temptations come thick on us, three. page
180 Compacts with Satan, 1 open, 2 secret. page 204 Means to avoid Satan's
Compacts, five. page 206 Conference of Scriptures beats out the true sense of
them: see instances at large. page 165 Councils no competent Judges of
controversies, four reas. page 160 In the inner Court of the Temple were four
things of note. page 104
D
DAy of sickness and death most unfit to resist Satan's temptations, three
reas. page 42 Death enters the Soul by the windows of the Senses, four real.
page 187 Devil is not driven away by holy water, relics, nor the naming of
Jesus. page 7 Difference between the love of God as God, and of God as a
Father. page ^9 Directions for the fortifying of faith, three. page 56
Distinction of (...) and (...): 1 silly, 2 ignorant, 3 novel. page 223 Doctors
and Fathers no competent Judges of Scripture, five reas. page 160 Doing of what
God commands, not always a sign of true grace, three reasons. page 247 God
draws near his Saluts in trouble, three ways. page 61
E
EFfects of the spirits assured governance in troubles, three. page 12 Eminent
persons must be so much the more watchful. page 186 Ends and means must be tied
together. page 179 Equivocation a Jesultical trick discovered. page 150 Three
Estates Satan especially would cast men from: 1 of innocence, 2 regeneration, 3
office in Church or Commonwealth. page 133 Evil men cleave one to another,
because all of them hate Christ. page 103 Excellency cannot exempt a man from
Satan's temptations, three reasons. page 6 How to avoid Satan's extremities,
three rules. page 129
F
Family Worship of God stands in five things. page 111 Fasting, the kinds, 1
civil: 2 religious: 3 miraculous. page 31 Fasting of Christ differs from
Popish in eight things. page 32 Christ fasted his fast for four causes. ibid
Fast of Christ no longer or shorter than forty days, five reasons. page 33
Forty nights of Christ's fast expressed, two reasons. ibid Fasting a necessary
Christian duty, three reasons. page 34 Motives to fasting six. page 35 Faith
his ablions about the means of safety: if present three, 30. if absent three.
ibid Overthrow of faith the aim of all Satan's temptations, five reas. page 54
Faith must be so much the stronglier fortified, as Satan more furiously
assaileth it page 56 Faith his excellency in four things. ibid The least Faith
can pray for more. page 57 Properties of Faith in want of means, three page 64
Faith how it demeaneth it self toward the word of Gods providence, three
Rules. page 94 Faithfulness in Promises, enforced by five reasons. page 198
G
COmmon Gamesters live by no word of God. page 97 Generality of obedience in
four things. page 250 Gifts of God differ from the devils in four things. page
205 Glory of God must be preferred above all the world, six reas. page 210
Motives to promote the glory of God, five. page 225 To glorify God in good
measure, means four. page 213 God glorifieth himself in our trials, four ways.
page 254 Glory of the world falsely claimed by Satan, for 1 possession: 2
disposition: four reas. page 199 God some ways an actor in evil, no ways an
author. page 10 God tempts man two ways. page 20 Godly men shall want no
accusation in the world, why. page 19 The more God graceth a man, the more
Satan seeks to disgrace him, three reasons. page 1 and page 6 Six graces
Satan would fain rob us of. page 182
H
POpish hallowing of water wicked, six reas. page 8 Headship of the Pope falsely
grounded. page 149 Little or no Help in injustice, three reas. page 95 Christ
full of the Holy Ghost, how. page 25 Holiness sweeteneth our callings three
ways page 98 To hold out in trials without hast-making, four reas. page 234 No
sign of Gods hatred to be vexed with the Devil, but of the Devils: four
reasons. page 125 Christ able to feed others miraculously, was hungry himself.
page 38
I
SAtan can make gross Idolatry seem a small moat. page 203 Jerusalem called
holy City, five reasons. page 104 Jerusalem full of corruptions, yet called
holy: why. page 107 Importunity of Satan against Christ and his members to draw
them to sin, four reas. page 180 Infirmities which Christ took upon him: which,
in three propositions. page 38 Why Christ took our infirmities, five reasons.
page 39 Infirmities of Christ differ from ours in six things. page 40 Induction
to prove all things subjected to Christ's word. page 242 Infallible Judge of
controveres the holy Scriptures, four reas. page 157 Incompetent Judges of
controversies obtruded by the Church of Rome. four. page 158 Instance of Satan
to draw us to evil, must make us more instant in good. page 182 Instances of
Satan's false conclusions in matter of faith, three, of practice, nine. page 66
Instances in four kinds of temptations, how to use the word against Satan. page
81 Instances of many men, whose obedience is no better than that of Devils.
page 249
L.
TO know a man led by the Spirit, three rules. page 12 Christ comes led of the
Spirit, Satan comes of himself. page 49 Liberties of religion are better
prized in their absence than in their presence. page 117 The more light of
grace the Lord bestows on his children, the more does the darkness of the
world fight against it. page 102 Life of a Christian a continual intercourse of
peace and trouble, four reasons. page 251 Love of the world easily makes a man
a prey and spoil of Satan, five reasons, page 192 To pull our hearts from the
love of the world, five means. page 195 Four other considerations to the same
purpose. page 194 Lying is the Devils mother tongue. page 65 A Looking-glass
for Liars. page 202 Lying a hateful sin, for three reasons. ibid.
M.
MAgistrates, governors not of men only, but of Christians. page 215 Man
tempts God two ways. page 20 Man tempts man three ways. ibid. Man tempts
himself two ways. ibid. Manner of Christ's temptation external, four reasons.
page 48 Not to be present at Mass, with pretense of keeping the heart to God,
five reasons. page 225 Mean estate best, three reasons. page 5 Means of
fortifying faith, four. page 56 Means to confirm to a man's self his own
adoption, three. page 60 To use unlawful means to help our selves Diabolical,
three reasons. page 61 Means to fence us against Satan's wicked inferences,
three. page 67 Means not sufficient to sustain the life of man, in six
instances, and five reasons. page 87 Means not to be set above their place.
page 89 Means not to be neglected where they are, three reasons. ibid. Better
to want means than to enjoy such as proceed not out of the mouth of God. page
99 Means to raise our selves being cast down, four. page 136 To sin against
means fearful in things 1 Spiritual: 2 Temporal. page 143 Means to partake of
the Angels ministry, three. page 155 Means of nourishing confidence in God,
four. page 178 Meekness of Christ to Satan himself, five reasons. page 72
Ministers must be very watchful over their people, because of the tempter.
page 46 Wicked Ministers hinder some comfort, but not all efficacy from the
Sacrament. page 108 To conceive of dumb Ministers, five grounds. page 109
Modesty in speaking of our selves commended in Christ's example. page 74 Motives
to avoid slandering, five. page 18 Motives to out-stand temptations, three.
page 27 Motives to stir up one another to good, four. page 47 Mountains about
Jerusalem, seven. page 186 Mountain chosen for the third temptation, three
reasons. page 184 No mountains to be wished but Gods holy mountain. page 186
N.
DIfference of Names or Numbers, must not make us suspect error in the
Scripture, but our own ignorance. page 171
O.
OBjections for Usury answered. page 96 Objections for Sabbath-breaking. page
97 Chief Objections of the separation answered. page 108 Objections to prove
Christ on the pinnacle only in vision, answered. page 122 Objects of Senses,
five warrantable. page 189 In opposition of good men and good things, consider
five things. page 102 Ordinances of God not to be meddled with without due
respect and reverence: as 1 Word: 2 Oath: 3 Lots. page 113 Conditions of sound
obedience, four. page 247 Cheerful obedience, four things. page 248 Outward
things make neither happy nor unhappy, four reasons. page 59
P.
Pinnacle of the Temple chosen for the second temptation by Satan, four reasons.
page 118 No place in the world free from temptation. page 13 Places of Gods
worship to be reverently esteemed and used. page 113 No place longer holy than
God and his worship are present. page 114 Satan usually sits his temptation
to the place, or the place to his temptation, three reasons. page 118 Places of
probable peril and danger to be avoided especially, of four sorts. page 119 Men
in highest places are in greatest danger of falling, three reasons. page 184
The higher the Pinnacle a man stands on, the more busy Satan is to cast him
down. page 134 Satan helps men up to the Pinnacle, only to cast them down
again. page 135 The Pope puts down the Devil in boasting. page 203 Power of
Christ unresistable by all the Devils in Hell, four reasons. page 241 Power of
Christ is of his Office and Essence. ibid. They differ in three things. ibid.
Popes have erred in matters of faith. page 162 Fight marks of the mighty power
of Christ in us. page 244 Power of Christ frustrateth Satan's greatest
advantages. page 124 Power of Satan over the bodies of men great, God
permitting him. page 125 Prayer to be made for Governors especially, why. page
185 Presence of God in his Word and Worship makes places holy, three reasons.
page 106 Satan ordinarily tempts to presumption, four reasons. page 129 Most
dangerous presumption is in spiritual things, as in six instances. page 131
Presumption in things temporal to be avoided, in four instances. page 132
Privilege of Gods children because of the Angels. page 154 A singular
privilege of the Church to have so perfect a direction as the Scripture. page
87 Privilege of the godly to find God sweet to their souls in trials, or after
them, four reasons. page 260 Properties of such as to whom Christ will reveal
himself, three. page 77 All promises and threats in Scripture conditional,
although the condition be not ever expressed. page 170 All promises of Satan
are miserable, soul, and deceitful, five reasons. page 195 Promises of God
differ from the Devils, how. page 196 Profers of Satan all upon some wicked
condition or other. page 203 Miserable men that accept of Satan's profers, four
instances. page 206 Public persons must especially watch against two things.
page 4 Public persons must be above other careful of Gods glory. page 215
Q.
QVestion, How could Christ be safe among wild beasts. page 28 How could Christ
be hungry, being able to feed so many miraculously. page 38 Why Christ took not
all infirmities of every particular man, three reasons. page 39 Why Satan is so
restless in tempting, three reasons. page 45 Whether Christ's temptations were
in inward motion or external. page 48 Why Christ seeing he could, would not
turn stones into bread, five reasons. page 74 How to conceive the Word of God
by which he governs and preserves the Ceatures. page 92 Whether St. Matthew
or St. Luke, observe the right order of the temptations, seeing they differ.
page 100 Whether a man may pray or communicate with an evil man, or with a
wicked or dumb minister. page 108 Whether a man may hear the Word with profit
and blessing from a wicked man. page 110 Whether Christ was indeed on the
pinnacle, or in vision. page 121 How Satan a Spirit, could carry Christ his
body, five considerations. page 123 Whether Jonathans action, who with his
Armor-bearer only set on a whole army of enemies, was presumption. page 130
Why did not Satan Cast down Christ, but says, Cast thy self down, three
reasons. page 137 How Satan is said to fill Ananias his heart, Acts 5.3. page
141 Whether it be not lawful to ask a sign. page 174 How Satan can prevail to
bring men to worship himself in stead of God, ways, and means. page 207, etc.
Whether we may present our selves at Mass, thinking to keep our hearts to
God. page 225 Whether on no occasion we may be present at Mass. page 227
Whether the Prophet gave Naaman leave to be present at Idolatry. page 228
R.
REasons why our Savior would not yield to the last temptation, five. page 210
Receive nothing from the Devils hand, three reasons. page 205 Redemption free
to us, cost Christ dear. page 124 Religion set up, or held up by bad means is
wicked, as the Romish. page 202 Representation of Satan quick and short, three
reasons. page 187 Restlesness in evil an express image of the Devil. page 180
Strong resistance of Satan makes him fly, four reasons. page 235 Means of
resisting Satan, five. page 238 Manner of resistance in five things. page 239
Reverence in Gods worship urged, six reasons. page 229 Riches must not have our
hearts, four reasons. page 98 Romish teachers disarming men of the Scriptures,
confuted by five reasons. page 79 Romish doctrine Idolatrous, proved at large.
page 222 Rules of resisting Satan's temptations, three. page 37 Rules to know
when the tempter comes, two. page 50 Rules to confirm the heart in the love of
God, not withstanding outward crosses, three. page 60 Rules to sense us from
using unwarrantable means of our good, four. page 63 Rules to avoid seduction
by Separatists, four. page 111 Rules to uphold our selves when Satan would cast
us down, three. page 71 Rules to try whether a Scripture be wrested, seven.
page 165 Rules of trial whether our obedience be beyond that of the Devils,
four. page 250 Rules to carry our selves free from infection of sin in all
places where we come, three. page 120
S.
Sabbath Breakers cast by Gods word, notwithstanding all their pleas. page 97
Sacrament may be received where open offenders are tolerated. page 103 To
Sanctify a man's person, he must set up Gods worship in his heart. page 112
The word Satan used by Christ in the last temptation, four reasons. page 213
Satan cannot hinder Gods Children of salvation, he may of comfort. page 3
Satan's mouth may be stopped, but not his malice. page 4 Satan an accuser, three
reasons. page 16 Satan tempts, two ways. page 21 May allure us, cannot force
us. page 22 Ever takes us at the weakest, three reasons. page 42 Comes to a
man, two ways. page 48 Assayleth the Son of God knowing him so to be, four
reasons. page 50 Aims at four things in his first temptation. page 51 In
tempting directly opposes the word of God, five reasons. page 52 Satan the
most eminent and dangerous tempter, four reasons. page 45 Seeks ever to
blemish the good he cannot hinder. page 63 Infers mischievous conclusions
upon true premises, four reasons. page 64 Never comes without some stone or
other. page 70 Allows his servants, stones for bread. ibid. Seeks chiefly
to draw them to sin who have most means against it, four reasons. page 140 Can
tempt, but not force us to sin, five reasons. page 137 His subtilties to be
watched, six instances. page 128 Can allege Scripture to thrust forward his
wicked purposes five reasons. page 144 Alleges Scripture three ways. page 145
Is not content that men sin, unless they do it most sinfully. page 141 In one
allegation of Scripture out of Psalm. 91.11. he hides eight faults. page 147
Never overcome without resistance. page 240 Scriptures being our Weapon, we
must always have them in readiness. page 80 Scriptures the hammer of
Heresies, as in six instances. page 85 Scriptures how abused to establish
errors in doctrine, five instances. page 149 In practice, in many. page 151
Scriptures no dumb, but speaking Judge. page 158 Scriptures conferred in
parallel places. page 166 Scriptures collated in unlike places and reconciled,
in twenty five instances. page 167 Scripture most aptly alleged by Christ.
page 172 Some Scriptures fitter for some to meditate on, than others. page 173
Security must be watched against, after temptation foiled, five reasons. page
180 Senses must be diligently kept, and four rules for the right ordering of
them. page 188 Service of God must be ruled wholly by God, for 1 matter, 2
manner, 3 end. page 231 Service of God twofold, 1 Legal, 2 Evangelical. page
229 Of Service Evangelical, three conditions. page 230 Service of God must be
cheerful, three reasons. page 232 Marks of a good servant of God, five. ib.
Means to be preserved from the service of Satan, five. page 209 A sign may be
asked in four cases. page 174 Five vain ends of asking a sign. page 175 Three
sins above other, make men most like the Devil. page 181 Sins of Jerusalem, the
sins of England, five instances. page 115 Sins of this age fearfully aggravated
by our means of grace. page 142 Soul lives by Gods word four ways. page 90
Solitary places fittest for temptation, two reasons. page 14 Directions for
solitariness, four. page 16 Spirit of God led Christ into the Wilderness,
three reasons. page 8 Spirits created, of three sorts. ibid. Sundry sorts of
men snared by Satan, in seeking unlawful courses to help themselves. page 62 To
turn stones into bread an ordinary temptation. How and wherein. page 68 Sundry
sorts of men to whom Christ never reveals himself. page 76
T.
TEmple of Jerusalem described, with the several Courts, and their contents.
page 104 Temptation not a sign of Gods hatred, but of the Devils. page 7
Temptations all of them appointed and limited by God, two reasons. page 9 It
was not against the holiness or power of Christ to be tempted. page 21 Christ
being tempted was without sin, how, in three grounds. ibid. Of Temptations,
three degrees. page 22 Greatest temptation, not to be tempted. ibid.
Temptations manfully to be resisted, three motives. page 24 Being tempted look
up to Christ tempted, for 1 salvation, 2 imitation. page 25 By lesser
Temptations Satan makes a way to greater, four reasons. page 36 Where Satan
begins Temptation, we must begin resistance. page 37 To tempt any to evil a
fearful sin. page 47 The first Temptation of Christ, was not to gluttony, as
Papists, two reasons. page 51 No temptation, no faith. page 56 Eight things
slily couched in the first temptation. page 68 In the second temptation Satan
aims at five things. page 126 Satan tempting seeks to bring men to
extremes, five reasons. page 127 Satan can tempt and persuade, but not force us
to sin, five reasons. page 137 Temptations armed with Scripture most dangerous.
page 149 Men tempt God, in 1 judgment: 2 affection: 3 actions. page 173 God
actually tempted, four ways. page 175 To tempt God dangerous, four reas. page
176 Five sorts of Tempters of God. page 177 How men tempt God in matters, 1 of
soul, ibid. 2 of body: three ways. page 178 Tempters of themselves, as if
there were no Tempter. page 45 Christ abides the whole temptation to the end,
four reas. page 234 God suffers his children to be vexed with long and
strong temptations, three reas. page 236 Gods children shall outstand all
temptations, four reas. page 235 A sober use of humane testimonies in Sermons
not unlawful. page 162 Men thrust from God by Satan. page 209 God has sundry
ways threatened this land of late years. page 255 Greatest trials of the godly
cannot make them unhappy, four reas. page 261 To try spirits alleging
Scripture, four rules. page 145 Holy times, as the Sabbath, not to be
profaned. page 114
V
Unjust getting of earthly things accursed three ways. page 94 All the voice
of Satan is, Cast thy self down. page 159 Usurers live not by Gods word, but
against it. page 95
W
TO watch over our weakness, five notable rules. page 43 Five sorts of persons
fail in the watch over their senses. page 153 Many warnings of God to Jerusalem
and England. page 116 Wild beasts, why Christ was with them, four reas. page
28 Wealth becomes ours, and rightly used four ways. page 98 God never brings
his children into the wilderness of temptation, but first fits them with
sufficient grace, four reas. page 26 Will of man moved two ways. page 138 A
principal wile of Satan to overthrow men by Scripture, four reas. page 160
Witches and seekers to them condemned, three reas. page 63 Wicked men by no
means lay aside their malice to Gods children, four reas. page 101 Wicked men
are loath to be compared to the Devil, but are sometimes worse. page 103 Word
written a principal weapon of the Christian soldier, five reas. page 77 Word
is then used aright, when temptations are cut off by it, three reas. page 81
The Word cutteth off temptations to despair, in six instances. 82. to
presumption in eight instances, 83. to pride in five instances, 84. to
injustice, six instances. ibid Only Gods word, but every word of God,
preserves the life of man, four reasons page 90 Word of God susteineth us, 1
above all means, three ways. 91. 2 without all means. ibid. 3 against all
means. ibid. Word of God made the air light without the Sun, and the earth
fruitful without rain. page 92 Word of God from an evil man, may be heard
with blessing to a good man, four reas. page 110 To hear or read the word
religiously, four rules. page 146 Satan seldom so good as his word, three
reas. page 197 Worship is twofold. 1 Civil: 2 Divine: both of them twofold.
page 218 Worship civil, and religious, differ in five things. page 220 Worship
Civil, is grounded in Divine. ibid Worship religious due to God only, five
reasons. page 221 Six means by which Satan prevails to set up the worship of
himself. page 208
AN EXPOSITION UPON Peter's Sermon BEFORE CORNELIUS: Which was the first
general Calling OF THE GENTILES: OR, JAPHETS First Public Persuasion INTO SEMS
TENTS.

BY Thomas Tailor, D.D. Preacher of Gods Word at Aldermanbury, London.

LONDON, Printed for A. K. and R. I. and are to be sold by Elisha Wallis at the
Golden Horse-shooe in the Old-Bayley. 1659.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir JAMES ALTHAM, Knight, one of the Barons of his
Majesty's Court of Exchequor; AND Sir CHARLES MORRISON, Knight Baronet, TWO
Worthy Justices and Magistrates of the Town of Watfort in Hartfordshire:
Grace, Peace, and abundance of all Blessings accompanying Salvation.
Right Worshipful,
LEt it stand with your pleasures, whom one profession of Religion toward God,
and execution of Justice toward man, whom one near Neighborhood, and one near
affection combine, to be conjoined also in this Dedication: wherein, as my
desire is to manifest my dutiful respect of you both, so also to entreat your
favorable construction and acceptance of this my presumption: whereof I want
not just reasons, whether I look upon you jointly, or severally. Your joint
government under which we the Inhabitants of this Town of Watford enjoy our
public peace, binds all of us, wherein we may, to testify our thankfulness
for so great and public a good. God might govern the World (if he pleased) by
himself immediately, yet he commits it to Magistrates and Rulers, both
supreme and delegates; whom he honors with an high style, calling them
Assistants to him that rules the whole earth, Zach. 4.14. yea the shields of
the earth, Psalm. 47.9. to bear off wrongs and evils from men. The boughs of
this fair tree of Magistracy (as in that sacred emblem) are shelter for all,
and the fruit meat for all, Dan. 4.7.17. And the weilding of so stately an
Ordinance, is not to be committed, but to fit and qualified persons, as they
are described by Jethro to Moses, by four most worthy properties, Exodus 18.21.

First, they must be men of courage, stout to undergo all the parts of their
calling. How fit a virtue this is for a Magistrate, will appear, if we
consider, 1 The good and godly in the hand, Romans 13.3. who are to be encouraged
and praised in well-doing by their Rulers: which will never be, if a man be
afraid to be seen, or be timorous, as Nicodemus was, who would fain be with
Christ, but cast himself into the night, as though that had been a work of
darkness. Moses for his courage was called Pharaohs God, he told Pharaoh to his
face, he would not leave an hoof behind him, that Pharaoh himself stood in awe
of him. 2 The wicked, who are stout in their wickedness; and sin is with them
as bold as an Harlot, as Solomon speaks. Now the Magistrate, with Job, must
bestirre himself, and cloth himself with zeal and courage, that the young men
may hide themselves, and the old rise up at his presence, Job 29.8. whereas an
irreligious mildness and remissness, strengthens the hands of the ungodly. 3
The wicked one, even Satan himself, who emboldneth offenders against the
chiefest Ordinances of God, I mean Magistracy, and Ministry, to bring them into
contempt, and so bring in all confusion into the earth.

Secondly, they must be men fearing God, and they are specially called upon to
kiss the Son of God, Psalm 2. For, 1 Gods fear is the beginning of wisdom, and
who should be wise, if not Magistrates, to judge and discern of the most
difficult cases amongst men? 2 If he fear not God, he will fear the face of
man, and so accept of persons condemned, Deuteronomy. 1.17. 3 He must herein assist
the Lord himself in planting the fear of God in all his government. Cyrus must
perform not his own, but all the Lords desire: he must say to Jerusalem, thou
shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundations shall be surely laid, Isa.
44.28. Every Christian Magistrate must be a Nursing Father to the Church* and
here begin his government, as Moses, with celebrating the Passover, Exodus 12.
Joshua, with renewing Circumcision, Joshua 5.7. Gideon, with destroying Baal,
Judge. 6. David, with establishing the Ark; Solomon, with building Gods house,
Asa, with renewing the Lords Altar. And whereas many inferior Magistrates look
on, whilst this care slippeth into other men's hands; yet must they all know,
that they are Gods Vicegerents, and the judgment is Gods, that is, from God,
and for God: and therefore they must not only cut off Thefts, Murders,
Adulteries, and such barbarous outrages, and ryots against public peace and
humane society; but Blasphemies, Heresies, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and such
sins as more directly oppose God and his Worship: and these will the fear of
God, where it is, especially hunt out. This was the grace that made Nehemiah
seek the wealth of Israel, by making the Princes swear to Gods Covenant: this
made him almost forget himself in zealous revenge against the Sabbath Breakers:
all Jerusalem could not maintain this one sin against that one godly Magistrate.

Thirdly, Magistrates must be men dealing truly. 1 Affecting sincerity, truth,
and justice, which are the very sinews of humane society. 2 Effecting it, by
taking true pains, that the truth of every cause may be sifted out, Exodus 23.6.
and receive a true sentence, that the poor may not be born down with power and
greatness, nor go away in a good cause disappointed, Deuteronomy. 16.20. 3 Opposing
with all their strength, whatsoever is opposite unto truth: not suffering the
truth to be clouded and veiled by flourishing pleas, or shows of truth: but
resembling God, whose Judgment Seat is said to be a throne of whit^ Ivory,
Optima respub quae maxim leges minime ^hetore^ ^ndiat.
for the purity and innocence both of the Judge and Judgment, before which
every secret shall one day be set in a clear light.

Fourthly, They must be men hating covetousness. For, 1 a public person must
seek the public good, and not be privately minded, or self-seeing. 2 He will
then hate gifts, which blind the wise, and pervert the words of righteousness:
Now what a fearful inversion of Gods order were it, if he who is set up to
execute judgment, should pervert it? 3 He is in place, wherein (if he be
corrupt) he may help himself by the damage of others: but who should hinder
the confusion that would flow in as a deluge, if the means ordained by God to
help the oppressed, should be corrupted to help forward oppression? Now such a
man thus qualified, Jethro thought sit to be set over thousands, and over
hundreds; over fifties, and over tens. To this serve those ancient Ceremonies
used among Gods own people, in the installing of their governors: example
whereof we have in Joash, 2 Kin. 11.12. whom when Jeho^adah had set into the
right of his Kingdom, they did three things unto him.

1 They crowned him with a Crown of pure gold, set with Pearls and precious
Stones: and these signified both the integrity of his Person, and the
incorruption of his manners.

2 They gave him the book of the testimony: the book showed that wisdom is
meet for a Ruler: and that it was the book of the Testimony, shows, that 1
The most necessary wisdom for a Magistrate, is the wisdom of God: 2 That he
must judge by Gods Book and directions, and therefore must be learned in Gods
Laws, and skilful in the cases of Gods Statute-book: and 3 The Book was given
him, that he might keep and preserve it, and see the contents of it observed in
others: for he is a keeper of both the Tables.

3 They anointed him, to signify the power and gifts of courage, magnanimity,
and other ornaments sit to attend Magistracy. And indeed it notably preserves
the honor of this Ordinance, when the person executing it, is as eminent in
gifts and graces, as in place, and pre-eminence. I take not upon me to teach
your Worships how to govern, but only declare how the Lord would every way have
this Ordinance of his, and the bearers of it honored, and what be the special
ornaments which draw the eyes, and reverent respect of inferiors upon you.

Now more severally, your gravity (Reverend Judge) your humanity, your equity
in the just and unpartial carriage of causes, your zeal against vice and
vicious persons, who gladly decline your censure, your diligent frequenting the
house of God, your care of promoting the pure Worship of God, which you
witness by your new erection dedicated thereunto, have got you a worthy and
due regard through all our Country, wherein though I be but a stranger, yet
must he be more strange that meets not with the report of your virtues. And
you noble Knight (whom I have known of longer time) will give me leave to
conceal a great part of that I conceive of your worth. You do well to imitate
your worthy Parents, one of whom has left you with a fair inheritance, a
pattern (as I have heard) of many virtues, from which you may not depart: the
other, God has yet left unto you, to follow you with motherly advice and
counsel, to set before you still the best Patterns: but above all, the glass of
Gods word, the reverent observation whereof, if you add to the other excellent
endowments of your mind, person, and estate, you shall give a number of your
years and rank leave to come behind you, and follow you ^farre off, whilst your
Country shall be reaping the increase, and your self the comfort of those
hopeful seeds which every one that know you, acknowledge with gladness in you.

Thus humbly craving pardon for my boldness, I commend this Book to your
Worships acceptance, which for the whole argument (containing a plain unfolding
of the most grounds and main pillars of our Religion) is worthy your respect;
and your selves, with your virtuous Ladies, and hopeful Children, together with
all your studies and endeavors for the Church or Commonwealth, to the rich
blessing of God: who fill your hearts with heavenly wisdom, and preserve you
both blameless till his appearing, Amen.

Your Worships to be commanded, THOMAS TAILOR.
Watford, July 20.
AN EXPOSITION UPON S. Peter's Sermon BEFORE CORNELIUS.
ACTS 10.34, etc.
Verse. 34. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that
God is no accepter of persons:

35 But in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him.

36 Ye know the word which God has sent to the children of Israel, preaching
peace by Jesus Christ, which is Lord of all:

37 Even the word which came through all Judea, beginning in Galilee, after the
baptism which John Preached.

38 To wit, how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with
power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
Devil: for God was with him.

39 And we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land of the
Jews, and in Jerusalem: whom they slew, hanging him on a tree.

40 Him God raised up the third day, and caused that he was showed openly:

41 Not to all the people, but unto the witnesses chosen before of God, even to
us which did eat and drink with him, after he arose from the dead.

42 And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that he is
ordained of God a judge of quick and dead.

43 To him also give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, all that
believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.


THe occasion of this worthy Sermon (breathed not only by an Apostolic spirit
but from such an instrument also as was worthily accounted a Pillar of the
Church, Gal. 2.9.) is laid down in the former verse, which contains an
abridgement of the most of the Chapter going before; included in these three
points.

1 Cornelius his obedience, in sending for Peter: Then, that is, having so good
a ground, even a Commandment from God by the ministry of an Angel, verse. 5. I
sent for thee to Joppa (which was somewhat above thirty miles from Caesaria):
Immediately, as soon as ever I had received the Commandment, Cyprian.
without delay, yea, or deliberation, which being dangerous, divine things
admit not of.

Secondly, his kind entertainment of Peter to encourage him, and thou have well
done to come.

Thirdly, his preparation and readiness of himself and his, to heat whatsoever
God by Peter's ministry shall enjoin them: Now therefore we all; he would
have that holy doctrine communicated to his family, friends, and kinsfolks: here
present before God, the place of Gods pure worship is the place of his
presence: to hear, with attention, understanding, affection, and obedience; for
all these go to the hearing ear: all things, for that is sound obedience which
is universal to one Commandment as well as another: every one being of like
authority and necessity: that are commanded thee of God; for Peter himself m^st
be confined within his Commission, and speak only what God commands;
neither are hearers bound to receive any thing else.

The Apostle Peter by this speech, perceiving both the occasion and scope of
their meeting, as also the readiness and attention of his hearers, addresseth
himself to speech; Then Peter opened his mouth, and said.

The phrase of opening the mouth some think to be but a more full kind of
speech* Pleon^smus.
as we say, I heard it with mine ears; or, I saw it with mine eyes. But we
must conceive it rather to be fetched from the Hebrews, who in this form of
speech signifye, not the uttering of any trivial or vulgar matter; or in a
slight or careless manner: but the relation of some excellent matter of great
moment, and that in grave and serious manner; and not without premeditation and
preparation, such as is fit to attend things of worth and weight. Thus is it
used, Psalm. 78.2. I will open my mouth in a Parable, I will declare sentences
of Old: Job 33.1. Behold I have opened my mouth; my tongue has spoken in my
mouth: my words are in the uprightness of my heart, and my lips shall speak
pure knowledge. Yea, our Lord Jesus himself, when he begun his most heavenly
Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 5.2. is said to open his mouth, and say.

Whence, 1 we have the Doctrine in the Sermon following commended unto us, to
be for the matter of it grave, and high, and nearly concerning the salvation of
men: wherein are laid down the main grounds of all Religion, and whatsoever we
are to believe concerning Christ unto salvation, as we shall see when we come
to open the several points.

2 We are secretly incited, that seeing the Holy Ghost has opened the mouth
of such a worthy instrument, we are also to open our ears, yea, our hearts, to
let in the matter following, that as it proceeded out of the treasury of a good
and sanctified heart, so we also may hide it in good hearts, as in good
treasures, to bring it forth as our needs and occasions shall require.

3 Ministers must come with their mouths open, and not only not to be dumb
dogs which cannot, or seal up their lips and will not protest against the sins
of the times but also must have care to speak the words of wisdom, judgment,
sobriety: for if the holy men of God, Prophets, Apostles, nor the Son of God
himself did not preach without preparation and due consideration, both of what,
how, and to whom they spoke, how much more should ordinary ministers use all
diligence in fitting themselves to speak from God, and for God, and even as God
himself would speak to his people?

4 Every Christian may hence also take up his duty; namely, that he never open
his mouth but to edification: For it is attributed to every just man, that his
mouth speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment, Psa. 37.30. he
judges of his speeches before he let them pass the doo^ of his lips: and of
the virtuous woman it is said, She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the law
of grace is in her tongue, Prove. 31.26.

Now the Sermon following consists of three parts. The parts of the Sermon,
three.


The first is an entrance or preface, in the two first verses, 34, 35.

2 The Proposition or Narration; that Jesus Christ was the Messiah now
exhibited in the flesh, and Lord of all, verse. 36.

3 A confirmation of that narration, partly from the Apostles; and partly from
the Prophets witness. 1 For the Apostles, they witnessed of such facts of
Christ as argued him, First, a Prophet, verse. 37, 38. Who went about doing
good, and healing, etc. for these Miracles served to confirm his heavenly
doctrine. Secondly, a Priest, verse. 39. Whom they sl^w, and hanged on a tree:
which notes his sacrifice. Thirdly, a King, proved by three Arguments: 1 By
his rising from death, verse. 40, 41. 2 By sending out his Apostles to preach,
v. 42. 3 By his coming to judge all flesh, ver. 42.

2 The same truth is confirmed by the witness of all the Prophets: ver. 43. In
the Preface Peter makes way unto his Doctrine three ways.

1 By removing from himself an imputation of levity, and sudden change of his
mind, which might otherwise have been objected against him; for all men knew
that he being a Jew had been very respective, lest at any time he should come
near an Heathen or Gentile (such as Cornelius and his company were) for so it
appears by his answer in the Vision, ver. 14. yea and after his vision he was
full of doubts whether he might adventure into their company, till the Lord
adds to his vision, a voice; bidding him go in to Cornelius, doubting nothing,
verse. 20. Peter therefore most ingenuously in the first place acknowledges an
error that had stuck by him: namely, in accounting now after Christ's death and
Resurrection (whereby he brake down all partition walls) such as were
uncircumcised, an unclean company, and like Dogs and Swine to whom holy things
might not be cast and offered.

2 That the Lord had removed this error, manifestly teaching him, both by
vision and voice, that his grace did now extend it self over all sorts of men;
and therefore that he came not of his own head, moved by remerity, or rashness;
but upon good ground, to teach even the Gentiles the mysteries of their
salvation.

3 He gets not audience only and attention, but authority also to his Doctrine;
by showing what a good conceit he had of Cornelius and his company; that he had
not now to deal with profane, and lewd persons, but such as the Lord had
sanctified to himself, according to the vision and voice, What or whom the Lord
has sanctified, account not thou profane, verse. 15.

Whence, 1 We have in this holy man a Map of Humane frailty, Observe. 1. A Map
of humane frailty in the Apostle.
in which we may see how heavy the best are to their duties: for was it not
long before given Peter in charge to teach the Gentiles? was not his commission
large enough, when among other Disciples he was dismissed by Christ himself to
teach, not only the Nations, but all Nations. Had not he heard often from the
mouth of Christ, and read in the Writings of the Prophets, that the Gentiles
must be called in, that the Tents of the Church must be enlarged, her
Curtains stretched out, and that their own sound must go over all the world?
yet Peter had forgotten all this; and as though Christ had not been come, or as
if himself had never conversed with him, he would still uphold the difference
of peoples which his Mr. had destroyed, confine salvation to the Jews only, as
if Christ had not been a common Savior of Jews and Gentiles; he must have new
visions, and voices, to lift him up to his duty, or else he cannot be brought
so much as to acknowledge it.

Let us look upon this example to condemn our own corruption by it, yea to
watch over it; lest following (as we are too prove) the stream of it, we be
carried away from the most essential duties, which by our calling, either
general, or particular, are by God enjoined us. Let the Popish guides also look
upon this example, and tell us whether Peter erred not, 1 In judgment. 2 After
Christ's promise. 3 In a weighty matter; forgetting his commission, and calling,
yea, and the calling and salvation of the whole body of the Gentiles; all which
he sailed in. And then whether it be a sound ar^und, upon Peter's person, or any
promise made to him, to build their Popes immunity and freedom from error in
matter of faith, so long as he siteth in Peter's pretended chair.

Secondly, In that the Apostle Peter secretly implies an acknowledgement of
his error, A pattern of special grace in the same Apostle.
We have in him a worthy pattern of a special grace to be practiced of us all;
namely, upon better grounds, to lay aside any error in judgment, or practice,
although never so long held, or stiffly maintained of us before; and not be
ashamed to profess that we so do: which virtue is a sound fruit of humility,
and argues a good heart, which is in love with the truth for it self; and
esteems it above his own estimation: the observing whereof would cut off
infinite controversies which could never be carried and continued with such
burning heat in the Church of God, if the contention were not many times more
for victory, than for truth; and rather lest error should be acknowledged,
than that truth should triumph over it.

Thirdly, In this Preface every Minister is taught, wisely to cut off and
remove such le^s, as might hinder his doctrine among his Hearers; and
contrarily to win by all good means such credit to his person, as that he may
preserve a reverent estimation of himself in the hearts of his people. So did
the Apostle here, and not without cause; seeing the acceptance of the person of
a Minister, is a great furtherance for the entertainment of his doctrine, not
that the faith of God ought to be had in respect of persons; but because man's
weakness carries him beyond his duty herein.

And again, Satan and his instruments seek exceptions against their persons,
whose doctrine is without exception: well knowing, that where the person is not
first received, hardly will any doctrine from him be embraced, Matthew. 10.14.
He that receives not you, nor your words. Whence the Apostle Paul was
constrained to be much and often in the justifying of his person, calling, and
conversation; because to hinder his doctrine, the false Apostles by all these
labored to bring him into contempt. Nay our Lord Jesus himself was forced
often to aver his person to be Divine, his calling to be heavenly, and his
conversation holy and without sin: because the Jews were ever hence disgracing
his doctrine, because of the meanness of his appearance. Now whosoever would
retain reverence and authority among his people, must show forth, 1 Conscience
of his duty. 2 Love to his peoples souls and bodies. 3 A wise and unblameable
carriage and conversation: these things if he do not, he has more disgraced
himself, than his people can.

Of a truth, I perceive that God accepts not of persons.

By person, is not here meant the substance of man, or the man himself: but the
outward quality, appearance, or condition, which being offered to the eye, may
make a man more or less respected; such as are wealth, honor, learning,
parentage, beauty, or such like, here called the face of a man: for which God
accepts not, nor rejects any man, Job 34.19. He accepts not the persons
of Princes (says Elihu) nor regards the rich more than the poor, they being
all the work of his hands. And applied to the Apostles purpose, is as if he had
said, I now indeed clearly perceive, that the Lord has no respect of any
dignity, or privilege in any people, above another, that he should pour his
grace upon one more than another, upon the Jew above the Gentile; Why God
accepts not of persons.
upon the circumcision above the uncircumcision; upon the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh, above the rest of the Nations and Kindreds throughout
the world. Now I see that the righteous Judge of all the earth, can be no
accepter of persons. For,

1 This were to esteem men by adjuncts and qualities, Lazarus; and the proud
Pharisee before the penitent Publican.

2 This were to judge by inconstant things: for all these outward respects pass
away, as the figure of the world it self does; whereas the judgment of God is
most unchangeable, and therefore grounded on things unchangeable.

3 It were a most unequal valuation to compare, and much more to prefer things
which are in no proportion of goodness, to the things which are undervalued:
for between temporal and eternal, heavenly and earthly things can be no
proportion. 4 He which has forbidden us to judge by the false, and crooked
rule of sense, sight, reason, and such things as are before us, cannot himself
do so: both which points are plainly reproved, 1 Samuel 16.7. The Lord bids
Samuel (being to choose one of the Sons of Ishai to be King) look not on his
countenance, nor on the height of his stature: and adds this as a reason: for
God sees not as man sees; man looks on the outward appearance but the Lord
beholds the heart.

Object. But when the Lord passed by all the rest of the Nations, and chose
Abraham and his seed did he not accept persons?

Answ. That Abraham and the Israelites were chosen, the Ismalites and Heathen
rejected, was no accepting of persons: the Lord himself declares that there
was no cause at all in the people which furthered his choice of them, just
cause there was in them why he should have passed by them, as well as the
rest: for as they were the fewest of all people, Deuteronomy. 7.7. so they were the
worst, and most stiff-necked of all, Deuteronomy. 9.6. Yea, consider Abraham himself
their Father, and the Father of all the Faithful; what cause was in him that
God should set his love upon himself or his posterity, or call him out of Ur of
the Chaldaeans, where he lived in as Heathenish Idolatry, as any of the rest?
in so much as God by his Prophet puts them in mind of the pit whence they were
hewn, and tells them their Father was an Amorite, and their Mother an
H^ttite, Ezekiel. 16.3. If it be still asked, what cause then was there why this
people should above all other be chosen to partake in the Covenant of life,
the Lord himself directly answers, that there was no cause without himself
that moved him hereunto, it was only his free love, and mere good will: The
Lord loved you, because he loved you, Deuteronomy. 7.8.

Object, But when God electeth one to salvation, and rejects another, he
seems no accept of persons, for all lie alike in the same condition.

Ans. The Objection answers it self: for in that all lie alike in the same
mass, and all are corrupted, it is plain that election and reprobation depend
not upon any thing outward: for seeing matter enough to condemn all, all being
sold unto sin; and no more matter of love in those whom he chooses, than those
whom he refuses; we must needs conclude with the Apostle, that He chooses
freely whom he will, and whom he will he justly reprobateth and refuses Romans
9.18. If it be here alleged that it seems hard that those that are all equal
in Adam should be so unequally dealt with. I answer, may not the Lord do with
his own what we will? who art thou that dare dispute with God, or prescribe
Laws to thy Creator? who is it that binds him, or spoileth him of his
Sovereignty over his creatures, that he may not deal with one thus, and with an
other, another way?

Object. But when God judges men according to their works, does he not accept
of men by outward things, and did not the Lord accept persons when he
respected Abel and his sacrifice; but to Cain and his sacrifice had no respect?

Answ. God judges men according to works, but not as they are outward actions,
but as they are fruits of Faith purifying the heart, and working by love, thus
only he looks on them with acceptance: whereas be they never so many, and
glorious, without faith, he rejects them: so as still he judges by that
which is within, and not by things without, further than they testify of the
former. As for Abel, his ^ace and person was no more respected than Ca^ns, it
was the faith of his heart, the fear of God, and working of righteousness that
was accepted, and which is witnessed, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered a
greater sacrifice than Cain, by the which he obtained witness that he was
righteous. So as notwithstanding all that can be said to the contrary, it
remains an undeniable conclusion: That God is no accepter of persons.

Wh soeve^ would b^ ^^e God, mu^^ (...) accept of persons.
Use 1. If God accept not, nor reject men for outward respects, no more must
those who would be like unto him. And hence sundry sorts of men are to be
instructed in their duty. As,

1 Magistrates, who are Gods Vicegerents, and called gods, yea called by God to
execute his Judgments, must beware of respecting persons in judgment. Deuteronomy.
1.17. Moses appointing Judges over the people, sends them away with this
charge, Ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear the
small as well as the great: ye shall not fear the face of man; for the
judgment is Gods. This corruption yielded unto, makes a man say to the wicked,
thou art righteous, and lays him open, not only to the curse of God, but even
to the curse of the people, Prove. 24.24. Nay more, he makes God, so far as
lies in him, a patron of iniquity, a justifier of the wicked, a taker of the
ungodly by the hand, a condemner and punisher of the innocent: for he
pronounces sentence from God, and fastneth that upon the Lord, which the Lord
abhorres.

2 Ministers who are the mouth and Messengers of God, must take heed of this
base sin of accepting the face or persons of men; so as for fear or flattery
they hide or betray any part of the truth of God. The Herodians could say, that
Christ taught the way of God truly, because he respected not the face of man,
Mark 12.14. What a straight charge gives the Apostle Paul to Timothy, that he
should prefer no man in his ministry, and do nothing with partiality? 1 Timothy
5.21. It was a worthy commendation of Levi, that the law of truth was in his
mouth, iniquity was not found in his lips, he walked with God in peace and
equity, and so turned many from iniquity, Mal. 2.6. Whereas on the contrary,
what a wicked thing it is to preach for hire, reward, favor, and yet lean upon
the Lord: See in Micha 3.11.

3 Ordinary Professors may not accept persons. 1 Not in civil things. For when
elections, offices, and common benefits, are passed and bestowed partially for
friendship, money, kindred, favor, or entreaty: this is the ruin of all
societies, and a bringer in of all corruption: especially, when men have taken
oaths to a Corporation to the contrary, the sin is like an infolded disease
more incurable and dangerous. 2 In matters of religion much less,
notwithstanding this sin be many ways committed. As,

1 To have the faith of God in respect of persons, which the Apostle James
notes in this instance, Jam. 2.2. When a man with a gold ring, or goodly
apparel, be he never so wicked, is magnified and advanced above another, who
is not so outwardly gaudy; but inwardly arrayed with the white garments of
Christ's righteousness; and adorned with the Jewels of faith, love, holiness,
and sincerity, which the world takes little knowledge of.

2 To accept the word, because he is a man of pomp that brings it, a rich
man, or a friend: the Corinths were justly blamed for partial hearing, and
holding, some to Paul, some to Apollos, some to Cephas, 1 Cor. 3.4. who is
Paul, who is Apollos, who is Cephas, are not they all Ministers by whom ye
believe? Ahab will not hear Micah, because he hates his person, but he shall
justly fall for it at Ramoth Gilead, 1 King. 22.37.

3 To reject the profession of religion because it wants countenance, and
credit at most hands, and a few poor ones only receive it. Many Protestants can
hear us justly confute the Popish doctrine and practice; in that they embrace
their religion in respect of persons, that is, of the outward appearance of it;
because they pretend a perpetual succession, consent of Councils, defense of
Princes, antiquity, universality, the most part of Europe having generally
taken the mark of the Beast in their hands and foreheads: and yet the same men
see not how themselves are slipped into the same Popish error, that refuse one
course because it wants outward supporters and props; and choose that by which
they may swim with the stream: they hate Popery because the Laws hate it, and
love religion because it is now crowned, established, and establishes their
prosperity.

4 To disdain the persons of poor professors: which is so general, and common a
sin, as that nothing can they do or speak, but it passes much unjust censure:
nay things by them exceeding well and holily performed, are so far from being
drawn into example, as that thereby they can be traduced. Wherein yet they are
conformed unto the Son of God, the head of their profession, whose powerful
doctrine, and mighty works were carped at, and depraved, because they knew his
Father, his Mother, himself at the best but a Carpenters Son, not brought up at
study and learning. For example, how was that great work of healing a man
miraculously, so far from affecting the Jews, as that they fell very foul,
and were angry with him? and the reason is rendered by our Savior Christ, Joh.
7.23, 24. Because they judged according to the outward appearance, and not with
righteous judgment concerning him.

5 For professors themselves to look too big upon some meaner ones as they
conceive, but by the Gospel, members of Christ, and his Kingdom as well as
they: Isa. 65.1. Christ who preached to the poor as well as the rich, has
spoken to their hearts as well as their own; and has equalled them, or perhaps
made them superior in graces to the other. Now should not those that profess
God, herein resemble him, who though he be high and excellent, inhabiting
eternity, and dwell in the high and holy place; yet he looks to the humble and
lowly, yea and dwells also with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit,
Isa. 57.15. To think too basely of him whom God chooses, is to err from Gods
righteous judgment: and what can the blind world do more disgraceful to the
profession, than to pass by the graces of God as not knowing what they mean?

6 Not to speak here of Popish spirits, who seek to disgrace our Religion,
because Artificers, and simple women are (as they say) Scripturers: not
considering, that in Christ neither male nor female are rejected, Gal. 3.23.
and that God chooses even weak and foolish things to confound the wise and
mighty; and the poor ones of the world to be rich in faith, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27.

Use 2. If God accept not persons for outward respects, If outward things could
bring us into acceptance with God, we might see our hearts on them.
why should any outward thing gain our hearts, our affections, our studies;
seeing if we could gain them all, we are never the further in Gods books? Many
are ready to say, oh, God loves them; and judge themselves highly in savor,
because he suffers his light to shine upon their habitations; their hands
find out wealth, they are increased in possessions, and prospered in their
labors, peaceable in their houses without fear: therefore does pride compass
them as a chain. But with one word does the wise man shatter down all the
pillars of this foolish erection, Eccles. 9.2. No man knows love or hatred,
of all that is before them. And if outward things could commend a man to God,
Antiochus, Nebuchadnezzar, Nero, and such wicked Tyrants had been highest in
favor with him; whose feathers he plucked, whose pride he brought low, making
them spectacles of his vengeance to all the world, who for their outward
greatness had been the terrors of the world. And yet much less should these
things swell the hearts of men with pride above others, who perhaps have a
better part in Heaven than themselves. The proneness unto which sin the Lord
perceiving, he has expressly charged, that the rich man should not glory in his
riches, nor the strong man in his strength, Jer. 9.24. but, if any man glory,
let him glory in this, that he understands and knows me. All other
rejoicing is not good: that is, is hurtful and perilous; besides the vanity of
such vain boasting; common experience showing, that the higher scale is always
lightest.

We must stand naked in Gods Judgment, seeing no outward thing can commend us
to him.
Use 3. If God accept no man for outward things, then when we enter into Gods
judgment we shall appear naked, stripped of all outward respects, as birth,
riches, learning, crowns, and kingdoms; these in men's Courts are good
advocates, but before Gods Tribunal, may not plead, and cannot help. No
condition of life, no degree, no outward quality, no calling, no not the
outward calling of a Christian (if thou have no more) shall stand by thee;
stripped stark naked shall thou be; figge-leaves can hide thy shame no longer:
only the Wedding Garment can now cover thee from the consuming wrath of God. A
garment not laid with gold, silver, pearls, but straked with blood, yea dyed
red in the blood of the Lamb. The High Priest upon pain of death might never
enter into the Sanctuary, but he must first be sprinkled with the blood of
Bullocks, figuring the blood of Christ. Never dare thou to appear in the
Sanctuary of Gods holiness, without this garment of thy elder brother, in which
alone thou gettest the blessing, as Jacob gat the blessing in Esaus garments:
from this alone the Lord savoureth a savor of rest, Genesis 27.26.

Lastly, from this consideration that God is no respecter of persons, the
Apostle admonishes superiors to moderation and equal dealing with their
inferiors, Ephesians. 6.9. and inferiors to silence, and contentation under the
tough dealing of their superiors, Col. 3.25.

Verse. 35. But in every Nation, he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him.
BY a fearer of God, and worker of righteousness, is signified an upright and
truly religious man, in whom these two things must necessarily concut, as the
cause and effect, the fountain and stream, the root and fruit of pure and
undefiled religion: for under the fear of God are contained all the duties of
the first Table concerning God, and his Worship; such as are Knowledge, Love,
Faith, Hope, and such like; whence Solomon often calls it, the beginning of
wisdom, that is, of true worship or piety.

And under working of righteousness, is comprehended the observation of the
duties of the second Table: whereby the former being most of them inward, are
outwardly manifested and justified: so as under both is comprised the whole
duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is
the whole man: All those ten words wherein the Lord has included an admirable
perfection of wisdom and holiness, are here contracted into two, 1 The fear of
God. 2 The keeping of his Commandments: and therefore when the Holy Ghost in
the Scriptures would grace this or that holy man with full commendation, as it
were with his whole style, be commonly joyneth these two together, unto which
nothing more can be added: Job was a just man, fearing God, and abstaining
from evil, Job 1.8. Zachary and Elizabeth were just before God, and walked in
all the Ordinances of God without reproof, Luke 1.6.

Here two points are to be considered, 1 Who is a religious man; he that
fears God, and works righteousness. 2 What is his privilege; he is
accepted of God.

Religion is a binder, and thence has his name, for it both binds man unto
God, as the former of the points will show: as also God unto man, as the latter
declares. The former band knitting man unto God, is the fear of God, Fear of
God.
which is a peculiar gift of the Spirit of God, whereby the Regenerate fear God
for himself, not so much that they be not offended and punished by him, as
that they do not offend him. An excellent grace both in regard of the excellent
Object, and of the excellent Use of it through the whole life.

1 The right object of our fear, is God himself, who is, 1 Omnipotent, of power
to do whatsoever he will, who is able to cast body and soul into Hell, fear him,
Matthew. 10.28. 2 Omnipresent, he is all an eye, beholding our Thoughts, Words,
and Deeds, of which he is both a witness and a Judge, 3 Full of Majesty, which
even in a mortal Man strikes us with reverence. 4 Full of Grace and Bounty, we
stand in need of his Favor and Bounty every Moment, who can turn us out of all
at his pleasure. In all which respects we ought to make him our dread, Isa.
8.13. But above all in that he has been so good and gracious a Father unto us
through his Christ, we ought to fear to offend him, and so turn his love into
displeasure against us.

II. Now the Use of this Grace is manifold. As, 1 To beat down pride and
high-mindedness, against which it is a notable medicine, Romans 11.20. Be not
high-minded, but fear, Prove. 3.7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, but fear God:
this grace makes a man come low before the Lord, as Jacob fearing Esau. Genesis
33.3. Came and bowed seven times before him.

2 To cause a man to renounce, and restrain himself from sin; and therefore the
fear of God and departing from evil, are often joined together. Joseph could
not commit the sin with his Mistress, because he feared God: the Midwives
feared God, and killed not the Hebrews Children: Nehem. 5.15. Nehemiah did not
exact upon, and oppress the people, as the former Governors that were before
him, because he feared God: and whereas the wicked man's servile fear keeps
him often from open sins, but not from secret; from gross sins, but not from
smaller; and this of Pain, not of Conscience: this grace makes a man hate
Pride, Arrogance, and every evil way, Prove. 8.1, 3. never so small, and never
so secret.

3 To destroy false and fleshly fears which foil every good duty, and lay open
to many sins and judgments: Quod supra homines est time, and homines te non
terrebunt. August.
it is a property of a wicked man to fear where no fear is; and not fearing God
he fears every thing but God; the face of man, the arm of man, the Tongue of
man, whence many a man dare scarce profess Religion, or if they do, dare show
no power of it for fear of reproach and nicknames; and so come to be ranked
in the foremost band of those which march to Hell, called the fearful, Rev.
21.8. and that which they fear shall come upon them, Prove. 10.24. even disgrace
of God, of Men, and Angels. Jeroboam feared lest the people should return to
their own Master, if they should persist in the true Worship of the true God;
and so for the establishing of his Posterity, he established Idolatry; but in
the very next generation his whole race was extinct:

The Jews were afraid lest the Romans should come and take their nation; and
therefore Christ must dye: but the Romans not long after came with a powder,
and took their Nation, and so dis-peopled and dispersed them, as they could
never be gathered into a nation till this day. Pilatus multis diveratus
Calamitatibus sibi-ipsi manum intulit. Euse. lib. 2. cap. 7. Entrop. lib. 7.
hist. eccl. c. 7.
Pilate feared not God but Caesar; but he was not long after cast out of
Caesar's favor, and slew himself. Now this grace of God fenceth a man from such
fleshly fears which draw on such fearful falls and mischiefs: and preserves
him, that neither hope of promotion, nor gain, nor ease, nor favor of man, who
is but a worm, shall make him forget the Lord that spread the Heavens: this
fear, which is Loves keeper, holds the heart in the Love of God himself, of
his Worship, of his Word, of his Children, and whatsoever carries his Image;
all which without it either lie, or quickly grow as refuse wares out of request.

4 To drive away security, awake sloathfulness, provoke to watchfulness, stir
up to prayer, keep in a fitness to profit by the word, to tremble at it when
God threatens; to rejoice in the promises, as those to whom they belong: to
help us to better our selves by our afflictions, as the speech of the converted
Thief to his fellow implies, that if he had had the fear of God, he would,
being in the same condemnation, have otherwise carried himself toward Christ
than he did. And in a word, to fence the heart, which is as the marketplace
of a City, against temptation, in which special use it is called a Wellspring
of life to escape the snares of death.

By all this that has been spoken, every man that would seem religious, ought
to labor above all things for this worthy Grace, which God specially bestows
upon his Children, with whom he makes his new Covenant, Jerem. 32. I will put
my fear in their hearts never to depart from me, says the Lord. Which has
all promises belonging unto it, for a man's Self, for his Children, for this
life present, for a better, for supplies of every good, for withholding and
removing of every evil: so as whosoever fears the Lord, wants not a good
and rich treasury, such as all the Indian Mines cannot afford; yea, such as
both possesses himself, and entaileth unto his posterity, the rich blessing of
the Almighty. Blessed (says the Psalm) is the man that fears the Lord, Psalm:
128.2, 3. himself shall be mighty on earth, his Children shall be blessed
after him, his Wife shall be as a fruitful Vine: Riches and Treasure shall be
in his house, Psalm 112.3. he shall want nothing that is good; and let his
troubles be never so great, the Lord will deliver him out of them all. Here is
a Jewel worth hiding and laying up in the safest closet of the soul, even in
the midst of the heart, for there God lays it, and calls for the Heart to
make room for it: Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were such an heart in them to fear
me. Isa. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and let him be your dread.

Another bond whereby man is knit unto God, is the working of righteousness,
an immediate fruit of the fear of God. Where must be considered, 1 What this
righteousness is, and then 2 What is the working of it. For the former, To work
righteousness what it is.
This righteousness is a grace of God, whereby the believer is inclined unto
honest actions according to the prescript of Gods Law. When I say a grace of
God, I understand that righteousness whereof a man in the state of grace is by
grace made partaker; and exclude all that Original Righteousness which was set
in the nature of man by his Creation, whereby he was wholly conformable to the
Image and Righteousness of God: further, saying, that the believer is hereby
inclined to honest actions, three things are employed.

1 That this righteousness is not that imputed righteousness of Christ, which
is a most exact conformity of the humane nature of Christ with all his actions
and sufferings, performed of him in our stead, with the whole Law of God;
whereby we are wholly covered as with a Garment in the sight of God: but
rather a fruit of that, namely, that infused and inherent righteousness wrought
in the heart of every believer, by the finger of the Spirit, whereby the Image
of God is daily renewed and repaired in him, and so himself inclined to works
of righteousness, to which he is now Created, Ephesians. 4.24.

2 That the subject of this righteousness is the Believer; for all the works of
unbeleevers (whose mind and conscience are defiled, Tit. 1.15.) inward or
outward, cannot be other than sin and unrighteousness.

3 That the next efficient cause of it is lively faith, being the instrument of
the Holy Ghost, by which he begets this righteousness, wheresoever it is:
now Faith produces this righteousness in us, not as it is a^ excellent gift of
God, nor as an excellent quality in us; but only as it is a^ ^and or
instrument apprehending and laying hold upon Christ, who justifying us by his
own righteousness imputed, and by his Spirit regenerating and sanctifying our
natures, is the very proper cause of this infused and inherent righteousness.

The last words in the description [according to the prescript of Gods Law)
show, that then a work is righteous, Just agere est agere ex praescripto juris.
when it is framed according to the right rule of the Law of God, it being the
only perfect rule of all righteousness: Men's Laws are rules also, but
imperfect, and no further, yet so far bind as they are agreeable unto Gods.

II. The second point is the working of righteousness: wherein, 1 The Order. 2
The Manner.

The Order is in the words, first, To fear God, and then to work
righteousness: all the duties of love must be founded in Faith, and in the
fear of God; for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin: and the fear of God is the
very seed and life of all true obedience; which the wise man implies, when he
calls it the head and beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1.7. that look as all sense
flows from the head; so all heavenly sense and motion from the fear of the
Lord. Which shows, that many men begin at the wrong end in the matter of
their obedience: some think they do. God high service, if they come to Church,
say some prayers, hear a Sermon: things not to be dis-allowed: but know not
how far they are from pleasing God herein, because they bring not hearts
renewed with Faith and Repentance, nor souls possessed with Hope, Love, and the
true knowledge of God; without which, the Lord accounts their sacrifices but
maimed, and professes his hatred against them: others place all their Holiness
and Obedience in the works and duties of the second Table: If they be liberal
to the poor, just in their dealing, sober and civil in their conversation,
though they live in gross ignorance of God and his Word, utterly careless of
the ways and worship of God, yet conceive themselves in as good case as any
other man; which is all one as to account that man a living man who has no
head, the fear of God being to true religion, even as the head to the body of a
man: besides that they thrust the second Table into the place of the first,
inverting the order of God; yea, they pull and break asunder the two Tables,
which the Lord has so nearly conjoined.

Now for the right manner of working righteousness, it appears in these rules.

1 It sets all the rule before it, and endeavors in all, if it were
possible, The right manner of working righteousness in four things.
to fulfill all righteousness: for seeing all the Commandments of God are Truth
and Righteousness, they are all without exception to be observed. And this,
although it be necessarily implied in the Text; yet is it elsewhere
expressed, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were in them such an heart as to fear me,
and keep all my Commandments.

2 A second thing required is diligence, which must needs attend fear. How
diligent a virtue fear is, appears in Jacob, who being to meet his Brother
whom he feared, could not sleep all night: and in Abraham, who having a most
difficult Commandment, to slay his Son, yet rose early, and went three days
journey, without reasoning the matter. But what moved him hereto? surely the
Lord himself shows the true cause, Genesis 22.12. Now I know that thou fear
God, seeing thou have not spared thine only Son.

3 Delight in the works of righteousness, which also attends the fear of the
Lord, Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, he delights
greatly in his Commandments, both to think of them, to speak of them, and to
do them. Whereas the worldlings heart, speech, and affection, is taken up with
his Gain, Commodity, Rents, and income. For as the fear of God it self is not a
servile and slavish fear for punishment; no more is that obedience which
proceeds from it forced or wrung out: but as it is such a fear as delights
greatly in Gods Commandments; so the obedience is such as is offered from a
willing people, like a free will offering, which they must only offer whose
heart encourages them, and whose spirit makes them willing.

4 Continuance in working: for this is another property of the true fear of
God, that it respects not only all the Commandments, but always, Deuteronomy. 5.19.
and seeing Gods fear is to keep the heart continually, and that man is blessed
that fears always, Prove. 23.17. this inseparable fruit of it, working of
righteousness, Prove. 28.24. must never wither or fail in the godly, who are
exhorted to pass the whole time of their dwelling here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17.
to walk with God as Henoch did; and to have their conversation in Heaven,
Philip. 3.20. that is, their whole practice and course, and not a part of it
only.

Motives to the practice of righteousness.
Hence therefore is afforded another ground of exhortation, namely, that
howsoever this is not such a righteousness as wherein we can stand before Gods
Judgment Seat, not being every way answerable to the Laws perfection; yet we
want not good reason to take up the practice of it in the manner prescribed:
Seeing,

1 It is commanded by God, Psalm. 4.6. Offer to God the sacrifice of
righteousness. 2 It pleases him, and makes us also pleasing unto him: for the
former, Psalm. 11.7. The righteous Lord loves righteousness: the latter, is the
latter words of the verse in hand. 3 It makes us like him, 1 John 3.7. Little
children, he that does righteousness is righteous as he is righteous. 4 It is a
mark of our regeneration, and a fruit of faith, easier discerned than it self,
1 John 3.10. In this are the children of God known, and the children of the
Devil; He that does not righteousness is not of God. 5 Much blessing is upon
the head of the righteous (says Solomon.)

The blessing of God comes down upon him, and descends to his posterity, God
has blessed him, and he shall be blessed in his person, in his estate, in his
name, in his goods, in this life, and in the life to come. The blessing of men
also comes upon him, the loins of the poor bless him; the Church of God
blesses him; yea, turn him what way he will, the blessing of goodness
meets him every way: God gives him according to the work of his hands often
even here in this life; and if that should fail, he being marked for a member
of the Church Militant, he shall be in due time removed into the holy mountain
of Heaven; where he shall dwell who works righteousness, Psalm. 15.2. Thus
much of the description of a religious person: now of his privilege.

Secondly, the privilege of a religious man is, that a believer of any Nation
under Heaven, of any calling, sex, or condition of life, is accepted of God.
Where it may be asked,

Whether God, whose grace is most free, be bound by any thing which any man can
do, to accept of him?

I answer, a man is to be considered two ways. 1 As in the state of his corrupt
nature before his calling and conversion: and thus he has nothing worthy love,
and nothing which provokes not further hatred: here are no works which are not
wicked and stained, such a filthy puddle cannot send out one drop of sweet
water; How the person and work of a believer can be accepted of God.
not any clean thing can be brought out of such filthiness; all this while
can be no acceptance of the person, or of the work; no sight of any present
object in such a party, nor any foresight of any future faith or work whereby
the Lord can be moved to accept him: for then the freedom of his grace should
be hindered.

2 As he is converted, and now reconciled unto God, called by the Word,
regenerated by the Spirit, and having his heart purified by faith. Now the Lord
looking upon him, sees him not as he was before, all naked, and lying in his
blood and filthiness; but beholding him in the face of his Christ, he espieth
his own image upon him, yea and his own workmanship upon him; and thus comes
the person to be first accepted. And then in the second place, the work of such
a person cannot but be also pleasing unto God, not for any worthiness or
perfection in it self (for even the best work of the best man from imperfect
faith, and imperfect knowledge, is so far from meriting, as that it needs
pardon) but, 1 Because it comes from an accepted person: 2 Is a fruit of
faith: 3 A testimony of obedience unto Gods Commandment: 4 The imperfection
and stain of it is covered and wiped away with Christ's most absolute obedience.
And thus both the person, fearing God, and his working of righteousness, is
accepted of God.

Use 1. To comfort the godly poor, Comfort the godly in that God is the God of
the ^bject.
who find but strange entertainment in the world where they are strangers; who
hence learn, That as the world loves her own, so God loves and accepts his
own, in what Country, or condition soever they be: the which comfort if they
had not to sustain their hearts withal, they could not but think themselves
the most miserable of all men: so many sins they see which God may see in them,
so many temptations with which they are daily toyled, so many discouragements
without them to cast them down, or back at the least: against all which, this
one consideration shall be able to bear them up, that the eyes of the Lord are
upon them that fear him: and by these eyes he sees their wants, to supply
them; their injuries, to releeve them; their sorrows, to mitigate them; their
hearts, to approve them; and their works to accept them.

2 Those that fear God, must also be accepted, and respected of us, We must
accept them that fear God, because God himself does.
as they be of God: and it cannot be that those who love God, should not love
his Image in his children: David's delight was wholly in the Saints, and such as
excelled in virtue, Psalm. 16.3. so must we frame our judgment and practice,
to the Saints of God before us, who have made but small account of great men,
if wicked, and preferred very mean ones, fearing God, before them. Thus that
worthy Prophet Elisha, who contemned not the poor Shunamite fearing God, told
wicked Jehoram King of Israel, that if he had not regarded the presence of good
Jehosaphat, he would not so much as have looked toward him, or seen him, 2
King. 3.14. Nay, even the Lord himself has gone before us herein for example,
who for the most part respects poor and mean ones to call them to partake of
his grace, pass^^g by the great, noble, and every way more likely of respect,
if we should judge according to the outward appearance: David, the least of his
brethren, was chosen King: Gideon, the least in all his fathers house, Judge.
3.15. appointed by God the deliverer of his people: and indeed the meanest
Christian, being descended of the blood of Christ, and so nobly born, deserves
most respective entertainment in the best room of our hearts.

3 This doctrine teaches all sorts of men, to turn their course from such
earnest seeking after honors, profits, preferments, and such things, which
make men accepted amongst men, and as eagerly to pursue the things which would
bring them to be accepted of God; such as are faith, fear of God, love of
righteousness, good conscience, and the like: which things bring not only into
favor with God, but often get the approbation of men, at least so far as God
sees good for his children, Romans 14.17, 18. The kingdom of God is not meat
and drink, that is, has not such need of such indifferent things as these are,
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; those are the essential
things to be respected of all such as are the subjects of that Kingdom of
grace. And to urge the godly hereunto, mark the Apostles reason in the next
verse; for whosoever in these things serves Christ, is ACCEPTABLE unto God,
and approved of men: such a man's ways please the Lord, and then he makes his
enemies become his friends.

Verse. 36. The which word he declared, or sent, to the children of Israel,
preaching peace by Jesus Christ, which is Lord of all.
OF all other readings I follow this, not only as the plainest, but because it
most aptly knitteth this verse with the former, as a clear proof of it. For
having said, that now he knew that whosoever, whether Jew or Gentile, did now
purely worship God, according to the prescript of his Word, the same is
accepted of him: he proves this to be a truth, because it is the self same
thing which God himself had of old published to the Israelites, when he
declared unto them, that peace and reconciliation was made between God and man
by the means of Jesus Christ, who is Lord, not of any one people or Nation, but
Lord of all.

For the Apostle does not secretly oppose the ministry of Moses, and of
Christ: Moses was a Minister of the Law to the Jews only, but Christ himself,
and the Gospel, is the power of God to salvation to every believer, first to
the Jew, and then to the Grecian: and now God is not the God of the Jew only,
but even of the Gentiles also, according to that heavenly song of the Angels,
when Christ appeared to throw down that partition wall which stood between the
Jew and Gentile; wherein they ascribed not only all the glory unto God, but
proclaimed peace to all the earth. In one word, that Jesus Christ is our peace,
and Lord of all, is the scope of this whole Sermon, and of all the Prophets, as
after remains to be showed in verse. 43.

The former part of this verse has two general points to be explained: the
former, touching the peace here spoken of: the latter, concerning the preaching
or declaring of it. By peace what is meant.
In the former must be considered, 1 What this peace is: 2 How it is by Jesus
Christ. First, by peace, among the Hebrews and Greeks, is meant all prosperity
and happiness; for both of them in their salutations (though with some
difference) prayed for peace to the parties saluted, that is, all good success
from God the fountain of mercy. And includes in it, 1 Peace with God: 2 Peace
with man, both with a man's self, and others: 3 Peace with all the creatures of
God, so far forth as that none of them shall be able to hurt him further
than God thinks good for his exercise; and in this peace stands true
happiness.

2 It must be considered how this peace is by Jesus Christ, namely, according
to the former branches of it.

1 Peace with God by three things.
First he wrought our peace with God, from whom our sin had sundered and
separated us, three ways. 1 By interposing himself between his Fathers anger
and us, who durst not come near him, 2 By satisfying in our stead all his
justice through his blood; thereby removing all enmity, cancelling all
handwritings which might have been laid against us; and bestowing on us a
perfect righteousness in which God is delighted to behold us. 3 By appearing
now for us in Heaven, and making requests for us: in all which he cannot but
be heard, being the Son of his Fathers love in whom he is well pleased, and,
for him, with us his members.

2 Peace with men. 1 Others.
Secondly, he wrought peace between man and man, 1 By demolishing and casting
down the wall of separation, whereby Jew and Gentile might not accord or meddle
one with another; his death rent down the veil, that both Jew and Gentile might
look into the Sanctuary, that of two he might make one people, one body, yea
one new m^n unto himself, Ephesians. 2.13, 14.

2 By changing the fierce and cruel disposition of men, who are now become the
subjects of his Kingdom, that of Lions, and Cockatrises, they become as meek
and tractable as Lambs, and little Children: having peace so far as is possible
with all men: with the godly for Gods Image sake, and that they are members of
the same body with them: and with the wicked for Gods Commandments sake, and
because they may become members of Christ as well as they: they seek peace even
with the worst, and shall obtain it so far as God sees good: who when a man's
ways please him, does so overruled his enemies hearts, as they shall become
friendly unto him.

3 By setting every Christian at peace with himself who before had no peace, 2
With a man's self.
but now has obtained 1 Peace of Conscience; when his Conscience being
p^rswaded of his reconciliation with God through Christ, it cease to wound,
and accuse, and begins to excuse, and comfort; and so brings quietness
and tranquillity of mind into the soul, which passes understanding. 2 Peace
in his will and affections, which by grace cease to be rebellious, and become
daily more pliant to the Commandment, and obedient to the mind enlightened by
the Spirit. 3 Peace in Christian combat; in that grace gets daily victory,
corruption receives daily foyls and consumption, and so the heart every day
more quiet than other from the power, and molestation of it.

Thirdly, whereas so long as God himself is our enemy, 3 Peace with the
Creatures.
all his Creatures are armed against us, to take his part, and revenge their
Creators wrong upon us; by Christ even this curse is also removed: and it is an
express branch of the New Covenant, that the Lord will work our peace with the
Creatures, Hos. 2.18. And in that day will I make a Covenant, for them, with
the wild beasts, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with that which creeps
upon the earth: For God being in league with us, even the stones in the field,
and the beasts in the field shall be at league with us also, Job 5.23. And the
reason is, because as then the Creatures rebelled against man, when he became
a rebel against God: so when men by Christ are reconciled unto God, and become
his sons by adoption and grace, then is their ancient right and rule over the
Creatures (lost by the fall) restored in part, so as his children never receive
hurt from them, but such as the Lord sanctifies, both for the furtherance of
his own glory, and their salvation, which are the main ends which God
respects in all his ways with his elect. Thus we see what is this peace, and
how Jesus Christ procures it us: whence we may observe sundry profitable
points of doctrine.

Observe. 1. That there is no sound peace without Christ; he is the Prince of
peace, his doctrine is the message of peace, and himself the Messenger of the
great Covenant of peace. There can be no peace with God by Moses, nor by the
works of the Law (whatsoever dotages Popish teachers hold to the contrary) only
the obedience and merit of Christ, is the matter of it: which made the Apostles
always pray, not for peace from merit, but for mercy and peace, or grace and
peace: because it only flows from the grace and mercy of God in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, it is as clear as the former, That there can be no peace to the
wicked man, Isa. 57.21. because he is out of Christ. 1 No inward peace in his
Conscience, the which howsoever it may slumber for a while, or become feared,
benumbed, and past feeling; yet like a wild beast will it hastily waken and
pursue him, and make him restless, as Cain, and fly when none pursues him. 2
No true outward peace: for although their houses may seem peaceable and without
fear, and all things pass according to their hearts desire, yet this i^ but a
truce for a time, or rather a respite of a condemned person, who, where ever he
goes, carries his sentence of death with him: and woe must needs be the end
of that peace, that makes men most quiet, when their sins cry the loudest for
vengeance in the ears of God.

Thirdly, this point affords some main differences between true and false
peace, Difference between true and false peace.
by which every man may be helped in the examination of his estate. For, 1
sound Christian peace is always a fruit of righteousness, and by
unrighteousness is unsettled and disquieted: but the peace of the wicked is for
most part a fruit of iniquity, and by it is never disturbed; but for the time,
the more sin, the more peace, as in a number of sinners might be instanced.

2 Peace by Christ arises from sorrow for sin: whence our Savior counts
mourners blessed: but worldly peace, from the fruition of some worldly delight
or other.

3 The former is rooted in the heart, and stablisheth it: the latter is a
rejoicing in the face, not in the heart, 2 Cor. 5.12. in the midst of such
laughter, the heart is heavy, or may well be so; it being not unlike the
laughter of the thief upon the gallows.

4 As none can give the former, save the Spirit of God; so none can take it
away; it has no end, because he that is the Prince of it, is also Father of
eternity, Isa. 9. neither can it be but lasting, having such soundness in it
self, but especially in respect of that infallible promise, my peace shall none
take from you. Whereas the latter, though never so fai^ for the time, is as
unlasting as unsound. Job compares it to a dream, Job 20.5. Solomon to the
crackling of Thorns under a Pot, Eccl. 6 7. God snatcheth it suddenly from
them, and as Baltaz^r was taken at his banquet, so God makes their Sun fall
even at noon day, and darken them in the clear day, Amos 8.9. And, which adds
to the misery of the wicked, their earthly happiness, not only ends, but the
end of it is fullness of woe, and heaviness it self, Prove. 14.13. the issues of
such pleasing ways are death, according to that of the wise man, Prove. 9.17.
Stolen waters are sweet, but they know not that the dead be there.

Whosoever then would not be deceived in his peace, let him not own any out of
Christ, let him look that his joy be helped out of sorrow, that it be a fruit
of righteousness, and rooted in the heart; for then it is lasting for ever, and
ever comfortable. But let thy peace be never so great, and the light of God
shine never so bright upon thy habitation, and yet thou have never been
troubled with the sight of thy sin (as many profess they never were) if it can
dwell with iniquity, as many jolly fellows who make bold Covenants with Hell
and Death, if it stablish not the heart with assured hope and comfort in all
well doing; all this is but a brawn of heart, a laughing madness and frenzy;
and even in the crying of this peace comes destruction, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. and let
all that fear to be at war with God, beware of this ungodly and dishonorable
peace; which is the most general peace in the world at this day: the guise of
which is, then to laugh and rejoice most, when Christ is departed, as himself
witnesses, Joh. 16.20.

The best way to come by peace in the want of it.
Fourthly, In the want of peace, we are by this Doctrine directed to the best
and only means to come by it; namely, to make our peace first with God through
Jesus Christ; and then, if the Conscience sting, or accuse, and terrify, look
upon this brazen Serpent, and that wound shall be cured. Some being wounded in
spirit, use means to forget their grief; now the music, merry company, with
sundry sports, must be called in; all which enlarge the wound, but are far
from working any cure: the only Physician in this case, is Jesus Christ: he
calls, Come to me all that are heavy laden, and I will ease you: only in
him can thou find refreshing for thy weary soul. Do thou perceive God
frowning against thy sin? there is no way f^r thee but to get him to behold
thee in the face of his anointed, Psalm. 84.9. no merits, no works, no good
intentions, no gifts can clear his countenance, to make it shine upon thee;
only he is well pleased in his Christ, and with such as ^e b^holdeth in him,
and no other. If men be at odds with thee, the next way to be at one with
them, is not by raging and storming against them to drive thy self further from
God: but to draw near unto him in Christ, ^y whom reconcile thy self unto him;
and then as thine own mind shall be more composed unto peace and love; so
will he also make thine enemies thy friends if he see it good; at the least,
restrain them, so as they shall not hurt thee. For if he pitch a Covenant for
us with the brute beasts of the field, that they shall not hurt us, much more
will he shelter us from the malice of men, be they never so brutish and
unreasonable. So much of this peace by Jesus Christ.

Now in the second place, Christ was preached to Israel, two ways.
we are to consider the Preaching of it to the children of Israel. Where two
things are to be explained: 1 How Christ was preached unto the Israelites. 2
Why he was so preached unto them. Concerning the former, Christ was Preached
to Israel two ways: 1 by the word, or promise. 2 by deed, or type.

For the first, the main promise of all concerning this truth, was that which
(after it was by Gods own mouth once delivered unto Adam in Paradise, The seed
of the woman shall bruise, etc.) was so often repeated to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 12.3.
The same promise in substance Moses makes to the whole people of the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 18.15. Also all the Prophets (says Peter) from Samuel, and thenceforth
so many as have spoken, have likewise foretold the same thing, Act. 3.24. and
in this regard the Jews are called, the Children of the Prophets, and of the
Covenant which God made to the Fathers; where the very same Promise made to
Abraham, is repeated, verse. 25. And the Apostle Paul is as express, Gal. 3.8.
The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles through faith,
preached before the Gospel to Abraham, saying, in thee, that is, in thy seed,
shall all the Gentiles be blessed.

Again, Christ was by deed or type, preached our peace in the whole Levitical
Priesthood: for all that Ceremonial Worship, all their Sacrifices, Oblations,
Altars, yea, their Temple, Ark, and Propitiatory, resembled, and pointed at
Christ our peace: and yet further, their very Kings, and Kingdom, their
Priests and Prophets, all of them not obscurely resembled Jesus Christ, and
preached him our peace; who as a King delivered his subjects from all the
former bondage of foreign power, and by his merit, and triumph, wrought out
their peace: As a Priest, sacrificed himself, and offered unto his Father a
sweet smelling sacrifice of peace for them: and as a Prophet, fully delivered
from his Father the whole Doctrine of peace and reconciliation. Both these ways
was Christ preached to the Israelites; whereof for brevities sake we will for
the present forbear further discourse.

The Second thing to be explained is, Christ was preached (...) Israel, 1 b^.
why was Christ preached our peace to the Children of Israel first; and why was
that Doctrine renewed to them from time to time by the hand and ministry of the
Prophets?

Answ. For three reasons. 1 Because they were that seed and certain family of
whom the Messiah should descend and arise: for which cause they were to observe
an accurate distinction of the tribes, according to that Ordinance and
Government which God had established amongst them, that they might not be
deceived in his person, when he should in fullness of time appear.

2 Because God had chosen them to be a peculiar people, he set them up above
all nations, not only in many other prerogatives, but in this, which was the
chief of all (had they seen it) that the Oracles of God were committed unto
them, Romans 3.2. He gave his Laws to Jacob, his Covenants to Israel, he dealt
not so with every Nation, Psalm. 147.30. The Apostle Paul when he had reckoned
a number of the Jews advancements above the Gentiles, such as were their
Adoption, Covenant, Promises, Fathers, he shuts up all with the chief of
all, in these words, of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, Romans 9.5. Now as
that was the first, that he came of them, so this is the next, that he came
unto them alone first, in the promises and types, then in his person and
appearance, then in his Doctrine and miracles performed in his own person; add
hereto, that he came to them in his life and death, and lastly, he came first
and alone to them in the Ministry and Miracles of his Holy Apostles, who must
not go into the way of the Gentiles, nor turn themselves to other Nations, till
the Jews by despising that Grace offered, had made themselves unworthy of life
everlasting: the lost sheep of the house of Israel must first be sought up,
and therefore (as Paul said) it was necessary that the word of God should first
be spoken unto them, Act. 13.46.

3 That both Jew and Gentile might know that Christ came not by hap, or chance,
or on the sudden, so as his coming might not be observed; but that he came
for the time, and for the manner, according to the Promises, and predictions of
old, of which our Apostle is willing in these words to imply the accomplishment.

Divinity of Scripture proved.
Observe. 1. Whence we may note, 1 The Divinity of Scripture, which foretells
beforehand things which are to come to pass many hundreths, yea, some thousands
of years after. The thing that foretells things properly to come, which have
no existence in any cause, or sign, must needs be of God. Satan indeed can
guess at some events, but which have some grounds in nature, or experience; or
can foretell a thing to come which God has revealed to him, or himself is made
an executioner of, as in Saul: but to foretell a thing, or event merely to
come, is proper to God. Whence it necessarily follows, that the Scripture,
foreseeing that God would justifye the Gentiles through faith, Gal. 3.8. that
is, a thing to come to pass almost two thousand years after, must needs be of
God.

Again, it follows as necessarily, that the Prophets in preaching, and the
Holy Penmen of God, spoke and writ as they were moved by the Spirit of God,
and directed by the immediate assistance of God, and therefore could not err
in any thing: for they foretold directly such things, which both for matter,
and manner, came to pass many years after. Jacob in his will foretold; that the
Scepter should not depart from Judah till Shiloh came: this prophecy was not
accomplished till above seventeen hundred years after the prediction: for not
much above twenty years before Christ's birth, Herod became King of Judea, killed
the whole College of the Jews, called the sanhedrim, wherein was the heir
apparent of the Kings blood.

King Cyrus was named by the Prophet Esaiah, an hundred years before he was
born, Isaiah 44.28. and of him prophesied, that he should build the Temple.
The worthy King Josiah, with his facts, were declared three hundred fifty nine
years before he was born, 1 King. 13.2. The Apostle Paul prophesyed of the
destruction of the Roman Empire, and thereby the rising of the Antichrist,
which was not accomplished till about the year four hundred seventy five after
Christ. For whereas the Roman Empire was divided into Eastern, and Western, the
Western which only hindered the revelation of Antichrist was in that year quite
overthrown, and Rome it self taken by the Goths, Joh. Funct. in ^^no praedicto.
and after this, never had any Roman Emperor his seat of Authority in Rome.
These and the like, neither man nor Angel could ever of themselves foretell,
and therefore the Author and Director of them must needs be God.

Observe. 2. Secondly, from hence also note The Antiquity of the Gospel, in that
it was Preached by the Prophets to the ancient Israelites; and known for the
substance of it, not only to the Apostles, and ancient Christians, and
believers, but to the Patriarks and Prophets, yea, even to Adam in Paradise, to
all whom Christ was preached the Lord of all, and that blessed seed in whom all
the Nations of the earth were to be blessed. This Doctrine, although it be
called a new Testament, Our religion is the oldest religion, and Popery but a
novelty.
is no new Doctrine. Let the Papists make a vain brag of Antiquity, and charge
us with a new religion, the truth is, whereas the body of their doctrine was not
known to the Prophets, nor Apostles, nor Believers for many hundred years after
Christ; our doctrine is, that which God sent to the children of Israel, and
therefore is most ancient and true. And to prove this that I say, we will go
no further than our text. That doctrine which preaches peace by Jesus Christ,
is the doctrine which was sent to Israel; which we profess at this day: but so
is not Popish doctrine, which preaches peace not by Christ, but by our selves,
our merits, and satisfactions, and peace by the Popes Pardons, Bulls, and
Absolutions, and Indulgences; now these, with other dependences thereon, being
the main points and pillars of their doctrine, were never preached to the
children of Israel, by any Prophet, nor ever by any of the Apostles, to the
Church of God; but have crept in one after another many hundred years since
Christ and his Apostles. Let their own rule stand in force therefore with good
will; if we cannot plead antiquity, we will lay no claim to the truth.

Observe. 3. Thirdly, hence we note, That there is but one way to salvation, But
one way to salvation.
and this was declared to the Children of Israel for substance as well as to
us, who went to Heaven by the same way which we doe-There is but one Christ,
one precious Faith, one and the same Gospel common to all times, one common
Salvation preached by the same Christ, who is the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, Heb. 13.8. who is the Lamb slain from the beginning, not actually,
but by the efficacy of his Sacrifice, the virtue of which to come they laid
hold on to salvation, as we do upon it past, and accomplished already.

Thus Abel believed, and received testimony that he was just before God, Heb.
11.4. Thus Noah was made heir of the righteousness which is by faith, Heb.
11.7. Every religion will not save thr professors: there is but one way, and
that a strait one that leads to life. We come into the world one way, we
depart many ways; so there is but one way to find life everlasting, but many
ways to lose it: only Christ is the way, by his Doctrine, by his Merit, by his
example, even the new and living way; his blood is ever fresh, ever trickling
down, and ever living: it quickneth them that walk in it, and refreshes them
with new strength: never any rent the veil but he: never any but he made a high
way into the Holy of Holies in the highest Heaven: never any came to the
Father, but by him, neither was peace ever preached in any other name but his,
who is Lord over all, blessed for ever.

Which is Lord of all.]

Christ may be said to be Lord of all two ways: 1 More generally, he is with
the Father and Holy Ghost Lord of all things, unto whom all Creatures by right
of Creation, even the very Devils are subject. Thus he rules in the very midst
of his enemies, disposing of the wicked and their malice, to his own glory. In
this respect he is both owner and possessor of all things, Bagnal. Ado^.
and a sustainer and maintainer of all things, and that by his word, Heb. 1.3.

2 More specially, he is Lord of all men, whether Jews of Gentiles, believing
in his name, even a Lord of his Church; and in this latter sense, Christ Lord
of his Church.
Christ is called Lord of all in this place.

1 Now Christ is Lord of his Church, consisting of Jew and Gentile: Psalm. 2.8.
I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance: which being a Prophecy of
the calling of the Gentiles, implies, that the kingdom of grace, whereof
Christ is appointed King in Sion, consists of all Countries and peoples, and
is not bounded or bordered but with the ends of the earth; and shows further,
that all these his subjects are given him of God to become his servants, Joh.
17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to all whom thou have given him.

2 They are so given unto him, as he must win them before he can enjoy them.
He wins partly by ^onquest, partly by ransom: he both conquereth and
casts out the strong man that held them captive, spoyleth him of his armor,
and weakneth his arm for ever: as also he pays a precious ransom for them to
God his Father: so as being now redeemed, and bought with a price, they are no
longer their own, but the Lords that bought them. 1 Cor. 6.20.

3 Because when he has thus dearly purchased his Church, he contracteth
himself in spiritual Marriage with her, and so becomes her Lord, Hos. 2.18. I
will marry thee for ever unto my self: yea, I will marry thee unto me in
righteousness, in judgment, in mercy, and in compassion, Ephesians. 5.23. As the
husband is the wives head, so is Christ of the Church. So as if a man be a
Lord of that which is given him; of that which he has redeemed and ransomed;
of her whom he had married into his bosom; in all these regards by as good
right is Jesus Christ the Lord of his Church, and every member of it.

Object. But how can Christ be a Lord and a servant too? Isa. 42.1. Behold my
servant, I will lea^e upon him: and he took upon him the form of a servant,
Phil. 2.7.

Ans. Christ considered as Mediator, is after a special manner both his Fathers
servant, and yet the Lord of his Church. In all the work of man's Redemption he
served and obeyed his Father, being sent of his Father for this end, he was
subject to the death, he prayed unto him, gave him thanks, learned obedience by
the things he suffered, not as God equal to his Father, but as our Mediator and
Surety: and yet by all these things he became our Lord, and the King of his
Church. And herein the Apostles travel as in their main scope, to prove that
Jesus Christ, whom the Jews put to death, has showed himself the Lord of
glory, and the true Messiah, Acts 2.34. Let all the house of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made that Jesus, which they crucified, Lord and Christ.

Object. But how can Christ be the Lord of all, seeing many, yea the most will
not obey him?

Ans. Does a King cease to be the Lord of all his Country, because some which
were his subjects are gone out in rebellion against him? besides, howsoever it
stands with his glory and grace, to suffer with patience the vessels of
wrath; yet at length he shows his power against them, in bringing forth his
whole displeasure upon them.

Use. Hence in that Christ is in general Lord of all, we learn that all
Creatures are his, and therefore we must never use any of them without leave
from him, or without return of praise and thanks unto him: none of them are
sanctified to our use, without the Word and Prayer. And if we have leave from
him, we ought in sobriety to use them, 1 Cor. 10.26. Eat whatsoever is sold in
the shambles, making no question for conscience sake. Hence follows it also,
that he having an absolute power over all, he may do with his own what he
will: who shall hinder a Potter to frame one vessel to honor, another to
dishonor? which I speak, because many cannot endure to hear of a decree of
reprobation, who must frame their judgment to his will who cannot but be just
and good, and leave off to reason with God. Hence also he may make one rich,
another poor, at his pleasure: The rich and poor meet, this Lord makes them
both.

Secondly, in that Christ is in special, Lord of his Church, sundry things are
to be noted: as first, That none can have Christ to be a Jesus, that is, a
Savior, who have him not for their Sovereign and Lord: whosoever thou art that
challengest him for thy Savior, see thou acknowledge him thy Lord.

Quest. How may a man have Christ to be his Lord?

A man has Christ his Lord by four things.
Ans. By the practice of four duties. 1 By preserving in the heart a fear and
reverence toward his person, Malac. 1.6. If I be a Lord, where is my fear?
Lordship requires subjection, Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord, and reverence thou,
or bow unto him. Now this fear must proceed from love; for if any man love not
the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed: and wheresoever this love is, it must
needs be attended with a fear to displease him.

2 By professing him to be thy Lord: as servants by their livery, or
cognizance, speak, and proclaim to all men to whom they belong: so if Christ
be thy Lord, thou must not be ashamed of him; but be ever speaking of him,
commending his goodness: thou must glory of such a service, accounting it thy
greatest honor, that thou art become his servant: thou must defend his name,
where ever thou hear it called into question: thou must suffer with him, and
take part with him in affliction, 1 Pet 4.13. an unfaithful servant is he,
that can be dumb in his Masters dishonor, but especially if his Master be
assaulted, and in danger, then to forsake him when he has most need of him.

3 By acknowledging thy self to be countable unto him for all thy ways, and
for all thy receites: Make account to be countable of all to this Lord of all
The servant not being at his own hand must go about no business but his
Masters: whatsoever matter of trust he receives from his Master, it is not
his own, he is faithfully to discharge himself of it by a true and just
account. Thus therefore must thou reason the case with thine own heart: what,
am I now in my Masters work, had I commandment from him, did his word or
warrant set me about the business which is now in my hands? Again, what gifts
have I received of body, mind, wealth, authority, credit? I am to be countable
for all: all the Talents I have are his: If I gain nothing, I am unprofitable:
If I gain, I must be profitable unto him.

By absolute obedience unto his will revealed. To this Lord only must be given
absolute obedience.
Thus himself being to give his Law, begins thus, I am the Lord thy God,
thou shall do thus and thus: other Lords and Kings must be obeyed in him, yea,
disobeyed for him, if they command contrary unto him; only he must ever by
Kings themselves be obeyed absolutely in all the parts of his will revealed.
Which may be considered in three heads.

1 It is his will that we believe in him, Joh. 6.40. The will of Christ
reduced to three ^eads.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the Son, and
believes in him; not only believing his word to be true, but leaning upon
him only for thy salvation. If a Master should promise a servant, that if he
will but believe him, and seek to please him, he will provide for him for
ever, it would add cheerfulness to such a servant, and he would think none of
his Masters commandments burdensome; but yet we, having larger and surer
promises, are slow of heart and hand, to believe or yield obedience.

2 It is his will that we show forth this faith of our hearts in the fruits of
sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, Colos. 1.10. filled with the knowledge of his will, and wa^k
worthy of the Lord, etc. thou must not only speak for, but live to the credit
of thy Master; in thy speech, actions, attire, eating, drinking, and whatsoever
else, carry thy self like a Christian, else thou discreditest thy Masters house
and dishonourest himself. Were not he a notable Traitor, that being sworn of
the Kings guard, and professing all service to the King, should instead of the
Kings arms and coat, wear the enemies? so the thing it self speaks against
him, who professes Christ his Lord, and yet never appears or shows himself
in the street, or abroad, but in Satan's livery: his swearing, his covetousness,
his filthiness, his lying, his whole life lead in all intemperance, bewrays
to whom he has given himself to obey.

3 It is his will also, that we obey as well in suffering, as in doing his
pleasure: and the reason is plain, he is my Lord, I am but a servant, if he
please to buffet and blow me, I must with all meekness submit my self, yea and
more, be thankful for his government: 2 Samuel 15.26. If he say, I have no
delight in thee, let him do whatsoever seems good in his eyes, 1 Samuel 3.18.
When the Lord had threatened heavy things against Heli his whole house, he
answered, It is the Lord, let him do whatsoever seems good in his eyes: I was
dumb and opened not my mouth, says David, because thou LORD did is, Psalm.
39.9. Thus must we obey Christ as a Lord, giving up our bodies and souls unto
him, by living unto him, and dying unto him: and this is the Apostles ground,
we are the Lords, Romans 14.7. and therefore none of us lives unto himself, and
none of us dies unto himself, but living and dying we are the Lords:
otherwise what a trifling and mockery were it only to yield him a title of
Lord, or Master, and deny him his service? Why call ye me Master, Master, and
do not the things I speak? Luke 6.46.

All which if it be true, how few shall find Christ a Savior? for how few
make him their Lord? few there are that esteem this well-beloved above other
well-beloveds; not a few are ashamed of him and his profession: many
white-livered soldiers are daunted with Peter at the speeches of silly and
simple persons: most men never look to the hands of this Lord, to acknowledge
either receipt of Talents, or return of accounts, fewest of all obey him in
faith, who yet are overcarried with presumption of his favor; or in true
sanctification, though they can pretend it; or in patience, if they could get
out of his hands, if it were by flying to the Devil for help. Well, if Christ
have no more but a title of a Lord from thee, thou shall have but a title of
salvation from him, and not the thing it self: and if a name that thou live
content thee, when thou art but dead, the time comes, that when thou come
to seek thy name among the number that are saved by him, thou shall find thy
name left out of that role, and set in the number of those that shall dye in
their sins.

Christ being our Lord, no other Lord can lay (...) unto us.
Secondly, if Christ be the Lord of all, Then have we obtained much freedom
by him; both from all spiritual bondage, and all that tyranny which those hard
Lords, Sin, Death, Hell, Satan, exercised over us; our Lord has paved the
uttermost farthing, and wrought a glorious redemption for us; and he having
thus set us free, we are free indeed, both from the guilt, the punishment, and
service of sin. We are free also from all Papal bondage: for we have but one
Lord in Heaven who can save and destroy, to whom simple obedience belongs,
and to whom the Conscience is only subject. The man of sin indeed would be
Lord of all, and makes laws to bind conscience, where God has left it free;
but as the Scriptures acknowledge but one Lord, no more do we; and say more,
that we cannot serve two Masters commanding such contrary things. We are also
hence freed from the fear of all earthly Tyrants, if we belong to this Lord:
for if he stand with us, who can be against us? Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them
which can kill the body only; but him who can cast both body and soul into
Hell. The true fear of him will eat out all those false fears of men.

Observe. 3 Thirdly, If Christ be Lord of all, Then we and all believers are
fellow servants, All believers are fellow servants to this Lord.
and therefore ought to live and love together, making no dissension or schism
in our Masters house, which is the Apostles reason, Ephesians. 4.4. persuading the
Ephesians to keep the Unity of faith, because there is one Lord. This shall be
done, if all of us, who profess Christ, could learn to deny our selves, to
follow his will, not our own or other commanders, yea, to follow his blessed
example, learning daily of him to be humble and meek, patient and
tenderhearted one to another: forbearing and forgiving offenders: hard to
exasperate, and easy to be entreated. And these things should we rather
strive in, that (according to the Apostles precept) the same mind might be in
us which was in Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.5.

Verse. 37 Ye know the word which came through all Judea, beginning in Galilee,
after the Baptism which John Preached.
THE holy Apostle here begins the confirmation of that which he had
formerly spoken; that Christ is the Messiah and Lord of all; to prove which,
he begins orderly with the History of his life and death, of which even
these Gentiles could not be ignorant, therefore he says, ye know the word.

Where if it be asked, how they should come to know the doctrine of the Gospel,
seeing the Apostles were not yet turned to the Gentiles, and Peter was now sent
extraordinarily to teach them concerning Christ, which had been in vain if they
knew the word before: we must observe, Not (...), but (...).
that by the word here, is not meant the word preached, as in the former verse,
but as the word is different in the original, so also is the signification; and
betokens rather a thing done, than a word uttered; as Matthew. 18.16. (...).
By the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word or fact be confirmed.
Luke 2.15. Let us goo to Bethlem and see this word, that is, this thing which
the Lord has brought to pass. The plain sense then is this, Ye know the
word, that is, the same of Christ which was quickly dispersed through all Judea
in the mouths of common men.

Which fame, that they should not mistake him or themselves, he describes, 1
By the place, where it arose, beginning in Galilee. 2 By the time, when it most
prevailed, after the Baptism which John preached, which some expound thus,
After the Baptism of Christ by John, which he preached, that is, administered:
but the natural sense is, after the doctrine which John preached concerning him:
for usually in the New Testament, by John's Baptism (especially which John
preached) is meant all his doctrine, and his whole Ministry, Matthew. 21.25. The
baptism of John whence was it? that is, the doctrine, as the words after imply;
Why did ye not believe him? and all men held John for a Prophet, Mark 1.4. He
preached the baptism of repentance unto remission of sins, that is, the doctrine
of repentance: for 1 Else it were improperly said to preach baptism. 2 John's
doctrine was this, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand, Acts 18.25.
Apollos knew only the baptism of John, that is, his doctrine: and therefore is
it said in the next verse, that Priscilla and Aquila took him home, and showed
him the way of God more clearly. And in Acts 19.3, 4. Into what were ye
baptized? that is, into what doctrine were ye initiated and instructed: they
said, into John's baptism; that is, into John's doctrine: the which interpretation
notably freeth that hard text from the false collection of Anabaptists, who
thence would gather, that those were by Paul rebaptised, who were formerly
baptized by John: but the difficulty will be removed, if the words of Paul be
wisely distinguished from the words of the Evangelist, and Writer of that
History: John baptized (says Paul) the baptism of repentance: that is, taught
the doctrine of repentance, saying, that they should believe: which when they
heard, namely, they which heard by John's Ministry, they were baptized into the
name of the Lord Jesus, namely, by John, not by Paul. Then adds the
Evangelist ^ers. 6. And Paul put his hands on them, and the Holy Ghost came on
them, and furnished them with such gifts, as they by their own confession, ver.
2. had not heard of before. And thus according to the plain sense of other
Scriptures, is that difficult place made very plain also.

Quest. But why is the ministry and preaching of John called his baptism? The
ministry of John called his Baptism. Why.


Ans. Because his doctrine was first of all sealed with the seal of Baptism, in
which regard, as his person is called the Baptist, so is his doctrine by the
name of baptism.

Quest. But why is this circumstance of place noted, that this fame began in
Galilee?

Ans. 1 To note the accomplishment of that Prophecy in Isa. 9.1. which also was
observed by the Evangelist, Matthew 4.14. 2 To show that this fame was no bare,
or ungrounded rumor, but raised upon just cause: for Jesus was baptized by
John not far from the borders of Galilee about Enou, Joh. 3.23. And presently
after he returned by virtue of the Spirit, and came into Galilee preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom, Mark 1.14. and made no end till he had taught all their
Cities in all their Synagogues, Luke 4.14. add to his Baptism and Doctrine,
that he wrought his first Miracle of turning Water into Wine at Cana a Town of
Galilee; and that he called his Disciples in Galilee; all which beginnings must
needs raise a rumor and fame of him, which, as Luke reports, went through
all the adjacent region round about. 3 This circumstance notably befitteth this
argument, to prove him Lord of all, both Jews and Gentiles, because he begun
and was so famous in Galilee of the Gentiles.

Quest. But was not Christ sent to the last sheep of the house of Israel? Did
he not come to his own? how then did he begin his ministry in Galilee of the
Gentiles?

Ans. Galilee of the Gentiles is so called, not because it was not in Judea,
but 1 To distinguish it from another Galilee, which was also in Judea, and
called Galilea inferior, in the tribe of Zabulon, where Nazaret was situate:
But this was called Galilea superior, or Gentium, in the tribe of Nephtali, not
far from Capernaum. 2 Because there were twenty Cities in Galilee given by
Solomon to Hyram a Gentile, 1 King. 9.11. 3 Because being in the extremity of
Palestina, near the Sea, and not far from Tyrus and Sidon, they were ever
mixed with many Gentiles that were foreiners; besides that, they were so seated
within that Country in Salomons time, as they could never after be removed.
G^lilaea ge^tium vel populorum.
4 M. Junius thinks it to be so called, not only because of the abundance of
Gentiles there; but also because it was a most populous Country, full of
inhabitants above the rest of Palestina.

Quest. But why should Christ begin his Ministry here, rather than at
Jerusalem, was it for any singular disposition or good which he found in them
above other?

I answer: No, for they were in regard of the Gentiles, who were mingled among
them, Why Christ begun his Ministry in Galilee.
of all other most ignorant, most superstitious, most rude and indocible: for
so they are noted, Matthew. 4.15. A people sitting in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, saw a great light. But hereby the Lord Jesus showed himself.



2 Hence he manifested himself a true Prophet, who would rather hide himself in
the furthest and most remote parts of the Country, amongst a barbarous and rude
people, than ambitiously affect the principal City, to get himself a name or
applause in; as false Prophets use to do.

Permixtum a Judaeis and Gentibus inhabitata fuit. Chem Har 35 c.
3 Not obscurely hence would he be noted the Lord of all, both Jews and
Gentiles, in that he begins his Ministry in this Country, whose inhabitants
were mixed of Jews and Gentiles.

Object. But this seems to cross sundry places of the Scripture, which
affirm that the preaching of Christ must begin at Jerusalem, not in Galilee,
Luke 24.47. And that repentance and remission of sins, should be preached among
all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

Ans. 1. That place is meant of the preaching of Christ's Apostles, and not of
his own, as this is. 2 That of their preaching of him after his Death and
Resurrection; this of his own in his life time. 3 That was a Ministerial
publishing of Christ; this place speaks only of a voice, fame, and good
report in the mouths of the common people, such as followed extraordinary
Prophets: and therefore such places cannot cross this.

Now for the other circumstance of time, when this fame went of Christ, namely,
after the Baptism which John preached, it is not without weighty cause added by
the Apostle.

1 To note the truth and accomplishment of those Prophecies which concerned
John himself: as Mal. 3.1. Behold I send my messenger, and he shall prepare the
way before me, which prophecy Christ himself applies to John, Mat. 11.10. that
by this consideration they might be one step nearer the acknowledging of the
true Messiah, seeing that his Harbinger Elijah was come already.

2 To note that Christ appeared in his due season, not before John had preached
the Baptism of Repentance, and amendment of life, and so had prepared the way
to Christ: neither before the people were fitted to receive him; for John had
spoken many things concerning him, had pointed at him as the only Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the world: had affirmed that he saw the Holy Ghost
descending upon him, and sitting on his head like a dove: had professed him far
worthier than himself: had promised that he should baptize them with the Holy
Ghost and fire. Now (...) ^he people desirous to see him of whom they had heard
so much: and (...) ^^erefore was the due time of Christ's coming after the
baptism which John preached.

Whence we may shortly note, how the Lord finds us when he first sets
his love upon us, as far from meriting his love, as these Galilaeans who were a
most wretched people: so as he respects only his own grace in his respecting
of us: which consideration he would often fasten upon his own ancient people
the Jews; professing to their face, that he made no covenant with them for any
worthiness he saw in them above other, for they were the worst of all people,
Deuteronomy. 9.4. and much less can he find any worthiness to entitle a man to the
heavenly Canaan: the freedom of this grace does therefore shine out more
clearly; and deserves that we should with much thankfulness, both acknowledge
it, and also walk worthy of it.

Secondly, Hence is to be noted, That then men seasonably hear of Christ, when
they are prepared by John in the doctrine of repentance: when the Law has
killed, cast us down, and made us guilty of the sentence of death; then the
Gospel does seasonably propound the grace and mercy of God in Christ. Hence for
pacifying the troubled conscience, it is called the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15.
for chearing up the heavy heart, it is called a good word, Heb. 6.5. and for
healing and bringing the sick soul to health and soundness, it is called a
sound word, Tit. 2.8. and therefore Ministers in despensing the promises, must
see that men be fitted for them; because if the ground be not plowed up, all
the seed is cast and lost among thorns: and hearers must be as wary of false
Application; lest in time they as heavily lose, as they have hastily snatched,
such things as never belonged unto them.

Verse. 38 How God anointed Jesus of Nazaret with the Holy Ghost, and with
power: Who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
Devil, for God was with him.


THE Apostle having proved by the common voice and fame, that Christ is Lord of
all, he now descends to prove it by his facts, all which, because they were
performed by virtue of his Heavenly commission and calling; therefore (as good
order requires) he begins there, and in this verse propounds two things:
1 Christ's calling to his office of Mediatorship, How God anointed, etc. 2 The
execution of that office, according to his Calling, who went about, etc. In the
former are three points to be considered, 1 who was called, Jesus of Nazaret. 2
Who called him, how God anointed. 3 The manifestation of this calling,
anointed him with the Holy Ghost, and with power.

1 The person called was Jesus of Nazaret, for so he was commonly called among
the Jews, not that he was born there; for he was born at Bethlem in Judaea,
Christ called Jesus of Nazaret although he was not born there, why.
Matt. 2.5. according to the prophesy, Mic. 5.2. but because, 1 He was brought
up there, for Joseph his Father fearing Archelaus, Herod's son Mat. 2.22. he
sought him out (or rather directed by Divine dream) a most obscure village in
Galilee named Nazaret, and dwelt there.

2 He was so called by the overruling hand and council, that he might be
probably known to be the true Messiah, in that he was a Nazarite as was
prophesied of him before, Zach. 6.12. Behold the man whose name is BRANCH, and
he shall grow up out of his place, and shall build the Temple; so Isa. 60.21.
These are the places which the Evangelist Matthew aims at, ^e^s^r.
when he said, that Christ dwelt in the City of Nazaret, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, he shall be called a Nazarite: for
seeing so much is not elsewhere spoken in clear and proper speech; necessarily
it must be spoken figuratively at least, and more obscurely, as in those
places: which M. Junius does manifestly clear to appertain to this very
purpose; Jun. paral l. 1. par. ^. and analys. in numb. 6.1
in whom the Learned may read much more concerning this argument, which
willingly I forbear

3 That they might under this title acknowledge him according to the Scripture
to be the rod of the stock of Jesse, and a plant going out of his roots,
^e^s^r.
which by the same word is signified, Isa. 11.1.

4 That they and we might hence gather that he was sanctified and set apart
unto a most holy purpose, being a true Nazarite (neither by vow, nor
Commandment, for then he might neither drink wine, nor touch the dead, which
he did, and caused others also to do the same; nor yet cut his hair, which in
likelihood both by the custom of the Jews, and Paul's speech, 1 Cor. 11.7.14.
he did) but by most perfect holiness and absolute purity of his whole man
(whereof those Nazarites were but shadows) that so he might be a perfect
Savior, and high Priest, separate from all sinners, Heb. 7.26.

Whence note, How the providence of God in overruling every particular
circumstance is manifestly cleared. The very particular places assigned for
this and that purpose, are accurately set down, to show how those seven bright
eyes of Gods providence, which go over all the world, Zach. 4.10. have been
ever waking and watchful over both predictions, and accomplishments, to bring
them just together in the just point and period fore-appointed. Christ must not
be born neither in Egypt, nor in Nazaret* nor in his fathers house; but in a
journey, and in an Inn at Bethlem, because i^ (...) so foretold, that Bethlem,
the least of all the Cities in Judea, should be made (...) highest in this
privilege.

Again, Christ though the Son of David, must not be brought up in Bethlem, the
City of David, nor yet (being of the Kings seed) in Jerusalem, the City and
seat of the Kings; but in Nazaret, that he might be called a Nazarite.
Whatsoever therefore God has promised in the Scriptures, wait in faith for the
accomplishment, this providence will not suffer it unaccomplished; but make not
haste, he has a due season for it, which thou must patiently expect, and the
patient abiding of the just shall not miscarry.

2 Note hence, That Christ was the only true Messiah, and could not have been
so, if he had not been of Nazaret, and such a Nazarite as the Prophets
foretold. The Jews took offense hereat, as too base a place for the Messiah,
whom they expected, to rise out of: even Nathaniel himself could ask if any
good could come out of Nazaret, Joh. 1.47. and this was in scorn added as a
part of his style and title written in three tongues upon the Cross, Jesus of
N^zaret, King of the Jews: and as they dealt with the Head; so also with the
members; for presently after the death of Christ, the Christians were in scorn
al^ called Nazarites, that is, silly fools that did believe in such a Messiah
as came from Nazaret. But we must know, that the wisdom of God would have him
hereby generally proclaimed the Messiah and Savior of the world, both to Jews
and Gentiles: as also confirm our faith and affiance in him, made known to us
to be such a one, as in whom we also become Nazarites, that is, sanctified and
consecrated unto God.

3 Note hence, that the Messiah must needs be come already, because he must
needs be a Nazarite by education, as of Bethlem by birth, which places have
been long since destroyed, and hopeless of ever being builded up again, or
that in them the Jews should ever recover any authority. And is it not a
wonderful blindness, that the Jews should still look for their Messiah out of
a Town which has been destroyed a thousand and five hundred years ago, the
very place of which cannot be assigned? Our request to God must be for them,
that he would remove that thick veil which to this day is drawn over the hearts
of his own ancient people.

Secondly, by whom was Christ called to this Office? By God who anointed him:
for that which is said of one part of it, namely his Priesthood, is true of the
whole; No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God,
Heb. 5.5. so neither Christ took this honor to himself, but expected that
voice, Thou art my Son. How often did Christ witness of himself, that he came
not of himself, but was sent by his Father? Joh. 5.37. My Father that sent me
witnesses of me: and in that chapter because the Jews objected that he came of
himself, he tells them six times that his Father sent him: yea has sealed
him his commission, as he says, Joh. 6.27. Him has God the Father sealed,
that is, made his commission authentical, as men do their deeds by their seal,
and set upon him an impression or character; anointing him with oil of grace
above all his fellows; yea himself being an express Image of his Fathers
substance, in him he has laid up all treasures of wisdom and knowledge, that
from his fullness we might receive grace for grace.

Whence, 1 We learn, Christ expected his Fathers calling, and therefore must
his Ministers much more.
That no man ought to thrust himself into any Office or Function, nor run
before he be sent, but wait till God give him a calling thereunto. For shall
Christ, who had the Spirit of God without all measure, wait his Fathers
leisure, and expect his Fathers voice; and shall we, who have received the
Spirit scarce in any measure, run, and ride, and shoove, and thrust in before
we have any commission drawn or sealed by God? who even carried such post-hast
happily? How miserably perished proud Absolon, who thought it not enough to be
the Kings Son, unless he thrust his Father out of his Kingdom? Corah and his
accomplices would have been Rulers, but that the earth would not suffer th^^
above it. What shall I speak of Vzzah, Uzziah, and the rest, who found (...)
Lord as good as his word against such which go on any errand and he send them
not? they found the Lord coming many ways against them, as he often threatens
in Jer. 23.30, 31. etc.

2 If God have called Christ to this office, we must carry our selves dutifully
and reverently unto him, whom as the Father has called, so he will defend and
establish in his place, and revenge such as rebel against him. This is that
the Prophet teaches in Psalm. 2.2. that if the greatest Kings band themselves
together against the Lord, and against his Christ, the Lord out of Heaven will
laugh them to scorn, he will speak to them in his anger, and vex them in sore
displeasure; and the ground of all this is laid down, ver. 6. Even I have set
my King upon Sion: as if he had said, Shall I set up a King, and dare ye
rebelliously resist him, or seek to displace him? Let us take heed it befall
not us as (...) did the Jews taxed in the Parable of the King letting out his
Vineyard, which sent his servants for his rent to the Husbandmen, and
afterward his son; but they beat the one, slew the other, acknowledged
neither: surely no more grace remains for such; but the Lord of the Vineyard
must needs destroy such Husbandmen, and lay waste their City. In like manner is
he as ready to defend, and do good unto such as subject themselves unto his
Son, depend upon him, or suffer any thing for his sake: they shall not repent
them of their service, seeing they serve so good a Lord.

The third thing in this calling of Christ to his Office, is the manifestation
of it to himself and others: in that he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and
power. There were three sorts of men that used to be anointed in the entrance
unto their Office in the Old Testament, 1 Kings, 2 Priests. Anointing what it
signified.
3 Prophets. And this outward Ceremony signified two things: First, their
ordination or calling unto that Office: secondly, the promise of proportionable
gifts for the performance: so as they were hereby confirmed, God never calls
any men to any place but he furnishes him with gifts fit for it,
both that God has chosen them to their office, as also that he would furnish
them unto it, and protect them in the same.

Christ is here said to be also anointed; but not by man, as they, but by God:
not with external oil, but with the Holy Ghost, and with power: not
ceremonially, and typically, but really and spiritually: not to any one of
those Offices, but to them all three: not receiving the sign, but the thing
signified; because he was a real and true King, Priest, and Prophet of his
Church, or whom all they were but types and shadows. In this anointing of
Christ therefore both these things are signified and proved: 1 That he was
ordained of God to the performance of this Office of Mediatorship, and
consecrated by God, to be the Messiah, that is, a spiritual King, Priest, and
Prophet. 2. That he had poured out upon him, the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which
gave him power, and furnished him for this Office; signified here by the Holy
Ghost, and power: he receiving of the Holy Ghost power, whereby he performed
the greatest work that ever was undertaken.

Difference between Christ's anointing and all other men's.
And here is to be observed a plain difference, between Christ's anointing and
all men's besides. For whereas all other shadowed anoyntings were imperfect, and
some had more gifts bestowed, and some less, but none all, nor all in one
degree; Christ was perfectly anointed, and even in his Human nature was adorned
with gifts without measure: for God gave not him the Spirit by measure, Joh.
3.34. and not only with gifts, but all gifts in the highest degree, above all
his fellows, Psalm. 45. men or Angels, in none of which ever dwelt the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, as it did in him, Coloss. 2.10.

2 Whereas all other received gifts only for themselves, and could not by their
gifts make others Kings as they were, or Priests, or Prophets; Christ was so
anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power, that he could impart his gifts to
others in such manner, and measure, as they might become like unto himself:
that look as the oil which was poured out upon Aarons head, run down by his
beard even to the skirts of his garment, and so sweetened his whole body; even
so such abundance of grace was poured (as out of a full horn) upon Christ the
head of his Church, as it distilleth from him to the sweetning and perfuming of
all his body, to make the same acceptable in the sight of God. This the
Evangelist expresses, Joh. 1.16. Full of grace, of truth -- and, of his
fullness we receive grace for grace: Coloss. 2.10. In him dwells the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him.

Quest. But when was Christ thus anointed?

Ans. The anointing of Christ is twofold. 1 In respect of his gifts: and with
these he was anointed by the very union of his two Natures into one Person in
the Womb of the Virgin, from the first moment of his conception: for being
admirably conceived by the Holy Ghost, his Humane nature was anointed by the
Divine, uniting it self thereunto.

2 In respect of his calling to the exercise of those gifts; and this was then
complete, when in the thirtieth year of his age at his Baptism, he was solemnly
inaugurated by a voice from Heaven, by the opening of the Heaven, and the
descending of the Spirit of God in a visible shape abiding upon him; not that
be wanted the Spirit before, but that herein, as in the former respect also, a
main difference might be put between his, and the anointing of all that went
before, who neither were anointed in the Womb, nor by the union of the Deity,
nor by any other than material oil: whereas he was anointed with the Holy
Ghost lighting upon him. And this was that which was prophesied before of him,
Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me that
I should preach, etc. In the exposition of which place, when Christ begun his
Ministry in Galilee, he said, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your
ears, Luke 4.17.

Hence we learn, None can be cap^^le of the Office of a Redeemer or Mediator
but Christ, because none was so anointed as he.
1 That Christ was and is an all-sufficient Savior and Redeemer: for being to
this purpose anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power, he cannot but be able
fully to work and absolve the work of man's redemption. This is not a work to be
committed to any King, or Emperor, nor the greatest state and Potentate in the
earth, no nor to any Angel or Archangel in Heaven: none of these are fit for
it, because none are capable of this anointing with the Holy Ghost and with
power, but he alone: who therefore is able to subdue all the Devils of Hell,
though they come rushing upon him all at once; to overthrow all the armies of
Hell, Sin, Death, and Damnation, assaulting himself and members with all their
might and force: in a word, able to make his enemies (although principalities,
and powers, never so mighty, and never so cruel) his very footstool.

1 A greater King than Solomon is here, who not only can tread down his
enemies, but give us strength also so to do: who not only can give us Laws,
but of his fullness, grace to keep them. God has anointed him King, and set
him upon his Throne, and endued him with rare Gifts fit for government; in all
which regards we owe unto him simple and absolute obedience.

2 A far more excellent Priest also than Aaron is here, he is not anointed to
offer the blood of Bulls, or Goats, but to offer himself a sweet smelling
Sacrifice, and that not often, but once for all, Heb. 8.6. neither does he
offer only this sacrifice, but by this spirit and power with which he is
anointed, he applies it to his Church: neither need he offer for himself as
they, because he was a holy, harmless, and undefiled High Priest, Heb. 7.26.
neither does he only pray for his Church, but meriteth also to be heard, is
never denied, neither ever dies, but lives for ever to make intercession for
them, verse. 25.

3 A more famous Prophet than Moses is here anointed: he was but a servant in
the house, this is the Son: Moses was but the Instrument, this is the Author of
the word he delivers: Moses could teach but the ear, this Prophet teaches
the heart: Moses was a Minister of the outward Circumcision, this Circumciseth,
or rather baptizeth with the Holy Ghost and with fire: let not us therefore
despise him that speaks from heaven: for if they escaped not which refused
Moses that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from
him that speaks from heaven: Heb. 12.25. And can we want reason? 1 In his
anointing we are commanded by a voice from Heaven, hear him, Mat. 17.5. 2 He
delivers the whole will of his Father, we shall therefore be perfectly taught
if we hear him. 3 We may safely rest in his Doctrine, because with him are the
treasures of wisdom. 4 In a word, he has only the words of life everlasting,
and whither should we go? Joh. 6.68.

Secondly, hence we learn, That seeing every believer is anointed with Christ,
Every Christian must partake of Christ his anointing.
and in Christ, we must all be careful to find this holy oil running down from
the head upon us the members: 1 John 2.27. The anointing which ye receive of
him dwells in you. And indeed our very name of Christians, puts us in
mind that we must have our measure of that oil of grace which was poured on
Christ without measure: so as if we carry the name and title of Christ, we
must see that the nature and gifts of Christians appear in our lives. Revel:
1.6. he has made us Kings and Priests unto God. And it was long before
prophesied of the Church of the New Testament, that the sons and daughters of
it shall Prophecy, Joel 2.28. and all this by virtue of this anointing.

Add hereunto, that Christ is not perfectly anointed till his Church be: for
Christ may be said to be anointed two ways: Christus totus vel Christus
mysticus.
either properly, in his own person, as considered in himself; or figuratively,
by the use of Scripture, as he is the head of his Church, which joined unto
him, makes up whole Christ, as the Fathers call him, or mystical Christ. Thus
Paul calls Christ united with the Church, by the name of Christ, 1 Cor.
12.12. we must therefore help on the perfection of this latter, seeing he is
already perfect in the former.

Every Christian must be a King.
To this purpose every man must become a King (for so he is if he partake of
Christ's anointing) in being ever in the field in combat against sin, in taking
up arms against Satan's hellish power, in getting daily dominion over his own
rebellious flesh, and wicked lusts. For if thou be a Christian, thou have
ten thousand rebels to encounter, and as many strong temptations and lusts
which thou must stand out to victory: and here faith must be thy victory, which
grace is attained by this anointing. But, oh the misery of infinite numbers
every where mere Bondmen, and captive Caytiffs to Satan's suggestions, and held
down under the power and tyranny of their own lusts, in whom there is no
resistance, no fight, never a stroke they strike against their own sins, the
strong man is gone away with all, very cowards against the Devil, nay
courageous Champions for him, and yet will be called Christians: no, no, there
is never a drop of Christian blood in such; this anointing as yet never came
near them; here is no spirit, no power, but such as rules in the world.

And a Priest, Romans 6 13
Again, thou that wilt be a Christian, must be a Priest, to offer up thy self,
soul and body, an acceptable sacrifice of sweet smell unto the Lord: to offer
up thy prayers and praises, the calves of thy lips: these are the odours of the
Saints, Revel. 5.8. to offer up thy sins to be sacrificed and slain by the
knife and sword of the Spirit in the Ministry of the word: to offer the
sacrifices of alms and mercy, with which sacrifices God is well pleased: to
offer the sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, which the Lord despises
not: and lastly, to offer, if need require, thy life, and dearest blood for
Christ and his profession. But how many titular Christians be there, who indeed
are no better than Belzebubs Priests; who offer their souls, their bodies,
their senses, themselves, wholly to the service of the Devil, in sin and
unrighteousness: for prayer and praise, they curse, swear, and blaspheme most
remorselesly fierce and hard-hearted in themselves, and unto others; and so
far from this anointing, as many of the Heathens, who never heard of Christ,
would be ashamed of them, and wonder what kind of God that Christ should be,
by whom they will be called?

And a Prophet.
Lastly, thou must be a Prophet: thou must have the knowledge of God in thy
self, thou must hold it out, and impart it unto others within thy family and
without: for to this thou art anointed, as also to hold out Christ in a
constant profession: which tyeth every man to know and acknowledge the truth of
God, that he may be able to propagate it to others; but especially Ministers,
Magistrates, Parents, and Masters, whose special calling, besides the general,
fastneth this duty upon them. These are the chief things (to which others might
be added) wherein every Christian ought to testify himself anointed by Christ's
anointing, that he communicates as well in his graces as in his name, and that
he has received some good measure of that oil of grace, which was poured out
upon him without measure: for as in the head, the Godhead dwells bodily, so
in every member, (...).
though not the Godhead it self, yet a Divine nature is apparent, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Now this godly nature is nothing else, but those excellent renewed qualities
and precious gifts, which the Holy Ghost bestows upon the regenerate by means
of this anointing, and is opposed to natural lust and corruption, in the same
verse.

Who went about doing good, Now we come to Christ's execution of his Office,
according to his former calling and furnishing. For no sooner receives he
gifts and calling from his Father, but he manifests and puts forth the
same in most painful preaching, and most powerful working of Miracles; which
he did not for a brunt, or by starts, and fits, but he went above doing good.
By which words is noted his diligence, in absolving and finishing his course
within his vocation and calling: not seeking herein himself, nor the praise or
applause of men, nor the Kingdoms of this world, but denying himself and glory,
spent his whole life in doing good unto others; suffering himself to be
subdued under a most shameful and cursed death; that he might bring others to
life, who were as yet his enemies, and lying in the shadow of death.

Wherein he propounded himself a worthy pattern and example of imitation, unto
all such as have received gifts, Note.
and calling unto any office in Church or Commonwealth: who are not to hide in
a Napkin those talents, but bring them forth, and traffic with them: and that
not for their private, as seeking themselves; but for the common good: and not
for a start or brunt, but thus to finish their course, holding out in
well-doing unto the end.

Thus if we shall do, we shall be conformable unto Jesus Christ, acceptable to
God our Father, profitable to our brethren here on earth, and shall treasure to
our selves an excellent weight of glory in heaven. But how many be there, who
having received many talents, and charge to traffic with them, bury their
gifts, and forget their charge; against whom the fearful sentence is not only
passed, but half executed already? his talent is taken from the sloathful
servant; there now remains nothing but the binding of him, and casting him
into hell. And would this were not too true, not in many Ministers only, but
even in numbers of private Christians, who have had both gifts and calling to
teach and pray in their families, but have wilfully lost them for want of the
careful use of them.

Now more specially, this going about of Christ doing good, stands in two
things. The former, in curing the deadly diseases of men's souls, by most holy
and saving doctrine, revealing his Fathers whole will, and teaching the things
of the Kingdom, not coldly, as the Scribes, but in most powerful manner: so as
his very enemies were forced to say, Never man spoke as this man does. The
latter, in curing the bodies of men also by most powerful Miracles: one kind
whereof, which was most eminent (namely the healing of Demoniaks) is put for
all the rest, in the words following: by both which means he showed himself a
merciful Savior, and the chief Physician both of soul and body, and in one
word, the very healing God.

Of both which points we are to speak something, seeing the former is the
principal, and included in this latter; and these latter were but servants unto
the former. It is true that the Jews were more affected with his Miracles than
with his Doctrine, insomuch as they were often wholly carried after him for the
bread and belly sake. Which seems to be the reason why the Apostle Peter
speaks more plainly of these, as being better observed, and more sparingly of
his Doctrine, which was not so great a rayser of his fame as these were: but it
must not be so with us, who look for Salvation by his most holy Doctrine, but
cannot by his Miracles.

And first for his Doctrine; the calling of our blessed Savior being to seek
and save that which was lost, Christ went about doing good in dispersing every
where most holy doctrine.
to reduce the lost sheep of the house of Israel unto the fold, to find the
lost groat, to call sinners unto Repentance; how all his life was thus taken
up, were too long in every particular to manifest. To omit his private life
which was nothing but an increasing in wisdom and favor with God and man.
After his solemn and public inauguration, he showed himself a perfect mirror
of goodness, both in the more general parts of his prophetical office, as also
in the more special practices of it.

For the former, how faithful was he in all the house of his Father; not as
Moses, who was but a Servant, but as the Son; who from the bosom of his Father
brought and delivered a most perfect Word of Truth; yea, who was not only the
bearer of it, but the very Author of all Truth? And therefore according to his
Power and Commission, reformed the Law corrupted with false glosses of the
Pharisees, and established it: preached the Gospel, and dispersed it, by
himself, his Apostles, and other Teachers after them raised by himself; and
fitted with gifts thereunto for the gathering of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.
instituted, and ministered the Sacraments of the New Testament after the
abolishing of the Old: framed and prescribed a perfect form of prayer, unto
which all ours must be squared: delivered (as Moses) a pattern of the Temple
and all things therein; namely, an absolute form of external government for the
perpetual use of the Church, for the well ordering and cutting off dis-orders
in it.

And for the later, how careful was he to take all occasions to instruct
particular persons in the will of his Father; nay, not only to take, but even
seek them, that so he might make offer of the greatest good, that ever men in
this world could meet withal? If his Disciples only speak of bread, he
tells them he has other bread that they know not of. If a poor woman meet
him while she goes to draw a bucket of water, he preaches unto her of the
water of the well of life. If he look upon the Sun, he takes occasion thence
to instruct those who were about him, that he is the light of the world, and
that whosoever follow him, walk not in darkness. If he see but a little child,
he thence takes occasion to instruct his followers in the Doctrine of
humility, innocence, and meekness, Matthew. 18.3. If he do but hear of his
Mother and Brethren, he takes occasion to show his spiritual kindred, and
acquaintance, Mat. 12.50. And in both these, how Meekly, gently, humbly, yea,
and compassionately did he carry himself toward those that were any way
teachable, howsoever in public, and against gainsayers he taught with
Majesty, and as one having authority? Besides this, how boldly and diligently
went he about, Preaching the will of his Father in the midst of dangers,
discouragements, and reproaches, which were raised against him: not only when
they lay in wait to catch him in his speech, but even to attach his person to
mischief him? How often did the Jews take up stones to stone him? Joh. 16. and
10. How did the people assault him to throw him down headlong from the top of
an hill? Luke 4.29. how many other deadly dangers escaped he, and yet in the
midst of death could not be discouraged, nor overcome of their malice, but
overcame their evil with goodness?

Unto which most holy course of Doctrine, if we add his most innocent life, in
which was no spot or error, it adds also grace and glory to his Doctrine.
Never went any before him, or can do after him, doing good as he did: for he
never did otherwise; no word or deed ever proceeded from him, but was
answerable to the Laws perfection: so as the Church may well sing out his
beauty from top to toe which is every way matchless and incomparable, U e of
Christ. ^^^acle^ three^^ld.
Cant. 5.10.

Secondly, Christ went about doing good by many miraculous actions, all of them
directly tending to the good of man. The especial uses of them all were three.
First, to confirm the truth of his Divine person, Joh. 10.24. Tell us plainly
if thou be the Christ; to which Jesus answered, The works which I do, hear
witness of me: and again, If I do not the works of my Father, believe me
not: and Joh. 2.11. This beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Cana^ of Galilee,
and showed forth his glory. Secondly, to confirm the truth of his office: thus
the Jews could sometimes confess, that he was a Teacher sent of God, Matthew.
21.16. and Nicodemus affirmed, Joh. 3.2
that no man could do such things unless God were with him: and Joh. 6.14. Then
the men when they had seen the miracle, said, This is of a truth the Prophet
that should come into the World. Thirdly, to confirm the truth of his Doctrine,
and consequently our Faith in the same; Joh. 11.14. Lazarus is dead, and I am
glad that I was not there for your sakes, that ye may believe: and chap.
14.11. Believe me at least for the works sake.

Object. But the Prophets and Apostles also wrought miracles, and therefore
they cannot argue him more extraordinary, either for his person, or office,
than they were.

Ans. Yes, because there was great difference between his Miracles, Difference
between the miracles of Christ, and of the Prophets and Apostles.
and those that were wrought by Prophets and Apostles. For howsoever all of
them conspired in the main end of them, which was to confirm the same Doctrine,
together with the Divine person, and office of Jesus Christ: as also in the
substance of them, all of them in both being such works as transcend the power,
reach, and law of all nature created, yet differ they much,

1 In the manner of working: Christ wrought his Miracles by his own power and
strength, Luke 6.19. The whole multitude sought to touch him, for virtue went
out of him, and he healed them all. But they wrought by Christ's power, and
acknowledging themselves but Instruments, disclaim all power in themselves,
that all the glory might be Christ's, whose also the works done in and by them
are: Act. 3.12. Why stand ye gazing on us, as if we by our own power or
godliness had made this man go? The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, has
glorified his Son Jesus, -- and his name has made this man sound, verse. 16.
Yea, in the working they show themselves instruments: As, Moses commands the
Sea, but he is bidden take his staff: Elizeus divides Jordan, but he must
use his cloak, 2 King. 12.13. Joshuah divides Jordan, but by means of the Ark,
Josh. 3.13. but when Christ comes to still the Sea, he does it by his very
word, and command, which is so powerful, as the very senceless creatures obey
it. So also the Apostles in working miracles, always change their style from
Christ's. Act. 3.6. In the name of Jesus Christ I say to thee, rise and walk:
Act. 9.34. Peter to Aeneas, Jesus Christ makes thee whole, arise. But Christ
coming to a sick person, says, Mar. 5.41. Maid, I say to thee arise: yea, to
a dead man, as to Lazarus, I say to thee arise. So the Apostles in casting our
Devils, commanded them in the name of Jesus Christ to come out, Act. 16.12. But
Christ says, Come out of the man thou unclean spirit, charging them in his own
name.

2 The Prophets and Apostles had not that habitual power to work miricles, when
they would, nor could not at any time, but even then when they were commanded
by the Spirit. But Christ could when he pleased, not being at the command of
any other; but having ever that power with him which could command whole
nature: so as Christ only went about doing good by his own power and word, and
no Proph^^ or Apostle could so do it; and this power was habitual in him, which
in them was present only in some extraordinary motion.

Quest. But was not the holy Doctrine of Christ sufficient and powerful enough
of it self without miracles?

Ans. His Doctrine was such as ought to have been received for it self, if there
had been no addition of miracles, which only serve to help our weakness, whose
incredulity is such, as except we see signs and wonders, we will not
believe, Joh. 4.48. whereas we must strive to say with the Samaritans, that
we believe not now for the Miracle, but because our selves have heard him,
ver. 42.

Object. But how can those Miracles infallibly confirm his Dostrin or person,
seeing it is granted to wicked men also to work Miracles? as Pharaohs
inchanters, Simon Magus, the Man of Sin: yea, one may remove Mountains who
wants love: and many shall say in the day of judgment, Lord, we have cast
out Devils in thy name, and done many great things, to whom he shall answer,
Depart from me, I never knew you.

Difference of the miracles of the Apostles, and wonde^s wrought by the help of
Satan.
Ans. There is main difference (besides the former) between the true Miracles
of Christ himself, and his Apostles, and all those wonders and strange things
which God justly permits to be effected by Satan, and his instruments.

First, in their substance or being: for in a true Miracle, the thing is the
same that it appears to be, and has true and real, and not only seeming
effects. Moses produced a true Serpent, and very blood; whose effects were the
eating up of the Enchanters rods, and the killing of the fish: but the other
are lies, and not the things which they seem to be, called by the Apostle
lying Wonders; ^ Thessalonians. 2. mere Sorceries, Juglings, Sleights, deluding the
senses; in stead of Samuel himself, offering but a shape or appearance of him
to Saul. Thus Pharaohs Inchanters by juggling, made no Serpent, nor blood, but
the appearance of both: for the Text says expressly, it was done by Sorcery,
Exodus 7.22. and 8.7. Such lying wonders are the Popish Miracles, the sweating
of their Images, the bleeding of some of their hosts, the motions of their
Images, their speech, their weeping; most of them effected by sleight and
knavery; and many other by sorcery and juggling.

Object. But was not that a true and real effect of the Devil, when he stirred
up winds, and blow down Jobs house, and slew his children?

Ans. Yes, but no true Miracle, because it was done mediately by the natural
causes, for he knows well the matter of winds, and the manner of generating
them, and by Gods permission can gather much matter together, and join himself
with it, to make it far more violent, raging, and fitting to his purpose than
ordinary; but all this while exceeds he not the compass of nature, which all
true Miracles do. The like must be said of the fire which he brought down from
Heaven upon the Cattle and servants of Job, he created it not, for creation is
the sole and proper action of God; but added combustible matter together, Vel
ludificatio sensus, vel occultatum naturalium causarum conjunctio
and brought fire to it, by his power and agility. And thus also he infected
the air, corrupted Jobs humors, and smote him with sore boyles from top to toe.
In one word, all the work of Satan, and his instruments in such strange events,
is nothing else, but either, the deceiving of the senses, or conjunction of
natural causes to deceive by. And by the way, let the Roman Church consider
what kind of Miracle their transubstantiation is; seeing in every true miracle,
every thing is as it appears to be; and there is no appearance but of bread.

Secondly, In the end and use: true Miracles always confirm true doctrine,
always tend to the glory of God, and salvation of men; but all these false
Miracles, as they be lies, so they tend to lies, to confirm false Doctrine, to
impair Gods Glory, to hinder the Salvation of men, yea, to further and hasten
their Damnation. The Miracles of Moses tended to the dis-missing of Gods
People, according to Gods Commandment, that himself might be served, his
people eased, and Pharaoh himself (if it might be) freed from destruction: but
the lying wonders of Jannes and Jambres (for they were the Sorcerers that
resisted Moses) tended to hold them in Egypt still, against the express
Commandment of God; to harden the heart of Pharaoh, and resisted the power and
glory of God, and the good of his people, yea, of Pharaoh himself and his land.
By which rule if we shall examine Popish Miracles, we shall ever find them
brought to confirm some untruth, which has no ground in the word to stand
upon; as to prove Image Worship, prayers to the Virgin Mary, Saints, Angels,
and dead men; Pilgrimages, Monastical life, with sundry other orders, Christ's
real and bodily presence in the consecrated Host, the verity of their most
Idolatrous Mass. To which or the like purposes let them bring in their whole
legend; we are to adjudge their Miracle-mongers no better than Pharaohs
Inchanters; nor the Miracles themselves no other than the lying Wonders of
Antichrist, which cause men to believe lies, who have not received the love of
the truth.

Thirdly, they differ in the manner of confirming doctrine. For never was any
device so powerfully confirmed, as the Doctrine and Religion of Christ which we
profess. For as it is said of Pharaohs Inchanters, Exodus 8.17. after that Moses
had brought the Lice, that they assayed to do the like, but could not; so in
admirable wisdom has the Lord put forth his mighty power, in effecting such
Miracles for this doctrine, as he never suffered to be wrought for any other.
For this only has he stayed and pulled back the course of the Sun in the
Heavens; let the fire from burning; divided the Sea, and made it stand as a
wall; raised not the sick only to health, but the dead to life: strengthened
decrepit persons to beget and conceive; yea more, set apart a Virgin to bear a
Son.

Let Popish impostors leave to brag of Straw-miracles, such as was taken up
at Garnets execution; and their childish Miracles, as their late London Boy;
and show us such as these. Let us hear (but without imposture) of such as speak
with new tongues; drive away Serpents, and drink deadly poison and hurt them
not; but never was any other doctrine thus confirmed: and whatsoever Signs and
Wonders are wrought to weaken any part of this truth, or establish any doctrine
not grounded therein, as we are commanded, so we hold them all accursed.

Use 1. In that Christ went about doing good, we note, Christ's life was not
monastical, but he conversed with men to do good unto them.
that as his person was a perfect mirror of all goodness; so his life was no
monastical or cloystered life: but his delight was with the sons of men, he
eat with them, drunk with them, more familiarly conversed with them than John
did, that he might still take occasion to do them good, and communicate unto
them of his fullness of grace. Neither was his life an idle, delicate, or
pompous life, neither swelled he with abundance and wealth: but poor, mean,
industrious, and painful: he continually went about doing good. From whom how
many Ministers are degenerate; who professing themselves servants, would be
loath to be as their Lord was? some setting up themselves as it were a fatting
in a course of case and delicacy: feeding themselves (not the flock) without
fear; others climbing with restless desires to honors and preferments: others
incessantly thirsting (as if they had a Dropsy) after money and profits,
serving their Master only to carry the bag: others are doing perhaps, but
little good they do in their places, their doctrine is so cold, so indigested,
or their lives so scandalous, so offensive; or their hearts so corrupt and
cankred, as they rather oppose themselves to the doing or doers of good;
amongst all whom, the Master is out of sight, and out of mind.

2 Seeing Christ by this going about and doing good, showed himself to be that
Prophet, whom God would raise like Moses, mighty in word and deed: Deuteronomy. 18.15.
We are hence bound to believe him, and his holy Doctrine so surely confirmed by
so many and mighty Miracles; that so we may avoid that fearful hardening so
long before Prophesied to befall the Jews, Who though he had done many Miracles
before them, Read John 11.37, 38.
yet believed not they on him: and attain also the blessedness of those that
believe, without desiring to see any more new Miracles. For is not the doctrine
we profess sufficiently confirmed already? The ancient doctrine of the Church
needs no new Miracles to confirm it.
an Indenture once sealed, is confirmed for ever, and needs no new seals to
be set to it. Men do not ever water their plants, but only till they be
rooted: even so the Lord out of his wisdom would water with Miracles the
tender plant of his Church, till it was rooted in the world, and brought on to
some strength and stature; but afterward thought all such labor neednesse. If
men will broach and bring into the Church new doctrins, and devises of their
own (as the Romish Church does at this day) it is no marvail it they seek after
new Miracles to obtrude them withal: but if men will profess the ancient
doctrine of the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, to gape after new
Miracles, were too lightly to esteem of the old; and account of these powerful
works of Christ himself and his servants no better than some nine days wonders.

Christians must imitate Christ in doing good.
3 As Christ went about doing good, so must we also imitate his worthy
example, taking, yea seeking occasions to do good unto all, and that readily,
seasonably, cheerfully, to our power, yea and if need be, beyond it, 2 Cor.
8.3. And to spur us hereunto, besides this example of Jesus Christ, we have,

1 The Commandment of God, charging us not to forget to do good and
distribute, Heb. 13. with which sacrifices he professes himself to be well
pleased: whose children if we would be, we must let the streams of our fountain
also run to the refreshing and releeving of others; as he being the fountain
of all good, causes his Sun to shine, and rain to fall upon the good and the
bad.

Secondly, we are every way fitted to do good, having, 1 Callings wherein to
abide, to the good of others as well as our selves. 2 Our Lives further leased
and lengthned unto us, that in them we should glorify God, in making our
election sure, and furthering our own reckoning by doing good unto others. 3 A
most precious time of liberty, peace, plenty, and prosperity, that unless we
bind our own hands, we cannot but be doing good unto all, especially the
household of faith, Gal. 6. 4 Fit objects of doing good are never wanting unto
us. For

1 The poor we have always with us, the ministers of Jesus Christ, and other
his members that stand in need of us; and many of Gods dear ones are oppressed
and distressed, that we might never be unmindful of the afflictions of Joseph.
2 We have with us store of good men, who have most right to our goodness, the
Sons of God, the members of Christ, the Temples of the Holy Ghost; to whom,
whatsoever we do, the Lord does accept and account of it as done to himself. 3
We have in the worst of all Gods Image which is lovely, our own nature, which
should draw us to respect, if not the man, yet manhood or humanity in him: and
for ought that we know to the contrary, by the rule of charity, we must hope
that they may participate in the death of Christ, as well as our selves.

Lastly, we are provoked to do good by that blessed reward which God of his
mercy has promised to all those good and faithful servants, who when their
Master shall come, shall be found well doing.

And healed all that were oppressed of the Devil: for God was with him.
THe Apostle proceeds to prove that Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost,
and with power; because he was able to rescue out of the hands of the Devil
such as he oppressed and played the tyrant over, God having in Justice put them
under his power. Now although Christ did most powerfully spoil Satan of his
dominion which he had in the souls of men; this being the (...) of his power,
but possessed and disposed by him, and ruled at his will and pleasure. For

First, who would think him possessed that can fall down on his knees, make a
solemn profession and confession of Jesus Christ, that he is the Son of God,
and the most high, Mark 5.7. and make loud prayers unto him, as acknowledging
him to be the Lord of glory? and yet all these are the speeches and behaviors
of a man possessed, not with one or two, but with a Legion of Devils, Luke
8.28. What, do the Devils honor Christ, who fear nothing more than that he
should be honored, and hate nothing so much as he? No, but all this confession
and worship was by constraint; partly, because they knew him a Prince and a
Judge, whose power they could not resist: and partly they flatter him, to
obtain more gentle entreaty at his hands than they deserved: so many a man
professes Christ, but you shall observe, at least he may himself, that many
foul spirits breath in him: for although he know Christ (as the Devils did)
yet he obeys him not; he would fain resist him if he were strong enough to
make his part good against him: which because he cannot do, he will give him
fair words, and call him Lord and Master: he will pray to him in sickness or
distress, but it is but to get out of his hands, and keep his wonted hold still.

If the power of Christ's word come near him, he can begin to accuse Christ, and
Christian profession of unpeaceableness, and tormenting him before the time
(for what time would please these that Christ should come unto them?) he can
ask Christ and his Ministers what they have to do with him, and Christ shall
be blamed, because he cannot be at peace for him, if he would let him alone,
all should be well and quiet, but the Ministry and Discipline are
intolerable: let Christ preach, and he will preach him too, so it be such a
Gospel as brings no repentance or amendment of life to himself, but he may
remain where he was, even in the Graves, already lodged with death. When he
cannot do the greater mischief that he would, he would do the lesser if he
can: if he cannot hinder the Ministry, he can deprave it: wherein (as in all
the rest) he shows himself at the command of that wicked spirit, who when he
could no longer torment the man, would drown the swine.

Secondly, although the Devil might be forced through the power of Christ to
acknowledge him the holy one of God, so as themselves might continue Devils
still; yet who would think him guided by any other than a good Spirit of God,
that should extol the servants of Christ, their persons, their Ministry, their
doctrine? for would any conceive that the Father of Lies would praise the truth?
and yet mark what a large testimony the Devil himself in the Maid gave of Paul
and Silas, These men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us
the way of salvation: and this she did many days, A ts 16.17. Why, did not the
Devil know that they were the greatest enemies he had upon earth? Yes, he did,
but he must sometimes transform himself into an Angel of Light, he must color
all his Lies with some truth which is undeniable, he can lay all his falsehoods
upon appearance of truth; as his eldest Son Mahomet enlarged the praises of
Christ, and his Disciples, to overthrow Christian religion withal: he has his
fetch to make men believe there is an agreement between Christ, and his
Apostles, and himself, or that they needed his testimony; who therefore put him
to silence, and would receive no commendation from him, but for praises
returned sharp rebukes. Even so, many men can praise good men and Ministers
before their faces, whom they know to be deadly enemies to their vices: not
for love of their virtues, but lest they should use them: and can call them
honest men, to try if by that they can hinder them from doing the duty of
honest men, as the Devils called Paul and Silas the Servants of God, lest they
should show themselves so by dispossessing them.

Besides, they would seem herein to be better than they are, and therefore
will honor the Gospel, and bringers, with their mouths, whereas in their
hearts they cannot abide that the doctrine of it should be in sincerity, either
published or practiced: the name of Christianity and of the Gospel pleases
them well enough, so as the power and fruit of it come not near them. But as
the Devil had no sooner praised the Servants of God, but presently he changed
his copy, and never left persecuting them till he had cast them into prison,
got them soundly beaten, set fast in the stocks, and after sent out of the
City: even so, many who now commend the person and doctrine of the Servants of
God, presently (showing what spirit guides them) can accuse them to be
mutinous, and seditious, troublers of their City and State; and raise up the
whole City, and stir up the wrath of the Magistrates against them, that so
under pretense of the W^rd, or Law, or Peace, or Order, the true Ministers of
God shall be wrongfully condemned, and cast out.

Thirdly, Who would think that he could be haunted with a wicked spirit, that
can see his sin, 1 Samuel 24.17, 18. confess it with tears and indignation
against himself, openly justify the righteousness of Gods children? and yet in
the example of Saul we see that a soul possessed of Satan may do all this. For
as it is in bodily possession, though the Devils desire is incessantly to hurt
and vex the poor creatures, yet by Gods overruling power he is forced to give
them some respite, and though hardly, yet sometimes departs from them; and
not always, but sometimes casts them into the fire, and sometimes into the
water, Luke 9. So is it in spiritual possession, the Lord for the common good
bridleth often the rage of the Devil in his instruments, that they cannot
always exercise it as they would; but they have their fits sometimes, that is,
some strong lusts which Satan watches and puts himself into (as Judas his
Covetousness invited the Devil to enter into him) and also sometimes again they
have their good moods, and seem to be come to themselves; but long stay they
not here, but in a moment are changed and cast into their fits again.

Thus in a good mood, Saul could confess his wickedness, and David's innocence,
and lift up his voice and weep; and David was now his good Son, and who but
he? but presently the good spirit went, and the evil spirit came upon him, and
he became more tyrannous and furious than ever before: even so some there are
who seem to have remorse of conscience for sin, they will confess their
wickedness with tears, pray for pardon, promise amendment, beg prayers of
others (as Pharaoh) one would think them very penitent, themselves think they
are so also, but the Moon changes not so often as these spiritual lunaticks:
who hence may know that the evil spirit has taken possession of them, because
they are never long in a good mind. These few notes, instead of many, I
thought good to set down, to help men that are desirous to see how secretly
Satan works in their souls; and how he can cunningly most forceably keep
possession, when he seems most to disclaim it: that thus they coming to
perceive the disease, may run out of themselves to seek for remedy. Which what
it is, we are now in the next point to declare.

The third point in the words to be considered is, The mighty power of Jesus
Christ, who only could heal those that were thus oppressed and enthralled by
the Devil: and here consider, 1 The ground; 2 The proof or manifestation of it.
The ground was, because God was with him.

How God was with his Son, and how with his Servants.
It will be objected that God is said to have been with many of his servants
who yet had not this power: as with Joseph, Joshuah, Moses, and others.

Answ. God was indeed with them only by manifesting his presence in some
powerful or loving effect which he wrought in, by, or for them. But never was
God present with any of his Saints as he was with his Son, who had not the
virtue only and power of the Godhead effectually and energetically working
with him (which was all they had) but the godhead it self was after a sort
bodily with him: yea, the fullness of the Godhead was not only with him, but
in him bodily, Col. 2.9. as elsewhere God is said, not only to be with
Christ, but in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. So as
he of himself performed the works which proceeded from him (which they did
not) and his actions as from himself were divine.

Quest. Why then does not the Apostle more shortly and plainly say, that Christ
was God, as that God was with him?

Answ. He might indeed have so said as truly: but for the time, spares the
weakness of his hearers, contenting himself to deliver Doctrine as they were
able to receive it: in great wisdom by little and little instilling into their
minds the knowledge of Christ; and by degrees laying such grounds and
foundations, as whereby themselves might more easily rise to that high point of
Divinity, which the Apostle calls a great mystery, namely, God manifested in
the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.26.

Secondly, For the proof or manifestation of this Divine power of Christ,
Christ powerfully treads Satan under his feet.
^n overthrowing the power of Satan, and treading him under his feet, is
evident in the Scripture. The first promise that ever was made to man fallen,
is. That this seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head. According to
which prophecy, he, not only put Satan to flight in his own person, Mat. 4.
but took also his strongest holds where he had strongly fortified himself in
the persons of others, as every where the History of the Gospel records. He
rebuked the unclean spirits, and made them cry for grief and anger, Mark. 9.25.
He forced them to silence, and would not suffer them to confess him, Mar.
1.25. By his very word he chained and bound them whom no bolts could hold, nor
any other means subdue: such was his power and glory (though men saw little of
it) that the Devils could neither fly from him, nor yet abide his presence. A
whole legion of them, ran to meet him a far off, and worshipped him, Mar. 5.6.
most submisly entreated him that he would not torment them; and earnestly sued
unto him, that seeing they could no longer inhabit the man, they might have
power over the swine. By all which examples, and many more that might be
added, appears what command Jesus Christ has over the Devils, and that by
his only word he healed all those that were oppressed by them.

Quest. It is true that Christ has this power and glory in himself, How the
power of Christ foyleth Satan for us.
because God is with him, but how comes this power to be so saving and
sovereign unto miserable creatures who are held under the power of the Devil,
and that most justly?

Ans. In healing all our diseases, Mat. 8.16.17. (among which this cute is
numbered) we must knit and combine those two things which in Christ were
inseparable, namely his glory and his grace, the latter of which makeeth the
former sovereign unto us; and appears in two actions: in removing from us the
next causes of all our diseases, namely, our sins. For as the Physician in
working a cure, first removes the distempered humors of his patient which are
the matter of the disease: so does our heavenly Physician imply, that this is
the beginning of his cure, and therefore often his first word is, Thy sins are
forgiven thee, and his last word is, go, and sin no more, lest a worse thing
befall thee. 2 By taking our diseases upon himself, which (...) Physician does
or can do: but this Lamb of God takes away the sins of the world, by taking
them upon himself: for he bare our infirmities, Col. 2.22. and carried our
sorrows and sins in the body of his flesh, even to the cross, where they were
fastened with him, buried them in his grave, yea, cast them into Hell, and there
left them; by which most glorious triumph of his, the snares and letters
wherewith we were chained to death, and the Devil, are broken, and our souls
(as a bird) are escaped.

Christ only by his P^opes power casts out Devils.
Hence note, 1 That no man can cast a Devil out of a possessed party, or ever
did, as a principal efficient cause, but as an instrument, and that only by
this power of the Lord Jesus, to whom all power in heaven and earth is given,
and to whom all the honor of this power must be ascribed: for what power can
countermand Satan's, but only Gods? I grant, Satan may give place to beelzabub,
and depart his habitation for his greater advantage, and forsake a body, to get
faster hold upon the soul, or to delude many beholders: but such hostile
conquest over Satan, argues a mighty power of God, which all the Devils in
hell cannot resist.

Secondly, That whosoever find themselves any way molested of Satan, must
hasten themselves to Jesus Christ, who only can batter down the holds of the
Devil, In all thy spiritual captivity, repair unto Christ.
and work their deliverance. Feel thou thy self held under any spiritual
captivity or bondage? does the Law of evil present with thee, toil thee with
heaviness, and unchearfulness to any thing that is good? see thou in any
measure Satan's secret trains, working against thy salvation? Oh come unto
Christ! not faintly, as the Father of the possessed child, Mark. 9.22. Master,
if thou can do any thing help us: but with confidence, as the Leper, Master,
if thou will thou can make me whole, Matthew. 8.2. or as the Centurion, only
speak the word: rebuke these dumb and deaf spirits within me: and thou who only
can make the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the blind to see, and the lame
to leap for joy, set me at liberty, work my enlargement, chase away these
spiritual enemies; and thou that art the Son, set me free, and I shall be
free indeed.

In cases of sorcery and bodily oppressions by Satan, what to do.
Again, art thou in any affliction of body, or mind, or goods, or name? yea,
be it in the case of Sorcery or Witchcraft, against thy self, or any of thine,
or whatsoever belongs unto thee? look up unto Christ, he can command Fire,
Water, Winds, Seas, Diseases, Death, the Devils themselves: and if he see it
good for thee, he can check all thy grievances; he is of no less power now in
his glory at his Fathers right hand, than he was in his humility upon earth:
and yet when he was at lowest, he could command Legions of Devils, nay
Legions of Angels (as at his apprehension) much more can he now command and
rebuke the former, and pitch the latter round about them that fear him: so as
without his will, all the Devils in Hell cannot make one hair of thy head to
fall.

The superstitious sorcery of such as attempt by amulets and words to drive
away Devils and Diseases.
Thirdly, Hence are overthrown sundry superstitious and wicked opinions and
practices, very rife in the world: As,

1 Such Popish minded persons as think that by certain words and amulets,
Devils may be driven away, diseases healed, etc. And for this they allege
that in the New Testament, only by naming, Jesus such cures were effected.

To which I answer, that it is too gross a conceit, to think that there can be
any virtue in words to dive away diseases, much less Devils: or to conceive
that by the pronouncing of words, but by the virtue and power of Christ,
working by the Apostles, and miraculously put forth with those words, both
diseases and Devils gave place, and so the parties were healed.

Popish charming.
2 Such as think that by the applying of consecrated things (as they call them)
Devils are scared away: as by holy Water, Salt, hallowed Candles, relics of
Saints, the sign of the Cross, Images fashioned in such or such a place: All
which howsoever very ordinary in the Church of Rome, yet indeed are no better
than sorcery and charming; and the very practices of those who while they will
drive the Devil from others, plainly prove that themselves are spiritually
possessed by him, in that they will cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils. They object for these relics, that a soldier that was to be buried,
was revived by touching the dead bones of Elisha, 2 King. 13.21. But this was a
Miracle wrought by the finger of God, to confirm the truth preached by that
worthy Prophet, and is not to be ascribed to the touching of the bones, which
in themselves, nor at any other time, had any such virtue.

They allege also the example of the Woman having the bloody issue, who was
cured by the touching of Christ's garment: whereas that disease was cured, not
by the Corporal touching of his skirt, but by the Spiritual touching of
himself, which was by the hand of her faith: and therefore our Savior said, be
it unto thee, not according to thy feeling, but according to thy faith. They
allege also, Acts 19.12. That from Paul's body were brought to the sick,
Napkins or Handkerchiefs, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil
spirits went out of them. Which things had no such power in them, but only that
it pleased God by such weak means to produce Miracles, for the confirmation of
that holy Doctrine preached by ^aul. And therefore the text ascribes these
Miracles, not to the garments of Paul, but to God himself; who by the hands of
Paul wrought them, verse. 11. W^^^ce we may conclude, that whosoever use any
such means as these, show th^mselves, not only superstitious and wicked; but
most foolish and ridiculous to think that any bodily substance whatsoever can
work upon or violence a substance which is not bodily, such as the Devils is.
It will be alleged, that experience shows that such means as these prevail
to these intents and purposes: which we grant to be true; but that is by
Satan's subtilty, who often dissembleth a flight, as though he were forced by an
exorcist to depart: or else indeed goes away, that men might be confirmed in
their impiety, and grow more mad upon such wicked and unlawful means.

3 Others, who when Gods hand is any way upon them or theirs, Against such as
leave him with whom God is, and run to the Witch with whom the Devil is.
especially if they conceive it (as they are prone enough) a case of Sorcery or
Witchcraft, leave the help of him with whom God is; and run to one with whom
the Devil is, that is, the Wizzard or Witch, commonly called, the Cunning man,
and Woman; or the Wise man and Woman. Which because it is so common a sin, and
so bold, as men and women do not so much as Saul, who changed his garments
that he might not be known, I will by some reasons prove this conclusion, that
although a man knew that a Cunning man or Woman so called, or a Wizzard, could
and would help him; yet ought he not to seek or admit of such help, were his
case never so desperate.

1 Besides express places of Scripture against it, as Deuteronomy. 18.10. Levit.
19.31. Levit. 29.6. It is a departure from God to the Devil; Isa. 8.19. Should
not a people inquire at their God? from the living to the dead? 2 King. 1.16.
Because thou have sent messengers to inquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron, was
is not because there was no God in Israel? and indeed, the seeking to such is a
service and homage to Satan; which he often and for most part (being very
skilful in Natural things) recompenseth with cure of the disease. Augustine.
Hence did the ancient Fathers call this seeking unto them, a renouncing of
Christianity, and an Apostasy from God.

2 All help is to be sought of God, and in those lawful means which he has
appointed, and promised blessing unto. But for words, Amulets, Characters
(which are Diabolical Sacraments) or good prayers (as they call them) of the
limbs of the Devil, whose warrant have they, or what power but from the Devil?
for God never put any such efficacy either into their nature by Creation, or by
any Divine institution since: and therefore their work is from the Devil; on
his part by Satanical operation; and on the Seekers part by Satanical faith and
illusion.

Obj. But they use good means of Physic also.

Ans. Seldom or never; but if at any time they do, whence have they, being so
simple and illiterate persons, their skill, but from the Devil, or Diabolical
tradition? And who made the Devil thy Physician? who if he should minister
nothing but Natural things, thou might not accept them from him.

3 This remedy is worse and more desperate than the disease, because Gods curse
follows it: who in his Law, has commanded that whosoever go a whoring after
such, should be stoned with stones: and if any turn after such, he will set his
face against them to cut them off, Levit. 20.6. And according to this
threatening, he has executed visible Judgments against it, even against Kings
themselves (who think themselves most free to do their pleasure) as 1
Chronicles 10.13, 14. Saul dyed for his transgression that he committed
against the Lord, even against the word of the Lord which he kept not, and in
that he sought and asked counsel of a familiar spirit: therefore the Lord slew
him, and turned the Kingdom to David: Asa never came often his bed for this sin,
2 King. 1.16. and more, not only Kings, but whole Nations were cast out before
his people for this sin: and not only they, but even his own people were cast
among the Nations when they followed these ways of theirs, Isa. 2.6. Better w^
^t therefore to dye of a disease in the hand, than be recovered by the hand of
^^e Devil.

4 Mark how the Devil has circumvented such a party. 1 He has robbed him of
his faith in God, because he makes haste. 2 Of his fealty and subjection to
God, because he either denies Gods government, or the equity of it. 3 He has
got in him what he desired to win from Christ, but could not, namely, to take
up another means of safety than God had appointed. 4 He having thus set up
himself for such a man's God, he makes him commit execrable Idolatry, in
ascribing to the Devil himself that which is proper to God and Jesus Christ.

First, a power of healing, which the Devil has not further than God
permits him, to the just blinding of the sinner.

Secondly, a faith and persuasion in that power, that it shall be available to
him: which is nothing else but a secret confederacy and league with the Devil,
without which nothing can be done. This the Lord implies in the bounding of
his Laws, as Lev. 19.31. Ye shall not seek, etc. for I am your Lord: as if he
had said, you ought to depend upon me and not upon the enemy of Mankind, Levit.
20.6. Ye shall not go a whoring -- but be holy: as if he had said, have
nothing to do with such an impure spirit, if you would be an holy people.

Why God permits a power of curing to them of whom we may not seek cure.
Quest. But if God would not have them to help, why does he give them such
power of curing, of foretelling things to come, and revealing hidden things?

Ans. 1. The power of curing is from Satan, God justly permitting him, to the
further deluding of unbeleevers.

2 Neither does the Wizzard foretell things to come, but the Devil by them
such things as he by the quickness of his spiritual nature sees present in the
causes; or which God permits himself to be the worker of: and casie it is
for him to discover the Thief which himself tempted to steal.

3 The Lord permits all this, not that we should trust him or use him, but
to try whether we will depart from our God: the case here is the same with that
of the false Prophet, who must not be believed when he fore-telleth things
that come to pass.

Why then, may some say, does God suffer them to foretell such things? The
text answers, The Lord thy God tempts thee, whether thou will cleave unto
him or no, Deuteronomy. 13.3. Let all such persons as have sought to them, consider
betime how they have broken Covenant with God, betaken themselves to Satan's
help, broken prison to their greater punishment, and made stones bread: let
these bewayl the sin and renounce it: never was Saul in so fearful a case as
when he run unto the Witch; by his own confession God was departed from him.
Let no man lessen this sin, or dare to defend such limbs of the Devil under
titles of good, wise, or cunning persons; seeing these cursed blessers draw
Towns and Countries after them into their own damnation. Let none think it a
slight matter to counsel others to this sin, and remember, that by the Law of
God they ought to dye, that seek to thrust people from their God, and drive
them to the Devil: a far greater sin is this, than that which the Lord makes
capital.

Fourthly, here we have also strong consolation, The comfort of the Church is,
that Christ is stronger than all.
that Christ is stronger than the Devil, 1 John 4.4. stronger is he that is in
us, than he that is in the world: look how strong the Father is, so strong is
the Son, Joh. 10.29 and therefore his strength is as far above Satan's, as the
Creators is above the Creatures. Hence we are sure none can take us out of his
hands: not the World; Be of good comfort I have overcome the world: not the
Devil; The Prince of this world is cast out: not sin, not death; both which are
cast into the Lake: not temptation, nor persecution: for by Christ, we are more
than conquerours. All these may molest us, but cannot hurt us: they may make
war upon us, but we may pluck up our hearts, seeing we fight against
conquered enemies. and are, through his strength that has loved us. sure of
victory before we strike a blow. Let not us forget the consolation, in that
although our enemies may nible at our heels, yet the seed of the Woman has
broken their heads for us.

Verse. 39. And we are witnesses of all things which he did in the Land of
Judea, and in Jerusalem: whom they slew, hanging him on a tree.


THe Apostle having witnessed of such facts of Christ as testified him the
great Prophet of his Church, affirms in these words of himself, and the rest
of the Apostles, that they were witnesses, not only of the things formerly
u^^^ed, but of all things else, not only which Christ did in Judea, and
Jerusalem, but also which he suffered among them; and so descends to lay
down his Priestly Office in this verse, and his Kingly Office in the next.

That the Apostles were such witnesses of all things which Christ did, and
suffered in Judea and Jerusalem, will appear to him that considers, that it
was one of Christ's first actions in his Offices, after his Baptism, to call his
Disciples, who presently left all and followed him, to the end that they might
be oculate witnesses, of his mighty works, of his life, of his death and
resurrection: and that they may be ear-witnesses, of all the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth: to which purpose, he took them after a sort
into his Family, that by their domestical and familiar converse with him, all
the while he lived in the execution of his office, they might be furnished to
this testimony.

Hence is it that John says, We saw his glory, namely in his Doctrine and
Works: and, the things which we have heard and seen, declare we unto you. Many
worthy points concerning this witness of the Apostles, were here to be
delivered, but that I refer them all to the forty one, and forty two verses,
where we shall as fitly, and more fully handle the same. And now proceed to the
matter witnessed, namely, the Priestly Office of Christ, in these words, Whom
they slew, hanging him upon a tree: wherein are to be considered, 1 The Person
that was put to death, whom. 2 The persons that put him to death, they slew,
namely, of Judea and Jerusalem. 3 The kind and manner of his death, slew,
hanging him on a tree. 4 The use of Christ his Crucifying.

First, the person that was put to death, was Jesus Christ, whom we have heard
to be Lord of all; anointed with the Holy Ghost and power, to work most
powerful Miracles; who went about doing good, and never harm, with whom God so
was, as he never was with any Creature before, nor ever shall be hereafter;
who subdued mightily the very Devils themselves with one word; for all this he
was killed and slain.

How the Lord of life could be subdued under death.
Quest. But how could the Lord of life be subdued of death; yea he that did
only good, and was without all sin, which is the mother of death?

Ans. Christ the Mediator must be considered in his two Natures, 1 The
Godhead, 2 The Manhood: and in that he dyed, it was according to his
Manhood; so Peter says, he dyed according unto his flesh, 1 Pet. 3.18. for
his body was dead being separated from his soul; and his soul suffered the
sorrows of death. But yet we must conceive, that he suffered not in such a
Manhood as was a naked and bare flesh, such as ours, but such as was
inseparably united and knit to the Godhead; and therefore the Apostle says,
that God shed his blood, that is, not the Godhead, but such a person as is
both God and Man. Secondly, although he had no personal sin to bring him to
death, yet had he sin imputed unto him, even the sins of his whole Church,
which he willingly took upon himself; so as God reckoned with him, not for the
sins of one man, but of all his Church, and esteemed him as a captain sinner
till the price was paid; and men reckoned him among sinners, and esteemed him
an arch-malefactor.

Why wicked men prevail against Christ who had vanquished the Devils themselves.
Quest. But does not this cross the power of Christ immediately before
mentioned, whereby he controlled the Devils themselves, that wicked men should
thus far prevail against him?

Ans. No, but it argues a voluntary laying down of his power for the time of
his suffering; for at his apprehension he could have commanded twelve Legions
of Angels, but that the Scriptures must be fulfilled; yea, and this laying
aside of his power was the most powerful work that ever he wrought, by which he
more foiled and broke the Devils power and forces in men, than ever by any;
showing himself the true Sampson, who more mightily prevailed against his
enemies in his death, than in all his life.

Hence note, 1 How Christ's righteousness is witnessed; he went ^^^ut doing
good, and yet he is slain; and teaches that Christ himself deserved not death,
but he endured it for some other that had deserved it: and indeed. Christ dyed
for us, and in our stead, that we should not dye.

How it stands with Gods justice to punish the innocent, and let the guilty
go free
Object. But how could he, being innocent, suffer for us sinners, or how
stands it with equity, that God should punish the innocent, and let the
guilty go free?

Ans. We must consider Christ in his death, not as a Debtor, but as a Surety or
Pledge between God and us, who has undertaken our whole debt; and therefore
he suffers not as guilty in himself, but in the room of us that were guilty:
now it stands with the course of Justice, to lay the Debtors action upon the
Surety, being 1 Willing, 2 Able to pay the debt, as Christ was.

Secondly, we may gather hence the hainousness^ and odiousness of our sins, it
was no trifle, nor a matter of small desert, that the Lord of glory, the only
Son of God, yea God himself must shed his blood for: and yet what a small
reckoning is made of soul and open sins? Thirdly, take notice also of the love
of God, who to free us, would lay the chastisement of our peace upon his do^^
Son, that so his justice might be satisfied.

Object. But how could his Justice be satisfied, who was infinitely offended,
with such a finite and short death as Christ's was? The justice of God does more
appear in Christ his P^ssi^n than if all the world had been damned.


Ans. By reason of the dignity of the person who suffered, being God as well as
Man: that suffering was in value eternal, though not in duration or continuance.

Lastly, we have here the two Natures of Christ lively set before us; the one
most powerful and glorious in mighty Miracles, which forced Legions of Devils
to fly before it: the other beaten down with wrongs and injuries, even to the
death it self: and it was meet that the Apostle intending to prove Christ to
be the true Messiah, should mention both these natures, which are absolutely
necessary to the Mediator: the Humanity, that it might suffer death, and so
satisfy in the same nature that had sinned; and the Deity, to overcome in
suffering so to apply that satisfaction unto believers.

Secondly, The persons that put Christ to death were the Jews, they of Judea
and Jerusalem.

Object. But the Jews had no power to put him to death, How the Jews are said
to put Christ to death though they had no power to do it.
the Scepter was gone from them; and if the Scribes and Pharisees had had the
power in their hands, they would never have suffered him alive so long.
Besides, the Judge who was Pontius Pilate, was the Roman Emperors Deputy; the
Soldiers, his Executioners, were of the Roman band; the manner of Death also,
not Jewish, but Roman: why is it then said, that the Jews slew him, and no
mention made of the Romans, by whose authority he was put to death?

Answ. The Jews are justly charged with it, because they were the chief causes
and abettors in all that violence which the Romans used against him. They made
way to this sentence, and went as far as they could; they apprehended him, they
mocked him, they charged him with blasphemy, they raised false witness against
him, they beat him, spate in his face, they hood-winkt him, and bad him
prophecy who smote him: finally, they delivered him to the Roman governor,
accuse him with matter of death, falsely witness it against him, moved the
people to ask Barabbas, and cry, Crucify him: they are content that his blood
be upon them and their children, as it is at this day: and this is that which
Pilate in his own defense said unto Christ, Joh. 18.35. Am I a Jew? Thine own
Countrymen and High Priests delivered thee unto me: as if he had said; I
bear thee no hatred or displeasure, I am no Jew, who best know what thou have
done, being a Jew also, but thine own nation deeply accuse thee unto me.
Whence may be noted sundry instructions.

First, That the lower degrees of murder, such as are envy, hatred, Lowest
degrees of Murder condemned.
and uncharitable proceedings, are esteemed murder it self before God: for the
Jews slew Christ in that they delivered him of envy to the Romans to be slain:
The Law of God which condemns the least injury against the person of our
Neighbor, does it in these words, Thou shall not kill: The Apostle John
speaks of a mental murder, He that hates his brother is a manslayer, 1 John
3.15. he has secretly in his heart slain him already. And yet how openly do
men testify the malice of their hearts, so far as they dare, by cursed,
reviling, and murdering speeches, that they may show themselves Murderers
with witness? but alas, little know they what they do; for if the least and
lowest degrees of provoking and rancorous speeches, as to call the brother,
fool, deserve to be punished with Hell fire, Matthew. 5.22. what deserve those
venomous and spightful speeches, which numbers without all conscience,
accustom their Tongues unto? let such consider that the Apostle rangeth
Raylers in the rank with Adulterers. Buggerers, and such beastly persons as
shall never enter into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.20. Others there are, even
a generation of rough Ishmaels, men of a word and a blow, whose fists are
against every man, who instead of seeking peace, and pursuing it, devise how to
quarrel and contend, they care not with whom, and this is counted courage and
manhood; but is indeed a satanical practice, and an high degree of Murder,
which for the most part ends in the highest to the destruction of others with
themselves.

Secondly, Note that it is no less sin to sin by instruments, As great a sin to
sin by others as by our selves.
than by our own hands; the Jews were as deep (if not deeper) in this sin as
the Romans: Calaphas the High Priest was as far in it, as Pilate that read the
sentence: the one gave wicked Counsel, the other followed it: the receiver
partaketh as deep in the sin and punishment as the Thief himself. Ahab
murdered not Naboth, but because he consented to Jezabel, gives her his
ring, and concealeth her wicked intent, therefore the Lord asks him, if he
had killed, and gotten possession? 1 King. 21.9. as for Jezabel, there was
another reckoning for her behind.

David slew not Vriah with his own hands, but writing to Joab to put him in the
forlorn hope and recoyle back from him that he might be smitten by the enemy
and dye, therefore the Lord asked him, wherefore have thou killed Vriah with
the sword? 2 Samuel 11.15. and 12.9.

Communication in sin ^undry ways.
This teaches us to take heed of setting sinners a work, or any way of casting
in our lot with them, either by, 1 Commanding, 2 Counselling, 3 Countenancing,
4 Provoking, 5 Flattering, 6 Silence, 7 Winking at, as Ely, 8 Defending any sin
or sinner; for accessories are before God as principals: which is the rather to
be considered of, because men willingly deceive themselves in this behalf.
Many Masters will not work themselves upon the Sabbath day, but their servants
must for them; in whom they sin as heinously, as if they set their own hands to
work: for they ought by Gods Law, to see that their servants, nay, their
beasts, rest on the Sabbath as well as themselves.

Many Parents may hence also see their great sin, who themselves perhaps will
not Swear, Lie, Drink to drunkenness; but all these, and worse they do in their
children, over whom they watch not, whom they correct not, not use good means
to reclaim them. Many men will not themselves revile or persecute Gods
children, but can well enough bear it in others, without much offense to
themselves, or defense of the other, even when they have a calling often to do
it: Paul, so soon as he was converted, accused himself for keeping the
garments of those that stoned Stephen. And the truth of grace would make them
listen to the Counsel which Pilates wife gave her Husband, have nothing to do
with that just m^^: have no hand, no tongue, no ear, no foot to stir against
Christ in his members, if thou do not mean one day dearly to buy it.

Horrible ingratitude of the Jews noted.
Thirdly, Note The extreme wickedness and unthankfulness of the Jews, whose
sin is here aggravated, in that they persecute to the death, a just, and
innocent man, one that was sent unto them by God, that came unto them as unto
his own, among whom he had performed all his great works, had given sight to
their blind, healed their sick, dis-possessed their Devils, raised their dead,
and all this most freely and cheerfully; and yet, such was their ingratitude,
that when he came to his own, his own received him not; this chief
cornerstone was refused of the builders; this chief shepherd was smitten,
even in the house of his friends.

Add hereunto, that they persecute such a worthy, and the Lord of all, with
such indignity and despite, as they, not only reckoned him among sinners, but
preferred a Murderer before the just, and holy one of God: and wherefore? what
had the righteous man done? which of them could accuse him of sin? or might not
he have taken his enemies book upon his shoulder, and have bound it as a crown
unto him? Job 31.35. yes verily. The Apostle has told us in the words before,
what Christ had done; he had gone about, and spent all his life in doing good
unto the Jews, but they returned him evil for good, to the grief of his soul:
and therefore as David lamenteth the death of Abner, How dyed Abner? his hands
were not bound, nor his feet chained; but as a man falls before wicked men,
so did he fall, 2 Samuel 3.35. that is, Abner was a valiant and worthy man, and
so would have acquitted himself, if he could have met his enemy face to face,
and had not been wickedly and trecherously slain by Joab: even so, Christ
continued a worthy person, although (according to the Counsel of God) he fell
before wicked men through malice and envy: and as David amplified both the sin
and the punishment of such a wretch as so cowardly slew Abner, when he said,
know ye not that this day a great Prince is fallen in Israel? even so the sin
of the Jews was hereby heightened, that a great Prince fell in Jerusalem, and
the severity of Gods judgment lies heavily upon them till this day, in that
both a mighty God, and innocent man, was with all extremity of rage and fury,
pursued even unto the death.

Fourthly, note in these Jews, The malice of the wicked against Christ and his
members, is never without matter to work upon.
what an imbred malice there is in wicked men against Christ, and his Members;
for it is never without matter to work upon, if it cannot accuse justly of
evil, it can unjustly condemn for doing good: this Christ shows, Joh. 10.32.
Many good works have I done, for which of them do ye stone me? They answer
him no, but they stone him for Blasphemy: so something shall be pretended, as
Blasphemy, Treason, Mutiny, faction, or some such thing, and a form of Law
shall be followed; nothing in the world is more easy than to find out a Law
to put Christ to death by (for that is the conclusion of all wicked Laws,
Christ and his members must dye by them) but whatsoever be pretended against
them, it makes much for the glory of God, the patience of his Saints, and the
just overthrow of his enemies, that whatsoever the godly suffer at the hands of
the wicked, it is for most part, causles in themselves, and consequently unjust
in the other. Let such as profess the Lord Jesus, take notice hereof, and
content themselves, if they find return of evil for good; it was their Lords
case, and the servant can look for no better entertainment than his Lord
finds.

Let us not be weary of well-doing, although it breed us hatred of the World,
as knowing, that the same spirit of malice is gone out into the world, and does
breath in numbers that follow the way of Cain, who slew his brother, because
his works were good; as all those titles of reproach cast upon Gods Children
lowdly convince, as that they are Church-gadders, holy Brethren, too nice and
precise persons; the which and the like terms, if a man sing but a Psalm in
his Family, he cannot avoid: well, needs must Christians suffer, let their
care be to suffer only as Christians, and for well-doing: for it is no shame
to suffer as a Christian, 1 Pet. 3.17. and seeing it is the will of God that
they must suffer, it is better (says the Apostle) to suffer for well-doing
than as evil doers, 1 Pet. 4.16. many receiving indignities from men, will say,
if I had deserved such and such things, it would never have grieved me, but
Christians must be in a contrary note, it would grieve me if I had deserved
such things as I suffer at the hands of men, but I rejoice in that I have not
deserved them.

The third point is the manner and kind of Christ's death, in these words, and
hanged him on a Tree.

Quest. Why was Christ rather to dye on the Cross, than by any other kind of
death?

Answ. Some say, that because mankind was foiled in the first Adam, Why Christ
was rather to dye on the Cross then by any other death.
by means of a Tree, it was meet it should be restored by the second Adam upon
a tree; which although it be but inconsequent, yet this the Scripture
affirms, that Christ on the Cross, as upon a glorious Chariot of Triumph,
rescued his Church, foiled the Devil, spoiled Principalities and Powers, and
made an absolute conquest against all the enemies of man's salvation, Col. 2.14.
and that it was meet he should thus do by this manner of death, we want not
stronger reasons out of the Scriptures. As

First, This was the counsel of God, Act. 2.23. for the Jews did nothing
against him, but by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God; which
Counsel of God, overruled the matter, and brought it to this pass strangely;
for the High Priests had accused Christ with blasphemy, had produced witnesses
against him in that cause, yea, had his own confession, that he was the Son of
God, which they took for blasphemy: yet for this could they not put him to this
kind of death, seeing the blasphemer, by the Law of God, must be stoned, not
crucified, and so had Christ been, if the power of death had been in the hands
of the Jews, as not long before it was: but the providence of God over-ruleth
the matter so, as he must be brought before the Roman Governor, and a new
action of treasonable affecting the Kingdom be laid against him, whence it
was that Pilate asked if he were the King of the Jewe, and he answered, yea,
upon which answer, he was condemned to the most cruel death that was in use
among the Romans: for of those three kinds of death, burning, heading, and
crucifying, this last was the most severe and shameful, Christ reputed an
arch-Traytor in his life and death.
to which the chief malefactors were sentenced: and that Christ was executed as
an Arch-traytor, the inscription on the Cross, containing the crime for which
he was condemned, plainly shows, Jesus of Nazaret the King of the Jews, that
no man could look upon or read that writing, but he should presently conceive
Christ a malefactor in the highest kind of treason and rebellion.

Secondly, This kind of death was anciently prefigured, as also
fore-prophesied: it was prefigured by Isaac, laid bound upon the wood, and the
other sacrifices, which all were laid on the wood to be consumed by fire; by
the lifting up of the shoulder of the peace offering, Levit. 7.30. by the
shaking of the breast of the same to and fro, which as some say, signifies the
spreading of our Saviors hands upon the Cross: but especially by the lifting
up of the brazen serpent in the wilderness, which, (as Christ says) shadowed
his own lifting up upon the cross, Joh. 3.14.

Again, this kind of death was also fore-prophesied, Psalm. 22.16. they peirced
or dug my hands and feet: it was also foretold by himself, Mat. 20.19. They
shall deliver him to the Gentiles, and they shall mock him, and scourge him,
and crucify him: and that it was necessary that this word of Christ should be
fulfilled, see Joh. 18.32.

Thirdly, This kind of death carried with it a more special infamy than any
other (as at this day we count hanging a dogs death, that is, an infamous
kind of death) because it was especially execrable by the Law, which accursed
every one which was hanged on a tree; not that this death by any Law of nature,
or in it self, was more accursed than burning, or pressing, nor by the Sword;
for then neither the Thief on the Cross could be saved, nor any of our fellons
thus executed, whereas the scripture in the one, and our own experience in the
other, speak the contrary: but it was only accursed by the Ceremonial law of
Moses; so that every Malefactor of the Jews that was hanged, was in the
Ceremony accursed, and was the type of Christ, the substance of all Ceremonies,
who on the Cross was really and truly accursed, sustaining the whole wrath of
God, which is the curse of the Law, and not only Ceremonially and typically as
they were. This the Apostle Paul teaches, Gal. 3.13. that Christ was not only
dead, but made a curse for us: his reason is, because he dyed on a tree; and
therefore are we admonished. Phil. 2.8. to consider, not only that Christ was
obedient unto the death, but to the death of the Cross: for any other death had
not so much concerned us.

Fourthly, This death which so much concerned all the Church of the Jews, and
Gentiles, must not be obscure, and therefore the Lord would not have Christ to
dye in a tumult, or in secret, but most conspicuously and apparently; at
Jerusalem the great City of the Jews, but tributary to the Romans, as it were
upon the Theater of the World, at a solemn feast, when all the Males out of all
quarters must appear before the Lord: upon a Cross high erected, that all might
see him, and on the Cross himself proclaimed King of the Jews, in three
several Langages, the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, that all sorts of men might
come to the knowledge of it: and further, because in his death stands our
life, he must be thus lifted up that all men might see him certainly dead,
and that he dyed not in show and appearance only, but in deed, and in truth,
really and perfectly: for which cause also our Apostle doubleth his
affirmation, they slew him, and hanged him on a tree: which most necessary
ground of Faith and Religion, Satan has mightily by many Heretics sought to
overthrow: the Turks at this day are held off from the faith in this Messiah,
by that Diabolical suggestion, that not Christ himself, but Simon the Cyrenian
was miraculously crucified in his stead.

And therefore because the assurance of the death it self assures us more
fully of all the fruits and benefits of it, the Scripture is careful so
pregnantly to confirm it, as that it cannot be denied, not only that he was in
the sight of a number of thousands dead on the Cross, but by his three days
burial, by the peircing of his side, out of which came water and blood, by
which was manifest that the very Call of his heart was peirced, by the
confession of his very enemies, who would believe nothing but their own senses:
and lastly, by the fact of the Soldiers, who, whereas they hastened the death
of the Thieves by breaking their legs, they broke not his, because (the text
says) they saw that he was dead already.

The fourth point is the use of Christ's Crucifying. First, in Christ on the
Cross take a full view of the cursednesse and execration of sin, and
consequently of thine own wretchedness, both in regard of thy wicked nature,
and cursed practices; every sin being so loathsome and odious in the eyes of
God, as the least could never be put away but by such an ignominious death of
the Son of God himself.

If thou look at sin in thy self, or in thy sufferings, yea or in the
sufferings of the damned in Hell, it will seem but a slight thing: but behold
God coming down from Heaven, and him that thought it no robbery to be equal
to his Father in glory, taking flesh, in that flesh abasing himself to the
death of the Cross, on that Cross sustaining the whole wrath of his Father,
and so becoming accursed for it, and thou shall see it in the native face of
it. And indeed, this one consideration sets a more ugly face upon sin, than
the Law possibly can; for that shows our sins to be a knife to stab our
selves withal, The most ugly visage of sin that can be.
but this to be the very spear that went to Christ's heart, which is the most
odious apprehension in the world: all the sin that ever was committed on the
earth, could not bring a man so low (suppose one man had committed them all) as
the least sin of the elect brought the Son of God; seeing he that falls
lowest, falls but from one degree in earth to another, but Christ falls
from the glory of Heaven, into the very sorrows of Hell: whosoever thou art
then that make light account of sin, and pleadest that God is merciful, look
a little in this glass, wherein behold Gods Justice, and sins desert, in the
Fathers just indignation against his wel-beloved Son, whom nothing but the
cursed death of his only Son, in whom he professed himself well pleased, could
appease.

Secondly, seeing all the knowledge of Christ profitable to salvation, is of
Christ crucified, let us desire to know nothing in comparison, but Christ and
him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. seeing such a great Apostle as Paul was, desired to
know nothing else. Now to come to the distinct knowledge of it, we must
consider these three points. 1 The virtue and power of this death in it self. 2
The application of it unto our selves. 3 The fruits, which must appear in us by
such application.

For the first, Look upon this death of the Son of God, not as of another dead
man, neither think or speak of it as of the death of another ordinary felon
executed; but as of a death which slew all the sins, of all the believers in
the world, and as a destroyer of all destroyers; a death wherein was more power
than in all the lives of all Angels and Men that ever were or shall be, More
power in Christ's death than in the lives of all men and Angels.
yea such a death as has life in it, quickening all the deaths of all that have
benefit by it. Here we have a mighty Sampson bearing away the gates of his
enemies; by death, killing death; by suffering his Fathers wrath, overcoming
it; by entering into the Grave, opening it for all believers; by his Blood
shedding upon the Cross, reconciling all things, Col. 1.20. never was there
such an active suffering of any man, which tormented and crucified the Devils
themselves, when the Devils instruments were tormenting and crucifying him: it
is peerlesse and unmatchable, no Martyr ever thus suffered, though Popish
doctrine would match as Corrivals some of their Saints sufferings with it; the
most faithful Martyrs suffered but dissolution of soul and body; but Christ
besides, suffered the whole Wrath of God due to man's sin: they suffered in way
of Christian duty and service; but he to make a sacrifice of expiation of sin:
they having their sins removed, and taken off from them; but he bare all
theirs, and all believers sins in his body upon the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24.
Howsoever therefore Humane wisdom stumbleth at this death of Christ, yet must
we, by the eye of faith, labor to espy glory in ignominy, esteem of the Cross
as an honorable Chariot, and rejoice in a triumph made (as the Jews scoff) by
an hanged man; thus shall we see the foolishness of God, wiser than man, and
the weakness of God, stronger than man; thus also shall we imitate the holy men
of God, who looking back to the Cross of Christ, could see him thereon
triumphing, spoiling Principalities, breaking down partitions, reconciling God
and man, Coloss. 2.14. yea man and man, both Jew and Gentile, into one body
upon his Cross, Ephesians. 2.15. slaying hatred, and procuring perfect peace.

Secondly, seeing it is clear in the text that Christ dyed not for his own
sins, it is clear that he dyed for the sins of his elect, unto whom this virtue
of his death must be applied; and this two ways, 1 To their Humiliation. 2 To
their Consolation.

Both of them grounded hereupon, that Christ was thus Crucified for thee:
without which application, the knowledge of Christ crucified excels not that
in the Devils themselves. For the former, if Christ dyed for thee, then wast
thou the cause of his death, thou crucifyedst him, thou art as faulty and
blameworthy for his death as ever was Judas, Pilate, the Jews, or the
Soldiers; thy sins were the Nails, and the Spear, and thy self wast one of
them that peirced him: Christ's humiliation must humble Christians, and how it
does so.
which consideration seriously thought of, will be forceable to cast down the
proud conceits of those for whom Christ must be thus humbled; and cannot but
bring bitterness of spirit to him that truly conceives that himself deserved
that death, which Christ, not deserving, endured for him: yea, and to have been
held under the wrath of God for all eternity, if Christ had not freed him: urge
this point upon thy Conscience to bring thy self to the bewayling of thy sins:
Oh it was my pride that stripped Christ stark naked: it was the sin of my soul
that made his soul heavy unto the death: my corruptions were the cords that
bound him; my malice, my contempt of God, my ignorance, my woeful courses, were
the thorns and nails that wounded him, he all this while standing in my room
and stead.

Thus is it prophesied of believers in the New Testament, that when the Spirit
of grace shall be poured upon them, Zach. 12.10. they shall look on him whom
they have peirced, and lament for him: that is, by faith they shall look to
Christ whom by sin they have peirced, and th^s shall be an effectu^l means to
lead them further in^o the practice of repentance: Thus Peter, when he would
bring down the stiffness of the Jews, told them, that they crucified the Lord
of glory, Acts 2.37. which when they heard, they were pricked in their hearts,
and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Popish Preachers so
handle this matter, as to stir up compassion toward Christ, hatred of the
Jews, and Judas, and the Soldiers: but we must labor by it to come to the
hatred of our own sins, or else we shall come behind the Jews themselves.

For the latter, If Christ was thus crucified for thee, then also be thou of
good comfort, for many things were nailed on the Cross with him, even all thy
Indictment, all thy sin, original and actual, the Curse, Hell, and Death it
self dyed with him; if thou be a believer, the same nails which were driven
into his hands and feet were driven into thy sins, so as thou may look upon
the Cross as the Israelites did upon the Brazen Serpent, and thereby be cured
of all the sting of sin, and deadly sickness of thy soul: Christ his abasement
is the advancement of every Christian.
thou may behold his ignominy, as thy glorious robe; his arraignment, thy
absolution; his binding, thy freedom; his abasement, thy advancement; his
nakedness, the cover of thy shame; his death, thy life; and his Fathers
forsaking of him, an assurance that thou shall never be forsaken.

Only this knowledge of Christ crucified in special for thee, is it that can
settle the Conscience in peace: when thou know and beleevest that all thy
personal and particular sins were hung on the Cross with Christ, and that he
in thy room suffered for them, that which in Gods acceptance was as much as if
in thine own person thou had borne the Curse of the Law for all eternity. The
most content themselves generally to know that Christ dyed for Sinners, but
never care to know what this particular application means: The Popish doctrine
also is an open adversary to this most comfortable persuasion of justifying
faith: but it behooveth him that would have the right use of this Doctrine,
never to be at rest, till he can come to say with the holy Apostle, who loved
me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. and with Thomas, after he had seen the
impressions of the Wounds in his hands and side, my Lord, and my God.

Thirdly, seeing that of the two main things in this death, 1 Merit. 2 The
efficacy; none shall have his part in the former, that has not in the latter:
our care must be, if we would find life in this death of Christ, never to be at
rest until we find the fruit and effect thereof in some sort in our selves. The
most powerful fruits of it are reduced to two Heads, the former is an
ingrafting of us into the similitude of his death; for he dyed that we after a
sort should dye with him. The latter is a framing in us the quality of his
life; for therefore he dyed for us, that we should live unto him: both of these
are required to the right knowledge of Christ crucified; joined, Ephesians. 4.24.
and enjoined him that would know Christ as the truth is in Christ; called the
casting off of the old man, and the putting on of the new. What it is to be
planted into the similitude of the death of Christ, the Apostle shows;
namely, when our old man is crucified with him, Romans 6.6. but when is that
done? the next words answer; when the body of sin is destroyed: that is, not
when sin is restrained, or some sins cut off; but when original sin, that is,
the old man is killed, in all the parts and members of sin; when men hate,
abhor, and groan under their corruptions, yea even their smallest and
sweetest sins: this is a fruit of Christ's death, and noted to be in all those
that are Christ's, when it is said, that they crucify the affections and lusts,
Gal. 5.24.

Quest. But how are these lusts crucified by the death of Christ? How Christ
his c^ucifying crucifieth the lusts of Christians.


Ans. Not only by that deadly blow which Christ has given them by his death:
but also by setting often before thine eyes this death of his especially in the
time of temptation. For example, being tempted to impatiency in sustaining
wrongs, look upon Christ on the Cross, what sharp things he suffered, the
thorns, the nayls, the spear, and all this while as a sheep dumb before his
shearer: in motions to pride, look to Christ on the Cross thus far humbled
for thy sins: if to revenge, behold Christ on the Cross praying, and dying for
his deadly enemies: if to oppress the poor and innocent, see Christ on the
Cross suffering his blood to be sucked out for those whose blood thou suckest:
so in temptation to any other sin, deny it, and say, Oh no, I see Christ on the
Cross made a curse for my sins already, I have done him wrong enough already,
I will not add this to the former, I see rather an infinite debt due from me
toward him; and I must rather think of the payment of that, than offer to run
in further.

Thus we see both the duty and the means, neither of them both are regarded by
many: some would fain see Christ on the Cross, for the remitting of their sin,
but not for the crucifying of it: their lusts are as strong as ever bebefore:
pride, contention, hastiness, voluptuousness, worldliness, live and thrive
in them, and yet they say, Christ was crucified for them, whereas if Christ be
crucified for thee, the world is crucified unto thee, and thou unto the world.
Others, because Christ is come and dead for sinners, make a clean contrary
argument: Christ dyed for sinners, and therefore they will live in their sins:
as though that were the work of Christ upon the Cross to maintain sin, and
Libertine courses, and not rather to abolish the same: what a fearful thing is
it that men dare make the death of the Son of God as a common pack-horse to lay
all their sins upon, while yet hereby they embolden themselves in the
multiplication of them?

Many will not endure to have their lusts pricked in the Ministry, and much
less crucified.
Others are so far from crucifying their lusts, as they will not endure to
have them pricked or touched in the Ministry: Oh meddle not with mine eyes, I
can not endure it: or if they endure to crucify many, yet some sweet sins
shall be spared, they are sweet morsels, or fat morsels, profitable or
pleasurable sins, and they must not be let go: but never a one of all these
ever tasted in truth the least fruit of the death of Christ.

The second fruit that must appear in us, is the life of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.15.
He dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which dyed for them and rose again: Romans 6.11, 12.
Likewise think ye also that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God in Jesus
Christ: 12. Let not therefore sin reign in your mortal body. In which places,
this life of Christ is opposed to the course of our lives framed of our selves;
and is nothing else but to depend upon Christ in all things, to give up all our
thoughts, words, and actions to be guided by his word, and directed to his
glory, and so to order our whole course, as his blessed Spirit may appear to
breath, lead, and live in us. Now that this fruit should be added to the
former, is evident, 1 Pet. 2.24. He bare our sins upon the tree, that we being
dead to sin, should live in righteousness.

Thus therefore help thy self by this meditation, shall my Lord Jesus so
willingly forsake his glory for me, and shall not I forsake my sin and shame
for him? shall he contentedly dye an accursed death for me, and shall not I as
contentedly dye to an accursed life for him? Shall he dye to glorify me; and
shall not I live to glorify him? Shall not he think his heart-bloud too dear
for me, and shall I love any thing better than him? Thus to behold Christ on
his Cross, will help thee forward in this fruit also.

To which purposes the Lord in wisdom has instituted the Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments, No marvel seeing the Papists shu^ out the preaching of
Christ crucified, that they must see him in Crucifixes and such Idolotrous
representations
that we might have Christ crucified, Gal. 3.1. continually as it were hanging
before our eyes: which ordinance of preaching Christ crucified, were it in
request in the Church of Rome, they should not need their manuary Bables,
Crosses, Pipes, Crucifixes, their Agnus Dei, and the rest: neither would they
with religious adoration honor the Wooden Cross, to the dishonor of him that
dyed upon it: but accursed be all such dead and Idolatrous representations
against the word; let it be our happiness with care and reverence to frequent
the Word and Sacraments, which are blessed means ordained of God, not only to
set Christ on the Cross before our eyes, but to bring into possession those
happy fruits formerly described.

Verse. 40 Him God raised up the third day, and caused that he was showed
openly.
THE Apostle having delivered the Doctrine of Christ his death, he orderly
descends to instruct his hearers also of his resurrection, without which his
death had never been beneficial unto them.

And the words in general imply one point not to be omitted: For howsoever the
Apostle expresses nothing between Christ his hanging on a tree, and his
raising again; yet because it cannot be properly said, that he was raised
from the Tree, or from the Cross, which was a kind of exaltation and lifting
up, necessarily must be included a lower estate than that was; namely, that
condition of the dead under which he lay for a certain time, as it were cast
from the face of God his Father, and of men, yea, from the face of the earth:
Christ submitted to the lowest estate of death, why.
when death and sin seemed to triumph over him all the while of his burial,
when they had him in the grave, the house of death. This was the low estate
from whence he rose, the which he willingly submitted himself unto for a time.

1 That the faith of his Church might be confirmed, in that he was truly and
certainly dead, and not in show or appearance.

2 That his victory and conquest over death might be more glorious; in that
he could not hold him down when he had him in his own house; but like a
mighty Sampson he carried away the gates of his enemies.

3 To remove by undergoing for us that fearful state of death and damnation,
which we had otherwise for ever lain under; to sanctify unto us our estate
under temporal death, which is sweetened by his death: to make our graves as
so^t and perfumed beds of rest, by his lying in the grave: and that we also
therein by being subdued under corruption, might put it off, and so be sitted
to immortality and glory.

4 To teach us, that our head being of power to rise from the power of death
when the bands of it wrapped him round about; can now much more being in glory,
draw us his members out of the deepest pits of danger or thraldom, spiritual
or temporal; and will in his time set us free. This time we must wait, but not
appoint it; neither distrust his power and grace when we are in the deepest of
our distress.

5 That seeing it was his pleasure to submit himself to the lowest estate of
humiliation before his exaltation; we might also with more cheerfulness
content our selves, to suffer even any abasement with him, and for him, before
we look to reign with him.

The words of the verse contain two things. 1 The assertion of Christ his
resurrection, Him God raised up the third day. 2 The manifestation or evidence
of it, and caused that he was openly showed. The former part is laid down in
four distinct points. 1 The person raised, him. 2 The person raising him, God.
3 The action it self, raised, 4 The time when, the third day.

First, the person raised is Christ: where,

First, It will be demanded how Christ can be said to be raised, How Christ
can be said to rise, seeing neither his Deity nor the soul of his humanity
arose.
seeing he consisted of a Divine and a Humane nature whereof the first could
neither fall nor rise: and for the second that also consisted of soul and body;
the former of which being the principal part dyed not, but was in Paradise.
Seeing then neither the Deity, nor the soul of his Humanity, nor his person did
rise, but only his body; how can Christ be said to be raised?

Answ. In sundry other places of Scripture besides this, we meet with such
synechdochical phrases and forms of speech, wherein somewhat is attributed to
the whole, which is proper but to one part, and that ascribed to the whole
person, which belongs but to one nature: which comes to pass by reason of
that straight and personal union of the two natures in Christ. Thus we read
that God purchased his Church by his own blood, Act. 20.28. and that the Lord
of glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. of the sons being in heaven and in earth at
one time, Joh. 3.18. of Christ's being before Abraham was, Joh. 8.58. of his
being omnipotent, etc. All which are spoken of the whole person, but properly
are to be referred to the several natures to which they do agree.

Thus the Apostles sometimes expound them, and teach us so to do; 1 Pet. 3.18.
Christ was mortified according to the flesh, and quickened according to the
spirit, 2 Cor. 13.4. He dyed according to the infirmity of his flesh, and was
quickened according to the power of God: and to help our conceit herein, serves
that school distinction, Lords Christus, non totum Christi
which says, that whole Christ is said to do this or that, which the whole of
Christ did not: yea, our own common form of speech says, a man is dead whose
soul lives, and a man is asleep when his body only sleeps.

2 We have hence to note that the same body was raised which had been laid
down in the Grave, and no imaginary body, neither any other body for it; for
never was any other laid there before. Of all which himself against all
Heretics gives sufficient evidence, as in the manifestation following
remains to be cleared.

3 That this person raised was not a private person, but the same who had as a
public person been abused, accused, condemned, and executed; and now as a
public person also raised from the dead; in whom all his Church, and every
member of it rose again: for whosoever have interest in his death, have their
part also in his resurrection.

4 Here is a further thing in this person to be noted than ever was in any:
the first Adam was a root also and a public person; when he sinned, he
sinned for himself and us, and having sinned, and we in him, he dyed away, and
left us in that sin; and being dead we hear no more of him: and the
Scriptures, though they record at large the Histories of the holiest men that
have lived, yet when once they come to this, that such or such a man dyed, we
hear no more of him: but with Christ it is not so; who was not only as another
Sampson, who bewrayed the greatest power in his death; but herein unmatchable
and peerless, that he did greater things after his death, than ever he did in
all his life: Contra. Faust. lib. 16.
insomuch as Augustine was wont to say, that the faith of Christians was
Christ's resurrection.

We must not then content our selves, with common people, that Christ is dead
for all, and no more; but fasten our eyes upon his resurrection so much the
more diligently, by how much it is easier to believe that he was dead, than
that he rose again. And what other thing can more fitly be collected from
that practice of all the Evangelists, who in other things, while some of them
omit one History, some another, or else some of them briefly point at, and
lightly touch and pass over some other Histories, all of them set themselves of
purpose to be copious and large in this of Christ's resurrection; that the
faith of Believers might be firmly grounded herein, and the rather, because no
benefit of his resurrection, none of his death: and without the certain
apprehension hereof, all Preaching, and Hearing, and Faith were in vain; and
we our selves were yet in our sins: To which Apostolical practice, this of our
Apostle is not unsuitable in this place in hand, 1 Cor. 15.17, 18. who while
he almost in one word makes mention of the death of Christ, he at large
prosecuteth and proves the truth of his resurrection.

The second point, is to consider the person that raised Christ. Him God
raised, that is, God the Father, Act. 2.24. And have crucified and slain, whom
God had raised: and 3.15. Ye have killed the Lord of Life, whom God has raised
from the dead. More plainly is this work attributed to the mighty power of the
Father of glory working in Christ, and raising him from the dead, Ephesians. 1.17,
20. and to him at whose right hand he sits: so Romans 4.24. We believe in
him which raised our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead.

Object. But Christ raised himself, Joh. 2.19. Destroy this Temple, and in
three days I will raise it again: and hereby was he mightily declared to be
the Son of God by raising himself from the dead, Romans 1.14. In like manner is
this resurrection of his ascribed to the Holy Ghost, Romans 8.11. If the Spirit
of him which raised up Christ, etc. therefore the Father raised him not.

Answ. Here is no contrariety, the Father raised him, and he raised himself.
For

1 There is but one Deity of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is the
common foundation of all their actions. 2 There is but one power common to them
all three, and this is the power that Christ challenges he has, to lay down
his life and take it up again. Opera ad extra communia tribus personis.
3 There is but one common act in them all three, for the putting out of this
power unto any external action without themselves; of which Christ speaking,
Joh. 5.19. says, whatsoever the Father does, the same things does the Son
also. In these respects holds the speech of the Apostle, These three are one,
1 John 5.7. that is, these three, 1 In the true and real distinction of their
persons: 2 In their inward proprieties, as to beget, to be begotten, and
proceed: and 3 In their several offices one to another, as to send, and to be
sent, these three are one in nature and essence, one in power and will, and one
in the act of producing all such actions, as without themselves any of them is
said to perform.

Secondly, Although here is no contrariety, yet here is an order in the working
or administration of the person to be observed: for the Father as the first
efficient in order, raises Christ as man, by the Son as a second efficient in
order, and by the Holy Ghost as a third. For as it is in all the matter of
creation, so is it in all the works of redemption: they are ascribed unto the
Father especially; not because they agree not unto the other two persons, but
because he after a peculiar manner works them, namely, by the Son, and by
the Holy Ghost; but they not by him, but from him: and so neither this, or any
other such place, where it is ascribed to the Father to raise his Son Jesus,
must be conceived, either as making Christ (as the Son) inferior in power to
his Father, or as excluding his own mighty power in raising himself; for they
show only the order of the persons, but make no inequality in essence, or
power, or will, or working.

Thirdly, where the Son is said to be raised of the Father, it must not be
understood of the person of the Son, but in respect of his nature assumed, that
is, his humanity. Whence observe, that as the former point showed that Christ
was a true man, because he was in the state of the dead, whence he was
raised; so this consideration shows him to be a true and glorious God, and
notably concludes that which the Apostle aims at, who would hence prove him
to be Lord of all, in that by his own power he raised himself from death; and
so mightily declared himself the Son of God, Romans 1.4. Ubi resurrectio non
passive sed active accipitur cum sit (...) deitatis. Christ's Deity cle^red by
his glorious resurrection.
and Lord of all, blessed for ever.

This is it which makes him the fit object of our Faith, and if he had not
expressed himself as well a true and perfect God, as a true and entire man, we
ought not to have believed in him: we believe not then (as the Jews scoffingly
say) in a crucified God; but in a God raising and exalting to glory, by his own
omnipotent power, an assumed humane nature, even then when it lay under the
curse of all the sins that ever have, or shall be committed by the true
members of the Church; the which thing no power of man or Angel, nor any
created nature, could ever turn hand unto, could ever have stood under, and
much sess have swum out with conquest and victory: neither indeed had he
himself, if there had remained the least sin of any the elect to have been
accounted for: we need then no other sign to be given us to prove his Deity,
but this sign of Jonas: and when the Jews demanded a sign why he took such
authority upon him; he gave them no other, but sent them hither, destroy this
Temple, and I will rear it on three days, Joh. 2.18, 19, etc.

It was necessary that Christ should rise again, reasons.
The third point is the raising it self: wherein three points are to be
opened, 1 The necessity of Christ's rising. 2 The manner. 3 The fruit or ends of
it. First, it was necessary that Christ should rise again in three respects.

1 For the accomplishment of things fore-appointed and foretold: it was from
all eternity decreed and appointed by God, and therefore it behoved Christ to
rise from the dead the third day, Luke 24.46. and it was impossible that he
should be held down of death, Act. 2.24.

Again, the Scriptures must necessarily be fulfilled, all which beat upon
these two points, 1 His sufferings, Luke 24.26. 2 the glory that should follow,
1 Pet. 1.11. And more specially all those predictions, and types of his
resurrection enforced this necessity, Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul
in grave: which our Apostle proves cannot be meant of David, whose body saw
corruption; but that David spoke concerning him: Isa. 53.10. when he shall
make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, and prolong his
days: Besides his own prediction of his resurrection, must either be
fulfilled, or he could not have been the only true Prophet of his Church: for
himself had said, that the Jews should slay him and crucify him, but the third
day shall he rise again, Matthew. 20.17. and this the High Priests and Pharisees
remembered well, when they came to Pilate and said. Sir, we remember that this
deceiver while he was alive said, within three days I will rise: command
therefore that the sepulcher be made sure, etc.

Add hereunto, that all the predictions of his ascension, of his triumph, and
of the last judgment, depended hereupon. Further, the types which
fore-shadowed his resurrection, must not be frustrate, but answered in the
truth of them: as that of Jsaac bound upon the wood, but yet reserved alive,
whom his Father received from the dead after a sort: of Sampson escaping the
revenge and malice of his enemies, by carrying away the gates wherein he
seemed fast shut: of the two goats, one slain for sin, the other a scapegoat,
shadowing Christ both slain for sin, and yet escaping, Levit. 16.5. of the two
sparrows, the one killed, the other let fly: and the most express of all, that
of Jonah, which Christ himself mentions, Matthew. 12.39. and most properly
applies to this very purpose.

Neither the person of Christ, nor any of his Offices could suffer him to abide
long under death.
2 It was necessary in respect of himself, whether we consider the excellency
of his person, or of his office. For his Person, he was by nature the eternal
Son of God, the Lord of Life and Glory; and by no better means could he be
discerned to be this true and natural Son of God, or the resurrection and
life, than by raising himself from death to life by his most glorious power.
Hence it was that himself a little before his death, prayed in these words:
Father, glorify thy Son, Joh. 17.1.

As for his Office, as he was set out by his Father to be a perpetual
Mediator between God and the Church; so was he to be an everlasting King of
Glory; Not his kingly.
of whose Kingdom there must be no end, Luke 1.33. according to that Prophecy
of Daniel 7.27. The Kingdom of the most High is an everlasting Kingdom. And
according to the oath of the Lord, recorded Psalm. 89.36. I have sworn once by
my Holiness, that I will not fail David: his seed shall endure for ever; and
his Throne as the Sun before me, he shall be established for evermore as the
Moon, and as a faithful witness in the Heaven. Selah.

2 He must be also a Priest for ever after the order, Not his Priestly Office.
not after the order of Levi or Aaron, but, of Mel^hisedeck, without beginning
or end of days: and this also the Lord had sworn unto his Son, and could not
repent, that he should be a Priest for ever, Psalm. 110.4. wherein the
Priesthood of Christ is advanced above all the Priests that ever were, who
having received their Office in time, in time also ceased their office with
their life, but Christ his Priesthood was not limit^ed in any time, but was
every way eternal. They were many who succeeded one another, because they were
not suffered to endure by death, Heb. 7.23. But this man because he endures
for ever, has (no successor, but,) an everlasting Priesthood. They were made
Priests after the Law of the carnal Commandment, but he after the power of
the endless life, verse. 16. that is, he was not made a Priest by the Law,
namely Ceremonial, which established for a time dying and vanishing things,
signified by the name of flesh: but he was made by the efficacy of the Word
and oath of his Father, which gave him endless life, and perpetual duration; so
as neither death it self, n^^ the grave could hold any dominion over him, when
they seemed to have clasped him fast in their bands; which yet were powerful
enough to have held down any or all other men in the world besides himself: and
the Apostle to the Hebrews gives a double reason why he must necessarily
outlive death it self.

The former, because he must not only make a perpetual oblation that need no
repetition; but also he must live ever to make intercession, Heb. 7.25. and
that perpetually, without which the Apostle implies that he had not perfectly
saved his people. This is most clearly proved, Romans 8.34. It is Christ who
dyed; yea, or rather which is risen again: who is also at the right hand of
God, and makes intercession for us: and Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered into the
very Heaven to appear now in the sight of God for us: which appearance of his
in Heaven with his Merits, has the force of the most effectual prayer that
ever was.

The latter is, By dying Christ offers, and by rising he applies his
sacrifice to the conscience of believers.
that he may not only make one offering for sin (as those Priests did many)
but that he may always live to apply it (as they did not) and see that his
people have the benefit of it; not only before God for the appeasing of his
wrath, but also for the purging of their consciences from dead works to serve
the living God: as the same Apostle notes, Heb. 9.14. and in the last place to
bestow upon every believer the spirit of faith, whereby they may apprehend, and
apply his sacrifice to their own salvation.

Neither does it any whit impeach the eternity of Christ's Priesthood, because
four thousand years almost of the world were passed before he suffered: for
howsoever the execution of it was not all those ages after the beginning of the
World; yet the virtue, efficacy, and benefit of it, reached to the first
Believer that ever was in the World, Adam himself, whose faith in this seed of
the woman saved him. Abraham also saw his day and rejoiced: and the Holy Ghost
fears not to call him the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World, Rev.
13.8. namely, 1 In Gods Council and Decree. 2 In the virtue and efficacy of his
Sacrifice. 3 In regard of Gods acceptance of it for Believers. 4 In the types
and shadows of it, whereof the Ceremonial Law was full. And much less does that
hinder it from being eternal, in that after the day of judgment it shall
cease, when we shall stand no more in need of Priests or Saviors: for
howsoever the execution of this office shall then cease, yet the virtue and
efficacy of it shall last for ever and ever.

3 He must be also the perpetual Prophet of his Church, Nor his Prophetical.
the unchangeable Doctor of his Church, and the Apostle of our profession: who
must constantly send his Spirit to lead us into all truth, raise up Teachers,
and hold them in his right hand, for the gathering of the Saints, until we
all meet, in the unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4.13. so as it is cleared that no part of his Offices could admit that he
should abide under death, and therefore necessarily in this second respect must
rise again.

Thirdly, It was necessary he should rise again, because he was so to dye as
that thereby he must overcome, yea* and destroy death, which he had not done,
if he had lain conquered of death still in the grave: yea more, he must so
dye as that he must give eternal life to his sheep, Joh. 10.28. and by his
death merit it, put, and hold them in possession of it for ever: all signified
in the phrases following, they shall never perish, neither shall any take them
out of my hands: which could never have been accomplished, it himself had
perished, and had been left in the hands and house of death. But hence has he
brought his Church strong consolation, in that being risen from the dead he
has fully overcome death, satisfied for every sin of every Believer, and risen
from under all that weight of sin and death which would have oppressed us for
ever; yea, even himself, if he had left one of our sins that believe in his
name unsatisfied for.

Out of this that has been spoken, comes to be answered that objection,

That seeing Christ by his death paid the price of sin unto God, what need we
more of him, we can be but acquitted and discharged?

Ans. The providing of the most sovereign Plaster is not enough to work a Cure,
but the apply^ng of it also. Neither was it sufficient for Christ to perform
the former part of his Priesthood, namely satisfaction for sin, if he had not
added the latter thereto, which is the application of it. This latter makes
the former ours, and comfortable unto us. And both these the Apostle affirms
of Christ, Romans 4.25. Christ was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen
again for our justification: where by justification is meant by a Metonimy, the
application of justice.

II. The second point propounded to be considered of in the rising of Christ,
is the manner of it, which will appear in three things: the 1 Concerning his
Soul; the 2 his Body; the 3 his whole Humanity standing of both.

First, the Soul of Christ which on the Cross was separated from the body,
commended into the hands of his Father, and translated that same day into
Paradise, was by the mighty power of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
brought back into his dead body, lying in the grave: quickened it, and made it a
living body, moving and sensible in it self, and unto others.

Secondly, the self-same Body which was born of the Virgin Mary, educated in
Egypt and Galilee; which was apprehended, condemned, crucified, and laid in
the Grave, came out of the Grave a living body; God by the ministry of the
Angels removing all lets, loosing the bands and apparel of death from often his
blessed body; by the earthquake tumbled away the stone that held him down,
drove away the Soldiers for fear, who would have assayed to have killed him
the second time if they had seen him rise: and so opened the Grave, that all
might see the body was gone.

Thirdly, the whole Humanity was raised glorified. For 1 His Body put off all
such infirmities and passions as he pleased to make trial of for our sakes,
that he might be a more merciful High Priest: such as are hunger, thirst, cold,
weariness, pain, and death it self: and contrarily put on such excellent
qualities as are fit for a glorified body; Christus gloriam corpori su^ dedit,
naturam non abstulit.
such as are agility, brightness, incorruption, immortality, and the like.

But here two rules must be remembered; the former that none of these qualities
are Divine properties: for although the Deity personally inhabiting this Humane
nature, does adorn it with all perfection of most excellent qualities, yet must
they still be conceived as finite and created accidents, which destroy not the
nature of a body: they beautify it, but deifie it not; they make it not
omni-present nor yet invisible, for then should it cease to be a body, and
become a spirit to which only these can agree.

The latter rule is, that although Jesus Christ rose most glorified, yet did
he still while he was up on earth, veil his Majesty, and showed not himself in
that perfect glory, the degrees of which he was now entered into; not only
because he would reserve the fu^l manifestation of it until the last Judgment,
but also in regard of his Disciples and faithful ones, that they might be able
to discover the self-same body, which they had formerly well known: and that
his surpassi^g glory should not hinder or affray them from that further
familiar converse with him, whereby they (being to be his witnesses) might be
confirmed and fit^ed to their testimony, by seeing, hearing, yea and touching
him. Hence was it that while he was on earth, after his Resurrection, he would
carry the s^ars and prints of the spear and nayls, that they might put their
fingers into them for their better discerning of him. Hence also although he
rose naked out of the Grave, and left the clothes behind him (for that was
agreeable to the state of a Glorified body, which stands no more in need of
clothing for necessity nor ornament, than Adam did in the state of innocence)
yet in respect of their infirmity to whom he was to appear, he used clothes:
and although he needed neither meat nor drink, yet for their sakes and ours,
he ate and drunk, as we shall after see.

Secondly, as for the soul of our blessed Savior, it was beautified with such
a measure of knowledge as excelled all creatures Men or Angels; even such as
was meet for such an head: the Godhead revealing unto it all things which
either it would know, or in regard of his glorious Office ought to know. The
like is t^ be said of Righteousness Holiness, and the rest of his Graces:
wherein he was set so far above all Creatures, as they all are not able to
comprehend them: and yet in regard of God, all of them finite as his soul it
self is.

III. The third point in this rising of Christ, is the fruit or benefits of it,
which will appear to be not so many as great, if we attentively consider,
either 1 The Evils that hereby he has removed, or 2 The good things he has
pr^cured unto his people. The former is manifest, in that hence all the enemies
of man's salvation, are not only utterly subdued, but made not only not
formidable and terrible, as before, but after a sort friendly, at least
beneficial unto Believers: the which point after we have a little cleared, we
will proc^^d to the second sort of benefits hence also accrewing.

Jo^huah in leading the people, Joshuah a singular type of Christ, wherein.
and putting them in possession of the land of Canaan, w s in many things a
singular type of Jesus Christ: As that he begins where Moses ends; his
calling was confirmed to him by the voice of God himself: the end of his
calling, to guide the people to the promised Land of Canaan: the destroying and
casting out all the enemies that lifted up hand against them: the dividing of
the Land according to their Tribes, and so preparing after a sort to every one
his mansion: the establishing of Laws and Ordinances to be observed of all the
Subjects of that Kingdom: the peoples ackn^wledgment of him for their Captain,
their promise of frank obedience, and o subjecting themselves to whatsoever he
commanded them. In one word, the whole History does represent our true Joshuah
or Jesus, who is the accomplisher of all Gods promises concerning the heavenly
Canaan, and the leader of Gods people to true felicity: but in no one action
did this worthy Captain of the Lords Hosts, more lively resemble the Truth or
true Joshuah, than when at one time in one Cave he slew five Kings; who being
deadly enemies against the people of God, made out a strong head, and united
their forces to hinder their peaceable possession: For our Joshuah or Jesus,
which is all one, went into the Grave or Cave where he was buried, and there
met with, and slew five mighty Tyrants, and came out a most glorious Conqueror.
The names of these five Kings, were 1 Sin, 2 Death, 3 Hell, 4 Satan, 5 The
World: over all whom Christ by his powerful resurrection most gloriously
triumphed.

The first enemy soyled by Christ is sin
The first of these enemies is Sin: who had for ever reigned in us to death,
and held us under his power, if Christ had not br^ken his power by his
Resurrection. So says the Apostle, if Christ be not risen again, We are yet
in our sins, 1 Cor. 15.17. But it is plain this enemy is soiled: for if the
guilt of one sin had remained unabolished, and Christ had not paid the
uttermost faithing, he had never risen again.

A great quest^on answered at large.
But against this will be objected, that not withstanding Christ's rising we
see sin rule and reign in the most, and has as much dominion and power as it
ever had or can have: and if we look at the best, they have many sinful
actions found in their hands, plainly arguing, that sin moves and stirs,
and is not dead in them. How say we then that Christ by his resurrection has
slain it?

Answ. We must here observe a twofold distinction, whereby we shall more
easily loose this knot. First, of persons, some are members of his body, and
some, yea the most are not: some are sheep, but the most are goat; some are in
communion with him, as the s^i^ns set and growing in the root; but the most are
out of fellowship with him, and are no otherwise knit unto him than a sciens
tied to a tree by a thread, I mean by the slender thread of outward profession.
Now as the Head only imparteth of the life, sense, motion, protection, light
and comfort which it has* to the members of its own body, and no other: even
so the Head of this Mystical body, quickneth, moves, protecteth, inlightneth,
graceth, saves only such as are in true communion with him: for these sheep
only he gives his life; for these he rose again; for these he spoiled
principalities and powers; for these he slew hatred; yea, not for these only,
but in these also, and in these only. As for all the rest, he prays not for
the world, namely, the wicked of the world; he dyed much less for them, his
death killed none of their sins; but they are left in their sins, and unto the
reign and damnation of their sins, without all benefit either of the death of
Christ, or of his resurrection. When we lay then, that Christ killed sin, we
must be understood (according to the Scriptures) only for, and in true
Believers, who only can receive of his fullness. The latter distinction
concerns sin; wherein we must consider two things: 1 the guilt. 2 The
corruption of it.

In believers the whole guilt of sin is abolished by Christ, though not the
whole corruption.
The whole guilt of sin, is wholly and at once abolished to all believers by
means of Christ his Death and Resurrection, but not the whole corruption; which
while they dwell in the body will dwell with them: yet so as they neith^r live
in it, not it scarcely live in them. For the former, the Apostle asks this
Question, Rom 6.2. How can we that are dead to sin, live in it? and hence it
is, that such as are in communion with Christ, are not only said to be dead,
but buried also with Christ: and consequently they leave their sins in his
grave, even as Christ himself left them there: where if they be left, there
will be a ^^tting and consuming of them away, that they will be every day
less than other, even as it is with the body that lies in the grave: and those
which remain yet unmortified, they will be even as dead ca^kases, All the
motions of sin in the ^ ^ct (...) only in letting the life of it go.
loathsome and stinking, which above all things the godly desire to be
covered. Now how impossible is it that these should be the practices of such as
live in sin. Nay, I say more, that all the corruption of sin left in the godly,
can scarcely be said to live in them. I grant indeed, some moving and stirring
of it in them, but it is such a motion as is in a beast which has the throat
cut: it strugleth and striveth in letting life go: but the beast is killed, and
the unclean issues of sin in the godly (which indeed are many) are like such
issues which come from a dead man, and are a very parting from them, rather
than any argument of the life of sin, or of any delight in them. This is that
which the Apostle aims at, Romans 6.7. He that is dead, is freed from sin: as
the Thief once hanged, steals no more; so sin once dead and executed in
Christ, lives no more in state or strength: the sinews of this giant are cut,
and what strength of motion can be in it? In a word, it is in Believers but
dying sin, sin destroyed: the whole Host of sin is discomfited, though some
straglers of the Army wander here and there as Rebels in another man's dominions.

The second Enemy is Death, which entered into the World by sin, The second
enemy is death.
and went over all men, in that all men had sinned, and stands in full force
and state by sin wheresoever it reigns. Now Christ by removing the cause,
has also removed the effect: for sin being slain, death is also swallowed up
in victory: he has made his word good, O death I will be thy death; who
although he be the last enemy that shall be fully destroyed, yet has he
disarmed him, taken away his dart and sting from him, and so spoiled him, as
he has left him nothing to harm the elect withal.

The third Enemy is Hell, the gates of which was set wide open by sin; for, The
third, Hell
In the day thou sinnest, thou shall dye the death, namely, the second death as
well as the former. But Jesus Christ, by descending into Hell, and suffering
the sorrows of the second death, loosed the same from himself, and all such as
shall believe in his name unto the worlds end: Rev. 1.18. I was dead, but am
alive for evermore, Amen: and I have the keys of Hell and Death: which phrase
seems to be borrowed from great Commanders and Conquerours, who having won
and entered any City, presently have the keys delivered unto them, in token of
that regiment and authority which now of right belongs unto them; and plainly
imports, that howsoever Christ was once dead, yet by his death he has
vanquished Hell and Death, and so has obtained full power and command over
them both.

The fourth Enemy is Satan, the arch enemy of mankind; most malicious, The
fourth Satan.
being a manslayer from the beginning, and most powerful, being the Prince,
yea, the God of this world: yet has the victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah,
put to flight this roaring Lion: whose rage and malice made him bold to set
upon the Son of God himself, that so he might work his own ruin and
overthrow. How Christ avoided his sundry fierce assaults, and temptations in
the wilderness; broke his power and forces by his powerful dis-possessing and
casting him out of men and women; trod upon his neck by the power of his death
and resurrection, we might at large out of the Evangelists show, but that we
have spent some time already in this argument: so as now the gates of Hell can
never prevail against the Faith of the godly* the seed of the Woman has broken
the Serpents head: the strong man is cast out by a stronger than he: the
spoiler is spoiled, and lead in triumph by him that appeared for this end, to
destroy the works of the Devil: who has this Tyrant also in chains reserved
for the blackness of darkness for ever.

The last enemy, but not the least in strength, is the World, The fifth, the
world.
Satan's servant and armor-bearer; which by all the power and policy it could
use, could not keep Christ down in the grave, but he rose again
notwithstanding all the opposition of it: this is that our Savior professes
of himself a little before his death; Be of good comfort, for I have overcome
the world, Joh. 16.33. As if he had said, trouble not your hearts, although
you have all the strength and malice of the wicked world against you, all which
shall be no more able to prejudice your salvation, or hinder your glory, than
mine own, who have overcome it, so as you fight against a Conquered Enemy. By
all this that has been said, that of the Apostle appears to be true: that
he has subdued all things unto himself, and has put all his enemies under
his feet, that none nor all of them can separate us from God or Christ, or our
salvation purchased and preserved for us by him.

How all these enemies are not only soyled, but after a sort made friendly unto
us.
Now we are to see in the next place, that Christ by his resurrection, has
not only spoiled these enemies for us, but that he has made them all after a
sort friendly unto us; that whereas they desire still indeed, and seem to wound
us, they do nothing else but heal us.

1 For sin, that now serves to humble Gods Children and keep them low in their
own eyes, as also provokes them to walk awfully in regard of God, and
watchfully over their hearts and lives, still groaning to God under their daily
infirmities. By this means out of the eater comes meat, as was said in
Sampsons riddle, Judge. 14.14.

2 Death is not now to Gods Children as it was to Christ, joined with a sense
of Gods anger against it, or paying a debt to the Justice of God (for it were
against the rule of Gods Justice to require the payment of the same debt twice)
but wherein they have a sweet sense of Gods Fatherly love, wherein sin is
perfectly to be abolished, whereby way and entrance is made unto life
everlasting, where we shall be with God and Jesus Christ, which is best of
all. The Saints of God in these regards have rather desired than feared it: for
what man having been tossed a long time upon a dangerous Sea, would fear the
Haven? or who being wearied with the Travels of the day, would fear to go to
his rest at night?

3 Sense of Hell keeps in us an hatred of sin, and a longing after Heaven:
yea, how beneficial the terrors of Conscience are to Gods Children, were too
long here to discourse. The speech is as true as common, the way to heaven
lies by hell gates.

4 The Devil makes us fly to God our help, and rely upon his strength: yea,
when men by no other means will be drawn, God sets the Devil in their necks
to drag them to Heaven, as a grave Divine speaks,

5 All the evils in the world work to the best to them that love God, and
hasten them to the fruition of the victory obtained by Christ: they wean them
from the World, and the love of it. And whereas they are as prone to pitch
their Tabernacles here below as others, God uses these as means to keep his
from being of the World, even while they are in it. They conform them to Jesus
Christ their head, and train them in the imitation of him, both in patience and
obedience. Now how could any of these parcels of Gods curse against the sin of
man, or man's cursed sin it self, bring to any such sweet and profitable fruits,
but by the overruling power of Jesus Christ, who brings life out of death,
light out of darkness; and who only can make his own wise, out of a rank
poison to suck most sweet and sovereign preservatives? which who does not, he
never as yet knew the benefit of Christ his resurrection.

Christ by his resurrection not only removed evils, but procured all our good,
as appears by three instances.
The second sort of blessings procured to the Church, by Christ his
resurrection, is the fruition of good things which it puts us in possession
of even in this life, by giving us our first fruits, and a sweet taste: but
up-heapeth our measure after this life when our Harvest comes, and we
admitted to feed fully at the Supper of the Lamb. The benefits which I will
mention are three.

First, We are confirmed hereby in the whole truth of all our Religion; the
main foundation of which laid by all the Prophets and Apostles, is, that Jesus
Christ the Son of Mary, was the Son of God, the true Messiah, perfect God and
perfect man: and so indeed he was such a one as he was foretold to be: one
that was to dye, and yet saw no corruption: one who must make his soul an
offering for sin, and yet must survive to see his seed, and prolong his days:
one that had power to lay down his Life, 1 Pet. 3.18
and power to take it up again. In a word, one that was put to death concerning
the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit: that is, by virtue of his Deity,
raising that flesh up again. Let all the Jews and Atheists in the earth despise
the indignity of his death, we with the Angels will admire the glory of his
resurrection.

II. The second benefit is, that hence we are assured that our 1
Justification, 2 Sanctification, 3 Perfect salvation, is not only obtained, but
applied unto us.

1 For our Justification before God, by means of Christ his resurrection, he
brought in to us an everlasting righteousness; in that he not only bare our
burden upon himself, but bare it away from us: for what is his resurrection
else but his actual absolution from our sins which were imputed unto him, and
for which he subjected himself unto the death? Whence we grow up in full
assurance, that the whole price is not only paid to the uttermost on Christ's
part, but that the satisfaction is accepted also on his Fathers, whose justice
would never have absolved him, if all the Bills and Writings which were to be
laid against us, had not been fastened to the Cross, and so cancelled and fully
discharged: so as now we may with the Apostle, hold out a flagge of defiance,
and challenge our righteousness; for who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect? It is God that justifies; who shall condemn? it is Christ which is
dead, yea, or rather which is risen again, Romans 8.34. And the same Apostle
thirsting after that Righteousness which is by Faith in him, counts all
things loss and dung, save only to know him, and the virtue of his
resurrection, Phil. 3.10.

2 From this Resurrection of Christ issues our sanctification, which is our
first resurrection or raising of our souls from the death of sin: because in
every reconciliation-making must be two conditions. 1 A forgetting upon
satisfaction, of all old wrongs and injuries. 2 A binding from future offenses:
the former Christ effects by his death, the latter by his resurrection, into
the which whosoever are grafted, they cannot henceforth serve sin, Romans 6.5,
6. but being risen with Christ, they seek the things which are above, Colos.
3.1. where Christ sits: they cease further by sin to offend, as such who are
begotten to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 1
Pet. 1.3. and for this cause our Savior was careful after his departure hence,
to send out his Spirit in more plentiful and abundant manner than before, that
he might continually inspire his people with ardent desires after the
beginnings of that life eternal unto which Christ himself is risen: who then
manifest themselves members of such an advanced head, when this new life
manifests it self in them.

Thirdly, our perfect salvation is also hence fully assured us; for if our Lord
Jesus has soyled all the powers of Hell, Death, and Darkness in himself, when
he was yet dead; how much more does he it for us his members, being now
alive? if he could drive back and disperse all spiritual enmitles even when
he was in Hell it self after a sort, how much more now being ascended far
above all moveable and aspectible Heavens? Ephesians. 4.10. for we must not behold
the victory and triumph of Christ, What or who shall separate us from the love
of God, seeing it is Christ that is dead, or rather risen from the dead?
as performed only in and for himself; but as the ground and pledge of the
victory and conquest of all the Believers in the World. Look upon this Son of
David prostrating the great Goliath of Hell, for all the Israel of God; casting
out the strong man, not only out of his, but of our possessions, that he might
take us up for his own use; spoiling him of his kingdom and weapons, for us,
yea and in us.

And hence, as out of a well of consolation, we shall draw this comfort to our
selves, that look as the gates of Hell could not prevail against him our head,
no more shall they ever be able to prevail against us his members, although
they never so fiercely and forcibly assayl us. And it spiritual enmities shall
not be able to cut us short of our Salvation, much less shall temporal dangers:
for by virtue of this resurrection also, even in the most troublesome deeps,
when the waves of sorrows overtake one another, and go over our souls; when
with Jonas we are ready to say, We are cast from the face of the Lord; Jonah
2.4. even then we have hope to rise out of such evils; and because out head is
above, in short time comfortably to swim out.

Add hereunto, that death itself, nor the grave shall stand between us and
home: for this rising of Christ is both the cause and confirmation that we
shall rise again: If the head be risen, so shall also the members: if Christ
the first fruits of them that sleep be raised, so shall also the whole bulk and
body of believers: if we believe that Christ is risen from the dead, even so
them which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. and if the
same spirit which raised Jesus from the dead dwell in us, then he that raised
Christ from the dead shall also quicken our mortal bodies, Romans 8.11. for
Christ has not redeemed the soul alone from death, but the body also: else had
this second Adam been interior to the first, if not able to save by his rising
all that which was lost by the fall of the former. Oh how would this meditation
well digested, sweeten the remembrance of death and the grave? when a Christian
shall consider, that look how it was with Christ when his soul and body were
separated, yet both of them were united to the Deity, which brought them
together again: even so I am taught by the Scriptures, that when my soul and
body shall be separated, yet shall neither of them be sundred from Christ my
head, but he will reunite them like loving friends that they may participate in
his own glory. How would this meditation bring the soul not only to be content
but to desire to be dissolved, and be with Christ, accounting that the best
of all, Phil. 1.23.

III. The third benefit befalling us by the resurrection of Christ i^ that
because Christ is risen, we know it shall not only go well with us, but with
all the Church of God; the prosperity of which, so many as would prosper must
rejoice in; for hence it is that Christ calls a Church out of the world,
which after a sort rises even out ot his own grave: hence is it that being
ascended on high, he gave gifts to men, for the gathering and preserving of his
Church: hence is it that the Church shall always have the light of the Gospel,
Pastors, Teachers, and the Ministry, till we all meet to a perfect man: hence
is it that this Church shall be defended from Wolves and Tyrants; seeing ^one
is stronger than he, nor able to pluck any ot his sheep out of his hands. Let
the Church be pressed, it shall never be suppressed: Let the Kings of the earth
band themselves and forces against it, the Lord has set his Son upon his holy
Mountain, and he shall crush them like a Potters vessel.

Let Heretics and Antich^ist send armies of Locusts, Jesuits, and seducing
vagrants to waste the Church, and bereave it of the truth and light leading to
life, they shall only seduce such as whose names are not written in the Book of
life, and of the Lamb: for seeing Christ is risen, so long as he (who can dye
no more) lives, he will preserve his darling, he will send out the Stars that
are in his right hand for her relief; who like David's Worhies shall break
through the Hosts of the enemy, and bring the pure waters of the Well of Life:
as we are for ever thankfully to acknowledge in those worthy restorers of our
religion. Lastly, let floods of persecution rise and swell, so as this Dove of
Christ cannot find rest fo the sole of her foot, one means or other Christ will
use for her help: for he will either send her into the Wilderness, or the
earth shall help the Woman and drink in the waters, that they shall not hunt
her: or he will provide for her one of the chambers of his providence (as he
did for Joash against the rage of Athaliah) wherein she shall be safe till the
Storm be blown over. These are the principal benefits procured us by Christ's
resurrection, which belong not unto all, but only to such as are risen with him.

Quest. How shall we know that we are risen with Christ, How to know that we
are risen with Christ.
that they mat assuredly belong unto us?

Ans. The Apostle sets himself to resolve this question, Col. 3.1. where he
makes the seeking of things above where Christ is, and infallible mark of our
rising with him; for as when Christ was risen, he minded not things below any
more, but all his course was a preparation to his ascension, to which all
things tended: so now if thou be risen with him, Heaven will be in thine eye,
and thine affections are ascended thither where Christ is: if Christ were on
earth, thou might fix thy soul and senses here on earth, and yet be a
Christian; but seeing he who is thy head is in Heaven, thou that art a member
of him, must be there also. And as Christ while he continued upon earth after
his resurrection, lived a kind of supernatural and heavenly life; so if thou be
risen with him, thou live not the life of nature, but have begun the life of
grace, and an heavenly conversation.

Quest. But how shall I know whether I live by this heavenly life or no?
Heavenly life disce^n^d by two notes


Ans. There be two special notes to discern this truth by: the former is the
dissimilitude and opposition which it has with the life of sinful natural men
upon earth: the latter is the similitude and agreement it has with the life of
Saints and glorified men in heaven.

Concerning the former: ^ In the matters of this life.
the Natural man will follow and pursue things which tend to a sensual and
natural life; he will beat his brains for gold and silver, meat and cloth,
goods and lands for himself and his: as for Heaven, he will have nothing to do
there till he be dead, and for the way thither, he cateth not to know it till
he be dying at the soonest.

But the Spiritual man, he coveteth after Spiritual things: the power of
Christ's Spirit where it is present, will lift up his heart be it never so
heavy, to seek the Kingdom and the righteousness or it, and he seeks after
the wisdom of God; as for gold and treasures, he accounts of the graces of
faith, love, hope, humility, and the fear of the Lord above all pearls and
precious things; he provideth for himself and his, the food that perishes not,
and thinks h^mself warmly and comely arrayed, when he has put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, as knowing, that only the garment of his righteousness, can
fence him from all the injury of wind and weather.

The Natural man does not more seriously listen after great purchases of Lands
and Fields, as he does cast with himself to purchase the pearl hid in the
field; for which he will sell himself, as we say, into his shirt; nay and
further, how own self, liberty, life, and if he had any thing dearer than that.

The Spiritual man, as for the things of this life, if he have them not, he
wants not his portion: If he have them, his care is that they have not him,
or become his portion: If riches increase, he sets not his heart upon them:
If they decrease, his heart fails not with them. In abundance, he carries
himself warily and weanedly. In want, cheerfully and contentedly. The things
he has, he uses as not using them: the things he has not, he knows he
has no good use of them, or else he should have them. And thus as the Natural
man bestirreth himself, and all his motion tends to the bettering of his
outward estate at home; so contrarily does an heavenly-minded man (accounting
himself from home while he is here in the body) bend his chief care to settle
his estate at home in heaven; and all his trading and converse in this strange
Country tends to the enriching of him in his own Country.

Further, if we look to the Natural man's course in the matter of his religion,
we shall see as great difference between them. For it is clear, 2 In the
matters of religion.
that whereas matters of religion are a burden to the one, they are the joy of
the other. The one as heavy to pray, to hear, to read and meditate on the
Word, and of his own estate, as a Bear to the stake: if Law, of shame, or some
such by-respect moved him not, if were all one to him to be on his Horseback
as in the Church: the other, would account his life tedious, were it not for
these meetings of God and his people in the assemblies, and those sweet
refreshments they bring back from thence.

The one, if he pray sometimes in public, he makes little conscience of
private prayer in his family, and so of other private duties, to which God and
a good conscience would bind him as straight as to the former.

The other, walks wisely and religiously in the midst of his house, and
preserves the worship of God at home, and makes his house a little Church and
house of God.

The one, makes little or no conscience of such sins, as either in comparison
of other, or in his own corrupt conceit, are smaller sins: such as are inferior
oaths, idleness, gaming, sins of omission, idle words of hurtful; unclean or
wandering thoughts: words he thinks to be but wind, if he mean no hurt; and if
he mean hurt, but do none, thoughts are free. As for the sins of the time, he
will not be so undiscreet as to swim against the stream; he is here violently
carried without resistance into a gulf of known evils, and all is well, he does
but as others do, and it were worse for him if he did not.

The other, makes conscience of all sin, lesser sins, and secret sins: he can
hate all, even those which he cannot avoid: he hates the evil that himself
does, and willingly will not displease God though all men be therefore
offended with him. To conclude this point, the one seeks to appprove himself
unto man; the other to approve his heart to God, because he knows he made it,
and knows what is in it. And this shall serve for a taste of the opposite
disposition between Natural, and Spiritual life.

Agreement which it has with the life of the Saints in Heaven, in two things.
II. The second note, to discern this heavenly life by, is the similitude or
agreement which it has with the life of the Saints in heaven. For the life of
the Saints in Heaven, must be a counterpane of the believers upon earth, to
which they must be daily framed in sundry regards. 1 In respect of the things
they are called from. 2 In respect of the things they are called unto.

1 The Saints in Heaven are called from three things. 1 The world it self. 2
The corruptions that are in the world through lust. 3 The company of the wicked
of the world. Even so must believers in the world in their degree and measure,
carry themselves as those that are chosen out of the world, and such as are
bought from the earth, Rev. 14.3. meddling no more which earthly things than
needs must, enjoying them so, as they joy no more in them, than in things which
are not their own, but borrowed only for a time: using them so, as they abuse
them not, because they are to be countable for them; abiding in them earthly
business and callings* What the Saints are called from, in three things
so as they be never earthly minded: in one word, so desiring, pursuing,
having, holding, and parting from the profits of this life, as those to whom
God has showed better things, than any below; yea, and esteeming of their
present life it self so indifferently, as that they can account the day of
their death better than the day wherein they were born.

2 As the Saints in Heaven, being delivered out of the prison of the body, have
all the bolts and chains of their corruption struck off; so the godly who have
their parts in the first resurrection, have after a sort changed their lives,
and put on a Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. they have bid farewell to the follies
of their former times, yea renounce, and as far as frailty will permit,
loathe their sins; saying unto them, as Ephraim to his rejected Idols, get you
hence: what have I to do with you? they that were of the Synagogue of Satan,
are now in the Temple with true believers. Thus is it said of the hundred forty
four thousand, that were bought from the earth, that were not defiled with
women, but were virgins, that is sanctified in part, and washed from their
filthiness, and will have no more fellowship in the unfruitful works of
darkness, wherein sometimes they were chief actors.

3 The Saints in heaven never join with the wicked of the world any more; that
being verified, which Moses spoke to the Israelites, concerning the Egyptians,
The enemies whom your eyes have seen this day, you shall never see more: even
to the faithful hate the company of the wicked, with whom they can neither do
good, nor take any: whereas before their calling, they were mixed with them, and
ran with them to the same excess of riot. Now their fellowship is dissolved,
they are no more Companions with them; the light of the one admits no
communion with the others darkness: and that they are often forced to dwell in
Mesech with them, it is the woe and grief of their hearts.

Another part of this agreement, What the Saints are called unto in five things,
stands in the things to which the Saints are called, which are sundry. As, 1
Look as their chief happiness stands in the beholding of the face of God, and
seeing him as he is, together with their rejoicing in his blessed communion;
and that most sweet fellowship they have one with another; even so the chief
blessedness of the Saints in earth, is their fellowship with God and Christ,
though it be not so immediate as the former. They see his back parts indeed
rather than his face, and rejoice after a sort in his face, but afar off; and
as in a glass of the Word and Sacraments, not face to face, nor in that
brightness wherein they shall behold him, when they are at home with him at his
right hand: but yet what they want in the thing, they want not in desire to be
where he is, that they may see his glory, so as they may be satisfied with the
fullness of it; that they may so see him, as they may be like him; that they
may drink (not of the streams, but) of the well of life, and see light in his
light. And because loving him that begat, they cannot but love him that is
begotten: the next happiness to the former, do the godly justly esteem the
communion of Saints, placing under God their chief delight in such as excel in
virtue.

Secondly, as the heavenly life of the Saints is spent in the perfect praise of
God, wherein they employ their eternity, keeping in the presence of the Throne
of God a perpetual Sabbath, and serving him day and night: Rev. 11.17. and 7.15.
even so believers endeavor in their measure, that the same mind be in them
which was in Jesus Christ, who thought it as his meat and drink to do the will
of his heavenly Father: they bring free-will-offerings: they esteem one day
better in his Courts, than a thousand besides: and account these persons
blessed that may dwell in his house, because they ever praise him. Not that
much rebellion and corruption of nature, does not often dead and dull even the
most sanctified; but yet something they get forward; and delight in the
progress they make to the cheerful praise and worship of God. And this they do,
not by fits and starts but imitate that heavenly life in the continual
endeavor, to make the pleasing of God their principal delight, and the chief
thing that most soliciteth them.

Thirdly, as the Saints in Heaven live according to the Law of perfect
righteousness, which is the Law and charter of Heaven, and have obtained
perfect sanctification: so Believers on earth set the same Law before them, to
rule and direct every particular action by, and begin the self same obedience:
they begin to weigh all they give out or take in by the weights of the
sanctuary, which God has sealed as just: they follow the Lamb whither-soever
he goes before them, whether by voice or example.

Fourthly, as the Saints in heaven enjoy God for the means of all their lives,
Rev. 22.3, 5. for he is their Temple, their light, their Tree of Life, their
Crystal river, etc. evenso the Saints in the World, though they live by means,
and must not look to reap without sowing, as once it was, 2 Kin. 19.29. yet
enjoy they God above all means; and acknowledge that he is their life, and the
length of their days; that they live not by bread alone, but by every word
proceeding out of the mouth of God: that it is he that gives them power to
get substance, and blesses their children with increase: that he which
cloatheth the Lillies, and feeds the Sparrows, will cloathe and feed them:
yea and more, that before they shall want that which is good for them, it all
means should fail, he would sustain them without means, by Miracle: that his
Promise cannot fail them, when the Indian Mines shall come to naught: that his
word is means enough, which commands the Rock, and it gives water; and the
Winds, and they blow Quails before his Host shall perish.

Fifthly, as the Saints in Heaven would not for all the world forgo their
Happiness for one day, and yet are they not now so fully happy, but that they
still wait and long for further perfection of their glory; saying, Lord, how
long, Holy, and Just? Rev. 6.10, so the godly would not for all the world be
separated from their estate in Christ. A cloud of Martyrs in all ages
manifes^ed, that all the World, the sweet of it, nor the sour, the flattery of
it, nor the tyranny, could draw the godly from the fruition of their
privileges in Christ. And yet dwell they not in these first fruits, but wait
still for the perfecting of this their redemption. Hence the Apostle describes
them by their inseparable property, 2 Cor. 5.2. Romans 8.23. which is, to love
the appearing of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8.

These notes laid together, Examination of a man's self by the former notes.
will give witness with or against a man, whether his conversation be
heavenly, and consequently whether he partake of all the former benefits of
Christ's resurrection. Examine thy self by them: Whether art thou called out of
the World in thy affection? whether art thou actually separated from the
corruptions that are in it through lust? whether do thou contemn, and avoid
vile and graceless persons? do thou rejoice in the fellowship with God and
communion of his Saints? spendest thou thy days in the constant praise and
worship of God? framest thou thy life according to the Word of God, the rule of
all Righteousness? enjoyest thou all things in God, and God in all things?
prizest thou thy present estate above all the World, and yet longest thou for
the perfecting of thy happiness, saying, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly? this is
to converse in Heaven, while thou art on earth; and to seek the things above,
where Jesus Christ sits.

Which if it be, then how few have their conversation there, or are risen with
Christ? How few are set free from the power of sin, witnesses the general
reign of it every where. How many mind only earthly things; how many mind
them principally? How do most men swim with the stream, drinking in the
corruptions of the World most insatiably, as the fish does water? How do
sinners combine themselves against God, to run to all excess of riot? How
unpleasant and unwelcome a voice is it, to call men to delight in God and his
Children? How heavy are they to the parts of his Worship? coming unto them, as
if they went to some punishment? How are men's Lusts become their Laws, instead
of the perfect Rule and Law of God? every man almost living as Israel when
there was no King among them. How do men rest in the means of their warfare,
withdrawing their hearts from the author of it? How few prize the life of
Christianity, how many scorn it in themselves and others? How many wish in
their hearts there were no other life to come, and that they rather had good
assurance of this which is present? and instead of wishing and waiting, tremble
at the mention of Christ his coming again? Yet most of these men, professors
of Christ: all of them baptized into his name; and all of them will be reputed
as good Christians as the best. But all this forenamed course, has no savor
or relish of Heaven; all that take it up, mind nothing but earthly things;
and the end of it, without timely repentance, will be damnation, Phil. 2.19.

IV. The fourth general point, is the time of Christ's resurrection, set down in
the Text to be the third day.

To understand which, we must know that Christ lay not in the grave three
whole natural days, each of them standing of twenty four hours; for then he
should have lain seventy two hours, and have risen also on the fourth day;
whereas he lay not in the Grave above thirty nine hours, and rize on the
third. But the Scripture uses a grace, or form of speech, Synechdoche.
whereby two parts of days are called by the whole: and three days put for
the time which passed in three several days; every day having his night
belonging unto him.

The first day of the three, says Augustine, is to be reckoned by his latter
part, in which Christ was dead and buried, not passing three hours of the four
and twenty; yet so as both the night before when the Jews day begun, and the
most of that day was spent in taking, examining, whipping, misusing,
condemning, and executing him. The second day is to be accounted wholly and
perfect; from the evening of the day before the Passover, to the evening of
the Sabbath following; standing of full four and twenty hours. The third day is
to be accounted from the former part of it, beginning at the evening of the
Jewish Sabbath: for Christ lay all night, near twelve hours, in the grave, and
rose in the morning betime about the midst of that natural day, standing of
four and twenty hours. And thus is Christ truly said to have risen the third
day.

Now that Christ should rise the third day, and no sooner, nor later, these
reasons show. Why Christ would rise no sooner than the third day.


1 He must rise the third day, according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.4. For
they had foretold this to be the particular time, Hos. 6.2. After two days he
will revive us; and in the third day he will raise us up; namely, in his own
person: for we also were raised with him, as we have seen. The Scriptures had
also further figured this distinct time in the type of Jonas, who having lain
three days and three nights in the belly of the Whale, was the third day cast
on the dry land: as our Savior himself while he was yet alive, expounded of
himself, Matthew. 12.40. As Jonas was in the belly of the Whale three days and
three nights, so shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the
heart of the earth.

2 It pleased him not to rise sooner: he would not presently come down from
the Cross, nor revive himself before he was buried, nor rise presently after
he was laid down, as he easily could; because he would manifest that he was
truly dead: as also because he would lead his Church into some suspense,
therefore he rose not till the case seemed desperate: Luke 24.21. We trusted
that it had been he that should have delivered Israel: and as touching all
these things, this is the third day that they were done.

Again, he would no longer defer his rising. Why he would no longer defer his
rising.
1 Lest he should utterly have endangered the faith of the Disciples, which in
that short time was sore shaken; as not only the former example, but the
heaviness of the Disciples themselves to believe the news of it, and
wilfulness of Thomas, plainly bewraveth.

2 Because upon this event and keeping touch in this very circumstance of time,
he had laid all the credit of his Person, Ministry, Doctrine, Miracles, Life
and Death. For when they come to ask him a sign to prove himself the Messiah,
he refers them to this event after his death: that when they had destroyed
the Temple of his body, if he did raise it either after or before the third
day, or did not on that day raise it, they should never take him for the
Messiah. And of this very circumstance Angels and men had taken notice from his
own mouth, Luke 24.7. when the women came to the Sepulcher to seek Christ after
he was newly risen, the Angels told them, he was risen, he was not there: and
further wishes them to remember what he had said to them while he was with
them, that the third day he must rise again: nay not only his friends, but his
very enemies had got this by the end, and therefore came to Pilate, saying,
Sir, we remember that this Deceiver said, that he would rise the third day: let
us take such order that the last error become not worse than the first.

3 The blessed body of Christ was not to enter into the least or lowest degree
of corruption, and therefore he would lie no longer in the house of corruption.

Quest. But how could his body be preserved so long, seeing Lazarus his body,
and our bodies in that time enter into many degrees of it?

Ans. Christ was indeed balmed and sweetened with Odours: but all this could not
have preserved him, if his soul and body had not now been ^aced from sin, the
mother of corruption.

Obj. But he had sin imputed unto him.

Ans. Yea, but he had overcome all that, and slain it on the Cross: for had he
not destroyed it, himself had been destroyed by it, and subdued for ever under
the corruption of it. In all which regards, that is verified which himself
being risen, affirmed, Luke 24.46. Thus it is written, and th^^ it beh^eveth
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day.

Other things the Evangelists observe in this circumstance: as that it was the
first day of the week; that is, the first day wherein he had created the
Heavens and the Earth, and wherein he would create now a new Heaven, and a new
Earth; and as before he had set up a mavelous frame of the world, but sin^e
exceedingly shaken and defaced by sin, he would now restore the world again*
and repair the ruins of it, by abolishing sin: as formerly he had filled
Heaven and earth with the glory of his power in Creation; so would he now fill
them with the glory of his power in Redemption, which is a second creation.
Hence is it, that that day is now converted into the Christian Sabbath* and
called the Lords Day, Revel. 1.10. or if you will, Sunday; but not as the
Heathen, Christ rose early, and what we learn thence
in honor of the Sun; but as Christians, in honor of the Sun of
righteousness. Again, the Gospel notes, that this our glorious Son ^^s^ about
Sun rising, early in the morning, or a little before it, Matthew. 28.1. To show
unto us,

1 The power of his Godhead, who could while his body was dead, perform the
promise which he had made alive, even in the instant of which he had spoken.

2 The impotency of his enemies, who although they watched him, f^^l^^^ him up,
laid an heavy stone upon him, were every way cautelous to keep him d^wn till
the third day was past, and he not stealing away secretly in the d^^d time of
the night, but ^ose with noise and warning, even in the morning, ye^ could they
no more stay him, than they could the Sun from rising and running his course.

3 The benefit which the world of believers obtain by his rising again set down
by the Evangelist, Luke 1.78. Through the tender mercy of our God the
dayspring from an high has visited us, 79. To give light to them that s^^ in
darkness, and to guide our feet into the way of peace. The Chronologers
further observe, that this was the day wherein Moses led the Israelites through
the Sea, wherein all the troops of Pharaoh and his Host were drowned: Even to
our Lord Jesus this third day, led all the Israel of God out of the spiritual
Egypt of blindness and filthiness; but gloriously triumphed over all the
bands of Satan. Sin, and Death: all which were sunk like a stone into the
bottomless pit of Hell. Other observations concerning this day might be
inserted out of Authors, which because I see no sound ground for them out of
the Scriptures, I will omit them, that I may now come to the lessons which out
of this circumstance, we may draw for our further instruction.

First, we learn hence, All the promises of God are accomplished in their du^
season
that all the promises of God shall be in due season accomplished, whatsoever
may seem to come between them and us. For seeing Christ being dead, both could
and did perform his promise to his Church, will not he much more being alive
and in his glory do it? The Israelites had a promise of a good Land: they must
in the mean time suffer much oppression in Egypt, for the space of four
hundred and thirty years together: but the self-same night, Exodus 12.41. when
the term was expired, they went out against the heart, and yet at the entreaty
of Pharaoh and his people. In like sort Joseph had a Dream, that the Sun and
Moon, and the twelve Stars should worship him: in the mean time he must be
cast into the Pit and Dungeon, where he can see neither Sun, Moon, nor Star:
many days and years passed wherein he saw nothing but the clean contrary, and
yet in the due season of it, this dream was accomplished. And the reason is,
because,

1 God is true of his word, he cannot lie, nor repent: and

2 He is able to fulfill whatsoever passes from his mouth: for shall any thing
be hard or impossible to God? or shall any power, or death, or the grave it
self falsify it? Lean thy self then upon this truth of God: have thou a
promise of outward or inward peace, health, wealth, or any other good thing,
which thy heart can wish? hold this promise fast in the midst of thy heart;
wait for the accomplishment of it; it shall not fail thee, so far as thy
Father sees good for thee: if it be delayed and deferred, even this also shall
turn to thy best. Have thou a promise of life everlasting? hold it by the faith
of thy soul, as the aim and end of all thy faith and religion: for all the
miseries of this present life shall not be able to defeat thee of it. Have thou
the promise of the resurrection of the body after death? stick to this Article
of thy faith also: nothing could hinder the rising of thy head, no more can
let, but the members shall be where the head is: not the grave, not fire, not
water, not the bellies of beasts or fishes, but they shall give up their dead,
and further the accomplishment of the word of their Creator.

The second observation is, The L^^^ denies n t to help his children although
he delay them till his own due time be come.
that as the Lord of life raised not his Son as soon as he was dead, but he
must lie in the grave two days, yea and the third also, till his case seemed
desperate to the Disciples themselves: even so may the members of Christ lie
long in the graves of their misery, yea, so long, as their case seems
desperate; and all that while, the Lord not only deferreth, but seems to deny
their help, and utterly to neglect them. Abraham had the promise of a Son by
Sarah; he looked every year for him, ten, twenty years together, nay till the
thirtieth year, till it was not with Sarah as with childing-women, in so much
as she laughed when she heard it, the case in nature was desperate: who would
have thought but that God had forgotten his promise: which Abraham himself in
all that time (if God had not shoared up his faith) might have forgotten: but
though long first, yet at length the Lord found out a time fit enough to bring
his word to pass. David in like manner had the promise of the Kingdom, but in
the mean time he was so traced and hunted by Saul, that he said in himself, I
shall surely one day fall by the hands of Saul; but howsoever the Lord still
deferred his promise, he knew not how to break it: the Kingdom was rent from
Saul, and given to him that was better than he. Why God delayeth to answer his
children. Reasons.


Now the chief Reasons of this dealing of the Lords with his Children, are
these,

1 In Gods delays there is a seasonable time for all the graces which he
gives to be set on work, such as are faith, patience, hope, prayer; all which
cease in the accomplishment.

Secondly, he will have his childrens case often desperate, that his own hand
may be acknowledged in giving them unexpected deliverance. How could Israel
but acknowledge his outstretched arm in their delivery, when they saw nothing
but the mountains before them, the enemies behind them, and the sea as a wall
on either side? and if the Lord had delivered them before they came into the
bottom of the sea (as he easily could have done) the glory of his work had been
obscured, which all ages since have admired and extolled till this day. How did
Jonah and the Ninevites acknowledge the finger of God, in calling him to that
Ministry, when as he seemed utterly cast away, being buried in the Whales
belly three days and three nights? for when by the powerful Word of God, the
Fish was commanded to cast him on the dry ground, what a worthy fruit of
conversion it had in them generally, the History does declare. What great glory
the Lord won to himself by saving Daniel, (not from the Den,) but from the
Lions teeth in the Den: and the three children, (not from the Furnace,) but the
very fire in the Furnace; it appears, in that the very Heathen Kings
themselves made public Edicts, that no God, but Daniels, and no God but
Shadrachs, etc. should be worshipped through all their Dominions, because no
God could deliver their worshippers as he had done.

Thirdly, the Lord often longer absenteth himself from his own children, that
when he is returned, they might make the more account of him; it pleased him to
deal herein as a Mother with her child, who although she be tender enough over
it, will sometimes get her out of sight, and behind a door; in the mean time
the child falls and gets some knocks, and all this to make the child
perceive its own weakness, and depend upon her so much the more. Example
hereof we have, Cant. 3.4. when the Church had sought her beloved in her bed,
in the streets, among the Watchmen, and found him not, at last, after much
seeking and sorrowing after him, she finds him whom her soul loved: then she
took hold on him, and would not let him go, till she had brought him to the
house of her mother.

Use 1. Tedious and heavy afflictions may not be an argument of Gods hatred.
It is a simple opinion of simple people, that God loves not that man, who is
exercised with any strange cross, especially if it be more lasting and
lingering upon him. Lingering afflictions no sign of Gods hatred.
Why do thou not consider, ignorant man, that the Lord suffered his own
wel-beloved Son to lie in the Grave till the third day, before he raised him
up? What say thou to the Israelites in Egypt, did they cease to be the
people of God, or to be dear to God, when the heaviest tasks were laid upon
them? Whose blood was it that Manasseh made the streets of Jerusalem run with,
but the Saints? In the Persecutions of the Primitive Church, we read of thirty
thousand of the dear Saints of God put to death in seventeen days under the
Tyrant Maximinian, and as many chained under met als and mines, Who was it that
asked if the Lord would absent himself for ever, and whether his mercy was
clean gone for evermore? Was not this the voice of David, a man after Gods own
heart? Would thou hear the style of Gods children in the Scriptures? thou
hear them called worms of Jacob, dead men of Israel, Isa. 41.14. Would
thou know their state? neither is that unanswerable to that style: read Heb.
11. from verse thirty five to the thirty ninth, They wandered in Sheepskins,
and Goat Skins; and they (of whom the world was not worthy) were banished the
world, as unworthy to live in it. Impossible therefore it is, as Solomon
teaches, to know love or hatred by any thing before a man, Eccles. 9. A man
may be a Dives, and a Devil, or little better: another may be a Lazarus, and a
Saint. Fat pastures, for most part, threaten slaughter, when lean ware need not
fear the Butcher.

2 In tedious and heavy afflictions, and graves of misery, prescribe not unto
God, neither the time, nor the manner of thy release; but leave all to him, in
whose hand, times and seasons, and means of deliverance are. We would not by
our good wills lie one day, no not one hour under affliction: our spirits are
as short as Jehorams was; what, shall I attend any longer upon the Lord? is not
this evil from him? Some crosses more smart and durable, why.
And hence are all those murmurings and complaints; Oh, never was any in such
misery, or so long, as I am. But the Lord knows what he does, and whom he
has in hand. He sees perhaps,

1 That thou have strong hidden corruptions; thy hard knots must have hard
wedges, as hard bodies strong potions. 2 It may be, thou wast long in thy sin
before thy conversion, and thy Cross is the longer, to be a means to bring thy
old sins into fresh memory, that so thou may renew thy repentance. 3 It may
be, thou have since given some great scandal to the Church, and so thy
correction abides, till thou have testified thy repentance.

4 Thy heart perhaps can tell thee that some other crosses of some other kind
have been neglected, or would not have smarted half so much: therefore the Lord
will have this to stick by increasing the smart, and withdrawing his comforts,
till thy great heart be made to stoop. 5 Look whether some lust, as yet not
denied, lends not a sting to this cross above all the former: whether thy
heart be over-mastered, or fretful and peevish; for even so we deal with our
Children, who when a little smart does but set them on frowardness, we meeken
and overcome with more stripes. 6 Or else the Lord in mercy lingringly does
correct as thou are able to bear, to bend thee and work thee to good: whereas,
if he should bring his chastisements roughly, and at once, it would break thy
heart: great cause therefore have thou to subscribe to his wisdom, whose ways
are all justice and mercy.

3 Hence we fetch our assured comfort, The Lord will seasonably remember his
children, at least the third day.
That as God delivered his Son the third day, so will he also seasonably
deliver us. What if we seem to be dead in our graves, despised, neglected, and
forgotten one day, yea, the second? yet the third day comes: Hos. 6.2. After
two days he will revive us, and in the third day he will raise us up, and
we shall live in his sight. This made Abraham hope above hope: In waiting, I
waited, says David; that is, I continued waiting on God. Job after darkness
hoped for light. It may be the third day is not yet come. Thou art not yet
come to the Mountain where God will provide: nor thou art not yet in that
extremity which is Gods opportunity. Isaac must not sit at home, but take a
journey of three days to be slain; he must not be sent back the first of
second day, but the third day (yet not before he be bound on the altar, and
the stroke of death a fetching) is he taken from off the wood.

Is the Lord a killing thee? yet trust in his mercy: God seems indeed not to
know his own Children sometimes, but to be deaf at their prayers: to have
broken the bottle wherein he was wont to preserve their tears: but he knows
us well enough, says Paul, 2 Cor. 6.9. though we think our selves unknown:
and therefore we are sometimes, as dying, but yet we live: chastened, but not
killed; yea killed, but not overcome. He seems now to know none better than
the wicked: but the third day comes, and puts as great a difference
between them, as it did between Pharaohs Baker and Butler, Genesis 40.13, 19. the
third day shall lift up the head of the one, and restore him to his office; but
the same third day shall take the head from the other, and shall hang the body
on a tree for the birds to eat the flesh from it.

And caused that he was showed openly.
Verse. 41 Not to all the people, but unto the witnesses chosen before of God:
even to us which did eat and drink with him, after he rose from the dead.
NOw we come to the manifestation of Christ his resurrection. Which is
described, first, by the persons to whom he was so manifested: set down, 1
Negatively, not to all the people: 2 Affirmatively, but to us who were chosen
of God to be witnesses. Secondly, by the facts of Christ toward these
witnesses: which are two, the former in this verse, in that he admitted them
to eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead: the latter in the next
verse, in that he sent out his Disciples with commandment to preach unto the
people: and especially to acquaint them with the Article of Faith concerning
his coming again to judge the quick and the dead. In which two actions,
namely, of sending out his Disciples, and judging of the world, his Kingly
office does notably put for^h it self.

And caused that he was showed openly:]

1 It behooves Christ to make open show and manifest knowledge of his
resurrection. It was necessary that Christ should manifest his resurrection,
for these reasons.


1 Because as he had been openly put to death, and openly buried, that none
could doubt of the truth of either, so this being as main a beam as lies in
all the frame of our Religion; it was meet that it should be as sufficiently
cleared, and as little liable to exception, as any of the former: which it had
not been, if it had not been as openly confirmed: and therefore he would for
the space of forty days, Act. 1.3. by many bodily appearances to many credible
persons at once; and by many other infallible tokens, make it evident, that the
same body which was crucified, having the same hands, feet, and side which were
peirced, and wherein the prints yet remained; even the same finite and
circumscribed body, which was to be seen and handled, and no other, was now
raised from the grave, and loosed from all the bands of death.

2 Because some things remained to be done by Jesus Christ, between his
Resurrection and Ascension, which craved his manifest presence. As, 1 He was
further to instruct his Disciples in the things which appertained to the
Kingdom of God; namely, in all the Doctrine they were to teach, and all the
Ordinances they were to observe, in the external government of the Christian
Churches unto the end of the World: and therefore the Evangelist shows us,
how Christ begun at Moses, and all the Prophets; and opened unto them in all
the Scriptures, the things that were written of him, Luke 24.27, 32. and not
only the Scriptures, but their eyes, and their hearts, to understand and be
warmed and affected with the same. 2 He was to establish and send out into all
the world in his own person, the Apostles to Preach the Gospel; which he
pleased to defer till this time, when by his glorious resurrection they might
see, that all power was given him in heaven and in earth, Mat. 18.19.

3 He was to confirm this their extraordinary Ministry, by an extraordinary
Sacrament, namely, breathing upon them, and giving them the Holy Ghost, Joh.
20.22. that is, some smaller measure of gifts, as a pledge for the time; but
directing them also when and where to expect the plentiful pouring out of the
Spirit upon them after his departure: as it was most miraculously performed in
the day of Pentecost, after they had a while waited at Jerusalem for the
Promise of the Father, Act. 1.4.

4 He was by Miracle to confirm to his Disciples the truth of his
Resurrection, that they might be the better fitted to the testimony of it, as
he did by that miraculous draught of fish, whereby they knew that he was the
Lord, Joh. 21.7, 12.

5 In that also he was (according to that which the Scriptures had
foreprophecyed of him, and himself also often foretold) to ascend up bodily and
visibly into Heaven, whence he descended, so to show himself the Son of God,
and our High Priest lifted up higher than the Heavens; Luke 14.33. cum 51.
to open Heaven for us, and carry our flesh before hand thither, where in the
mean time he makes requests for us: it was meet in the presence of all the
eleven, Act. 1.9. and they all beholding, that he should openly, and according
to his body be visibly and locally taken up, as the Angels witnessed, Act.
1.11.

Now though in these and other regards, it was meet he should show himself
openly, yet would he not so openly show himself as to all the people, but only
to such as his wisdom thought fit to behold him.

Quest. But why did not Christ after his Resurrection, ride in an open triumph
before all the People? In all reason it would have made much to the confusion
of his enemies, and the comfort of his friends. It could not have been but if
he had risen in the sight of the Soldiers, and had gone into Jerusalem among
the Scribes and Pharisees, into the Temple among the Doctors, into Pilates
Palace; they would all have been stricken down, and confounded in the
remembrance of their so cruel and wicked a fact, if they had been so plainly
and sensibly convinced of it.

Answ. We may not suffer our folly to prescribe to the Wisdom of God, Christ
most not show himself so openly as to all the people after his resurrection,
Why.
whose ways are not our ways. The foolishness of God, is wiser than men, and
the weakness of God, is stronger than men. And there be sundry just reasons
why Christ neither would, nor did so openly show himself. For,

1 He declares hereby that his Kingdom is not of this World; for then he
would have showed himself unto the World, whereas after he rose from death,
he would not show himself but to those of his own Kingdom. Neither needs
he for the furthering of his Kingdom the help or witness of the great ones in
the world: for then would he not have passed by the Scribes and Pharisees, the
Doctors and great Rabbis, whose words would easily have been taken, and showed
himself to a few poor and abject men and women. Neither comes his Kingdom with
outward pomp and observation, Luke 17.21. as Humane Kingdoms do; his triumph
is correspondent to his conquest; both of them spiritual and inward, not
discernable but to the eye of the soul.

2 The time was now come wherein Christ was not to be known any longer
according to the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. the World that had so known him before,
must know him so no more; but only by dispensation for the time, that such as
were to witness of him, might take the better notice of him.

3 The wicked had made themselves unworthy to see him any more: and this was a
part of the just judgment of God upon them, who had so despighted him: they
saw him once, and were sufficiently convinced by the Scriptures, by his
Miracles, his Life, and his Doctrine: all which because they despised, and
wilfully thrust the Kingdom of God from them, they are justly left of God and
Christ, and permitted to be further blinded, that they may up-heap the measure
of their sins.

4 As for the godly, the Lord would not have their Faith to depend upon the
witness of the eyes and sight of the wicked and ungodly; but upon a Divine
testimony, namely, upon such as were appointed of God for it: and this is a
sure ground of Faith.

5 If Christ had openly appeared to all the people, he had falsified his own
word, who had threatened them, that because when he would have gathered them as
an Hen her Chickens under her wing, but they would not, Matthew. 23.39. they
should not thenceforth see him till they could say, Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord. As if he had said, from henceforth, namely, after you
have crucified me, ye shall not see me till the end of the world, when I shall
come again; which coming some few of you, namely, that are elect, shall
gratulate unto me, and say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.
And perhaps (as some interpret it) all you who now reject me, as a vile person;
will then, but too late, and to no profit of your own, either by force, or in
imitation of the godly, acknowledge me the blessed that comes in the name of
the Lord: and to this also makes that. Matthew. 26.64. where giving a reason of
his confession to Pilate, that he was the Christ the Son of God; he tells
them, that they shall hereafter see the Son of man; but not before he be
sitting at the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the Clouds of
heaven.

6 It appears that many more of the Jews were more convinced in their
Consciences, and pricked in their hearts for crucifying the Lord of glory, by
the preaching and ministry of the Apostles; than they would have been by the
sight of Christ himself. In the second, fourth, fifth, and seventh Chapters of
the Acts it evidently appears, how by the Apostles direct dealing against
their sins, many thousands were converted at some one Sermon: and how many were
daily added unto the Church, whose faith was far more sound in that they
attained the blessing which Christ pronounced upon those that believed, and yet
had not seen.

All which teaches us, that in matter of Divinity, we must always subscribe
to Gods wisdom, shutting up our own eyes; If we have a word to believe any
thing, or to do any thing, although our reason be utterly against it, though
custom, though example, yet must we follow our direction, esteeming the word as
our pillar of the cloud by day, and our pillar of fire by night, to guide all
our motions, while we are wandering in the wilderness of this world; and even
till we attain the rest which is prepared for the people of God.

But unto the Witnesses chosen before of God,]

Sundry sorts of witnesses of Christ his resurrection.
We read of many and sundry sorts of Witnesses of Christ his Resurrection, and
therefore it is worth inquiry, which of them are here to be understood.

1 There was a Divine witness of the Angels, Luke 24.6. Why seek ye the
living among the dead? he is not here, but is risen.

Secondly, there was a real witness of the Saints that rose again with him and
appeared to many, to the end, that they might testify of his resurrection,
which we doubt not but they did, both by their appearing, and by word of mouth
also.

Thirdly, there was a forced testimony of the Soldiers, Matthew. 28.11. They
came into the City, and told all things that were done: whose first report was
a main proof of the truth of the thing, howsoever after they were hired to turn
their tongues.

Fourthly, there was the witness of the Disciples and followers of Christ: and
this was either private or public. The private witness was of many private
Christians, not only men, but women also who followed Christ, who also were by
Christ vouchsafed to be the first preachers of it even unto the Apostles
themselves; as we read of Mary Magdalen, Mary the Mother of Joses, Salome,
Joanna, and diverse others. Such was the testimony of the two Disciples who went
between Jerusalem and Emans, Luke 24. to whom Christ made himself known the
very day of his resurrection, and yet were no Apostles. Thus were many other
private Christians undoubted witnesses of the resurrection, who no doubt saw
and heard him in many of his apparitions, as well as the Apostles themselves;
in so much as Paul says, that he was seen of more than five hundred brethren
at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. But the text is not meant of any of these sorts, but
restrains it self to the public witnesses even the twelve Apostles; (...).
What these ch^sen witnesses were.
who were to carry the tidings of this with the other Articles of Christian
faith, throughout the whole world, For,

1 These witnesses are said to be chosen of God, which word is borrowed from
the elections of men, who were set apart to their several offices by laying on
of men's hands upon them: even so God laid his hands on these, that is, Christ
immediately by his own voice called these to be witnesses unto him, which was
one of the privileges of the Apostles.

2 The Apostle in the words expresses himself, by limiting them to themselves;
to us, namely, Apostles, who ate and drunk with him: not only who before his
death lived as it were at bed and board with him, but after he rose from the
dead, that we might not be deceived in our witness of him.

3 To us, whom be commanded to preach and testify (namely, to the whole world)
these things, together with his coming again to judgment.

Now for the further clearing of this public witness of the Apostles, we
will consider three things. 1 That these twelve were appointed by Christ
himself to this witness; which the Apostle Peter plainly concludes, Act.
1.22. where speaking of one to be elected into Judas his room, he says, he
must be chosen of one of them which have companied with us all the time that
the Lord Jesus was conversant among us, beginning at the Baptism of John unto
the day that he was taken up* implying, that whosoever was not thus qualified,
he was not fit to be made such a public witness with them of his
resurrection: because to the making of an Apostle, was necessary either an
ordinary converse with Christ upon earth, or else an extraordinary sight of him
in Heaven: by which latter, Paul, who made an honorable access to that
number, proved himself an Apostle.

The second thing is, how they were furnished to this witness: By what means
the Apostles were furnished to their witness
and this was su^^y ways. 1 By their senses, they ate and drunk with him, that
is, were in a familiar sort conversant with him after he rose again. 2 By word
of mouth, he gave them charge and commandment to do it: of both which we are
to speak in the text. 3 By a Sacrament or sign of breathing upon them, he
confirmed them to their vocation, saying, As my Father sent me, so I send you.
4 By adding thereunto the thing signified: for he opened their understandings,
and made them able to conceive the Scriptures, and unfold all the Mysteries
therein, so far as was behoveful for the Church. 5 By bestowing sundry other
great gifts upon them, sending the Holy Ghost upon them in the likeness of
fiery Tongues: whereby they received the gift of Tongues, he gift of Miracles,
of casting out Devils, of healing the Sick by imposition of hands, of
preserving from poison and deadly things, of the Apostolical rod, whereby death
it self was at the command of their word, either to take place, as in Ananias
and Saphira, both struck dead with the word of the Apostle; or to give place,
as in Dorcas, who by a word of the Apostle was raised to life being dead. By
these means the Lord put into the hands of the Apostles, great power to give
witness of the resurrection of Christ, Act. 4.33.

The third thing is, By what means they witnessed, or gave testimony to Christ.

Ans. Because they were to be authentical and faithful witnesses to all the
world, and that both in the age wherein they lived, as also in all the
succeeding ages to the end of the world: therefore was it necessary that they
should give witness two ways. 1 By zealous and painful preaching by voice
while they lived. 2 Even after their death, by the holy Doctrine left behind
them in their Works and Writings: and thus do they still remain public
witnesses to us, on whom the ends of the world are come.

Doct. Hence observe, that the office of the Apostles was to give testimony
unto Christ after a peculiar manner; Acts 1.8. When the Holy Ghost shall come
upon you, ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria and
to the uttermost parts of the earth. I say, they were to be witnesses after a
peculiar manner, for these reasons.

The Apostles were to be peculiar witnesses to Christ, and why.
1 To distinguish their witness from ours, who are ordinary Ministers: for
every Minister is called of God to give witness to Christ: but properly to
speak, they are rather Preachers and Publishers of things witnessed, than
witnesses: or if witnesses, yet herein they differ from the Apostles, that they
are not oculate, or ear-witnesses, nor such sensible witnesses as they were:
for this is an Apostolical speech, and manner of preaching, not derived to
ordinary Pastors and Teachers, to say, That which we have heard, and seen, and
our hands have handled, that we testify unto you, 1 John 1.1.

2 They were all faithful witnesses and faithful men; endued with faith and
full belief of the things they wrote and testified; as all ordinary Ministers
are not. Whence the Evangelist John professes of them all, that they knew the
testimony to be true, Joh. 21.24. True for the matter: for they delivered the
whole Counsel of God, and kept nothing back that was fit to be known, and true
for the manner, they all speaking as they were moved by the Spirit of God, 2
Pet. 1.21. and therefore exempted from all error in their witness, as we are
not.

3 And hence follows that their witness is to be believed, as infallible,
being the witness of such as with their eyes saw his Majesty* verse. 16. who did
not at any time deliver any thing, which they either heard not of Christ, or
saw him not doing, or suffering: but all other ordinary Ministers are so far to
be believed, as they consent with these; and so far as they testify no other
thing than what these oculate witnesses have left in writing.

Object. But Christ needs not the witness of any man, he has a greater
witness than John, or than any Apostle: therefore there is no use of the
Apostles witness.

Answ. Christ has indeed three greater witnesses than the witness of his
Apostles, namely, 1 His Father that sent him, bears witness of him. 2 The
Scriptures, if they be searched, testify of him. 3 His works that he did,
bear witness of him, Joh. 8.18. and 5.39. and 5.36. but yet howsoever in
regard of himself, he need no other testimony of man, that we might believe
and be saved; he uses the witness of men, (...) John, and the Apostles: and
of this Divine Testimony in the mouth of the Apostles may be said, as Christ
did of the voice from heaven, Joh. 12.30. This voice came not because of me,
but for your sakes.

In divine things we must lean upon a sure word.
Use 1. From this Doctrine we learn, how necessary a thing it is in causes of
Faith, to lean upon true and certain things, and not upon tottring traditions,
or unwritten verities, which are the main pillars of Popish Doctrine. Oh how
good has our God been to this Church and Land of ours, in giving us a surer
word of the Prophets, and Apostles, to become a light unto us in a dark place:
and a sure ground whereon we may build the truth, and certainty of our Faith,
and religion; that we need not be carried about with every wind of corrupt
Doctrine? These witnesses being sensible, faithful and so extraordinarily
assisted, neither would not could deceive us: yea, and writing in such a time,
and the same age in which the things were done; if they had written any false
or corrupted thing, all that lived at that time could easily have confuted
them. And therefore as Moses when he had written the Book of the Law, Exodus
24.7. called all the people to be a witness of the truth of it: even so the
Apostles writing the books of the Gospel and finishing them, appealed to the
men of that age for the truth of them: as John the last of them all in the last
end of his book says, we know, that is, all this age knows, that this
witness is true.

2 This Doctrine gives us direction, how to carry our selves to the present
Ministry; for some man may say, as the Devil once did, Paul I know, and Cephas
I know, but who are you? Surely even we are sent by Christ as well as the
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Pastors, some Teachers. Where it is evident, that he that gives the Apostle,
gives the Pastor also.

We being then called by Christ to teach this doctrine in the Church, Ordinary
Ministers must be received as Apostles, while they teach things hea^d seen by
the Apostles.
whatsoever our own unworthiness be, yet to contemn us shall be the contempt
of Christ himself: yet we being men subject to error (as they were not) must
hold us to our rule, which is Apostolical Doctrine: for as the Apostles have
faithfully performed their parts, so our part and duty is faithfully to depend
upon them: and then not to depend upon, or depart from us, is to depart from
Christ and his Ordinance. We that are Teachers reserve to every Christian his
privilege, which is not to receive every thing from us hand over head, nor any
thing at all on our bare words, but to try our spirits, to search the
Scriptures, (as the B^reans.) They have ^r ought to have their Bibles, we wish
them to look and enquire there whether our Doctrine be true or no: and by this
note shall they know it what it is, according as we shall be able to show the
Apostles the ear or eyewitnesses of it: for else are they not bound to believe
it.

Let any man come with a conje^tural, or probable truth, or any traditionary
doctrine, and cannot show which of the Apostles heard or saw it in Christ, no
man is bound to believe it as necessary to his salvation. But if any come, and
can back his Doctrine thus from the Apostles, it is all one as if the Apostles
did utter it. Let every Minister, if he would be believed, tread in the steps
of the holy Apostles; and see he be able to clear, that all he speaks be
spoken in their Language, be seen with their eyes, or heard with their ears;
which he is sure so to be, if it be contained in their writings. Hereof the
Evangelist John gives a notable president, The Word, says he, was made
flesh, Joh. 1.14. here was a great mystery, and a main principle of Salvation:
but how knows he it, is he sure of it? yea, that he is: and therefore
adds, we saw the glory of it.

Again, it were to be wished, that hearers would take up their duty, which is,
in reverent manner to come to their teachers in things doubtfully delivered,
and ask the question; I beseech you tell me which of the Apostles heard, or saw
this from Christ, which you have taught us, that I may believe it? for they
delivered nothing else. To which rule would Ministers and people frame
themselves, it would bring the Scriptures into request, which for most part,
are least set by in many Sermons; it would make men more careful of their
Doctrine, and thrust out an infinite deal of trash, and foolish conceits of
froathy brains: which make it a chief part of their reputation, to see with any
eyes save the Apostles and speak with any tongues save theirs, by which means
it comes to pass, that Gods own voice is least heard in Gods house, in Gods
business, and among Gods people.

3 Hence note also, The Lord Jesus chose mean and weak men for his witnesses.
Why.
What mean and weak men did the Lord choose to be his witnesses to all the
world; not great Rabbis, not Rich, not Worldly-wise: (who are not so expedite
and ready, neither to preach, nor receive the Gospel) but poor, simple, and
mean men. For these reasons,

1 That the conversion of men might not be ascribed to eloquence, arts, power,
or wisdom of the world: but this treasure is put in earthen vessels, that all
the power and glory of the work, may redound to God, who commonly, in weak and
foolish things, puts forth his admirable strength and wisdom.

2 That there may be held a difference between Civil, and Ecclesiastical
power: the one is outwardly glorious, and stately; the other mean and lowly:
the Ministry which ever brought most men to God, was least pompous, and which
came the nearest to the simplicity of Christ and his Apostles: and on which the
Sun of the World, for most part, as little shines, as it did on Christ himself
and his Apostles.

3 It made more for the glory of Christ, and his Apostles: of Christ, in that
he chooses illiterate and unlearned persons, and presently makes them wise,
learned, and intelligent, able by the wisdom of God, to put t^ silence the
most Learned and exercised Adversaries they can meet withal. Earthly Kings and
Princes, not being able to give such gifts, are forced to advance such as are
wise and experienced already; and set over their business, the wisest, most
learned, and most noble that they can find: Christ need choose none such, but
honors himself in choosing foolish and ignoble things, to make them wise and
noble, and every way fitted to his work. Again, herein he honors also his
instruments, who being in themselves mean and contemptible, yet upon their
calling received such a portion of the Spirit, as that they drove the wisest
and most learned into admiration; and daunted the greatest and most powerful,
when they saw that no power or glory of this world, could draw or hinder them
from the Execution of that Office, to which they were deputed. Hence was it
that the wise and mighty, Act. 4. seeing the freedom and wisdom of Peter and
John in speaking (knowing them to be unlearned men) they wondered, and knew
they had been with Jesus: and seeing the man standing with them which had been
healed, they had nothing to say against them. How great glory won Christ hereby
to himself, and his servants?

4 By this choice of his, he puts a plain difference between his Kingdom,
and the Kingdom of Antichrist. His Kingdom upholdeth the truth of God, which
is strong of it self, and well fenced by the power and strength of God watching
over it; and needs not the arm of man's wisdom, or humane power to lean upon:
but if it get simple and plain men to carry it through the world, it disperseth
it self as the light: twelve naked and unlearned men shall be enough to
overcome all the power and wisdom that the world can make against it.

But the Kingdom of Antichrist, maintaining nothing but fables and lies,
needs all the colors that wit and learning can devise, and all the power and
tyranny in the World to maintain it: false Doctrine can never stand of it self,
if it have not the two legs of humane policy, and power to stand upon. And what
other is it that for these many years (espec ally since the light of the Gospel
was by the mercy of God restored to these parts of Europe) has undershoared
that tottering Kingdom, but a flourish of wise, learned, prudent, and holy
Fathers: the profound policies, equivocating tricks, and acute Sophistry of
their Jesuits: the cunning practices, powder plots, hellish attempts of their
Priests and Disciples, against Kings, and Kingdoms, whose power they cannot
command: the base insinuations and flattery on the one side, and false fears
and treachery on the other, whereby they hold fast unto them sundry other great
powers and Kings of the earth? to which add the insatiable thirst of money*
and their base tricks to lay false fingers, and put loin goods and lands, which
they heap and lay together as the sands of the Sea, you may take a view of the
main props of that Kingdom. It must have the wit of men, the sword of Princes,
the strength of arms, the supp^rt of wealth, and every way a glorious outward
estate; else down must it needs fall like Dagon before the Ark. Christ's
Kingdom has none of these, needs none of these, and yet it propagateth it
self, and prevails daily, and so shall do, whilst this Antichristian
Kingdom being now in a consumption already, by the breath of his mouth, shall
be utterly abolished by the brightness of his coming.

4 In that the Apostles were chosen witnesses of God, it is a notable proof of
Christ his resurrection, which is the Apostles own use: for if Christ be not
risen, we are (says he) proved false witnesses: but that cannot be for the
former reasons, and therefore he is surely risen. The like deduction may be
used for the confirmation of any other Article of Faith delivered by them,
wherein they are no less true witnesses than in this of Christ's resurrection.

Who are and drunk with him after he rose from the dead. In these words the
Apostle Peter uses another argument of demonstrative force to prove Christ his
resurrection, Christ manifested himself to be both God and man, after his
resurrection, by two sorts of actions.
who both before his death and after did manifest himself to be both God and
man, by two sorts of actions.

1 Such as were miraculous and extraordinary: an instance whereof after his
Resurrection we have formerly mentioned, Joh. 21.11. in the miraculous lading
of the net with fishes.

2 Such as were more ordinary and familiar: such as in the next verse of that
Chapter is recorded, namely, his dining with the Disciples. Which was so
familiar, and so open a revealing of himself, as wherein they could not be
deceived in the truth of his person. And to confirm this truth of our Apostle,
we read, that not once or twice, but often, he ate and drunk with his
Disciples after he rose from the dead, for he did not only eat with six of
his Disciples, as Joh. 21.2. cum 13. but with the two Disciples with whom he
joined himself going to Emaus, Luke 24.30. and with all the eleven gathered
together, Luke 24.33. cum 43.

Quest. How could Christ eat and drink, seeing he was not raised to a natural
life which he lived before, and we now live: but to a spiritual life, which
cannot be nourished by corporal means, no more than our bodies shall be after
the general Resurrection?

Answ. Christ did not eat seemingly, or in appearance, Cibus hic ad humanae
naturae indicium, non ad corporis gloriosi fulcrum pertinuit, and comestio
potestatis fuit nota non necessitatis. Tilenus.
as one deluding them; but as before, truly both ate and drunk: for else this
could be no infallible proof of his Resurrection unto them, as our Savior
intended it should be. For when the Disciples had seen his ^ands and feet,
wondered at the matter, and yet believed not for joy, Luke 24.41. for their
further confirmation he called for some meat, and having a piece of broyled
fish, and an honeycomb given him, he took it and did eat before them.

2 Although Christ ate and drunk truly, and indeed, yet was it not necessary,
as before, for the nourishment of his body; which now living a spiritual life,
took no nourishment from it. And as he needed not to eat, Considerations of
Christ's eating and drinking after his resurrection.
so that which he did eat, went not through his body as it did before, or as
ours now does. It will be asked first, what became of it; and secondly,
whether that can be true eating, where can be no nourishment. To the former I
answer, that himself, when, and as it pleased himself, dissolved the substance
of it into his first principles, or into nothing after he had truly eat it.
To the latter, that every man has experience that he can truly eat many
things which never nourish him: and so will avoid further curiosity, and
inquisition into questions so needless.

But it will be more materially objected, that this eating and drinking does
not necessarily and infallibly prove the point of Christ his Resurrection,
seeing the Angels have eat and drunk, and yet were no men.

Answ. As for the Angels which ate and drunk with Abraham, Lot, and others, the
truth is that (whatsoever some speak to the contrary) they did truly eat as
well as they truly walked, spoke, and indeed had their feet washed: all which,
though they proved them not to be true men, yet proved them to have had true
bodies, which were assumed for the time of their message, and again dissolved
into their first nature, as also was the meat which they did eat: even so our
Savior Christ is proved hereby after he was dead, to have a true, living
organical body, which is a sufficient proof of his resurrection, and
confirmation of our Faith in that Article; especially seeing that it was the
self same body that was laid in the grave, the testimony of the Angels, the
emptiness of the grave, the prints of the nails and spear, with many other
evidences sufficiently confirm.

1 Note hence, in that our Lord Jesus, would not only appear once, but very
often, and not only that, but eat and drink sundry times, and this also in the
presence of many authentical witnesses; To believe the resurrection, is an hard
point.
what an hard thing it is to believe the resurrection from the dead: yea, if
we should hear it Preached from the blessed mouth of the Son of God himself.
The Disciples of Christ had often heard him, teaching them particularly of his
resurrection the third day; they had seen him accordingly risen; yea, they had
handled him with their hands: yet unless he condescend to admit them as
familiarly to eat and drink with him as before, they scarcely believe: neither
can we think the Disciples flower of heart to believe than our selves are, who
are ready to say in any thing that our eyes see not, with Mary, How can this
be? But that neither they nor we should sink down in this weakness, he has
pleased to condescend to our infirmity, to remove all scruple from them and us,
in this main article of our religion.

His wisdom saw how necessary it was, that they who were to be witnesses unto
him, should be enabled with much persuasion, both by lively voice, and by
writing, to assure all other believers of the certainty of his Resurrection,
till his return to judgment: and therefore to all the other means of
manifesting himself, he added this, to sit down among them to eat and drink
with them: not to feed himself by that meat, but their faith, and in them the
faith of the whole Church. For what is it that more confirms and
strengthens our Faith, than the boldness and liberty of the Apostles, both
in their Sermons and Writings? and whence is this but from their own full
persuasion of the truth, which makes them bold, and whence is this persuasion,
but from certain sense and undoubted knowledge, arising from their familiar
converse with him after his resurrection?

Use 1. To strengthen this our weak Faith by this consideration, conceive with
thy self that Christ ate and drunk with his Disciples, that thy Faith might be
nourished as well as others: and in that they saw him, heard him, handled him,
ate and drunk with him, and being faithful witnesses have Preached, and by
writing avouched the same to all the world; thy Faith must be as fully
assured, as if thine own eyes had seen him, thine own hands handled him, and
thy self had sit with him at the Table while he ate and drunk among them: yea,
so often as thou hear, or read, or think of any of these things; so
often must thou be renewing and adding something to thy Faith in this behalf;
as every new apparition or manifestation of Christ, added something to the
faith of his Apostles.

2 In that our Lord after he was gloriously raised from the dead, would still
for those forty days depart from his glory, abasing himself to converse with
sinful men; yea, to eat and drink corruptible creatures; of which his
incorruptible body had no need: and would still humble himself to condescend to
the weakness of his Church: we are to learn the same lesson toward our
Brethren, to be of a yielding disposition, ready to depart with some of our
right for their good and edification; and carry our selves as weak to the weak,
and become all things to all men, to save some.

Verse. 4^. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that
he is ordained of God a Judge of quick and dead.
A Third argument to prove that Christ is raised from the dead, and so is
indeed the true Messiah, and Lord of his Church, is, that he gave Commission
and Commandment to his Apostles to become Preachers and witnesses, as of other
points, so especially of this; that howsoever he was adjudged to death,
according to that judgment executed, and laid as one foiled by death for the
space of three days, yet he is now gloriously raised again, and appointed of
God the Judge of all that ever have lived, do, or shall live to the end of the
world.

In the verse we have three things to be handled.

1 That preaching is a reverent and necessary ordinance of Christ himself, And
he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify. 2 The object of
this ordinance, or what we must preach, namely Christ, that he is, etc. 3 What
particular doctrine concerning Christ must more especially be preached, that he
is ordained of God, a judge of quick and dead.
In the first of these, are two branches to be cleared. 1 That preaching is
the ordinance of Christ. 2 The necessity, which will easily be deduced from
the former. That Christ instituted this holy ordinance, is plain, Matthew. 28.19.
Go preach to all nations, baptizing them, etc. the which commission, that it
was extended beyond their persons, to such as should in after ages succeed
them, appears by his last words, and behold, I am with you to the end of the
world. Preaching the ordinance of Christ.
And that the ordinary teachers are no less the gift of Christ than the
Apostles themselves* is as plain, Ephesians. 4.11. he therefore gave some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and some Teachers.
Neither must this trouble us, that both in this place alleged, as also in
some other it is attributed to the Father, to send and give Pastors according
to his own heart, Jer. 3.15. and 25.4. and sometime to the Holy Ghost, Acts
20.28. Take heed to your selves, and the flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made you overseers, 1 Cor. 12.11. and all these things works even the
self-same Spirit, distributing to every man severally, even as he will. For,

1 All those external works are common to all the three persons: and where any
one of them are named in any action done without themselves, no one of them is
excluded, but all the three must be included.

2 The Divinity of Christ is not obscurely proved, in that the same glorious
actions of the Father, and the Holy Ghost, are ascribed also unto him, as from
Heaven whither he ascended, to give several gifts for the work of the Ministry.

3 That we might better instruct our selves, in their several order and manner
of working the self same action: for the Father is the Fountain, and the first
Author of all these gifts; the Son properly is the distributer and giver: for
the Father works all in us by the Son, and both of them by the communication
of the blessed Spirit: even as the Sun by his beams sends light, and heat
unto the inferior creatur^s.

Object. But this ordinance of preaching, seems not to be Christ's, because it
was long before his Incarnation; and now remains after his ascension, when
he cannot call men as he called the Apostles while he was on earth.

Ans. The Ministry of the Gospel, in the proper acception of it, has two
things to be considered. First, the being of it: Secondly, the virtue and
efficacy of it. The being of it (as it was the Ministry of the New Testament,
wherein glad tidings were published to all Nations) was temporary, beginning in
the time of Christ, and shall have end with the world: yet can it be called no
new doctrine, because the sum and substance of it, was (though more obscurely)
delivered to Adam, and the Fathers of the Old Testament. But if we consider the
virtue and efficacy of it, it is an eternal Gospel, Rev. 14.6. during from the
beginning of the world to all eternity.

Now therefore will it not follow, that because it was before his Incarnation,
it was not his; but rather therefore it was his, who was before Abraham was,
the chief Prophet of his Church, that raised, according to the several ages of
his Church, such men as were fit, either more obscurely, as before his coming
(when rather some Evangelical promises of things to come were preached, than
the Gospel it self,) or else more manifestly to preach and open the mysteries
of the Kingdom of God. And this latter kind of preaching, was not before his
incarnation; neither was it fully settled before he ascended into Heaven, and
from thence gave gifts to men; that thereby he might show himself a careful
Head and Governor of his Church, even then when he was set down at the right
hand of his Father. It is true indeed that before Christ's suffering, he called
his Apostles, instructed and furnished them with many gifts of the Spirit; yea,
and these gifts were increased very much after his resurrection, whereby they
were more confirmed in their Apostleship; and although they did before Christ's
death, exercise the office of Apostleship in Judea amongst the lost sheep of
the house of Israel, yet had they not received that fullness of the Spirit, and
power from above, which was necessary to Apostles, before they had received in
the visible form of fiery Tongues, the Spirit in abundant measure: whereby they
were before all the people of the world, after a sort, solemnly inaugurated,
and confirmed to be the Apostles of Jesus Christ: neither had they, till after
Christ's resurrection, received this Commandment (of which our Apostle
speaks) To preach to all Nations, and to every creature under heaven: the
practice of which Commadement they took up after that (they having stayed at
Jerusalem for the promise) the Spirit came upon them, and they were endued with
power from on high, Luke 24.49.

As for the second branch of the objection, that because ordinary Pastors and
Teachers are not immediately called by Christ, being now in Heaven, therefore
they are not ordained by him, it is false: for of the Pastors and Elders of
Ephesus it is said, that the Holy Ghost made them overseers: and Paul
accounts Apollos ordained by Christ as well as himself, 1 Cor. 3.5. What is
Paul, and who is Apollos, but the Ministers by whom ye believe? and, as the
Lord gave to every man? only the difference must be observed in their calling
both are called of Christ, but the Apostle by himself immediately, not by men:
the ordinary Pastor called of him by the Ministry of man. I call it a
Ministry, because the whole power and authority of the Church in calling
Ministers, is but a service unto Christ; approving, declaring, and testifying
to the Church those whom Christ has called. And therefore both before his
incarnation a long time, and after his ascension also, the exhortation which
was enforced upon believers run in this tenor, to day if ye hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, Psalm. 95.7. Heb. 3.7. Whence we conclude, that his
voice has ever sounded in the Church, and so shall do in the ministry of his
servants, until his coming again to Judgment, Luke 10.16. he that hears
them, hears him; he that receives them, receives him; he that refuses
them, refuses him: he by his servants entreats men to be reconciled; by them
he binds and loses, saves and destroys.

Necessity of p^eaching ^vinced by four reasons.
Secondly, for the necessity of this ordinance, can any deny it who sees the
Son of God so careful before his death, after his resurrection and ascension
also into Heaven, to furnish and fit with an extraordinary measure of the
Spirit, Apostles and Apostolic men, for the founding of the Church of the New
Testament; and not only so, but now sitting in his glory at the right hand of
his Father, is mindful of his promise, and is with his Church to raise up
successively faithful Pastors and Teachers, gracing them with variety of
excellent gifts; and blessing those gifts for the building up, and repairing of
his body, and the gathering of the Saints* of whom, as of living stones, is
reared a spiritual house or temple fit for his own use. But because most men
are willingly ignorant of this necessity of preaching, I will a little enlarge
it by some reasons.

1 Consider the condition of those that are unconverted; In regard of the
unconverted.
and it will appear necessary for them. No man was ever saved, while he was in
his natural blindness, no unbeleever could ever get within the gates of the
holy City: no hard-hearted or impenitent person, could ever, so remaining, see
the life of God. Neither was ever any man ordinarily drawn out of this fearful
estate of Damnation, but by the Word of God preached; which is the light to the
blind eyes, the ground of faith: for how can they believe, except they hear?
and the hammer of the Lord to break asunder the hardest stones in men's hearts,
Jer. 23.29. Who were ever begotten to God, without this immortal see^ (...)
^here spiritual Fathers? Who ever became living stones in the building, wit^
(...) ^e hewing and polishing of Gods builders? What harvest was ever ^^ought
in to God, without these laborers? What soul was ever pulled out of the
kingdom of darkness, and brought to be a member of Gods Kingdom, but by
this means? The word in this ordinance is called the Gospel of the Kingdom of
God, Mark 1.14. that is, whereby men attain both the parts of Gods Kingdom:
both that of grace here in this life, and that of glory in the life to come:
from which effect it is called, 1 The word of grace, Acts 20.32. 2 The Gospel
of glory, 1 Timothy 1.11. also the word of reconciliation, because hereby sinners
are reconciled to God, Ephesians. 1.13. the word of life, because it quickneth the
dead in sin: the Gospel of peace, chap. 6.15. because it alone pacifieth the
conscience, and setleth it in the peace of God: to conclude, The good word,
Heb. 6.5. because it only reveals Christ, who procures all good unto
believers. Who sees not then the necessity of preaching? seeing none are added
to the Church without it, Act. 2.41. no spiritual life can be preserved
without this feeding, Act. 20. No Saints are gathered, nor no body of Christ
built up without Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. And it pleased not God
by any other means, but by the foolishness of Preaching, to save such as
believe.

S^condly, If we consider those that are called to knowledge and faith, In
regard of the converted.
it will appear also a most necessary ordinance in regard of them. For,

1 Seeing a man cannot safely and comfortably pass through any part of the day,
without the light, strength and comfort of the Scriptures, it pleased the Lord
to set up this public ministry in his Church, that even believers themselves
by hearing the Scriptures daily explained, obscure places opened by those which
are clearer, and figurative speeches cleared by the proper; might attain not
only to a clearer understanding of the Scriptures, but also to have them
printed in their minds and memories, so as they might be able to draw them
into continual use.

2 Even the best have nature in them, and their daily failings; and without
daily repair, grow weak in faith, weary of well-doing, and unfruitful in the
work of the Lord. And therefore though they should not need to come to increase
their knowledge, yet have they need to hear their faults controlled, to be
provoked unto duty, to be confirmed in their obedience, to be strengthened in
their faith, reformed in their lives, comforted in their troubles, and spurred
to bring every thing to use and practice; and therefore the best may be still
Disciples and Learners in the School of Christ.

3 The agreement and fellowship of the members of the Church, is excellently
hereby maintained and preserved: not only by communication of gift^ and
graces, while some teach and some learn, but also while it is a mean to hold
them all of a mind; whereas without this public Ministry, if every one were
left to hi^ private sense and reading, it could not but br^^d corrupt and
private opinion^, to the dissolving of minds and affections. And this special
benefit of thi^ public ordinance, the Apostle aimed at, Ephesians. 4.13. Till we
all meet together in the unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man; implying, that the scope of the Ministry, is to bring and
preserve all the members of the Church in this unity of faith and knowledge; wh
ch in this world it cannot do, but so soon as it has done this, it self shall
ce^se, nam^ly, in the life to come. He must needs be wilfully blind, that
espieth not very gr at necessity of the word preached, for the strengthening of
th^se joy^^s and bands, whereby believers are knit both unto the head, as also
unto the me^* (...).

From the oppo^ition of the Devil, and wic^ed on^^.
Thirdly, The necessity of this Ordinance appears, in that the Devil and
wicked (...). W^^^^, have ever resisted it above all other, as being the
greatest enemy unto his Kingdom, which makes him fall down like lightening in
the heart of men. Hence is it that he stirs up Jannes and Jambres, and all
the ^able of Egypts Inchanters against Moses; and sets all his power against
him, to prove him a counterfeit. Hence is it that he will not want a Pashur to
sin Jeremy, nor an Amaziah to do as much to Amos. Hence raised he up many
Armies against Paul; Elimas and Alexander, Hymeneus and Philetus, D^otrephes
and Demas, and from his mouth he casts out floods of r^pro^chful and virulent
slanders against him; that he is a pestilent and (...) ou^ fellow; that he
speaks against the Law, and against the Temple, away with such a fellow, it
is not fit that he should live.

A d has the Devil grown any whit more calm, or can he digest Paul's preach^ ^
better since Paul's time? no sure, he is no changling, except because his time
is shorter, his malice be stronger and more raging: I wish Gods faithful
Ministers every where found it otherwise. But to omit other proofs, (...) serve
generally the voice of the multitude. Where there is no Preacher, but some poor
creature to serve, as they say, or starve them rather; it is wonderful how well
people think themselves with him: he shall be commended and defended, for a
very honest peaceable man, or for a very good fellow, that will bear his
Neighbors company, they could not have a better; and for all he cannot preach,
a worse (they f ar) will come when he is gone. But whose voice is this? and is
not the hand of the Devil in all this? Well, on the contrary, where there is by
Gods mercy a painful and faithful Minister, that Preaches constantly and
conscionably; how goes the cry and common voice of people upon him? we have
one that Preaches indeed often, and (perhaps* is a good Scholar; but he is
very unpeaceable, a reprover of every man, a spy-fault, he has made such
contention in our Parish since he came, that we wish he had never come
amongst us; we were quiet enough, and held peace and neighborhood before he
came. And thus he is counted, as Jeremy, a man that striveth with the whole
earth.

The same prove^ by experience.
Fourthly, The necessity appears by common experience, if we compare the
people, who have had the Ministry planted amongst them, with those who have it
not. In the one, what shall a man sooner meet with, than woeful ignorance,
Popish opinions, superstitious practices, heathenish conversation? they live as
men without God in the world: or, as if the old Sodomites were alive again. But
in the other, by Gods mercy some seal of the Ministry you shall meet withal;
some men of knowledge, of conscience, and out of conscience performing duties
in public, and in private; in the house of God, and in their own houses; you
shall hear godly and gracious speech in their mouths* see good example in their
lives, holy desires and endeavors to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
Jesus Christ. And whence is this difference, but from the presence or absence
of this ordinance, and Gods blessing attending or departing from it?

Use 1. Ministers must urge themselves to diligence by this necessity.
The Ministers of Christ must urge upon themselves this self same Commandment,
to provoke themselves to diligence in p^eaching: for it lays necessity upon
them, and woe unto that Minister that pre^^heth not the Gospel. A lamentable
thing is it to see how little either this commandement^ or the denunciation of
this fearful woe prevails with many: but some are given up with Demas, to
embrace this present world; some give up themselves to idleness, and
voluptuousness of life; some to ambition, and further preferments; some to
policy, and state matters; and very few only to faithful and painful
Preaching. Thus this commandment of Christ is generally forgotten, the sheep
and Lambs of Christ unfed and forsaken, the Kingdom of Christ unbuilded and
unrepaired, and the Kingdom and power of sin generally stands in the state
of it unshaken in the hearts of men.

2 We see hence what little need we have of a dumb, or blind Ministry;
unless there he need of breaking so express a Commandment of Jesus Christ,
who seals no man's Commission, but to Preach to his people. No need of a du^b
o^ blind Ministe^y.
What need is there of wells without water, of mouths that speak not, of
candlesticks without light, of stars without shine, of salt without savor?
Christ needed not to have ascended to send men without gifts; he sends no
Messenger without a message, no Steward without his provision, no Captain
without weapons, no Watchmen without eyes: this were a folly which the wisdom
and weakness of man cannot brook: but he sends an interpreter, the Learned
tongue, the prompt Scribe in the Law of the Lord; such as are mighty in the
Scriptures, and are stored with things new and old. Let us not implead the
wisdom of the Son of God, and say, where shall we have such store of
Preachers for our several Parishes? If we want them, the fault is our own, and
not Gods; who has given means, men, and maintenance enough; if all these were
wisely and thankfully disposed to his glory, and the service of the Church.

3 This Doctrine must be applied also to the more ignorant sort of men, who
never as yet came to see the absolute necessity of this Ordinance of Preaching:
as witn^ss, 1 Their formal coming hereunto, as forced by Law, ^ow men see this
necessity of preaching.
or constrained by custom: and thence departing again without any fruit of
Faith, or increase either of knowledge, of obedience, or of comfort. 2 The
inbred corruption, yea, and malice of their hearts against it; which bewrays
it self in a number of frivolous Objections, which they shame not to bolt out
among their mates. As, that this preaching of the Gospel is but foolishness:
they see other have lived honestly and well without it, before them, and so
have themselves done for many years: and yet they live as well as those that
are the forwardest to run after Sermons. Alas, poor souls, how has Satan
overreached them in a matter of such moment, as is their whole estate and
freehold of Heaven? who if ever they come to see their lost estate, and what a
woeful condition they stand in for the present, they will tell us another tale,
with shame in their faces, for that they have said: they will profess the
Ministry of Reconciliation, to be as necessary as their atonement and
friendship with God, which is better and sweeter than life it self.

Others conceive and complain, as the Israelites, Many pl^^^ against it.
that there is too much Preaching, and too much of this Mannah: and some of
better place, but no better hearts, avouch that it is so common, that it grows
into contempt.

Now would I ask of these, was it the abundance of Mannah, the Angels food,
that was the fault, or their wicked loathing of it? even so is it the
commonness of the word, that makes the wicked contemn it, (for the hungry soul
of the godly would never despise it, if it were ten times more common) or
rather because they see not the worth, nor taste the sweetness of it? des^^s^
we the Sun because it rises daily, and shines all the day long upon (...) or
the air which we breath in every moment? or does the ordinary and common use
of the bread upon our Tables, bring bread out of request with us? No, we see
the necessity, that without the Sun, and without our daily bread, and without
the air, we cannot live. And did we see also as clearly that where vision
fails people perish, we should change with our minds our note; and highly
bless God for the commonness of it, as we do in the other: and sure I am, that
either the Apostle Paul did not fear this inconvenience, or else he oversaw
it, when he enjoined the Ministers to Preach instantly, both in season and out
of season.

Others say the world was better when there was less Preaching, and thence
conclude, that it is far worse now, because there is more: which though it be
a rude fallacy scarce worthy answer, as putting that to be a cause of men's
wickedness which is not, yet something must be said unto it; and fools must
be answered in their folly, lest they be wise in their own conceit. Let these
men bethink themselves, and then tell us whether the Holy Gospel (being the
power and arm of God to save every believer, the glad tidings of salvation, and
word of life) can make the World worse than it is. For if that be the use of
it, our blessed Savior was far overseen to leave his glory of Heaven, to take
our flesh, and in it to submit himself to the obedience of the whole Law; and
to the suffering of the whole curse of it, for our disobedience; if by all this
he leave the World, or make the World worse than he found it. How shall it be
true that is written of him, that the Son of Man came not to destroy, but to
seek and save that which was lost, if the Preaching of him make the World worse
than it was? we will easily grant that the Gospel, being a great sight, it
daily discovers that corruption and darkness which before lay hid; as the Sun
rising manifests all those things which were wrapped up in the darkness of
the night.

But to say that sin is the more, because it is more seen by the light of the
Gospel, is a fancy: or if sin it self in these days of the Gospel by the
multiplication of people be multiplied; shall we say the Gospel is the cause,
or rather the malice of men, who pervert it to their own destruction, taking
occasion by it to turn the grace of God into wantonness? Let not ^s therefore
be (as the old Idolaters in Jeremies time) who told him plainly, that they
would not hear the Word that he spoke in the name of the Lord, for while they
served the Queen of Heaven, they had plenty of victuals, and were well, and
felt none evil: but since they left to burn incense unto her, it was never well
with them, they had scarceness of all things, and were consumed by the Sword
and by Famine, Jer. 44.17, 18. and therefore they were resolved to do as their
Fathers did. But let us with thankfulness cast our eyes upon the Grace of God,
that has appeared, and learn (as it teaches) to deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

Many other allegations of simple people against this ordinance I might
allege, but they are well met withal by some others; and my self have
elsewhere answered many of them, Beauties of Bethel.
and therefore referring the Reader thither, I content my self with these few
for the present: and conclude this point with this exhortation to these poor
seduced people: that considering the straight charge and Commandment that
lies upon us to Preach in season, and out of season, they would be willing to
pick out their duty therein employed; which is to be diligent, yea, swift to
hear, to attend as earnest suitors at the gates of Wisdom, for their own good;
to lay up instruction as they would treasure gold, and to call after the
wisdom of God revealed in this ordinance, without which never was any made
wise to salvation. And let them further know, that (seeing God does not
extraordinarily save men, where the ordinary means are afforded or offered) the
neglect of this means is to despite great salvation; and to make themselves
unworthy of life eternal. And from the evidence of truth I avouch against every
soul, that turns his ear from hearing the word preached; that he despises
the pardon of the King of Heaven, he refuses life and salvation offered; he
chooses death, and forsakes his own mercy, Joh. 10.27. he is no sheep of
Christ, for then would he hear his voice, Joh. 8.47. and if he were born of
God, he would hear the words of God.

Secondly, The object of this Ordinance, or what we must Preach, Christ the
matter of our preaching.
and that is Christ. The scope of the whole Scripture is Christ, and it is
wholly resolved into him. The Law, that is a Schoolmaster to Christ; for by
convincing of sin, and making the sinner exceeding sinful, it leads him forth
of himself to seek salvation in Christ. The Gospel preaches nothing but
Christ, and him crucified for sin, 1 Cor. 2. We preach Christ the power of
God, and the wisdom of God. Hence is called the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mark.
1.1. and the word of Christ, Col. 3. not only because it is from him being
God, a^ an ^^h^ ^ent cause, and preached by him as the chief Teacher of his
Church; but also for the material cause which is Christ. The Apostle Paul
calls it the word of Truth, not only for the truth of it, but because it
publishes that eternal Truth Jesus Christ: as also the word of the cross, not
only because the cross ordinarily attends the faithful preaching and
profession of it, but because the matter of it is Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 2.

Quest. What is it to preach Christ?

Answ. It stands in two things. To preach Christ wherein it stand h
1 In plain manner to preach the docttrin of Christ, concerning his Person, his
Natures, his Offices, and the execution of them from his incarnation to his
ascension.

2 In powerful manner so to apply this Doctrine to every hearer, that every one
may feel a change to follow, both in his heart and life. For to teach only the
History of Christ his Doctrine, his Miracles, his Life, his Death, is not the
full teaching of Christ: for thus the unbeleeving Jews know Christ; and the
Infidel Turks can easily come to this knowledge of him. But to reach Christ as
the truth is in Christ, is to apply every particular to the heart of a sinner,
that he may be framed to conversion and repentance; which is the most
difficult labor of the Ministry, and most to be striven in. Many Teachers
who can choose hard Texts, and make learned discourses, and show much dexterity
of wit, reading, and humane literature, have not thus learned Christ
themselves, not can after such a lively manner teach him to others.

And pity it is to see that whereas so great an Apostle as Paul, who wanted
not Arts, Tongues, and humane Learning, desired to know nothing but Christ, and
him crucified, among the Corinths themselves: it should be the study of many
men to show the knowledge of any thing rather than of Christ; and how they may
paint out themselves rather than Christ in their Preaching. Is not the end of
preaching to make Disciples of Christ, Mat. 28. (...)
was it instituted to please the ear, or to prick and pence the heart? Let the
Minister therefore strive to ransack the hearts of men with whom he is to
deal; that discovering their secret things they may fall down and say, God is
in him indeed. Let him think he has spoken the word of Christ; when he has
both taught him, and led his hearers unto him. And this will not be done but
by the plainness of words, and evidence of the Spirit. It is thought a
reproach to preach a plain Sermon, whereas indeed, that is the best Sermon
which teaches Christ most plainly. 1 By true interpretation of Scripture. 2 By
wholesome savory and proper Doctrine gathered thence. 3 By sound application of
that Doctrine for the information of men's judgments, and reformation of their
lives: where Christ crucified is thus held out, there need no wooden Images nor
Pictures; nor the real sacrifice of the abominable Mass, to put men in mind of
him.

2 Hearers may hence learn to judge of themselves, whether they have heard
aright or no. And then have you heard well, when you not only know that which
you did not before, but when you believe more, love more, hope more, and are
more changed than before, When you find our Sermons as the glass wherein you
see and discern the true estate of your souls; when you are cast into the form
of this Doctrine; when your Lusts stoop and yield to this Scepter of Christ:
without this no knowledge is saving; but all our preaching and your hearing
tends to damnation: if ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them?
Joh. 13.17.

The Apostles commanded in special to teach the doctrine of the last judgment.
Reasons.
The third point is, what is the particular Doctrine which the Apostles, and we
in them are so straightly enjoined to preach: and that is, the Article of Christ's
coming again to judge the quick and the dead. And surely it is not without
reason, that our Savior should wish them to insist in this doctrine, above
others.

1 Because this being the last work of Christ remaining to be done after his
ascension, it could not be so easily believed as those things which were
^^re^^y done and accomplished, being still in fresh memory; and so much the
less deniable, by how much they were still fixed even in the senses of all
those who were eyewitnesses of the same. And therefore he would have his
Apostles careful to help the weakness of men's faith, in the expectation of his
return to judgment, by much and often beating upon it, as a point that needs
more instance and persuasion, than such as (being past, and so sensibly
confirmed by many hundreds and thousands as they were) are far more easily
apprehended, and believed.

2 The Scriptures teach that the remembrance of this judgment to come, is a
notable means to quicken the godly in their duty, to work in them a reverent
fear, and shake out security, which breeds hardness of heart: therefore did
the Apostle Paul, considering the terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11. provoke
both himself and others unto their Duty: and no marvail, seeing the children of
God, have even at the consideration of more particular judgments, been
stricken with the fear of the Almighty. The Prophet Habakkuk when he heard but
of judgments to come, says, That his belly trembled, his lips shook, and
rottenness entered into his bones, Habak. 3.16. And David, being a noble King,
has these words, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments, Psalm. 119.120. A special example whereof, we have in that famous
Preacher of righteousness, Noah, of whom it is recorded, Heb. 11.7. that being
warned by God of the flood to come an hundred and twenty years after, he was
moved with a reverent fear of God to make the Ark. And as Noah, was by hearing
of the waters, so the servants of God hearing of fire, wherewith the world
shall once again be destroyed, ought to be, and are moved with a reverent
fear of God, which is as a steel spur to provoke them to their duty.

3 The Scriptures make the contempt of this day of judgment, the ground of all
sins, and of the destruction of ungodly ones. For as it was in the days of
Noah, so shall it be in the day of the Son of man: they never dreamed of the
judgment, before it came, and so perished in it; so men eat and drink, marry,
and give in marriage, till the day come upon them as a snare, and they taken as
a bird in an evil net. What was the cause that the evil Servant sat him down
with drunkards, and rose up to beat his Fellow Servants, but because he said
with himself, my Master will still defer his coming? In all which regards,
neither the Apostles, nor we the ordinary Ministers succeeding them, can want
good reason to stir up our selves and others, by the often and diligent
propounding and applying of this holy Doctrine of Christ his coming again to
judgment.

The verse contains two things: 1 Christ his appointment to this office, that
he is ordained of God, 2 The execution of it, a Judge of the quick and dead.

Touching the former, it will be asked, Dan. 2 9 Joh. 16 8. How Christ is
ordained a Judge, seeing the Father, and holy Ghost judge also.
how God could ordain Christ a Judge, seeing that both the Father and the Holy
Ghost judge as well as he?

Ans. In the last judgment must be considered, 1 The decree of judging. 2 The
authority, or judiciary power. 3 The external and visible act, or execution of
judgment. Now in regard of the two former, all the three blessed persons, the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost concur, as having an equal decree of judging, an
equal authority and judiciary power, an equal dominion over all creatures, and
an equal consent in the judging of them: But in regard of the third, the
visible judicial act, Christ is the Judge, and that according to both his
natures, the Godhead, and Manhood: and yet both of them herein retaining
their own properties. Thus is Christ ordained of God a Judge: and thus is it
said, that the Father ^udgeth no man, but has committed all judgment to the
Son, Joh. 5.22. Where by judgment, (...)
must be meant the administration of judgment: for so the Evangelist
expounds it in the 27. verse of the same Chapter, where he says, that the
Father has given him power to execute judgment. And by committing it unto the
Son, (...).
not as opposing the second person in Trinity, to the first or third, or as
excluding the other two; but only appropriating it thus far, that by the Son,
in a visible form, and according to his humanity, shall the last and general
judgment be exercised. For all that power of judging which is in God by
nature, shall be in Christ as man by grace of personal union, for the
execution of it.

Now the wisdom of God thought fit in this manner, Administration of judgment
laid upon the Son for sundry reasons.
to lay the administration of the judgment upon the Son, for sundry reasons.

1 Because Christ having in his humanity accomplished the work of man's
redemption, and in it had been judged in the world; it is meet that he should
now manifest the glory of his manhood, exalted above all creatures, and shining
in such brightness of glory, as is fit for such a body as is united to the
Divine nature.

Hence is it, that often we read this second coming opposed unto his former,
wherein he pleased to cover and veil his glory, which now he will reveal and
display above the shining of a world of Suns: Mat. 25.31. When the Son of man
comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then he shall sit upon
the throne of his glory: Luke 21.27. Then shall they see the Son of man come in
a cloud with power and great glory.

Secondly, He shall show his near affinity unto man, in that he shall in his
humanity be seen visibly descending in the clouds, as he was seen visibly to
ascend by a cloud: this was long since prophesied, that every eye should see
him, Act. 1.11. and how meet is it, that the Judge of all should be seen of
all?

Thirdly, In regard of his Church; which as it is justified by his first
appearing in humility, so must it be glorified by the second appearing of the
head of the Church in glory.

Fourthly, That he might in this last act of it, fully accomplish his Kingly
Office: for when he shall have faithfully finished this judgment, which is
committed unto him, he shall immediately deliver up the Kingdom unto his
Father, 1 Corinthians 15.24. not that he shall then cease to be an
everlasting King of glory, but because he shall no longer exercise any
temporary government as now he does. He shall not rule his Kingdom by Civil
Magistrates, nor his Church by such Officers, and ministry, as are now
appointed under him for the gathering of the Saints. It shall not stand in need
of the means of edification by the Word, Sacraments, or Censures; the Lamb
himself shall be all these in the midst of the Throne of God. In both these
regards, he shall deliver up his Kingdom; but he must first appear in a most
glorious humanity to finish this great business. For these reasons is this
great work committed to the Son immediately to execute.

The comfort of Gods children that their Savior shall be their Judge.
Use 1. Is Christ appointed the Judge? then may every godly man and woman
comfort themselves, seeing their Savior shall be their Judge. If a man's
brother were to be his Judge, he would not fear but to get the day, and the
cause to go with him: but he is the elder brother of every believer: he bade
the woman go tell my Brethren that I am risen again: I know (says holy Job)
that my Redeemer, or near kinsman, lives: yea he is nearer than a Brother,
being the Husband of every faithful Spouse. If the Wise should have her loving
Husband, who loves her better than his own life, to judge her cause, what need
she fear but the matter will go well with her? what need the members fear the
head? Let us comfort our selves with these words, and lift up our heads,
because this day, wherein our Head shall show forth both his own and our glory,
who are his Members, draws near.

He shall judge the wicked against whom all their villainies have been committed.
2 This doctrine serves also to daunt the wicked and ungodly: They shall see
him whom they have peirced: he is their Judge against whom all their villainies
have been committed, whose servants they have villanously entreated, whose
kindness and peaceable conditions they have despised and refused. What a
fearful sentence awaiteth them when they shall come before him? no marvail if
they call for the mountains to cover them, and the hills to hide them, rather
than they should appear before the presence of his glory, whose wrath is as a
consuming fire, and no stubble can stand before it. Oh consider this ye that
put far from you this great day of the Lord, speaking peace to your selves,
whilst every thing wageth war against you, in that you still by living in your
sins proclaim open war against the Son of God. Why should you any longer abuse
his patience? why will you treasure up wrath for your selves against this day
of wrath? why will you fit your selves as fuel for the fire of that day, when
the Lord Jesus shall come from Heaven, in flaming fire, to render vengeance
against all them which know not God, nor obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus? 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Well, if you will not be warned, but you will go on in such
impenitent courses; know it, that the party wronged by your sins, is he who is
appointed of God to be your Judge: you will think it will go hard with Pilate,
seeing he is to be his judge who was judged by him to death; and with Judas
that betrayed him, and with the Soldiers that put him to death: but change the
persons, the case is your own.

Secondly, In the execution of this Office, two things must be considered: 1
The persons upon whom, here said to be the quick and the dead. 2 The manner of
it.

First, By the phrase of quick and dead, is meant all mankind without
exception, of what age, condition, sex, or quality soever they be, even all
that ever have received life from God, from the first man that ever lived upon
earth, to the last that shall be found living at the coming of Christ; even
all these shall be juged. And the dead are mentioned as well as the living;
because the carnal and unbeleeving heart of man makes more question how those
who have been resolved into dust many thousand years ago, can be quickened and
raised to judgment, than those that shall be found alive at that day:
therefore is the Scripture very express in this particular, Rev. 20.12. I saw
the dead both great and small stand before God, 2 Cor. 5.10. We shall all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. In like manner those speeches admit
no exception, which we every where meet withal: as, Every eye shall see him:
every man shall bear his own burden: every man shall give account of himself
unto God, Romans 14.12. And that we should not doubt of the certainty hereof,
the Scripture condescendeth so far to our weakness, The means whereby both
quick and dead shall be g^thered to judgment.
as to show us the means how this great work shall be brought about. As,

1 By the mighty and powerful voice of Christ, which whilst he was in his
abasement, could call dead Lazarus out of his grave, Joh. 5.28. Those that are
in the graves shall hear his voice.

2 By the ministry of the Angels, who shall all (not one excepted) come with
him, and they shall gather the elect from all winds, and present and force the
wicked to the bar, before the Judge of all the earth; even then when they
shall fly to the hills to cover them, if it were possible, from his presence.

3 By the diligence of all the brute creatures, who in their kinds shall hear
the voice of the Son of God. The Sea shall give up her dead; so shall Death and
the Grave give up their dead; the very fire shall give up again the bodies it
has wasted. In a word, all the Creatures shall help forward this work of the
great day: which although it transcend the shallow reach of man, yet is it not
above the power of God.

Object. But how can the quick and dead be then presented to Judgment, s^eing
the godly shall not enter into judgment; and for the wicked, they are judged
already: for he that believes not, is condemned already?

Ans. First, for the godly, they shall not enter into the judgment of
condemnation. 2 They are by their particular judgment acquitted already, but
they must also by the general Judgment receive in their bodies (which till
that day are not absolved) according as they have done in the flesh. 3 They
must be solemnly and publicly inaugurated and invested into the glory of their
head; and their blessed estate manifested to all the world both men and Angels,
and even in the eyes of the wicked themselves: therefore although they enjoy
God already in part, and the beginnings of the life to come; and such as are
dead in the grave rest with the Lord, and enjoy his glory in their soul, yet
are they not fully happy, nor can be, till this day breath on them, and this
their morning awake them to their perfect glory.

As for the wicked, although they are already condemned: 1 In Gods Counsel
before all worlds. 2 By the word wherein their sentence is read, Wicked already
judged five ways.
declared, and published. 3 In their own consciences the judgemen^ of which
fore-runneth the final Judgment. 4 By certain degrees of insensible plagues
that are upon them, as hardness of heart, blindness of mind, wilfulness in
their wickedness, malice against God and good men; hatred of the light and
means of salvation. 5 By the horrible torment of the souls of such as are in
Hell with the Devil and damned ones: yet does the full vial of Gods wrath
remain to be poured upon them: and the final execution, and manifestation of
their endless misery, is reserved till this Day of Judgment, when the body
shall be reunited to the soul, and both delivered to the Devil as their head,
by him to be tormented together, as they have been inseparable friends in
sinning together.

Use. Let every man make account of this judgment, high and low, rich and
poor, learned and unlearned: No man can avoid this judgment unless his power
be above the power of the judge.
the mightiest Monarch shall not be able to withdraw or absent himself,
unless his power be above the power of Christ the judge: the poorest soul
that ever saw the Sun shall not be neglected: the most rebellions of all
Creatures, men or Angels, must of force appear, and that not by a Proctor or
Advocate, but in his own person: for every man must give accounts of himself
unto God. None can be forgotten, no not through the passing of thousands of
years: Cain dyed many thousand years since, Judas many hundreths; yet both must
appear, the one for killing his innocent brother, the other for betraying his
innocent Master. No excuse will serve the turn: the Friars plea, we are
exempted Lord, will do no good here: no not that which all men's Courts must
needs excuse absence by, that the party is dead: for this Judgment Seat is set
up for the quick and the dead. God must, for his glory, truth and justice,
bring every man to this tribunal; that if he have been good and faithful, he
may have his time of refreshing: and be put into the perfe^t state of happiness
in soul and body.

And contrarily, if he have been hard-hearted, and impenitent, he may know
the weight of Gods justice and power, and be in full state of endless and
easelesse misery both in soul and body. Oh then what great cause has every man
to forecast this day, and expecting it, to prepare for it; rather than to
betake themselves to that Epicurean and profane practice of mocker^, who put
far from them this evil day, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? we
see all things alike since the beginning: he makes but small haste. And thus
because judgment is not speedily executed, they resolve themselves on a most
wicked course* not knowing that as a snare it shall come upon them when they
least look for it, and that though slowly, yet he will come surely, and make
them know what it is to abuse his patience which should lead them to repentance.

Now follows the manner of this Judgment, and that is comprehended in three
things. 1 It shall be glorious and powerful. 2 Just and righteous. The glory
of the last judgment described.
3 Strict, and accurate. For the first, it is said that the Son of man shall
come with power and great glory, yea in the glory of the Father: that is, such
as belongs to his Father with himself, but to no creature else. The clouds
and the air shall be as a fiery Chariot to carry him with admirable swiftness:
his train and attendants shall be the Archangel making his way by the sound of
a trumpet; which the very dust and ashes shall hear, and follow: and all the
other Angels of Heaven, from whose multitude, power, and glory, this coming
shall be wonderfully glorious; and yet the Judge himself shall surpass them
all in glory and brightness; and as the Sun does darken all the lesser
Stars, so shall his most admirable glory obscure them all. This a^pearance
may be shadowed by the coming in of earthly Judges to hold Assizes through
their Circuit, attended with the Honorable, Nobles, Justic^s, and Gentlemen of
the Country: yea with the High Sheriffs power, besides all their own followers:
by which great state and attendance, they are both honored, and aided, as
becomes such public Ministers of Justice; as also are made formidable to
daunt and quell malefactors.

Or rather, look as Princes going to their Parliament to make Laws, put on
their royal robes, and show themselves in their greatest glory; even so shall
this great King of glory coming to require the obedience of his Laws, cloth
himself with such a robe of glory as the brightest Sun shall not endure to
behold: neither the Heavens nor the Earth shall be able to see this glory, but
shall shrink at it, and melt away with a noise: Revel: 20.11. John saw a great
white Throne, and one that sat upon it, from whose face fled away both the
earth and heaven, and their pla e was found no more. Thus may we in some dark
resemblance something conceive of this glory of the Judge of all the world;
unto which the consideration of the persons that shall be judged by him,
adds not a little moment: for not only small, but great must stand before
him. It is indeed a great honor among men to be deputed the Lord high Steward
under a King, whose office is to sit in Judgment upon a noble man: what an
height of glory then is it for the Son of God to sit in Judgment, and call
personally before him, not nobles only, but all the Kings and Monarchs that
ever the earth bare? If there be such preparation, and state amongst men for
the trial but of some one noble man: what glory may we conceive must attend
the mighty God, whilst he brings to their trial, not only meaner persons,
but all the most powerful Monarchs and Potentates that ever were, or shall be,
to the end of the world?

This consideration ministers comfort to the godly, seeing he comes to
Judgment, who is able perfectly to free them from all misery; able to strike
often their bolts of sin, to acquit them from terrors of conscience, fears of
death, the Grave, the Devil, and Hell it self the comes from Heaven for their
release, who has trodden down all his enemies under his feet: and all this
glory is for their safety and happiness, who wish and wait for the appearing
of this mighty God, Tit. 2.13. And on the contrary, it serves to strike the
wicked and ungodly with terror and dread, seeing the Lord Jesus shall come from
Heaven in such power and majesty, and all to judge and condemn them: whom when
they shall see arrayed with vengeance against them, no marvail if they be
driven to their wits ends: yea, as it is with guilty Malefactors, when they see
the Judge coming in so honorably attended, so shall it be here; this very
glory of Christ shall strike them with fear, horror, and an azednesse, and
force them to all miserable, and unavaylable shifts; and to wish, if it were
possible, that the rocks would fall upon them, and crush them to pieces, so as
they might never come before his presence: for the great day of the Lord, which
is to all the wicked of the world a black day, a cloudy day, a dismal day, this
day is come, and they cannot abide it.

Secondly, this Judgment shall be righteous, and according to the truth,
(...).
Romans 2.2. We know that the judgment of God is according to truth, Heb. 1.8.
Thy throne, O God, is for ever, the scepter of thy Kingdom is a righteous
scepter: The righteousness of the Judge and judgment.
Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity. Hitherto is to be referred
that of Daniel, 7.9. who says, that this Judge shall sit upon a great white
throne; alluding to the white Ivory throne of Solomon, but infinitely more
glorious: the whiteness betokenning the purity and righteousness both of the
Judge, and the judgment: for every man shall receive according to his works.
Here shall be no concealment of things: for he will bring every secret into
judgment, Eccles. 12. He will lighten all things that are hid in darkness,
and make the counsels of the hearts manifest, 1 Cor. 4.5. Here shall be no
daubing or salving up of bad matters in corners: no pleading of Lawyers, who
craftily cloud the truth of Causes for gain: no respect of persons, no
favoring for the sake of any friends, nor fear of foes, or any displeasure.
Here shall be no inducement by gifts, which blind men's eyes, to pervert
judgment: the purest gold of Ophir shall gild no matters here: for what shall
gold or silver, pearls or jewels do, when Heaven and earth shall be on a
light fire? Here shall be no sanctuaries, nor privileged persons, or places,
to hinder the course of justice: hence shall be no appeals; but every person
shall receive an eternal sentence of every cause according to the truth and
equity of it: for else the Judge of all the world should not do right.

Use 1, To comfort Gods children, Gods children who here have all sentences
pass against them, shall have justice at this day
who in this world are herein conformed unto Christ, for the most part, causes,
and sentences pass against them, and their light is darkened, their innocence
by the might and malice of the wicked trodde^ down: but then shall they be sure
of the day, God will cause their uprightness to break out as the Sun in his
strength: for when wickedness shall ruin the sinner into Hell, righteousness
shall deliver their souls from death.

2 To teach them to possess their souls in patience, when they see the
confusions that are in the world: to beware of revenge, but commit all (as
Christ himself did) to him that judges righteously. We must be content for a
while to see our righteous ways depraved, our good repaied with evil by evil
men: and be so far from thinking hence that there is no providence, o^ care in
God over his Children, as that we must necessarily conclude hence this
judgment day. Observe the rule, Eccl. 3.16. When thou seeest in the pla^e of
judgment wickedness, and iniquity in the place of justice think in thy he^rt;
surely God will udge the just and the wicked: for there is a time for every
purpose and work, and Chap. 5.7. If in a Country thou see oppression of the
p^or, and the defraud^ng of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the
matter: for he that a^ higher than the highest regards it. The same ground
do the Ap^stles ^ft^n lay, to raise this same exhortation unto patience in
enduring wrongs: as, Phil 4.5. Let your patient mind be known unto all men:
the Lord (...) at hand. Jam. 5.7. Be ye also patient, and settle your hearts:
for the c^mming of the Lord d^aweth near. As if these holy men had said with
one m^uth, look not to have your right here in this World, as neither the
wicked have their liv^e* but wait the appointed time, as the Husbandman does
for the we^ks of Harvest: and this time is the coming of the Lord, before
which ti^e neither is the full recompense of righteousness given to the
Saint^, not punishment rendered unto the wicked in the full measure of it. Grow
not weary of well doing, though ye meet with nothing but discouragements; not
out of love with the practice of piety, although the world have you f^r it, as
it did your head before you; for in due season ye shall reap ^f ye faint not.

3 This teaches men carefully to look to all their works and ways, that they
be just and justifiable, The works and words of men which shall abide the
trial of that d^y, must now be tried before h^nd.
such as will hold water (as we say:) For there is a day of trial, when all
those causes which they have by Money, Friends, or wicked policy contrived and
over-wayed in, shall be brought about again into a clear light, and put into
the balance of equity it self, where they shall be found too light. And think
seriously with your selves, how those cause^, words, and actions, will abide
the trial of that day, which even for the present, can bring no sound comfort
to the heart; but rather heaviness to the heart, accusation and guiltiness to
the conscience, fear in the thoughts, and shame in the face, if any man should
know how impiously, and injuriously they have been contrived: how many
Oppressions, Wrongs, Cruelties, Usuries, Revengeful suits, only commensed to
make men spend their goods, and lose their peace; how much of many men's estates
would give a loud witn^ss against their owners, but that men will not so long
before hand trouble themselves with such thoughts? Well, look to thy self
whosoever thou art. If thy conscience now accuse thee, or can accuse thee, but
thou will either stifle it, or stop thine ears against the cry of it; know,
that it has a voice, and will do good service to this Judge one day; a
thousand witn^sses cannot do more than it will do: it will bring back old
reckonings, which Christ has not reckoned for, and set them in order before
thee; when thou that can find none now, shall have leisure enough to look
into them, but all to the breaking of thy heart, and increase of thy torment,
that thou did not, till too late, look into thy reckonings.

Now to all such as mind hereafter to look into so main a business as this is,
The touchst^ne of this trial is the word of God.
I will for the present commend only one rule, whereby they may discern
whether their actions will abide the trial that abides them, and that is this;
If the Word of God do now approve them, they will then be justifiable; but
whatsoever word or action has passed from thee, for which thou ^a^st not bring
thy ground thence, the same will cast thee in judgment. This is that our
Savior tells the Jews, The word that I speak shall judge you at the last
day, J^h. 12 48.

The str^ctne^s of the l st j^dgement 1 In regard o^ persons judged.
Thirdly, This judgment of Christ shall be most strict and accurate, 1 In
regard of the persons that shall be judged, who shall be inquired into and
brought to give accounts of themselves, not only generally, as men or
Chri^tians; but in special, according to the particular places, and courses of
life wherein they were set in this world.

For example; public persons must give account for themselves, and others that
have been committed unto them: Magistrates for their People; Ministers for
their Flocks; both of them how they entered, how they ruled, how they walked in
and out before their people: what faithfulness they used in discovering, and
discountenancing sin and ungodliness; how diligent they have been to draw and
force men to the keeping of the two tables; how they have acquitted themselves
from communicating in other men's sins: and whether they have faithfully in
their places denounced, and executed the judgments of God, whilst both of
them have stood in the room of God.

In like manner, private men must be countable, not only for themselves, but
or all those that are under their charge: as Fathers for the education of their
Children; Masters for the instructing and governing of their Servants, and
Family; Tutors for their care or negligence toward such as are committed unto
them: for the rule of the Law is general, and will take fast hold upon many a
soul, that think it enough to look to themselves, that whosoever hinders not
that sin which he can hinder by good means, comm^tteth it.

Be now thine own Judge whether thou have well looked to one* when thou have
neglected to reform the disorders of such as God has put under thy power. Thou
have not a person in thine house, but if it any way perish under thy hands,
thou must give account of the life of it to the Parents of it, or to the
Magistrate, the Parent of the Country: in like manner, there is not the meanest
soul in thy Family, but if it perish by thy default, for want of instruction,
correction, or wise government of it, thou shall be called before the God of
the Spirits of all flesh, and shall be arraigned and condemned for the blood
of that soul. And this is not to bear the burden of that soul, which bears
the weight of it own sin, but to bear thine own sin in not preventing that evil
from him, which by thy negligence came upon him.

Secondly, it shall be strict in regard of the things, either received of us,
2 In regard of things, 1 done, 2 received.
or done by us. Account must be made what goods of our Masters we have
received, both for the kinds and measure. What number of Talents were committed
to our trust; If one, or more, how we have laid them out; what we have
gained, whether we have faithfully returned this gain to our Master, as having
sought his advantage, and not our own: how we have Husbanded our
opportunities* and redeemed our times: how we have employed the gifts of our
Minds, Understanding, Judgment, Wisdom, Learning, Memory: how we have used
or abused to sin, the strength, health and beauty of our bodies: how we have
justly and charitably received in, and retailed out, the matter of our
maintenance and revenew.

And in all these lesser things, if our unfaithfulness be found out, let us
never look to have greater matters committed unto us: for the things that are
done by us, they shall all be straightly judged, whether they are conformable
to the Law, the rule of Righteousness; or acceptable by the Gospel, the
restorer of our Righteousness: Eccl. 12.14. God will bring every work into
judgment, good or evil, open or secret: for all things are naked before him,
with whom we are to deal: he planted the ear, and must needs hear; and formed
the eye, and therefore must needs see things secret, and covered with darkness.
Hence is he said to have books, and to open them, because all things are as
certainly recorded and registered by him, as if he had registers in Heaven to
keep roles and records of all that ever were or shall be to the end. Yea, he
has not only his own books of judgment in Heaven, but for more surenesse
that nothing escape him, he has millions of books of record in earth, that
shall all help forward his judgment, and give testimony to the righteousness
of it, so as every mouth shall be stopped at that day: and these are the bo^ks
of every man's particular conscience, which howsoever they be now shut, or as
roles folded up; yet shall they also then be opened and unfolded, to give
witness of whatsoever any man has spoken or done in the flesh, be it good or
evil.

3 In regard of words.
3 This judgment shall be strict in regard of every man's words, Jude 15. In
this judgment he shall rebuke all the ungodly of all the cruel speakings
which wicked sinners have spoken against him. For if of every idle word we
must give account to God. Matthew. 12.36. much more of every wicked word. Every
man thinks words are but wind, and he may speak his mind, and he has
done: but in this judgment by thy words thou shall be justified, or by thy
words thou shall be condemned: and though thou when thou have spoken thy mind
against thy brother have done, the Judge has not done with thee.

4 In regard of thoughts to be jud^ed.
4 It shall be strict in regard of every man's thoughts: for even these are not
so free as men say they are, nor shall go scot-free: for even they are bound to
the conformity of the Law, as well as our words and actions. The commandment
is very express, Thou shall worship the Lord with all thy hears, and all thy
thoughts, and all thy strength: and when the Apostle Paul would note the
damnable estate of the Ephesians before they were called to the Faith, Ephesians.
2.3. he sets it forth in this, that they then followed the will and counsel
of their own thoughts. (...).
Add hereunto, that the Lord Jesus is the se^^, the s^archer, and judge of the
heart, and therefore hereby shall the Throne of his judgment be advanced
above all the tribunals in the World, in that the most secret thoughts and
reasonings of men's hearts cannot escape him, which the highest seats of justice
amongst men, can take no notice of at all.

Sin carried never so secretly shall come into a clear light.
Use 1. Let this Doctrine abate somewhat the pleasure of sin, which most men
swallow up so delightfully, yea and glory in their iniquity when they can carry
it so close and clear away, that men see it not, and can stopp the cry of their
scared conscience for the present: but remember, that God has written it up,
and the time hasteneth when that conscience of thine, now in a dead sleep, and
scared up, shall be awakened, and become as a thousand witnesses against thee,
that if all other accusers should fail, thy self should not fail to do that
office against thy self; but shall be both a servant to Gods justice, as also
the subject of it. Be admonished then in time, whosoever thou art, to beware of
all secret sins, as close cousenage, lying, uncleanness, whisperings, and all
other cunningly-contrived wickedness: seeing there is a clear light into which
they shall be brought, and by which they shall be reproved. True it is, that
open shame of the World restrains many one from committing open and gross
sins; but where conscience is wanting, the same sins, if they can cleanly
convey them, are made no bones of.

Hence is it that the Adulterer watches for the twilight, before he go into
his Neighbors house; he cares not for his chastity, so be he may charily,
and cauteously compass his uncleanness. If a child of four or five years old
stood by, he would forbear his sin; but the presence of the mighty God that
stands at his elbow, who sees and records his soul sin to bring it into
judgment, moves him never a whit. Would a felon commit burglary, if he
thought the Judge himself looked upon him? would Gehezi have run after Naaman,
if he had thought his Masters eye and spirit had run after him? would Ananias
have lied to the Apostles, if he had thought they had known he did so? Even
so is it a shame to speak what is done of many Christians in secret; because
their eye is not upon the judge, whose eye is upon them, and who is framing a
bill of indictment against this day of general assize.

2 This consideration must move us to carefulness, both of our receipts, and
expenses, whether they be gifts of mind, or of body, Be careful of thy
receipts and expenses because thou fittest in another man's, to whom thou must
be countable.
or of our outward estate. He that spends, and walleth his own, need care
the less, because none can call him to reckoning why he does so? but he that
sits in another man's, or has a matter of trust in his hands, and cannot
mis-spend but out of another man's stock, had need look about him; because he
is to be countable, and must make good whatsoever his reckoning comes short
in. Ask thy self, What have I which I have not received of my Master? How came
I to be so rich? Is all the Wealth I have of my Masters gift, or have I gotten
goods into my hands by wronging, or injuring some other men?

Again, I remember I received at such and such a time a great sum of my
Ma^ters money, he betrusted me with a great p^rtion; how have I laid it out,
that I may give him up a just and comfortable reckoning, to which I am sure to
be called. Thus much I have spent upon suits in Law: Thus much upon my
pleasures and sports; my dogs have ravend up a part of my revenue; my Hawks
have flown away with another end: Cards and Dice have cost me no little: and a
great deal is wasted by compassing my sin, uncleanness, pride, revenge,
gluttony, and the like.

But O thou unfaithful Servant, that have thus wasted thy Masters goods* how
much have thou given to the poor? how much to good uses, to works of mercy, to
a settled Ministry, to help Joseph out of his affliction? oh no, here he can
set down little or nothing; the Dogs are preferred before Lazarus by many a
Dives, who if they timely look not better to their reckonings, must make the
foot of their account to be this; no sooner to be dead than to be buried in
Hell, according to the sentence, Take that unprofitable servant, bind him hand
and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be wayling and
gnashing of teeth.

3 This stri^t account shows, that a man cannot be too strict, No man can
be too precise because the judgment shall be thus precise.
too precise, or too careful of his ways. Men generally cast the reproach of
purity upon men, that desire to approve their hearts and lives unto God: and
count them more nice than wise, and say, it were hard, if every one that were
not so pre^ise and curious, should be damned. But what, does not the Scripture
^ay plainly, that he Master is an hard man; that is, a most just God that will
straightly stand for justice? shall not every idle word, every ungodly thought
and motion, though not attended, nor assented unto, come unto judgment? and if
it must, is it more than needs for men to look to the door of their lips;
yea, to keep out, if it were possible, every vain, and wandering thought out of
their minds? shall not he that breaks the least commandment, be the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, have no place at all there? shall not all
omissions and failings in duty be set upon the heads of sinners, seeing the
sentence shall run. In that ye did not these things, depart from me ye
^^^sed? or shall we thi^^ that the least carelessness of men shall be
justified in this judgem^nt, or the ungodly be taken by the hand? far be it
from the Judge of all the world, not to judge with righteous judgment:
howsoever loose persons wrap themselves in the woe of those that call good
evil, and evil good.

Now for the general use of this Doctrine of the last judgment. To what other
end has the word so expressly discovered this holy Doctrine, and enjoined us to
teach it in the Church, 1 Cor. 15. but that every man should lay it to heart,
and benefit himself by it? and therefore,

First, The godly are to comfort themselves with these words, The godly may
l^f^ up their heads in expectation of this day of redemption.
seeing they hear of this day wherein they shall be gainers, receiving their
sentence of absolution: and therefore, 1 Perfect redemption from all the danger
of all spiritual enmities: the first fruits whereof they have already attained:
hence is it called the day of their redemption. 2 Perfect security and safety
against a^^ the mol^stations of sin, death, the grave, the gates of Hell,
temptation and tribulation: for all these shall be cast into the Lake. 3
Perfect glory with the Saints, for they shall be from henceforth ever with the
Lord, and enjoy the sweet ^^uit of that prayer which the Son of God in the
days of his flesh r^quested, and was heard in: Father, I will that where I am
they may be also, that they may behold my glory, Joh. 17.24. Why should not we
then lift up our heads in the exp^ctation and ardent desire of this day, which
the very dumb creature (...) for? Rom 8.19.

Godly must address them selves to thi^ judgment two ways.
Secondly Let every man labor to fit and address himself unto this judgem^nt,
that h^^ may ^ee able to stand before the Son of Man: And that by two things: 1
By making full account and reckoning of it: 2 By using the best (...)
af^re-hand to pass through it happily.

The (...) i^ ^harged upon us by that precept, which commands us to be like
the Servant that waits for his Masters coming, and has every thing i^ a
^^adin^ss, and that at all watches: and by that of Peter, 2 Pet 3.11. Seeing
a^^ these terrors of the Lord; what manner of men ought we to be in all holy
con^er^at^on? Two things hinder this c^re.
An^ for the furthering of this care, two things must carefully be (...), which
shut it quite out of the hearts of the most.

The first i^, (...) ^^^ry and deadness of heart: which is a slumber of
spirit, and sl^^p^^^ss of the s^ul, which has bound up all faculties and
powers of the (...) as ^^ttle move o^ stir in the actions and affairs of
heavenly (...) s^i^^tual ^se, as a man when he is in a dead sleep can move or
bestir himself to (...) natural a tion. The mind, till God awaken it, never
ser^ously thi^ke^h of God, or of his own estate. The conscience never, or
seldom accuses for (...) committed. The will inclines not to any thing
tru^ly good. The affe^ti^ns remain unmoved at Gods word, o^ works. The whol^
man i^ s^nselesse and careless of Gods judgments, either present, or to come:
and whence is all this, but from a profane delusion of the heart, that the
Master will not yet come; they shall not yet be called to their reckoning;
there is time enough behind to repent in: they crave but an hour on then
Deathbeds, and that they hope they shall have? In the mean time they are eaten
up with dissoluteness and profaneness, casting away sobriety and watchfulness,
so as their Master comes unexpected, and in an hour they know not.

How does it the^^fore stand every man in hand, to awake from his sleep, and
stand up from the dead? with wis^ Virgins to prepare and trim the^^ Lamps with
oil before hand, and so wait for the coming of the Bride groom: to take heed of
every ^i^, thought, word, and deed? to watch narrowly their own lives, to provo
^ themselves to the best duties?

What, is not sin a fearful thing, which made the Son of God cry, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Is not the greatness of them like the
mountai^^, and the number of them ^ike the sand of the Sea-shoar, which is
numb^^l^s^* Is it not a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,
whose wra^h and justice against the least sin, all Creatures in Heaven and
earth (...) stand und^^, ^^t be oppressed and shaken in pieces? Is not the
night past, and the day ^^me, the Sun of righteousness risen, so as if ever
we mean to (...) of this deadly sleep, and walk as the children of light, it
is more than t me? Would thou be taken lying, or swearing, or gaming, or
drinking, or railing, or breaking the Sabbath, or stealing, or whoring; would
(...) have thy Master find thee in any of these practices and distemp^^? o^
no, I m^an to repent: But he comes suddenly as a Thief in the n ght; and this
s^d^a^^ ^oming, at least to thee in particular, may cut off all thy purposes f
^ it is just with God, that they who take not his time of rep^ntance, shall
never attain to their own. What will now be the issue of thy delays? surely
thou ^adst better been a Dog, or a Toad, or the vilest Creature of all the
Creation, than a secure sinner overtaken in thy wickedness.

The second thing that hinders this expectation of the last Judgment, as
carefully to be avoided as the former, are the cares of this present life, and
the greedy desire and thirst after the world, which by this consideration also
may be abated. For if this day of Judgment, whether general, or particular to
thy self, were to morrow, what were thy Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels, worth to
thee? they were all one with the stones in the street. Tell me now whether thou
would not then esteem Christ and his merit thy chiefest commodity: or if thou
could but conceive with thy self the truth, and say to thy soul I shall
certainly shortly come to answer the Judge of all the world; c^uldst thou go
on to lade thy Conscience with iniquity for so short a possession of vanishing
profits? No, thou would begin to husband thy time, which worldliness has
hitherto engrossed: thou would not suffer thy soul to be so surcharged with
earthlinesse, as to forget treasuring in Heaven, making ready thy account, and
the finishing of thy reckoning: thou would not suffer the thorny cares of
this life to choke all the seed of thy salvation: neither could it be that the
Ox, or Fa^m should so still fill up thine eyes, as that the supper of the King
should be despised.

Bu^, in truth men live generally as though there were no Judgment to come, or
as though they had stricken a covenant with it to pass over them: for when we
preach, and men hear or read of the Judgment to come, who trembles at it, as
Felix an Heathen did, to hear Paul dispute of it? When we teach that the Judge
is at the door, who sees all the facts of men, and draw^th them into bills of
remembrance, and of them all is drawing a bill of indictment; who fears more,
who sins less? who is it that smites his thigh, or says, what have I
done? Who forsakes his wilful ignorance, his contempt of the Word, his abuse
of Gods Servants, his Blasphemies, his pride, uncleanness, unlawful games, or
lawful unlawfully used, his Sabbath-breaking, his swearing, his oppression, his
usury, or the like? We like Lot fore-warn men of the evil to come; but men,
like Lots cousins and kinsmen, entertain our words as a jest: we are as though
we mocked; and so they sit out the summons to their further danger: yea more
than this, when the Lord thrusts his fearful judgments into the eyes and
senses of men, as forerunners of this general; men shut their eyes, and will
not see the brightness of them; nor the danger of sin by them; nor the special
anger of God bewraying it self and broken out in them; but still live as they
did in the days of Noah, and will lay none of these things to heart, till it
be too late.

The second thing whereby every man must address himself to this judgment, is
to use the best means, that he may happily pass through it. And the only means
is set down by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged of the Lord. Judging of our selves aforehand stands in
four things.
Now this judging of our selves before hand, stands in four things.

First, in arraigning our selves before Gods Judgment Seat; that is, when by
serious consideration we summon our selves before this Judge to whom we are to
be countable. This is the memento that Solomon gives the young man who is set
upon his pleasure, Remember that for all this thou must come to judgment. And
if the young man must sauce his pleasures with this remembrance, much more the
older had need, as being in the ordinary course of nature nearer it than they:
some of the ancients have so acquainted and accustomed their hearts to this
meditation, that one of them professes of himself that wheresoever he was, or
whatsoever he was doing, he thought he heard always this voice in his ears,
Arise ye dead, and come unto judgment.

Secondly, in examining of our selves; and this is, when we search and fan
our selves, when we sift the secret corners of our hearts, and enqu^re
narrowly, and without partiality, What have I done? that look as the Kings
Attorney sifteth out, and exaggerateth every circumstance of the Crime against a
Traitor at the Bar, to make his offense as foul as can be; so should we become
the King of Heaven his Attorney against our selves; not ^^ssening or min^ing,
and much less excusing, hiding, or defending any (...) labor to see our sin
in every circumstance, and make it as vile as we can, at our hearts may be
convinced, and beaten down in the sense of our misery. For this purpose, lay
thy life, and every particular action of it t^ the L^w of God; that as a
straight line will show thee all thy crookedness, and (...) ^hee in by such
circumstances as whereby thou shall not content thy s^^ with a c^nfession in
gross, that thou art a sinner; but shall confess thy sin t^ (...) ^^t of
measure sinful. But many a Christian is like a desperate Bankcrupt, who being
afraid to look into his reckonings, goes on till he be clapped up in prison; and
at length they see there was no heavenly husbandry in all this.

Thirdly, In confessing our sin, and pleading guilty, Prove. 20.13. this is the
covenant, that whereas he that hides his sin shall not prosper; he that
confesses shall find mercy; Psalm. 32.4. I said I will confess mine iniquity,
and thou forgavest me the punishment of my sin, Job 31.33. It is too near
joined to our natures, to hide our sin with Adam, and conceal it in our bosom;
or else to sum up all in a word without special grief for any special sin, and
herein they think they have peace, which is but unfeelingnesse. But those that
belong to God, he brings them to found humiliation, he makes them sick in
smiting them, and sets their sins in order before them like a bill of
parcels; to the breaking of their hearts, and the utter acknowledgement of
themselves to be miserable bankcrupts. For this purpose he makes their own
Consciences also to be judges of their actions, pronouncing sentence of
guiltiness and death against themselves: As David, Against thee, against thee
have I sinned: and again, I am the man: and again, I have done very foolishly,
but these s^eep what have they d^ne? The penitent Thief thus judges himself,
we are righteously here: To conclude this point, he was never truly humbled,
nor ^ver aright judged himself, that is more ashamed to confess, than to
commit sin.

Fourthly, After pleading guilty, in pleading for pardon, as for life and
death: and as the poor Malefactor condemned to dye, c^ys for mercy, and all his
hope and longing is for a pardon; even so this is noted to be the practi^e of
the Church, Hos. 14.2, 3. Oh Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have
fallen by thine iniquity: Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and say
unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. And which of the
Saints have not placed all their happiness in the pardon of sin; or have not
preferred the shining of Gods countenan^e upon them, above all the outward
happiness that the earth affords? Now in the seeking and suing for pardon,
because God will not hear him that regards wickedness in his heart* for
wicked Esau shall find no repentance nor favor with tears: therefore thou
must forthwith cease to do evil, as being ashamed of it; and learn to do
well; lay Laws upon thy self; be more severe against thy self in the things
wherein thou have displeased thy God; watch diligently over those corruptions
which have most foiled thee: this is the way both to make and preserve thy
peace. Bring thy self then with fear and trembling before Gods righteous
Judgment; accuse thy self, and bewayl thy sins: be not ashamed to confess,
but to commit them again: be so far from purposing any wickedness in thy
heart, as rather thou be strongly armed with full purp^se against it: And thus
remembering thy sins, God will forget them: thus wi^^ing them deep in thine own
books, God will blot them out of his. Thus if thou hide them not, but cast them
out of thy heart and life, he will hide them for ever, and cast them utterly
out of his sight: so that if thou can thus judge thy self aforehand, thou
shall never be judged of the Lord.

Verse. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, all
that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.
THe Apostle Peter although he has sufficiently proved whatsoever he has
form^rly delivered concerning the Doctrine, and Miracles, Life and Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, and the coming of Christ again unto Judgment: yet
as though no proof could be too much; or as if he could not satisfy himself in
enforcing this holy doctrine, and binding it upon the consciences of his
Hearers; he shuts up his Sermon in this verse with another assured testim^ny
above all exception, drawn from all the Prophets; who all consent and conspire
with the Apostles in all their doctrine concerning him: the sum and main end of
all which is, that through believing in his name, the elect should receive
remission of sins: which is the sum and effect of this verse.

Where first may be asked, Why the Apostle infers so many testimonies
concerning Christ. Reasons.
why does the Apostle induce so many testimonies one in the ne^k of another? In
the answer whereof we shall see, that none of them are needless or
superfluous. For,

1 All the points of Christian religion are above and against corrupt nature;
as appears in the Heathen, wh^ still esteemed the preaching of Christ
foolishness, 2 Corin. 2.23. and in the Athenians, who when they heard Paul
preaching of the Judgment Day, and Christ's Resurrection from the dead, they
mocked him, Acts 17.32. The hardened Jews at this day, on whom the Wrath of God
is (...) me to the uttermost, do the like: and well it were for many, if
professed Christians in the midst of such a light, made more reckoning of our
painful preaching* of Christ, who teach the same points, than some of the
former: which were they so slight matters as most account them, what need they
be so enforced? We are therefore hence fitly informed, both to make more high
account of such great Mysteries, which the Spirit of God is so careful t^
commend unto us, as also to bewayl the infidelity of our hearts, that need so
much working upon them to entertain such necessary truths as these be.

2 Because (although he was an Apostle) yet would he show his care, that in all
his Sermon he taught nothing of his own which the Prophets had not formerly
taught. Which teaches all Ministers much more to beware, lest in any of their
Sermons they broach such doctrine, or bring in such stuff, of which they cannot
prove the Prophets and Apostles to be Patrons and Publishers: For this was the
commandment of the Apostles, that we teach no other doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3.
neither contrary, nor diverse from it; no private opinions, which are the
causes of Schisms and Heresies; nor vain conceits or jangling, which breed
questions, but no godly edifying.

3 It was not only their precept, but practice also: as, Act. 26.22. Paul spoke
no other things than those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come: to
wit that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should
rise from the dead: Nay, the Lord of the holy Apostles, Jesus Christ himself,
preached no other Doctrine; of whom it is said, Luke 24.27. that be began at
Moses, and all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all the Scriptures,
the things which were written of him: shall the Son of God, who might have made
every word he spoke Scripture, tie himself to the Scriptures, and make them
the ground of all his Sermons; and shall not weak men who cannot without error
depart an hair breadth from them, be careful to contain all their doctrine
within the limits of them? especially seeing nothing else binds the
conscience of the hearer.

3 The Apostle knew that this was a convincing argument, if he could persuade
his hearers that he did deliver nothing but prophetical Doctrine: for all men,
Jews and Gentiles, were easily persuaded, that Moses, and the Prophets spoke
directly from God: yea, and the most blinded and wilful Jews at this day
profess, that if we can prove Christ the Messiah, from Moses and the Prophets,
they will believe in him: so as in great wisdom did the Apostle add this
testimony to all the former, knowing, that that is the only sound ground of
teaching, when men can be persuaded that what they hear is uttered from the
mouth of God, as by this testimony his hearers were.

Now in the verse we have three thing to consider of.

1 The generality of this testimony; That all the Prophets bear witness unto
him.

2 The scope and end of their witness; that men might believe in his Name.

3 The fruit of this belief; that believers might receive remission of sin.

A proof that all the Prophets witness unto Christ.
For the first, we will by a brief induction make it appear, that all the
Prophets bare witness unto Christ: and then gather some observations from it.
To begin with Moses, who by Christ his own confession writ of him, Joh. 5.46.
In Genesis the first thing after the creation and fall is the main promise that
the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head: Exodus sets out Christ
our Passover: Leviticus in all those sacrifices points out Christ our
Sacrifice: Numbers sets before our eyes, Christ our brazen Serpent, lifted
up upon the Cross: Deuteronomy describes Christ our chief Prophet, whom
whosoever will not hear, he must dye the death, Deuteronomy. 8.18, 19. Act. 3.21.
Joshuah, bears his name, and most lively resembles him in slaying the
enemies of Gods people, and bringing them into the promised land. The Judges
were all Saviors and types of him. The book of Ruth shows he family whence
he sprung. Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, his Genealogy, and the very persons
of whom he descended: especially, David and Solomon, both eminent types of
him. Ezrah and Nehemiah built the second Temple into which he was to enter,
and so to become the glory of it, as both Haggai and Malachy foretold.

Job knew that his Redeemer lived, and that he should see him at last on the
earth. David in the Psalms acknowledged, that the stone which the builders
refused was become the chief stone of the corner; and expresses the peircing
of his hands and feet. Solomon in the Proverbs describes his wisdom and
eternity. In the Canticles his contract and espousals with the Church.

Isay is called the Evangelical Prophet, than whom no Evangelist could more
lively express his Person, his Doctrine, his Life, Death, Burial, Resurrection,
and Ascension: that he rather seemed to write an History of something past,
than a Prophecy of things to come. Jeremy plainly styles him the Lord of
Righteousness, Jer. 23. Ezekiel in all his dark shadows figureth out the
government of Christ from point to point.

Daniel reckons the very year and time when the Messiah shall be slain; at
the end of whose seventy weeks Christ was put to death.

The small Prophets testify of him also with as joint consent. 1 Malachy
mentions with him his forerunner John Baptist. 2 Micha describes the place
of his birth. Micah 5.2. And thou Bethlem of Ephrata art little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth that shall be ruler in
Israel; whose goings forth have been from the beginning, and from everlasting.
3 Zachary names the place of his education, which was Nazaret, Zach. 6.12.
There must he grow that must build the Temple of the Lord. 4 Haggai
prophecyeth of his coming into his Temple and purging it. 5 Nahum wishes
Judah to behold on the mountains the feet of him that declares and publishes
peace, Nahum. 1.15. which tidings none can bring but through Jesus Christ the
prince of peace. 6 Obadiah promises to Judah and Jerusalem such Saviors as
should advance and set up the Kingdom of the Messiah, Obad. v. 21. and so the
Kingdom shall be the Lords: that is, Christ's, who shall reign in his Church
for ever; and of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. 7 Jonas, in his own
person preached his Death, Burial, and Resurrection, in that he was swallowed
of the Whale, and lay three days in the belly of it; and in the third day was
cast alive on dry Land. 8 Hosea records his triumph and victory over death,
Hos. 13.14. O death, I will be thy death; O Grave, I will be thy destruction.
9 Habakkuk the sending out of his blessed Gospel into all the World by his
Apostles; so as all the earth should be filled with the knowledge of God, as
the Waters cover the Sea. 10 Joel foretells of his ascension, and the pouring
out of his Spirit upon all flesh, Joel 2.28. 11 Amos of the calling of the
Gentiles, a fruit of that ascension, which he calls the ^^sing of the
Tabernacle of David, Amos 9.11. as James notably applies it, Act. 15.16. 12
Zephany shadoweth his second coming to judgment, and shows what a fearful
and terrible day it shall be to all the wicked of the earth. Thus have we
shortly seen all the Prophets witnessing unto the doctrine taught in this
Sermon by our holy Apostle. And that the chief aim and drift of all these
Master builders was to lay this, the main foundation of all our Religion; that
Jesus Christ the Son of Mary, was the Son of God, the true Messiah, the Lord of
all, and the only Savior and Redeemer of the World.

First note hence, Consent of the Church to any doctrine to be received with
these cautions.
what is the true consent which all Teachers must aim at in the delivery of any
Doctrine unto the people of God; namely, the consent of the Prophets and
Apostles: it forces not a Doctrine to be Orthodox, or Ancient, for a man to
say, all the Fathers are of this mind; which is the Popish cry for all their
Heresies: but to this Doctrine give all the Prophets, and all the Apostles
witness, and therefore it is sound and persuasive. Yet we refuse not, but
challenge to the Doctrine which we teach, the consent of the ancient Church;
but with these cautions.

1 With the Primitive and Apostolical Churches, which as they were most
ancient, so were they the purest.

2 With the Churches which were after them five or six hundred years; so far
forth as they consented in doctrine and discipline with the former: for many
Popish errors are ancient, and the Apostle tells us, that Antichrist begun to
work in a mystery even in their days. And some of the Fathers were carried
into some superstitions and errors, and so, not espying the mystery, helped up
Antichrist, whom they intended to hold down.

3 The Holy Ghost has revealed every Doctrine necessary to salvation, more
holily, more clearly, and more eloquently than all the Fathers put together,
who if they had any true wisdom, had it from the Scriptures; to which we must
still hold our selves, both as the ground, as also the judge of consent.

4 If any Father or Fathers, shall by a common error, by word or writing,
condemn any point of our doctrine without the authority of the Scriptures, we
will willingly dissent; neither do we give credence to any Doctrine, because
the Fathers have taught it, but because that which they teach is founded in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

5 We cannot hold consent to be a note of the true Church, unless it be in
the true doctrine: and therefore we justly blame sundry of the learned Papists,
who make unity a note of the Church, but make no mention of verity at all: for
the strong man may hold all at peace and unity, whilst Paul and Barnabas
having the truth may be at odds between themselves. On which conditions, as
we are able to justify our whole Religion by antiquity, and consent of the
most ancient Churches and Fathers, so also has it been, and may be made as
clear as the light, that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, wherein they
dissent from us, is a stranger, and novelty, never known to the Prophets and
Apostles, nor the purest Churches after them: neither had it ever that which
they brag of, the consent of the ancient Fathers neither do they consent in it
among themselves.

The force of consent wherein it stands
Secondly, Note hence what is the force and work of consent of the Church in
Doctrine, it is not to work Faith, for that is in the next words tied to the
word and witness of the Prophets and Apostles, which is called the word of
Faith, because it is by Gods Ordinance a means to work that Faith by which it
self is believed: but to move the heart, and prepare the way to Faith, For it
cannot be that any spiritual grace, such as faith is, can be wrought by any
but supernatural means: of which kind no outward ^estimony, if it come backed
with the voice of all the Churches in the world, can be, for all this is but
an humane witness, simply, and in it self consider^^. If they say the Churches
testimony is a Divine testimony: I answer, so far as it carries with it the
agreement of the Scriptures, and Holy Ghost speaking therein, it may be said
to witness a Divine truth. And thus in no other respect can the voice of the
Church be called a divine testimony, than the preaching and writing of some
other teacher in the Church, who delivers nothing but what is agreeable to
the Scriptures. From this ground it follows that the doctrine of the Church of
Rome is wicked and derogatory to the Glory and Majesty of the Scriptures, in
that they stiffly after conviction avouch and maintain, that the authority of
the Scriptures, depend upon the testimony of the Church, some of them
blasphemously saying, that they have no more credit than Esops Fables, further
than the Church gives it unto them: which is to say, that God must not be
believed for himself: and as if the Kings word should have no credit or
command, but from his guard.

In reading the prophets thou must be led still nearer unto Christ.
3 Hence note, That in our reading of the Prophets, we must still be led
further unto Christ; for as all the Scriptures, so the writings of the
Prophets, were reserved for this purpose, and set apart by God to be the
ordinary outward stay and foundation of the faith of the Church. And if our
Lord Jesus himself, whilst he was yet in the flesh present with his
Disciples, did for the confirmation of their Faith in his Doctrine, Life, Death,
and Resurrection, interpret unto them the writings of the Prophets; how much
more need have we now in his bodily absence, to read with diligence these same
writings, to help us forward being so wavering and staggering in our faith, and
the attendent graces of it? And hereunto answers that commandment, Joh.
5.39. Search the Scriptures, namely, Moses, and the Prophets: that is, do not
only procure these writings to your selves, nor only read perfunctorily; but
diligently and studiously search to find out the chief scope and matter
contained therein; which lies not in the crust or shell, but within, in the
very bowels of them: and this kernel himself in the next words shows to be
himself, and life eternal through him. And why must we thus search the
Scriptures of the Prophets? himself rendereth the reason, the very ground of
our exhortation; because they testify of me. This is the natural scope of
them, to bring men to the acknowledgement of the persons, offices, and benefits
of Christ.

Thou losest all thy labor in searching the Scriptures, if thou searchest any
thing but Christ; if thou have not and hold him not in thine eye; if thou
give over searching before thou have met with him: and then thou have met
with him in the Scriptures, not when thou Historically know something of
him, which thou did not know before; nor when thou art able to discourse, or
di^pute of deep points of Divinity: but when thou come unto him, as the
context shows, when by the quickening of thy faith and repentance, thou
layest faster hold upon him for life everlasting. Alas, how few searchers of
the Scriptures thus search them? to say nothing of them who search them not at
all, but cast them aside as refuse waters; of whom we may renew the woeful
complaint of Christ against the Jews, who when he had exhotted them to search
the Scriptures, presently adds, But ye will not come to me that ye might have
life, Joh. 5.40.

The second point, is, The scope of all the Prophets witness: and this is, to
bring men to believe in the name of the Son of God; which is by faith to
receive Christ, as he has described and propounded himself in the Word and
Promises of the Gospel. For although the Apostle might sooner have said, that
whosoever believe in him, yet he uses this phrase rather of believing in his
Name, thereby secretly to refer us unto the word of the Prophets and Apostles
which testify of no other name to be saved by but only the name of the Lord
Jesus. For our better clearing of this point, we will consider, 1 What this
says is. 2 The benefit of it. 3 The marks and signs of it. 4 The use.

First, What this Faith is, It is a supernatural gift whereby every believer
apprehends and applies unto himself Christ and all his merits unto
salvation. Faith, what it is.
I say, it is a gift: nay the Scripture says, that it is the gift of God,
Phil. 1.29. and it is given you to believe, as also to suffer: And that it is
supernatural, all the commandments we have to believe plainly evince; for
were it natural we should need no commandment to do it.

Further, it is such a gift, Opera naturalia non indigent p^aecepto.
as whereby we apprehend and apply unto our selves Christ and all his merits:
for the very nature of justifying and saving Faith stands in these two
degrees. 1 In apprehension and receiving of Christ: for to believe and receive
Christ are all one, Joh. 1.13. 2 In applying to ones self Christ and his merits
particularly, which is not only to know that Christ is God in himself, and all
other parts of truth necessary to be believed; but a full persuasion of the
mercy of God through Christ to belong unto himself in particular: so as he be
able with Thomas to say, My Lord, and my God: not only confessing that Christ
dyed for sinners (which the very Devils believe) but as Paul describes the
true Faith in the Son of God by the proper speech and voice of it, Gal. 2.20.
Who dyed for me, and gave himself for me. Further, the description
restraining this grace to believers, gives us to understand, that faith is not
of all, 2 Thessalonians. 3. Faith is not of all.
nor so common as men take it to be: not every one that can say, I believe in
God, has faith; nor every one that will boldly say, Christ is his Savior,
has presently saving Faith. For.

1 The Prophet Esaias, speaks of a number that believed not the Prophets
report, and to whom the arm of God was not revealed, Isa. 53.1. The Evangelists
and the Apostles also complain in their times how this prophecy was
accomplished, notwithstanding they heard the blessed word of truth from the
mouth of truth it self, and saw the wonderful Miracles in the hands of Christ
himself, and his Apostles, for the confirmation of that truth.

2 The end of Faith, which is salvation, belongs not to the most, and
therefore not faith it self the means: for there are few which shall be saved.

3 The Word, the parent of faith, is wanting to many people; and where it is,
so neglected by the most as grace and Gods blessing is withdrawn from it:
besides, that the unfaithfulness of Teachers, and abundance of iniquity in all
sorts of men provokes the Lord to revenge with his fearful stroke of slownesse
of heart to believe; that in the midst of means men should wilfully perish: now
if there be no seed-time, what fruit or harvest of faith can be expected?

4 The Scriptures not only deny true and saving faith to the reprobate, whose
eyes the Lord blinds, and whose hearts he hardneth, lest they should see and
believe, Isa. 6.9. but impropriateth it to the elect, whence it is called the
faith of the elect, Tit. 1.1. To them whom God has predestined to life: for
so many as were ordained to life everlasting, believed, Acts 13:48. to the
sheep of Christ, Joh. 10.16. But ye believe not, for ye are not of my sheep:
to them that are regenerate by the Holy Ghost, as 1 John 5.1. Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God.

Lastly, the description adds the final cause of faith to be Salvation,
namely, in regard of believers: for the main end of all graces is the glory of
God: and so Abraham by believing is said to give glory to God, Romans 4.20. but
the subordinate end of faith, is the salvation of the elect, and therefore is
it called saving faith, (...). In salutem animae. Be^^ Faith never quite lost.
Heb. 10.39. we are not they which withdraw our selves unto perdition, but we
follow faith to the conservation of the soul, 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of
your faith, even the salvation of your souls. And from hence follows it, that
saving faith can never be quite shaken out of the heart of him that once has
it; being, 1 but once given to the Saints, Jude 3. and a gift of which God
never repents him. 2 A gift flowing from Gods eternal election, as we have
showed out of Acts 13.48. 3 A seed of God perpetually preserved in the
regenerate, who sin not because this seed of God remains in them, 1 John 4.4.
4 It has the promise of the Father, to be the victory that overcomes the
world: the intercession of the Son of God, that it fail not, Luke 22.32. and
the confirmation of the holy Spirit, who by it seals up, and gives his
earnest into the hearts of believers, 2 Cor. 1.22. so as unless the mighty
power of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit upholding it, can be shaken, it can
never be by all the gates of Hell so shaken out of the heart, but that the end
of it shall be salvation, which could not be, if the elect did not ever abide
in communion and fellowship with Christ.

Popish doctrine teaches not true faith to this day.
From which description of true justifying faith, it is evident that Popish
Doctrine knows not, teaches not, nor suffers men to be taught the true
Doctrine of saving faith, because it utterly disclaimeth the very essential form
of it, which is special application of Christ and his merits, with affiance and
resting only on them unto salvation; yea and more, they condemn this glorious
work of faith as a mortal sin, and style it by the name of presumption: and so,
by Gods just judgment, they take up such a faith in stead of it, as is common,
not only to Heretics and Reprobates, but to the very Devils themselves, who
believe as much as Popish doctrine requires to salvation, yea and more, they
tremble also. For do not they know and assent that there is one God; that all
that is in the Word of God is true and certain; that all the Articles of the
Creed are the true grounds of Christian religion? and if you go any further
(excepting the thrusting in of general Councils and Traditions which every good
Catholic must take in with the former) Popish faith leaves you, and bids
you farewell: and even those things which are absolutely necessary to salvation
to be believed by saving faith (as that the Scriptures are Gods Word, that the
Articles of faith comprised in the Creed of the Apostles are of undoubted
truth) they embrace only by Historical faith; by which yet was never man saved:
for if ever man were, then might the Devils also by the same faith. But
justifying faith is another manner of thing; it seateth not it self in the
understanding only, as the former, but takeeth up the whole soul, even the
heart, will, and affections also, all which lay hold and cleave unto Christ for
salvation. Neither is it a common and general work of the Spirit upon good and
bad, as the former illumination and assent is; but a special favor and
extraordinary grace proper to the elect, as we have heard, and the stranger
enters not into this their joy.

The second point to be considered, is the benefit or excellent fruit of this
grace.

1 It is the first stone to be laid in the building of a Christian, Five
excellent fruits of saving faith.
and therefore called a substance and foundation, Heb. 11.1. and the Colossians
are said to be rooted, and built, and stablished in the faith, Colos. 2.7. this
is that rocky foundation which shall bear up the house against all winds and
weathers. It is the first work of change in the heart, and the first difference
between man and man, when God by faith purifieth the heart, Acts 15. It is the
foundation of all obedience; for whatsoevee is not of faith, is sin. It is the
root of all Gods worship; for till we believe in God, we can neither trust, nor
hope, nor love, nor pray, nor perform any other part of his service truly or
acceptably. It is the mother of all good works: the word is the seed of them,
which faith conceives and digesteth, and so brings forth commanded and
commended actions. General faith knows the work to be good in the kind of
it, and special justifying faith begins it, and makes it good in the
person, and endeavor of the doer; and lays hold upon Christ to cover the
defects of it. Hence is it, that often in the Scriptures we read it to be the
first Commandment given by Christ and his Apostles, to such as were desirous
to know the way of life, and how they might please God. The Jews come to our
Savior, and ask him, what they might do to work the works of God? and Christ
beginning here, tells them, that this is the work of God, that they believe
in him whom he has sent, Joh. 6.28, 29. And, 1 John 3.23. This is his
Commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one
another: for we cannot perform any work of love before we believe. In one word,
faith is the very soul of all obedience, without which, the most fightly and
glorious actions, be it of alms, prayer, preaching, hearing, worship, or
miracles themselves, all are but very Corpses and Carcases of good works, dead
and liveless.

Secondly, faith exalts it self above all other graces, not only in the
excellent object of it, which is Christ and Salvation; but also in the
excellent work of it above them all, notwithstanding they all have their
special excellencies: it espouseth us unto Jesus Christ, and in these espousals
and contract for the present, it assures us of our marriage with him
hereafter. And being the condition of the New Covenant of life, Joh. 3.16. it
tyeth God himself unto us; who is not further bound to any man, than he is a
believer. True it is, that Love places it self upon Christ, but it is after
faith: for he must be apprehended before he be loved. Hope waits for
salvation: but faith first believes it. Trust leans upon the promises: but
faith first lays hold on Christ the Author and accomplisher of them. And
though the Apostle say, that of Faith, Hope, and Love, Love is the chiefest, 1
Cor. 13. himself interprets it to be in respect of durance and continuance,
but not in respect of our justification, or acceptance with God. Love indeed
surviveth and lasts longest; for our sight of God as he is shall vanish
faith; but yet faith is before it, and the mother of it.

Thirdly, saving faith is a living thing, and makes a man to live by it: It
purges his own dwelling by purifying the heart and conscience, it renews the
spirit and mind, it quickneth to all good duties: for it being an instrument to
unite unto Christ, by it, as by a bond of union, we receive from him our Head,
life, and power to move and stir in Christian duties: yea, it so governs
the whole life, that we henceforth live not, but Christ lives in us. In our
business and labor, it makes men diligent in the work, but leave the success
to God. In temporal wants, it faith with Abraham, God will provide, at least in
the mountain: it cares not so much for bread, as the staff of it: if it have
means, it blesses God, and uses them; but trusts not in them: if it have
them not, it rests on God, but uses no unlawful courses for them. In
afflictions it stablisheth the heart with assurance of a good issue, and still
waits the Lords leisure without making haste. In temptations it goes against
sense and feeling, and rests upon the naked promise: yea, when it can scarce
apprehend any thing but wrath, it will uphold the heart, and rear it, even when
God seems to ^id him, to trust in his mercy. In the use of things Spiritual^
as the Words Sacraments, Prayer, and other holy means, only faith draws
virtue from Christ; and all of them are unprofitable, further than they are
mingled with faith. In the use of Temporal, it is faith that weaneth the ^ea^^,
and k^epeth it that earthly cares choke it not, earthly pleasures possess it
not, and ear^hly comforts oppr^ss it not: but it holds the mind heavenly in
the midst of earthly business, and suffers it not to love pleasures more than
God, not to enjoy any comfort of the Creature above, or against the comforts of
God and his Word, whom they acknowledge the very life of their lives, and the
soul of their souls and bodies here and for ever. Thus is faith every where
diffused; if we walk, we walk by faith: if we live, we live by faith in the Son
of God: if we stand, we stand by faith: if we dye, we must dye in faith, as the
Patriarks did, Heb. 11.13.

4 This excellent grace only fenceth against temptation, quieteth the
distressed soul, and keeps it from sinking, as once it did Peter, Matthew.
14.20. This is the only shield which quenches all the fiery darts of the
Devils Ephesians. 6.16. and 1 Pet. 5.9. Your adversary the Devil goes about like a
roaring Lion, whom resist steadfast in the faith. This is the victory also that
overcomes the world, even our faith, 1 John 5.4. This is the conquest over the
lusts of our own flesh, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. Be sober, and put on the breast-pla^e of
faith. Again, as it moun^eth and fenceth, so it stilleth the heart disquieted
and distressed, when it sees it self beset with spiritual wickednesses, and
lusts, and even almost drowned in the gulfs of sinful and earthly courses.
Therefore the poor Jav^or that could not tell what to do with himself, that of
an unhappy man now ready to kill himself, he might become happy, and an heir of
Salvation, was sent n^ where else by the Apostle, but to the doctrine and
practice of this grac of faith. This only resolves fully the question, Oh,
what shall I do to be saved? Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved: he gets no other answer of Paul, because he well knew, that no other
would have answered his question, nor settled his conscience now touched with
sense of his sin. If he had sent him to the Word, that could have done him no
good, if he did (...) mingle it with faith. If to his prayers, only the prayer
of faith is available, Jam. 5.15. If to the Sacraments, they must be seals of
faith, Romans 4.11. or else d^e no more good than seals set to blanks. If to a
good life, it must be the life of faith, which the just must live by. If to
the Church to join himself to that, he must himself be first of the household of
faith, Gal. 6.10. Nay more, if to Christ himself, if he carry not faith with
him, he is after a sort disabled from doing him any good. As he could do no
great works in Capernaum, because of their unbelief, Mar. 6. only thy faith in
the Son of God, is the beginning, and a^complishment of thy happiness. Add
hereunto, that it nor only removes discomfort, but brings with it all the
sound joy and comfort of our lives; whence it is that Christian joy is called,
joy of faith, Philip. 1.25. and all the Sons of faithful Abraham tread in their
Fathers steps, who saw the day of Christ and rejoiced, Joh. 8.56. because God
has not only reserved mercy for us, but by the faith which his Spirit works
in our hearts, he lets us know, yea and taste what he has done for us: so
as hence have we peace with God, and with our own hearts, boldness in prayer,
and not patience only, but joy in sorrow: thus give a man once faith, and sin
flies before him, bands of temptations are discomfited, afflictions dismay him
not, death and deadly things are disarmed unto him: faith has gotten, and
holds Christ his victory, his strength, his life; yea, whilst he walks in
a thousand deaths, the faith of his heart has filled his soul with that
heavenly and spiritual joy which all the world cannot give, neither can it take
away.

Lastly, By this worthy grace of Faith, we are not only brought into thee
grace by which we stand, Romans 5 2 Col. 2.12
receive increase of it through the communion of Christ his Death and
Resurrection, as also the inhabitation of the Spirit in our hearts; but also
we are fitted unto our glory: for Faith assures every believer of his
salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. and every believer is kept by the power of God
through Faith unto salvation, which is prepared to be showed in the last time,
1 Pet. 1.5.

Thirdly, A believer may know he has faith by soul marks or notes.
Seeing that this is so special a grace of God bestowed but on a few, it is
worth inquiry, by what touchstone a man may know the s^undness of his Faith,
and that it is much more precious than Gold: And therefore that a man may not
be deceived in a matter of such moment as this is the Scriptures have
furnished us with such marks and notes, as such, who will use diligence in
laying their Faith thereunto, shall certainly know the truth or unsoundness of
it: for else why should we be commanded to prove our selves whether we be
in the faith or no, 2 Cor. 13.5. unless the believer know that he does
believe? Again, who be they that know not that Christ is in them, but
Reprobates? and can Christ live in any man^ and he not know it at one time or
other, and be able to say with Paul, I live not henceforth, but Christ lives
in me? and, I know whom I have believed? 2 Timothy 1.12. Which if any say Paul
might know, being an Apostle, and having a Revelation, which ordinary men have
not, the same Apostle answers it, 1 Cor. 2.12. when he joyneth with himself
all believers, we have not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things that are given us of God. Now
whosoever have received this spirit, want not this revelation: who if he
reveal unto us any thing that is given us of God, then would he not neglect
the greatest gift that (...) given us, even Christ himself, and life eternal
through his name.

The first mark of sound Faith, is the seat and dwelling of it: and (...) an
humbled soul that longs and almost faints for Gods mercy i^ (...) that not
feeling Faith, can bitterly complain for want of it: that striveth against
doubting because God has commanded to believe: that endeavors to assent to
the promise touching forgiveness of sin, with purpose to sin no more; this holy
seed is fown in no other ground but this.

The second Mark, are the essential properties of sound Faith: II The essenti^l
properties of it.
and they are three in number.

1 It is most pliable to the Word, of which it is begotten: the Jayler as soon
as he was converted, would but know of the Apostles what he might do: it will
except against nothing that the word enjoyneth; it will pick no quarrels; but
with Abraham rises early to obey God, when if he had reasoned with flesh and
blood, he could have excepted many things, which all the wisdom of flesh
could never have answered. This is that the Apostle ascribes unto it, that it
establi^heth the whole Law, Romans 4.19. yea, the whole Word of God, the Law and
Gospel, by provoking to cheerful endeavor in the obedience of them both.

2 Sound Faith being a subsistence, (...).
it inableth a man to stand under a great burden, and not be crushed, Psalm.
46.2. Therefore we will not fear, though the earth be moved, Job will not let
his hold go, if the Lord should smite off his hand; yea, if he kill him, he
will trust still: it rests upon Gods arm, and truth in all estates; in Life
and Death: whereas every cross puff of wind of temptation or affliction,
unsetleth, yea, and sinketh the unbeleever.

3 It being a subsistence of things not seen, it cares not how little it see,
the less it sees, the more it believes, and the less it sees of men and
means, the more it sees of God. It sees an Almighty promiser, who can do what
he will. It sees him that is true of his word, who cannot lie, 2 Cor 6.18.
and who cannot but do what he has said. It sees a merciful and loving
Savior, whose eyes are upon them that trust in his mercy, Psalm. 33.18. and
seeing these, it sees enough. Besides, it estrangeth the heart from the World
which it sees, and seeks an unseen Country. Heb. 11.13, 15. Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, acknowledged themselves rather strangers in this W^r^d t^an
Inhabitants, and that they came into it rather to see it, and go through it,
than dwell or set up their rest in it. It weaneth the heart from the things
below, as the woman at the well once meeting with Christ, she forgeteth her
water-pot. What cares Zacheus for half his goods, yea, ^r all, when Christ
once becomes his ghost, and brings salvation to his ^^use? And on the
contrary, it sends up the heart to those treasures which the eye of flesh
cannot see, but are reserved to the seekets of the Country where they ar^. And
these are the three worthy properties, whereby the naturalnesse and soundness
of it may be discerned of such as are willing to try the same.

III. The honorable attendants and companions of it, four.
The third mark or note of true justifying Faith, is by the attendants and
companions of it: for this being as Queen among the virtues, goes not alone,
but with all the train of virtues, as handmaids attending upon her. The chief
of them, are these four.

1 A true knowledge of the Word of God, acknowledging it in part, and in wh^le
to be the truth of God, and that himself is straightly bound to believe and
embrace the same, and that he has a special part in the promise of grace and
life by Christ, in which grace he rests himself, daily growing up in the
certainty and assurance of his salvation.

2 A sound ^oy of the heart, which the Apostle Peter calls unspeakable, and
glorious; breaking out into thankful praises, in that the Lord has begun (...)
^iness, by making Christ his Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and (...)
^tion. The Poor, Blind, and Lame persons of whom we read in the (...) never
leaped more joyfully when they had met with Christ, and had (...) ^s opened,
and their limbs restored by him, than he that has met with him, and received
him into his heart, to enlighten him, to quicken him, and to heal him of all
his infirmities. How gladly did Zacheus receive Christ? with what joy of heart
finds any man the hidden pearl? Mat. 13.44. how did the Eunuch converted go
away rejoicing? Act. 8. And all this is, because they can value such a
commodity as this is, which they see God has made their own: for if they
either knew it not, or not to be theirs, they could not thus joy in it.

3 Christian Hope is another handmaid of Faith: for so the Apostle teaches,
Rom 5.2. Being justified by Faith, we have peace -- etc. we rejoice under the
hope of the glory of God For this is the special work of hope, to wait for, and
rejoice in the expectation of the glorious appearing of the Lord Jesu. And
hence is it, that whereas unbeleevers are glewed to the earth, and cannot think
of Heaven, but either with sorrow, of a formal and false joy (and what marveil
is it, that those who have no better should set their hearts upon the worse)
believers have preserved in them a willingness to leave this World, and to be
with Christ, which is best of all: yea, so sweet is their present taste of
Christ, through Faith and Hope, that they are unquiet till they be filled with
the fruition of his fullness; being often in his absence sick of love, and pine
away till they be with him whom their soul loves.

4 An assured trust relying upon God, believing hi^ word of promise to raise
and feed the heart, of threatening to shake it, and cast it down, and submitting
it se^f to the counsel and good pleasure of God: because his faith has let him
see the truth, the wisdom, the equity and righteousness of all these. Such a
man's heart sets nothing above God in prosperity: it distrusteth not, but
has God for his God in adversity: it indeavoureth in all things to walk with
God: it is a sweet usher and disposer of the whole life, so as it is most
obedient to the word, and most full of comfort and sweetness to it self.

The fourth mark or note or true Faith, is taken from the infallible fruits,
IV. The infallible fruits of it, four.
and effects of it, which are many, I will only note four of the principal.
First, it frames and fitteth the own habitation, it purifieth the heart, Act.
15. it suffers not unclean thoughts, unlawful lusts, or wandering motions to
harbor there: it guides the affections of Love, Hatred, Joy, Sorrow, and the
rest; that a man love nothing more, or so much, as God and his Image: he
hates not men's persons but their sins, and no man's sin so much as his own: he
rejoices in nothing so much as in doing the will of God; this is as his meat
and drink: he sorroweth for nothing in the world so much as for offending so
good and patient a God. This pure heart also guides the words with wisdom,
and makes it his chief study how to preserve with faith, good conscience in
every thing, Act. 24.16.

Secondly, Faith works by love, Gal. 5.6. both toward God, and toward man:
toward him that begat, and him that is begotten, yea, and him that is ye^ not
begotten. This love of God expresses it self,

1 In much thankfulness unto him, who has loved us first; Our love of God
express^d in three things.
who has given so much, even his Son, and all things with him pertaining to
life and godliness: who has forgiven us so much, and to whom many sins are
forgiven, they must love much: who has done so great things for us, by
becoming our portion, our treasure and our chief good.

2 In shame for our unkindness unto him, both before, and even since we knew
this his love in Christ, and have been acquainted with his ways; taking up
with shame in our faces, sorrow into our hearts, for the sins of our youth, and
of our age: against the law the rule of righteousness; but especially against
the glorious Gospel, which of all other are least of served.

3 In desire of that blessed fellowship of his, when and where we may never
sin against him any more: accounting one day within his holy of holies, better
than a thousand besides: and much more to be ever with the Lord, and to enjoy
the p^easures at his right hand for evermore, to be at home with him, and sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, yea, with Jesus Christ himself, should
make us groan in our souls, and say with David, Oh, when shall I appear in this
thy presence? The Spirit says, Come, and the Spouse says, Come. Even so, come
Lord Jesus, come quickly.

The love of men by which Faith works, discovers it self not only in just
dealing with them as we would be dealt by, which many civil men, endued only
with civil righteousness, have excelled in; nor only in merciful distribution
of outward comforts for the releeving of the bodies of our brethren, yea, and
of our enemies, which hardlier goes down with the unconverted than the former:
but also in showing most love unto their souls, in helping forward their
conversion and salvation. For so soon as any man is converted, he will
strengthen the brethren. Faith, wheresoever it lives, it loves, and love
being an hand giving out, moves men converted to counsel, exhort, rebuke,
admonish, comfort, pray, and wait when God will give unto others the grace of
Repentance.

As soon as Andrew was called, he brings his brother Simon to Christ. No
sooner had Christ found Philip, but Philip finding Nathaniel, he brings him
to christ. The woman at the well no sooner hears that Christ was the Messiah,
but she brings all the City. In finding this treasure, the Christian cannot
hide his joy; neither can any man's joy be so full, unless he with others
rejoice together. For it is not here as in earthly things, which the more they
are communicated, the more are they diminished, and every man's share is the
less; but heavenly things are by communication the more increased; for we read
not of any man that laid out his Tallent, but to increase? and as the light of
the Sun is never a whit impaired by communicating it self to the whole world;
or as he that lights one candle of another, dimisheth not in either, but
increases the light; so is it in the light of the Sun of Righteousness much
more* and in the kindling of these heavenly sparkles, whose property is to
diffuse themselves as fire, and the further they spread, the greater and
brighter is the flame.

3 The third fruit or effect of Faith, is an undaunted confession of it: Romans
10.10. With the heart we believe to justification, and with the mouth we
confess to salvation. For where faith is in the heart, it will be also in the
mouth. The spirit of Faith, and the speech of Faith are undivided: as 2 Cor.
4.13. And because we have the same spirit of Faith, according to that which
was written: I believed, and therefore I spoke, even so we believe, and
therefore also we speak. Now there be three actions of Faith which help
forward this free confession. 1 It makes a man bold in a good cause, Act.
5.29. Peter being full of faith, with a bold spirit told the Council that had
the power of Life and Death in their hands, and himself in their power, we
ought rather to obey God than you. 2 Faith keeps a man in a preparedness to
suffer by leading him along in the denial of himself; and hereof we have a
notable example in Paul, Act. 21.13. who professed how ready he was, not only
to be bound, but to dye also at Jerusalem, if God called him thereunto. 3 It
works joy, yea, much rejoicing in the heart, in the suffering for Christ and
a good cause: Romans 5.3. after the Apostle had laid down the justification of
faith as a ground, he says, that we then rejoice in tribulation: and that
they did so indeed is plain, Act. 5.41. They departed from the Council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his name: hence
could they sing Psalm^ at midnight in the dungeon, and fetters: and hence
could the Martyrs embrace the fire, kiss the stake, and testify such joy in the
flames, as all men might acknowledge the truth of the speech of our Savior,
Your joy shall no man take away from you; no Tyrant, no tormentor, nor any kind
of torment.

The fourth and last fruit or work of faith is, that wheresoever sound faith
is, it is most diligent in preserving, yea, and increasing of it self. The most
covetous man is not more complaining nor gathering than the believer, who is
ever complaining of want of Faith, or of the weakness of it; Mar. 9.24. and
knowing the want of it to be so dangerous and hurtful, as without which he
wants Christ himself: as also that the weakness of it depriveth him of much
comfort and many goods things; for a man of weak estate must needs want many
rich commoditys and sweet comforts which the wealthy enjoy in abundance.
Therefore he uses all good means to increase his stock: as,

1 He is much in hearing, reading, and meditating in the word, because he
knows, Means to increase the stock of faith.
faith comes by hearing: and every thing is preserved and nourished by that
whereof it is begotten.

2 He is much in godly talk and Christian conference, by which as the fire by
the bellows, so is the grace of God blown, and stirred up in him.

3 Because he sees how without prayer, both his own, but especially Christ's,
his faith is as ready to fail as Peter's was, Luke 22.32. he is much in prayer,
and with the Father of the Child, cries with tears often, Lord, I believe,
help my unbeleef, Mark. 9.24. and with the Disciples, Lord increase our Faith,
Luke 17.5. And these are the marks by which the soundness and currence of
Faith; as by a touchstone may be tried, and distinguished from all that false
and counterfeit Faith which is so stiring in the World, and whereby most men are
lamentably deceived.

The use of this Doctrine is, 1 To stir up men to examine, and by these notes to
prove themselves, whether they are in the Faith or no, to try their faith of
what kind it is, least in the end they find that they have leaned upon a
staff of reed. By which examination, I fear it will be too evidently seen,
that these are the last days wherein the Son of man shall come, and scarcely
find faith upon the face of the earth. Sure it is, that the common faith of men
is neither thus, 1 Founded, 2 Nor qualified, The most common faith of men is
not thus qualified.
3 Nor attended. 4 Nor thus fruitful: as will briefly appear in the particulars.

First, Every man says he has Faith; but whence had he it: it was never
begotten by the Word; he never cared for that, that was ever as a sixth finger
and superfluity unto him. It was never founded in repentance, nor dwells with
Humility; for most men never saw change in themselves, they have loved God and
believed in Christ ever since they can remember. It was never cherished with
the duties of prayer and invocation, they could never pray in all their lives
except after the Minister, or by set forms, but the spirit of prayer never
dwelt there. It was never conflicted with unbeleef: they wonder what that
should be, or that any man should not ever believe: so as indeed here is no
character of the faith of the Elect; and nothing all this while but a voice,
and very carkase of Faith.

2 Others say they believe, and brag of a saving faith in Christ, but they feed
a bare fancy: for they could never believe God for lesser things: they want the
faith of Gods providence even for meat and drink, which is apparent in that
they can use wicked and unwarrantable means for them: their strong faith they
brag of, waits not for Gods provision, but will shift for it self by hook and
by crook: it holds not the heart to patient bearing of the Cross, but
flingeth out in distempers: it puts not forth in inferior businesses, to
give directions to the particular actions of life: and therefore seeing this
faith fails in lesser and smaller things, how can it be sound in the
greatest of all?

3 Others boast of a sound faith, which were it so, it would lay hold upon the
promise, and believe for themselves and their seed; but this it does not: for
many who for themselves would rest in the providence of God, upon the good and
warrantable m^^^s, will yet endanger themselves for their children. And hence
is it that many who have lived conscionably in single estate, have remitted
much of their care and fear in their married condition, and come short of their
former uprightness; and why is this else, but that they conceive not the Lord
to be all sufficient for them and theirs, Genesis 17.1.

4 Others there be that challenge as sound a faith as any, but never prise
such a pearl as it is: can a man have such a commodity, but he shall value it
according to the worth? but these think themselves never the richer for it:
they have more sense and joy in the smallest, and most trifling earthly profit,
then that Christ is become their gain, which although they profess, yet this
undervaluing of him in their hearts, gives their tongues the lie. Besides, it
they did esteem of faith indeed, they would profess it boldly, and confess it
to all the World, whereas they are ashamed of Christ before men, and cast
themselves into the night with Nicodemus, as fearing lest if they should come
to Christ by day, men would see them, whose praise they love above the praise
of God: and whose reproach they fear above the rebuke of the Almighty. But how
unlike is this to the faith of the Saints, whereby they could esteem the
rebukes of Christ, above the treasures of Egypt. And further, were it so they
made reckoning of their faith, they would much more care for the end of it; for
sound faith carries the heart even in the constant waiting and wishing for
Christ's appearance; but these rather fear it than hope it. Now what a faith is
that which never cares to come to the end of it, that fain would still be
pitching upon earth, saying with Peter when he wist not what he said, It is
good being here. Is this Faith an evidence of things not seen? or does it look
at things within the veil?

5 Another sort would be loath to be otherwise accounted, but true believers,
and yet their faith works no change in them; how their hearts are purified,
witness the uncleanness, envy, drunkenness, oaths, injustice,
covetousness, contempt of the Ministry, prophanations of the Sabbaths of God
in themselves and theirs: these and the like proceed from within; and by the
Ways in the shop any man may know how the Warehouse is stored. And as this
faith purges not the nasty corners of the heart, no more does it the mouth,
but that venteth according to the abundant foulness of the heart, and is
filled with unclean, unsavory, or unfruitful speeches. Further, as they were
at first enemies to God, and goodness; so they abide still, and are no
changelings. Here is no faith working by love; neither to God; for they will
do nothing for him, will be at no costs or pains for him: and as little will
they suffer for his sake, not a reproachful word; much less will they rejoice
in suffering: neither to Gods children, these can they pinch and disgrace,
where as l^ved they him that begat, they would love those that are begotten of
him. As for helping others to Heaven, they are so far from it, as that if any
will cast an eye that way, they can tell what he is presently, and they would
be loath to be such an hypocrite, or precise tool as he is.

To conclude, although true faith is most industrious in the means of
preserving and increasing it self, these men hold their wont: enemies to the
Word were they, and so are they still, they neglect the means, and absent
themselves from the Ministry; and can no more believe than Thomas, who was
absent when Christ came and showed himself to the rest of the Disciples, Joh.
20.24. and that which they do hear, they mingle not with faith, and so it
becom^th unprofitable. The Lion roareth, they fear not in their hearts, because
they apply not the threats of the Law against their own sins. The Gospel
propounds promis s of life and salvation, but they trust God no further than
they see him; they rejoice no more in them than they can in another man's money
or evidences; they pray not to be taught of God, nor hear to be increased in
faith; nor meditate nor confer (...) things they hear, further to edify
themselves and others in their most holy ^aith. Now will these fruits stand
with faith? or if they will not, is faith so common as men pretend? but I hope
I have a little helped many a man to see by this application, how that his Gold
is turned into Copper; and his faith but into a dream and fancy.

Labor for the truth of faith ^ earnestly as for salvation.
Use 2. This doctrine teaches every man to labor for the truth of this grace
as earnestly as for salvation it self: for this is the scope of all the
Prophets, to bring men, not so much to faith, as to the end of faith through
the Messiah, which is salvation. And hence is it that faith is said to save;
believe and thou shall be saved: and in many places and phrases besides, the
Lord ascribes that to the instrument which belongs to himself the principal
efficient.

Necessity of this grace to him that expects salvati^n.
1 Both to show the excellency of the grace in it self, in that it
comprehends such an excellent object as Christ, Heaven, and happiness, which
are infinite; and holds such great things being absent as present in the hand
of it.

2 As also the n^cessity of it to the party that looks for salvation: for he
that believes not, must needs be damned, yea, is damned already, Romans 4.11.
For, 1. He has not set his seal that God is true, but so far as he can has
made him a liar, 1 John: 5.10. 2 He has defiled all his actions, and lost all
his labor. 3 He has disabled God from doing him good, who cannot save him
that lies in the state of infidelity. 4 He has shut Heaven against himself,
for without shall be unbeleevers: and if infirmity of faith in Moses, the
Servant of God, shut him out of Canaan; what shall the want of it in the wicked
do but shut them out of the heavenly Canaan, which is a r^st prepared only for
the people of God.

3 To teach in what an high reckoning it is with God; who is the Author of it,
the finisher of it, the accepter and approver of it, yea of a grain of it; and
not of it only, but of our persons and imperf ct works, because of it: and
c^nsequently that every believer should make as high account of it as of
salvation it self, it leading to the very g^te of Heaven: nay, being the
threshold over which every one m^st step that means to enter into the holy
City.

Use 3. This teaches us, that seeing the Ministry of the Prophets, Apostles,
Pastors, and Teachers, was instituted to this purpose, to beget and confirm men
in the faith: all such as frequent the Ministry must be careful to grow up in
the strength of faith. For otherwise they frustrate to themselves this holy
ordinance: for the sum of our commission is this, Go teach all Nations, he
that believes hall be sav^d, Mar. 16.16. And what is Paul, Apollos, or any
other ordinary Minister, but the Ministers of your faith; both for the
begetting and confirming of the same? Grow up in the strength of faith.
So as whosoever under the Ministry wants either the work of faith, or the
working of it to further strength and degrees; that Ministry is by him
perverted to his own danger, and damnation, without repentan^e. And i^ we
search further into the Scriptures, we shall not want store of reasons to the
same purpose. As,

1 According to the increase of faith is the increase of all graces:

2 As a child on^e born grows daily unto the tallnesse of it, so those that
have been born unto God, have ever increased (except in temptation, and
desertion) in faith and godliness, and so drew daily nearer their salvation
than when they first believed: so must we walk from faith to faith; from
strength to strength; of weak becoming strong; not standing in the infancy, or
childhood, but growing up to our full age and old age in Jesus Christ.

3 It is true that a grain of true faith is very powerful and prevailing; but
the strength of faith can do much more: and therefore the ^^ll sayls wherewith
Abraham was carried to the promise, are set before us, Romans 4.5.

Again, every measure of faith, if true, is acc^ptable to God, and makes us
so; because Christ is laid hold on unto life; but the greater measure is much
more: a smoking flax shall not be quenched, that is, the least sparkle of true
faith shall not be despised; but a flame of faith is of great beauty and
brightness. If a poor man wrestle haltingly with Jacob, he shall prevail, and
get a bl^ssing to carry away; but if a man stand stoutly with the Centurion,
and Syrophaenicean, Christ himself will be foiled after a sort, he will admire
it, and profess he found not so great faith in Israel; and according to this
great faith shall it be to this party. Seeing therefore the Lord has still
afforded the Ministry and word of faith, let this be thy chief aim to find the
work of it upon thy faith; and content not thy self that Christ may say to
thee, O thou of little faith: but rise up in the degrees of it, that he may say
as of that Woman, O man, great is thy faith: this will bear thee up in the
waves of temptation and affliction: no blast or billow shall sink thee, not all
the gates of H^ll shall prevail against thee.

But alas, how is this principal end of the Ministry neglected of the most?
and many come to hear a Sermon, and that is all: some rather to see a Sermon,
or be seen at it, than hear it: some to know more than they did, some to reform
something, as Herod, who heard John gladly, and did many things, but few to
learn to become believers: which till they have done, all moral precepts urged
upon them are but lost, because the inside is not yet clean: and fewest of all
do live by their faith in the Son of God: for of all sins that the Spirit shall
rebuke the World of, this is the chief, that they believe not in him. Thus much
of this worthy doctrine concerning faith, which is the scope of all the Prophets
and Apostles.

The third point in the verse, is the fruit of faith, namely, That all that
believe in his name should receive remission of sins. Where for the meaning
must be known, 1 What is Remission of sins. 2 Wh^t it is to receive it. 3 The
persons receiving it, namely, those that believe in the name of Christ: even
all they, and none but they.

First, Remission of sins in a grace of God, whereby for the merit of Christ,
he accounts the sits of believers as no sins, and acquitteth them from the
guilt and punishment of them all. Where I say, it is a grace or favor of God,
this rem ssion of sin is dist^nguish^d from all other: for man has also from
God power and commandment to remit sins; and that either publicly or
privately.

Offense ^s either, 1 against God, which he alone can for give. 2 Against
public peace, which belongs to the law. Or 3 personal against our selves
which must be to g^ven of us.
The former, when the Minister by authority from God, remitteth the sins of
Believers, and repentant sinners, by publishing the grace of the Gospel, and
applying it unto such. And such as are thus ministerially loosed in earth, are
loosed also in heaven.

The latter, is of every private man, who has also received a commandment of
God to forgive the sins and offenses which his brother has committed against
him: not that any man can properly forgive the sin of his Brother, so far as it
is a breach of Gods Commandment, but as it is wrong and injury against
himself: and even this private remissi^n of a man's Brother, if repenting,
confessing, and asking pardon, is ratified and confirmed in heaven also: but if
they seek not forgiveness at us, we must still not only our selves forgive,
but seek it for them of God, saving, Father forgive them: yea, and forgive us
as we forgive them, But this remission of sins is proper unto God, to whom it
belonge^h to say, I will forgive.

The Lord only properly forgiveth sins.
1 Because it is he against whom all sin is committed. Psalm. 51. Against thee,
against thee, have I si^ned: and who can forgive the debt but the creditor? If
any man shall offer to forgive another man's debt; what does he but deceive the
debto^, who thinks himself free from that which lies as heavy upon him as
before; as also abuse and wrong the Creditor, whose right without his knowledge
he has enchroached upon, 2 The Lord challenges it as his prerogative,
proclaiming himself, Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful,
gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin: and Esaias 43.25. I,
even I am he that puts away thine iniquity, for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. 3 Our Savior in his Prayer taught us to beg the forgiveness
of our debts, only from our Father which is in heaven. 4 The Church of God
has ever ascribed unto the Lord alone this honor of mercy, which is a part of
his gl^ry which he will not impart to any other, Micah 7.18. Who is a God l^ke
unto thee, that takes away iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the
remnant of his heritage? he retains not his wrath for eve^, because mercy
pleases him: Psalm. 130. ult. He will redeem Israel from all his iniquities. 5
The very Jews themselves accounted it an high blasphemy for any man to take
upon him to remit sins, Luke ^.21. Who is this that speaks blasphemies, who
can forgive sins but God only? Whence it plainly appears, that the Pope or
any other of his shavelings, whilst they challenge (though a subordinate)
power properly to forgive sins, and do not content t emselves with the
ministerial publishing in the name and authority of God alone, and pronouncing
forgiveness to all repentant sinners, become open blasphemers against God, and
not without an high wickedness set themselves in the room of God.

2 I say in the description, that the Lord does account the sins of his Elect
as no sins, and that for the merit of Christ: both which appear in the former
resembla^ce, which compares sins to debts: wherein God is compar^d to a
Creditor, man to a debtor, the Law to the bill or bond which binds man to
G^d, 1 to obedience, 2 in default of that to punishment; so as her^ is nothing
but either satisfaction, or to go to prison. Now we being banq^^rupts by our
fall, and of such broken estate, as we are not able to pay on^ farthing,
neither of the principal, n^r the for^eiture* the m^rcy of our ^reditor
steppe^h in, who himself procures us a surety both able and w^lling to
discharge our whole debt, and the forfeit as well as the principal: that ^s,
Jesus Christ, who by his obedience active, and passive has made a ^^d
^^scharge, and sufficient sa^isfaction for the sins of all the beleev^rs in the
wo^ld; the which being accepted of his Father in full p^ym^^t, are f^^ther
imputes not to us our si^s, but covers them, cast ^h them all (...) his back
Isa. 38 17. and into the bott^me of the sea, M^. 7.9. as th^^gs which he will
never remember more.

Th^s they ^ecome as though they had never been and we accounted as innocent,
as if we had never fallen from our first state of innocenc^. From th^s we
learn how to co^ceive that place and the li^e, where it is said, that the blood
of J^^us Christ cleans^th us from all sin, 1 John 1. wherein not the ^^ti^n of
remissi^n, wh ch is proper to the Deity is as^ribed to the bl^od of Christ; but
only the cause of remission is signified, f^r which God the Fat^er remitteth
sins; and that is the blood of Christ, in^luding his wh^le obedien e, and the
merit of it, which is a just price, and pac ficati^n of his Father; Ephesians. 1.7.
In whom we have redemption through his blood even he remission o^ sins.

3 I a^de, that the Lord does acquit Believers from the guilt and puni hment of
all their sins: for as where the debt is once paid, As the Lord so g^veth
properly (...) o^ pe f ^ctly ^^th (...) punishment.
the wh^le obligation is void, and there remains no more satisfa tion to be
made, so where the L^^d forgiv th a debt once, he thenceforth acq^itteth the
debt^^, and is far from requiring any new satisfaction. This will not sta^^ w^
the justice of God, to exact the satisfaction of one debt twice, (...) in (...)
surety, another tim^ in our selves. It will not stan^ with the gl^ry of God* wi
h wh^m is plentiful redemption: It will not stand with the hon^ur of (...) to
work out with all his obedience, but an ^all red^mption, wh ch would argue but
a hal^ satisfaction. Ch istus comm^^ (...) no^i^ (...) and culp m (...) and
(...) ^g^st S^^m. de temp 141
It will not stand with the price of his blood nor woe thiness of his death not
fully to satisfy the whole ^ust ce of his Fat^er. I will not stand with the
faith of our prayer for remission of sins; (...) whole debt be not f^rgiven,
but some satisfaction remains f^r us to perf rm, to believe remission of sins
were no faith, but a vain opinion and fancy: ^ r with our peace wi^h God, if
his wrath be not yet fully satisfied.

Nay it will not stand with right reason: for is it reason, that he that owes
n thing to a man, should be forced to make a satisfaction where nothing is due?
but where the debt is remitted, nothing is due nothing is ^wing, the deb^or is
freed, and the whole obligation cancelled. Who sees not therefore by all this,
what a w cked and detestable devise it is of the School-m^n, and defended by
all the Papists ^t this day? to affirm, C^ncil. (...) d n^ ss. 4 Can. 4.
that only the fault of mortal sins is rem^tted by Christ but not the
punishment or satisfaction; the which being as they say by the grace of God,
changed from eternal to temp^rary, rem^in^th to be born either here in this
life, or in purgatory, till Gods justice be fully satisfied, and the uttermost
farthing be paid.

Upon this string hang their indulgences, pardons, masses, pilgrimages, and the
whole body of their trumpery, devised to make a prey of the World a great part
of which (being the cunningest thieves in all the world) they have by such
crafty and fraudulent conveyances gotten into their hands. And lest they
should want all color, they allege the example of David, 2 Samuel 12.13. David's
sin and punishment both for^iven notwi hstanding the child must dye.
Whose sin the Lord put away, and yet the child born to him must surely dye:
and again, though the sins of the godly be pardoned, yet death which is the
punishment of original sin remains.

I answer, 1 That David's sin and punishment were both remitted, for so said the
Prophet, Thou shall not dye.

2 We must distinguish between punishment of sin, whereby Gods justice is
satisfied, and chastening of sin with a fatherly rod. The former are always
remitted with the sin, not always the latter: by the former, the Lord
revengeth the si^s of men, by the latter, he corrects. The former can only
be born away ^y Christ: the latter cannot be born off by any masses or
indulgences; but are wholesomely dispensed and disposed by God to his dearest
children for their good. Of this latter kind was the death of David's child, not
properly for his sin, but that in the deed doing he had caused the enemies of
God to blaspheme. Of this kind was the sentence against Moses and Aaron, whose
sin of not glorifying God at the waters of strife, Numb. 20.12. was pardoned,
and yet they must not enter into the land of promise: they were corrected with
rodds of men (not punished in proper speech) both that others with themselves
might be more careful not to offend in the like kind, as also, that being
deprived of the earthly Canaan, they might more studiously seek for the
heavenly;

Bellarm. lib. 4. de p^nit. cap. 2.
The like is to be said of the Corinths, of whom Bellarmine says, that they
were reconciled to God, and yet diverse of them were stricken with death for
unworthy receiving of the Sacrament. As for the example of the Israeli es,
Numb. 14.20. whose sin of murmuring God is said to forgive at Moses prayer, yet
they must all for this sin dye in the wilderness,

Note well this answer.
The answer is, that Moses did not pray that God would absolutely and for ever
pardon their sin; nor that the Lord would abstain from all judgment and
punishment of that sin: but that now at this present time he would be pleased
to appease his great anger so justly conceived, and desist from that great
judgment of the utter destroying of them, threatened v. 12. as may appear, both
by the arguments used by him, as by that he expressly notes the manner of this
fo^giveness. verse. 19. as thou have forgiven this people, even from Egypt till
now: and forgive them, even according as thou have spoken, v. 17. but how the
Lord had after they came out of Egypt forgiven them, appears Exodus 32.35.
when they had made a calf, and the Lord wished Moses to let him alone that he
might consume them, yet by Moses intercession, the Lord did not consume them,
but plagued them with a great plague and destruction; and yet the holy man
prays, he would forgive them as he had done from Egypt till now. And what
was it the Lord had said which Moses takes hold on? namely, in verse 34. of
that 32. of Exodus Go now, bring the people unto the place which I commanded
thee, behold mine Angel shall go before thee: but yet in the day of my v
sitation, I will visit their sin upon them. So as this place rightly
interpreted, yields no patronage to any such Popish and wicked collection.

Further for the second objection, That death remains, though the sin be
pardone;

Though death remain after sin is pardoned, both the fault and pun shment is
removed
I Answer, it remains not as any satisfaction to the justice of God to
believers; nor as a punishment of sin to such as have their sins remitted; but
it has lost his sting* which is the guilt of sin; and is become a remedy
rather than a punishment, physic rather than poison, an end of their misery,
and an entrance into a better life. So as it still abides firm against all
such detestable devises of Popery, that remission of sins carries with it the
removal of all the guilt and punishment of sin to such as have their parts in
the same.

And it is lastly to be observed in this description, that I say the guilt and
punishment of all sin is taken away: for if any be not remitted, they be
either greater sins or lesser: to remit the lesser and not the greater, what
were we the better? how could our salvation be effected or perfected? how
could grace be every way grace? or do we pray for remission of lesser, and
not of greater also, seeing our selves must forgive our Brethren, not only
lesser offenses, but even the greatest?

A^ain, to remit the greater, and retain the lesser, were to say that the Lord
is either not s^ able, or so willing to forgive lesser sins as greater. Shall a
man frankly forgive a debt of thousands of pounds, and will he not forgive also
to the same party a few pence? The Popish Church confidently avouch, A bundle
of P^p sh blasphemies.
that many sins need no remission; as concupiscence, which they say is not prop
rly a sin, albeit indeed, it is the mother sin of all. And all the heap of
their venial sins, which they say are not against, but besides the
commandment, because they are not attended unto, or deliberately done with
full consent o^ reason: because they cannot hinder the hab^^ of virtue, but the
act of it, and that a very little; nor turn us from our end, but hinder so much
as it is our progress unto it: and because they (though themselves displease
God) yet they make not God displeased with the party committing them, for they
can stand with grace, and have not properly and simply the reason and respect
of sin or offense: therefore are they not to be punished with eternal, but
only temporary punishment.

These need not the blood of Christ, nor Grace, nor confession in particular,
nor abs^lution, nor any new habit of charity; but these are easily wiped away
with a little holy water, or any meritorious work, or by the Sacraments
received, or by general Confession, or by a small humiliation; as knocking the
breast, fasting, alms, the Lords Prayer, an ave Maria, or by entering into a
consecrated Church, or by a Bishops blessing: or if all these help but a
little, presently after death they are all consumed in the fire of purgatory.
Oh horrible blasphemies, derogatory to the blood of Christ which purges us
from all sin, and to the truth of the Scriptures which teach us that when we
had nothing to pay, our Master forgave us our whole debt, Matthew. 18.32. But I
have followed them too far, were it not that the discovery of their impieties
may bring some profit to such as are not so well acquainted or exer^ised in
their writings. Thus much of the description of this Grace.

The second thing propounded, is what it is to receive remission of sins?
which because it implies a gift or oblation, therefore we must know that
pardon of sin is offered generally to all, in the word of grace publicly
preached, and conferred unto believers, not only in the beginning of their
conversion, but through their whole life. Now to receive this remission, How
remission of sin is received.
is when a capable, that is, a contrite heart by Faith (which is an hand taking
in) receives Christ and all his benefits (among which remission of sins is the
chief) Preached and published in the Gospel. And this it does on this manner.

1 Upon a touch of sin, and sense, that without this gracious pardon there is
nothing b^^ (...) p^rdition: the heart beaten down begins seriously to
meditate of the promise of m rcy in Christ, and of the means of deliverance
from this woeful estate.

2 It desires to believe, and wishes that mercy to belong to it self, it
sends groans to God, it hops for pardon, and weakly applies the general
promises of grace.

3 After such desires and groans of the heart, the Lord most graciously
answers by his Spirit, and by little and little settleth, and quieteth the
heart, persuading it that Christ himself, and consequently reconciliation with
God does indeed belong unto him, so as he rests in that assurance. Thus the
Lord will not only give us mercy, but lets us know that he does so, that our
joy, and peace, and boldness in him might be more full.

Thirdly* the persons receiving this remission, are all believers. Whosoever
believe in his name: whose faith intitles them to the main promise of life, and
all other depending thereupon: Believe in the name of Christ, why.
they must believe in his name. For, 1 There is no other name to be saved by:
In him alone is the matter of our salvation, seeing remission is obtained by
his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. 2 He alone is God and man, both which natures are
necessary to our Surety: by the former, he has power; by the latter, a right
to us, not only more general of propriety, as the Father and Holy Ghost also
have; but more special of propinquity, being our brother, and firstborn of our
Family; the next of our Kindred, and therefore of right belongs to him to
recover our weak estate, as was figured in that Law, Levit. 25.25. If thy
brother be impoverished, and sell his possession; then his redeemer shall come,
even his near kinsman, and buy out that which his brother sold. 3 He only was
deputed of God to derive life and grace into us, as the head into the members:
and therefore most meet it is, that whosoever would suck and draw of his
fullness, should believe in his name.

Now from these words we learn two instructions.

1 What is the chief thing which every Christian must strive to obtain while
he lives in his world; namely, remission of sins.

2 What a his estate and condition that has attained it.

The chief duty of every Christian while he is in this world.
For the first, it is grounded in the text, because howsoever rem^ssion of sins
is here only named, yet in it are included all the other gracious mercies of
God: not only all deliverances, and freedom from the evils and punishments that
attend upon sin, but even all our redemption and salvation with the means of
it, and blessings accompanying the same. And indeed, this is the sum or epitome
of all Gods mercy, in which the Lord crowns his Saints with compassion; a
mercy which reaches up to heaven, and draws them out of the most miserable
thing in all the world; which is to lie under the curse and danger of sin, and
consequently, under the endless displeasure of the Almighty. Which point being
even as the one thing necessary to be known and attained. I will stand a little
longer upon it, hoping to spend my time well in setting down these five points.
1 The necessity of remission of sins. 2 The benefits of it. 3 The Letters of
it. 4 The helps to it. 5 The companions of it, by which as by so many notes we
may know we have it: and so we will add the use of the whole doctrine.

1 Necessity of remission of sins in three points.
First, the necessity of it will appear, if we consider, 1 The multitude and
abundance of our sins, which are to be remitted, being for number as our
hairs, and as the sand of the Sea which is numberless; which cannot be other,
seeing we drink in sin as the Fish does water, Job 15.16. that is, incessantly,
for the Fish ceasing to drink in water, cease to live; neither can we cease
to sin, till we cease to live. Nay, seeing our very best actions hold no
correspondence with the Law of God; and in strict justice are no better than so
many sins: this consideration exceedingly multiplieth our sins; in that not
only in failing in, but in doing of our duties we sin incessantly against our
God.

2 If we look upon the danger of sin, we shall better see the necessity of
remission. It is a filthy Leprosy which infecteth the body and soul, the
thoughts, speeches, and actions: it makes a man a loathsome creature in the
eyes of God; it makes God our enemy, who is the fountain of life, and whose
lightsome countenance is better than life: yea, it makes God depart from his
Creature, and destroy the works of his own fingers: it lays the sinner open
and naked to all the wrath of God, to all the Curses of the Law in this life,
and in the life to come. It sets him as a butt against whom the Lord in
anger shoots out of his quiver all the arrows of his displeasure. It is the
only thing which unremitted, makes the sinner absolutely unhappy, and every
way most accursed. Neither does the whole heap of sin only make the sinner so
miserable, but any one sin even the least unpardoned, would for ever hold the
sinner under perdition. And more, all the men that ever were or shall be in the
world, were never able to rise from under the burden of one sin, if it were
imputed unto them: and yet the most of the world see no part of this danger of
sin, and therefore no such necessity of the remission of it.

3 Consider thy own insufficiency, if thou had the strength and power of all
men and Angels, to satisfy for the least sin: and if we: cannot satisfy for
any, what remains but a fearful perdition from the Lord, and from the glory
of his power, if all be not remitted. In one word, the sinner who has not got
his discharge sealed, is without all safety in his life, all sound comfort in
his death, and at the Judgment Day, shall have the sentence of everlasting
torment with the Devil and his Angels awarded him, before men and Angels.

The second point, is the benefits issuing from it, and these are: Benefits
flowing from remission of sin four.
1 Peace of conscience, an immediate fruit of our justification by faith, and
reconciliation with God, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God: and it was ordinary with our Savior to join them together, as Luk 7.47.
Thy sins are forgiven thee, go in peace. This benefit the most know not what
it means, but he that has the feeling of the wrath of God against his sin;
and sees nothing but an angry face of God burning like a consuming fire; he
that is so straightened as he can think no other thing but that the Lord in his
just judgment has cast him quite away: this man, as of all other torments
that can be suffered in the world he lies under the greatest, so nothing in
the earth can content or comfort him, but only the sense, and persuasion of
Gods favor. Now the conditions of peace with his God, are the most joyful
tidings in all the world, as is the unexpected news of a Pardon to a Malefactor
ready to execution for high Treason against his Prince.

2 The right and possession also of life everlasting: For if we be estated
unto life eternal by our justification and righteousness before God; then are
we so also by remission of sins; because these two are confounded in the
Scriptures, and are the same. Whence it is that the Apostle, Romans 4.7. being to
prove the point of justification of a sinner before God, without the works of
the Law, cites the text, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

And further, If our whole redemption put us in possession of everlasting
happiness; so does also remission of sin, seeing the Apostle in sundry places
confounds these two, and expounds one by the other, Ephesians. 1.7. By whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins, Col.
1.14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, that is, the forgiveness
of sins. And it must needs follow, that if they who are justified, and
sanctified, are also glorified, then they have attained the beginnings of their
glory, who have attained remission of sins.

3 The benefit of Christ's intercession, which meriteth all our good; for he
prays not for the world, but those that are given him out of the world, Joh.
17.19. and this is no small benefit, seeing no part in the prayer of Christ, no
part in his death: he will not endure death for him for whom he will not
vouchsafe to pray.

4 Consolation in affliction, strength in temptations, and assured comfort in
life and death, are the sweet fruits arising from remission of sin. For,

1 Although afflictions entered with death into the world by sin, and in their
nature are testimonies of Gods wrath; yet sin being remitted, they proceed no
further from God, as a just Judge revenging sin, but from a merciful Father,
either for trial of us and our graces, or for chastisement, to keep us from
perishing with the world; to make us hate sin the more, to draw us nearer him
in invocation and prayer, to force our affections out of this present world, to
fray others from sin by our example, to conform us to the image of his Son, and
to show his mighty power in our weakness, by turning them to our best. And
thus from the former consideration arises to the believer even in darkness a
great light.

Satan's temptations foiled by this assurance.
2 From hence obtains the believer notable strength and sense against the
fiery darts of Satan's temptations. For Satan urges the poor sinner sundry
ways, as 1 By the multitude and vileness of his sins, with which his
conscience tells him he is covered: and thence infers, that because the
wages of every sin is death, and because he has deserved eternal death, he
must needs perish, he can expect no other. But now can the believer stop his
mouth, and say, I grant Satan all thy premises; no sinner is worthy of, or can
expect salvation in or by himself or so long as he continues in sin: but my
sins are remitted by means of Christ's satisfaction; and though in my self I am
worthy to perish, yet in Christ I have a worthiness to bring me to salvation.
I continue not in my sinful estate, but am drawn out of the guiltiness, the
filthiness, the service, the love and liking of my sins, through the grace
wherein I stand: and therefore thy consequent is false, I fear it not being so
forcelesse.

2 From the Justice of God, who cannot but reject whatsoever and whosoever is
not fully conformable to his righteousness: but here the believing heart is
quieted, in that through remission of sins, the Justice of God is fully
satisfied, though not by the person offending, yet in his pledge and surety
Jesus Christ, who being just, dyed for the un^ust, that we might be the
righteousness of God in him. And hence the justice of God is a matter of most
comfort to the poor sinner, in that this righteousness cannot suffer him to
demand satisfaction twice for one and the same sin; for this directly fights
with justice and equity.

And if Satan be still instant, and say, But what shall another righteousness
avail thee, if thy self be not a keeper of the Law? for the soul that sins,
that soul shall dye: the believing heart will readily answer:

That although the Law require proper and personal obedience, yet the Gospel
translateth it to the person of ou^ Surety, who being God and man, not only
paid the whole debt, but performed all righteousness, absolutely fulfilling
the whole Law: whence it is that his obedience is called the fulfilling of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.4. and himself was
made under the Law, that he might redeem from it those that were under it,
Gal. 4.4.

And whereas the Tempter will allege, But for all thy righteousness thou
have innumerable sins, original and actual, which the Lord hates, and every
day addest to the huge heap of them; The heart which holds this article of
remission of sins, abides undaunted: for though it feel a body of sin dwelling
with it, yet is it not reigning sin, it is not sin at quiet, but daily battle
is maintained against it; it is sin weakened, and in daily consumption; and
therefore shall never be laid to the charge of him that is in Jesus Christ,
Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ: for the
law of the spirit of life which was in Jesus Christ has freed me (though not
from all molestation and presence* yet) from the Law, that is the service and
slavery of sin and of death, verse. 2. But numbers (will he say) who make
account to partake in the death and righteousness of Christ, are damned, and
have no benefit by it: and numbers have revolted and fallen away, and why may
not thou? to which the believer will readily answer, that those that were thus
plucked up, were never of the Fathers planting; only infidels and unbeleevers
have fallen away, and withered for want of rooting and moisture; but I believe
the remission of sins, not by any ungrounded persuasion, but with a sound,
lasting, and unfayling faith, resting it self wholly upon Christ; so as I am
persuaded neither death nor life can separate me from his love, the work of
whose spirit makes me bold to call upon God as my tender Father; and produces
the fruits of true faith and conversion into my whole life, whereby I know as
infallibly the truth of my faith, as I know the presence of the Sun by his
light, or of Fire by his heat. Finally, he that has begun to make me good,
will make me also persevere in goodness.

3 This assurance of remission of sins, yields most assured comfort in life,
The sound comfort of this article.
and in death: the goodness of Paul's conscience, was his comfort when he
stood at the bar, Acts 23.1. and 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, even the
testimony of our conscience: and in the agony of death, this is the Christians
comfort, that his sin being remitted, the sting of death is gone; the locks of
this strong Sampson wherein his great strength say, are clipped off, and he is
disarmed of his weapons which are our own sins. So as a Christian may challenge
him into the field, and say, O death where is thy sting? which because he is
bereaved of, when he intends to kill, he cures; when he does his worst,
which is to separate soul and body, he can sever neither from Christ; nay
rather he sends the member of Christ, and sets him nearer to his head,
which is best of all.

The third point propounded, Three lets which hinder men from seeking so
precious a grace.
is to consider of the Le^s which hinder men from seeking the assurance of the
remission of their sins, which is indeed their true happiness, if they could
so esteem of it: some of which I will set down.

1 An erroneous judgment, that no man can attain certainly to believe the
pardon of his sins: for the common Protestant is a very Papist in this opinion,
who hold that to doubt of this point is a virtue, and to believe it, is
presumption, because no man can certainly know it without a special revelation:
so ask ordinary Christians, do ye believe the pardon of your sins, they will
say yea, for God is merciful, and they be not so many or great but they may be
pardoned. Hereby we have brought the party to confess that his sins be
pardonable; but urge him, are you sure they are pardoned; Believers may and
must know the pardon of their own sins.
and here he is set up, he stammers out a careless answer; he cannot surely
tell, but he hops well, and this is all you can wring out of him: he knows
not whether Christ be in him or no, whether he be in the faith or no, he
believes he knows not what.

But to let men see their error herein. 1 Does not our text say, that men must
receive the remission of sins: and can any man receive so precious a gift from
God, and not know when, and how be came by it? 2 What is the meaning of that
Article in our Creed which we profess, I believe the remission of sins: what
believe we more than the Devils, if we believe no more than that God forgiveth
the sins of the elect, and not our own; and then, how is this one of the
privileges of the Church? 3 To believe in the name of Jesus Christ in
particular for remission of sins, is his commandment, 1 John 3.23. and
therefore no presumption, but a necessary obedience so to do. 4 Doubting is
forbidden, and therefore no virtue, but a vice, Matthew. 14. O thou of little
faith, why doubtest thou?

Object. But experience teaches that every man is full of doubting, Objection,
answered.
and therefore no faithful man can believe it.

Answ. The consequent is false, seeing this doubting exercises, but destroys
not faith; and that they go together, not only the speech of our Savior
formerly alleged, but the prayer of the Father of the Child proves, Lord, I
believe, help my unbelief: as also the two natures of which every Christian
consists, flesh and spirit, which are in continual combat.

Object. But no man can know Gods mind, and so cannot be assured, Romans 11.34.

Answ. By his mind is there meant his secret will: but his mind revealed we
may, and must; a part of which is, that whosoever believes in his Name shall
receive remission of sins: which general promise while we specially apply to
our selves, the Spirit begets this assurance.

Object. but we are commanded still to fear, Blessed is he that fears
always.

Ans. We must not fear the mercy of God concerning salvation, but carry a
reverent fear in regard of Gods judgments. 2 We are to fear in regard of our
selves, and sins, by which we deserve the judgments of God as well as others;
but this is not contrary to assurance of forgiveness of sins; for mercy is with
thee that thou may be feared: which the holy Prophet would never have said,
it fear could not stand with assurance of mercy. 3 Such a fear is commanded as
may shake our security, but not to drive away the boldness of Faith: a fear of
falling into sin, not a falling away from grace: a fear lest we offend a
merciful God, but not lest he take away his mercy from us.

A second Let, is the want of judgment to discern aright of the best things,
and of resolution to purchase or practice that which a truly informed
judgment concludes to be the best. This was the sin taxed in Martha, who saw
not the greatest good near her, as Mary did. And the world is full of Marthaes,
who willingly hurried with many earthly distractions, utterly neglect the one
thing necessary; namely, their Reconciliation with God, and the things which
serve to uphold and maintain the Christian life, whereby Christ should live in
them, and they in him.

What else is it that makes men run over Sea and Land to provide for the body
and bodily life, and in the mean time cast off all the care, and means of the
knowledge of God, and conscience of their ways, but that they see no profit in
serving God? they taste a little sweetness of the creature, but not of the
Creator himself; a small piece of earth has more savor to them, than the God
of Heaven. This is it that causes men to walk painfully all the week in their
personal and particular Calling, but all the week and Sabbath too neglect the
general Calling of a Christian: whereas had they any judgment in the things of
God, reason would teach them that the particular must yield to the general, as
the inferior give place to the superior.

Learn to esteem every thing in the measure and degree of its goodness.
Yea, this is it which strongly forces men to choose the profits and pleasures
of this life, which altogether cross and hinder this chief and principal care
of gaining the favor of God; because they do not follow the rules of wisdom,
which esteems of things according to their degree and measure of goodness,
and not above. Which if men would give themselves to be ruled by, they would
with the Saints of God in this comparison, account but meanly of the things in
the highest account with earthly minded men. The Apostle Paul comparing his
gain of Christ with the gain of the World, he esteemed this as loss, yea as
dung, which indeed is the right estimate of it in this comparison.

Holy David would rather be a doorkeeper where Gods face may shine upon him,
than enjoy the honors and pleasures of the World in the Palaces of Princes
without it. Solomon himself, the wisest and wealthiest of all men, after good
trial, pronounced of all earthly indowments, abstracted from the fear and
favor of God, that they were vanity and vexation of spirit: and determines
this to be the sum of all, to fear God, and keep his Commandments. Thus are
the wise man's eyes in his head, and his heart is at his right hand, Eccl. 2.
both for deliberating and executing of things most necessary to be done;
whereas the heart of the fool is at his left hand, he does all as it were with
a left hand for want of this judgment.

A Third and main Let, are frivolous and fleshly conceits which dead and quench
any such motions as otherwise might provoke men to this care of remission of
sins. As

1 What need I be so foolish, and precise, I have lived well hitherto without
all this ado; if God loved me not, he would never have blessed me as he has
done.

Answ. But look to thy self who thus reasonest; Say not God loves thee unless
thou have such sure grounds as follow.
It is not enough to say God loves me; but to have sure evidence of it, yea,
surer evidences than any thou yet speak of, I mean common and outward
blessings; which like the Sun, or the rain are generally disposed to the good
and bad; and by which no man can know love or hatred, Eccl. 9.

Again, Gods love goes with Election, Justification, Sanctification, effectual
Calling, Faith, Love, Hope, Patience, Repentance, Mortification. Examine thy
self by these notes: for if God love thee as his Child, thou love him, and
keep his Commandments; thou love not sin, but hate it, even thy dearest
sins, and preservest a care to please him in all things: Joh. 14.23. If any man
love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him.

2 Whereas they say that others which nourish this care, are as much crossed as
any other, and therefore they see no reason that they should make their Life so
uncomfortable to no purpose: let them know, that all the crosses Gods Children,
whose care is to make up their peace with God, Godly life not to be feared for
the crosses attending it. Reasons.
are exercised with, 1 Proceed from the Love of God, and not from hatred. 2
They are trials of Graces, not punishments of sins. 3 Their end is not
rejection from God, but through their purging and amendment to draw them nearer
unto God. 4 By this Reason, Christ and his Apostles might have been refused,
and all the Saints of God, who through many afflictions are passed into Heaven.
5 The way to avoid Crosses and Punishments is, to intend this one care of
getting sin remitted. And 6 If the way to Heaven be so strawed with Crosses,
what is the way to Hell: If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
wicked and sinner appear?

3 Whereas they object further against this care, that men of good note, and
perhaps Preachers too, account it but fantastical, and more than needs; and
only a few, and those despised ones in the World, do thus disquiet themselves,
who make their lives more uncomfortable than they need.

I Answer, this is indeed one of Satan's greatest holds, Better going to heaven
alone, then to Hell with company.
but such a snare as God leads his Children out of in safety: whom he
teaches that it is their happiness to go to Heaven, though alone, rather than
to Hell with company. Mary will sit her down, though alone, at Christ's feet, if
she cannot get her sisters company: she knows it is the good part that
shall never be taken from her. And for those (especially if they be
Ministers, who should most advance this care) but disgrace it as a needless
vexation of the Spirit, let them know, that the Lord Jesus was of another
mind, who pronounced blessedness on those that mourn now, and promised that
they should be comforted: and far are they from the guidance of that spirit who
has taught us, that of all Sacrifices none is comparable to that of a broken
spirit and contrite heart which the Lord never dispiseth.

IV. Now follow the helps to the obtaining of remission of sins. As, Helps to
attain this grace of remission.
1 Thou must become a member of the Church, Isa. 33.24. The people that dwell
there shall have their sins forgiven: And Chap. 62.12. They shall call them the
holy people, the redeemed of the Lord. Now to know a man's self a true member of
the Church, the Prophet David gives two infallible notes, Psalm. 15.2. The
former in regard of God, to walk uprightly and sincerely as in Gods presence,
and under his eye: and the latter in regard of men, to exercise righteousness,
both in word and deed.

2 Consider seriously of the nature of sin, how odious it is in it self, how
vile it makes thy self in the sight of God; how it keeps away all good
things, how it procures all evil; how proan thy self art unto it, yea, even
after grace received: this will bring thee to the judging and accusing of thy
self, to the confession and forsaking of thy sin, which is the highway to
find mercy, Prove. 28.13. for the former. Psalm. 32. I said I will confess my
sin, and thou forgavest me the iniquity of my sin. And for the latter, it is
plainly employed in Christ's reason, Joh. 5.14. Go thy ways, ^ow thou art whole;
but sin no more, lest a worse thing follow. The fellon that has been in
prison, endured the misery of his Irons, has been condemned, and with the ^ope
about his neck in fear of present death, if he have escaped he will take heed
of coming into the like misery again: and he that has found this grace in
truth, cannot by turning again to his sin, turn it unto wantonness.

3 Carefully use the means which the wisdom of God has left to believers for
the attaining and assuring of this grace of Remission. As namely,

1 The Ministry of the word, which in the right use of it is the Ministry of
Reconciliation, in which the Lord offers conditions of peace, remission of
sins, and life everlasting, 2 As also of the holy Sacram nts which are the
seals of rem ssion of sins to all believers, worthily receiving the same,
Matthew. 26.28. and 3 another special means is fervent prayer for pardon of sin
above all things in the World. Drowsy Protestants esteems slightly of pardon
of sin, even as they do of sin it self, which they think easily blown off with
a Lord of mercy. But the tender and distressed Conscience, that seeeth and
combateth with the danger, sueth for pardon as one that would speed. A poor
fellon on the gallows ready to be turned off would think a pardon the
welcomest thing in all the World: but the hardness and drowsiness of men's
hearts, every where argue that they be a very few that find this rare grace,
unless we will say that the greatest blessedness that living man is capable
of, can be given to him that sleeps on both sides, that never thinks of it,
and never makes means after it.

Companions of remission of sins.
V. The companions of remission of sins whereby it may easily be discerned,
are five.

1 The daily exercise of true repentance in all the parts of it: as,

First, In judging ones self for sin past and present: and this was apparent in
Paul himself, who looking back to his former estate, reckoned himself a Captain
sinner, and the chief of all sinners, he saw in himself many sinn^s, and great
sins, which needed great mercy and much forgiveness: the which one
consideration kept him under continually, and fostered in him the grace of
Humility, when as otherwise through his abundance of gifts and revelations, he
might have exalted himself out of measure.

Secondly, in watchfulness and fear of sin in time to come, according to our
Saviors holy Counsel, Thou art now made whole, go thy way, and sin no more.

Thirdly, In daily purging and cleansing from known and secret corruptions:
many are the places wherein the pardoning and purging of sins are joined as
inseparable: Jer. 33.8. I will cleanse all their iniquity, yea, I will pardon
all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me: 1 John 1.9. If we
confess our sins, faithful is he to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all our unrighteousness. This was the sum of the Baptism, that is, the
doctrine which John preached, even amendment of life for the remission of sins,
Mark 1.4. never hope for remission, unless thou hungrest after this grace of
Repentance: for the Lord will not be merciful to that man that blesses
himself in his sins, Deuteronomy. 29.19. but if the wicked return from his sins, he
shall live, and not dye, Ezekiel. 18.21.

2 The second Companion, is Gladness and cheerfulness of heart, yea, an
unspeakable joy that the Lord has done so great things for his soul, and made
him so happy as to bring him from such extremity of misery to partake in the
Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, and Redemption of Christ: for can a man have
a gift bestowed upon him of more price and use than all the Kingdoms of the
world, and never find his heart made glad in it? or is it possible that he that
finds the pearl, can go away without joy? The Eunuch being converted, went
away rejoicing: and if every believer must rejoice in another man's conversion,
much more must he in his own.

3 The Third is Love and Thankfulness to God, which are enforced by this
excellent grace, Luke 7.47. The poor woman that stood weeping behind Christ
loved much, because much was forgiven her: Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord,
because he has heard my voice: and wherein the Lord had thus graciously dealt
with him, the whole Psalm teaches, especially, v. 8. Because thou have
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, my feet from falling. Now
if David for a temporal deliverance from Saul in the Wilderness, did thus
provoke his heart to the love of God; how should the consideration of our
spiritual deliverance from Sin, Death, and all hellish powers, blow up these
Heavenly sparkles in us? And what can so liberal a love beget in a good heart,
but much thankfulness for apprehension of much mercy? how David in the sense of
mercy reaching to the pardon of his sins, melts into the praises of God, see
Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. etc. And the Apostle Paul considering what a weight of
corruption did still oppress him, whereof he expected to be fully eased,
concludes his comfort with thanks unto God in Jesus Christ, Romans 7.2^. And
remembering what a bloody persecutor, and an extreme waster of the Church he
had been formerly, 1 Timothy 1.12. yea, what an Enemy unto God, what a blasphemer
of his Name; he breaks with vehemence into the praises of God for his happy
change, But I thank him who has counted me faithful, and put me in his
service, verse. 14. and, the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant toward me.

4 The fourth is a sound and sincere heart, hating and striving against all
sin, even secret and small, as well as open and greater: David in Psalm. 32.1.
pronouncing him a blessed man whose iniquity is covered, and whose sin is
pardoned: true, but it might be asked; how shall I know such a blessed man, or
my self to have attained that blessedness? The Prophet gives us this note to
know him by, in the next words: and in whose spirit is no guile: namely, to
hide and foster any sin, of which guile he there directly speaks.

5 The fifth note or Companion is a tender affection to forgive our Brethren
private wrongs and injuries, even great as well as small: he that has ten
thousand talents forgiven him, will not easily take his brother by the throat
for two pence. The Commandment is to forgive one another, Ephesians. 4.32. even as
God for Christ's sake forgave us. The Example is set down, Luke 6.36. Be
merciful, as your Heavenly Father is merciful, but he forgiveth all, and
freely, is the first in forgiveness; and perfectly, he forgiveth and
forgets too. The form of our petition of mercy is; forgive us, as we
forgive, etc. Thou would have God to forgive thee all, and forget all, and
to make thy wrongs against him as though they had never been, go then and do so
to thy brother, otherwise the threatening will meet thee, Jam. 2.13. Judgment
merciless to him that shows no mercy.

Use 1. All this Doctrine concerning this article shows, that there is no
other means in the world to be free from si^, but by Gods (...) remission of
it. Whence it is, that remission of sin is called the covering of sin, Psalm.
32.2. in that the faith of the heart lays hold on Christ and his
righteousness, who is our Propitiatory, covering us and our sins against the
two Tables, as the Propitiatory covered the Ark in which those Tables we^^:
without which cover, every Sinner is next to the Devil and his Angels, the m^st
vile, and loathsome creature in the eyes of God. This use must the rather be
thought ^f; because neither the Papists, not yet the common and carnal
Protestant yield con^ent unto it.

Neither Papist nor comm^n Protestant yee^deth to this d^ctrin of free
remission of sin
The Papist, he believes that many si^s are venial, and prop^rly no sins:
am^ng which he reckons Concupiscence (which indeed is the mo her (...) of
all) and these need no remission. He h^l^eth also, that men redeem^^ by
Ch^is^, and having received the first grace of God, a^^ ^^w (...) to m^^it by
their works, rem ssion of their sin^. Are further, be thinks, that beca^^e no
man knows whether he have w^rks ^n^ugh ^ ple^^^ Go^, n^ man can know that
his sins are remitted. All wh ch, wi^h many (...) to th^^, ar^ most blasphemous
Heresies against th^^ (...) A^ticle of free rem^ssion of sins through belief i^
(...) S^n (...): w^ ^h (so l^^g as (...) us they hold t^em) (...) in the r^m
ssion of their sins by Christ, and consequently (...) the grace ^f life.

But the comm^n Protestant also (...) with simple def^nc^s against his sin, ^he
A^ams cover and* arm^ (...) ^aves, which wi^^ ^^ar^e hold the sewing. S^m^ w^ll
(...) their (...) in men's eyes, and then all is safe: others strive to f ^g^
them, and having ^^^^ked (...) their conscience, they lie them d w^^ se^mely,
and (...) of them any more. Others ^^ve^ ^^osse and soul sins, su^^ (...) of
God, contempt of his W^rd, ^^^^nesse of heart, ^atr^d ^f (...) and all
irreligion, with an outward civil life and an honest conversation as it seems
to be; not thinking that God sees many a wi^ked hear^ th^^ugh a civil life.

Lutum l^vi^^ ^^to, ^gn^^ extinguunt lign^rum struc.
Others will go beyond the former in a^kn^wl^dgi^^ th^ms^lv^^ (...) is, a d
will make some show of ^a^ing up their peace; but it is with so^^ c^rem ny, or
bodily exercise, they will fast, and pra^, and (...) some (...), o^ some Many to
good uses when they dye: (...) as for the grace of faith, which should be as a
soul to quicken these acti^ns, they (...) know what that meant. But h wsoever
m^st men are carried (...) wit such s^^on^ ^^^usions as these; let no man that
would not deceive him (...) w^lf^lly, (...) in any such course to meet with
sound peace: n^thing but the blo^d (...) Jesus his Son, that cleanses from al
sin. In the garment of (...) elder (...) we can carry away the blessing: and
(...) text teaches ^s, (...) of ^^ns stands n t in the doing of any thing,
but in the rec^^^^ng of (...) the hands of Christ, by so many as be^eeve in his
name.

All diligence must be given to (...) p^^d (...) sin (...) to our selves.
Use 2. I^ this so wort^y a grace of so excellent use and sw^etnesse thr^ugh
the wh^le life? then it stands every man in hand (...) lab^u^, and ^ive all
d^ligence to make sure unto himself, the pardon of his (...). But lam^^table it
is to (...) the general care^ sn^sse of men in a matt^^ (...) and consequ^n^^
as this is An^ surely it will prov^ t^^ (...) the world, that whereas the whole
lives of men are th^ug^t too (...) and all their ^ime t^o li^^^ to be eaten up
in worldly cares, which br^ak their sleep, their strength, and often their
brains, yea and their v^ry (...) ^nly the last day of all, and their dying-day,
is scarcely devoted to this (...) of seeking remissi n of sin, and the way to
life everlasting. See we (...) h^w busy and ^ rnest m st men are in the
infin^te encumbrances of the world whilst this one thing is the only thing
neglected? May we not observe how sure m^n devis^ by learned counsel at their
great charge, to make to themselves their Deed^, Leases, Bonds and other
instruments and assurances of the things of this life, who in all their lives
scarce ever dreamed of this assurance? Oh how wilfully herein do men forsake
their own mercy, how carelessly do they cast out of their hands, the only
comfort of their life and death?

Whosoever therefore thou art that have hitherto despised so great salvation,
that have set light by Gods gracious invitings to repentance, and that have
frowardly rejected his kindest offers of mercy, now at length begin to take up
shame in thy face, and sorrow into thy heart: in earnest accuse the security of
thy soul, the deadness of thy spirit, the hardness of thy heart, the
unthankfulness of thy whole life: say with thy self, Ah my folly, that have
neglected my mercy so long: alas, how have I hated instruction? how unkindly
have I dealt with so loving and patient a God: I see now that it is high time
to look to the main business of my life, to make up my peace with God, to get
my pardon sealed: I will live me to the Throne of Grace. I will henceforth lay
hold of eternal life: I see now that there is one thing necessary, and that is
the good part which I will choose, and which shall never be taken from me.

Now we come to the second point propounded (which is the last of this worthy
Sermon) namely, what is the condition of every one that has attained this
excellent grace of remission of sins: Whosoever has attained remission of his
sins is an happy man.
and that is to be a blessed and happy man: for such a one has part in
Christ, and with him of forgiveness of sins; in which David, Psalm. 32.1.
places blessedness.

Quest. But how can this man be a blessed man, seeing he is compassed with a
body of sin and death, and subject unto infinite afflictions, than whom no man
is in this life more miserable, no sort of men more perplexed inwardly with
sense of sin, none more outwardly disgraced for well-doing.

Answ. There be three degrees of blessedness. 1 In this life, Degrees of
blessedness.
when God brings his children into the kingdom of grace, and gives them his
Son, and with him their whole justification* and sanctification in part. 2 The
second degree is in the end of this life: when God brings the souls of the
faithful to Heaven, and their bodies to the earth, safely to be kept until the
last day. 3 The third in and after the Day of Judgment, when he brings both
soul and body into the glory prepared for the elect: Of this last which is
happiness by way of eminency, the two former are certain forerunners, and he
that has attained the first, has also assurance of the last, and must needs
be a blessed man, not only in time to come, but even for the present, whether
we respect his outward estate or inward.

For his outward estate, Gods blessing never fails him, but affords him all
good things, and that in due season, and in due measure: his riches are often
not great, but ever precious: and his little shall nourish him, and make him as
well liking as the water and pulse did the Jewish children in Chaldea. The same
providence which watches to supply all his good, keeps him from all evil; it
pitcheth the Angels round about him to guard his life; let him be persecuted,
he is not forsaken; his losses become his gain; his sickness is his physic;
his heart is cheared even in trouble, which makes that part of his life
comfortable; his soul is bound up in the bundle of life with God; death shall
not come before he can bid it heartily welcome: yea, let violent death come,
it shall not be to him deadly: slain he may be, but not overcome: victory
attends him, and blessedness every where abides him.

But all this is the least part of his blessedness: for if we look yet a
little more inwardly into him, we shall see the boundless extent of his
happiness far more large: whether we respect the spiritual misery he has
escaped; or else the spiritual good which with the pardon of his sins he has
attained: for on the one hand, he has escaped the heavy wrath of God due to
sin; and so is discharged of an infinite debt, healed of a most deadly poison,
and pardoned from a fearful sentence of eternal death and perdition ready to
be executed upon him: and on the other, he has obtained a plentiful
redemption; he has purchased the pearl, received Christ with his merits and
graces; such as are Wisdom, Faith, Hope: whence issue our peace, and joy of
heart which is Heaven before heaven (for in these stand the Kingdom of God)
and the comfort of a good conscience, which is a continual feast. By all which
it appears, that he is no small gainer that has got his part in Gods mercy
reaching to the remission of his sins.

Open thine eyes and see the happiness of the Saints.
Use. 1 We are here admonished to open our eyes that we may more clearly see
and grow in love with the felicity of the Saints, which the most see not,
because 1 It is inward; the glory of the Spouse is like her Head and Husbands
glory, she is all glorious within. 2 Because of their infirmities and
frailties, which wicked eyes altogether gaze upon. 3 Because of their
Afflictions wherewith they are continually exercised. If the Tower of Siloam
fall on any of them, they are thenceforth greater sinners than all other men:
holy Job, because he was afflicted, cannot avoid the note of an Hypocrite,
even among his own Friends and Visiters. And no marvail if the members look
thus black when the Sun looks upon them; seeing their Head Christ himself was
rejected, because they saw and judged him to be plagued and smitten of God,
Isa. 53.4. But we must look beyond all these, as the Lord himself does, who in
his judgment goes beyond the outside, and pronounces sentence according to
the grace which himself works within.

Let us imitate our Lord Jesus, who notwithstanding all the infirmities, yea
and deformities of his Church, pronounces of her, that she is all fair, and
no spot is in her, not because there are none, but, because all are covered,
and none are reckoned and imputed unto her: yea, let us remember that the pure
and holy Spirit of God is contented, notwithstanding much blackness, to take up
his lodging in those hearts where he finds reigning sin dispossessed. Now
how far are they from the mind and judgment of this blessed Father, Son, and
Spirit, who have nimble eyes to spy out every infirmity of Gods Children to
blaze them; nay, rather than they will not accuse and slander them, can of
themselves coin, raise up, and impute unto them that, whereof they are most
innocent? Assuredly these are of near kindred to the Devil, who is the accuser
of the brethren.

The glory of God in his children turned into shame.
And surely were Christ on earth again, even this most innocent Lamb of God
should not want accusers, wherein are so many of Cains constitution, who hate
their brethren, because their works are good; and so many Sons of men, who seek
to turn the glory of God in his Children into shame. Alas, religion is at a low
ebb already, and not so reckoned of as it should be by the forwardest, and
yet so malicious is the Devil in his instruments, as unless this smoking flax
also be quenched, we can see nor hear of any hope or treaty of peace: the
beauty of Gods people goes disgraced under titles of niceness, preciseness,
purity, holy brotherhood, and the like. To go ordinarily to Sermons, is to be
a Sermon-munger: not to swear, is the next way for a man not to be trusted:
and except a man be as black and deformed as either the Devil is, or can make
him, by Drinking, Swearing, Gaming, Sabbath-breaking, and casting off all care
of Civil Honesty, as well as godliness, he may sit alone well enough, he has
a great many Neighbors that care but a little for his company. What can make
it more evidently appear, that numbers there are in this age who never knew,
and without Gods infinite mercy in their timely conversion, are never like to
know what the blessedness of remission of sin means, neither in others, nor
yet in themselves?

Use 2. Let no man be discouraged in the pure ways of God, but walk on
without weariness or faintness: A strong motive to hold on in well-doing.
seeing that (whatsoever the blind world may deem to the contrary) thou, who
art a believer in the name of Christ, have blessedness between thy hands, for
thy sins are remitted, thou must go in peace. And this happiness by the grace
wherein thou stand, is surer than that of nature which Adam had in his
innocence: that was lost because it was in his own keeping, this is seated in
the unchangeable favor of God, by whose mighty power thou shall be preserved
to the full fruition of it. Get faith in thy heart, and thou shall dea^ly
behold thy happiness, if all the World should set it self to make thee
miserable. Get faith into thy soul, and thou shall think him only happy whom
God so esteems, although it be the misery of the world to place happiness
only in misery. Get assurance of faith, to clasp the sure promise and word of
God, and thou shall possess in misery felicity, in sorrow joy, in trouble
peace, in nothing all things, and in death it self, life eternal.

An Alphabetical Table, to lead the Reader more easily unto the things
contained in this Exposition.
A.
A Basement of Christ is the Christians advancement. 335 A bundle of Popish
blasphemies. 405 Account must be given to God of all things done by us, and
received of us. 381 Administration of Judgment laid upon the Son for sundry
reasons. 375 Afflictions though lingering, no sign of Gods hatred. 356 Agreement
of the life of the Saints upon earth, with the life of the Saints in Heaven.
350 All diligence must be given to make our pardon of sin sure unto our selves.
414 Anointing of three sorts of persons, what it signified. 308 Antiquity of
the Gospel, and of our religion. 298 Apostles peculiar witnesses of Christ, and
why. 362 A proof by induction that all the Prophets bear witness unto Christ.
388 Attendants and companions of faith, four. 396 A strong motive to hold on in
well-doing. 417
B
Baptism often put for doctrine. 303 Believers are fellow servants under one
Lord. 302 Believers may know they have faith by four marks. 395 Believers may
and must know the pardon of their own sins. 409 Benefits flowing from remission
of sin, four. 407 Better to go to Heaven alone, than to Hell with company. 411
C.
CAre of Christians must be to suffer as Christians. 331 Care must be had of
our receipts and expenses, because we must be countable for them. 383 Chief
duty of every Christian whilst he is in this world. 406 Children of God
delayed often, but not denied in their suits. 355 Christ acknowledged our Lord
by four practices. 301 Christ already come, proved. 307 Christ his life not
monastical. 315 Christ preached to the Israelites two ways. 297 Christ first
preached to the children of Israel for three reasons. ibid. Christ Lord of all,
two ways. 299 Christ both a Lord and a Servant, how. 300 Christ is not a Jesus
but to whom he is a Lord. ibid. Christ no sooner received gifts and calling,
but did good with them for our example. 311 Christ seasonably preached after
John's Baptism, that is, John's doctrine of repentance. 305 Christ proved the
only Messiah, because he was Jesus of Nazareth. 306 Christ his Deity proved by
his glorious resurrection. 339 Christ by dying offers, and by rising applies
his one only sacrifice. 341 Christ went about doing good two way 311 Christ
sent of his Father, and came (...) before he was sent. 3^7 Christ his
righteousness notably witnessed. 328 Christ his two natures lively set out.
ibid. Christ reputed an arch-traytor in his life and death. 332 Christ
submitted to the l^west estate of death, reas. five. 337 Christ the Lamb slain
from the beginning, how. 341 Christ has powerfully trodden Satan under his
feet, and under our feet, how. 323 Christ rose early in the morning, and what
we learn thence. 354 Christ in respect of himself needs not any witnesses,
and yet he uses them. 362 Christ must be the matter of all our preaching.
373 Christians must partake of Christ's anointing. 309 Christians must become
Kings, Priests, and Prophets. 310 Christians must imitate Christ in doing good.
316 Chosen witnesses of Christ, who. 361 Comfort of the godly, who meet with
strange entertainment in the world, where they are strangers. 293 Comfort that
Christ is stronger than all. 327 Common Protestant believes not the Article of
free remission of sins. 414 Communication in sin sundry ways, but all to be
avoided. 330 Companions of remission of sins. 412 Consent of the Church to any
Doctrine to be required and received with five several cautions. 389 Conditions
of reconciliation two. 347 Consideration of the last Judgment, a ground of the
godlies patience. 379 Consolations from Christ's Resurrection, 348 Consolation
of Gods children, that their Savior shall be their Judge. 376 Consolation
issuing from pardon of sin. 409 Cros^ of Christ an honorable chariot of our
triumph. 334 Crosses some more smart, and durable, why. 357
D
DAnger of sin. 406 David's sin and punishment both forgiven though the child
must dye. 404 Death of Christ after a special manner infamous. 332 Death of
Christ has more power in it than all the lives of Men and Angels. 334 Death of
Christ a destroyer of death and all destroyers. 342 Death, though it remain
after sin is pardoned, both the fault and punishment (...) notwithstanding
removed. 333 Degrees of blessedness. 415 Devil not cast out but by Christ's
power. 324 Differences between Christian and worldly peace. 265 Differences
between Christ's anointing and all other. 308 Differences between Christ's
miracles, and miracles of the Prophets and Apostles. 313 Difference between the
miracles of the Prophets and Apostles, and those wonders wrought by Satan, in
three things. 314 Difference between the life of the natural and regenerate man
in matters both civil and religious. 349 Difference between Civil and
Ecclesiastical power. 363 Difference between the kingdom of Christ and
Antichrist. 364 Divinity of Scripture proved. 298
E
ENemies even spiritual, not only foiled by Christ, but made after a sort
friendly. 345 Essential properties of Faith, three. 395 Evangelists all large
in the Article of Christ his resurrection, Why. 339 Every thing must be
esteemed in the measure and degree of the goodness of it. 410 Examination of
heavenly life. 352
F
FAith what it is, 391 Faith is not of all, reas. 391 Faith never lost, reas.
four. 392 Faith commends every thing. 394 Faith of most not rightly
qualified. 399 Faith seateth it self in an humbled soul. 395 Faith in the
resurrection an hard point. 366 Faithful are seasonably remembered of God, at
least on the third day. 357 Fame of Christ begun in Galilee, why. 303 And why
after John's preaching. 305 Fear of God what, and wherein it consists. 288
Fearers of God must be accepted of us. 293 Few men see the necessity of
preaching, why. 372 Five deadly enemies foiled by Christ: 1 Sin. 2 Death. 3
Hell. 4 The Devil. 5 The World. 344 Five excellent fruits of saving faith. 393
Five sorts of men all boast of faith, and yet all of them want it. 399 Freedom
by Christ. 302 Fruits of faith, four. 397 Fruits of Christ's death reduced to
two heads. 335 Force of consent in doctrine, wherein it stands. 390
G.
GAlilee of the Gentiles, why so called. 304 Glory of the last Judgment
described, 378 Glory of God in his children turned into shame. 416 God no
accepter of persons, why. 284 Gods providence over-ruleth every special event
with the special circumstances. 306 God was with Christ how, and how with his
servants. 322 Gods wisdom and power most seen in choosing the most weak things.
364 God only properly forgiveth sins, why. 402 God forgiveth sins not only
properly but perfectly: that is, both the guilt and punishment. 4^7 Godly must
enquire of the truth of Doctrine delivered by the Scriptures. 363 Godly enter
not into the judgment, how. 377 Godly must lift up their heads in expectation
of the day of their redemption. 383 Godly who have all hard sentences pass
against them, shall have justice at the last day. 379 Godly must address
themselves to the Judgment Day two ways. 384 Godly life must not be shunned
for the crosses that attend it. 411 Graces in the soul of Christ after his
resurrection were incomprehensible by all Creatures, but in respect of God
finite, as the soul it self is. 343 Guilt of sin is wholly abolished in
believers, although not the whole corruption of it. 344
H.
Happiness how it stands in remission of sins, 415 Hearers how to know they
have heard aright. 374 Heavenly life discerned by the notes of it. 349 Helps to
attain the grace of remission of sins. 411 Hope is Faiths hand-ma^d. 396 How
the Lord of life could be subdued of death. 328 How God can be just in
punishing Christ an innocent, and letting the guilty go free. ibid. ^ow an
infinite Justice could be satisfied by so short a death. ibid. How the jews
are said to put Christ to death, seeing they had no power to do it. 329 How
Christ's crucifying crucifieth the lusts of Christians. 335 How Christ can be
said to rise ag^^n, seeing neither his Deity, nor the soul of his Humanity did.
337 How Christ is said to rise, seeing God the Father, and the Holy Ghost are
said also to raise him. 339 How Christ has slain our sin, which yet is so
stirring in the best. 344 How believers may know they are risen with Christ.
349 How the Apostles were furnished to their witness. 361 How Christ could eat
and drink after he rose again, seeing he rose not to natural life. 365 How
preaching could be Christ's ordinance, being so long before his incarnation.
367 How Christ is ordained Judge, seeing the Father, and the Holy Ghost judge
as well as he. 375 How Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father. 375
Humiliation of Christ must humble Christians, and h^w. 334
I
Jesus of Nazaret, why so called. 306 In Gods udgement we must stand naked.
288 In all spiritual captivity hasten to Christ. 324 In cases of sor^ery what
to do. ibid. In all divine things we must lean on a sure ground. 302 In
reading the Prophets, we must still be led to Christ. 390 Ingratitude of the
Jews most extreme 330 Joshua in many things a singular type of Christ. 333
Judging of our selves stands in four things. 385
L
LAw of perfect righteousness is the charter of heaven. 351 Life of Faith,
wherein. 393 Lets which hinder men from seeking the remission of their sins.
409 Love of God expressed in three things. 397 Love of men wherein chiefly
descerned. ibid Love and thankfulness to God attends the remission of sins.
413 Lowest degrees of murder condemned as murder. 329
M
MAgistrates must not accept of persons. 286 Malice of the wicked against the
godly never wants matter to w^rk upon. 331 Many men bodily possessed by the
Devil in Christ's time, above all other times, before or since, why. 308 Manner
of Christ's resurrection in three things. 34^ Map of humane frai ty in Peter.
283 Means by which quick and dead shall be presented before the last
judgment. 377 Means to increase the stock of Faith, 398 Men endure not their
lusts to be pricked in the ministry, and much less crucified. 336 Minister
must be careful to remove what may hinder his Doctrine. 284 Ministers must
expect Gods calling as Christ did. 307 Ministers must urge themselves to
diligent preaching, why. 371 Miracles of Christ had a threefold use. 313 Motion
of sin in the regenerate is in letting the life of it go. 344 Motives to the
practice of Righteousness 292.
N
NEcessity of preaching evinced by sundry reasons. 369 Necessity of remission
of sins in three points. ibid. Neither the person, nor any of the offices of
Christ, could suffer him long to abide under the power of death. 340 New
miracles not needful to confirm old doctrine. 316 No less in to sin by others as
by our selves 329. No need of a dumb or blind ministry 371 No man can avoid
the last judgment, unless his power be above Christ's. 377 No man can be too
precise, seeing the judgment shall be so precise and strict. 383 None capable
of Christ's office, because none is so anointed as he. 309 No peace by Moses.
295
O
OBjections against preaching answered. 374 Objections against special faith
answered. 409 One way only to salvation. 299 Opening the mouth what it means.
282 Open the eyes to see the happiness of the Saints. 416 Offenses are of
sundry sorts. 402 Ordina^y Ministers must be believed as Apostles, while they
teach things heard and seen by the Apostles. 363 Ordinary Pastors now called by
Christ, though he be now in heaven. 368 Outward things cannot bring into Gods
acceptance. 287
P
PAttern of special grace in Peter. 284 Peace, wha by it usually meant. 294
Peace by Christ with God, man, creatures, how. ibid. Peace wanting, how to
obtain it. 296 Peace of conscience flows from remission of sin. 407 Person,
what it means. 284 Phrase of quick and dead what is means. 377 Plain
preaching of Christ wherein it stands. 373 Popery a novelty. 298 Popery
turns the doctrine of Christ crucified into crucifixes. 336 Popish doctrine
tea^heth not true faith to this day. 392 Popish doctrine assenteth not to the
article of free remission of sins. 413 Preaching the ordinance of Christ, 367
Preaching of Christ, wherein it stands. 373 Privilege of a Godly man, what
it is. 292 Promises of God all accomplished in due season. 355 Prophetical
office of Christ. 312 Public persons must give accounts for themselves and
others in the judgment day. 381
Q
QUalities of ^hrists raised body are not divine properties, they beautify but
not deify it. 343
R
REasons against seeking to witches. 325 Reasons why it was necessary Christ
should rise again. 340 Reasons why God delayeth to answer his children. 356
Reasons why Christ must so manifest his resurrection. 358 Reasons why the
Apostles were specially commanded to teach the doctrine of the last judgment.
374 Reasons to grow up in the strength of faith 401 Religion what, and wherein
it stands. 288 Remembrance of judgment to come a notable means to further
godliness. 374 Remission of sins, what. 402 Remission of sins how received. 413
Resurrection of Christ not only removes evils, but procures all our good, as
in five instances. 346 Right and pos^ession of eternal life issues from
remission of sins. 407 Righteousness of the Judge, and last judgment
described. 379
S
SAlvation assured believers from Christ's resurrection. 347 Saints in Heaven
wholly called from three things, and the Saints in earth in part from the same.
350 Saints in heaven, enjoy five things, which the Saints in earth do also in
part. 351 Satan's tyranny over the souls of men more fearful than that he
exercises over their bodies. 319 Scriptures ascribe that often to the
instruments, which belongs to God the principal efficient, why. 400 Sermons
which plainest teach Christ are the best. 373 Sin set out in the most ugly
visage of it. 333 Sins carries never so secretly shall come into a clear light.
38^ Sins compared to debts. 403 Sor^ery of sundry kinds condemned. 324
Spiritual possession very common, proved at large by sundry instances. 321
Strictness of the last judgment laid open. 380 Sure grounds that God loves a
man. 411
T
TEmptations of sundry sorts foiled by holding the Article of remission of
sins. 408 Tender affection to forgive our brethren, a good sign that God has
forgiven us. 413 The tyranny of Satan over those whom he bodily possesses,
discovered five ways. 318 The touchstone of trial of our words and deeds is
the word of God. 380 Three actions of faith helping forward the free confession
of it. 398 Thoughts must be judged of as well as our works. 382 To believe in
the name of Christ, what. 406 Two things especially hinder the care of the la t
judgment. 384 Truth of faith as much to be labored for as salvation it self.
400
V.
Virtue of Christ's death applied two ways. 334 Unbeleevers damned already how,
and why. 400 Unregenerate men have all the mad properties of mad or possessed
persons, proved. 320 Use of Christ's crucifying at large. 333
W
WHy God suffers the devil to possess the bodies of men in all ages, four
reas. 317 Why God suffers the Devil so to tyrannize, abuse, and torture them
whom he possesses, reas. four. 319 Why God permits a power of curing to
them of whom we may not seek cure. 326 Why the wicked prevail against Christ,
who had prevailed against the Devils themselves. 328 Why Christ was rather to
be hanged on a tree, than to dye by any other kind of death, reas. four. 331
Why Christ must dye in Jerusalem the theater of the world. 332 Why Christ would
still vail his glory after his resurrection. 343 Why Christ rose no sooner, nor
would defer his ri^ing again no longer than the third day. 353 Why Christ would
not show himself to all the people after that he rose aga^n 362 Why Christ
chose such mean men for his witnesses. 363 Why the Apostle, infers so many
testimonies together concerning Christ. 387 Whosoever would have his works and
words abide the trial of the last day, must try them before hand. 380 Wicked
men shall be judged by him, against whom all their villainies have been
committed. 376 Wicked men already judged five ways. 377 Wisdom of God in
every thing to be subscribed unto. 360 Witches, and all seekers to them
condemned. 325 Witnesses of Christ's resurrection of sundry sorts. 360 Witness
of the Apostles to be believed as infallible. 359 Word preached, what use it
has both to the unconverted, and converted. 369 Word preached opposed by the
Devil and all wicked ones, and therefore is from God. 370 Working
righteousness, what, and wherein. 190 The manner of it in four things. 191
CIRCUMSPECT VVALKING.

DESCRIBING Several Rules, As so many STEPS in the way of WISDOM.

BY Thomas Tailor, D. D. Preacher of Gods Word at Aldermanbury, London.

GALAT. 6 16. As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace shall be upon them,
and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

LONDON, Printed for A. K. and R. I. and are to be sold by Elisha Wallis at the
Golden Horse-shooe in the Old-Bayley. 1659.

TO THE Right Honorable and Learned Knight Sir ROBERT NANTON One of the
Principal Secretaries unto His Excellent Majesty, and of his Majesty's
Honorable Privy Counsel, All the Blessings of this Life, and a better.
SIR,
THat which Solomon teaches in that one Aphorism often repeated, wanted not
apparent weight and moments of Reason: saying, Prove. 11.10. and 29.2.
that In the prosperity of the Righteous, the City rejoices: For God being in
Covenant with them, for their sakes does good to such as are joined in the same
Society with them: for one Joseph all P^tiphars house was blessed; and for one
Paul, all that were in the ship with him are saved: yea, good and virtuous men
by their presence, as Lot in Sodom; by their Prayers, as Moses in the breach;
and by their prudent Counsel, as that poor wise man, Eccl. 9.15
withstand the judgments of God, and save the City: for had there been found
one good man, all Jerusalem had been spared for his sake. Again, virtuous men
advanced, will confer all their honor and grace to the public good: they live
not to themselves and theirs, but take in the Church and Commonwealth, as
fellow-Commoners of all their goodness Mordecaies authority wrought public
deliverance to the whole Church; (...).
and Joseph's advancement sustained the whole Land, by opening the Garners in
time of Famine. The honor of one good man shall be the grace of all good men;
his power the strength of many; his greatness the raising of many: as when one
Mordecai is raised, light, and joy, Ester 8.16.
and gladness, and Honor, came to all the Jews. Further, good men honored by
God, will honor God again, and withstand his dishonor: they will (to their
power) provide that Gods worship be erected, that his Sabbaths be sanctified,
that true religion be maintained, that falsehood and errors be suppressed,
that publ^ke p^ace be not disturbed, that common justice be not perverted,
est Gods favor be discontinued, Sine pli^ cen^uplex murus rebus servandis
parum est.
and his judgments let in. Whence they are to be esteemed the strongest
Towers, the thickest Walls, the most impregnable Forts, the surest Muniments,
and the stoutest Horsemen and Chariots of their Country: yea, the Wise man in
one word says much more, Prove. 10.25 Justu^ fundamentum mundi.
that the Righteous is a sure foundation, upholding the whole World.

But why write I this, or to your Honor? surely as one who ever reverenced
your worthy parts. I could not but crave l^ave to express my self one of the
City, rejoicing, and praising God in your honors prosperity, and advancement:
and the rather, because my self was an eyewitness how God led you through
some of your younger years; which were so studiously and commendably passed, as
this your later time fitly answers that expectation which was then conceived
of you.

You were then dear to our common Mother, that famous University of Cambridge,
which for your Eloquence and grace of speech and persuasion, appointed you her
Orator: for your wisdom and gravity in government, chose you her Proctor: for
your soundness in all kind of fruitful and commendable literature, tendered
you all her honors and degrees: and for your sober, studious, and virtuous
conversation, worth ly held now her great Ornament. And now, as riper for
greater employments, the same God (whose privilege it is to dispense
promotions, for be pulls down one, and sets up another) has moved his
Majesty, not only to set your seat among the honorable, but to admit you (as
it were) into his breast, and betrust you with the secrets of this great state
and Kingdom: an Office not more Ancient than Honorable, befitting only men of
rarest wisdom, fidelity, and fitness to stand before so great, so wise a
King. This was a most honorable Office among the most ancient Kings of Israel:
for King David had his two Principal Secretaries, Serajah, and Jonathan, whom
the Text commends for a man of Counsel and understanding: 2 Samuel 8.17 1 Chro.
27.32
and King Solomon his Son had two other, Elihoreph and Ahiah, who were in chief
place near the King. 1 King 4.3
We read also of Shebna, principal Secretary to King Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.18
of whom Junius says, he was secundus a rege. Now your place being a service
of such Honor under his Majesty, cannot be without an answerable weight and
charge. Your Honor easily conceives, that the Lord charge you with a chief
care of honoring him, who has honored you: that you stand charged to his
Majesty with great trust and fidelity: that the Church expects, that by your
authority, you should promote her causes, and stand in the maintenance of pure
Religion: that the Commonwealth claims her part in you, for the preservation
of peace within her walls, and prosperity within her Palaces: that the
University looks you should advance her just causes, promote Learning, and
encourage her Students, by helping them into the rooms of the ignorant and
unlearned Ministers: in a word, Prove. 11.11.
that the whole City hops to be exalted by the prosperity of the righteous.

And now if your Honors thankful heart shall call upon you, and say, Quid
retribuam Domino? Tota vita Christiani sanctum desiderium est. Aug. in Joh.
tract. 4.
you will easily fall into frequent thoughts and desires, of discharging all
this expectation. This shall be happily done, if you shall choose about you the
wisest Counselors, for the happy and prudent carriage of your great affairs,
imitating herein that peerless pattern of wisdom, Solomon himself; who
notwithstanding his extraordinary measure of wisdom, chose unto himself,
selectissimum senatum, a bench of most wise and grave Counselors, whose
Counsel Rhehoboam after despis^d. The best Counselor is that great Counselor,
who is daily to be consulted by fervent prayer. The next is the word of God,
Isa. 9
which as it gives no less certain direction in difficult cases, than the
Oracle did unto Israel, or than did the pillar of the cloud and of fire, by day
and night for their motion or station, while they passed through the
wilderness: so the daily consulting with Gods statutes, by reading and
meditation (as with so many learned Counselors) made holy David wiser than the
Aged, than the Learned, than the Princes, than his Adversaries, Psa. 119 98,
99, 100. Josh 1.^
And if Joshuah would prosper and have good success in his high enterprises,
he must keep him to the book of the Law, and not depart from it.

(...). Prove. 10.32
The fear of God is wisdom, and the next wisdom to that, is to converse and
consult with such as do fear God, whose lips speak just and good things:
whereby a man shall become both wiser and better. This is the high way to
attain and retain grace and reputation with God and good men; for this is an
inheritance not gotten with greatness, but with goodness: the former cannot
force or compel affections, the latter sweetly draws and allures them; the
former may procure flattery and applause, the latter only yields true honor
and sound comfort.

Might I add but one grain to your godly care, by this little direction, with
which I offer my most inward affections, I have my expectation. I know well
your Honors sufficiency, even in this kind, above many of my profession, to
furnish your self with Divine directions, if your leisure or weighty affairs
would permit you to set them down: yet I assure my self, your Honor will not
refuse the help of such, as are at more leisure to gather them, and humbly
offer them unto your hand. I was also more presumptuous to offer these lines
unto your view, because I conceived that the rules of Christian prudence and
circumspection, could not be more fitly directed, nor be better welcome, than
to so prudent and circumspect a personage. In which assurance I rest,
commending your Honors further happiness and prosperity to him, who is an
exceeding great reward, abundantly able to fill your heart with grace, to crown
your days with blessing, and finish them with comfort, life and immortality.
(...).

Your Honors, to be commanded, THO. TAILOR.

Circumspect Walking.
EPHESIANS. 5.15. Take heed therefore that ye walk Circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise.


CHAP. I. The ground of the ensuing Treatise.
THe Apostle in the former words, had under a comparison of Light and Darkness,
excited the Ephesians to holy conversation, and to hate such obscene and filthy
courses, as were found with the Workers of darkness. Now he speaks in plain
terms that which before be infolded in comparisons: Seeing ye are light, and in
the light, wherein all things are manifest, see ye walk circumspectly, etc. In
which words are.

First, A duty propounded, Circumspect walking, which in the first word (...),
is straightly charged upon every Christian.

Secondly, The expounding of that duty, not as fools, but as wise.

And the words run, as if the holy Apostle had in other terms said thus; You
that are believers, sons of the light, ought, as by your light, to check and
control, yea and discover other men's sins and corruptions; so also to be as
unblameable, yea, and lightsome in your selves, as possibly may be, and
therefore take heed of your own walking, and see it be circumspect. Briefly
thus.

Every Christian man must walk warily and circumspectly, or, Strict and
accurate walking, not warranted only, but necessarily enforced in the
scriptures.
the course of Christianity must be a circumspect walking. For so the word
(...) signifies, an accurate, and a strickt walking, or an exquisite course. So
it is used, Luke 1.3. It seemed good to me, when I had accurately searched all
things: And Mat. 2.8. Herod charged the wise men thus, (...), search
exquisitively and most diligently for the Babe: And Act. 22. v. 3. Paul
professes he was brought up, (...), according to the exact manner of the Law.

CHAP. II. What Circumspect Walking is, and wherein it consists.
OUt of which so substantial a ground, it shall be worth our labor to inquire
what this Circumspect Walking is; for we may not conceive it as any carnal
craft and policy by which a man is wary to save his goods and outward estate,
as many crafty heads and worldlings cast about, and continually contrive with
all wariness to save themselves and their profits, and he must rise early that
can get the better of them in any bargain. Neither is this Circumspection any
such policy and wariness in matters of Religion, as relinguisheth any good duty
to which it has calling, or any practice of holiness, for outward profits and
commodity, or to preserve outward peace and pleasures, as many crafty and
deceitful Protestants, that are so circumspect, as they will profess a Religion
which shall cost them nothing. Neither is this Circumspection in any thing
contrary, or cross to that dove-like simplicity and Christian innocence, What
it is
which is the ornament of holy profession. But is a careful and exact
proceeding in the ways of God, according to the rules of God: even as a
workman most exactly fitteth his work by the level and rule, and departs not
from it.

And in what.
Now to this Circumspection are four things required:

To circumspect walking four things required.
1. A knowledge of the right way, which is as the light, guiding him to set
every foot safely. For let a man be never so circumspect and wary, if he be in
the night without a light, and without a guide, he can never walk securely and
safe. The Word is the Lanthorn, and the Commandment is the light. And when
wisdom enters into the heart, and knowledge delights the soul, then shall
counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, and deliver thee from
the evil way, Prove. 2.11, 12.

2. A diligent watch and care to keep from all extremities, to turn neither to
the right hand, nor to the left. For it is hard to keep a mean, we being very
propense to extremes. Satan cares not so he can conquer us, whether it be by
curiosity or by carelessness; whether he can keep us out of the Church, or cast
us out by our own conceits; whether he can keep us so cold, as no good thing
greatly affects us, or whether he can make us boil over with unbridled zeal,
that because we cannot have all the good we would, we will refuse a great deal
of good we might have. A Circumspect Christian will distinguish good from evil,
and not refuse good for evil, for that is an extremity.

3 An holy jealousy and suspicion, lest the heart be deceived through the
deceitfulness of sin. The most simple-hearted Christian is a most wary man,
that is, of his own hearts slipperiness, suspecting himself in all things,
fearing in all things lest he should offend God. He knows sin lies in
ambush, and suspects the insinuations of it. As he that is very circumspect for
the World, is most suspicious of others, lest they overreach and beguile him:
So one that is most circumspect for heaven, does more suspect himself than any
other.

4 A Provident Walking, by which a man is able to foresee future danger and
evils to prevent them, and provide for such things as may best bestead him in
the way. Thus Solomon speaks of the circumspect and prudent Christian, that he
forsees the Plague, and hides himself; and learns of the Emmet to provide in
Summer for Winter. This property of Circumspection we see in the wise Virgins,
that prepared Oil in time. All these are inseparable properties of a provident
and circumspect walking.

Which is enjoined us in sundry other places of scripture, as Prove. 4.26.
Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be ordered aright. Matthew.
10.16. Be wise as Serpents: This Serpentine wisdom is nothing else but
Christian Circumspection. Heb. 12.13. Make right steps unto your feet* as good
runners, who not only speed themselves in the way, but are wary to keep the
right way, which they know is the shortest, and so carefully observe every step
and every advantage.

CHAP. III. Of the next Words of the Apostle, further explaining Circumspect
Walking. Not as unwise, but as wise.
THe Apostle here expounds what he means by circumspect walking, namely, a
wise ordering of a man's self according to the rules of Christian Prudence. For
wisdom is twofold, either Worldly and Carnal, or else Heavenly and Spiritual.

This distinction is the Holy Ghosts own, in Jam. 3.15, 17. where both of them
are at large described. True wisdom, what it is.
Our Text speaks of spiritual and heavenly wisdom, which is such a gift of
God, as both directs and effects, or causes a man to do that which is
acceptable and pleasing unto God. Wherein it is much distinguished from humane
wisdom, which is merely contemplative knowledge; but this is an active
knowledge, giving rules and guidance in practice and action, Eccles. 10.10. The
excellency to direct a thing is wisdom. As a Coachman in a Coach, so spiritual
wisdom in the heart, orders the whole motion of a Christian in all his ways.
They are wisest men that walk most strictly.


The connection implies, that those be the wisest men that walk most exactly,
Prove. 14.8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way, Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep
them, and do them, for this is your wisdom, and your understanding in the sight
of the people: -- Only this is a wise people and understanding, Prove. 23.19. O
thou my Son, hear, and be wise, and guide thy heart in the way.

CHAP. IV. Proving strict walking to be the wisest walking.
1. HE that is but a little acquainted with the Scriptures, shall easily
observe, that he who walks most strictly according to Gods word, is led by Gods
wisdom, which makes him discern between good and evil, (...) Arist.
and so walks at a certain, by a most right and constant rule and direction;
so as you shall find him square and stable, of good judgment and sound
resolution in the things he is about. He is the wisest man that follows the
wisest guide. But what man is he that fears the Lord? that is, walks
exactly: Him will the Lord teach the way that he shall choose, Psalm. 25.12.
Whereas it is a just punishment of carelessness, to wander as vagrants and
unsettled persons in the way of Religion, and grounds of Christianity, and to be
tossed and tumbled every way with the waves of inconstancy, and doubtfulness in
every thing, for want of sound information and judgment in the ways of God;
and needs must such be as wavering in their practice, as in their judgment.

2. He is the wisest man, that being to journey, takes the safest, shortest,
cleannest, and most lightsome way; But so does he that walks more strictly and
circumspe^^ly; he only walks safely, because he walks sincerely; whereas in
declining Gods ways but a little, there can be nothing but fears without, and
terrors within, and danger on every side, which nothing but uprightness can
fence out. So who can deny but God himself has described the rightest, and so
the shortest way to heaven, which is the way over which he holds his own light?
And howsoever many aspersions and foul things be cast upon it, yet this is the
only clean way of holiness and innocence that leads to the Holy of Holies,
into which no unclean persn or thing can enter.

3. He is the wisest man whose words and actions, being scanned most narrowly,
will abide the trial: But thus must needs his words and actions be found, that
is most exact and stands most strictly to the word. So David says, Then shall
I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.6.
and Job 31.35. The Almighty will witness for me, though mine enemies write a
Book against me. Let the enemies of Grace, slander, reproach, and traduce for a
time the ways of Gods righteous servants, He will make their righteousness
break out as the light, Psalm 37.5.
and time shall show they were not so overshot as the world deemed. For,
standing straightly to the word, they may truly say with Jeremy, Lord, If I be
deceived, thou and thy word has deceived me.

4. He is the wisest man that best acquits himself in all estates: but he that
walks precisely according to the directions of the word, shall most handsomely
demean himself in all estates. If God give prosperity to a wicked man, it
drowns him; Prove. 1.32.
Ease slays the foolish; but this man uses it warily, without pride or
insolency; 1 Cor. 7.31.
he is taught to use the world weanedly, as not using it. If he be in
adversity, which sinks the sinner, this man bears it without impatience or
murmuring; Phil. 4.12.
yea, he makes himself a great gainer by it. Gods word fits him for every
estate; he can want, and abound; he is for peace or war, for sickness or
health, for life or death, no evil tidings can make him afraid. As a wise man
lace has rule and power over his affections, and is free from unruly passions.

5. He is the wisest man that takes the best course for his own preferment:
But so does he that walks most exactly, 1 Timothy 6.6.
Godliness is the greatest gain. This man is ever in the way of preferment, he
stands still in the presence of God, lives continually in his eye, by constant
honoring of him, he is coming into place of great honor, and great honor is
coming upon him. He has wealth and riches, and is still storing up as one
covetous for heaven, is ever increasing in grace and glory.

6. He is the wisest man that can give others the best and wisest counsel: But
who is so well able to give advise, as he that is best acquainted with the ways
of God? If experienced counsel be the best, who so fit as he, Who has tasted
how good God is? who so able as he whom God has stored with wisdom, 1 Pet. 2.3.
such as has winded him out of many troubles, such as brought into his hands
so rich a stock and revenue of grace, and made him a pattern and example of
piety and virtue to many others?

Such as charge strict walking of silliness and folly, do it with greater folly.
Which if it be so, then we might take occasion to reprove such as charge Gods
people with simplicity and foolishness, and condemn them of much madness, in
that they go in a way unknown, uncouth, and contrary to the world. They cannot
walk in the dirty path of sinful pleasures, nor by the crooked rule of carnal
policy, nor make the fashion of the world the measure of their conformity,
Luke 13.34.
but are content to walk in the straight way unto eternal life, which the
foolish world counts foolishness, and a simple silliness, but with greater
folly; for God and his word approve them as the wisest men in the world, and so
denominateth them Wise Virgins, Wise Servants, Wise Merchants, etc. And our
Text calls them Fools that walk not Circumspectly.

CHAP. V. Describing some means to attain this Wisdom.
Means of spiritual Wisdom. 1 Acquaintance with the Scriptures.
NOw before we pass this point, it shall not be amiss to direct the Reader by
the way to some means to attain this wisdom, to walk exactly; as, 1. A
diligent and frequent use and acquaintance in the word of God, as men become
wise Politicians by often using the book of S^atutes. This Law of God, has
Gods wisdom contained in it, and makes us truly wise for the matter and
measure, as God would have us. Hence the holy Ghost every where calls foolish
men to give ear to understanding, and to hear the words of Wisdom, Prove. 8.5,
6. and verse 33. Hear instruction, and be wise. Neither must we hear till we
get a smattering knowledge of some general grounds of Religion, in which most
rest themselves; but to understand the whole will of God, which is our rule;
and not only to understand it, Psalm. 119.115.
but to apply it to our several occasions, that it may not only be light in it
self, but a Lanthorn to our feet, and that in all our steps. This is the high
privilege of the Scripture above all writings, that these alone are able to
make men wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Most men read humane Histories, men's
sayings, and writings, politic Essaies and observations of prudent men; and
this furnishes them with some model of humane and earthly wisdom; but only
the wisdom of Gods word, can make us truly wise to salvation, without which
all the wisest Gentiles, professing wisdom, (...)
and abounding in moralities, proved stark fools, Romans 1.22. Cast Gods book of
wisdom aside, thou shall prove a fool in the end.

2. Meditation of that a man hears and reads; for to be wise, 2 Meditation.
we must not only receive the ingrafted word, Jam. 1.^1. but keep it, Luke
12.28. Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. Now an especial
way to keep the word, is meditation, which digests it into the several parts.
Mary heard the sayings of Christ, and pondered them in her heart. And David
used this means to become wise; yea, by constant meditation in the Testimonies
of God, he professes how he became wiser than the prudent, than his teachers,
than his ancients, than his enemies, Psalm. 119.97, 98, 99, 100. And the reason
why many hear a long time, and are never the wiser, is, because they never care
to fasten it by meditation, and make it their own; but wise men will lay up
knowledge, Prove. 10.14.

3. A loving and thankful embracing of admonition and rebuke, 3. Embracing of
admonition.
Prove. 9.8, 9. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee; give admonition to the
wise, and he will be the wiser; teach a righteous man, and he will increase in
learning: But rebuke a Scorner, and he will hate thee, and fools scorn
admonition. And therefore we are commanded not to speak in the ears of a fool,
for he despises the wisdom of our words, Prove. 23.9. The way for a man to
grow wise, is, daily to discover his own folly, and make use of their words,
who would help him in this business. Thus David grew sensibly wiser by the
reproof of Nathan, when he made him confess he had done very foolishly. 2. Sam.
12.
This is Christian teachableness, when a man is apt to receive a reproof.

4. Frequent the company of godly and wise men; 4. Company of the wise. (...).
Theog.
for he that walks with the wise, shall be wise, Prove. 13.20. and 9.6. Forsake
the foolish, and walk in the way of wisdom. In the company of the wise a man
may be sure to do good, or take good; The lips of the righteous feed many; he
will speak out of a good storehouse: he will deal faithfully with his brother,
to help his soul out of sin, his name from infamy, his person from scandal.
Besides, he shall be resolved in doubts, encouraged in well-doing, and directed
by such both by good instruction and good example.

5. Be fervent in prayer; It is a spiritual wisdom, and a gift of the Spirit;
therefore if any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, Jam. 1.5. It is
wisdom from above, Jam. 3.17. This wisdom is not the birth and issue of great
wits, and quick conceits, but is seated in the heart that is humble, and in
sanctified souls, that are familiar with God, and frequent in prayer. For as
Moses when he was long in the Mount with God, his face shined when he came
down; So those that continue in the Mount of Divine Meditations, and petitions,
shall shine in wisdom and knowledge. How, or whence got Solomon all that
measure of Wisdom (in which he was an eminent Type of Jesus Christ, in whom
were hid treasures of Wisdom) but because he asked it of God as his chief
choice? And David in the 119. Psalm makes no end of begging wisdom,
understanding, good judgment from God; because he knew there was the Fountain.

These are the means that are set apart by God, for the attaining of Wisdom.
If we fail in them, let us blame ourselves, if folly eat us up.

CHAP. VI. Loading into the particular Rules of Christian Wisdom, with the
general distribution of them.
BEcause this Wisdom is not a contemplative, but an active knowledge, we must
acquaint our selves with the precepts of it, to guide us to this exact walking,
that the whole man may be led by the rules of Christian Prudence in all
things. ^his is that which the Apostle prays for the Colossians, Chap. 1.
verse 9. That they might be filled with the knowledge of his will, and all
wisdom in all things, to walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all
things. And because knowledge is of generals, and wisdom of particulars;
therefore for our better direction, let us here consider some particular rules
of Spiritual Wisdom grounded in Gods Word; which be must be careful of,
that would walk not as unwise, but as wise, according to this Apostolical
counsel.

Rules of Wisdom concern 1 God, and the things of God. 2 Man himself, in his
Inner man, 1 Mind. 2 Thoughts. 3, Will. 4 Conscience. 5 Affections.
Outward man in his 1 Calling. 2 Estate, of Prosperity. Adversity.
3 Speeches. 4 Actions in General, for Trial. Undertaking
Special, of 1 Mercy. Justice. Necessity.
2



Others in 1 General, toward all. ^ Indifferency in General. Special, for
Meats. Sports. Apparel.


2 Special, toward 1 Good men, 2 Evil men, in 1 General. 2 Special. 1
Scorners. 2 Haters of our selves.







CHAP. VII.
RUles of Wisdom concerning God, and the things of God, are four. Rules of
wisdom concerning things of God

1 Love God as the chiefest go^d.


1. That God is to be loved above all, and that for himself, being the chief
good. This is the scope of the whole first Table, the first and the great
Commandment, Mark 12.33. To love God with all the heart, all the
understanding, all the soul, and all the strength, is more than all burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as the Scribe conf^ssed; whereupon the Text infers
he answered ((...) cordate) discreetly, wisely, and that in Christ's Judgment.
This is wisdom, to give God the first place, first thoughts, first service,
chief praise and precedence; for, of him, and through him, Romans 11.36.
and from him are all things.

2 Another chief point of spiritual wisdom in the things of God, is, 2
Purchase Christ above all gain.
to purchase Christ and Remission of sins above all things in the World. The
sound Christian is that wise Merchant, that sells all to buy the Pearl, that
is, Christ and his Righteousness; that wise builder, that lays Christ a sure
foundation in his heart: He is of the number of those Wise Virgins, that will
be sure (what ever they lack) to furnish themselves of Oil in their Lamps to
meet their Bridegroom. Wisdom will procure the best commodities, and chief
gain, which is Christ both in life and death. Phil. 1.^1.
Paul was a wise Merchant, who esteemed all things as dross and dung in
comparison of Christ. So were the Disciples, saying, Master, we have left all
and followed thee. John 6.63.
So were the Martyrs, whom the world accounted simple fools, in following
Christ, with the loss of life and all. Happy is that soul, and filled with
sound and saving Wisdom, that comes to Christ with this resolution, Master,
thou have the words of eternal life, and whither shall I go?

3. Let us prefer in our election and choice, things of higher nature, 3 Choose
best things first.
before things of inferior; for wisdom keeps a method, by which it ever
subordinateth lower things to higher. This rule our Savior prescribes, Matthew.
6.33. First seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and then the
things of this life; First provide for heaven, and then for earth. By which
rule of wisdom, 1 All profits and pleasures must give place to piety; for all
is but pidling gain to godliness. 2 By this rule of wisdom, the special
calling and trade of life must give place to the general calling, which is the
trade of Christianity. 3 By this rule a Christian must choose to be rich in God
and good works, rather than in the world; which because the Rich man in the
Gospel neglected, he is called fool for his labor. Luke 12.10.
4 By this rule we must with David, Psalm 4.
more affect one glimpse of Gods favor and countenance, than all Corn, Wine,
and Oil, that is, the most necessary and delightful profits in the World. 5 By
this rule we must make more account of pardon of sins looked up in our
breasts, than of the whole treasury of a Kingdom in our chests. 6 By this rule
we must esteem a grain of grace above a million of gold. And 7 a poor godly
man, above a wicked Prince, Eccles. 4.13. Better is a wise Child, than an old
foolish King, which will not be admonished.

4 Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man, 4
Fear God and keep his Commandments
Eccles. 12.13. This is to apply our hearts to Wisdom; to set our hearts, to
keep Gods commandments, and do them. This is our Wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4.5. Who is a
wise man among you, endued with knowledge? Let him by good conversation show
his works in meekness of wisdom, Jam. 5.13. A Wise man will attend the mouth
of the King, and will fear the danger of the Law: So a wise Christian will walk
in the Law of the Lord, Psalm 119.1. and will be sure to keep him to this rule
and warrant contained in the word of God, Gal. 6.16. And as a Wise man is
careful to keep his Assurances and Evidences for the certainty of his Lands and
earthly Livelihoods, and is loath to forfeit any of them by failing in any of
the conditions: So it is the Wisdom of a godly man to keep the word safely in
his heart, which assures him of his estate in heaven, and which he is loath
to forfeit by failing in the conditions and clauses of it.

CHAP. VIII. Containing Rules of Wisdom concerning the Inner man; and first of
the Mind, Thoughts, and Will.
BEing to entreat of the Rules of Wisdom concerning man and the things of man,
good order requires that we b^gin with such as concern, first, Ones self; And
secondly, others. They which concern a man's self, respect either the inner man,
of the outward. The inner man in five particulars. 1 In his Mind. 2 Thoughts. 3
Will. 4 Conscience; And 5 Affections.

Rules for the Mind. 1 To inlighten it.
For the Mind, these rules of wisdom are necessary to be remembered.

1 To furnish it with necessary, profitable, and humble knowledge: The wise
man's eyes are in his head, Eccles. 2.14. This is a wisdom to sobriety, Romans
12.13. where also the Apostle condemns curiosity and conceitedness, which
wastes our time, and brings infinite idle questions, wherein men presume above
that which is meet. The Prophet David professed he meddled not with things too
high for him. Psalm 131.1. 1 Cor. 2.2.
And the Apostle Paul desired after his conversion, to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. As for humbleness in knowledge, Solomon says, The
way of a Fool is right in his own eyes, Prove. 1^.15. and, A wise man in his own
conceit is more hopeless than a Fool, Prove. 26.12, 16. Our rule therefore must
be to grow up in wisdom, and as we grow in knowledge, so to grow in
humility; for the more sound knowledge a man attains, the more shall he see in
himself to humble him.

2 To deck.
2 To deck and adorn the mind with humility, holiness, modesty, shamefastness,
etc. 1 Pet. 3.4, 5. and Col. 3.12. As the Elect of God, put o^ tender mercy,
kindness, humbleness, and meekness, but above all things put on love, verse 14.

Rules for the Thoughts.
The second sort of Rules concerns a man's Thoughts. The general is in Prove.
4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence; for it is slippery and deceitful, more
than necessary to watch and suspect it, and to set time apart to check and
reclaim it. But for the better keeping of thy thoughts in order, think on these
particulars: 1 Give God the first thoughts.
1 Give God thy first thoughts, that he may hold the chief part in thy heart,
and this will sweetly rell^sh the heart, and by estranging it from worldly
impediments, fit it, and keep it in preparedness for all good occasions, Psa.
108.1, 2, 3. David prepares his heart, and will awake early to praise the Lord:
The way to walk safely and comfortably all the day, is first to reform that
which is within.

2 Examine them whence they come, and whither they go.
2 Examine thy thoughts whence they come, and whither they go, and what they do
in thee: By which means thou shall banish a number of idle and wandering
thoughts, which like roaving vagrants, being worth nothing, come ^ver to steal
something, either time or grace, and so shall thou make and keep room for
better. And do this betime, because the first motions of sinful thoughts defile
a man; This rule is in 2 Cor. 10.5. to draw weapons against every strong
imagination, that is exalted against the knowledge of Christ.

3 If thy thoughts concern the world, pull them back, keep them from the world,
3 Pull them from the world.
save as much as needs must for the moderate maintaining of thy self and thine,
lest heavenly thoughts be drowned and hindered, 1 Timothy 6.9. The reason is,
because our hearts being earthly, do presently conceive a sweetness in earthly
things, and are presently distracted from the love of the Creator, to the love
of the creature. Now spiritual wisdom requires, that we diminish the love of
the creature, that we may increase our love of the Creator. But, if they will
run upon the world, then turn the course of them a little, to consider the
vanity and misery of this evil world; the painted vizor of the pleasures of it,
the uncertainty of life, the deceitfulness of riches, how they be not ours,
what evils and encumbrances we have received from the world, what fools they
have made us in treasuring on earth, whose home and expectation is in heaven.

4 If thy thoughts concern thy self, or others, thy brethren, If they concern
thy self or others, see they be humble.
labor to think better of others than thy self; for thou see no such thing
in them as in thy self, Phil. 2.3. Let every one esteem better of another than
of himself. Yea, the more thou seem to excel others in gifts, the more
humble labor to be. An hard rule and difficult to be practiced; and
therefore it is often commended to us, as Romans 12.16. Make your selves equal to
them of the lower sort, and elsewhere. For this purpose, conceive not only
what thou have received, but what thou want, and what good things thou art
without; and then with Paul, say, thou have not yet attained to perfection.
Phil. 3.12. 5 If they concern sin, be sure it be to have it.


5 If thy thoughts concern any sin, be sure it be to hate and renounce, to
bewail and mourn for it, in thy self, or others. For there is a sliness and
subtilty in sin, which while we think of, it easily gains some tickling and
consent, which at least hinders that thorow-hatred that we ought to maintain
against it.

The third rule for the inner man concerns the Will, namely, Rules for the
will.
that our care must be, there be but one will between God and us; for so has
the Lord taught us to pray, Thy Will be done. Concurrence of our will with Gods
will. 1 Revealing. 2 Determining. 3 Prescribing.
1 Wherein soever God has revealed his will to us, in that we must rest. 2
Whatsoever his will determines of us, that we must account holy and just,
whether with us, or against us. 3 Whatsoever his will prescribes to us,
whether obedience to the Law, or faith of the Gospel, we must hold our selves
fast bound in conscience unto it, let it seem never so cross to us, or contrary
to his Law, as Abraham ^^id in offering his son. 4 Whatsoever his will
disposes to us, 4 Disposing.
prosperity or adversity, sickness or health, life or death, or whatsoever
else; all is from a most wise hand, disposing every thing for the good and
salvation of his Elect, and so should be entertained. Thus Eli said, 1 Samuel
3.18. Isa. 39.8.
It is the Lord, let him do what is good in his eyes: And Hezekiah, The word of
the Lord is good, even when it threatened the overthrow of his house and
Kingdom. So David Psalm. 39.9. I held my tongue, and said nothing, because thou
Lord did it: And Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, Chap. 1. v. 11.
blessed be the name of the Lord.

CHAP. IX. Rules for the Conscience.
THe fourth sort of rules for the inner man, concerns the conscience. Rules for
the conscience. 1 Beware of a blind conscience. Joh. 16.2.
1 Beware of doing any thing with a blind Conscience. A blind man swallows
many a gnat, and a blind conscience swalloweth any sin. This is a wicked
conscience, to which no sin so great shall come, but a man shall think he does
God good service in it, as Christ speaks of them that would slay his Disciples.
Why do Heathens persecute Christians, and Papists pursue Protestants even to
death, but out of blind zeal and conscience, that they root out a false
Religion? And whatsoever a man does by an erroneous and seduced conscience, is
sin; The rule of conscience to Heathens being the Law of nature, and to the
Church, the Law written, even the whole word of God, as a pillar of cloud and
fire to direct it in all the way to Heaven. Therefore let the Word of God dwell
plentiously in you, in all Wisdom^, Col. 3.16.

2 Do nothing with a doubting conscience Conscientia nobis anima. Tertul.
2 Do nothing with a doubtful conscience; for whatsoever is done with a
scrupulous conscience, is sin, and is not only an offense of God, but of the
conscience too, which is as a little God within us; for it is not of faith, nor
obedience to the known will of God, Romans 14. ult. He that doubts, is
condemned, because his action is not of faith. Therefore verse 5. he says,
Let every man be fully persuaded in his mind.

3 Get a good conscience above all things.
3 Labor to get a good conscience above all things, Act. 23.1. I have
endeavored in all good Conscience till this day. A pure conscience by nature
has no man, but made pure by the blood of Christ sprinkled upon it by faith,
in that he has obtained full remission of sin, and by his blood also merited
the Spirit of Sanctification, by which the conscience of the believer is daily
cleansed.

4 Aim (...) a pure conscience.
4 Labor to get a pure conscience in all things. A man by observing many
things, may get himself good credit, but a good conscience must be in all the
things of God. Joh. 1^.28.
The Pharisees might not go into Pilates Judgment Hall, lest they should be
polluted; and yet at the same time, they could dispense with their conscience,
to crucify the Son of God, a sin defiling Heaven and earth, whiles the Sun was
ashamed, and the earth trembled at it. The Papists may not eat flesh in Lent,
their consciences will not suffer them; but to kill Kings, and blow up
Parliament-Houses, their consciences give them good leave. Many Protestants
will not steal, kill, commit the act of adultery; but their conscience can
dispense with covetousness, unbridled anger, wantonness, filthy speeches, etc.
But if Gods word be the same, so must the conscience; and he that serves God
as Paul did, in Pure Conscience, 2 Timothy 1.3. will do so at all times, in all
places and things, and will avoid sin in his Closet as much as in most public
meetings, yea, small sins as well as great.

5 Keep diligently the goodness and purity of conscience by two things.
5 It is great wisdom to keep things well, as to purchase th^^^ therefore we
must (if we would walk wisely) be as careful to keep good consciences, as to
obtain them, and thereunto observe two things:

1 Daily take away matter of accusation, which is sin, by repentance.

2 Rather displease all men than thine own conscience, thy friends, thy family,
thy rulers, nay, thy own self before thy conscience. So did Daniel and his
fellows. So did Cyprian (as Augustine relates it) when the Emperor in the way
to his execution said; Now I give thee space to consider whether thou will obey
me in casting a grain into the fire, or be thus miserably slain? Nay (says
he) In retam sancta deliberatio non habet locum, there needs no deliberation
in this case. The like we read in the History of France, in the year 1572.
presently after that tragical and perfidious slaughter and massacre of so many
thousands of Gods Saints by treacherous Papists, Charles the ninth King of
France, called the Prince of Condo, and proposed to him this choice, Either to
go to Mass, or to die presently, or to suffer perpetual imprisonment. His noble
answer was, that by Gods help he would never choose the first, and for either
of the two latter, her left to the Kings pleasure, and Gods providence. Thus a
good conscience makes a good choice for it self, choosing any thing rather than
to offend God.

CHAP. X. Rules of Wisdom concerning the Affections.
THe fifth sort of rules for the inner man concerns the Affections, Rules
concerning the affections. 1 Give God the chief affections
and has these particulars:

1 Delight thy self in the Lord, and make him thy chief joy, Psalm 37.4. For
the object of our joy must not be carnal, but the Lord himself, apprehending
him, as Genesis 17.1. El shaddi, All-mighty to save, All-sufficient to supply, and
a large portion, our Sun, our Shield, Grace and Glory, Psalm 84. Solomon having
tried his heart with all other delights, came at last to a recantation; and so
do all Gods children, and say, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us, Psalm 4.

2 Labor to affect all other things in God, and for God, nothing like him, 2
Affect all other things in God, and for God.
much less above him, or against him, Psalm 34.8. Taste and see how good God
is, that is, in all things labor to find the sweetness of God in all his
creatures, and all his actions. A wise man will not insist in the gift, but
look to the giver, whose love he prizeth more than the token of it. If any
affection make us unfit to pray, or any way thrust us from God, it is carnal.

3 Let us labor to get our affections more to Heaven than earth, 3 Fix them
more upon Heavenly things, than earthly. Matthew. 6.24.
Col. 3.2. Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things
which are on earth; where we see plainly, that these two cannot both have the
affections set on them, no more than two Masters served at once; as also, that
it is not enough to affect heavenly things, but also with chief affection and
care, in the first place. Hence is that ordinary rule, Verse 33.
That spiritual things must be affected and asked simply, being simply good,
but temporal with limitation, as being but conditionally good.

4 Fear the evil of sin more than the evil of punishment, 4 Fear evil of sin,
more than of suffering.
because the evil of sin is more evil. Sin is simply evil, and so is nothing
else, no not the punishment of it. A wise man should rather choose Hell than
Gods offense; for there is nothing but sin which God hates; and we ought to
hate nothing so much; sin directly resists Gods glory, but punishment makes
for it in the manifestation of his justice.

5 Be affectionate one in the case and condition of another. 5 Commiserate the
afflicted estate of our brethren.
In case of spiritual misery, sin, weakness, humane frailty: Be tender hearted
one to another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you, Ephesians. 4.32. So Col.
3.12. Now Beloved, as the Elect of God, put on tender mercy, kindness, etc, one
to another. And in the temporal miseries of our brethren, put on bowels of
compassion, be not without natural affection, forget not Joseph's affliction,
Amos 6.6.
but lend, give, cloth, feed, protect from violence, and turn not thine eyes
from thine own flesh. The phrase (Bowels of mercy) shows that all our mercy
must be from within, even from the tender compassions of the estate of our
brother: And the same in Isa. 58.10. That we pour out our souls to the needy,
that is, our souls must first be merciful, and then our mercies will be
plentiful, which is noted in the word Pouring.

CHAP. XI. Rules of Wisdom for the outward man, and first concerning his
Calling.
NOw we come to such rules of Wisdom, as whereby the outward man is to be
ordered, that we may walk (both toward our selves, and others) not as unwise,
but as wise, and that by the Wisdom which is from above. And these rules
concern. 1 His Calling, 2 His Estate. 3 His words, 4 His actions.

Rules for the special calling. 1 Live in a lawful Calling.
Directions to walk wisely in his course and calling, are these:

1 Seeing the Calling is a part of Christian obedience, and duty to God, a
Christian may neither live out a Calling, nor in any Calling not warranted by
Gods word. For if God set us in our Callings, he promises both to be with us
in them, and to give us good success, and to help us against the tediousness of
them, Jos. 1.8. Therefore sanctify thy Calling, and every part thereof, 1 Timothy
4.5. 1 Show all good faithfulness in it.
by the Word and Prayer.

2 In the whole exercise of our Calling, we must show all good faithfulness.

1 To God. Hab. 1.16. Deuteronomy. 8.18. 2 To our selves.
1 To God, by depending on him, who has made our Calling a chief means of our
maintenance, and not sacrificing to our own Nets. For it is the Lord that gives
power to get substance.

2 To our selves, by walking diligently, and abiding in our Calling, that we
may eat our own bread, and provide for our selves and ours, and give to him
that needs, Ephesians. 4.28. For by idle and inordinate living, through the neglect
of the Vocation, by Gods just judgment men fall into the depth of sin,
Drunkenness, Gaming, Whoredom, Theeving, and nothing comes amiss to an idle
person. Besides, discredit, bad report, and poverty, come as an armed man upon
such a one. Prove. 6.11. 3 To others.


3 To others, whether we be Masters or servants, as knowing that in our
Calling we are to practice most Christian duties, as love to our brethren,
patience, truth, fidelity, uprightness, as being ever under Gods eye.

3 Be not busy in other men's Callings.
3 Another point of Wisdom in our Callings, is, not to meddle with other men's
business, but follow our own close. 1 These. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and to do
your own business. And every where the Apostle reproves busy bodies, who going
beyond their own bounds, thrust their sickle into every man's harvest, and being
out of their own places and business, intermeddle with that which no way
concerns them. And these are disturbers of peace and civil tranquillity,
kindling and blowing up contentions for lack of other work. The same rule is
for women also, that they be not gadders, but housekeepers. Tit. 2.5. 4 In
earthly business carry an Heavenly mind. Phil. 3.20.


4 In all earthly business, study to carry an heavenly mind. A Christian while
he converseth in earth, must have his conversation in Heaven. And know, that
in all the ways of this present life, he ought never to step out of the way to
eternal life. Neither shall a man be a loser by this course, seeing we have
an express promise, that if we seek Gods Kingdom first and principally, these
outward things should (so far as they are needful for us) without such carking
care be cast upon us.

5 Intend most the most necessary duties of them.
5 As all duties of the Calling must be profitable in themselves, and for the
public good, so the most profitable must be most intended, and specially
performed. A Minister must read the Word, but must apply himself more to
Preaching, as being more necessary. A Magistrate must execute Justice upon
transgressors of men's Laws, but especially against open transgressors of Gods
Law. Masters of families must provide for the bodies and health of their
family, but especially for the good and salvation of their souls.

CHAP. XII. Rules of Wisdom concerning a man's estate, and first for adversity.
THe rules of Wisdom concerning a Christian man's estate, are these: One
general Rule for all estates, is to think the present estate best for thee.
First, General. Secondly, Special.

The general rule for all estates, is this: Be prepared for any estate,
contented in every estate, and assure thy self the present estate (whatsoever
it is) is best for thee, though not ever in thy sense, yet in Gods gracious and
wise ordering of it. This lesson the Apostle Paul had well learned, Phil. 4.11,
12. I can want, and abound, I can be full, and hungry: I have learned in all
estates to be contented.

The special rules are either for prosperity, or for adversity. Rules for
affliction.
Concerning adversity and afflictions, these are the rules of Christian wisdom:

1 Consider thou art not placed here in the world by God, 1 God may as well be
enjoyed in Adversity as Prosperity.
to enjoy the pleasures of the World, but to enjoy God, which thou may do as
well in affliction as in prosperity, and to cleave to him in his service,
looking for nothing but afflictions, as a Pilgrim going to thy Country, the way
whereunto, lies through afflictions. This ground not laid, men count troubles
a strange thing, 1 Pet. 4.11. and start at the mention of them, as the
Apostles, Joh. 11.8. when they heard Christ speaking of going into Jury, where
the Jews had lately sought to stone him. And note it to be a corruption of the
heart, to be more grieved for thine own troubles, than the troubles of the
Church, for private, than public evils.

2 Lay up strength and comforts aforehand; As first, Humility, 2 Lay up
strength and comfort aforehand.
to overmaster and tame the pride and rebellion of our hearts, and to bring in
contentedness to sweeten our troubles, and our labor will be well spent; for
if we can relish the hardest part of our life, our whole life else will
assuredly be more sweet and joyful. 2 Grow up in the knowledge of God, which
will make thee rise up in much comfort, and will bring in comfort against that
confused heaviness, distrust, and dangerous affections and passions, which else
in trouble might beat us down, and off him. 3 Get assurance of faith, which
will sweetly warm the heart in the sense of Gods love in Jesus Christ; The
fruit of which will be, first, To enable us to trust our selves with God in
any estate, and be assured the Lord is with us in fire and water, in the midst
of the Valley of the shadow of Death. Secondly, to depend on him for strength;
Psalm. 23.4.
for howsoever Satan would make us believe our affliction is greater than it
is, or we are for it; yet we shall assure our hearts that the Lord has
measured it out for our strength, and not above. Thridly, 1 Cor. 10.13.
to wait upon him for a good issue and seasonable deliverance, who has
promised to turn it to the best. This shall keep us from fainting, distrust,
and despair. Romans 8.28.


3 In all evils of punishment, take occasion to set upon the evil of sin, 3 In
evils of punishment to set upon evil of sin.
and revenge upon that; complain of it to God and men, murmr and grudge at
nothing else. If affliction be sharper than ordinary, it is sure some sin or
lust adds a sting unto it. But this rule mortifies sin and unruly passions,
and will weaken the heart, and make a man say with the Church, Mic. 7.9.
I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned.

4 Make them no heavier than God makes them, by impatience, 4 Make them no
heavier th^n God has made them.
frowardness, and looseness of heart. God sometimes lays on a little finger,
and the froward heart lays on the whole hand and loins, to make the burden
heavier with faithless heaviness and distrust, which is but an addition of new
and worse troubles than the former. How inconsiderately do many men load
themselves with troubles too too light in themselves, and on the shoulders of
wise men, who can make a virtue of necessity, and step over a number of rubs,
which others stoop to remove, and infinitely toil themselves? How do many in
smaller troubles, as discourtesie of neighbors, unruliness of children,
unfaithfulness of servants, smaller losses and crosses in Family-matters, give
place to unquietness, impatience, and passion, till their folly have (by
seeking to case their burden) increased it from a dram to a talent? And now how
unmeet are they for the service of God? How unprofitable in any Christian
society? How sour and heavy in countenance, disguised in speech, Levius sit
pationus Quicquid corrigere est nosas. Horat.
and impotent in their behavior? All which testify the frowardness of the
heart, wherein had there been a dram of Christian wisdom and moderation, the
passion had not swelled to the cause, much less so far exceeded it.

5 Make not haste from under any affliction; He that believes, makes not
haste: 5 Make not too much haste from under them. Isa. 18.16.
But labor for a right use of it, rather than the removal; attain once a right
use, and doubt not of a good issue. Gold is not presently pulled out of the
fire so soon as it is cast in, but must stay a while till it be purged. A
Musician strains up a string, and lets it not down, lest the harmony and music
be spoiled: So the Lord deals with his children, but never forgets mercy, Isa.
27.9. 6 Observe both the trials and the fruits. (...).
nor measure; nay, it is mercy so to measure them, as they may be purged by
them.

6 Observe and mark thy troubles, and thy disposition in them; First, to grow
up in wisdom and experience by them; thus thy sufferings will become wholesome
instructions. Observe where thou wast most pinched, and wherein thou tookest
the greatest comfort. Secondly, to grow up in an infallible hope of Gods
goodness, and a good issue for time to come. For this, observe Gods seasonable
hearing of thy prayers, and the proofs of Gods help in most needful times,
which shall be a strong means to keep thee from fainting, 1 Samuel 17.37.
fears, and despairs for time to come. So did David in the case of the Lion and
Bear, and through all the 23. Psalm. Thus the Apostle from observations of
times past, gathers assurance for the time present, and to come, 2 Cor. 1.10.
-- Who delivered us from so great death, and does deliver us, and in whom we
trust, that he will yet hereafter deliver us. Thirdly, to be able to comfort
others with such comforts as our selves were upheld with in our troubles, 2
Cor. 1.4. Which comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in affliction, by the comfort wherewith our selves are
comforted of God. Thus to the godly arises light out of darkness, sweet comes
out of sour, and out of the eater meat.

CHAP. XIII. Rules of Wisdom for Prosperity.
Rules for prosperity. 1 Consider the danger of it.
IN prosperity take these directions.

1 If riches increase, set not thine heart upon them, Psalm 62.10. For why
should thou, considering the danger? How easy it is to wax wanton, How hard
for a rich man to be saved, How few by outward things are drawn to the love of
heavenly, How many are ensnared and choked with them, How flitting and
uncertain they be, How certainly we must leave them, or they us, and come to
account for them.

2 Be suspicious of thy self.
2 In the carriage of thy prosperity be suspicious of thy self, thankful to
God, and return the glory of it to him of whom thou receivest it. David, while
he had liberty, easily strayed, Psalm 119.67. Thankfulness is Gods tribute,
Has aeterna fames consequitur dapes. Hos aeterna sitis, -- Sen.
which being denied him, he reenters on his own, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because thou
servedst not the Lord with joyfulness, and a good heart, in the abundance of
all things, thou shall serve thine enemies in hunger, in thirst, and in need of
all things. So do many Prodigals.

3 Fear the cross before it come, and provide for it. 3 In thy calm, provide
for a storm.
The thing that I feared is come upon me, Job. 3.25. and, he waited for his
change. It was an addition to the great plague of Babylon, Isa. 46.11. that
evil should come on her, and she not know the morning thereof, Destruction
shall come upon thee suddenly ere thou be aware. Luke 14.28.
Therefore cast the costs of Religion and well-doing before hand.

4 Never account thy self prosperous, if it be not well with Gods Church: 4
Think not thy self prosperous, if the Church of God be not.
Good Uriah would not rest as long as the Ark of the Lord was abroad, and his
Lord Joab in the field. As a good child being in health mourns and droops for
the mothers sickness. David thought it not fit to dwell in seiled houses, and
the Ark of God lie in tents: For the neglect whereof, 2 Samuel 7.2.
the Jews are reproved, Hag. 1.4. Nehemiah, even before the King, was of a sad
countenance, and sorrowful at heart, when he received evil tidings of
Jerusalem, Chap. 2. verse 2. Hester and Mordecai joyed not in the greatest
advancements, so long as the sentence against the Jews was unreversed. And
Moses might have lived well, and at pleasure in Pharaohs Court; Heb. 11.25.
but he chose rather to suffer affliction with Gods people, than to enjoy such
pleasures.

5 In thy prosperity consider the affliction and adversity of others. 5 In thy
prosperity cast eye on others afflictions.
The contrary hereof was the sin of the Princes of Israel living in prosperity,
Amos 6.6. They lie on beds of ivory, and stretch themselves on beds, drink wine
in bowls, and anoint themselves with oil, but none remembered the affliction of
Joseph. The like of Dives his inhumanity toward Lazarus. Yea, some time it
shall be wisdom to go into the house of mourning, Eccl. 7.2.
which will strike a deeper impression; and to visit others in adversity; and
mark their speeches, who embrace these outward pleasures with greatest and
sharpest appetite, and thou shall find the affliction far more bitter, and
their sorrow in the loss so much the sharper, as the love was eager in enjoying
their peace; and perhaps they will tell thee, they were never such gainers by
all their prosperity, as they were losers by it, or gainers by that present
affliction.

CHAP. XIV. Rules to carry our speeches wisely, as those that aim at the
Apostolical rule of Christians circumspection.
1. COncerning the ground of them: Labor to get a good heart, Rules for
speeches. 1 Let words issue from a good fountain. Matthew. 5.18.
For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak. The heart of the
wise guides his mouth wisely, Prove. 16.23. And, if the heart indite a good
matter, the Tongue will be the Pen of a ready Writer, Psalm. 45.1. Such as the
heart is, such will be the speech: And therefore he that has no care of his
heart, cannot be a good and careful speaker. The Apostle requires gracious
speech, Col. 4.6. but that must come from a gracious heart, as Psalm 37.30, 31.
The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, and his tongue will talk of
Judgment; For the Law of his God is in his heart, and his steps shall not
slide. And Prove. 31.26. She opens her mouth with Wisdom, and the Law of
Grace is in her tongue. On the contrary, a graceless heart cannot speak well,
Prove. 10.20, 21. The heart of the wicked is little worth; the lips of the
righteous do feed many; but fools shall die for want of Wisdom. The true
reason why many mend not their bad speeches, is, because first they mend not
their heart.

2 Concerning the matter of speech; Let the matter be choice.
1 Because all must be wholesome so much as we may, therefore chus^ the best
matters to talk of, matters of Religion, faith, hope, and the way to salvation;
for wisdom always chooses the best. 2 If it be chosen or offered, it concerns
either God or our neighbors, If it concern God, what.
or our selves. 1 If it concern God, or any part of his Name, Attributes, Word,
or Works, we must speak most reverently, as those who are not worthy to take
his Name into our mouths. The precept is, Lev. 19.12. Thou shall not defile the
Name of the Lord, but fear his glorious Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. And they defile his
Name, who in common talk, lightly, and carelessly use his Name, of God, or Lord,
or any other of his titles, in ordinary speech: And they, who are ordinary or
idle swearers, and cursers, and jesters in Scripture-phrases, who are far from
trembling at his word, Isa. 66.3. and those that mock at sin and Gods
judgments, and abuse or are unthankful for any of his mercies. 2 If our
neighbor.
2 If the matter of thy speech concern thy brothers person, the rule is, to
speak of the good thou know by him, behind his back; but of evil, not
without calling, nor without grief, and before him, or to him, Tit. 3.2. Warn
them that they speak evil of no man, but be soft, and showing all meekness to
all men. Contrary whereunto is scoffing, deriding, cursing, railing, bitter and
slanderous speeches, tending to the offense of any man; yea, if men's speeches
may justly offend us, we must be soft and calm, showing all meekness, not
rendering rebuke for rebuke, but passing by his sin, espy in his person the
image of God worthy to be reverenced and loved. If thou speak of his saying^
or actions, if they be evil, speak as little of them as may be, if they be
doubtful, construe them in the best part; for love is not suspicious, but
hops all things. 1 Cor. 13.7.
Praise God for his good actions; and as for sins in him, deal plainly and
truly with him, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother, but shall plainly
rebuke him, and not suffer his sin upon him. We must not lie, dissemble,
flatter, or sooth up any in their sins, which is a most ordinary sin against
this rule of Wisdom. 3 If our selves.
3 If the matter of thy speech concern thy self, speak modestly, without vanity
or boasting, Prove. 27.2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own lips.
Nay, we should rather extenuate and lessen the good in us, if we must needs
speak of it, as Paul, I am the least of the Apostles; 1 Cor. 15 9.
and in another person, I knew a man, etc. 2 Cor. 12.2.

3 Concerning the manner of our speech. First, because every man's speech by
nature is corrupt, 3 The manner. 1 Savoury.
therefore strive to make it gracious, and powdered with salt, Col. 4.6. that
is, well seasoned and savoury, not sav^uring of the flesh and corruption, but
we must drive out, or dry up the corr^ption of them, with the salt of grace.
Against many, who powder their spe^ch with oaths, 2 Sincere.
and curses, and filthy rottenness, or sond idle speeches savouring of the
filthy sink and puddle within. Secondly, it must be just and sincere, The
truth of our heart, Psalm 15.2. without dissimulation or lies, seeing God made
the tongue to express the heart. A fearful thing it is, that most men's speeches
are turned into mere complement. 3 Most earnest in things heavenly.
Thirdly, it must be more earnest, joyful; and comfortable when thou speak
of heavenly things, than of earthly; not jesting or foolish talking, but rather
giving of thanks, Ephesians. 5.4.

4 The end of our speech, edification.
4 Concerning the end of our speech: It must tend to edification, Ephesians. 4.29. to
feed many, Prove. 10.21. and minister grace to the hearers. It must bend it self
still for God, the defense of good men and actions, and the disgrace of sin.
Better no speech, than to no good end. And yet many in their light and idle
speeches say, why, I hope I do no harm. Yea, but what good does it? Shame will
not let thee say, thou intendest edification. Therefore look well unto it.

5 Concerning the measure of our speech: First, We must not speak too little,
5 The measure. 1 Not too little.
and omit gracious speeches when occasion is offered, as many dry and barren
hearts and mouths, have not a word for God and goodness, that have words
enough, and more than enough in any other argument; like Idols, Psalm 115.5.
good things, that have mouths and speak not; or as if they were possessed
with dumb spirits, and not suffered t^ speak any good. Tell such a one of a
good Farm or bargain, or natural things, and they savor and relish them well
enough, whereas a good motion strikes them dumb, and makes them as Fish^s out
of their element. Neither, secondly, 2 Not too much (...).
must our words be too many; for in many words are many sins. The fool
multiplieth words, Eccl. 10.14. and Prove. 29.11. A fool pours out all his
mind: But he that has knowledge, spares his words, Prove. 17.27. and he
that refrains his lips is wise, Chap. 10.19. It is folly to lay on more words
than the matter requires, and argues imp^tency of mind, and carries a show or
demonstration of passion, and excess of affection, or pride in speaking.

6 Concerning the season of our speech. 6 The season.
All our words must be seasonable as well as seasone^, that is, fitted to
circumstances, times, places, and person^. Wisdom will seek a season for good
words: For there is a season wherein the prudent will keep silence. Amos 5.^3.
And how good is a good word in due season, Prove. 15.23. It is like apples of
gold, and pictures of silver. Husbandmen observe seasons in sowing, and so must
he that looks for an harvest of his speeches. Abigail would not speak to her
Husband Nabal in his drunkenness, but when he had slept out his win^. Every
man is not capable of every good speech, nor no man at all times alike. There
is an unadvised op^n^ess, against which our Savior by his example arms us,
Joh. 2. ult. He would not commit himself to some, who are said to believe in
him, because he know what was in man. Silence is best where no good can be
done, as Christ was silent before the High Priest; and Rabshecah must not be
answered. To meet a man in the heat of his passion with good words, is to meet
a Bear robbed of her whelps; but let the passion be calm, and then tell him
how disguised and uncovered he was, he will perhaps believe it.

CHAP. XV. Motives to look to our Tongue.
1 BEcause a good man cannot be an evil speaker; Motives to govern the tongue.
if the speech be naught, the Religion is vain, Jam. 1.29. Lying and accusing
is the devils work.

2 Watching of good spe^ch keeps out evil words, which ingendreth to evil. Take
up David's resolution, Psalm 39.1. I thought I will take heed to my ways, that
I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth bridled, while the wicked is in
my sight. And this is necessary, because the tongue is an unruly member, as
fire* and by this means shall become our glory, James 2.6, 8.
and our brothers shield.

3 God has a time to call to reckoning the words that are thought but wind,
Psalm 50.20, 21, even every idle word. Matthew. 12.36.

CHAP. XVI. Rules of Wisdom concerning our actions, that in all of them we
may show forth Chrstian prudence and circumspection; and first in general.
FIrst, Every Christian is to examine the work he is to do, whether he Rules
for our actions in general. 1 Examine what thou art doing.
be about a good work, whereof he may expect comfort, Gal. 6.3. Let every man
prove his own work, and so he shall have comfort in himself. And good reason,
for his work must be tr^^d afterward* and therefore it is will some to try it
before hand. This Trial stands in four thin^^. 1 Whether go d in the matt^^.
Deuteronomy. 12.32 (...). 1.12.
And the lam^^^^ of examining it, is now, and shall be hereafter. This tria^
stan^^ in four things:

1 Wheth^r it be good in it self, and in the matter of it; if i^ be^ l^wful,
if it be commanded. The rule for the goodness of any action is the word of
God: What I command thee, that do only: Or else it will ^ee a^ked, Who
required those things at your hands? And for the matter of our a^tions, we
have a spe^ial rule, Phil. 4.8. Whatso ver things are true, honest, just, pure;
Whatsoever things pertain to love, and are of good rep^^t; if there be any
virtue or praise, think on these things. And Romans 12.17. and 1 Cor. 8.21. Prov^
as things that are honest, no^ only before the Lord, but a so before men.

^ It g^^^ in he manner.
2 Examine wh there it be good in the doer, und^rtaken by virtue or a special
calling, and answ^rab^e to that ^^^y which himself ow^^^ to God or man. God
upholdeth the societ^^^ of men by order, which is, when every man k^^p his own
standing, and every one m^^^ ((...) the s^v^ral ^^ars) but every one in his own
sphere, n^^ troubling the motion of ^^^ner. S. public m^n should (...) the
public offi^^; and privat^ m^n (...) in private, but let the public alone.
For Christ reproved Peter's curiosity, in asking What John should do, Joh.
21.21. And the (...) of Scena wa^ted calling for an action that was good in
(...), and (...) were (...) and w^^^ded of the Devil. Act. 19 15, 16.


3 If good in circumstances.
3 Examine whether it be good in the circumstances, s^asona^^^ and ^^nvenient,
or whether the season^^^ not for some better action than that. For wisd^me will
intend of (...) the most necessary, and (...) most profi^able.

4 If good in the ends.
4 Examine whether the (...) done, be good in the ^nds (...) it, which
esp^cially are tw^, 1 G^^ glory, 1 Cor. 10.3. Let (...) the glory of God. 2 The
good and ed^fi^ation of our brethr n, 1 Cor. 14.2^. Let all be done to
edifying; yea, ^^king their profit in some (...) own. Then

2 ^inding the action good, spoil it no^ by ill handling. The right manner of
doing a good acti^n in three things.
Secondly, I^ by examination w^^ (...) ^^tions good in themselve, (...) us, in
circumstan^^^ and ^^ds, w^e must be careful (...) not good ^^^ons by ill
handling, but in (...) do good action^ well, and to (...) matter, add a good
manner of doing. Now the right manner of doing a good a^tion well, stand^^h
three things; To undertake them holily: To do them sincerely: And to finish
them humbly. The first i^, when we begin them with prayer; For as in all
matter^, small, and great, we are to take counsel at Gods mouth; so we are to
beg lea^e and blessing at (...) secretly to our selves, without which n^thing
is sanct^fied unto it. T^^ second is, when we do things sincerely, as in Gods
sight, with a good (...), and keeping good conscience, that a man if he b^^
questioned in any (...) may be able to say with Abimele^h, Genesis 2^.5. With an
upright heart aid I this thing: And whatsoever may befall him for well-doing,
he may appeal to God with Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3.
and say, Lord remember that I have walked u^rightly before thee. The third is,
when in effecting all our b^st action^ (...) labor to see our defects and
wants, and mourn that we ^^^ther do that w^e should do, not in the manner we
should. Wh^r^of there will be th^^^ notable fruits: 1 This will breed and
nourish humi^i^^. It will drive (...) Christ to get a covering. 3 It will make
us ascribe all the glory of our a tions to God, of whom we have not only all
the power, but eve^ the will and purpose, Phil. 2.13. For it is God that
works in you both the will and the deed, according to his good pleasure.

CHAP. XVII. Rules to carry works of Mercy wisely.
IF our actions concern others, then they be works either of Mercy, Rules for
works of mercy.

1 Mercy must p^^c^ed from faith and love.


or of Justice.

For works of Mercy much wisdom is required, and that is showed in these
particulars: 1 See thy charity come from a good ground, namely, from a heart
qualified with two graces: 1 Faith; For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin,
Romans 14.23. Thou must first give thy self to the Lord, and then to his Saints,
2 Cor. 8.5. Thy mercy must issue from the sense of Gods mercy in Christ to
thine own soul, apprehended by faith in Jesus Christ. Joh. 15.1.
Bring forth fruit in this vine. 2 It must proceed from love. Works of mercy
must come from the fountain of a merciful heart, Romans 12.8. He that
distributeth, let him do it of simplicity, that is, out of mere compassion, not
out of any by and sinister respe^ts. For if I feed the poor with all my goods,
and want love, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. The reason is, because the
Lord looks more at the affecti^n, than the action. Whence many, not giving out
of a tender heart, sympathizing and fellow-feeling their brethrens misery, lose
both their gift and reward. What comfort or help is in that work of mercy,
which i^ wrung out by importunity, or by strength of law, or for shame, lest a
man should be noted, or by terror of conscience, when a man would heal the
gripes of a galling and accusing conscience, by giving away at his death a
little ill-gotten goods to the poor, which were none of his to give, but to the
right owners; or when out of desire of praise, or out of superfluity, when a
man knows not else what to do with his wealth, but some must have it? If out of
any of these respects, all is lost.

2 Concerning the right subject of works of m^rcy: Do good unto all, 2 The
subject of mercy. ^ In general, all Eccles. 11.1.
but especially to the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. To all, viz. the poor that
are no^ able to recompense us; not looking for recompense of man, but casting
our bread upon the waters, where th^re is no likelihood of ever reaping it
again. And to all, even our enemies, who stand in need of us, and such as
usually do, and will recompense our good with evil, Romans 12.14. Matthew. 5.44.
And good reason; For first, all have our flesh, Isa. 58.7. For four Reasons.
from which we must not hide our face. 2 All have Gods image on them, which
we must not refuse. 3 Hereby we shall b^e likest to God, who does good to
all, and to us being enemies; and attain the most difficult practice of the
Law. 4 We shall hereby master the corruption of our own heart, which lusts
after revenge, and perhaps over-master the malice of our adversaries, at least
make them in^xcusable.

But esp^cially to the household of faith: Because here is Gods image renewed, ^
In special the faithful.
here is one of the blood and kindred of Christ: And if the good Samari^an was
commended for mercy showed to a stranger, how much more will the Lord Jesus
accept that which is done to one of those little ones that believe in him, as
done to himself? Mat. 25.45.


3 Concerning the matter of mercy: 3 The matter of mercy. 1 To the soul.
The greatest mercy we can show to any, is toward their souls which stands in
instructing the ignorant, in counselling the weak, in forgiving ^ffenders, in
admonishing or correcting him that erreth, comforting distressed consciences,
and confirming them that are in good ways. This therefore must be observed,
in all corporal mercy to ioyn spiritual, laboring in all the other, the good
of this; and especially to pray for such mercies from God for them, as neithe^
we nor other men can minist r unto them. And though that be to be done, yet
the other also must not be left undone, but we must be merci^ul to the
outward man of our brother, in giving, lending freely, clothing, feeding,
visi^ing, 2 To the body.
protecting from violence, etc. For this is mercy actual and accepta^l^, fitted
to that rule, 1 John 3.18. that we show mercy, not in word and tongue, but in
deed, and in truth. This age abounds with mouth-mercy, which is good cheap,
but a little handf^l were better than a great many such mouthfuls.

4 The measure of it, to our ability.
4 Concerning them measure of our mercy: We must be merciful in the highest
degr^e that we can get our hearts unto, and be as like our heavenly Father in
mercifulness as may be. This rule is, 1 Cor. 1^.2. that every m^n lay up and
distribute as God has prospered him, that is, according to his ab^lity: Gal
^.7.
For he that sows spar^ngly, shall reap sparingly. Doubtless men would not b^e
so niggardly and sparing, if they knew, that what is mercifully bestowed, Manus
pauperis. Chr^sti g z^phylacium.
is safest kept; the bosoms, bellies, and mouths of the poor, is the best
treasury to lay our goods in; and if we expected to reap after the measure of
m^rcy at the last day, we would more liberally sow, Hos. 10.12. Yea, a poor
man may be bountiful in a little, which was the commendation of the poor widow
for her two mites, Luke 20.

5 The manner of showing m^rcy 1 Seas nably.
5 Concerning the manner of showing mercy: First, It must be done seasonably
and speedily when need is, Prove. 3.28. Say not unto thy neighbor, Go and come
to morrow, if now thou have it with thee; For thou may be cut off from the
opportunity, or that from thee; besides tha^, thou omittest a present du^y
which is enjoined, Gal. 6.10. While we have time, let us do good. And life is
very uncertain. Secondly, It must be done cheerfully: God loves a cheerful
giver: 2 Cheerfully. 2 C^r. 9.7.
Not groaningly, or grudgingly, as if every penny were too much, as many
pinch-pennies, who have pounds enough for any lust or pleasure, do part with
pence to the poor Saints as from their joints or eyes. 3 Wisely.
Thirdly, I^ must be done wisely: True mercy is dispensed by judgment. It
spares not where God will punish, as Saul's cruel mercy: A glass for
Magistrates, whose remisness can swallow any thing, and punish nothing, neither
drunkenn^ss, nor profanation of the Sabbath, nor swearing, nor inordinate
walking. It is no mercy (out of extreme necessity) to releeve strong Rogues,
wandering beggats, and able idle persons, but rath^r to punish and r^dress them;
nor to keep hospitality for Drunkards, Gam^sters, and riotous persons, but a
good man is merciful, and measures his affairs by judgment, 4 Constantly. Gal.
6 9.
Psalm 112.5. Fourthly, Mercy must be showed constantly, acc^rding to the
precept. Be not weary of well-doing* Let not the springs of our compassion be
ever dried up, as we would never have God weary of doing us good. 5 Humbly.
Fifthly, We must not rest or rejoice in any work of mercy as meritorious, but
in the acceptance and covering of it, saying when we have done all we can, We
are unprofitable servants.

CHAP. XVIII. Rules for Works and Actions of Justice: In first, The Ground:
Secondly, Moderation.
IN all our civil conversation with men, see that our external righteousness
Rules for works of Justice.
flow from inward pi^^y. G^d in the m^ral Law, has coupled the two Tables as
the upholders one of another, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and thy
neighbor as thy self. We must love man in God, and for God. Christ 1
Concerning the ground.
aimed at both in the work of our redemption, that we should serve him in
righteousness, as well as in holiness, all our days, Luke 1.75. Civil
righteousness, abstracted from piety, is Pharisaical and unfruitful. Give to
Caesar Caesar's, and to God Gods.

2 Concerning moderation of Justice: Never stand so upon strict justice, 2
Concerning moderati n of Justice.
but that sometimes for peace we must depart from our right, according to the
prec^pt, Phil 4. verse 5. Let your equal mind be known unto all men: And the
practice of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 17.27. who needed not, nor could have
been compelled (...) pay toll; but to cut off occasion of offense and
contention, he departs from his right^ and p^yes it: he might have said* it
is my right^ and I will stand upon it, and will not los^ my freedom: And m^n
think they say well, if they d^mand but their right: But our Lord, for our
example, departed from his right, and accounted the pr^servation of peace
better than his own right. This rule is grounded upon the common law of nature,
which seeks the common good, and is as careful of the neighbors good as his
own. Contrary whereunto is that devilish and carnal speech, Every man for
himself, and God for us all; and yet it is come into common practice, against
all rules of nature and Scripture.

CHAP. XIX. Rules of Wisdom for Justice, First, Commutative. Secondly,
Distributive. Thirdly, Promissive. Fourthly, Retributive.
COncerning Justice commutative, in contracts and bargains, some rules concern
the seller and the buyer. 1 Justice commutative.


The seller must not abuse or wrong the buyer, neither in the kind, nor
quantity, nor quality of his commodity, concealing the defe^t, with that
profane protestation, Caveat emptor: Nay the caveat is for the seller, who
would not be deceived in his bargains with oaths, lies, tricks; and so is
bound to do to others, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Let no man oppress or defraud his Brother
in any matter: Here the holy Apostle condemns fraud by two reasons. 1 From the
near conjunction we have one with another, he is our b^other, in flesh and in
faith: 2 From the certainty of Gods wrath, For the Lord is the avenger of all
such th ngs, Lev. 19.11. Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to
another. And in Ezekiel. 22.12, 13. a fearful destruction is threatn^d against
Jerusalem, for bribes, usury, fraud, and oppression. Where by the way, Usurers
may do well to consider amongst whom the Lord there rank^s them.

The buyer also must not entertain the seller with words of dissimulation,
vilifying the thing, to buy it beneath the worth, Prove. 20.14. n^r detain the
price beyond the agreed time, as many do, whose care is to get into debt, and
take up more commodity in one year, than they mean to pay in twenty; and when
a^l is done, pay pounds scarce with crowns: A little m^re safe Theevery, than
by the highway, never a whit more honest or just.

In Justice distributive, never forget that golden rule, to do as we would be
done unt^, Matt. 7.12. 2 Justice distributive.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, that do ye unto them; for
this is the Law and the Prophets; the Royal Law, Jam. 2.8. that is, the Kings
Law, and the chief of all Laws which concern our neighbors.

Obje t. But here the Usurer has a Text for himself, saying, I would willingly
pay ten in the hundred if I had need, and therefore I may take so.

Answ. 1 This must be ordered by Grace, and the word of God, not by men's
blind and depraved jud^^ment. 2 This general rule must guide us where we want
a special word, which we have in the case of Usury. 3 It is false that thou
say, thou would not pay use, if thou could borrow freely; therefore if
in thy need thou would borrow freely, lend freely.

Others having overreached their neighbors, say, they may and must make the
most of their own, and they forced not their wares on them: But tell me,
would thou be overreached or deceived? or would thou have another to
make advantage of thy necessity or simplicity? I know thou would not: Luke
10.37.
^o thou, and do the like.

Concerning promissive Justice, in promises and covenan^^, he rule is this, 3
Just^ce promissive.
That all law^ul promises must be kept, suppose they were (...) never
^^rashly, to persons never so bad, though to the very great hindrence of the
party making them. I explain it thus: First* I say, a la^ful promise, nor such
as Herod made to Herodias, Jucam^ntum non si (...) non sum ^^qu^tatis.
to give her john Baptists hea^ in a pratter; for of such it is well said,
Rescinde fidem, In turpi vo^^mura decretum, break thy word, and change thy
determination; so did David in N^^^ls case. 2 Samuel 25.
But if it be lawful, thou must not be perfidious or slippery, as many like
Ec^es can slip out of most fair and cauteious contracts for their own advantage.

Object. What if I have done it rashly?

Ans. Repent of thy rashness, but perform thy promise.

Object. What, to a le^d fellow, or an heretic?

Answ. Papists say no. A position that has covered and colored more horrible
treachery and perfidiousness than ever was found among the heathens. Con.
Constan. Fides non servand^ cum haereticis.
But Joshua when he was circumvented, and drawn in by lies and deceit, to make
a rash covenant with the Gibeonites, strangers to the covenant of grace, did
faithfully keep it: And when Saul many hundred years after did break their
contract, he was plagued with sore famine, which could never be assuaged but
by the death of his sons, 2 Samuel 21.6, 14. So in the Turkish History, the story
of Ladislans, suddenly breaking the Truce made for ten years, with Amurathes
the great Turk, by the counsel of Pope Eugenius, shows in the event, the
wickedness of that position and practice, by the effusion of much Christian
blood, and the confusion of as many as had hand in that treacherous counsel.

Object. But I shall be greatly hindered.

Answ. Acknowledge thy cross, make a good use of it, but perform thy promises:
Who shall dwell on Gods Holy Mountain? He that swears to his own hindrance,
and changes not, Psam 15.4. Take heed of forfeiting Heaven for a little earth.

4 Justice retributive.
Concerning Justice retributive, in borrowing and lending, Romans 13.8. Owe
nothing to any man save love. Does not nature teach us to give every man his
due? And does not grace teach us to deal justly? a main point of which justice
is to pay debts. But our rule aims at two things:

First, To keep out of debt as much as may be: Owe nothing, and that is by
avoiding the means of debt: As 1 To live above ones degree and ability, to
neglect frugality and moderation. 2 Drinking, Gluttony, Wine, Tobacco. 3
Building, Purchasing, Wardrobe. 4 Suretiship and rash undertaking of others
payments. 5 Gaming, Dicing, Whoring. 6 Usury. All which directly make against
this rule of justice.

Secondly, To get out of debt being in, and make due and timely satisfaction,
and not as many, who force their Creditors to recover by Law, what was in love
lent them. What is the general voice of men in their trades? but complaints of
men's unfaithfulness, whiles many make no conscience of paying debts, others can
pay some to keep their credit, or all to be trusted again, but few pay any of
Conscience, because of the Commandment.

Object. But I am not able to pay my debts.

Answ. Then go and humble thy self to thy Creditor, Prove. 6.3. purpose and
promise to pay all when thou art able.

Object. So I shall utterly impoverish my self.

Answ. 1. Is not a little with righteousness and peace with God and thy
conscience, better than a great deal with iniquity?

2 Consider how God blessed a little to that poor Widow, that sold all to pay
her debts, 2 Kings 4.7. her oil was increased, till she had enough for her
creditors, and her self.

CHAP. XX. Rules of Wisdom for our own necessary actions, in respect of their
first, Order. Secondly, Subject.
THe fourth sort of rules for actions, Rules for necessary actions. 1 Ground.
Thou w^^^ sent in^o this World f r necessary business.
respects such as concern our selves, and these are either necessary, or
indifferent actions.

We were sent in^o this world to do some necessary business, which we must
intend, and not wa^e our time in impertinent things. The master that sent his
servants into the Vineyard, sent them in to work. Do we think that God sent man
into the World to sport and play for his recreation sake, or idleness, yea, or
to eat and drink, and only to get what to maintain himself by? No, but for
something beyond all these; else his end were not beyond the brute-beasts. Or
can we think that God has given men gifts of reason, understanding,
judgment, and means of nature and grace, for the culture of all these, only
to enjoy outward things, to feed their pleasure and appetite, which they might
fully enjoy without all their gifts? No, but the master gave his servants
talents to traffic withal, to make their Lord and themselves gainers. We
must therefore acknowledge some thing to be absolutely necessary, unto which
all other things are necessary but respecttively, and carry our selves unto
every thing accordingly. If we would know what that is, which is absolutely
necessary, our Savior tells us, Luke 10.42.
One thing is necessary, namely, to know how a man may come into Gods favor
and be saved; and all earthly things are respectively necessary, so far as
they conduce to this. To know the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection, is
absolutely necessary; all things are to be counted but dross and dung unto
this, Phil. 3.10.

But in all necessary actions, 2 For the order, the most necessary things m st
be done first
the rule of Wisdom requires that the most necessary action be done first, and
most, Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy
might. Nothing in the world is so necessary as to repent us of sin past, and
the reason, for it is the present time, to day. Nothing so necessary as
amendment of life for time to come, therefore do it now: Delays in all things
are dangerous, in this, often deadly. And this most necessary business must be
done most. Well said Augustine, Deficit in necessariis qui redundat in
superfluis. August.
h^e must needs fail in necessaries, who over-flowes in superfluities. How then
can men answer the wasting of their lives and time in pleasures, recreation,
eating, drinking, buying, selling, and seldom find in their hands the
business which ten is unto eternal life? A good rule therefore it is, often to
examine our selves thus? What am I doing? And whether in all inferior things
do I aim a^ the chief? in earing I must not forget the bread of life. In
recreation and pleasure I must ch^^fly affect the pleasures of Gods house. In
buying and se^ling, I must specially help forward my purchase of eternal life.
In my earthly calling, I must express the calling of Christianity. 3 For the
subject: The most necessary actions of evil men are evil.
This is the way to do the one necessary thing most of all.

3 Most necessary actions in evil men are evil; the best actions of the
unregenerate are sins: And therefore it is most necessary to be a good man.
The truth hereof appears, because a man may do what God commands, and omit and
forbear a work prohibited, and yet sin in both: For example, Aristides
practiced justice most strictly, yet herein he sinned, because it was no work
of faith. Alexander conquering Darius violated not the chastity of Darius his
wife and daughters, but forbear this prohibited and sinful action; yet therein
he sinned, because he forbear not of good conscience. But we must know, that
this sin lies not in the substance or matter of the work, which is materially
good, but in the vice of the doer, and manner or end of doing: Neither are
these sins in themselves but only by accident.

CHAP. XXI. Rules for necessary actions, in respect of the means, and the
order of the two Tables.
4 For the means. The best action may not be thrust on by evil means Romans 3.8
NO action is so necessary as it must be thrust on by evil means. We must not
do the least evil for the greatest good, which was Lots sin, to procure good by
evil; neither yield to a less evil, to prevent a greater, in evils of sin. In
civil things, it is a most necessary thing to preserve life; but not with a
lie, usury, sabbath-breaking* or going to Witche^: Life is not so necessary, as
without separation to cleave to that which is good. In spiritual things to
preach the word is so necessary, 1 Cor. 9.26.
as Paul cries, Woe unto himself if he do not, because the flock of God depends
upon him: But if I may not preach, unless I wound my conscience, by compounding
with heretics, and blending truth with error; I must never preach, but leave
the care of the Church to God, who without my lie, will provide for the good of
it. Thus Elijah fled and left his Ministry, because he could not exercise it,
unless he would have received Baals ceremonies, and flattered with the
Baalites: And if he had not thus forsaken his place, he had forsaken the
Church. Great Athanasius chused rather to leave his Church, than to yield any
thing to the Arrians. Act. 20.29.
Saint Paul knew, that after he went from Ephesus, grievous Wolves would come
in, not sparing the flock: And yet because he could not stay to preach, unless
he would have restored some pharisaical observations; and unless for peace
sake, he would have yeeld^d to the rites and image of Diana, he left the
place, because he must not do the greatest good by any evil means. Never let
any think to thrive, by means which God has accursed, and upon which himself
cannot pray for a blessing.

For the order of the two Tables.
All necessary actions must be done according to the order of the Tables, ever
esteeming the duties of the first Table, more necessary than they of the
second. This is Christ's own rule, Matthew. 22.38. This is the first and great
Commandment, Duties of the first table must be done first.
and the second is like to this, both in respect of the necessary binding, and
of the end; for even these are a worship of God, if they be performed in
faith, and for his commandment sake. Wherefore else did the Lord deliver two
Tables, whereas he might have put all into one, but that he would prefer and
claim the first place to duties that immediately concern his worship? From
whence Divines gather that rule of Antinomy and truth, that when the two Tables
are opposed, and both call for necessary duties, which both cannot be done at
the same time, the second Table must give place to the first, as Act. 5.25. It
is meet to obey God rather than man. Magistrates must be obeyed; but the first
Table derogates from the second* when both cannot be observed. So in the New
Testament, Parents and friends are to be loved; but if they be not hated for
Christ, when both cannot be loved together, one cannot be Christ's Disciple.

But here be three Caveats: Three caveats.


1 That a special commandment is more necessary, and dispenses with all the
Ten: And it is a principle, that all commandments of both tables run with one
exception, If God command not otherwise, Thou shall not kill, nor steal, unless
God command Abraham to kill his son, and the Israelites to rob the A^gyptians.
Thou shall make no graven image, unless God command Moses to make a Brazen
Serpent. Thus observations of immediate commandments give all Sovereignty to
God, who is to be simply obeyed and acknowledged above his Law.

2 Moral duties must take place of all ceremonies: The rule of Divines is, that
charity dispenses with ceremony, according to that, Matthew. 12.7.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, because mercy is moral, and sacrifice
ceremonial. So Abimelech gave David the Shewbread, which was not lawful, but
in the case of necessary mercy. And it was superstition in the Jews, that they
would rather suffer their City to be taken, Matthew. 12.11.
than fight upon the Sabbath day in their own defense. God allows an Ox to be
pulled out of a ditch, Exodus 12.16.
and led to water, and allows a necessary provision for the body, unto which
even Sabbath duties must give place.

3 Necessity (we say) has no law, but that is to be understood in man's laws,
when some sudden case falls out, so as the inferior cannot have recourse to
the Lawmakers, that then he may interpret the law himself, and break the
letter of it, to follow the reason and intent of it; as in case of the murder
of a thief. But in the Law of God, one only case does dispense with it, and
that is when necessity so alters a fact, as it takes away from it all reason
of sinning: As for example; it is not lawful to marry ones sister, but in the
beginning of the world extreme necessity altered this fact, and gave
dispensation. So it is not lawful to take away that which is another but
extreme necessity makes it lawful, because it is not another any longer,
seeing the Law of nature it self makes some things common in such extreme
necessity. On the Sabbath we must hold our selves strictly to Gods worship,
but if an house be on fire, we may leave it without sin. Note the equity of
that Law, Deuteronomy. 23.24, 25.

CHAP. XXII. Rules of Wisdom for necessary actions in respect of the scope and
binding of them.
ALL necessary actions, as they must begin with Gods will, 1 Scope. God must be
the end of all our actions.
so they must end with his glory. The end and scope of all our actions must be
God.

1 Because he made all things for himself.

2 He is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning from whom all is, and the end for
whom, and unto whom all must be referred.

3 If in all indifferent things Gods glory must be aimed at, much more in
necessary: But so it is in indifferent things, as eating, drinking, etc. 1 Cor.
10.31. and Romans 14.6. He that eats, eats to the Lord, or ought so to do.

4 The very Heathens had a glimmering hereof, professing that they were not
born for themselves, but partly their friends, partly their Country, and partly
God. But the Scripture speaks more plainly, that we owe all our selves to God.
Something indeed we owe to our neighbor, but that is in, 2 Binding necessity
duti s must be d ne, whatever follow.
and for God.

In the necessary duties of Religion, or our calling, we must hold our selves
bound to do them, whatsoever follow.

Two things commonly hinder us herein, which we must arm our selves against.

The first is fear of men's Judgments, faces, offense, and censures; but we
must tread this underfoot, if we have a comman^^m^^t and calling to do any
thing, as Paul did, 1 Cor. 4.3. I pass little to be judged of any man: Neither
feared he any persecution or trouble, so he might finish his course with joy.
Jeremy must make his brow of brass, to speak the word of the Lord, Chap. 1.
verse. 17. A Christian must prepare to pass through good report, and bad report,
and to count neither liberty nor life dear unto him. Daniel would open his
window, Daniel 6.10.
and pray as he was wont, even when his life was sought after.

Secondly* events of a^tions do often and much trouble us: For remedy whereof
ob^ ^ve two rules.

1 That of the Wise man, Eccles. 11.4. He that observes the wind shall not
s^w: It is a fo^lish Husbandman, who for sight of a cloud, forbears either his
seed time or harvest: So for sowing works of mercy, he that sticks in doubts,
and says, I may be poor, or old, long diseased, full of children, or
persecuted for the Gospel, and must provide for one, neglects his seed-time by
looking at winds and clouds. So many a carnal Gospeller says, If I should go
so often to Church as some, and be so forward in Religion, I should lose much
profit, and incur much rebukes and reproaches.

Therefore secondly, we must learn to leave events and successes to God; for
it is not in man to direct his steps, God disposes as he pleases. The Saints
of God are often frustrate of their godly p^rposes, as David in purposing and
preparing to build an house for the Lord. But first, they lose nothing, if they
do their du^y. Secondly, Gods overruling hand will dispose all to the best;
therefore there let them rest.

CHAP. XXIII. Rules for actions indifferent: first, In general.
A Great part of man's life is spent in the doing of natural and indifferent
actions, which in themselves are neither good nor evil, but as they are used:
And being so common and ordinary, many sins creep into them, because we take
our selves free and loose to do as we list in them; which conceit grows out of
ignorance of Gods wisdom, who by his word has tied u^ as straight in the use
of them as in things most necessarily enjoined. For there is no action in which
we must depart from God.

Obje^t. They are therefore indifferent, because they are neither commanded,
nor forbidden, and therefore as they be free, so be we also in them.

Answ. Alth^ugh there be no word commanding or forbidding, yet there is a w^rd
directing and ordering in them, as we shall see in some general rules
concerning them all, General Rules concerning all indifferents. 1 The most in
different must be by God. 1 W^rca^^. 2 Leave.
and in special rules applied to some particulars.

The general rules concerning them all, as meat, drink, apparel, recreation, i^
uses, marriage, and the like, are these:

1 The most indifferent action that is, must be used by warrant and leave from
God: Warrant is from the word, leave is by prayer; and thus must every creature
of God be sanctified by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. Our meat, our
apparel, our houses, our recreations must all be undertaken and used.

First, by the warrant of the word; for else it cannot be done in faith,
Former by the Word.
Romans 14.23. and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. The word must direct me
in this particular, as meat, apparel, recreation, that it is lawful in it
self, and to me, or else I sin in it.

Sec n^ly, by prayer; for we must lift up our hearts, Latter by Prayer.
at least in the use of them all: 1 In invocation for an holy use, suspecting
all our ways, and our inclinations to corrupt our selves in every thing. 2 In
thanksgiving for our liberty in all the creatures, that were justly forfeited,
and Gods blessing; in them. This neglected, 1 We have the creature, Reas.
but want the bl ssing have bread, but not the staff of bread; have money, but
not a bag to hold it; clothes, but no warmth; marriage, but not the comfort of
it; and so in the rest. 2 We do not distinguish our selves from the brute
beasts, who live by things before them, and never look above them to the giver.
3 We have no title recovered in any of them, but they all remain unclean, as
was signified in all the unclean beasts, as all other had been, but that they
were permitted by special leave, without which we are but usurpers. 4 God is
not acknowledged the Author of our life and liberties, and so is deprived of
his honor and homage, which no Lord among men will endure, in such as hold the
least copy under them.

The most indifferent action that is, must be done for God, that is, 2 The
most indifferent must be done for God.
to the glory and honor of God; whatsoever we eat or drink, etc. 1 Cor.
10.31. For while we take our part in the comforts of the creatures, God will
not lose his part of them, that is, his glory by them. Does my eating and
drinking make me heavy and unfit for the service of God, to perform it with
cheerfulness? here I have sinned in a lawful thing; for God looks to be served
with cheerfulness and a good heart, in the abundance of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.
v. 47. Does my apparel tend to pride up, and advance my self? This is a sinful
use of a lawful thing, wherein I should glorify God. Do my recreations and
sports not only justle out my duties of Christianity, of reading and
meditating, and private prayer; but ingross my time, so that I neglect my
special calling? Herein I use my liberty unlawfully, and turn it into a wicked
licentiousness: Recreation was never ordained by God to be an occupation, but
only an help unto it.

3 The most indifferent action that is, must be used in love, 3 The most
in^ifferent must be used in love. 1 N t offending others.
as well as in faith, to edification, as well as in sanctification. This
general rule is in 1. Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done to edifying, Romans
14.21. It is evil to eat with offense* and it is good, neither to eat flesh,
nor to drink wine, nor to do any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or made weak; and Paul would never eat, rather than offend a weak
brother. In case of offense, indifferent things lose their indifferency, and
become sins, and must not be done, be they never so small, never so
profitable, never so powerfully enjoined by authority, because an higher
authority of God, bids is nor offend our brother; the conscience of our brother
must be more tender unto us, than our own peace and preferment. Dan. 1.^.
Daniel and his fellows refusing the Kings meat, might seem very unwise, and
too strict, for so small a thing to lose the Kings favor and their own
advancement: but it was not frowardness in them, nor disobedience to the King,
but conscience and obedience to Gods commandment in a case offensive to
themselves and others: so they would not do the least evil for the greatest
good. So, is this garment lawful to me, and offensive to other of Gods
children? Then have I no liberty in it. Is this eating or drinking, or
Tobacco-taking lawful to me, and may it offend in circumstances? I must avoid
occasion of offense. Is this sport and recreation lawful in it self, and to
others* but is it offensive in me a public man, a Professor, a Preacher?
Wisdom teaches to refrain it. So the Apostle says, All things (that is,
indifferent, of which he there speaks) are lawful, but all things are not
expedient.

2 But building them up.
N^w as we must be far from offending any, so our endeavor must be to build
up our brethren, and our selves in the use of every indiffernt action.

Quest. How may that be?

Answ. When in the civil use of them we add some spiritual meditation, as
Christ when he spoke of bread, stirred the people to meditate on, and labor
for the food that abides to eternal life: So in eating and drinking we should
sometime think of feeding on Christ, the true bread and water of life; in
putting on our clothes, of putting on Christ as a garment; in putting them off,
of putting off the old man, and the lusts thereof: In Marriage, of the contract
between Christ and the faithful soul; in our j^urnies abroa^ and return home,
meditate with the Apostle Paul, of our being from home and at home wi^h the
Lord, etc. Thus shall we cherish and refresh our souls with our bodies.

4 The most indifferent must be used in sobriety.
4 The most indifferent things must be used in sobriety and moderation: And
this is.

1 When we use them as helps, not hindrances to our Calling, general or
special, but our hearts are kept by them in a fitness unto both. This is our
Saviors rule, Luke 21.34. Take heed that your hearts be not oppressed with
surfeiting or drunkenness or the cares of this life, that that day come
unawares.

2 When we exceed not in them our ability and degree, but square our selves to
the most sob^r of our age and condition: The neglect of which rule makes the
feast of churlish Nabal, like the feast of a King, and brings soft apparel out
of Kings houses into very Cottages, to the great confusion of all degrees, so
as every man is out of order; the servant more gallant than his Master or
Mistress, Scholars arraied in unseemly sort like Soldiers, the Gentleman like
a Nobleman, and the Carter like a Courtier, and every Degree, many degrees
beyond it self.

3 When we hold them indifferent not in our judgment only, but also in
affection, keeping the command of these, and be sure they command not us, 1
Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any thing: And 2 Cor. 7.30. We must rejoice in the creature, as not
rejoicing; use it as not using; buy, sell, and have a wife, is not having. This
is to affect indifferent things indifferently.

Contrary whereunto is that excessive desire and use of any creature, which
makes our servants our Masters, and puts us out of possession of them, that we
may be possessed by them, as when riches have our hearts, and we have not
power to command them to any good use; the Heathen disclaimed this slavery,
Divitiae mea sunt, non ego divitiarum. Sense.
My riches are mine (said Seneca) not I my riches: Would God Christians would
say so much, to whom grace offers better things. So when a man or woman have
inslaved themselves to any creature, and made it a Tyrant and Commander, as
insatiable Drunkards, who can no more be without strong drink or wine, than
the fish without water, or themselves without air. The Mule (they say) must
have the bag hang by his mouth, and these must have the bottle or pot at their
elbow continually.

Others that so addict themselves to that bewitching weed Tobacco, above all
season, set more thoughts upon it than they bestow upon God, bestow more time
on it by ten parts in one day than upon Gods service, yea, than upon any
profitable Calling, bestow more charge upon it than upon all pious and
charitable uses, through the year; yea serve it, as their God night and day,
and all to turn their bodies into Chimnies, their blood into Sut, their best
and radical humor into smoke. This is an intemperate and sinful use of a
creature, in it self good, if physically used: For we condemn not drink, when
we condemn drunkenness, but the drunken use of it. Neither can these dry
Drunkards more justify their sin than the moist, nay far less, seeing the one
is ordained for common use, so is not the other. But without comparing them
together, it is a great sin to be a slave either to a Pot, or to a Pipe.

5 In all indifferent actions, we must endeavor so wisely to pass them, 5 For
no indifferent, forgo better things th^n they; as, 1 Time.
as we d^ not for them lose any thing better than they; such as are,

1 Time: Men must not cast away much time in them. We should eat out as little
time with our meat as we may, much less play away our time. Women must be
conscionable to spend as little time as may be in arraying and trimming
themselves, for time is better than apparel. Neither for wealth must we
exchange our time, but that we reserve special times for better ends: For all
the wealth on earth will not buy an hour of time.

2 Our good name is better than any indifferent thing, 2 Good name.
and ought to be more precious than the sweetest ^yntment: We must not eat
and drink to be counted Gluttons and Drunkards; nor play in excess, to be
counted Dicers and Gamesters, which are infamous names, and such persons were
banished out of the Heathens Commonwealth; nor so apparel our selves as to be
accounted proud, garish, and wanton; nor build, to be accounted vain and
prodigal; but prefer our good names before the use of these.

3 Our goods and portion of wealth which God has given us, 3 Estate.
are better than the excessive use of any of th^se, and we must not waste our
goods more than is fit for our estate. Men have no warrant to venture great
sums of money upon a few casts at Dice, or Bowls, or other sports. We are not
Lords of our goods, but Stewards, and must be drawn to an account for them.
Religion will teach a man good husbandry, and though it allow not only a
necessary and convenient expense, but also for honest delight and pleasure, in
meat, drink, apparel, recreation, building etc. yet it allows no prodigality,
except in the case of godly and charitable uses, to the poor members of Christ.
Oh how rich should some mean men be in good works, if they had given that to
the poor which they have lost in p^ay? And who can say but one is far better,
far more comfortable than the other?

4 Our virtues and graces are far better than any indifferent thing, 4 Virtues.
and therefore we must not lose these for the other. Against which rule they
sin who in meats and drinks lose moderation, sobriety, and temperanc^; and they
who in apparel lose their humility and lowliness; and they who in recreation
lose their patience, meekness, love and peace; and they who in Marriage lose
their chastity and holiness, etc.

By all which Rules we see, h^w godliness takes not away the use of Gods
creatures (for it only gives liberty in them) but orders the use thereof, that
they may be used in the just measure of their goodness, and give place to
better; and restrains us no further than so, as the Calling be not exceeded,
nor the Rules of moderation violated.

CHAP. XXIV. Special Rules for Meat and Drink.
NOW for the special Rules of things indifferent, because I must not suffer
this Discourse to grow so large as it would; omitting all other things
indifferent, there be three things, as most common, so more specially to be
treated of:

1 Meat and drink. 2 Recreation. 3 Apparel. For all which the word of God is
plentiful in the Rules of Christian Wisdom, and Direction.

I. Rules for Eating and Drinking.
Rule^ f^r eating and d^inking. 1 Necessity.
First, For the lawfulness of it: 1 It is necessary to nourish and strengthen
us in our duties, and repair strength decayed. 2 It may also serve for delight;
for God has given us leave liberally to use the creatures, not only bread to
strengthen the heart, but oil to make his face glad. 3 God has afforded us
leave to feast togeth^r, and invite one another, for the maintaining and
cherishing of Christian love, and mutual fellowship, as we see in Jobs
children, which was nor unlawful; and the Primitive Churches had their Agapa's
and Love Feasts, of which the Scripture makes mention, Act. 2.46.

2 Propriety.
Secondly, For the Propriety; We must eat and drink our own, the sweat of our
own brows, not other men's. Many cut large pieces in other men's loaves, I mean
that which they know is not theirs, but other men's, if all debts were paid.
This is an high kind of injustice, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. not to eat our own bread.

3 Measure.
Thirdly, For the Measure: We must eat and drink according to the call of
Nature or honest and moderate delight, to make us, and keep us in a fitn^ss to
godly duties of hearing, reading, praying, etc. All that eating and drinking
whereby men make themselves, heavy, sleepy, unwieldy, and unfit for good
duties, is sinful; for this is not a refection, or refreshing, but a
destruction, or oppression of nature.

4 Affection.
Fourthly, For our Affection; We must eat and drink with moderation of
affection, not to sit at it, as though we had nothing else to do, as many who
bring themselves under the power of the creature, such as cannot be without
the Pot at their mouth, or without the Pipe at their nose; men of whom the
Apostle speaks, that corrupt themselves with the creatures, losing sobriety,
modesty, chastity, health, and reason it self. Here is an utter perverting of
God Ordinance, who has given us his creatures to refresh and help our selves
by them, but men instead thereof, hurt and destroy themselves by them.

5 Time.
Fifthly. For the time; We must not so eat and drink, as we eat up also too
much time; for so we hinder our selves in our Callings, which we ought
specially to further, Redeeming the time, Ephesians. 5.16. Numbers set down to eat
and drink, and in feasting and feeding their bodies, never feel the passage of
three or four hours; whereas to sit out a Sermon one hour long is very tedious;
so little care have most men of feeding their souls.

6 Sweetness.
Sixthly, In eating, desire to taste the goodness and sweetness of God himself
in his creatures; else have we no better use of them than the brute creatures.
Say to thy self, O Lord, how sweet and good art thou in thy self, who can put
such sweetness in thy creature?

7 Communication.
Seventhly, We should use good and savoury speech, as salt to our meat, to
acknowledge Gods bounty and goodness, to praise him, and to edify others. Our
empty and barren hearts cannot tell how to wear out the time of feasting, but
either in trifles, or inviting of others to eat and drink, who need rather
bridles, than spurs.

Quest. What, no other speech but of Scripture? How then should we be merry?

Answ. It is true, That commonly all other speech but carnal, is unsavory: But
a Christian must consider, 1 That he eats and drinks before the Lord, and his
speeches must become the presence of God, who hears and expects that all
the speech of Christians be better than silence. 2 All the speeches of
Christians ought to savor of sobriety and wisdom, and the grace of the heart;
for, whom call we to our tables but Gods children by profession, who must be
like themselves every where? 3 God has given us leave to be merry, but with
this only restraint, Be merry in the Lord; not against him, nor setting him
out of sight, as those who never think themselves merry, but in rude and
ungodly behaviors and speeches unbeseeming Christians.

Plato and Zenephon thought it fit and profitable, that men's speeches at Meals
should be written: And if Christians should so do, what kind of books would
they be?

Eighthly, ^ Meditation of four things.
In our eating and drinking we must be careful to season our hearts with
these, and the like Meditations: 1 How prone we are to know immoderate joy,
and provoke God in our feasts. Job was suspicious of his sons, sent to them to
sanctify themselves, and afterward himself sacrificed for them. 2 That we
shall not want incitements or provocations of such as are invited with us, or
otherwise to forget our selves, which incitements we must watch against, and
arm our selves aforehand.

I remember the story of Antigonus, who being invited to a place, where a
notable Harlot was to be present, asked counsel of Menedemus what he should
do: He bad him only remember that he was a Kings Son.

Good men may be invited where none of the best may meet them; the best
counsel is, to keep in mind that they be Kings Sons, Gods Children; and a
base thing it were to be allured from their profession, by the ungodly. 3 To
consider in our eating and drinking our own end, and mingle our feasting with a
meditation of death: As Joseph had his Tomb in his Garden, to season his
delight with meditation of his end. Alas, this feeding and feasting, is but a
little repair of a ruinous house which must go down. The Egyptians had a
Skeleton or carcass brought into their feasts to the same purpose: So do thou,
set thine own carcass before the eye of thy mind, and it will moderate thee in
the pampering of it. 4 Consider how many poor ones want some of thy
superfluity. It is a great sin of great men, to drink wine in bowls, and eat
the fat, and to forget the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6.6. Therefore Neh. 8.10.
Eat the fas, and drink the sweet, and send part to them for whom nothing is
prepared. Say with thy self, Who am I to be so full, when many are hungry?
That I should abound, when so many want? How am I indebted unto God to be
thankful; and shall I requite his love with such unkindness, as to grow wanton,
idle, and forgetful of him when he is most mindeful of me? Must I eat and
drink to rise up to play? No, I must bestir me in such duties, wherein I may
express much love, for much love.

CHAP. XXV. Rules for the right ordering of our selves in our sports.
THese concern, 1 The matter and kind of our sports and plays: 2 The manner
of using them aright. 3 The right ends.

First, Rules for sports. 1 Matter of them, not 1 Holy things. 2 Nor unholy.
The matter of our sports must be in things which our consciences tell us are
lawful or indifferent. Therefore, 1 Holy things, as phrases of Scripture, must
not be played with, Thou shall fear the holy Name of God, not delight thy self
in swearing. 2 Sinful things are not to be matter of our sport; As 1 To make a
man drunk, or swear, or to laugh at such persons; for this is a matter of
sorrow to see Gods Image so defaced: And David's eyes gushed out with Rivers of
tears to see such spectacles. 2 Unlawful sports, as Plays and Interludes,
which are the representations of vices not to be named among Christians;
besides men's wearing of women's apparel, the incentives of lust, and fewellers
of fleshly flames. Heathen Lawgivers have banished such out of their
Countries. 3 Mixed dancing of men and women together, never read of in
Scripture with approbation, and here in our Text noted to be the fruit of
Idolatry, Riot, Drinking, and all other dissolute behavior. Would God, the
root, and tree, and all branches laden with such fruit, were quite stubbed up.
The Heathens themselves condemned it: Nemo nisi aut ebrius aut infanus
tripudlat.
It was an ordinary speech among the Romans, None but either a Drunkard, or a
mad man danceth. It were too long to infer the sentences of the Heathen. The
general consent of Fathers, and the determinations of Councils made against
this wicked and lascivious practice.

Basil in a Sermon of his concerning Drunkenness, says, God made our knees not
to caper like Goats, but to bow to the worship of God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And Viret. on the seventh Commandment, Chorca in circulo, centrum diabolus,
circumferentia ejus Angels. Therefore let the Sons of Light detest such an
unfruitful work of darkness; For what is there here but lust of the flesh, and
lust of the eyes? What is here else, but carrying fire in the bosom, and
walking upon coals, and how can a man avoii burning? This practice agrees
neither with the gravity of the man, nor the shamefastness of the woman; nay,
the very sight of it in a woman, is known more to overwhelm a man than strong
drink, as we may see in Herod, Mar. 6.22.

4 Unlawful games are such as the Laws of the Land make unlawful, which bind
the conscience in things indifferent: Now among unlawful Games, the Laws reckon
Dicing, and so does the Law of God, because it has no good report in it, no
praise, no virtue, Phil. 4.8. and then it cannot be indifferent.

And the like may be said of all those Plays, the ground of which is lot,
seeing a lot is an Oracle and declaration of Gods will, a part of his Name,
more solemn than any Oath, and must not be vainly used, or for recreation.

Object. It is no lot, we use it for no such end.

Answ. That is no matter; the Jews cast lots for our Saviors garments, the
nature of lots remained, though the good end was neglected.

Object. Gods providence overrules all other games.

Answ. In other lawful Games that depend upon wit, strength, or skill, our own
infirmity, or want of skill, may be blamed in all imperfection: But here
because the ground is a lot, wherein we have no cunning (unless by cogging and
cheating which very Roysters condemn) nothing can be accused but Gods
immediate direction: Let men consider whom they dishonor, when they say, What
luck, what chance is this?

Lyranus in his praeceptorium, by nine Reasons proves the unlawfulness of
playing with Dice.

The Heathens themselves condemned it even in their Princes; as Suetonius in
the life of Augustus reports, that it was his greatest blemish, that he was at
leisure to play at Dice.

Chilo being sent from the Lacedaemonians to Corinth, upon an Embassage, and
finding the Senators of that City at Cards and Dice, would perform no part of
his Message, saying, He would not so much dishonor the Lacedaemonians, as that
they should either make or meddle with such persons. Were such Games infamous
among Heathens? How unworthy then are they among Christians?

Secondly, As sports and plays must be indifferent in their nature, so also
in their use; and that is when we confine our selves to the lawful manner of
using them.

1 The persons must have two qualities; 1 They must be pure, 2 The manner.
For to the pure all things are pure and to none else. Secondly, They must be
weary, and need refreshing; for God allows not the most lawful sports, till
the body and mind stand in need; till then, we must be busy in better
things.

2 All sports must be sanctified by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. Prayer
before, and Thanksgiving after, because we are in more danger to forget our
selves herein, than in any thing else; in that we unbend our selves from our
ordinary business, and think we may take more liberty than usual. A strange
lesson to Gamesters.

3 All sports must be joined with the fear of God, Rejoice with trembling,
which suffers not a man to power out himself to pleasure.

4 All must be joined with moderation agreeing to the time, person, and place.
A man must not be a lover of pleasure, set upon sport, as some, who are given
over to sport, never weary, all the week long is too little. The Apostle
commands, to rejoice, as not rejoicing; that is, to be so moderate and
retired, as not to overvalue sports, nor to set our affections on them, as
those who have other things to do. So observe due circumstances: Some at Cards
and Dice turn night into day, and sit up all night and day, longer than they
could for ten times more money be bound to any good business. Some wickedly
incroach on time allotted to Gods service, some part of the Sabbath day, and
other times; Some keep from Church, and some run from Church with their Games
in their mouths: Others bestow upon them too much time which should be
employed in the calling, either general or particular, and so much indamage
themselves thereby. The Mowers rifle is good to be set to his Sithe when it is
blunt; But if he does nothing but what still, he spoils the Sithe, and
hinders his work. Therefore let us moderate our selves in our sports, according
to the most sober of our age, degree, condition, and sort of life, and use them
with such as are both godly and wise, who may rather watch over us that we
offend not, rather than draw and provoke us so to do.

5 We must not exchange any virtue or good thing with our delight and sport
(as before we noted) because every thing that is good, even the least, is
better than any indifferent thing: And theref^re:

1 We must not by sports hinder our Callings, but fit our selves to them.

2 We may not clog our selves with them, because they ought to speed out way
in our spiritual course and race. Take heed they become not the Devils
bird-lime, in which while we wallow, we are disabled to mount aloft in
heav^nly meditations.

3 We may not lose our patience, our meekness, our love, as they that scorn,
quarrel, st rm, and rage like Heathens, against luck, chance, or fortune: yea,
swear and curse, if never so little crossed, as they that never heard of
Religion.

4 We may not lose our goods, or waste our substances, or play away more than
without any doubt or scruple of conscience we may bestow upon honest delight,
the necessary maintenance of other things and necessary contribution to the
Ministry, and the poor first liberally provided for.

5 We may not lose our good name, which is a precious thing, as to be counted
Gamesters, Dicers, common Bowlers, or idle persons, or a companion of them, or
by obscene, scurrilous, or uncomely words or actions, carry the brand of a rude
and disordered Mate.

6 We may not lose our mastery over our sports, to let them have us at
command; For he that thus loves pastime, shall be a poor man, Prove. 21.17.

Now we come to the right ends, 3 The right ends of sports.
which in our sports we must set before us, if we would not sin.

1 The end of sports must not be to pass the time, which we ought to redeem,
1 Negative.
and not let pass without gaining something by it better than it self. Nor to
maintain idleness, as men that cannot else tell what to do with themselves, for
this is as ill as idleness; for idleness is not only not working, but a doing
of trifles, and that which we dare not bring into our account to God. A
pitiful thing, that Christians having so much to do, and so much means, and so
many calls to their business, should find nothing so fit as Cards, and Die^.

2 The end of our sports must not be to purchase our neighbors money, or to
help our selves by his hindrance. And I would know, by what right of Gods word
I can hold my Neighbors money which comes into my hand without labor love
gift, or just contract. If it be not mine by justice distributive or
commutative, it cannot be mine by God: But no law of God or man, has ranked
Wagers in either; Nay, the Civil Law compels none to pay that which is lost; or
if he have paid, he may recover it within fifty hours.

2 Affi ma ive
But the right ends of sports are these:

1 Gods glory: Nothing can be lawful wherein some glory is not won to God, in
whatsoever we do. 1 Cor. 10.31. And therefore such sports as do not enable us
to cheerfulness in the duties of Religion, and Christianity, fail in this end.

2 All our earthly joys must help forward our spiritual joy in God, and the
eternal joys of his Kingdom; If they come in comparison with them, or will
step up to hinder us therein, they are to be contemned. Our chief joy must
ever be placed in the Lord, and our chief affections must be reserved for that
fullness of joy which is at Gods right hand. First seek the Kingdom of God,
even in these, and above these: How does he so, who spends more time in these
than in that? Yea more by a thousand degrees, if we would measure the time of
his sports, by the time of godly desires, and Religious duties?

3 The preservation of our own health, and not to impair the health of our
souls or bodies, as many by their watching to play, destroy their health, and
call numbers of diseases upon themselves, and oftentimes untimely death. In
this use alone can all recreations become good and comfortable unto us,
although our corrupt nature is loath to be so confined.

Object. If only these Recreations, in this manner, and these ends be lawful,
you leave us none.

Answ. Only these, in this manner, and ends are lawful; and yet we disallow
nothing which Gods word allows, which ought to govern all his people. Gods
word allows for the exercise of the body, the use of the Bow, 2 Samuel 1.18. of
Music, Neh. 7.67. of Hunting, Hawking, Birding, and such sports, without
swearing, disorder, and needless tormenting of the silly creatures. And for the
exercise of wit, he allows honest Riddles, Judge. 14. and such Games as the
ground of which is wit, or skill, as Chess, Draught^, etc. Besides, an heart
that is sanctified, would inure it self to heavenly joys, and prefer them
above carnal, and little affect those which loose persons so much dote upon.

And to those who will be ready to object the use and custom of the world, and
the practice of so many fore-running ages, I answer and conclude with the
Apostles words, Romans 12.2. Fashion not your selves according to this world, but
prove what is the will of God. Or if you will not walk by Gods Rules, your sin
shall destroy your own souls; Look you to your duties, I have endeavored to do
mine in discovering the same unto you.

CHAP. XXVI. Rules of wisdom concerning our Apparel.
HAving thus finished the Rules of Wisdom, concerning Meat, Rules for Apparel.
and Drink, and Recreations, we come to such Rules as concern Apparel; and
they are four:

1 The matter of our Apparel must not be stately and costly, 1 For the matter.
which must be measured partly by the ability our selves have, partly the
condition of life we are in, and partly by the example of such as are sober,
grave, and wise in our rank. Yea, even in the matter of our Apparel, our
sobriety and modesty must appear; yea, our humility: Prima v^stis data est
propter usum, non propter luxum.
When God made Adam garments, he made them of skins, homely and base, that he
might read therein his mortality, and that by his sin, he was become like the
beasts whose skins covered him.

2 For the manner of our Apparel, it must not be strange, garish, 2 The fashion.
affecting new fashions, which argues levity and new-fangledness, but such as
becomes holiness, Tit. 2.3. and according to the sober custom of our Country
and rank, Zeph. 1.8. I will visit Kings Children, and those that wear strange
Apparel; that is, such as in the form of fashion is wanton, curious, odd,
savouring of pride, lightness, and singularity. A fearful threat, under which
our whole Land lies, which is a receptacle of all the fashions of all
Countries, besides our own daily inventions of new fashions of monstrous
Apparel, that were men and women's bodies as monstrous as their Apparel; they
would be cast out of the company and account of men: And howsoever their
bodies be, surely their minds be monstrous, and filled with vanity: And how
just were it with God* seeing such persons will not fashion their clothes to
their bodies, to fashion them to their clothes? The Apostle wishes us not to
fashion our selves according to the world; which Precept is so far out of date
and use, that almost the fashions of all the world, and the vanity of all
Countries, England the worlds Ape.
may seem to be arrived and landed in this Land of ours, that a man may read
in Capital Letters upon men's Garments, the lightness, and lewdness that is
within.

3 For the measure of it; Beware of excess in Apparel, 3 For measure
which is a great sin, and carries with it,

1 Expense of Wealth, which might be better reserved to the use of the Church
or Commonwealth, or covering the poor and naked Saints. 1 Excess in Apparel, a
great sin. Reasons.
All excess is commonly maintained with covetousness, injustice, or
unmercifulness.

2 A note of a vain mind that glories in his Wardrobe, as if a Thief should
boast of his bolts, or glory in his brand, or mark of Felony; for Apparel is
the cover of our shame.

3 Waste of time, and idleness, in the too accurate and curious culture of the
body, which should be spent either in adorning the soul, or following our
ordinary Calling.

4 Oftentimes debts and unjust detaining of men's dues from them. We have known
great Rents soon turned into great Ruffes, and Lands into Laces. We have heard
of some brave Dames, in such variety of fashions and colors, as if they had
stood with a Pedlars shop about them; and of some brave Gallants, that have
carried some whole Manors upon their backs. But Mr. Latimer, in his time, a
man of much observation, noted one commodity in his Leather coat, which he
wore at the Court, when the Gallants mocked him, he told them, His was paid
for, and so were not many of their Velvets and Sattins.

4 Consider the ends and use of Apparel, and that is, 1 Spiritual; 2 Civil.
Spiritual, 4 The kinds of Apparel. 1 Spiritual.
many ways:

1 When by putting clothes on, we see our misery, and in the nakedness of our
bodies, the nakedness of our souls.

2 When we labor to put on Christ Jesus as a garment to cover us from the
storms and tempests which our sins have raised against us. I counsel thee to
buy of me white Garments of Innocence, Rev. 3.3. When by girding our Apparel
to us, we labor to girt up our loins, and look for our Lord Jesus.

4 When by putting off our old Garments, we daily put off some relick of the
old man.

5 When in adorning the body, we study to adorn the mind with humility,
holiness, modesty, meekness, etc. Not make any superstitious use, or put
Religion in Garments.

2 Civil, threefold. 1 Health.
Civil, and that is threefold; 1 For Health; 2 For Honesty; 3 For Ornament.

1 For Health and necessity, to defend us from the injury of weather, and to
keep us warm: To this end God clothed Adam; and it is a curse to put on
clothes, and not to be warm, Hag. 1.6.

2 For Honesty in two Branches: 1 Decency. 2 Distinction.

2 Honesty; in Decency.
First, Decency; For nakedness in the state of Innocence was a glorious
Ornament, but presently after the Fall, shame and deformity came in; and
therefore presently Adam sewed leaves together, and God made Coats to hide and
cover that nakedness. Now Decency requires seemly and cleanly Apparel, nor
sordid, base, and slovenly; and condemns that affected nakedness of men and
women, especially who wear their clothes, so as they discover the nakedness of
many parts of their body; whereas sin has cast shame on every part, and calls
for a cover over all but for necessity.

Distinction.
Secondly, Distinction of Persons, Sexes, Ages, and Callings. The man may not
wear the woman's Apparel, nor the woman the man's, Deuteronomy. 22.5. Against which Law
of Nature, and common honesty, how manly do women attire themselves, and how
effeminately do men imitate women, as though both were willing to change Sexes?
How undecent is it to see an old man in a youthful habit, to see a Minister in
his Ruffians hair, Pickadillies, and fashion like some Soldier? To see a
Peasant clothed like a Prince? As all sorts of men almost are confused in
Apparel. Joseph when he was set over all the Land of Egypt, was distinguished
from inferior Princes by his fine Linen, and golden Chain. In times past,
soft Garments were in Kings houses, but now that is no distinction of Courtiers.

CHAP. XXVII. Concerning Ornament in Apparel: Wherein three Questions are
resolved.
3 Ornament.
THE third and last Civil use of Garments is Ornament; Where consider two or
three Questions.

Quest. 1. Whether be Ornaments Lawful to be used, seeing the Apostle
commands women that their Apparel be not outward, with broydered hair, and
gold, nor pearls, nor costly Apparel, which he opposes to comely Apparel? 1
Pet. 3.3. 1 Timothy 2.9.

Answ. They are; For the Apostle simply condemns not the things themselves,
which are the good creatures of God, nor all use of them in Ornament, which
Rebeccah and Joseph being advanced, and all the Israelitish women, ware in
Earrings and Bracelets, which was not their sin. Deuteronomy. 32.
But he condemns in them,

1 The over-common and unseasonable use; for Ornaments are not fit for all
persons and times, but must be used sparingly, not commonly, having respect to
times and solemnity. They be for great, not for common men, neither for those
every day: The rich man in the Gospel is condemned for going in fine purple
every day.

2 He condemns the affected and excessive use of them; for they more affected
the adorning of the body, than of the mind, to which the Apostle in both
places calls them: Whereas a Christian must chiefly provide for the adorning
of the mind inwardly.

3 He condemns their offensive use of them, who did not use them as the sober
and grave Matrons of their years and age; but being newly converted from the
Heathens, still retained the Heathenish Ornaments, and would not, being
Christians, be put down by the Heathens, but retained the former manner of
adorning themselves.

4 He condemns their end in wearing these things, which was to set forth their
bodies, and pride up themselves with their Ornaments; whereas all Ornaments
must be used to Gods glory, while we adorn his Temple, and not to draw men's
eyes upon us.

Quest. 2. May not a man wear long hair for Ornament?

Answ. The Ornament of a man's head is short hair; long hair is an effeminate
Ornament, 1 Cor. 11.14. Does not nature it self teach, Against lock^ and long
hair in men.
that if a man have long hair, it is a shame for him? but if a woman have long
hair, it is a praise to her.

Object. We may use other things for Ornament, and why not our hair?

Answ. In Ornament we must look we be without offense, and that is, when we
frame our selves to the example of the grave and sober, who amongst us count
the fashion of flaring Locks, Effeminate, and Ruffian-like.

Again, in Ornament, as in every thing else, we must express godliness,
modesty, and sobriety; whereas this fashion of men, is received as a badge of a
sight mind, and an intemperate person.

Object. The Nazarites did nourish their hair.

Answ. That was by the special Law of their Profession, which Profession and
Law, and all is now ceased. If thou will be a Nazarite, thou must drink no
Wine, nor strong Beer; a hard law to many of our Locksters. That of Absalom
does not necessarily conclude against it, that his hair became his halter; yet
it is not to be passed lightly: Compare his pride with his fall, and we may
observe that God does ordinarily punish us in that wherein we sin.

Quest. ^. May not a woman paint her face, and mend her complexion?

Answ. No, Against painting of faces and complexions.
every one ought to be content with their own feature and complexion, and to
devise artificial forms and favors to set upon their bodies or faces, is a
most abominable practice.

For first, They are not content with their form which God has given in them
either because they are proud, and would not be inferior to others in beauty;
or because they are unchaste, and would by Art allure lovers when Nature has
failed them.

2 The form of it is a lie; it is no beauty, but a Picture of it, no sincerity,
no truth in it. They dissemble themselves to be other than God made them. What
truth may we expect within, when a man may read in their faces lying and
dissimulation? How is this to abstain from the appearance of evil?

3 What a dishonor is it to God, that a wretched worm should go about to
correct and mend his workmanship? How would a mean Workman take it, that a
Bungler should offer to correct, or alter his work?

4 What an indignity is it to take the face of that which they say is a member
of Christ, and make it the face of an Harlot? We read but of one in the
Scripture that painted her face, 2 King. 9.30.
and that was Jezabel, an arrant Strumpet, and called The Mother of
Fornication. How much more unseemly was it in that Vicar of Christ Pope Paul
the second, as Platina writes?

5 Our Savior plainly tells us, Matthew. 5. That we cannot make one hair white
or black, that is, we have not power of our hair to make it, no not to color
it; and yet these will make as many white and black as they list.

6 If thou be ashamed of that face which God has made thee, he will on a day
be ashamed of that face thou have made thy self. And dare a Christian carry a
face in his life time, which neither God made at first, nor he dares appear
withal in the Resurrection?

Object. But I must please my Husband, and hold his heart to me.

Answ. Will it not please him to behold the face that God made? or can thou
please him in bringing a strange beauty to cousen him withal, that he knows
is not thine own? or if he take thee for beautiful when thou art deformed,
would thou be thus deceived in a Husband, for a fair woman to marry a
painted Husband?

Object. but I may cover a deformity in my body.

Answ. Yes, but not by setting a new form upon thy face, nor by dissembling.

Object. Does not the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 12. We put covers on the members
that are least honorable?

Answ. 1. The Apostle speaks of not contemning the poorest Christian, under
that similitude.

2 We cover uncomely parts, but with what? with clothes to hide them, not with
painting, stibium, white lead, purpurisse, or cheek-varnish.

3 If thy external form be not so beautiful, beautify it with grace,
humility, the fear of God, and other Christian virtues. The Churches beauty is
within, which God and his Angels, and good men respect in the person that is
most deformed and contemptible.

CHAP. XXVIII. Rules for our carriage toward all men in general.
THE second sort of Rules concerning Man, and the things of men, respects our
carriage toward other men; and that, 1 In general toward all: In special
toward good, or bad.

General Rules to carry our selves toward all men. 1 Respect not all alike.
The general Rules are these:

1 Wisely to distinguish between men, and not promiscuously respect all alike.
1 This is a point of wisdom, 1 Cor. 6.6. And 2 commanded us, Jud. 22. Have
compassion on some, putting difference, others save with fear. Again, 3 Many
precepts can never be observed without it: As first, in things respecting God,
Cast not holy things to Dogs, Matthew. 7.6. that is, such as are known to be
wilful repellers of the truth, lest they profane them, and tear you. Secondly,
In things of men, Do good to all, but especially to the household of faith.
Thirdly, concerning our selves, He that hates, will counterfeit, though he
speak favorably, believe him not, etc. Prove. 26.24, 25. Therefore labor to
discern one from another. 4 There is great difference between an Israelite and
an Egyptian, between a Jew, and a Samaritan; And we must observe the
difference, wherein the Lord goes before us, who though he be patient and
good unto all, yet he is specially good unto Israel, even the upright of heart.

Object. This is to anticipate Gods judgment and censure.

Answ. No, because our judge meant reaches not to a man's final estate, but to
the present only; For we may not judge beyond our eyes, nor yet against them:
It is alike folly and wickedness to justify the ungodly, as to condemn the
innocent. Against this Rule fail those general men, whom all fashions and
companies please well enough, no matter whether Protestants or Papists,
Religions, or profane, Drunkards or sober, swearers, or fearers of an oath; as
the Jews, they put no difference between Christ and the Thieves who were
crucified with him, but only that Christ was the worst. Others put difference
between the godly and others, such as between Jews and Samaritans, they will
not meddle with a man truly fearing God, for a dish of water. But a fearful
sign it is when grace is not acknowledged.

2 Although we must make account to live amongst all, 2 Must live by a^l, but
s^^t with the b^st.
yet our care must be to sort with the best; that is, we must embrace
friendship with all so far as is poss^ble, Romans 12.18. and so as we war not
with God, but familiarity only with good m^n, who are but a few. Lightness of
familiarity is indiscretion. Here the Rule holds well, ^o try before we
trust; yea, a wise Christian must not commit himself to every one that seems
good, by the example of Christ, Joh. 2.24. For 1 Much hypocrisy lies at the
root of men's hearts. 2 Satan has taught many to transform themselves, and make
Religion and good words a cloak for their own ends. 3 Never did the Devil more
hurt to Christianity, than by false Brethren, who were sent in to spy their
l^berty. For even thy brethren, and the house of thy Father, even they have
dealt unfaithfully with thee, -- believe them not, though they speak fair to
thee, Jer. 12.6. He that eats bread with me (says David) and he that dips
his finger in the platte^ with me, even he lift up his heel against me: And
Christ says, A man's enemies are they of his own household. 4 Solomon says, An
unfaithful man is as a broken tooth and a sliding foot, Prove. 25.19. 5 Christ
would not commit himself to some that a^ said to believe in his Name, because
he knew what was in man. Many friends are like deep ponds, clear on the top
and all muddy at the bottom. And therefore a Christian must be well advised
before he inwardly converse with another. Now if a man must be careful even in
entertaining good company, how careless are men of themselves when they thrust
themselves into evil company, which is more contagious than any sickness, more
infectious than any pestilence? no age so catching of any disease, as every age
is of deadly diseases of the mind in such poisoned air. Let no Christian that
will be ruled by Gods wisdom, presume to converse in any such company further
than the limit of his particular Calling, or other just occasion and dealing is
offered.

3 In our converse with all men; we must keep a determination, In all
c^mpanies do good, or take good.
either to do good unto others, or receive good from others, helping one
another to life as occasion shall be offered, Heb. 10.24. Let us consider one
another, to provo^e to love and good works, Jude 20. Edify one another in your
holy fa th. Motives so to do:

1 How profi^abl^ should we be, if our lips were ever feeding others, Reas.
Prove. 10.20. And if our diligence were to draw understanding from others.
Prove. 2.5. How should we abound in wisdom, and make our whole life fruitful?
This would keep us in good trading, and return of godliness.

2 This is the right end and improvement of our gifts, for the good of the
whole body, Romans 12 6.

3 Here is an excellent work of love, which is called the Bond of perfection,
which ties persons and virtues together, and perfects them by frequent actions.

By conv^^sation actually confute all wickedness.
4. In what company soever a man comes, his care must be that his life and
conversation be a visible confutation of all ungodliness. Daniels piety
confuted Idolatry, and Lot was a real reproof of Sodom. A Christians light
must always shine, even in the darkness of the world, and against it. Should
the life of a Christian be like the life of unbeleevers, covetous,
contentious, conceited, unjust etc. or should not the life of a wife Christian,
vary from the multitude and common people, in judgment and practice? Did not
Christ and his followers so? This Rule is opposite to that worldly wisdom, to
swim with the stream, and to do as the most do, to avoid the note of
singularity. But here, as in all the course of godliness; 1 We must become
fools that we may be wise. 2 We must not avoid men's evil speaking, by
running with them into the same excess of riot. 3 We must not take the example
of many and great ones, but of Christ, the greatest and wisest of all: And
Phil. 3.17. he ye followers of me, and look on them that walk so. These
examples suit to our Rule.

Love ^very man's person, no man's si^.
5 Christiani^y enjoins love unto all, even the worst, whose vices we must
hate, their persons we must love; by which virtue all men have place in our
prayers, in our mercy and compassion as occasion requires. This grace covers a
multitude of sins in all; it bears with infirmity, it forgives offenses in
all, Col. 3.13. forbearing, and forgiving one another. And therefore the
Apostle wi^heth us, above all things to put on love. And to consider that
motive, Col. 4.7. Every one is one of us, even the worst, in the natural and
civil bond; one of us, if not in faith, yet in flesh; one of our Neighbors, or
Congregation, or at least by the common bond of a Christian.

Join with good conscience, good manners.
6 Religion requires courtesy as well as piety, good manners, together with
good conscience; and therefore we must be courteous to all, 1 Pet. 2.17. and
2.8. Honor all men. And Romans 12.10. In giving honor go one before another.
Which honor is a good opinion conceived inwardly, and expressed outwardly, by
reverent words and deeds. Christianity will make us have a low opinion of our
selves, and better of others, than of our selves.

Object. Some are so bad, or so base, as no honor or respect belongs unto them.

Answ. None is so bad, but has some honor on him, he is Gods creature, he
is a man, a Christian, and he may be a good man^ a member of Christ, and
certain reverence belongs to all this.

Object. But how can superiors, in higher place, honor their inferiors?

Answ. Many ways: 1 In action, by testifying their good opinion of them in
words, gestures, or deeds, not the least contempt: And so Job ^ehaved himself,
Chap. 31.13. 2 In affection, especially, when Superiors whom God has by their
place made receivers of honor, could out of an humble affection be well
pleased, either to want it, or return it upon their inferiors if they might do
it without offense, or might it stand with good order which God has set in the
Church and Commonwealth.

CHAP. XXIX. Rules of walking wisely toward good men.
1 Rule, brotherly affection Heb. 13.1.
THE first of these Rules is in respect of our affection, to love the godly
with brotherly love. It is true indeed, all men must be loved, but here is
required a more special love, as between brethren, of which Saint Peter says,
2 Pet. 1.7. Join with godliness brotherly kindness, because they are of the
same Father, and Family of God. The reason of this Rule is this: The nearer any
man comes to God or expresses him, the more right he has into our affections
for Gods Image sake; and here is a straighter bond than that of Nature. The
Apostle makes this a mark of Gods child, to love the brethren, 1 John 3.10.
And David professes, Psalm. 16.1.
That all his delight was in the Saints, the excellent on earth. And Romans
12.10. Be affectioned one to another with brotherly love. And because this
cannot be, Many things in Gods children might draw our eyes unto them.
except men see more in Gods people than ordinary, therefore labor to see, 1
Their high birth and true nobility; Joh. 1.13. Not of blood, nor of the will of
flesh, but of God. 2 Their kindred and alliance; they are Sons of God, brethren
of Christ, who was not ashamed to call them brethren, Heb. 2.11. 3 Their high
office and place, whom Christ the faithful witness, the first born from the
dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth, has loved and washed from
their sins by his blood, to make them Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.5. 4
Their beauty and glory, being covered with long white Robes of righteousness
and holiness; such as Kings anciently were distinguished by, wherein they
appear most lovely and graceful to God, Angels, and good men; nothing is
wanting to their perfection of beauty, seeing they are complete in Christ the
head of all power, Col. 2.10. 5 Their present wealth, and future expectation:
Their goods are God the chief good, Christ given them of God for righteousness,
the Holy Ghost sent unto their hearts for sanctification and consolation;
eternal election, effectual calling, justification. And their future
expectation is the City ot God, the heavenly Jerusalem, which God has prepared
for them, Heb. 11.16.

Now were it a wise course for a man to disaffect the chief favorite of his
King? And are not Gods children Gods chief favorites? Were it a safe thing to
hate the people of God, to disaffect them, to lowre upon them, seeing the Lord
observes what looks are cast down upon his children, as in Cain? How was Balaam
slain by the Lord for desiring evil to Israel, though himself could do them
none but by his wicked counsel? These are the last times, in which men are
lovers of themselves, and of men only for their own advantage, 2 Timothy 3.2.
they love them for their wealth, ease and pomp, not for God and his graces.

2 We must not only affect their persons, 2 Rule, Faithful communion.
but also embrace a fruitful fellowship and society with them in the Gospel.
This is the Apostles Rule, 1 Pet. 2.17. Love brotherly fellowship; And how glad
was he for the fellowship of the Philippians in the Gospel? Phil. 1.5.

Now the means of fruitful conversing with the godly, are these:

First, To consider one another, Means of fruitful converse.
what need the best have to be provoked and whetted on, especially in these
evil and cold days, yea, such times as ^ip and blast piety, and the fear of
God; Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, lest ye be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Think what a fearful thing it is to fall from the grace
of God, yea or the degrees of it; and would we suffer a brother to run into
this danger?

Secondly, Choose fit matter to confer of in company, either by calling to mind
things heard, or by stirring up to profitable hearing, diligent proceeding,
in-offensive walking, watchful speaking, and the like; or if need be, of
Admonition, Exhortation, or Reproof, show thy love therein; full clouds will
distill rain, light will shine abroad, and charitable knowledge is
communicative.

Thirdly, Be sure to perform these private Christian duties in good, and holy,
and unrebukeable manner: As 1, Orderly, those beginnings which are fittest in
gifts and place, as Elihu spoke in his turn. 2 Humbly, none seeking to speak
beyond his skill and reach. 3 Wisely, watching the fittest time and best
occasion. 4 Meekly and lovingly, without reasonings and murmuring, Phil. 2.15.
none crossing others, but through love one forbearing another, advising in the
spirit of meekness, and with offering to submit themselves in other cases to
receive words of Exhortation and Admonition. 5 Conscionably, so as in all such
meetings and conference every one be an helper to the truth, 3 John 8. to
find it out, not to obscure, or weaken it. By these means we shall have cause
to rejoice in our Christian fellowship, as Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 23.14.

Fourthly, Observe the graces that are in others, for a pattern to our selves,
1 Thessalonians. 1 7. for our own provocation and imitation: Yea, spy and encourage the
graces of God in the weakest and meanest Christian, so framing our selves to
that mark of a good man, who honors all that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4.
Neither let the strongest scorn to receive help from the weakest; Moses was
content to be advised by Jethro, and David by Abigail; and note Paul's
humility, Romans 1.12. he hoped to come, and be comforted by their faith, as
well as to help theirs.

Fifthly, In the use of good company, beware of giving any occasion of scandal,
or offense to any, Matthew. 18.7, 8. leave no ill smell behind thee; avoid the
note of pride, conceit, forwardness in speaking, frowardness, or stiffeness in
thine own sense, 1 John 2.10. He that loves his brother, there is no occasion
of stumbling or scandal in him.

Motives thus to carry our selves in good company.
Motives to provoke us wisely to carry our selves in good company.

1 Consider how in our company we are especially to watch, seeing in no part
of our life we are sooner corrupted than in that, seeing in no part of our
life we do so much discover our selves, and seeing in no part thereof, we do
either more good, or more harm, seeing we do nothing without witness, and
should do nothing which we would not have exemplary.

2 As Satan lays snares every where, so also in our company one with another,
not so much to bring the godly to such excess of riot, as he effects in
wicked societies, where is swearing, gaming, drinking, railing, etc. but to
make them unfruitful, and keep them from the good they might do; and so far
prevails, as sometimes impertinent speech, sometime debate and detracting
speeches arise, and the most tolerable speech is worldliness which steals
away the heart, and the time; so as some who intended more good to themselves
and others, carry away hearts smiting them, for not better employing that
opportunity.

3 There is apparent loss, when we watch not to do or receive good, in company
with good men. For godly men by reason of their Callings, and distance of
places, seldom meet; and when they do, they lose the gain of that time in
their special Calling; and it they get it not up in the furtherance of the
general calling of a Christian, it is utterly lost. And what but this makes the
mindfulness one of another sweet in their absence, when there was reaped so
good fruit one of another in their presence?

4 By this wise and fruitful carriage of company and meetings of good men,
Christians shall stop the mouths of such as are ever complaining of, and
accusing Christian meetings to be scarce to any other purpose, but to detract,
defame, slander, censure, to strengthen one another in faction, and the like.
Or if such mouths will not be shut, yet the conscience of Christians may
rejoice in the contrary innocence, and not be dejected by such false testimony.

3 Rule. In our speeches, let us be Proctors and Solicitors for the Saints,
speak wisely and willingly of the good we know in our brethren, 3 Apology.
and maintain the cause, person, and name of good men to our power. The
sincerity of love between David and Jonathan was manifest, in that Jonathan
defended David's innocence to Saul his Father, not only to the loss of his
Kingdom, but the danger of his own life. Ebedmelech the Blackmoor spoke a good
word for Jeremy, and was saved from destruction, when his Master Zedekiah was
slain. Nicodemus even in the beginning of grace spoke for Christ, when the
whole Council was against him. And how dangerous is it to devise and invent
words against Gods children, as David's enemies, to belie, or reproach them, to
raise or receive slanders against them? If such as stand not for grace shall
fall, then much more they that stand against it. How needful is this Apology
for them, against the reproaches and scorns of this age? How earnestly would
children speak for their parents, brethren, or kindred? Even so should it be
here. It is nothing to speak for a man when others speak for him.

4 Rule. Concerning our actions toward good men, 4 Rule, Helpfulness.
we should every way bestir our selves to procure their good and welfare: We
must to our hearts and affections join our hands, and help to do them good,
yea, be ready to lay our hands under the feet of the Saints Gal. 6.10. Do good
to all, but especially to the household of faith.

Now in special, 1 We must prevent from them all the evil we can, Means of it.
hinder them from sins, and from falling, hinder by all means reproach from
their profession, and danger from their persons. 2 If thou find a good man
slipped into an infirmity, labor to cover it, make the best of i^ as may be,
Vaunt not thy self over him, but consider thy self, and by all good means cure
it if it lie in thy power. 3 If thou find a good man stand in need of inward
comfort, and cast down, help to raise him again: Christ was sent to speak a
word of comfort to the weary, and every Christian has received of his
anointing. When David was in deep distress, his faithful friend Jonathan
comforted him in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 23.16. 4 I^ thou know a good man
helpless, and without outward comforts, thou must now show bowels of mercy and
compassion, gladly receiving the poor Saints, communicating willingly and
freely to their nec^ssity, 1 Pet. 3.8. Love one another as brethren, be
pitiful, 1 John 3.17. He that has this worlds good, and sees his brothers
need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?

To stir us up hereunto, consider these Motives: 1 Say with thy self, Motives
to the former duty.
What? am not I a member of the same body with him? Is not he of the same
family and household of Saints? This is the Apostles argument, Especially do
good to the household of faith. 2 What shall I gain, if by word or deed I shall
make sad the hearts of good and godly men? Cain cast down he* looks, but God
looks on it: Cannot Ishmael laugh at Isaac, but the Lord arraigns and condemns
him of high per^ecution? Surely then cannot I carry the like indignities
scot-free, 3 Do I read Meroz accursed, because she came not out to help the
people of God, though she had no hand against them? Judge. 5.23. Surely I must
not only have a hand against good men, but I must set my hand to help them,
else is not my heart so right as it should. Pilates wife wished her husband to
have nothing to do against that just man: But happy had Pilate been (who was
not violent against Christ) to have been earnest and resolute for his
deliverance; the defect whereof was his overthrow. And so it shall be heavy
enough in the day of judgment, that wicked men's hands have not helped the
godly, seeing the sentence shall not run because they had hurt them, but
because they helped them not.

CHAP. XXX. Rules how to walk wisely toward evil men; First, In general.
THE general Rule is in Col. 4.5. Rules of wise walking toward evil men
Walk wisely toward them that are without, that is, the Gentiles who were not
converted, without the border of the Church; for even in the Church some are of
Gods domestics, some without as strangers that want faith as yet. And godly
men must walk so much the more warily, not only because they have Gods eye,
and godly men's eyes on them, but even eyes of men yet unconverted, who must not
be cast back, or confirmed in their error, or hardened against the truth, but
by all wi^e walking (if it be possible) won to the love and liking of it.

Now toward all unbeleevers, and unconverted men in general these particulars
are worthy observation:

1 Avo^d all just causes of s^andal.
1 That every Christian avoid all known evils and offenses, by which evil men
might be occasioned to abide out of the Church. The Law is, Thou shall put no
stumbling block before the blind: For this is a fearful judgment of God on
men unconverted, they would willingly be blinded, and hardened in their
natural estate. Now our Rule is, being our selves pulled out of danger, to help
others out also; nay, our light must reprove their darkness, their covetousness
by liberality, their pride by humility, their impatience by patience, etc.

2 All unconverted men hate the light, and are prone to blaspheme the Gospel, 2
Stop mouths of evil men.
and to reproach the holy profession of it. Wise Christians therefore must cut
off occasions from them, and take heed of defiling their own nest, 1 Timothy 5.14.
Give no occasion to the adversary to speak evil: And David prays, that none
might be ashamed because of him. Ezekiel. 36.20. the Lord complains, that the
Israelites among the Heathen polluted his Name, and made them say, These are
the people of the Lord, and are gone out of his land. A lend child (says
Solomon) dishonors the whole house. Nay on the contrary, the meanest
Christian in his place, by his wife and Christian walking, must adorn the
profession of Christ: so the Apostle to Titus, 2.10. Servants must be no
pickers, but show all good faithfulness to adorn the Gospel of the Lord Jesus.
An holy course of life will make the Gentiles say, as they in Isa. 61.9. They
are the seed of the blessed of the Lord.

3 Seek to win them.
3 All unconverted men esteem of doctrine by the life, and the profession by
the practice of Professors; for they have no taste of the Doctrine in it self;
and therefore in the carriage of our profession, we must apply our selves if
it be possible to win them. So the Apostle (1 Pet. 2.12.) wishes the Jews to
have their conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they might glorify God
in the day of their visitation. And women are commanded, so to watch their
whole behavior, as their husbands might be won by their godly conversation.
Private men must convert others by their private conversation.

Motives.
Motives so to do, are these:

1 Christians are on a Mount, set on a Scaffold, nothing they do, escapes
sight and censure; all is marked, they stand or fall not alone, but to many.

2 They have a light with them, which draws all eyes upon them, and discovers
all.

3 The eyes of the wicked are not on others, but on them, to disgrace them and
through them to smite Christ himself.

4 The will of God is, By well-doing to ^lance the ignorance of foolish m^n, 1
Pet. 2.15.

5 What a glory is it, to slaughter envy it self, to stop an open mourh, and
cloathe an adversary with his own shame; that he that would accuse us, must
accuse the Sun of darkness when it shines.

6 Hereby we shall be conformable to Christ, whom when Satan came to sift,
he found nothing in him: Wicked men shall say as Saul said to David, Thou are
more righteous than I, etc. 1 Samuel 26.25.

CHAP. XXXI. Rules how to walk wisely toward evil men, in special: And first
for Scorners.
NOw we come to special Rules concerning special sorts of evil men, of whom
some are exceeding evil in themselves, some are evil also to good men. Of the
former rank are scornful persons: Of the latter hurtful.

For Scorners, observe these Rules.

1 If we know men to be so far naught, as they scorn goodness, Rules how to
carry our selves toward scorners. 1 Avoid them.
good men, and good things, we must avoid their company, so much as we may.
For what comfort can a godly man take in such company, where all good and godly
communication must either be banished or derided? There is no hope of doing
good, there is danger of taking harm.

2 If we be by occasion beset, 2 If cast into their company, observe five
Rules.
or cast into the company of profane brutish and scornful persons, then
observe these Rules; First, Grieve thou wast not better directed, Psalm. 120.5.
Woe is me that I remain in Meshec, and dwell in the tents of Kedar. Secondly,
Be sure though thou see no place or opportunity of good, that thou have no
fellowship with them in any of the unfruitful works of darkness. If they will
be no cleaner by thy company, be not thou defiled by theirs. If they will not
consent to thee in good, consent not thou to them in any sin. Thirdly, Please
them not by yielding to any sin, but give apparent tokens of dislike.

Object. Why, May we not by yielding a little to them, draw them to us?

Answ. No, but the way to win them, is a pure conversation with fear, 1 Pet.
3.12. much less may we flatter them in any evil. Mica^ah would not flatter
with the King, though four hundred false Prophets did. Fourthly, Acknowledge
thy self a child of Wisdom, which is justified of all her children: Suffer
not Gods glory to be trodden down by thy silence: Wisely break off fooleries,
by savoury Riddles or Questions, as Sampson, and in a wise and peaceable
manner, change the matter, holding it a settled ground of Religion, not to
relinquish piety, to keep peace with wicked men, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace and
holiness. No corruption of man must drive us from our station. Fifthly, So soon
as we may, depart from them, Prove. 14.7. Depart from the foolish man, when
thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge. And b^ware of falling into
the like company again. Joseph wisely declined the company of his Mistress,
when she daily spoke unto him, Genesis 39.10. and Dav^^ would not return with
Saul, when he perceived his wilfulness against him, 1 Samuel 26.25.

CHAP. XXXII. Rules to carry our selves wisely toward evil men, evi^^y
affected to us.
IF men be not only evil in themselves, but also to us, then it is either in
evil purposes, or in evil practices against us*

If they purpose evil, the^ our Saviors Rule is, Beware of men, Matthew. Rules
how to carry our selves to our enemies.
10.17. for they will deliver y^^ up to the Councils. By men, our Savior means
those whom in the former w^rds he calls Wolves, that desire to make a ^^ey
and spoil of the sheep of Christ, and in his Caveat advises, 1 Wisely to
prevent the plots and trains of ungodly men, discreetly to prevent our own
trouble so near as we can. 1 Wisely prevent their plots.
How wisely did Jacob prevent the fury of his brother Esau? And as they watch
to traduce us, so must we watch to cut off occasions of entrapping, Luke 6.7.
The Scribes and Pharisees watched whether Christ would heal on the Sabbath day
or no, to find accusation against him; our Savior for all this omitted not to
do good, but its doing it, by his question unto them, cut off, so far as he
could, the matter of their malice, by clearing the lawfulness of it. So must
we: And yet prepare stoutly to bear whatsoever the Lord measures out by them.

2 Decline their fury.
2 Our Savior would have us wisely decline their fury, not without cause
provoking them. It is no wisdom to provoke an evil man: It is no good
discretion to stir up a Lion, to take a Bear by the tooth, or a Dog by the
ears. For they desire nothing more, than matter to stir up their corruption by.
So Hezekiah commanded his servants not to answer Rabshecah one word.

3 Join with Serpentine wisdom, innocence of Doves.
3 Join with Serpentine wisdom, innocence of Doves, Matthew. 10.16. Nothing more
vexes and vanquisheth an Adversary than innocence; no better breast plate than
righteousness. But if a man had the innocence of Christ himself, the Adversary
will watch advantages, and play upon a man's simplicity; therefore join
Serpentine wisdom, as Paul did, Act. 23.6. he testified his innocence, and
that with all good conscience he served God till that day: But what tell you
Ananias of Doves innocence? he commands to strike him on the mouth; the more
innocent, the less endured, he fared the worse for that; and therefore he
joins in season Serpentine wisdom: For, perceiving his greatest enemies to be
Pharisees and Sadduces, he professes himself a Pharisee, and the son of a
Pharisee, and that he was brought in danger for the hope of the Resurrection
which the Sadduces denied; and so casting a bone between them, and letting them
by the ears, he escaped between them.

4 Out of their evil ^raw some good.
4 Out of their malice, we should draw our own good, so w^rily to carry our
selves toward them, as that we may find that of the Heathen true, An enemy
often hurts less, and profits more, than many friends. We must, both in
their absence and presence especially, take heed we do not disadvantage our
selves. It was some disadvantage to Paul, when in the Council (although he was
provoked, and unjustly smitten) he called the High Priest Whited wall, he was
glad to excuse it by his ignorance. We may not be too bold, or too forward to
speak in a good matter.

5 Having received wrong f om them, do three things.
5 If evil men have done us harm, and wrongfully molested and persecuted us,
our Rule is, 1 In respe^t of them, to pity, pardon, and pray for them. If we
do them good, we shall either overcome their evil with goodness, or heap coals
on their heads. 2 In respect of our selves, possess our souls with patience,
and show meekness and moderation, and say as David in Shimes his railing, It
may be the Lord will do me good for his cursing of me this day. 3 In respect
of our duty, still to show an undaunted constancy, and resolution for the
truth, and all good ways, 1 Pet. 3.14, 15. If ye suffer for righteousness,
blessed are ye; but fear not, neither be troubled, but sanctify the Lord in
your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks a
reason of your hope.

Thus far of the Rules of Christian Wisdom; of which I may say with Moses,
Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6. These are the Rules and Ordinances, keep them, and do them; for
this is your wisdom.

CHAP. XXXIII. Containing motives for Circumspect walking.
BUt because this accurate and Circumspect walking is grown out of request, and
men generally are too well contented to walk at adventure, and (as men that
shoot at tovers) secure themselves in a loose and neglected course, and go on
carelessly, as if there were no danger in wandering from God, and declining from
the good way; Motives to the former Rules.
we will use some Motives to provoke every Christian that tenders either Gods
glory, or his own salvation, to undertake this Christian course.

1 In regard of God; 1 Whose Commandment is, That all our ways be ordered
aright, Prove. 4.26. and that the Saints walk worthy of the Lord, and please him
in all things, Col. 1.10. 2 Whose Word must be our Rule, to which we must
continually frame our whole course, and every part thereof: For first, The
moral Law is a perpetual Rule, binding at all times without any intermission. 2
The Precepts of it are to make the Word our continual Counselor, to bind it
to us, not to let it depart, but to meditate in it night and day. And what is
it less than Blasphemy to charge the Saints with folly, singularity, and a
Saintish purity, in that wherein they were most acceptable to God? As David set
the Lord before him continually; and when he professes his great love to the
Law, says, That all the day long his meditation is in it, Psalm. 119.79. Read
we not, that the twelve Tribes served God instantly, night and day? Act. 26.7.
and the Apostles were assured, they had a good conscience in all things, Heb.
13.18. Was this care (so incessant) commendable in them, and is the same godly
care now grown a vice, an hateful practice or heresy? 3 Who being a God of
pure eyes, will strictly stand for justice. And do we fear we can be too
strict, who are to give account of every idle word, and roaving thought, much
more of every unwarrantable action? Are we not to pass a strict and straight
judgment, wherein every secret shall be made open, and in which it shall be
rewarded according to our works? And shall the Devil delude us, or the wicked
world make us believe we need not be so straight-laced, as to say with David,
I will look to my ways? Psalm. 39.1.
4 Who if he ponder all a man's paths, how ought he himself to ponder them?
For all the ways of a man are before the Lord, and he pondereth all his
ways, Prove. 5.21.

2 In respect of our selves; no watch or circumspection can be sufficient to
us, whose natures are carried to evil as naturally as to our ordinary food.
The whole frame of the heart of man is evil continually, as ready to receive
any impression of temptation, as the dry tinder a spark of fi^^; and not only
to receive such sparks, but to conceive them, and hatch evil, and hammer it out
on the anvils of our hard hearts, like cunning Workmen. Whence it cannot be
avoided, but that without our daily watch, sin must multiply and grow upon us,
even over our heads, to a numberless number.

3 In respect of the wicked amongst whom we live, who are ready to take all
advantages, and watch for our falls, both to harden themselves and reproach,
through us, Gods holy Religion. For if they can scorn and contemn the servants
of God for well-doing, and Religious actions, how would these men of Gath and
Askelon, these uncircumcised Philistims, triumph and glory in the falls of any
of Gods Worthies? Hence was the ground of our Saviors exhortation to his
Disciples, Behold, I send you as sheep among Wolves, and therefore be wise as
Serpent. Matthew. 10.16. Nay, we must not only by our circumspect ways stop
their mouths, but convince themselves, and win them to the same holy
profession with us, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.

4 In respect of our brethren, who some of them are not yet converted, some are
already called; both whom we offend and scandalize by our unwatchful walking,
and so the Name of God is blasphemed, because of us that profess it, as the
Apostle speaks of hypocritical Jews, Romans 2.24. Hence are those many
exhortations, Col. 4.5. Walk wisely toward them that are without, le^t you
give them any just occasion of exception or stumbling, and 1 Cor. 10.32. Give
no offense neither the Jews, nor Grecians, nor to the Church of God. And how
circumspect had he need to be, that must walk inoffensively between the Jew
and Gentile, seeing what was given to the one, seemed detracted from the other?
Yet so much is required to walk even between the godly and profane, whose
ways are diametrally contrary.

5 The way to heaven is full of snares, crosses, and dangers, by reason of our
enemies, and therefore requires all our diligence either to avoid them, or else
wisely to step over them. We can be very wary in the dangerours ways of this
world, to take direction or company, and armor, and the daylight to further
us: And why not in this way to Heaven? Besides, it is a narrow way, and on
high; all which makes it more perilous to decline from. How circumspect had
he need be, that walks upon a narrow high rock, a thousand fathom from
ground, especially where a little slip or error tumbles him down to dash him
all to pieces?

6 Is there any time afforded us, wherein we may set loose our hearts to any
unlawful liberty, or cast our selves upon Satan's snares, as Peter did, in going
into the Highpriests hall, Matthew. 26.71. or can we do so, and not be catched
by the deceitfulness of sin? Stand we against such enemies as will not take
advantages, who do nothing but seek them, especially when fear is set aside,
which is the souls Watch man? And if men will take liberty, and be at their
own hand, have they not full leave to fall often, lie long, rise hardly, and
being up again, walk weakly, and not recover their cheerfulness many a day, if
ever? And must they fear nothing so much, as lest they keep their watches, and
preserve themselves from falls? Lastly, A man may pull down more in one day,
than he can build in many: And experience shows, that a man is more weakened by
one days sur^et and negligence, than in an hundred, wherein he preserve the
care of his health: Even so it is in the soul, the health whereof is kept in
strictness of Diet, and observation of Gods Rules.

7 Who knows not that Christianity is a trade which will not forward, if it
be not close followed; an Husbandry, which the Professor shall never thrive
by, if he be not of a diligent hand, wherein something must be done daily,
or else the heart shall soon lie like the sluggards field, described by
Solomon? It needs therefore be hedged and fenced with the fear of God, and
kept with all diligence, Prove. 23.17.

8 This alone is the way to attain true comfort, which no man can find, by
allowing himself in any course which God allows not. This alone is to walk
safely, Prove. 10.9. He that walks uprightly, walks safely: And what other
means has the Wiseman appointed to preserve from failing, than to take hold
of instruction, and not leave her? This alone is the way to get peace peculiar
to the Israel of God, to walk by Rule, Gal. 6.16. neither can a course not
attended, stand with this Apostolical injunction of Christian Circumspection.

CHAP. XXXIV. Answering Objections against Circumspect walking.
ANd whereas our age abounds with men of profane minds and mouths, who
would turn all this our glory into shame, and censure this speech of the Holy
Ghost, which prescribes a strict, precise, and accurate walking: (why, say
they, what need men be so strict? and, shall no man come to heaven, but such
as are so strict and curious?) and the whole world, almost, thinks it a most
idle and needless course; we will therefore answer some Objections that are
made against it.

Object. 1. A great many have lived honestly and well, that were never so
foolish and strict, I hope to serve God, and do no man harm, and what need more?

Answ. 1. We must walk by Rule, not by example, except it be of the best, not
of the most.

2 The Pharisees led a civil life, were outwardly very just, to the tything of
Mint and Annise, and very devout in their worship, and yet if our righteousness
exceed not theirs, we can never enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.20.

3 The righteousness of God goes beyond all civil and outward righteousness; it
is inward, in Spirit and truth; It cuts off not only outward acts of Murder,
Uncleanness, Theft, etc. but inward motions of Hatred, Wantonness,
Covetousness; It strikes at roots and branches, and hates the least and
secretest evil, which civil righteousness makes no bones of.

Object. 2. But this circumspect and strict walking is taken up but by a few,
and those of the meanest; some men of great wisdom, place, and learning favor
it not, but scorn and oppose it.

Answ. 1. Christianity was ever hated by the most of the world, because of the
Cross; the Church is black, because the Sun looks on her, Cant. 1.5.
but comely to God and his Angels; and this makes few enter that way. 2 The
Apostle directly meets with this Objection, 1 Cor. 1.27. Not many mighty, not
many noble, not many wise; but God has chosen a few poor people, Zeph. 3.11.
and they shall call upon his Name. And why not many of those? Because they
cannot so easily deny themselves and this evil world, which they must do that
will be saved. 3 Let us not wholly cast our eyes upon the examples of the
world now declining, and, at last, so at worst; but upon such as formerly have
been set as eye-marks in the Scripture, and we shall find some, both great,
and noble, and learned, going before us in strict and circumspect walking. The
holy Patriarchs, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; godly and zealous Kings, David,
Solomon, Josiah; the holy Apostles, who endeavored always to have a clear
conscience before God and all men, Act. 24.16. Yea, the most wise, noble, and
learned that ever was, the Son of God, whose conversation was such as none
could accuse him of sin. These are the cloud of witnesses, which we must
follow in running the race set before us, Heb. 12.1.

Object. 3. But what an impossible Commandment is this, and who can bear it?
Can we be Saints in this world, thus to order our selves in every thing? We
are sinners, and must be sinners and cannot be thus strict as you require.
We hope we generally mean well, and God (we hope) will supply the rest.

Answ. 1. The scope of this plea is, to give over all, because they cannot
attain all; which is but a false fire, by which the Devil discourageth many
from the narrow way, and the narrow looking to their own way. For true it is,
that we call with the Scripture for a keeping of all Gods Commandments,
always, and to live with God, and walk with him; but with Evangelical
interpretation, which accepts the will, desire, and endeavor to walk with
God in every thing; which cannot but in some measure be found in a true
believer, and cannot but in Christ be accepted, where it is true and hearty.
Thus the Scriptures interpret themselves, 1 Chronicles. 28.7. If Solomon shall
endeavor to keep my Commandments. etc. Hos. 6.3. We shall endeavor to know
the Lord. What can God accept less, or a good heart tender less, than hearty
wishes, where strength is wanting to please God in all things? 2 Let us by the
strictness of the Commandment consider whence we are fallen, and see our
impotency, and confess our failings, but not therefore allow our selves in any
evil, or venture on any sin which we might by this Circumsspection avoid, or
remit our endeavor in respect of all Gods Commandments. 3 For such as think
it sufficient to mean well in general; Consider this, that as no Master is
pleased, if his steward bring him in a general Bill of great sums spent,
wherein he may hide much deceit, but sets down no days accounts, or weeks
bills of parcels; no more in the matter of heavenly treasure, is it enough to
hide himself in general good meanings, but in every particular to avoid deceit
and suspicion of it. And as it is with a Traveller in an unknown way, who will
not go at random, nor count it a sufficient direction to be set Eastward or
Westward, but he will ask every man of every Town, and take good heed of every
mark, to pass him from one place to another; so in this our passage to heaven,
we must keep our special directions, and walk with God in every thing, if we
will happily pass unto heaven.

Object. 4. But what need such daily and continual troubling of our selves?
What was the Sabbath made for, but for Gods service? and we keep our Church as
well as any; but for the week-dayes we have Callings to follow, and cannot
intend such things; and it were better if some of these nice fellows were more
diligent in their Calling, as we be^.

Answ. 1. Seeing the Rule by which we must walk, is to serve God i^ holiness
and righteousness all our days, Luke 1.75.
we have no liberty to part the week between God and us. Neither must we put
on holiness as an holy day garment, to put it off at night; neither may we be
less holy on other days than on the Sabbath, howsoever we must exercise our
holiness in the public worship of God on that day, and in the private worship,
and in the p^rsonal Callings on the other days. 2 He is a good Christian that
keeps a perpetual Sabbath, and is not only one on the Sabbath day. The trial
of soundness is at home, Psalm. ^01.2.
in the midst of a man's house, and not at Church, where the Phariseee is often
above the Publican. 3 Thou have a Calling on the weekday, in which thou must
sweat and abide who ever thou art; but thou must not so play the good husband,
as to become a worldling. Use the world as not using it, 1 Cor 7 31.
as not affecting it; and acknowledge thy special and personal Calling to be
subordinate to the general; for in the whole exercise of thy special Calling,
thou must show forth thy knowledge, and religious keeping of a good conscience;
once divorce these two, and never look for success on thy labors.

Object. 5. But this is fitter for Ministers and cloystered persons, who have
given themselves to continual devotion, than for ordinary and common men, who
are not acquainted with such novelties.

Answ. 1. If all Christians be alike subject to sin, all have need to be
continually alike fenced against it. If all have the same enemies, all had need
stand upon their ground. If one man's heart be as wicked as another, every man
had need set a watch round about himself. And if any have more need than other,
it is unlearned and simple persons, who want such means of helping themselves,
as learned Preachers have. 2 As for the novelty of this Circumspect course, we
must needs say it is so to such as are of Festus his suit, who thinks Paul
learned even to madness, to call him to such strictness; or Gallio his
Disciples, Act. 18. who being of no Religion, cannot be at leisure to give it
hearing. But we have seen it to be no novelty to the Spirit of God, every
where charging it upon us, nor to the godly guided by his Spirit, who can
neither be idle, nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord.

Object. 6. I like such as can be so strict, and I could wish so to be; but
then I must part from the pleasure and joy of my life: For this continual watch
and circumspection is full of melancholy and uncomfortable; it hinders
neighbors from sports and merriments, breaks off good company, and makes the
husband and wife often look heavily one upon another; and besides, I should
lose some profits and customers, and wrong my estate by neglecting it.

Answ. 1. This is a clean contrary judgment to Gods Spirit, Prove. 3.17. Her
ways are the ways of pleasures. Gods wisdom ordering the ways of man,
brings true joy and pleasure. For, is there no joy in God, in his word, Psalm.
19. Joh. 16.
which was wont to be as sweet as the honeycomb, nor in the Spirit of God,
which is called the Comforter? Is it such a thing of heaviness to live with
God? Alas! What is such an heart made of? 2 What delights do we call men from,
but such as are carnal, foolish, perishing, and unlawful; is stolen waters so
sweet and savoury to corrupt flesh, the forbidden fruit which a Christian
should neither touch, nor taste, and happy he were if he never saw it? 3
There is no sorrow in godly life; but all the sorrow of Gods servants, is, that
they cannot be more godly. Lay this for a ground that God is thy chief
delight, and no man may be so moderately joyful as thou. 4 For pleasant
companionship, thou losest no good company, but exchangest for better; thou
have now fellowship with God, union with Jesus Christ, the inseparable presence
of Gods blessed Spirit, the attendance of the Angels, the communion of the
Saints, the benefit of their prayers, comfort, and example. This is a pleasant
thing for brethren in the faith to live together in unity. And what true joy is
therein the company of Gamesters, Drinkers, Swearers, riotous, or idle persons,
who are never merry, unless they be mad, and never glad, but when they have
driven away the remembrance of God? 5 As for the loss of any part of thy
estate, trust God on his word, Prove. 3.16. In her right hand is length of
days, and in her left hand, riches and glory. Never did true piety weaken any
man's estate; but godliness has been the true and constant gain; this makes a
small portion sweet and precious, and intails a blessing upon it, when it
passes into the hands of our posterity after us.

CHAP. XXXV. Marks of a man walking Circumspectly.
AND seeing most men beguile themselves with the goodness of their present
course, and esteem a civil life, and external honesty, Marks of a circumspect
walker.
not only unblameable enough, but justifiable, and sufficiently commendable:
Be it known to them, that if they examine not the goodness of their course by
this Doctrine, they are far from Gods approbation, whatsoever they may conceive
of themselves. In which examination I will help them with a few notes and
signs of a Circumspect person, by whose ways, as by a right line, they may
both see the crookedness, and at length begin to straighten the obliquity of
their own.

1 A circumspect man watches all occasions for his own good and advantage, and
if they be offered, slips them no: So a circumspect Christian looks round
about him, and thinks it not sufficient to take occasions of grace and
well-doing, being offered, but will seek them. How might every moment of our
lives make us more stored with grace than other, if we would seek occasions of
good to our selves? What a rich stock of grace might we have attained? How
rich in good works? How should we have furthered our reckoning?

2 A circumspect man looks round about him, and so orders his many
businesses, as one hinder not the other, but all may go forward, and so saves
one commodity, as another be not lost, or lie in hazard: So a circumspect
Christian casts his occasions; as, seeing every Christian duty is enjoined
him, he has respect to all Gods Commandments. Duties of piety shall not
justle out civil duties, nor civil duties eat out duties of piety; but as ^ne
hand helps another, so one table shall further the other, one calling forward
another; yea, he looks to the thriving of all his graces. He will walk very
humbly before God, but so as he maintain his joy in God. His moderation shall
not damp his zeal, his zeal shall not outrun his knowledge. His providence
shall not lessen his faith, nor his faith destroy his providence. His love with
men's persons brings him not into love with their sins, and his hatred of their
sins, impeacheth not his love of their persons. His righteousness to men
hinders not his mercy, neither does cruel mercy withstand or thrust down
needful justice. Thus he is busy in maintaining all his graces, all of them
being of great use, and all of them flowing from the same Spirit.

3 A circumspect man will be sure not to disadvantage himself by his words,
but will speak to his own profit: So a circumspect Christians words make for
his own best advantage: He will speak for Gods glory, for good men, Gal. 4.6.
and good causes. He will be sure to profit himself, and others with gracious
and Religious speeches, and be silent where fruitful speech will not be
heard. Exercise to good speeches, brings a dexterity and readiness of
well-speaking, to which every Christian is exhorted, Col. 4.6. Let your
speeches be gracious always, and powdered with salt, that ye may know how to
answer every man.

4 As a wary and circumspect man proves a good husband for the world, so
circumspect Christians are the best husbands for their souls: Such a one has
wisdom and will, to increase his estate of grace by every thing, and thinks
himself then truly rich, when he thrives in the best Commodities. He
conceives himself rich, not when he has things about him to leave to his
heirs, but when he has his Wealth personally in himself, and for himself,
such Wealth as he carries to Heaven with him. A circumspect Christian will not
win the whole world with the loss of his own soul, which is nothing but to
make his heirs happy in his own eternal misery. A circumspect Christian is not
so careful to heap up gold, as good works in abundance, and by works of Mercy
and Love, he makes himself Bags that wax not old, a Treasure in Heaven that
can never fail, where the Thief comes not, not the moth corrupts, Luke
12.33. A circumspect Christian is not so careful for the soyling, tilling, and
sowing of his ground, the mounding of his Pasture, the weeding of his Field,
the pruning of his Trees, the feeding of his Cattle; as in fencing the heart
against Temptation, in sowing the Seed of Gods Word, in weeding of Sin by the
roots out of his Soul, in feeding and fostering of Grace. Here is a good
Husband for himself: He has that within himself that is better than all
without him, and requires more tendance than they all.

How improvident then are we in our general Calling, whiles we take not
opportunities of good in public or private, but slip many Lessons, Sermons and
comforts on the Sabbath, and on Week days? And whiles we will not offer a
sacrifice of Alms, when God sets up an Altar before us? How do our special
Callings eat out out care of the general, and are all in civilities, whiles for
the thrist of Grace, we are altogether idle and unprofitable? How many vain
and vile speeches, unfruitful, unsavory, and hurtful, do our corrupt hearts
send out, according to their own fullness, by swearing, slandering, lying,
cursing, and the like? How bad husbands are men for their souls, whiles they
have not a Horse, a Pig, Sheep, yea, scarce a Dog about their house, but is
more tended, and better provided for than their souls? whiles they will scarce
let any Dunghill lie about their house, so nasty as their souls? nor any patch
of ground so neglected as their own hearts, that they grow like Neules and
Brambles, to be cut up, and cast into the fire?

THE TABLE.
CHapter 1. The ground of the ensuing Treatise. Page 439 2 What Circumspect
Walking is, and wherein it consists. ibid. 3 Of the next words of the
Apostle, further explaining Circumspect Walking. Page 441 4 Proving strict
walking, to be the wisest walking. ibid. 5 Describing some means to attain
this Wisdom. Page 442 6 ^eading into the particular Rules of Christian
Wisdom, with the general distribution of them. Page 444 7 Rules of Wisdom
concerning God, and the things of God, are four. Page 445 8 Containing Rules of
Wisdom concerning the inner man; and first of the Mind, Thoughts, and Will.
Page 446 9 Rules for the Conscience. Page 447 10 Rules of Wisdom concerning
the Affections. Page 449 11 Rules of Wisdom for the outward man, and first
concerning his Calling. Page 450 12 Rules of Wisdom concerning a man's Estate;
and first for Adversity. Page 451 13 Rules of Wisdom for Prosperity. Page 452
14 Rules to carry our speeches wisely, as those that aim at the Apostolical
Rule of Christian Circumspection. Page 453 15 Motives to look to our Tongue.
Page 455 16 Rules of Wisdom concerning our actions that in all of them we may
show forth Christian prudence and circumspection, and first in general. ibid.
17 Rules to carry works of mercy wisely Page 457 18 Rules for works and actions
of Justice: In first, The Gr^und; Secondly, Moderation. Page 458 19 Rules of
Wisdom for Justice. First, Communicative. Secondly* Distributive. Thirdly,
Promissive. Fourthly, Retributive. Page 459 20 Rules of Wisdom for our own
necessary actions, in respect of their first, Order. Secondly, Subject. Page
461 21 Rules for necessary actions, i^ respect of the means, and the order of
the two Tables. Page 462 22 Rules of Wisdom for necessary actions in respect
of the scope and binding of them. Page 463 23 Rules for actions indifferent;
first, In general. Page 464 24 Special Rules for Meat and Drink. Page 467 25
Rules for the right ordering of our selves in our sports. Page 469 26 Rules of
Wisdom concerning our Apparel. Page 473 27 Concerning ornament in Apparel,
wherein three questions are resolved. Page 474 28 Rules for our carriage
toward all men in general. Page 476 29 Rules of walking wisely toward good
men. Page 478 30 Rules how to walk wisely toward evil men; first, In general.
Page 481 31 Rules how to walk wisely toward evil men in special; and first for
scorners. Page 483 32 Rules to carry our selves wisely toward evil men, evilly
affected to us. ibid. 33 Concerning motives for Circumspect walking. Page 485
34 Answering Objections against Circumspect walking. Page 487 35 Marks of a
man's walking Circumspectly. Page 489
FINIS.

