The diseased Maiden Lover. Being a pleasant new court Song:
To an excellent new tune, Or to be sung to the tune of Bonny Nell.


AS I went forth one Summers day,
To view the Meddowes fresh and gay,
A pleasant Bower I espied,
Standing hard by a Rivers side:
and in it I heard a Maiden cry,
alas, there is none ere loved like I.
I couched close to hear her moan,
With many a heavy groan,
And wished that I had been the wight,
That might have bred her hearts delight,
but these were all the words that she,
did still repeat, none loves like me.
Then round the Meddowes did she walk,
Catching each flower by the stalk,
Such as within the Meddowes grew,
As Dead-mans thumb, and Hare-bell blue:
and as she plucked them, still cryde she,
alas, there is none ere loved like me.
A bed therein she made to lie:
Of fine green things that grew fast by,
Of Poplers, and of Willow leaves,
Of Sicamore and Flaggy sheaues:
and as she plucked them, still cryde she,
alas, there is none ere loved like me.
The little Lark-foote she would not pass,
Nor yet the flowers of Three-leau'd grass,
With Milkemayds Honny Succles phraise,
The Crows foot, nor the yellow Crayse,
and as she plucked them, still cride she,
alas, there is none ere loved like me.
The pretty Dasie which does show
Her love to Phoebus, bred her woe,
Who joys to see his cheerful face,
And mournes when he is not in place,
alack, alack, alack, quoth she,
there is none that ever loved like me.
The Flowers of the sweetest sent,
She bound them round with knotted Bent,
And as she laid them still in bands,
She wept, she wayl'd, and wrung her hands,
alas, alas, alas, quoth she,
there is none that ever loved like me.
False man, quoth she, forgive thee heaven,
As I do wish my sins forgiven,
In blessed Elysium I shall sleep,
When thou with perjured souls shall weep
who when they lived, did like to thee,
that loved their Loves as thou do me.
When she had filled her Apron full,
Of such sweet Flowers as she could cull,
The green leaves served her for a Bed,
The Flowers pillowes for her head,
Then down she lay, never more did speak,
alas with love her heart did break.
FINIS.
Printed at London for I. Wright.


