A schole of wise Conceytes, Wherein as every Conceyte has wit, so the most
have much mirth, Set forth in common places by order of the Alphabet.

Translated out of diverse Greek and Latin Writers, by THOMAS BLAGE student,
of the Queens College in Cambridge.

Printed at London, by Henry Binneman. Anno. 1572.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The names of the Authors used in this Book.
LAurentius Abstemius. Aulus Gellius. Plinius Secundus Nouocomensis. Nicolaus
Gerbellius Phorcensis. Petrus Crinitus. Angelus Politianus. Aesopus. Gabrias.
Guilielmus Goudanus. Anianus. Ioannes Antonius Campanus. Horatius. Gerardus
Levv. Poggius. Bebelius. Brasitanus. Adrianus Barlandus. Erasmus Roterodamus.
Hermannus. Rimitius.
To the gentle Reader, in the commendation of Fables.
AS I reuolued in my mind the sundry kinds of vvriters, which for the
profit of man have put in remembrance their imaginations, they that have writ
Fables are to be accounted with the rest: for they have not only
wonderfully delighted the hearts of men, but also have more allured them to do
things both good and profitable with their Fables, than Philosophers with
their precepts. For they with such a sweetness do so pierce the hearts of
the Readers, and by similitudes do declare (which are of much force to move
affection) what me^ ought to take, and what to refuse, that thereby they are
compelled, against their wills to agree unto them. For the mind is disdaynfull
to hear, neither will it easily abide things profitable and honest, except
they be poudered with some merry ieste. Hereunto bears witness a certain
Orator of Athens, who on a time speaking to the Athenians, when he perceived
them less attentive, required them that they vvoulde vouchsafe to hear a
Fable: they were contented: then he began thus: Ceres, the Svvallovve and the
Egle sometime iorneyed together, when they were come to a river, the
Svvallovve flue over, and the Eele svvam through the river: when he had so
said he held his peace: then they asked him what Ceres did? Your Gods (quod
he) are offended at you which vvil not hear them that counsel you for your
profit, but if they tell any tales ye hear them willingly. What force
fables are of to move affection, I could declare by many examples, yet will I
propound but three. The inhabitants of Samos would have put their ruler to
death, whom Aesope dissuaded, saying: As a Fox passed over a river he was
driven into a ditche where he stuck fast in the mudde, that he could not
escape, whom the Flies stinged, the hedgehog seeing him there, moved with
compassion, asked him if he should drive the Flies from him. No (quod he) for
these are full with my blood and can little trouble me, but if thou should
drive the^ away, other hunger sterued flies vvil occupy their romes, and suck
out all the blood that is left within me. The like shall happen to you O
Samians, for if ye slay your Ruler which is so vvealthie, ye must needs chose
others, which vvhiles they enriche the^ selves, shall poll you of all that
this man has left: vvherevvithall the Samians being moved, left off their
purpose. By the like means was Tiberius Caesar persuaded, when he appointed
for every day Magistrates, whereupon (as Josephus tells) the country of
Jurie was governed by Cratus and Pilatus only by the space of twenty
years. For (as Statius says) he that rules but a little while, shows
small favor to the people. The Himerians sometime minded to choose Captain of
their army, Phalaris the tyrant of Agrigentum, whom Stesichorus the Poet
with this Fable discouraged from their purpose, saying. A horse fed alone in a
medovve, at length came a Heart thither and spoiled it: whereupon the horse
took the advice of man, by what mean he might be revenged, to whom the man
said: If thou vvilt take a bit in thy mouth and suffer me armed to get upon
thy back, whose counsel he follovved, and by his help put the heart to
flight and became the conqueror, but from that time forth he could not rid his
mouth from the bit nor the man from his back. Even so (said Stesichorus) the
like shall happen to you, if ye chose Phalaris your captain, for your enemies
ye shall subdue but ye shall be in bondage to this Tyrant for ever: with
which words the Himerians being discouraged, forsook the counsel to chose
such a captain. What time the people of Rome separated them selves from the
Senators, because they paid tribute and were combred with vvarfares, did not
Agrippa Minenius turn them from their purpose with this fable? Sometime
(quoth he) ye Romans, the members of man perceiving the belly to be
slothful, fell at variance with her and determined to give her no longer any
succor. It happened, that because they denied her nourishment, they became
faint, whereupon they were at one again. In like manner the Senate and people of
Rome are as the belly and members, which need one of another help, and as
by discord they perish, so by concord they are of strength: By which tale the
people turned from their purpose and became friends again with the Senate.
Therefore not without good cause both the Greek and Latin Poets, as Hesiodus
and Horace, have mingled such Fables amongst their works, and also the
chiefest and famous Philosophers, as Plato, Aristotle, and Plutarche, with
many more, have highly commended them, whose opinion was, that they much
auayled to the instruction of a moral and civil life: wherefore Leouicenus
and Valla, of late vvriters the best learned, did translate Fables out of Greek
into Latin, which they knevv would be to their praise, and to the delight and
profit of others: Neither were they deceived, for they are daily red of most
learned me^. I ca^ not therefore perceive, why by translating these Fables, I
should be defrauded of the praise due to me, which other have had, except we
be so spiteful, that to us that is not lavvfull, which with great
co^mendatio^ to the Grecians and Latinistes is allowed. Farevvell.

A Dialogue between the Author and the Printer.
Author. AS I did musing lie, with sundry thoughts oppressed,
Seeking to salve my careful mind, of pain to be redrest:
And pondring how my youth full ydlely I had spent,
In scilence only wrapped up, my mind it did torment.
From darkness unto light I thought it best to call,
By setting forth some little book which profit might us all.
And that I did intend is brought now to effect.
At idle hours I did it pen as time would me direct.
The work you plainly see, friend Printer what it is,
Declare if printing it deserve, and what there is amiss.

Printer. Your meaning I perceive, your purpose I allow,
In that you are so diligent to prosecute your vow.
And as in ages all, those have their praises due,
Which painfully do run their race, and idleness eschew:
So can I not mislyke your noble enterprise:
Which seek to help your countrymen, with this your fine devise.
But shall I tell you plain, herein what is my mind?
Me think this work was done before, and it in print I find:
For Esope (as you know,) already englisht is:
And what does yours, but taste of him? naught do I see but his.

Author. This briefly understand, that Esope is not last
In this my book, nor only he alone does stand aghast:
But sundry writers else about him here do stand,
Both witty, learned, eloquent. as has been taken in hand.
Besides, if well you mark, comparyng that with mine,
It is as near as East to Weast, and dross to Silver fine.
Uncomely tales in that are found, and most absurd to read,
Of reason void, of mirth bereft, to no good end they lead,
No head nor foot in them is had, but set confusedly,
On Esope falsely forged tales, what man can it deny?
As in the life of Xanthus wife, and others he does write
So rudely, falsely, foolishly, how then should this delight?
Of Esope that which I do write, the Greek text does allow,
Dissenting clean from that you think, let this content you now.
In common place it is reduced, applying as I might,
So truly, unto every thing his proper place and right.
From ninteene authors else, I have selected out,
Their fine devise, their sayings wise, their pleasant deeds and stout.
The truth hereof you hear, first try, then judgment give:
If contrary you find to this then do not me believe.

Printer. I have compared since your doings unto his,
And contrary to that I thought, I find that now it is:
Besides uncomely tales, and falsely forged fables,
Wherewith his book replenisht is, perceive I many bables.
For yours and his do far in every case dissent,
I see from whom you do derive, your doings and intents.
To answer your demand full ready am I pressed,
And will hereafter when you list, accomplish your request.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THe first Fable of the penance of the Wolf, the Fox, and the Ass. Fol. 1.
The Spyder and the Gout. Fol. 3. The Ass, the Trumpetter, and a Hare, the
messanger. Fol. 6 Of an old man eodem. An Heremite and a Soldier Fol. 7 The
Fox and Bramble. eod. The Myse and the Frogs Fol. 8 The Beasts and the Birds
Fol. 9 Pecock and Nightingale. eod. A young man that song at the burial of his
mother Fol. 10 A Lion in love with a countreymans daughter. eode^. The Gourde
and Pine tree Fol. 11 Of the Spyder and the Swalow Fol. 12 Of a Dog and a Wolf
eod. Of an Ass and a Fox Fol. 13 Of the Egle and a Pie. eod. A Countreyman
that would pass over a River. Fol. 14 Of a Heart and a Vine. eod. Of an Ass
that served an unkind master. Fol. 15 Of a Husbandeman pricked by a Be
eodem. Of the tree Abrotanum, and and the Hare Fol. 16 The Crow and the Dog.
eo. Of a Hunter and Partrich. Fol. 17 The Dolphin and the Eele. eo. The
Lioness and the Fox. Fol. 18 Of an Astronomer and a Trauayler eodem. Of
Scholars. eodem A boaster Fol. 19 Of a Boaster. Fol. 20 Of the Mole eodem The
birth of Hills. Fol. 21 The Frog and the Fox. eod. A Pecocke spoiled of his
feathers by a Soldier eod. The Kid and the Wolf. Fol. 22. The Sun and the
Northeast wind eodem Of a Fox and Women eating of a Hen Fol. 23 A Dog and
Wolves eodem Pecock and the Crane. Fol. 24 A knight which had a brauling wife.
eodem Arion and the Dolphin. Fol. 25 A Kid and a wolf Fol. 27 The Crab and the
Fox Fol. 28 The Apple tree, and the Pomegranate tree. eod. A Dog and his
master. eod. Of the Turtle Fol. 22 A scolding woman. eodem. The wolf and the
Crane. Fol. 30 A Fisher and a little Fish. Fol. 31 Of a Fox that would kill a
Hen sitting. eodem. The Frogs and their king. Fol. 32 The Colyer and the
Fuller. Fol. 33 Of the Raven and Wolves. eo. A Father and his Sons. Fol. 34
Of Bulls and a Lion. eodem The Lion that begged of the wolf part of his pray.
Fol. 35 Of a Snayle Fol. 36 The Heart and the Fox. eod. Of the Elm and the
Osiar. Fol. 37 Heart and the Wolf. eodem Of a Feller of woodde Fol. 38 The Cock
and the Fox Fol. 39 Of a deceyuer. Fol. 40 Fox caught by a Dog whiles she
fained her self dead Fol. 41 Of a Boy and a thief eod Of a Thrushe. Fol. 42 Of
the air and the Wind. eo. Of a Trauayler. Fol. 43 Of a Woman and a Hen. eod.
Of a covetous man eodem The Dog and the shadow. Fol. 44 A covetous Ambassador
Fol. 45 The covetous man dying eo. Of a covetous man that eat withered apples.
Fol. 46 A lester and a Bishop Fol. 47 Of a priest which buried his Dog eodem.
Of the Owl. Fol. 48 Of a Fox Fol. 49 Of the Lion and the Goat. Fol. 50 Of a
Fox taken by a Countreyman eodem Of a woman that would dye for her husband
Fol. 51 The Lion being old. eodem Of the Hares and the Frogs. Fol. 52 The Be
and Jupiter. Fol. 53 Of a Heart and a Lion. Fol. 54 Of the Town dogs. eod. Of
two Pottes eod. Of the Swanne singing at the point of death. Fol. 55 An old man
that set trees. eo. The Dog and the Cock Fol. 56 Of a Friar, Layma^, and wolf.
eo. Of a Parat Fol. 57 Of an Ass. Fol. 58 Pacient and Physician. eod. An Ass
carried an image. Fol. 59 Frogs and the Crabbe. eod. Leopard and Unicorn
fyghting with a Dragon. Fol. 60 Envious dog and the Ox Fol. 61 Of a young man.
eodem Countryman and Pears. eo. Of a man that refused Clysters. Fol. 62 Of a
Deceyuer eodem Of the Cat and the Myse. Fol. 63 The Wolf and the Sheep. Fol. 64
Of the sick Ass. eod. Of a Fox. eodem. A man that would kill a hog Fol. 65 Of
the Egle that cited al manner of birds Fol. 66 Satyr and wayfaringma^. eo. The
Pie and Cuckoo Fol. 67 Of a Serpent eod. The rule of women over their
husbands. Fol. 68 Of a Woman eodem The Bore and countryma^ Fol. 69 Of a Gnatte
Fol. 70 Of a nourisher of Bees. eod. Creping worms and beasts. Fol. 71 A bird
called Kings fisher. eo. The Hen and the Fox Fol. 72 Two enemies eodem The
Crow and the Raven Fol. 73 The Wolf and the Fox. eod. The Covetous man, and
the envious. Fol. 74 Wolf and the Ass Fol. 74.75 The Lion and the Wolf. Fol.
75 The Cock and the Cat. Fol. 76 Countryman and Serpent Fol. 77 A Servant
which cast his masters Ass from a rock. eod. The Bat, the Bramble, and the
Cormorant Fol. 78 Of a Worm. Fol. 79 Of Cockles eodem. The Ass and the Fox
eod. Dog and the Ass Fol. 80 Wicked man and the devil. eo. Of a Camel. Fol.
81 The Fox and Lion. eod. Of the Eagle. Fol. 82 A Dog fearing the rain. eo.
Of a Cock eodem. A sick man and a physitia^. Fol. 83. A man and his two
wives. eo. Of a Soldier. Fol. 84 Of Trauailers. eodem. A Lion and a Bear.
Fol. 85. Rich man and his Servant. Fol. 86 Of a Woman that bet her Husband.
Fol. 87. Of Fishers Fol. 88 A rich man and a poor. eod. Of a Physician Fol.
89 Countryma^ and the mouse. eo. Of the Lion and the Hog. Fol. 90 Dog that
devoured sheep. eo. Of the Lark. Fol. 91 Of the wild Ass eodem Of the
Countreyman and a counselor eodem Of Jupiter. Fol. 92 Of Flies Fol. 93 The
Egle and the Raven. eo. Two young men eodem Of Money. Fol. 94 The Goat and the
Vine Fol. 95 Of the Ant eodem Of Myse that would hang a bell about a Cats
neck. eod. Of Fishers. Fol. 96 The wolf and the Sow. Fol. 97 Of a Catte eodem
A man that would try his wives mind eodem. The Cock and the Capon. Fol. 98 A
Fouler and a Lark. eod. Of a Goose. Fol. 99 A woman and her Lover. eo. Of a
Serpent and a Husba^dman Fol. 100 A man and a woman twice married. eodem Of the
Countryman and the Horse Fol. 101 Of the Fox that fell into a Well. Fol.
101.102. A Pig and his fathers will. eod. Cockatrice and Seawolf. Fol. 102. Of a
Linnet Fol. 103 The Mule eodem. Of a King and Apes. eodem Of Oxen. Fol. 104 Of
a Hog. Fol. 105 A man which hid tresure. eo. The Pygard and the Egle Fol. 106
A man stoned eod. A Raven and a serpent. eod. A poor man. Fol. 107 A learned
man not esteemed. eo. Of a Physician. Fol. 108 Of Dogs Fol. 109 A sheep
wasting corn. Fol. 110. The Owl and the Lark. eo. Of the Reed. Fol. 111. Of
the Eele. eodem The Crow and the Sheep. eod. The Ape and the Fox. Fol. 112. The
Frogs and the Sun. eod. A Wolf fallen into a pit. eod. Two Hogs. Fol. 113 Of
the Wolf that put on a Sheep skin eodem The Elephant Fol. 114 Of an Ass
eodem A Husbandma^ and a Poet. Fol. 115 Of a rich man unlearned, and a poor
man learned. Fol. 116. The Pike and the Tench. Fol. 117 Of a jealous man. eod.
Of a Liberal man Fol. 118 A covetous man eod. The Dog and the Lion. Fol. 119.
Of the Shepeherde and the Husbandmen eodem. Of Mercurius. eod. An old man and
his Son. Fol. 120: Of the Camel. Fol. 121 Of the Ass, the Ape, and the Mole
eodem. Of a rich man. eodem A mad man. Fol. 122 A Priest and his Boy eod. A
young man Fol. 123 Of Jupiter eodem Of the Woolfe, and the Lamb Fol. 124 Of a
Swanne eodem Of a Horseman and a Husbandman Fol. 125 A man and his Dog eodem A
Soldier and his horse Fol. 126 The Kid and the Wolf. eod. A Philosopher. Fol.
127 The Mouse and the Cat. eo. The Sow and the Dog. Fol. 128. A Lamb and a
Wolf. eod. Of a Fly Fol. 129. The Ape and his two Sons eod. An old man
that carried an Ass. eodem The Fur tree and Bushe. Fol. 131 The Sow and the
Bitch. Fol. 132 The Dogs and the Ass. eod. The Lion and the Fox. Fol. 133. Of
the Wolf being hungrye. eod. The Horse and the Heart. Fol. 134. Of the Ape and
his young ones. Fol. 135. Of Maryners eodem Of the Owl Fol. 136 A Fox and a
Dog. eod. A Wolf and Porkupine. Fol. 137. An old man loath to die. Fol. 138.
The Ass and the Lion. eod. The Horse and the Ass. Fol. 139. Jupiter and the
Raven. Fol. 140. Of the Flea and the Lion. eo. Pecock and the Chough. Fol. 141.
A man and his Dog. Fol. 142. Of a Heardman. eodem. A man created Cardinal. Fol.
143 The Field Myse eodem Of a Flea Fol. 144 Of a Fisher eodem Of the Curryer
and the hunter. Fol. 145 A Wolf Fol. 146 Of a Bear eodem Of the simple
Countreyman. Fol. 147 The Mule and the Horse. eod. Of a Devil Fol. 148 The
Birds. Fol. 149 Of the Ox and the Bullock eodem: Of a Boy that would not
learn Fol. 150 Of the Dove and the Crow. folio eodem. The Ass and the Calfe.
Fol. 151 Of the Marchaunte and the Jew. eodem Of a Carter. Fol. 152 An old
Woman. eodem The Nyghtingale and the Raven. Fol. 153 Of the Dove and the Pie.
Fol. 154 Of the Ass and Frogs. eod. The Pelican Fol. 155 Of the Smythe and
his Dog eodem. Of the Bull and the Mouse. Fol. 156 Of a Weasyll. eodem Of
Hares. Fol. 157 Of the Nut tree, the Ass, and the woman eodem The Bear and
the Be. eode^ Of a Boy and his mother Fol. 158 Of a Grammarian teaching an
Ass. Fol. 159 Of a man that would try his friends eodem Of a young man and an
old. Fol. 160 Of a Lion and a Bull Fol. 161 Of a Lark eodem. Of an Ass. Fol.
163 Of one that played the part of Christ Fol. 164 Of the Heart eodem. Of the
Countreyman and of Hercules Fol. 165 Of the Biting Dog. eodem. Of the Hog and
the Horse. eod. Of the Swan and the crow. Fol. 166 Of the Thrushe. eodem. The
Lion and the Mouse. Fol. 167 Of a River. eod. Of the Serpent. Fol. 168 Of a man that brake an Image eodem Of an Ass and a Raven. Fol. 169 Of a Dog
eodem. The Nurse and the Wolf. eod. Of a woman that wept for her husband Fol.
170 Of a woman beaten. eodem Of the Widow and the grene Ass Fol. 171 Of the
Raven and the Fox. Fol. 172 The Dog and the Sheep. eo. Of the Dog and the
Butcher. Fol. 173 Of the Heart and the Oxen. folio. eodem. The Hare and the
Fox. Fol. 176.
FINIS.
(...)nance of the Wolf, the Fox, and the Ass.
Abuse of the simple.
THe Wolf, the Fox, and the Ass sometime iournied together toward Rome, to
obtain remission of their sins: In the way (because they thought the Pope
would be otherwise occupied, that he might not intend them) they agreed to be
shriuen one of an other, and to suffer penance at their discretion. The Wolf
therefore made his confession to the Fox in this manner: That he saw a Sow
which had.xij. Pigges, the which walked alone in the fields, walowing in
fatnes, and suffered her Pigges at home to starve: wherefore he devoured the sow,
because of her heinous offense in forsaking her young ones: and after, being
moved to pity, he killed also the pigs, to rid them out of their pain, and
ate them up: This he told with tears, desiring to know what penance he
should do therefore. In faith (quod the Fox) thy fault is not great, say once
a Pater noster, and then thou shall be pardoned. Straight after, the Fox began
his confession thus: A cou^tryman had a Cock of the game, which bet and
vanquished al other cocks near about, who with his shrill crowing, troubled in
every quarter, not only the hole, but also the sick persons, especially those
which had the headake, whose pride I could not well away with: as I found
him therefore on a time abroad with the hens, I caught him, and carried him
away to my hole, where I devoured him: for which deed the Hens kackled
against me, and troubled me with their crying: I therefore to revenge the
injury done unto me, tore many of them in pieces and ate them: herein I
confess that I offended, therefore I require pardon. Hereunto the Wolf said:
Thou did well in qualifying the noise and pride of the Cock and Hens, and
therefore it is but a small fault, yet will I join thee this penance, That the
three frydaies following thou eat no flesh, if thou can get none: for I
will show thee as much favor as thou did to me. Well now Sir said they to
the Ass, let us hear thy confession, who began thus: My moyling and
drudging which I endure, is not unknown to you my Lords, as in carrying of
corn sackes, stone, wood and water, yet once I offended, whereof I repent me
full often: For a servant of my Lords, appointed ruler over me, being once a
cold, a straw appeared out of his shoo, which I snatched away from him,
whereby he took great harm and cold of his feet. Therefore be merciful
unto me, and join me some penance. But they said, what haste thou done thou
thief? Mary fie on thee, by thy means that servant had such hurt of his
feet, that we think he is dead thereof, whereby thy soul is damned, and
therefore thy body ought not to escape scotte free: then they killed and
devoured him.

MOR. The mighty and rich men in like manner do pardon one another, but to
the poor they are hard hearted and inexorable.

Abundance sometime perilous.
4 Of the Spider, and the Gout.
A Spider nighe weeried with continual labor, ceased off his work and
walked abroad for disporte: whom the Gout met, and accompanied as fast as
he could, though it were with much pain: when that days journey was nighe
at a point, they approached near to a little Town called T^che, where they
determined to seek fit logding for their purpose. The Spider took little
heed but turned into the house of an exceeding rich man, where on every side
he set up his streamers. Then were straight at hand, those like Devils in a
play, which cast down his webbes, and as fast as he set them up in any part
of the house, they were swept down: he could not work so closely, but it was
found out: such was his misery, that in a house of so much wealth and
abundaunce, he only wanted and was thrust down. But the Gout went like a
beggar, (which caused him to be the longer without lodging) at length he got
him to the cottage of a poor man, where when he had laid him down to rest,
it is not to be told what misery he endured: his supper was coorse bread, and
a Cup of cold water to drink, when he was dry: his bed to rest his weerie
bones upon, was a hard boorde strewed without either boughs or grass, but
thinly with a little straw. I need not show, how ill agreed so hard a bed
and so rude an host, to so tender limbs, and to his skin as soft as silk.
When the day star was scarce risen, the Gout and the Spider met again.
Then the Spider first declared his nights ill rest, and how often he shifted his
place: sometime vpbrayding the Master with too much niceness, sometime with
the double diligence of the sweepers. Ah (quod the Gout) the poverty of mine
host is incredible: for if I had leisure, I could show thee spots black
and blew, that my bed as hard as the Adamant, has imprinted in my soft skin.
Then they took counsel thus once again, That the Spider should go to the
poor man's cottage, and the Gout to the rich man's house, where unto they
both agreed. When it waxed dark, they came near to a City, and the Gout
remembering well his appointment, fair and softely went into an exceeding rich
man's house, where he hid him self: whom when the Master had scarce seen,
Jesus God with what hearty good will, what kindness, and with what names did he
entertayne him: strayghtway he was laid upon beds of Down, his bolsters
stuffed with soft Partrich feathers. I will not speak of the wines, as sweet
and dark wines, wines of Lesbus and Campania, birds that feed on grapes,
Phesants, and party colored birds: to conclude, there was no kind of
pleasure that his fantasy lacked. The Spider went into a poor man's cottage
and began his webs on every side, from wall to wall he hanged them up, he
followed his business with hand and feet, he brake it down and set it up
again, and that he began he ended: and to tell you at a word, he was Lord
and King alone, craft and policy he feared none, for his buylding was so
high, that he was without the reach of a broom. Not long after the Gout
spoke with the Spider, to whom he magnified his plesures, his happiness and
riches: The Spider likewise wonderfully praised his kingdom and liberty in
buylding: They concluded therefore, that whyther so ever they iorneyed, the
Gout should lodge at the rich man's house, and the Spider at the poor man's
cottage.

MOR. Some sort of men speed better in some place than others, and rich men's
houses are a mansion place for disseases: but where least riches are, there is
most liberty.

Abiectes.
3 Of an Ass, the Trumpeter, and a Hare, the Messanger.
THe Lion king of four footed beasts, having war with the Fowls, set his
army in array, ready to join battle with them: who^ the Bear asked what
furderaunce the sluggish Ass, or the fearful Hare would be, to win the field,
because he saw them amongst the other soldiers. He answered him: The Ass
with the sound of his Trumpet, shall encourage the Soldiers to fight: and
the Hare, because of his swiftenesse, shall be a Messanger.

MOR. None is so vile, but good for some thing.

Abstinence.
4 Of an old man.
A Certain devout man counseled an old man to leave off the lusts of the
flesh, whereunto he had been outragiously given. He answered him: Holly Father,
I will obey your reverend and wholesome precepts, for I perceive that Venerie
does much hurt me, neither am I able to follow that trade any longer.

MOR. Many abstain from vices, wherein they are nooseled, not for the love of
God or goodness, but because of infirmity, and fear of punishment.

Agreement perforce.
5 Of an Hermit and a Soldier.
A Certain Heremite, being a man of godly living, exhorted a Soldier to
leave of the warfare in this world, which way very few without offending God
and hurt of their soul, do walk in, and to give him self to quietness,
and prepare for his souls health. I will Father (quod the Soldier) do as ye
will me, but truth is, that in these days Soldiers may neither demand
their wages, though it be very small, ne yet take any pray.

MOR. Many forsake their wicked living, because they can use it no longer.

Aid.
6 Of the Fox and the Bramble.
AS a Fox clymbed a hedge, his feet slipped, who (as he was falling) caught
hold on a Bramble to stay him: wherefore when he had torn his feet with
the pricks thereof, being in pain, he said to the Bramble: woe is me, for I
came to thee for help, who have hurt me worse: not so (quod the Briar) thou
wast deceived, for I catch every thing, and think thou to lay hold on me?

MOR. Some are so foolish as to require aid of those which naturally are bent
to hurt.

Ambition.
7 Of the Mise and the Frogs.
THe Mise on a time co^tended with the Frogs for the kingdom of the Marshes,
whereupon they proclaimed open war. The battle being joined, at the first
onset they behaved themselves so valiantly, that the victory was doutfull. The
wily Mouse lurking in the grass, privily as it were out of an ambushment,
assauted the Frog. But the Frog being of strength more puissant, in courage and
leaping more valiant, with open war provoked his enemy: Their spears were
bulrushes. It happened, as they were fighting, that a kight espied them a far
off, who incontinently made speed unto them: but these noble warriors, being
earnest in fighting, and nothing regarding themselves, were snatched up, and
torn in pieces by the Kight.

MOR. The like happens to seditious Citizens, which being inflamed with the
greedy lusts of bearing rule, whiles they strive either with other, who shall
be head officer, do hazard their goods, and commonly their lives.

Ambodexter.
8 Of the beasts and the birds.
THere was sometime a battle between the beasts and the birds, the victory
was uncertain, for both hoped well, yet much fear and danger was on either
party. The Bat thinking the birds to be the weaker side, left their company,
and took part with their enemies. The birds by the conducting and government
of the Egle won the field. The Batte was condemned for a runaway, and
banished the company of all birds, and that from thenceforthe he should never
fly by day light, and this was the only cause, that the Battes fly but by
night.

MOR. He that will not take part of the sour, shall not taste of that which is
sweet.

All things as God will.
9 Of the Pecocke and the Nightingale.
THe Pecocke complained to Juno, Sister and wife to Jupiter, because the
Nightingale song so sweet, and she hirselfe for her horsenesse, was a byword
to all men. To whom Juno said: Every one has his propre gift of God: The
Nightingal in singing, but thou in colors of feathers passest all other
birds, every man must be content with his estate.

MOR. What God sends, receive it thankefully, neither seek thou further, for
god does nothing unadvisedly.

All things not decent.
10 Of a young man that song at the burial of his mother.
A Certain man wept and lamented for his wife being carried to burying, but
his son did sing: whom his Father rebuked, as he had been mad that he would
sing when his mother went to burial, whereas he ought with him to be heavy and
lament. Why Father (quod he) if thou have hired these Priests to sing, why art
thou angry with me that sing for nothing? That is no part of thy office said
his Father, but belongs to the Priest.

MOR. All things are not seemly for all men.

Armed always.
^1 Of a Lion in love with a Countreymans daughter.
A Lion enamoured with a Countreymans daughter, desired her greatly, whereupon
he requested her father to give her to him in marriage. What (quod the man)
should I marry my daughter to a beast? Then the Lion frowned and grinded his
teeth at him, wherewith the countreyman being afraid, went from his former
talk, and said: I would gladly match my daughter with thee, so that thy
teeth were out, and thy nails off, because the maid stands in doubt
thereof. The Lion being inflamed with love, did so, and then required the
maid of him. The Countreyman seeing him lack his teeth and hooues, took up a
club wherewith he diverse times basted him, and chased him from his house.

MOR He that yields him self to his enemies, is soon dispatched.

Arrogancy.
12 Of a Goorde and a Pinetree.
A Goord sometime was sown near to a Pinetree, which for greatness of body
and breadth of boughs, passed. It happened that this Goord (by much rain and
temperature of weather) grew very rankely, and extended his boughs loftily:
He sprung up about the Pinetree and wrapped him about his boughs and leaves,
craking that he had greter leaves, hanging flowers, great fruit and fresh. At
length he was so puffed with pride, that he durst speak thus to the pinetree:
See thou not (quod he how far my leaves exceed thine, and how in
flourishing I pass thee, and am now, even in thy top? The Pinetree, in
wisdom and strength excellyng, nothing woondered at the loftynesse of the
Goorde, but thus answered and said unto him: I have a long time wyntered and
sommered here, and have passed through the pykes, and yet remain as sound as
a bell, but thou in thy first flourishing, what time thy leaves shall fall,
thy courage will be calmed, and all thy force in the dust.

MOR. In prosperity we ought not to be lofty.

Attempt not above thy capacity.
13 Of the Spider and the Swallowe.
A Spider offended with the swallow, because she devoured the flies which were
his meat, hanged up his webbes before the hole, (from whence the Swallowe should
fly) to take her. The Swallowe flew forth and carried away the web with the
weauer. Then the Spider hanging in the air, and perceiving his death to be at
hand, said: Justly have I this deserved, which did think to catch great
birds, when without great labor I could scarce get the smallest thing that
flies.

MOR. Attempt nothing above thy capacity.

Attendance.
14 Of a Dog and a Wolf.
AS a Dog slept in a court before the house of his Master, a Wolf came
suddenly and caught him: whom, as he would have killed, the Dog besought,
saying: Good master spare me now because I am lean and thin as thou see,
but if thou will tarry, there shall be within these few days a great
marriage kept at my Lords, where I will so fill me and make me so fat, that
then I shall do thee more good. The Wolf crediting his words, let him go.
Shortly after the wolf came and found the dog sleeping upon the house top, to
whom he called as he stood beneathe, willing him to perform his promis: Nay
verily (quod the Dog) but if from henceforth thou find me sleeping without
doors, tarry not at al, upon hope of any Marriage.

MOR. The burnt hand ever after fears the fire.

Bablers.
15 Of the Ass and the Fox.
AN Ass put on a Lions skin and walked abroad, putting all other beasts in
fear, who on a time seeing a Fox, endeavored to make him also afraid. But he
(for by chance he heard him bray) said to him: Thou know well that I would
have trembled at thee, if I had not herd thy braying.

MOR. Some unlearned men which outwardly bear countenance, through their
babbling are reproved.

16 Of the Egle and the Pie.
THe Pie sometime desired the Egle, to make him one of his friends of his
household, because the beauty of his body deserved it, and also the readiness
of his speech to do messages: I would so do, said the Egle, but I fear
least that which I speak within doors, thou would preach it abroad on
the house tops.

MOR. Keep no bablers nor teltales in thy house.

17 Of a Countreyman that would pass over a River.
A Country man ready to pass a stream, which by chance was suddenly risen,
with late rain that fell, sought the shallowe. When he had assayed that part
of the River which was calmest, he found it deeper than he supposed: again,
where it was roughest, there he found it shallowest: then he bethought him
whyther he might commit his life to the calmest place of the water, or to the
roughest.

MOR. Dread those less which are full of words and threatenings, than those
that say nothing.

Benefactors.
18 Of a Heart and a Vine.
A Heart escaping the Hunters, lay hid under a Vine. When they were a little
past her, she supposing she lay safe, began to feed on she vine leaves, which
being stirred, the Hunters returned: and judging (as it was in deed) some
beast to lurk under the leaves, they with their arrows slew the heart: who as
she lay a dying, said thus: Rightly am I served, for I ought not to have hurt
that which saved me.

MOR. They which do any wrong to their benefactors, are punished of God.

Benefits ill rewarded.
19 Of an Ass that served an unkind Master.
AN Ass served a certain man many years, in which time he never offended
him. It happened afterward, being heavy laden, that he stumbled in a rough
way, and fell under his burden. Then his cruel master bet him sore, and in
spite of his heart forced him to rise, calling him a slouthful and sluggish
beast: but this poor wretch thought thus with him self: Miserable is my
estate, which have happened to so unkind a master, for though I have served him
a long time without displeasing him, yet does he not forgive me this one
fault, in recompense of the good service I have done him.

MOR. This Fable is against those, which forget the benefits that they have
received, and grievously punish the least offense of their benefactors toward
them done.

Benefits.
20 Of a Husbandman pricked by a Be.
A Husbandman being stong by a Be, marvelled that out of the self same mouth
so sweet juice proceeded, and so grievous a sting. The Be answered, the more
beneficial I am, the more I hate them that do me wrong.

MOR. The more good men do, the less injury they endure.

21 Of the tree Abrotanum, and the Hare.
THe property of Abrotanum, is to draw out any thing that sticks fast, with
the help of Auxangia. Wherefore on a time came a Hare halting to him, for a
thorn which stuck in his foot, and said: O Physician both of body and
soul, take pity on me and help me, and forthwith showed his right foot.
This tree being moved with compassion, put himself upon the wound, brought
out the thorn, and healed it. Wherefore the Hare remembering this benefit,
carried daily a flaggon of water on his shoulders, and watered the root of the
tree, whereby he caused it to continue fresh and green.

MOR. Let us always gladly serve our benefactors.

Benefits for advantage.
22 Of the Crow and the Dog.
AS the Crow was offering sacrifice to M^nerua, she bad the Dog to her* good
cheer, but he answered her: Why do thou bestow sacrifice to no purpose?
For the Goddess so hates thee, that she suffers thee to have no credit in
any divination. To whom the Crow said, for that cause the more do I sacrifice
unto her, that I might get her favor again.

MOR. Many for advantage, fear not to be^efite their enemies.

Betraying.
23 Of a Hunter, and a Partriche,
A Hunter had caught a Partriche, which as he would have killed, she besought
him pardon for her life, and to set her at liberty, promising to bring to his
net many Partriches: The Fouler answered her readily again, saying: I think
that now thou art more worthy of death: because thou have given thy word to
betray thy friend.

MOR. He which goes about by deceit to undo his friend, runs headlong
into misery.

Beware of enemies.
24 Of the Dolphin and the Eele.
A Certain Dolphin finding an Eele in the sea, pursued after her, whom when
he had often caught, but could not hold, because of her slipperinesse, he was
wonderful sorry. But the Eele being disposed to mock him, and thereby to
escape, spoke craftily to the Dolphin: I am sorry for thee, that thou art too
much weeried and grieved with swimming after me, but thy labor is lost: for
in the deep waters thou shall never take me, but go with me into the mudde,
and thou shalt have me at thy pleasure. The foolish Dolphin being in a
chafe, and also greedy of his pray, began to swim after her: intending utterly
to destroy her: when the Ele had led the Dolphin into shallow places she wound
her self into the mud, and said: Come up to me, for I shall be stayed by the
roots of herbs, and thou shall have thy desire of me. The Dolphin gave a skip
to catch the Eele, but she skipte into the mud, and she stacke fast on dry
ground: In the mean time came a Fisher, and struck him through, whereof he
dyed.

MOR. He that goes with his Foe, it is no marvel if he fall.

25 Of a Lioness and the Fox.
THe Fox oftentimes vpbrayded the Lioness that she had but one whelpe at a
time, truth it is (quod she) but then that is a Lion.

MOR. Beauty consists not in plenty, but in virtue.

Boasters.
26 Of an Astronomer and a Traueler.
A Certain Astronomer diligently vewing the stars, unwittingly fell into a
well, but a Trauailer by chance coming by, and seeing him sighing, said:
Do not thou see the earth, which gave thy mind upward?

MOR. Many boast that they know of things to come, not knowing what presently
happens.

27 Of Scholars.
A Certain Wheel wright had been often deluded by Scholars, which were
vagabunds, which came to him for alms, saying they had great skill in Magike,
and that they could do many things: of which number, there came one a begging
to his door, in the name of a Master of the seven lyberall Arts, to whom he
said: My friend, were not you here the last year? No (quod the Scholar:)
depart therefore (quod he) and come no more here, for I will give thee nothing.
The Scholar was offended, and asked why he spoke in the singular number to him,
being a Master of the seven liberal Arts, and a Magitian. He answered: I
know much more than thou do: for with one handie craft labor I find me, my
wife and children, but thou with thy seven Arts can not find thy self, but
go a begging. Wherefore thou ought to reverence me, and not I thee. When
he had so said, the Scholar departed, well mocked.

MOR. It is a folly to boaste of any title, where as knowledge wants of that
which is professed.

28 Of a Boaster.
A Certain ragged and ill favored man came into a Lauerne, and because he was
light^^ regarded, began to boast of his nobility, ^^at he descended of an
ancient house, to whom ^^e answered: Auaunte knave with thy nobility, our
Millers Ass is more noble than thou, for he goes with a man waiting on him,
but thou go without.

29 Of a Boaster.
A Certain man, who having traueled far, returned into his country, and
made great vauntes of his manly acts that he had done in many places,
especially yt he had dau^ced a dau^ce at Rhodes, that none of that place could:
for proof whereof, he said, that he had to witness them which were there
present, to whom one of them that stood by, answered: Sir, if this be true,
what needs witness, there stands Rhod^^, and there is thy dance.

MOR. All talk is superfluous, except we have present proof.

30 Of the Mole.
THe Mole a blind brast, said sometime to her mother: I see a Mulbery tree,
and straight after, I smell a great savor of Frankincense: but the third time
she said, I hear the noise of the fall of an iron pellet: her mother
answered: As far as I perceive, thou lackest not only thy sight, but also
thy smelling and hearing.

MOR. Some brag they can do things impossible, and in the least are reproved.

Boasting.
31 Of the birth of Hills.
THe talk was sometime that the Hills did travel, whereof men hearing, came
thither, and stood gaping about, waiting for some monstrous thing, not
without great fear. At length the hills were delivered, and brought forth
a Mouse: whereat there fell such a laughter amongst them, that they were ready
to sown.

MOR. Crakers will promise great matters, but scarce perform the least.

32 Of the Frog and the Fox.
A Frog came forth of the Marshes into the wood amongst wild beasts, and
said, she was well seen in Phisike, and that her cunning was as good as
Hipocrates, or Galenes: all beasts gave credit, only the Fox mocked her,
saying: shall she be counted skillful in Phisike, whose lips be so pale? Let
her first heal her self. And thus the Fox mocked her. For the mouth of a
Frog is of a sky color.

MOR. It is mere folly to profess that whereof thou have no skill.

33 Of a Pecocke spoiled of his feathers by a Soldier.
A Pecocke boasted to a Soldier that had decked his hatte with Estrich
feathers, that she had much fayrer feathers: and to verify her saying, she
spread abroad her tail: The Soldier therewith being enamored, caughte and
spoiled her, wherewith to deck his helmet: Then the Pecocke said to her self:
woe is me wretch and fool, to show so precious a thing to a spoyler, which I
ought to have kept close.

MOR. By boasting of precious things many are stirred to become thieves.

Boldness.
34 Of the Kidde and the Wolf.
AS a Kid looked out of a window, he espied a wolf passing by, upon whom he
railed: Ah ungracious person said the wolf, it is not thou that tauntest me,
but thy safe hold.

35 Of the Sun and the Northeast wind.
Sometime the Sun and the Northeaste wind contended, who was the stronger,
whereupon they agreed to prove their strength on a wayfaring man, that he
might have the victory which caused him to cast away his wallet. First the
Northeast wind with sharp storms and bitter blastes assayed him: He stayed
not a whit therefore, but as he went he wrapped his clothes double about him:
When the Sun was come to his course, by little and little in spreading his
beams, he calmed the wind, then was this man in such a heat and swet, that
he puffed and blowed exceedingly, and at length by the outragiousnesse thereof,
being faint, he could go no further, but got him into the cool shadow,
casting away his wallet, and sat him down under a thick wood: by which
evident token the Sun was conqueror.

MOR. Look before thou leap, for though thou be strong, yet perhaps another
is stronger than thou, if not stronger, yet craftier, with his policy to give
thee the foil.

36 Of a Fox, and women eating of a Hen.
THe Fox passing by a farm house, espied a great route of women eating Hens
sumptuously prepared, but (God wot) there was no talk amongst them, to whom
she said: what crying and barking of Dogs would be after me, if I should
do as ye do? Thou wicked beast (quod an old woman) we eat that is our own,
but thou stealest from others.

MOR. We may not be so bold with other men's goods, as the right owners.

37 Of a Dog and Wolves.
A Great barking Dog was a sore enemy to the Wolves, for when they would
have entered the City, he kept them out: wherefore they also hated the Dog,
who^ they would feign have killed. At length they sent two Ambassadors to the
Dog, desiring him to come abroad into the fields, and they would make him
their king, because he was mighty and valiant. The foolish Curre consented,
and went with them, whom they brought safely to the other wolves that tare him
in pieces.

MOR. He that will be hardy, let him keep him self in a sure defense.

Bragging.
38 Of the Pecocke and the Crane.
THe Pecocke and the Crane sometime supped together, and amongst other talk,
the Pecocke bragged much of his fair tail, despising the Crane: he granted
that she was a fair bird in that point, yet was he able with his stout
flying, to enter amongst the clouds, when she could scarce fly to the house
top.

MOR. Let not one think scorn of another, every one has his proper gift and
virtue: for he that wants thy quality, perhaps has that which thou lackest.

Brawling women.
39 Of a Knight that had a brawling wife.
THere dwelt a Knight at Florence, descended of a noble blood, which had a
waywarde and brauling wife, that daily went to her ghostly Father, to whom
she complained of her husbands demeanure: for which he much blamed the knight.
It happened not long after, that she desired her ghostly father to set her and
her husband at quiet, whereupon he called him to shrift, saying, that if he
came, he doubted not but to make them Prendes again. The Knight agreeing, the
other required him to make declaration of his faults. In faith (quod the
Knight) it shall not need, for I know that my wife has often told thee all that ever I did, yea and more too.

Brute beasts kinder than men.
40 Of Arion and the Dolphin.
ARion was an ancient man, and came of a noble lineage: he could sing to the
harp: he was borne in the City of Methimne, in the Isle of Leshos, whom
Periander king of Corinthe loved for his cunnings sake, from whom he departed
to see the famous country of Sicilie and Italy When he was come thither, and
had well delighted the ears, and contented the mynds of most men in those
parts, he gained greatly, and lived in pleasure and love of all men.
Afterward having gathered much substance, he minded to return to Corinth,
whereupon he hired a Corinthian ship and mariners of that coast, because he
hoped to find friendship at their hands. The Corinthians received him, and
launched into the deep, who being greedy of this great pray of money, took
counsel to kill Arion. He understanding of his destruction, gave them all the
money that he had, praying them only to save his life. But being past hope and
sore afraid, he requested that before his death, he might put on his apparel
and take his Harp and sing a mourning song to comfort his heart withal: The
Mariners (though they were hard hearted and cruel) desiring to hear him,
granted his petition. He being clad as he was accustomed, standing in the
hinder part of the ship, song with a loud voice, the song called Orithium. In
the end of his song, as he stood with his Harp and in his clothes, he cast
himself into the Sea. The shipmen nothing douting but yt he was drouned, kept
on their voyage. But a strange and wonderful thing happened, for a Dolphin
suddenly swam by and received him, carried him on his back above the water, and
brought him safe and sound to Tenarus, in the land of Laconia: from whence
Arion went straight to Corinthe, and showed him self to King Periander, and
how he was carried of the Dolphin, declaring all that happened. The King little
believed this, but commanded him safely to be kept, till the truth were
tried. The Mariners were sought for, (and Arion sent out of the way) who being
brought before the King, he demanded of them (making no semblante that he
had knowledge of Arion) whither they heard any thing of him in the parties
whence they came: They answered, that when they set forth he was in Italy,
and lived well there, and was highly esteemed in the Cities: and also was
exceeding rich. Whiles they thus spoke, in came Arion with his Harp, having
on the same apparel wherewith he lept into the Sea, whereby the shipmen being
amazed, and pricked in conscience could not deny it.

MOR. In brute beasts we shall sometime find more friendship, than in covetous
men, which care for nothing but riches, neither have any spark of humanity,
but the only Phisnomie.

Busy bodies.
41 Of a Kid and a Wolf.
A Kidde straying from the flock, and being pursued by a Wolf, turned back
to him and said: O Wolf, because I am persuaded that thou shall eat me, play
first on thy pipe that I may dance, least I die in sorrow: As the Wolf was
playing and the Kid dancing, the dogs heard it and chased the Wolf: who
said to the Kid: I have well deserved this, for I ought not being a Cook, to
counterfeit a Minstrel.

MOR. They which regard not that whereunto they are naturally inclined, but
assay that which to others belongs, fall into adversity.

42 Of the Crab and the Fox.
A Crab fish came forth of the sea and fed, the Fox being hungry and seeing
him, caught him: who being ready to be devoured, said: I am well served,
which being a fish of the sea, would live on land.

MOR. Those men are justly miserable, that forsaking their proper science, do
meddle with that, which becomes them not.

43 Of the Apple tree, and the pomgranate tree.
THe Pomgranate and the Apple tree contended about their beauty: When they
had continued long in strife together, a bush, which was their neighbor, often
hearing them, at length said: It is time friends to be at one.

MOR. The vylest persons sometime will meddle in their betters matters.

Causers of evil.
44 Of a Dog and his Master.
A Certain man had a Dog whom he always fed with his own hands, because he
should love him the more, and when he was bound he loosed him: But yet he
commanded his servant to tie him up, and beat him, to the end the dog might
perceive he loved him, and that his servant did not. The dog taking it
grievously to be daily tied and beaten, ran away Whom when his master
rebuked as a churl, and forgetful of al his benefits, that he would run
away from him which loved him so, and fed him, whom he never bound nor ^ette.
Ah sir (said the Dog) that your servant does at your commandment, I count
it done by you.

MOR. Those are evil doers, which are causers of evil.

Chastity.
45 Of the Turtle.
A Certain Turtle being a widow, lived in great heaviness for the death of
her mate, but she remained chaste: whom other birds pitying desired her to
abide with them, whereunto at length she consented: They made her the best
cheer they could, but she seeing their abomination and whordome, forsook
them, and led the rest of her life in chaste widowhed.

MOR. Who protests chastity, must set his mind on no worldly affairs.

A charm for Scoldes.
46 Of a scolding Woman.
A Certain man had a scold to his wife, which always brauled with him, what
soever he did, which the more he bette her, the more fierce she was When he saw
that stripes would not prevail, he attempted an other way, for as often as she
chidde, he played on a pair of Bag^ pypes, whereof he had no skill. When he
had s^ done, she was more fierce: but at length he continuing his playing, she
daunced for anger, and in the end she stroke the Bagpipe out of his hand. But
he took it again, and played, wherewith she being chafed, ran out of the
doors, saying, that she would not endure his wickedness and drunkenness.
The next day she began her scolding a fresh, but her husband played as he was
wont. Then the woman declared that she was overcome, and left of her
curssing, promising her husband to become most gentle unto him, so that he
would lay away his Bagpipe.

MOR. Malaperte women by diverse ways must be charmed.

Churl.
47 Of the Wolf and the Crane.
THe Wolf sometime had killed a Sheep, which as he greedely devoured, by
chance the bones stuck fast in his throat: he trauai^ed far and near,
seeking for help but found ^one, for all men judged him well served for his
^reedinesse. At length by fair flattering words, and greater promises, he
allured the Crane to ^hruste his long neck into his throat, and to ^lucke out
the bone that stuck fast. When the ^rane had so done, he required a reward:
But ^he wolf laughed him to scorn, saying: Be pac^ing thou patche, can thou
not be content with thy life, thou art bound to thank me therefore: for had I
list, I might have bitten off thy neck.

MOR. All is lost that is put in a riuen dishe.

Certentie.
48 Of the Fisher and the little Fish.
A Fisher cast his hooks into the water baited with flesh, wherewith he caught
a little fish, the prisoner besought him to release him, now being so little,
and to let him grow bigger, that hereafter he might have the more commodity
of him: Nay said the Fisher, I will not bie the pigge in the poke, for I use to
take what presently I can get.

MOR. Leave not the bird in the hand, for that in the bushe.

49 Of a Fox that would kill a Hen sitting.
THe Fox being entered a countreymans house, found a Hen sitting on Eggs in
the nest, which besoughte him, saying: I pray thee kill me not now being
lean, tarry a while till my chickens be hatched, which thou maiste eat
without any tootheake being young: Ah (quod he) I were not worthy to be called
a Fox, if now being hungry, I would forsake my pray that is ready, upon
hope of Chickens which are not yet out of the shell: I have strong teethe,
which are able to grind the hardest flesh that is. And when he had so said, he
devoured the Hen.

MOR He is not wise, which upon uncertain hope of greater things, will let go
that which he has presently.

Common people.
50 Of the Frogs and their King.
THe Frogs being free, besought Jupiter to give them a king, he laughed at
their foolish petition, nevertheless they continued their instant suit so
long, that at the length they forced him thereunto. He cast them down a
beam, which with the fall thereof made a great noise in the water. The Frogs
being afraid held their peace, and did homage to their king, and approached
by little and little nearer unto him. At length they boldly hopped up and down
on him: and thus their foolish king became a laughing stock unto the^. Then
called they on Jupiter again, desiring of him a valiant king. He sent the^
the Storke, who walked like a stout champion through the Marshes, killing and
devouring as many Frogs as he met. At even when the Storke was gone to rest,
they came forth of their holes, hoarsly crying, but to a dead man, for
Jupiter his will was, seeing they were not content with a merciful king, that
they should be oppressed with a tyrant.

MOR. The like happens to the common people, which having a merciful and
gentle prince, judge him a dastard and slouthful, and pray that they may have a
stout prince. Again having a valiant prince, they disprayse his cruelty,
praising the others clemency. Either it is, that we are not contented with
things present, or that is true, seldom comes the better.

Company.
51 Of the Collier and the Fuller.
A Colyer sometime desired a Fuller to dwell with him in house together: Nay
(said the Fuller) this neither pleases me, nor yet is for my profit. For I
fear greatly least that which I make clean, thou should ray as black as a
coal.

MOR. We are hereby warned to keep company with those that be of a perfect
honest life, and to shun the fellowship of leude men, as a noisome plague.

52 Of the Raven and Wolves.
A Raven sometime followed Wolves over many high hills, wherefore he required
to be partaker of their pray, because he had so far followed them, neither had
left their company. The Wolves made light of him, because he followed not
the^, but their pray, and in that he would as soon devour the hearts of
Wolves, if they should be slain, as of any other beast.

MOR. We must always mark not that we ^oo, but of what mind we are in doing.

Concord.
53 Of the father and his sons.
A Husbandeman had many young men to his sons, which were always at
variaunce, whom he diligently endeavored to unite in love together, and because
he would plainly open to them the inconveniences of their discord, he brought
a bundle of small sticks, which he commanded them to bind with a little
cord, and then to break it in pieces: they being but young and weak, did
their good will to break it, but could not prevail: Then their father loosed
it, and gave every of them a little rod thereof, which every one according to
his strength did easily break: and forthwith he said to them: Sons, if ye
would agree, and stick thus one to an other, no man were able to vanquish you:
but if ye be eyger to hurt and pursue one an other with mortal hatred, ye
shall soon be a pray for your enemy.

MOR. By concord small things increase. By discord great things waste and
consume.

54 Of Bulls and a Lion.
THere were four Bulls which agreed to stick one to another as well in
wealth as in woe, whom the Lion perceived seeding together, and therefore was
afraid to assail them though he were very hungry: but in the end he
devised by some crafty way to sever them: whom after they were parted, he soon
tore them in pieces.

MOR. Nothing is surer than concord, and discord makes the mighty weak.

Consenting perforce.
55 Of a Lion which begged of the Wolf part of his pray.
THe Wolf and the Fox entered fellowship, and went a hunting, to whom, as they
were dividing the Heart which they had taken, the Lion came by chance, and
challenged the third part of the pray, because he was king of four footed
beasts: but the Wolf denied it: then the Lion being angry, laid hold on
the wolf with his claws, and plucked the skin clean from his head, and made
it read, whereby the wolf escaped scarce with his life. After the Lion turned
to the Fox, and said: What say thou? Forsooth my lord the king (quod he)
I grant not only the third part, but also the whole Heart unto you: What (quod
the Lion) has any body taught thee to answer so wisely: Yea sir (said the
Fox) the red hatte which you put on my fellow the Wolf has taught me.

MOR. Better it is sometime to grant a part than to leese the whole.

Content in thy state.
56 Of a Snayle and the Eagle.
THe Snayle being offended that he continually abode in moist and low places,
desired the Egle, (of whom he had heard, that she flew so high, that she
might behold the greatest part of the Earth on every side) to carry him up on
high, whereby he might at once behold both Hills and Valleys, the Fields and
the Sea. Which thing when the Egle had quickly done, she cast him down, whereby
he fell on ye ground, and was dashed in pieces.

MOR. Let no man exalt himself higher than his state and nature does require.

57 Of the Hare and the Fox.
THe Hare and the Fox made their petitions to Jupiter, the one desired
swiftness to his subtilitie, the other subtilitie to his swiftness: Jupiter
answered them: In the beginning of the world we gave every beast his proper
gift bountifully: now if one should have had all, other had been wronged.

MOR. God has bestowed his gifts so indifferently upon every man, that we
ought with our state to be satisfied.

Contention with superiors.
58 Of the Elm and the Osier.
THere sprung up an Elm in the bank of a River, which mocked an Osier that
grew next him, for his weakness, because that with the least beating of the
water he moved, but of his own strength and stoutnesse he boasted exceedingly,
and how that he had continued there many years, not able to be shaken by the
violence of the water. It happened on a time, that by force of the waves he was
broken down, and carried away by the stream: Then the Osier mocked him,
saying: Whither away neighbor, will thou now forsake me? Where is now thy
strength become?

MOR. Those men are wyser that give place to their betters, than they that do
contend and have a foul overthrow.

59 Of the Heart and the Wolf.
A Heart sometime accused a Sheep before the Wolf, that he ought him a bushel
of wheat: The sheep in very deed knew nothing of this, yet for fear of the
Wolf, promised payment. A day was set, which being come, the Heart put the
Sheep in remembrance thereof, she denied it, excusing that promise to be made
for fear of the Wolves presence. Forced promises are not to be kept.

MOR. It is a clause of the law, force must have the repulse by force. But
thereof comes a new sentence: It is lawful to pay craft with the like.

60 Of a Feller of Wood.
AS a Woodseller was cutting wood near a river side, he lost his axe, who
being uncertain what to do, sat him down on the ryuers bank and wept.
But Mercurius understanding the cause, and moved with pity, dyued under the
water, brought up a golden Axe, and asked him, if that were it which he lost:
He denied it to be his: then he dyued again, and brought up one of Silver,
the which he refused to be his: then he dyued the third time, and took up
his Axe, which he acknowledged to be his which he lost. Mercurius perceiving
him to be a just man and a true, gave them all unto him, who forthwith came
to his fellows, and showed them what had happened unto him. One of them
because he would also trys it, came to the River, and cast in his Axe
willingly: then satte him down and wept. Unto whom when Mercurius had
appeared, and understood the cause, he likewise dyued, and brought up a golden
Axe, which he asked, if he had lost: He rejoicing, did affirm it to be his.
Whose impudent and manifest falshoode Mercury perceiving, neither gave him the
golden Axe, nor his own.

MOR. How much God loves the righteous, so much he hates the unrighteous.

61 Of the Cock and the Fox.
THE Fox being sometime very hungry, thought by suttletie to get his pray
amongst the Hens, which by the conduction of the Cock were flowne into a
higher tree than he could clymbe: whereupon he came to the Cock, whom he
gently saluted, and said: What make thou so high? Have thou not heard the
news of late, which are so good for us? Verily (quod the Cock) I heard
nothing: but I pray thee what are they? The Fox said: I am come hither to
make thee privy of our joy: For there was lately a general Counsel held
of all Beasts, wherein was concluded a continual peace between all Beasts:
so that now without any manner of fear, molestation, or laying awayte of
any, every one may walk where as he list in safety and quietness,
therefore come down and let us keep holy this day. The Cock perceiving the
subtlety and craft of the Fox, said to him: Thy tidings are very good, which
also I do like well: and forthwith he stretched out his neck, and looked a
far off, as though he saw some strange thing, whom the Fox asked, what he
espied? The Cock answered, I see two Dogs coming amayne with open mouth:
the Fox therewith quaking for fear, bad them Adieu, for time it is for me to
be gone, and forthwith took him to his feet: What sir (quod the Cock)
whither runnest thou? what fear thou? thou need doubt nothing, if this
peace be concluded: verily (quod the Fox) I can not tell whether these Dogs
have heard of this decree or not. Whereby one craft was paid with the like.

62 Of a deceiuer.
THere was a certain man who sowed lead and other trifles in a piece of
lether, as though it had been some Jewel, and in the sight of a rich
merchant and other men, he privily threw it to the ground, and after took it
up again, inquiring if any had lost it: This rich man being covetous, came and
affirmed it to be his: to whom the Deceiuer said: Is it a precious thing as it
seems? The Marchaunte avouched it to be. Mary (quod the other) thou shalt
not have it it again except thou give me ten crowns for a reward, which he
willingly gave, and forthwith departed and opened the leather, but he
perceiving it to be a small trifle, went to the deceiuer, alleging that he was
beguyled, wherefore he threatened to hang him, except he restored the.x.
Crowns. Why (quod the deceiuer) didste thou craftily and falsely say it was
thine? and he caught hold on his hand, and would have brought him before the
Mayor to try their honesty, but the merchant plucked back his hand and ran
away.

63 Of a Fox caught by a Dog, whiles she fained her self dead.
A Fox counterfeyting that she was dead, to the end to entrap the birds
which should come to her as to a dead carcass, being walowed in durte, did lie
with her face upward in a field, waiting for Choughs and Ravens, and such
like greedy birds, which she would devour. It happened a dog to come by, which
snatched at her, and with his teeth tore her. Whereat she said: I am worthily
served, for whiles I endeavor subtly to catch birds, my self am caught by an
other.

MOR. They which lie in wait for other, ought not to be grieved if they be
entrapped them selves.

64 Of a Boy and a Thief.
A Boy sat weeping on the brinke of a Well, whom a Thief demanded the cause
thereof. Mary (quod he) as I drew water my roape brake, and a pot of gold is
fallen in. This thief believing him, put of his clothes, and lept into the well
to seek it: which, because he found not, he came up again, where he could
neither see the Boy nor his cote, for the Boy was gone with it.

MOR. He that uses deceit, sometime is deceived.

65 Of a Thrushe.
THe Thrushe made his vaunts that he had won the friendship of the Swallow,
to whom his mother said: Thou art a fool son, if thou think to live with
her, seeing either of you desires contrary places, for she abides in hot
places, but thou in cold.

MOR. Make not those thy friends, whose living disagreeth from thine.

66 Of the Air and the Wind.
THe Air on a time cited the wind before the Judge and maker of all things,
and said: O Lord of all things, behold and take pity of me, ye have placed
me Princelike enough, for which I give you thanks, because ye have appointed me
to be the life of all living things, but herein I was deceived, for this Wind
does make me so cold and intemperate, therefore I say to him, if he presume
from henceforth to blow upon me, I will choke him: to whom the Creator
said: Air thou say ill, though the wind make thee cold and toss thee,
yet he makes thee wholesome and temperate. If the wind blewe not on thee, thou
should be corrupt, loathsome, infected and hated of all men: wherefore thou
ought to love him which preserves thy health, wherewith the Air was at one
with the Wind.

MOR We ought to love, and patiently suffer them which correct us.

Covetousness.
67 Of a Trauailer.
A Waifaring man having travailed far, vowed, if he found any thing to offer
the half thereof to Mercurius. He found a bag full of Almondes and Dates,
which he took and ease: but the Date stones and shelles of the Almonds he
laid upon an Altar, saying: Thou haste O Mercury, my vow, for with thee I
partake both the outside and the inside of that I found.

MOR. The Fable is against covetous men, which for covetousness deceived the
Gods.

68 Of a Woman and a Hen.
A Certain Widow had a Hen, which day by day laid an egg, she supposing,
if she gave her more Barley, that she would lay twice a day, did so: but the
Hen being fat, could not lay once a day.

MOR. Sometime they loose the present commodity, which through covetousness
seek after more.

69 Of a covetous man.
A Covetous man having sold all his goods, made a wedge of gold, which in a
certain place he buried together with his soul and mind, to which he daily
went to see it: One of the work men watching him on a time, and perceiving what
was done, dug up the wedge and carried it away: afterward he came, who
seeing the place empty, began to lament and pluck him self by the hair.
When one saw him thus weeping, and understood the cause thereof, he said:
Friend be not sorry, for having gold, thou hadste it not, take therefore a
stone, and hide it for thy gold: and suppose that it is gold, and it shall be
all one to thee, for as I perceive, when it was gold, thou didste not occupy
it.

MOR. It avails nothing to be endued with possessions, except we have the use
thereof.

70 Of the Dog and the shadow.
AS a Dog by chance swam over the river, he carried in his jaws a piece of
flesh. The Sun then shining, as commonly it happens, the shadow thereof
appeared in the water: which when he had seen, supposing it to be another
piece of flesh, snatched greedely thereat, and so lost that he had in his jaws.
The Dog being stricken at the heart, both with the loss of his flesh, and also
of his foolish hope, barked thus in his language: Ah wretch, which lackedst a
measure in thy gree;edie desire. Thou had enough and too much, hadste thou
not doted, now through thy folly thou have nothing left thee.

MOR We are warned of modesty and wisdom, in desiring and eschuing of
things, and to use a mean in our desires.

71 Of a covetous Ambassadoure.
A Certain covetous man being sent ambassador for his country to another City,
there were straight at hand trumpetters to welcome him, and to delight^ his
ears with music, hoping thereby to fill their purses with money. He sent
them word, it was now no time to play, because his heart was heavy for the
death of his mother: the Trumpetters deceived of their purpose, departed
sorowing. Then a friend of his hearing of his sorrow, came to see and comfort
him, and asked him, how long it was since his mother died? Forty years (quod
he,) then his friend understanding the wily deceit of the Ambassadoure,
laughed exceedingly.

MOR. This Fable belongs to covetous men, which study all the ways to the
wood to save their money.

72 Of a Covetous man dying.
AS a covetous man lay a dying, and understood that at length he should carry
nothing with him, he turned him to his friends and neighbors whom he saw
present, and said: Learn of me, which al my life time have endeavored to
gather goods, that ye travail not too much to heap up riches: for of so
many Acres of land, of so much precious apparel which with so great
sweating, I have got, I shall have but a hole of five foot, and one sheet,
wherewith being dead, I shall be covered.

MOR. It is a foolish and miserable thing to bestow so much labor in
gathering of goods, which (whether we will or not) we must quickly leave.

92 Of a covetous man that eat withered Apples.
A Covetous man had gathered many Apples and fair, such as the Poets
report to have bin in the Gardins of Alcinous and the Hesperians: which he did
so spare, that he durst eat none, except they began to perish. His son being
very liberal, brought his fellows very often into the Apple loftes, saying:
Take of these what ye will, but touch not them that are perished, for my
father will have them served always after meat, which thing they willingly
obeyed.

MOR. Nothing is more miserable than a covetous man which keeps for others
that which God has lent him to use.

Covetous Prelates.
73 Of a lester and a Bishop.
A Certain Iester came in the Calendes of January to a Bishop, who was very
rich, but covetous: Of whom he begged a piece of gold for a New years gift.
This Prelate said that he was mad, in that he supposed to have so much money
given him for a new years gift. The^ the fellow begged a piece of silver, but
he said that was too much. Again, he required of him the least coin of
Brass: but when he could not obtain that, he said: I pray thee yet (reverend
father) at the least, bestow thy blissing on me instead of a present. Then
said the Bishop: Kneel down son that I may bliss thee. Nay, then (quod
he) I care not for your blissing, if it be so good cheap, for if it had been
worth a farthing, you would not have granted it to me.

MOR This is against Bishops and Priests, which set more by riches than all
holy mysteries of the Church.

74 Of a Priest which buried his Dog.
A Country Priest dwelling in Tuscia, who was very rich, had a little Dog
whom he bearely loved: which, when it dyed, he buried in the Churchyard.
Whereof the Bishop of that Diocese being aduertysed, and being covetous,
supposyng thereby to get some great sum of money, there upon he summoned
the Priest to appear before him. He knowinge well the pretense of the
Bishop, took with him fiftye pieces of Gold, and came to the Bishop, who
laid sore to his charge the burying of his Dog, for which he commanded him
to prisone. The Priest (as he was rich) so being witty withal, humbly
answered him, saying: Reverend Father, if your holiness understood the
singular wisdom of my Dog, ye would nothing marvel that he was buried
amongste men: For his wit passed man's reason, as well in his life time as at
the hour of his death. What is this (quod the Bishop) that thou say? Forsooth
(quod the Priest) he made a Will at his latter end, and knowing your
necessity, he bequeathed you fifty pieces of gold, which I have brought
with me. The Bishop, when he had received the money (being well pleased) sent
away the Priest unpunished.

Counsel.
75 Of the Owl.
SOmetime the most part of birds went to the Owl, and desired her no longer to
abide in holes of houses, but rather in the boughs of trees where is sweeter
singing. And incontinently they showed her a young Oak new sprung up, small and
tender, where she might sit very softly, and build her nest: she would not
agree thereto, but gave them counsel not to credit the young plant, for it
would bear in time to come, birdelime, which would be their destruction. They
being a light kind of birds and often flitting, despised the good counsel of
the Owl: but when the Oak was grown, it was broad and full of boughs: then
the Birds together did fly amongste the boughs, there they took their
pleasure, hopped up and down, played and song together. In the mean time the
Oak brought forth Birdlime. Then the small birds all too late repented, that
they refused that wholesome counsel: and this is the cause (men say) why al
birds, as soon as they see ye Owl, come clustering about her, follow her, sit
about her and fly with her, for they remembering that counsel, accounte her
wise, and come about her by flocks, that they might learn wisdom and
knowledge of her.

MOR Despise not the counsel of him that gives it a right.

Counsel for private gain.
76 Of a Fox.
A Fox being caught in a snare, when she had escaped with her tail cut
off, was ashamed of her life, whereupon she pretended to persuade other Foxes
thereto, so as by a common mischief she might cover her own shame: When she
had assembled them all together, she counseled them to cut off their
tails, alleging that they were not only uncomely, but also a superfluous
burden: One of the Foxes answered her: Truly sister, if this thing were not
only for thy profit, thou would not counsel us thereto.

MOR Wicked men give counsel to their neighbors for no good will, but for
their own advantage.

Crafty men.
77 Of the Lion and the Got.
A Lion by chance espied a Got upon an high rock, whom he counseled rather
to come down and feed in the green meadow: so would I said the got, if thou
were thence, for thou geeuest me counsel, not for my pleasure, but to slake thy
hunger.

MOR. Credit not every man's talk, for some counsel not to profit thee, but
themselves.

Crafty men.
78 Of a Fox taken by a Countryman.
A Fox being taken by a countryman, of whose Hens he had killed many, with
flattering words besought him to set him at liberty, swearing devoutly that
thencefoorthe he would never do him harm. The Countryman answered, I would
willingly forgive thee, and let thee go safe and sound, but that I know thee
to be crafty, and a promise breaker, and I certainly know, that thou can
not hinder me being dead, but I mistrust thee being alive.

MOR. We must give no credit to false and crafty men.

Craf^e of women.
79 Of a Woman that would die for her Husband.
A Certain chaste Matrone that loved her husband well, was grieved at the heart
for the sickness of him, weeping and mourning much: and because her hearty
good will might appear the more, she besought death, if needs he would
have her Husband, rather too take her and to excuse him: whiles she thus
spoke, she espied death with his loathsome looks approaching, wherewith she
being agaste, and already repenting, said: I am not that body which thou
seek, he lies in the bed whom thou cammest to slay.

MOR. No man loves his friend so well, but he loves him self better: Near
is my coat, but nearer is my skin.

Cruelty requited.
80 Of a Lion being old.
There was a Lion which in his youth through his fierceness had purchased the
displeasure of many: whereof in his old age he received just punishment. Every
beast in recompense of their hurt requited his quarrel: The Bore with his
Tuske, the Bull struck him with his bornes, and especially the Ass, being
inflamed to cast off the name of a cowarde) with chiding and kicking,
courageously did beat him. The Lion then wayling lamentably said: Those whom
sometime I have hurt, pay me again with the same measure, and not without a
cause: Again, those to whom sometime I have done good, requite not now my
goodness, but rather unjustly are my foes: great was my folly when I made so
many my enemies, but greater, in that I trusted false friends.

MOR. When thou art in prosperous estate, be not lofty nor fierce, if fortune
once frown or look awry, they whom thou have hurt, shall revenge their
quarrel: if thou have friends, put a difference between them, some are friends
not to thee, but to thy table, and to thy fortune, which as the wynd* turns,
will turn, and happy shall thou be if they be not thy foes. As Ovid
complayneth not without cause.

When prosperous vvindes did drive my sails,
of Friends I had good store,
But all were gone, when raging Seas
by blustering vvindes did rore.
Courage.
81 Of the Hares and the Frogs.
IT happened that Hares hearing a strange roaring in the wood, all trembling
began swiftly to run away: In running they stayed at a marishe, being in dout
what to do, seeing danger on every side: and to increase their fear, they
espied Frogs there drowned. Then one wiser than the rest, said: Wherefore are we
so fondly afraid? Let us take a good heart, for swiftness in running we
lack not, but only a courageous stomach, as for this hurly burly we need not
fear, but set it light.

MOR. In all things take a good heart: strength without courage is but dead: for
the chief head of strength is hardiness.

Cursing.
82 Of the Be and Jupiter.
THe Be which as men think, was the first maker of Wax, came sometime to
sacrifice to the Gods, whose oblation to Jupiter, was a house of Honey,
wherewith Jupiter rejoicing, commanded her petition whatsoever it were, to be
granted. Then the Be asked thus: most puissant God of all Gods, I beseech
thee grant to thy handmaide, that who so ever comes to the hiue, to steal
away her Honey, may forthewith die as I have pricked him. Jupiter being abashed
at her request, because he loved mankind far above all other, at length
said to her: Be thou content if thou sting him that steateth thy honey, that
thou maiste leese thy sting and forthewith die, and that in thy sting thy life
may lie.

MOR. We curse our enemies, but it commonly lights on our own heads.

Danger.
83 Of a Heart and a Lion.
A Heart escaping Hunters, entered a cave, where he chanced on a Lion, by whom
he was taken: As he was dying, he said: Woe is me, that fleeing from men, have
happened on the cruellest of all beasts.

MOR. Many men avoiding small dangers, run into great.

84 Of the Town Dogs.
A Great route of Town dogs coursed sore a Country dog which ran away,
and durst not resist: at the last he turned again, and showed his teethe to
them, then they all stood still, and durst not come near him, where as the
Captain general of the host was present, who turned to his soldiers, and
said: Fellows, this sight warns us not to flee, seeing we see more danger to
them that run away, than to those that resist.

Dealing.
85 Of two Pots.
TWo Pottes stood together on a bank, the one was of earth, the other of
Brass, which both were sodeinly caughte by the force of the streams, the
earthen Pot fearing to be broken went swiftliest, whom the Brazen pot
comforted, willing him to fear nothing: for he could take heed enough, that
they should not knock together. Nay (said the other) I know well enough,
whether the River beat thee against me, or me against thee, I shall be in
hazard on every side. Therefore have I determined to keep no company with
thee.

MOR. Better it is to deal with thy fellow, than with thy better, for the
mightier man can sooner hurt thee, than thou him.

Death.
86 Of the Swanne singing at the point of death.
A Swanne being near at the point of death, was asked of the Storke, why he
soong sweter, being nigh his death, (which all other beasts do so much hate)
than in all his life time before, seeing at that time he ought to be sorry: the
Swanne answered: Because from hencefoorthe I shall not be troubled with seeking
for meat, nether shall I need to fear the Foulers ginne.

MOR. We are warned hereby not to fear death, being by that berefte from all
miseries.

87 Of an Old man which set trees.
A Man of very old age, was mocked of a young man, because he planted trees,
whereof he should never see fruit: The old man answered: Neither thou
perhaps shalt gather fruit of those which thou go about to set.
Shortly after the young man fell out of a tree, which he climbed to gather
heries, and brake his neck.

MOR. Death spares no age.

Deceit.
88 Of the Dog and the Cock.
THe Dog and the Cock entered friendship and iorneyd together: when night
drue near, the Cock flew up into a tree, and rested, but the dog slept at
the root of the hollow tree. It happened that the Cock, as he was wont,
crowed in the night season, whom the Fox hearing, ran toward him, and as he
stood on the ground, he prayed the Cock to come down, because he greatly
desired to embrace so trim a singing bird: the Cock bad him that he should
first wake the porter, which slept at the root of the tree, and that when he
had opened he would come down: as the Fox sought means too call him up, the
Dog starte up and tore him in pieces.

MOR. Wise men will by policy send their enemies to mightier than themselves.

Deceitful persons.
89 Of a Friar, a Layman and the Wolf.
A Certain religions man of the order of S. Anthony, begged of a Husbandman a
portion of corn, for which he promised to warrant all that he had, especially
that his sheep that year should be safe. The countreyman giving credit to
his promises, let his sheep stray abroad where they list, whereof the
greatest number a Wolf destroyed: the Farmer therewith chafing, when the next
year the gatherer came for corn, did not only deny him his alms, but also
blamed him for his foolish promises. Why what is the matter (quod he?) The
other answered, his sheep were destroyed by the wolf. What the Wolf? (said
he) surely that is a naughty beast, trust him not, but beware of him: for he
would not only deceive S. Anthony but also Christ him self, if he could. It
is therefore folly to credit those whose mark that they shoot at is only to
deceive.

Deserts rewarded.
90 Of a Parate.
A Parate being brought out of the East parts into the West, where no such
Birds are wont to breed, marvelled that he was more esteemed there, than in
his native country: for he was kept in a Cage of yuorie wrought with Silver
wyre, fed with most sweet meat, which thing happened not to other birds of
the West parts, which in beauty and speaking as far excelled. Then the
Turtle being shut up in the same cage, said: this is not marvel worthy, for
no man in his own country is rewarded as he deserves.

Desire of new things.
91 Of an Ass
Sometime an Ass served a Gardener, of whose cruelty he complained to Jupiter,
beseechyng him to have a new master. Jupiter granted his request, and put him
to a Tyler, whom because he laded him with much heavier burdens, he mislyked:
He therefore prayed Jupiter yet once again, to shift his service from him to a
gentler Master. The God smyled at his folly, yet the Ass continued so long an
earnest suter, that he forced him thereto. Then he served a Curryer, whose
trade when the Ass had well perceived, he repented, saying: Ah wretch that I
am, which can be contented with no master, for now I have got such a one,
which as I suppose, will also curry my skin.

MOR. Things present we never allow, but seek for new.

Diet.
92 Of a Pacient and a Physician.
A Physician took upon him to cure a Pacient, who at length dyed: then said
he to the Pacients kinsfolk: this man cast him self away for lack of good
diet.

MOR. He that uses quaffing and lives inordinately, shall never be old, or
else shall have a very short life.

Dignity.
93 Of an Ass carrying an Image.
AN Ass carried an Image of silver on his shoulders, which every one that met
it, did worship: wherewith being insolent, he would no longer be an Ass: then
was it told him that he was no God, but carried an Idol.

MOR. They that are placed in dignity ought to know that they are men.

94 Of the Frog and the Crab.
A Frogge seeing a Crabbe swimming by the water side, said: What is he so ill
favored and foul, that dare trouble my water? seeing I am mighty and strong,
I will put him to flight. When he had so said, he lepte upon the Crab, saying:
why wast not thou ashamed O wretch, to enter into my resting place? Dyddest not
thou blush being so foul and so black, to defile the clear water? The Crab,
as his manner is, began to go back and said: I pray thee sister say not so,
for I would be at one with thee, therefore come not thus upon me. The Frog
seeing him go back, supposed that he did it for fear of him, whereby he waxed
more fierce against him, saying: Draw not back thou filthe, for thou may
not escape, this day will I give thy flesh to the fish, and incontinent he
skipped upon him to kill him. The Crab seeing the present danger turned about,
and with his claws byt the Frog and tore him in pieces.

MOR. Every man, as much as in him lies, let him study to avoid war and
discord.

95 Of a Leoparde and an Unicorn fighting with a Dragon.
THe Leopard sometime fought with a Dragon, against whom (because he could not
prevail) he besought the Unicorn to aid him, and said: Thou art a godly
beast, expert in fighting and valiant, wherefore I pray thee help me. The
Unicorn hearing this commendation of him self, answered: Thou say truth,
for I have skill in fighting, and therefore I will valyauntly defend thee, for
when the Dragon shall open his mouth, I will thrust him into the throat with my
horn. When they were both come to the Dragon, the Leoparde gave the onset,
trusting to the strength of the Unicorn, but the Dragon fought with them and
spit fire at them. The Unicorn seeing him open his mouth, ran hastily to
thrust him through, but he cast his head at one ^^de, whereby the Unicorn
missing him, smote his horn fast into the ground and dyed.

MOR He that will fight for another, seeks his own destruction.

Despite.
96 Of the envious Dog and the Ox.
A Dog lay sleeping in a rack full of hey, thither came an Ox to feed. The
Dog seeing him coming, barked and forbad him. To whom the Ox said: the
Devil choke thee with this thy despite, which neither can eat hey thy
self, nor yet will suffer me.

MOR Many are of that disposition, that they will grudge others that, which
they for lack of wit can not attain unto.

Despise nothing. 97 Of a young man.
A Certain young man espied an old man gooing crooked like a bent bow, whom he
asked if he would sell a bow? Haste thou (quod he) any need to loose thy
money? If thou live till my age, nature shall give thee a bow without money.

MOR. The faults of age are not to be laughed at, because no man, if he live,
can escape it.

98 Of a Countreyman and Pears.
A Certain gluttonous man took his journey to go to a wedding whereunto he
was bidden. By the way he found an heap of pears, but none of them he
touched, albeit he was exceeding hungry, which in contempt he made water on,
for he thought scorn of such meat, gooing to so good cheer. But as he passed
on his way, he came to a stream lately risen with rain, which without
danger of life he could not pass over, therefore he returned home again:
and by the way he was so hungry (because of his long fasting) that if he had
not eaten the pears that he pissed on, seeing there was nothing else, he had
famyshed.

MOR. Despise nothing, for what is so vile or base, that will not at one time
or another serve for some purpose?

Dispraysers of Phisike.
99 Of a man that refused Clysters.
A Certain rich German fell sick, to whom came many Physicians to cure him, (for
to honey come flies by heaps) amongst whom one held opinion that he must take
a Clyster, if he would recover his health: the Pacient hearing this (because he
had never taken any such medicine) was wood angry, and commanded all the
Physicians to be put out of doors, saying that they were mad, which would
minister to his tail, when his head aked.

MOR. All wholesome things seem tedious to them which neueh assayed them.

Dissemblers.
100 Of a Deceiuer.
A Certain poor man being sick, vowed to the Gods, if he might recover his
health, an hundred Oxen in sacrifice: the Gods (because they would try him)
made him whole. When he was well, because he had no Oxen, he made an hundred
Oxen of paste, which on the Altar he sacrificed. The Gods meaning to punish him
therefore, appeared to him in a dream, and said: Go to the sea shore in such
a place and there thou shall find an hundred talents of gold. This fellow
when he awaked, rejoicing greatly, went to the place that was showed him and
sought for it, where he was taken by Pirates, whom he prayed for his liberty,
promising them a M. talents of gold, but to him they gave no credit, but
carried him away and sold him for a M. grotes.

MOR. God hates dissemblers and liars.

Dissimulation.
101 Of a Cat and Myse.
A Cat hearing that there were many Mise in a certain house, came thither: of
which, those that she caught she devoured: The Myse seeing them selves daily
diminished, agreed together to come down no more, least they should all be
destroyed: for if the Cat come not hither (said they) we shall be safe. The Cat
perceiving the mise descended not, thought by deceit to take them, and climbed
up on a beam, whereon she hanged her self, fayning to be dead, whom one of the
Mise, as he looked downward espied, and said to him: verily my friend, though
I knew thou were dead, yet would I not come down.

MOR. A wise man once deceived through the falshode of a wicked man, will never
after credit his dissimulation.

102 Of the Wolf and the Sheep.
A Wolf being bitten by Dogs, and evil entreated, lay prostrate along: he
lackyng meat, espied a Sheep, whom he desired to bring him some of the
running water to drink, saying: If thou will give me drink, I will provide
meat my self: she answered: if I give thee drink, thou will eat me.

MOR. This Fable is against an evil body, which by dissimulation lies in
wait.

103 Of the sick Ass.
THe report was, that the Ass lay sick, nigh at the point of death, there
came both the wolves and Dogs to visit him, and demanded of his Son, how
his Father did, he answered (looking through the chinkes of the door) better
than ye would.

MOR. This Fable speaks of them that feign to take heavily the death of
other, where as they wish them dead long before.

140 Of a Fox.
A Fox came into a Vyneyard where he espied fair clusters of Grapes which
were ripe, of them feign would he eat, and because they were past his reach,
he thought to find some shift to get them: but perceiving his labor to be
lost, and that by no means he could satisfy his desire, he turned his sorrow
into joy, saying: Those Clusters be yet to sour to eat, for they would set my
teeth on edge.

MOR. It is wisdom to disse^ble that he cares not for that which he knows
he can not get.

105 Of a man that would kill a Hog.
IT was a custom in a certain City of Picene in Italy, that he which killed
a Hog in Winter, should bid his neighbors to supper. Now there was one which
minded to kill a Hog, but loathe he was to be at any charges, whereupon he
asked the advice of his Godfather, how he might thifte off the expenses. Tell
abroad (quod he) to morrow, that this night there was a Hog stolen from thee.
It happened the same night, (he nothing mistrusting it) that one verily
conveyed a Hog from him. In the morning when he rose, he looked for his
hogs, whereof missing one, he went incontinent to his Godfather, and cried
aloude, that one of his Hogs were stolen. Well done (quod he) thou playest
the wise fellow, for so I taught thee to speak: the other swore by all the
Gods he did not lie. I conne thee thank (said his Godfather) thou followest
well my counsel. The other for all that did swear and stare the more that it was
true. Thou art to be commended (quod he) for I forewarned thee so to say, and
my counsel was good. The other seeing him self thus flouted, departed heavily.

Disobedience.
106 Of the Egle that cited all manner of birds.
THe Egle called together all manner of wyldefoule: which being assembled, as
he corrected certain faults, there came Hunters which set abroad their nets
to catch the birds. The Egle seeing the present danger, made proclamation by
his criers, that al should follow the baner of the Egle, and fly with her, if
they would escape: then as many as flewe with her escaped, but some gluttonous
and disobedient, who beholding the pray and coveting it, flew into the nets,
wherein being entangled, they cried piteously.

MOR. He that will not obey, falls into mischief.

Double tonged.
107 Of a Satyr and a wayfaring man.
A Satyr, which in old time was counted God of the woods, walking abroad,
found a wayfaring man covered with snow and nighe dead with cold: on whom
taking pity, he brought him into his den, and made a fire and cherished him.
It happened that the Satyr espied him breathing on his hands, whereof demanding
the cause, he answered: to heat his hands. And being set down to meat, the
traueler blowed on fried barley that was on his trencher. He asked again, why
he did so? to cool it (quod he.) Then the Satyr drove him out of his den,
and told him that he would harbor none that had so variable a mouth.

MOR Deal not with that man, which has a double heart, or is unstable in his
words.

Doubt the worst.
108 Of a Pie and a Cuckowe.
A Pie espying a Cuckoo lurking amongst the boughs of a tree, supposed it to
be a Hawk, wherewith being moved, flew away: which thing other Birds near at
hand beholding, mocked the Pie, that in stead of a Hawk, she flew from the
Cuckoo, she answered: I had rather be mocked of you, than my friends should
weep for me,

MOR. It is better to minister occasion for our foes to laugh at, than our
friends to weep at.

Dredfulnesse.
109 Of a Serpent.
A Serpent being trodden upon by many, made his moan to Jupiter, but he said
to him: If thou had stinged him which first kicked thee, the next would never
have attempted it.

MOR. They which withstand their assaulters, become a terror to others.

Dread without need.
110 Of the rule of women of their husbands.
A Certain man carried about through the whole world a pair of boots,
which he would give that man who feared not his wife. He could find none a
great while, which would take them. But at length a countreyman received them,
to whom he said: Soft let me put them in thy bosom and wype them. But the
countreyma^ (because his shirt was new and white) said: I dare not lest my wife
tau^t me for blacking my shirt: then he took away the boots and bet him
therewith, saying: Get thee hence in the Devils name, because thou dreadest thy
wife for a little trifle, you did mean to deceive me of my boots, and he
straightway departed. But I think he has not yet bestowed them justly of any
man.

Drunkenness.
111 Of a woman.
A Certain woman had a dronkard to her husband, from which vice (because she
would rid him) she used this policy: She watched him when he was dronken heavy
asleep, and like a dead man without feeling, and took him on her shoulders,
carried him into the churchyard, laid him in a grave and departed. When she
supposed that he was sober, she knocked at the head of the tomb, who asked
who knocks at the door: his wife answered, I am here, and have brought
meat for the dead. Ah (quod he) bring me rather some drink than meat, thou
do trouble me in speaking of meat and no drink. The good woman stroke her
breast and said, woe is me wretch, for my craft will do no good: thou my
husband art nothing mended, but become worse, so that this disease has got an
habit in thee.

MOR. We must not continue in evil deeds, for custom sometime creeps on a
man.

Dulspirited.
112 Of the Bore and the Countreyman.
THere was a Bore which routed up the corn, whose ear a countreyman cut off.
It chanced he came the second time, then he cut off his other ear. When he
came yet again, he caught him and carried him into the city and gave it his
Attorney to make merry withal. At the feast when he was broken up, his heart was
not found. Then his master was wroth with the cook therefore. Sir (quod the
countreyman) it is no marvel that his heart is not here, for I think the foolish
Bore had no heart, for if he had had any, he would not have come so often into my
corn to his cost. The^ all the gests laughest exceedingly at his foolishness.

MOR. Many live so without spirit or boldness, that it is doubtefull whether
they have a heart or not.

Education of youth.
113 Of a Gnat.
A Gnat in the Winter season, supposing that he should die for hunger and
cold, came to a Hyue of Bees, of whom he desired meat and lodging, promising
(if they would grant it him) to teach their children the art of Music. Then
one of the Bees answered: I had rather my children learned some trade which can
keep them from hunger and cold.

MOR. We are warned to bring up our children in those sciences, whereby they may
be able to get their living.

Enemy.
114 Of a Norisher of Bees.
A Certain man, when the Owner was absent, came to the place where honey was
made, and stole away an honey comb: the owner at his return seeing the hyues
empty, stood up and sought if ought were left. The Bees returning fro
feeding, and finding him there, pricked him with their stings, and handled him
very ill. Then he said to them: O vile beasts, which have let escape unhurt
him which has stolen your honycombs, and strike me which take care over you.

MOR. Some men through folly can not beware of their enemies, and drive back
their friends, as such that lay awayte to deceive.

115 Of many creeping Worms and Beasts.
MAny creeping beasts sat sunning, amongst whom the cockatrice was, who cried
aloud, Who so dare fight with me, let him come forth. The Snayle came forth
to sight with her: as they were together striving, the Cockatrice would have
byt the Snayle, and poisoned him, but he drew his head into his shel that she
could not touch him, afterward ye Snayle came forth and byt the serpent,
whereby she was overcome. Not long after, she being again encoraged, excused
her self, that she was not valiantly overthrown: wherefore she said: If there
were any other warrior amongst them, she would revenge her self, and make him
run away. The Hedgehog hearing this came forth, who was full of prickles, who^
the Serpent assaulted, but the Hedgehog, pricked her sore, and wounded her,
whereof she was ashamed: but a Frog willing to be revenged of the Serpente,
went on her, and would have slain her, but she though weary, hardened her
heart, and took the Frog, and devoured him.

MOR. He is a fool which being unarmed, will assault his enemy.

116 Of the Kings fisher.
THe kings fisher is a solitary bird, always living in the sea, which as is
said, takes heed of men's huntings, and therefore buyldeth her nest upon the
rocks in the sea, who on a time being ready to breed, did make her nest: As
she was gone out to her pastime, it chanced the sea to arise (being stirred
with a boisterous wind) above her nest, which being drowned, her young ones
perished. She at her return, seeing what had happened, said: Woe is me wretch,
which fearing to be betrayed on land, have run to this which is more
deceitful.

MOR. Some men taking heed of their foes, do unwittingly happen upon friends
who are much crueller than their enemies.

117 Of the Hen and the Fox.
A Fox entered into a pultrie house, where he saw a Hen on her nest being
sick, whom he asked, how she did: Ah (quod the Hen) I should do much better
(sister) were thou gone.

MOR. The presence of our enemies does much hurt us.

118 Of two enemies.
TWo men hating one another deadly, sailed together in one ship, whereof the
one sat in the foreparte of the ship, the other in the hinder part thereof,
suddenly there arose a tempest, which put the ship in hazard: the^ he that sat
in ye stern asked the master which part of the ship should first be drouned,
the stern (quod he) the^ he said: My death shall nothing green me, if I may
see mine enemy die before me.

MOR. Many men care not what harm they have, so that they may see their
ennimies before them hurt.

119 Of the Crow and the Raven.
THe Crow envied the Raven, because by him men took divination, for which he
was supposed to forshew things to come: whereupon espying trauailers by, she
flew up into a tree, where she stood and cried like a Raven: They at her
crying turning aside and wondering, at the last understanding the truth, one
of them said: Let us be going fellows, it was the Crow that cried, and she
has no soothsaying.

MOR. Those men which strive with their betters, besides that they are never
able too match them, deserve to be laughed at.

Envy.
120 Of the Wolf and the Fox.
THe Wolf having much provision of meat, lived at ease, to whom the Fox came
and demanded the cause of his ease: the Wolf perceiving that he envied his
good fare, fained sickness to be the cause thereof, and he prayed the Fox, to
beseech the Gods for his health: The Fox being grieved that his purpose
would not prosper, went to a Shepeherd, and willed him to go to the Wolves
den, where suddenly he might take his enemy that lived void of care: the
shepherde assaulted the Wolf, and slew him, the Fox possessed his den with all the good cheer, but he enjoyed it no long time, for the same shepeherde
caught him likewise.

MOR. Envy is a lothseome thing, and he that is ye cause thereof commonly
makes a rod for him self. Horace in his.1. book of Epistles writes.

The envious man does grudge to see
his neighbors goods arise,
The Sicil tyrants could not well
a greater plage devise.
121 Of the Covetous man and the Envious.
Two men made their prayer to Jupiter, a Covetous man and an envious, who sent
Apollo to them to satisfy their desires, he gave the^ free liberty to desire,
upon this condition, that what soever the one required, the other should
receive duble. The covetous man was long in doubt: because he thought nothing
was enough: at length he asked no small thing, his companion received double so
much. The Envious man requested one of his own eyes to be put out, greatly
rejoicing that his fellow should lose both.

MOR. Covetousness never says ho: as for Envy, nothing is more mad, which
wishes him self mischief to hurt an other withal.

122 Of the Wolf and the Ass.
THe Wolf and the Ass were sawyers together, but the Ass wrought above, and
the wolf beneath, who sought occasion to slay his fellow, wherefore he said: Ah
wretched Ass, why do y^ cast dust into mine eyes? Forsooth (quod he) I do
not, but rule it after my knowledge: if it please thee to saw above, I will
beneath. Tushe (quoth the Wolf) I see what thou do, if thou cast any more
into my eyes I will pluck out thine: when he had thus said the Wolf blew hard,
that the dust might fly up into his fellows eyes, but the timber staying it,
it fell into his own: wherewith being sore troubled, he swear, that he would
overthrow the porters, but suddenly it fell, and killed the the Wolf.

MOR. Mischief commonly lights upon the pate of the Author.

123 Of the Lion and the Wolf.
THe Lion being stricken in age fell sick, and lay in his den, all beasts
save only the Fox came to visit their King: Whereupon the Wolf having
opportunity, accused the Fox unto the Lion, as one that set naught by him being
their Lord, for which cause he came not to see him. By chance the Fox came
in, and heard the latter end of the Wolves tale. Then the Lion roared against
the Fox, who incontinent craving space to make answer, said: which of all
those that are here present, has done so much good as I, which have
travailed far and near to seek a remedy for thee of the Physician, which I
have learned: Then the Lion commanding him forthwith to tell the medicine, he
said: The Wolves skin being yet alive, to be plucked from his back and put
warm about thee, is the medicine and only remedy. As the wolf lay along, the
Fox laughed at him, saying: It becomes not thee to provoke thy Lord to
wrath, but to favor and good will.

MOR. He which continually diggeth pittes, at length turns him self therein.

Evil men.
124 Of the Cock and the Cat.
A Catte sometime being hungry, came to devour a Cock, whom because she had
no just cause to hurt, laid to his charge his great notse that he was wont to
make, because that with his shrill crowing, he did let men of their rest in
the night: the Cock replied that he was thereof giltlesse, seeing by that
means he raised up men to their daily travel: It is but lost labor (said the
Cat) to plead thus: for thou treadest thy mother, neither art thou so content,
but thou medlest with thy sister: the Cock being ready to purge him self of
that fault, the Cat waxed more eger against him, saying: thou striuest against
the stream, for this day I will be thy priest.

MOR. If any man would beat a dog, he shall soon find a staff. The evil
man by hook or by crook, if he list, will throw thee down.

Evil for good.
125 Of the Countryman, and the Serpent.
AS a Countrima^ walked about his grounds, he found a Serpent in the snow nigh
dead with cold, which he pitying much, brought home, and laid him by the
fires side. The serpent by reason of the fire come again to his strength and
venime, could no longer endure the heat, but filled all the cottage with his
hissing. The Countryman got up a stake, and ran at him, wherewith he stroke
him, and then took him up for that displeasure, saying: Will thou thus
recompense my courtesy? Go thou about to destroy him that saved thy life?

MOR. It chances often, if a man save a thief from the gallows, he will
soonest seek his death, and on whom men bestow most labor, of him they
shall reap least good.

From evil to worse.
126 Of a Servant which cast his Masters Ass from a Rock.
A Certain husbandmannes Servant, threw down his masters Ass headlong from
an high Rock, that he might not daily be forced to drive him too and fro, but
he told his master, that he fell down himself: wherefore his master did
cause him to bear all things on his shoulders, which the Ass was woonte
before to carry. The which thing the evil servant marking, said: I was not
well advised when I slew my innocent fellow, which eased me of so great
travail, I am thus worthily served.

MOR. Whiles fools would avoid any evil, they fall into worse.

Exercise.
127 Of the Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormorant.
THe Bat, the Bramble, and the Cormoraunte entered freendship together, and
determined to live like merchants, whervppon the Bat borrowed money, and shipped
it, the Bramble took garments, and the Cormorant Brass, and sailed together.
It chanced a great storm to arise, that the ship was drowned, and al their
goods lost, and they escaped to land: since which time the Cormorante sits
on the sea shore, to see if the sea will cast up the Brass any where. The Bat
fearing his creditours, shows not his head by day light, but goes to feed
by night. And the Bramble does catch hold of the garments of such as are
passers by, seeking if he can find his own.

MOR. Whereunto we do apply our selves, in time to come we follow the same.

Experience.
128 Of the Worm.
THe Worm that lurketh in the dirt, went abroad upon land, and said to al
beasts, that she was as learned a phisitia^ for medicines as ever was Poeen
physician to the Gods: Why (quoth the Fox) can thou cure others, and can
not heal thy self of thy lamenesse?

MOR. All talk is in vain, except experience have been had before.

129 Of Cockels.
A Countreymans son roasted Cockles, whom as he heard hissing, he said: O
evil beasts which when your housen be burnte do sing.

MOR. Al things done out of due order, are to be discommended.

Falshod in fellowship.
130 Of the Ass and the Fox.
THe Ass and the Fox being entered freendship: went forth a hunting, whom a
Lion meeting, the Fox seeing the present danger, went to the Lion and
promised to deliver the Ass into his hands, so that she might escape scotfree:
the Lion agreed: then she led the Ass, and caused him to be trapped in a net:
but the Lion seeing him so fast, that he might not escape, first laid hold
on the Fox, and after he served the Ass likewise.

MOR. They which betray their fellows undo them selves unawares.

False witness.
131 Of the Dog and the Ass.
A Bandog (which is able to vanquish not only Wolves, but also Bears) did
iourneye a long way with an Ass which carried a sack full of bread. As they
went on their way, a tempest arose, then the Ass happened on a meadow, where with
good grass he filled his belly full: but the Dog desired the Ass to give him
a little piece of bread least he sterued: he not only denied him that, but also
scottingly counseled him to feed on grass with him. In the mean time the
Ass espying the Wolf coming, besoughte the dog to aid him. Nay (quod he)
thou did counsel me to feed on grass to slake my hunger, so I will thee to
defend thy self with thy iron heels against the Wolf.

MOR. They which aid not them which need help, are wont to be destitute of
the succoure of others in the time of need.

Faults punished.
132 Of a wicked man and the Devil.
A Wicked man having committed many heinous offenses, for which he was often
apprehended and committed to prison, where he was kept very straightly,
besought the help of a Devil, which often had aided and delivered him out of
trouble. At length he was taken again, who (as he wonted) required succoure
of the Devil: who came to him, carrying a great bundel of shoos on his shoulders
and said, friend, I can help thee no longer, for I have trotted to so many
places for thy deliverance, that I have worn out all these shoes, and I have
no money left me to bye any more, wherefore thou must needs peryshe.

MOR. Let us not believe always to escape scotfree with our faults.

Familiarity.
133 Of a Camel.
WHat time the Camel was first seen, he was much dreaded, and because of his
hugeness, men fled from him. But in process of time, his tamenesse being
known, they took a good heart and came to him: afterward understanding the
beasts courage, they so far forth despised him, that they put a bytte in
his mouth, and delivered him to be driven by boys.

MOR. Custom and daily company, make terrible things to be little set by.

134 Of the Fox and the Lion.
THere was a Fox which had not ben used to the sight of the Lion, whom when
he saw by chance once or twice, he quaked for fear and fled away: As he met
him the third time, he stood nothing in doubt, but approached and saluted him.

MOR. Familiar conversation makes men bold, even with those whom they were
afraid before to look on.

Fear.
135 Of the Egle
THe Egle for his beauty preferred him self before all other birds, which
thing all did affirm that it was true, but the pecock said to him self: the
feathers make thee not beautiful, but thy bill and thy talandes, because none
of us dare contend with thee about their beauty for fear of them.

MOR. Myghtier men's affairs are praised of many, more for fear than truth.

136 Of a Dog fearing the Rain.
A Certain Dog as often as it rayned, durst not come forth of the house, and
being demanded of an other Dog why he did so, answered: because sometime I
was scalded with hot water.

MOR. They which have tasted of great evils. are afraid of the smallest.

137 Of a Cock.
A Cock being taken by a Fox, escaped from him very hardely. Not long after,
he saw a Foxes skin, wherewith being sore afraid, ran away, whom other birds
mocked that he was afraid of nothing. Ah (quod he) if ye had been in the Foxes
gripes as I have been, ye would be afraid of his foot steps, how much more his
skyn.

MOR. They which have escaped great dangers, dread the least.

Flattery.
138 Of a sick man and a Physician.
A Sick man being demanded of the Phisitia^ how he did, answered: that he
sweet more than needed. Well (quod the Physician) that is good. The second time
being asked, how he did said: I shiuer and quake sore: that is good (quod ye
other.) The third time he demanded his pacient as before, who answered, that
he had the dropsy: that is also good said the Physician. The^ one of the
houhold asked him how he did: in faith (quod he) through so many good things I
perish.

MOR. We ought chiefly to abhor them which only speak to delight the ear.

Fellowship of Women.
139 Of a man and his two wives.
A Certain man of middle age being daintily brought up, whose hair was half
black half gray, married two wives at once in ye spring time whereof the one
was young, the other old, which both dwelled together in one house: the elder
because she would alure him only to love her, daily kemmed his head, and plucked
out the black hairs. The younger likewise (because she would entise him to her,
from the old woman's company) plucked out his white hairs. At length between
them, they had plucked off so much hair, that he became balde and a common
mocking stock.

MOR. Nothing is better for old men, than to leave the company of women,
especially those that be young, except he will be cloyed.

Flying of danger.
140 Of a Soldier.
A Certain Soldier being bidden of his fellows, to help them at a certain
City of Italy, which fell away from the king of France, answered them: If
the right Lord of the soil shall besiege the City, who shall bring us help?
They said: The king of France. Then the Souldioure climed up on a Tomb and
cried thrice with loud voice, O king of France, but when no answer was given
him, he turned to them that bad him, saying: I will not come thither, when he
that should help me can not hear me requiring aid. The other which went
thither, were besieged of the Lord of the town, which being won, they were
taken and killed.

MOR. They are fools which like Harebrains put them selves in danger.

Fellowship.
141 Of Trauailers.
TWo men iourneid together, whereof the one found an Axe, the other warned him
that he should not say, I have found, but we have found. Straight after, as
they came together to those which had lost it, he which had the Axe, following
his fellow which iourneyed with him, said: we are undone, nay (quoth the
other) say I am undone not we: for when thou foundest the Axe, thou did
say, I have found, not we.

MOR. They which were no partners in prosperity, are no sure friends in
misery.

Fighting.
142 Of the Lion and a Bear.
A Lion and a Bear having got a Hindcalfe did fight together for him. When
they had long fought and were giddy and weary, they lay down to rest. But
the Fox went about them, and seeing them laid flat with the Hindcalfe in the
midst, ran between them and took away the Calfe, they might see him, but culd
not arise, wherefore they said: what fools are we to labor for the Fox?

MOR. Fools lay the pooles, but wise men have the fishes.

Folly.
143 Of a rich man and his servant.
A Rich man had a dulhead to his servant, whom he used to call the king of
fools: He being often offended with his words, thought he would be even with
his master, and on a time he turned again to him and said: I would I were
King of fools, then in all the world there were no greter kingdom than mine,
yea and thou also should be in subjection to me.

MOR. All things are full of folly.

Fools.
144 Of a woman that bet her Husband.
A Certain Woman of a manly courage, had shrewdly beaten her husband, which was
a coward and dolte, because the Kight had stolen one of the chikens, which she
going forth left him to tend: wherefore when his Wife was absent again, he
tied all the chickens to one thread, and kept them more diligently, least the
Kight should snatche any of them which he was put in trust to keep: but the
Kight coming suddenly, caughte one in his claws, which as he would have
carried away, he drew up all the rest together into the Air. This wretched
husband remembering that for one chicken lost he was ill handled of his wife,
was afraid of more mischief to come, and thought it therefore better to die tha^
to try his wives fury again. Now this witty woman had put certain figs into a
little pot, well dressed with honey and sweet spices, whereof she warned her wise
husband, whose lickerousnesse she feared, that he should not taste thereof,
because present poison was in them. Her husband willing to die, did* eat up all the figs, supposing that to be the best way to die and to escape his wives
anger. When the woman came home and knew that the Kight had snatched away al
her chicke^s, she took up a staff and determined to beat her husband,
because he kept the chickens so ill: to whom her foolish husband said: I
pray thee wife beat me not now being ready to die, for I have eaten up all
the poison in the glass, to punish my self for my fault. Then the woman
turning her anger into laughter, forgave her husband, which for keeping her
chickens ill, otherwise contented her.

MOR There is no fit remedy against fools.

145 Of Fishers.
Sometime Fishers went a fishing: wherewith being weary and had caught nothing,
they were very sorry and minded to depart, forthwith a Tuny being chased by an
other great fish, skipped into their boat, whom they took and departed
merrily.

MOR. Fortune commonly gives that, which by cunning can not be got.

Fortune frowneth on the poor.
146 Of a rich man and a poor.
A Certain man being marvelous weary of the great abundance of his riches,
offered a beggar an.100. crowns if he would go to Fortune (which dwelt in ye
furthest parts of the world) and beseech her in his name to bestow no more
goods upon him. The poor man being aghast because of the trauail of so long a
journey, refused at the first, but afterward changing his mind, and
promising that he would go, the rich man said he would give but.90. The
poor man supposing it to be a small reward for so great pains, first would
not agree thereunto, but after requiring.90. the rich man could hardly be
persuaded to give him.80. The beggar refusing that sum, and after requiring
it, the other rebated always ten from the number which he offered, til it came
but to ten pieces. At length ye beggar, which refused.100. Crowns, being forced
by poverty, took the.10. Crowns, and went unto Fortune, whom with many
prayers he besought to give no more goods to the rich man, but rather that she
would be bountiful to him, which from his tender age had lived in continual
poverty, whom fortune answered: I have determined to double yea and treble ye
rich man's goods which sent thee, whither he will or not, but thee will I make
to live continually in poverty: besides that, thou should never have had
the.10. Crowns which thou receyuedst, had I not ben very fast asleep.

MOR. Against a miserable person Fortune always frowneth, but to a fortunate
person she is continually beneficial even against his will.

Friends.
147 Of a Physician.
A Physician having the cure of a sick man, whose chance was to die, said to
them which carried the corpse, this man if he had refrayned wine and taken
clisters, had bin alive at this day: then one of them that were by answered:
Sir your advise should have been showed when it might have done good, and not
now when it is to late to call him back.

MOR. Friends should help in time of need.

148 Of the Countryman and the Mouse.
THere was a Countryman very poor, but yet so merry conceyted, that in his
most misery he forgot not his natural pleasantness. It happened that his
ferme house by chance was set on fire, which burned so sore, yt he mistrusted
the quenching, which with heavy cheer he beheld. In ye mean time he espied a
Mouse running out of the ferme, which made have to escape burning. The
Countriman forgetting his loss, ran after the mouse, and caught him, slong him
into the midst of the fire, saying: Thou unthankful beast, in time of my
prosperytie thou dwelledst with me, now because Fortune is changed, thou have
left my house.

MOR. Those are no true friends which cleave to thee like a burre in thy
felicity, but in adversity swiftly run away.

149 Of the Lion and the Hog.
THe Lion intended to get him a companion, whereupon many beasts desired to be
matched with him, yea and instantly required it, but he set light by them, and
chose only the Hog into his fellowship, whereof being demanded the cause,
answered, this beast is so faithful that he never forsakes his friends or
fellows in the greatest danger that can be.

MOR. We seek the friendship of those men which in time of need cleave to us,
and not those which give us the slip.

Friendship feigned.
150 Of the Dog that devoured the sheep.
A Certain shepherd gave his Dog charge over his sheep to look to them, for
which he fed him with the best meat. Nevertheless the Dog often killed a
sheep and devoured him, which when the shepherd had espied, caught the Dog
and would have killed him. Why (quod the dog) would thou destroy me? I am one
of thy household, slay the wolf rather which continually lies in wait to
destroy thy sheep. Nay (quod the shepherd) I think thee ratherworthy of death
than the Wolf, for he is mine open enemy, but thou under the color of
friendship, do daily decrease my flock.

MOR. They are more grievously to be punished which under the pretense of
friendship do hurt us, than those which show them selves to be our open
enemies.

Gain.
151 Of the Lark.
A Lark being caught in a net, wept and said: Woe is me wretch and unhappy
bird, for I have taken from no man either gold, silver, or any other thing,
but for a grain of corn I die.

MOR. This fable is against those which for a trifling gain put them selves in
danger.

152 Of a wild Ass.
A Wild Ass seeing a tame Ass in a fu^ny place, went to him and accounted him
blissed, because he had good feeding and was in good liking: afterward seeing
him bear burdens, and the horsekeeper follow, striking him with a staff, he
said, I think thee now no more happy, for I see that with much sorrow thou
enioyest this felicity.

MOR Gain full of misery and danger, is not to be followed.

Gifts.
153 Of a Countryman and a Counselor.
A Certain Countryman being in law up to the ears, came to a Counselor, to
the end that by his help he might wind him self out of the law. But his
Counselor being otherwise occupied, sent him word that he had no leisure to
talk with him now, praying him to return an other time. The Countreyman
accounting him for his sure friend, came often, but could not speak with him.
At length he returned again and brought with him a young sucking Kidde and
fat, with which he stood at the Lawyers gate, and often plucked him to make
him bleate: the Porter (whom his master commanded to open the gates to them
that brought presents) hearing the voice of the Kid, straight way opened the
gate, and had him come in: Then the Countryman turned to the Kyd, and said: I
thank thee my little Kyd, for thou art the cause that I come in so lightly.

MOR. Nothing is so hard but with gifts it is mollifyed.

154 Of Jupiter.
WHat time that Jupiter made a feast at a marriage, all beasts brought in their
presents, every one after his ability, among whom the Serpent was with a rose
in his mouth, which he offered: Jupiter seeing him, said aloude, every man's
benevolence I willingly accept, but thine in no wise I will receive.

MOR The wise man may well guess that the wicked offer nothing without a
crafty pretense.

Gluttony.
155 Of Flies.
FLies flew into a hole full of honey, whereof they did eat: their feet stuck
fast therein, that they could not escape, who being nyghe choked, said: Ah
wretches, which for a little meat do peryshe.

MOR. Gluttonye is the cause of much evil to many.

Glorying.
156 Of the Egle and the Raven.
AN Egle came down from an high rock and light one a Lambs back, which thing
the Raven seeing, desired to counterfeit him in his doings, and descended upon
a Ram, where because he stuck fast, he was caught and cast out to play withal.

MOR. Let no man account of himself by an other man's manhood, but by his own
power. Cut thy rote after thy cloth.

God knows all.
157 Of two young men.
TWo young men came into a Cooks shop as though they would have bought
meat, the Cook being occupied, the one stole a piece of meat out of the
basket, and gave it his fellow to hide under his garment: the Cook perceiving
that a piece of flesh was gone, accused them both of theft: then he that took
it, swore by Jupiter, he had it not: the other that had it, swore that he took
it not. Well (quod the Cook) the thief I know not, but he that you have
sworn by, both saw and knows the thief.

MOR. If we have ought offended, men know it not straight way, but God that
rides on the heavens and beholds the depthes of the sea, sees al things: if
men would remember this, they would offend less.

Goods evil gotten.
158 Of Money.
Sometime Money being demanded of virtue, why she rather went to the evil tha^
the good, answered: because good men brought up in thy school never learned
to lie and forswere, and to occupy usury, and to rob others, for these things
are wont to draw me unto them: forsooth (quod virtue) I had rather that my
scholars lived in poverty, than they should defile the^ selves with these
vices, for both of them have a short end: ye good leaving everlasting glory
upon earth, fly up to the kingdom of heaven: but the evil with slander
enough, leaving their riches, shall go down to the bottom of Hell.

MOR. Gather riches after no ill way, for it will not only bring in this life
an evil report, but also after death perpetual torment.

159 Of a Got and a Vine.
THe Vine said to the Got, thou hurtest me by shering my leaves: thou know
I am no grass, but though thou do me this harm, I will provide great plenty
of Wine to sacrifice thee to the Gods.

MOR. Commonly a man helps him, to whom he would do some mischief.

Good turns.
160 Of the Ant.
AN Ant being thirsty came to a well to drink, wherein by mischaunce he fell,
which a Dove a far off espying, cast down a bough from an high tree, and
help him: the Ant clymed up thereon, and escaped. Immediately after, a Fouler
set up his nets to catch the Dove: then the Ant for to recompense his
benefactoure, came softely stealing on the Fouler, and bit his foot, whereby
the Dove flew away.

MOR. We must requite a good turn with ye like.

Great talkers.
161 Of Mise that Would hang a bell about a Ca^s neck.
THe Mise assembled together and took counsel by what policy or cunning they
might escape ye cats wiles: the^ one which in age and experience passed the
rest, said: I have found a way which shall save us harmless from so great
dangers, if ye will be ruled by me: let us hang a Bell about her neck, by
the sound whereof, we shall know and perceive the coming of the Catte: then
all with one voice commended his counsel as good, and said, they must so do.
Then an other elder than the rest start up, commanding silence, and said: I
also allow this opynion, but who will be so hardy, that dare hang the Bell
about the Catts neck? but when every one refused to do it, their talk was in
vain.

MOR. Many commend those things that ought to be don, but few are found to
execute the same.

Grief for sudden chance.
162 Of Fishers
ON a time Fishers drew their nets out of the sea, which they perceiving to be
heavy, rejoiced greatly, supposing they had a great multitude of Fishes, but
when they drew the net to land and found a great stone but few Fishes, they
waxed heavy, not for the small number, but because it fell otherwise out than
they judged: the^ one of the company being an ancient man said: let us not be
grieved, for sorrow waits upon pleasure, and therefore we ought to be sorry in
some thing, because we rejoiced so much before.

MOR. We ought not to be grieved, being defeated of our purpose.

Hastiness.
163 Of the Wolf and the Sow.
AS a Sow was ready to farrow, the Wolf came unto her, promysing to be safeguard
to her young Pigs: she answered, of thy service I have no need, but if thou will be accounted religious, or show me any pleasure, I pray thee depart
further from me, for with thine absence thy service shall stand me in better
steed than with thy presence.

MOR. All men deserve no credit in all things: for many promise their endeavor
not for thy sake, but for their own commodity.

164 Of a Cat.
A Certain man had a great Cheese in a coffer, which a Mouse had tasted,
therefore by the counsel of a friend of his, he shut in the Cat there, which
after she had killed the Mouse, devoured the whole Cheese.

MOR. Those ought to be no kepers, which can no less hurt us than our enemies.

Hasty credit.
165 Of a Man that would try his Wives mind.
A Certain crafty man desirous to understand his wives mind, because she had
often said that so derely she loved him yt if she might wish she would
redeem his life with her death, he willingly let fall upon both their feet a
burning stick. Then the woman being in pain, and forgetting the love she bare
to her husband, did shake off the burning stick from her feet only.

MOR. Credit not women when they say they love their husbands better than
themselves.

166 Of the Cock and the Capon.
A Cock and a Capon dwelled together in a poultry house, but the cock was lord
of the Hens, and the Capon fed amongst them: It happened yt a Fox caught this
Cock, and devoured him, and his comb he touched not, but kept it safe and
brought it to the Capon, saying: O brother capon, thy fellow is dead, wherefore
I have brought thee his comb even for pure love which I bear to thee, now if
it please thee to come down, I will crown thee, that thou may take the
regiment of the hens as the cock did: the Capon being ambitious and greedy of
promotion, flew down from his roost, and came to the Fox, who rejoicing
thereof, caught the Capon incontinent, and killed him.

MOR. Take heed how thou credit al men.

167 Of the Fouler and the Lark.
A Fowler set his nets for birds, whom the Lark a far off espying, asked
him what he did, he answered, that he built a City, then he went a good way
back, and hid himself: the lark crediting his words came to the net and was
taken: to it the Fouler ran, to whom the Lark said: Friend if thou build such
a City, thou shall find few dwellers therein.

MOR. Houses and Cities then chiefly become desolate, when the Rulers are busy
bodies.

Have makes wast.
168 Of Goose.
THere was a Goose which day by day laid a golden Egg: her master desirous
in all the have to be rich, killed the Goose, hoping that there was some hidden
treasure within her: and then finding her empty, the wretch was amazed and
after mourned and sighed, that he had lost both his hope and substance.

MOR. We must measure our affections and that we be not to hasty, for have
makes wast, and he that al would have, sometime loses all.

Harlots.
169 Of a woman and her Lover.
A Lewd woman wept bitterly for her lover ready to depart from her, whom she
had nere polled of all that he had: whereupon her neighbor demanded the cause
why she wept so comfortless, forsooth (quod she) his departing does not
grieve me, but the cloak which I left him to put on.

MOR. Harlots love not their lovers, but their Money.

Hatred.
170 Of a Serpent and a Husbandman.
A Serpent lurking in ye entry of a husbandmans house, slew his boy, for whom
his parents mourned much, but his father for sorrow took an axe, went out and
would have killed the Serpent, ye husbandman seeing him look up, made have to
strike him, but he missed him, for he stroke the mouth of his hole: when the
serpent was gone in and the husbandman thynking that he had forgot the wrong, he
came and set bread and salt before the hole, but the Serpent softely
hissing, said: Hereafter neither trust or friendship shall be between us as
long as I see a stone and thou thy sons grave.

MOR. None forgets hatred or vengeance as long as he sees the cause of his
grief.

171 Of a man and a woman twice married.
A Certain man having buried his wife, which he loved well, and married a
widow which daily laid in his dish the manlynesse of her former husband: he
because he would be even with her, dashed in her teeth his other wives honest
behavior and chaft living. It happened on a time, when she was angry, a beggar
came to the door and asked their alms, to whom she gave a piece of Capon
which she for her own supper and her husbands boiled, saying: I give thee this
for the soul of my first husband: Her good man hearing that, called the poor
man and gave him the rest of the Capo^, saying: I give thee this for the soul
of my wife that is dead: by which means either spyting other, at length had
nothing for their supper.

MOR. We must not fight with those that can revenge their quarrel.

Help in need.
172 Of the Countryman and the Horse.
A Cou^tryma^ drove by the way a spare horse, and an Ass sore laden with
packs, the Ass being weary with trauayling, prayed the Horse if he would save
his life, to ease him somewhat of his burden, the Horse thought skorne and
denied his help: It happened as they trauayled on in their journey, the Ass
being ouerladen, fell under his burden and dyed, then his master laid all the
Asses burden and eke the skin upon the horse, wherewithal his back began to
crack: Ah wretch yt I am, said the Horse, I am thus justly served, because that
lately I refused to help the poor laboring Ass.

MOR. We must help our friends that are in misery, for part of our rising
our country claymeth, and part our friends.

Heritage.
173 Of a Pig and his fathers will.
A Pig wept bitterly for ye death of his parents, but when he had red his will
and found that a great heap of Acornes and many bushels of meal were left him,
he held his peace: and being asked why he wept no more, answered: ye meal and
the Acornes has stopped my mouth.

MOR A great heritage causes the heirs quickly to leave their mourning.

Hypocrisy.
174 Of the Cockatrice and Seawolfe.
THe Cockatrice on a time went to ye sea side in the clothing of a Monk, and
called to him the Wolf, saying: O brother, since thou wast marked with the
sign of the cross, thou art become a perfect Christian, I pray thee therefore
come unto me, and instruct me in the faith of Christ, that I may be baptized,
and thereby escape everlasting judgment, and have fruition of eternal joy.
The Wolf fish marking him well and knowing what he was, said: O thou
hipocrite, a coule makes not a friar, thy words are full of wickedness and
craft, neither intendest thou to be baptized of me, but rather thou would
beguyle and poison me: therefore I will not hear thee, and forthwith he
swam away, and left him all ashamed.

MOR. Beware of those which come in sheep clothing outwardly, but inwardly
are ravening Wolves.

Hunger.
175 Of a Lynnet.
A Certain Linnet was kept up daintily by a rich man, who much delighted in
his singing. It happened in time of dearth, that many poor birds came to the
Linnet and asked his alms, but nothing would he give them, save of the
fragments and broken meat that was left, which he cared not for, but the
birds rejoicing thereof, eat it up sweetly.

MOR. It is an ill dysh, which a man will refuse when he is hungry.

Honor.
176 Of a Mule.
A Mule being fat and pricked with proue^der, cried aloude and said: My father
is a swifte running horse, and I am altogether like him, but once when he
should needs run, and in running stayed, he straight way remembered that he
was an Asses foale.

MOR. Though time bring a man to promotion, yet ought he not to forget his
estate, for this life is unstable.

177 Of a king and Apes.
A Certain King of Aegipt appointed Apes to be taught to dance, which as no
beast is of liker favor to a man, so none counterfayteth better or
willinglier a man in his doings. They having learned very quickly the art of
dau^cing, on a day appointed they began to dance, and were clad in the
richest purple. Their dancing delighted the company a long time, until a
merye conceited fellow cast down amongst them nuts, which he privily had
carried in his bosom: the Apes had no sooner seen the nuts, but forgetting the
dance, became as they were before time, of dauncers, Apes, biting and tearing
their clothes in pieces, and fighting together for their nuts, not without
great laughter of the beholders.

MOR. The gifts of Fortune change not a man's disposition.

Hope.
178 Of Oxen.
A Heardman entered the stable and saw the Oxen skipping for joy, he therefore
asked them the cause of their joy, they answered: Our hope is to spend this day
in the good leysnes Why (quod he) what thing has brought you to this hope? We
dreamed said they, it should be so: Ah (quod he) give no credit to such
dreams, which you are like to find untrue, for I dreamed that ye should
plough to day, and men's dreams are wont to be truer than beasts.

MOR. Nothing is so soon begyled, as the hope of men.

179 Of a Hog.
A Hog was blamed of a sheep that he yielded no profit to his master, of whom
he was so digently fed: seeing they gave him milk, wool, and lambs. He
answered: when I am dead my fruit comes in, for he feeds me for a purpose.

MOR None will take pains without hope of reward.

180 Of a man which hid a treasure.
A Certain rich man hid a treasure in the wood, whereof none knew but his
Godfather, who^ he greatly trusted. But when he came with in few days after
to see it: he found that it was dug up and carried away: he therefore judged
(as it was in deed) that his Godfather had taken it away: he went and spoke
with him, saying: Godfather, I will also hide a 1000. crowns more where my
treasure is. He being desirous to gain more, brought again the treasure and
laid it where it was, when the true owner came shortly after thither and
found it, he took it home with him and went to his Godfather and said: Thou
promise breaker, bestow no more labor in vain to go to the treasure, for
thou shall find it no more.

MOR. It is an easy thing to deceive a covetous man with hope of more money.

Humility
181 Of the Pigarde and the Egle
THe Pigarde sometime being pursued by a Hawk, flyed to the Egle for sauegard,
saying: Thou art great and merciful, therefore came I to thee for aid and
succoure, which am small and weak, craving that I may be under the shadow of
thy wings, to defend me from the fury of my enemy. The Egle moved with
pity and compassion, said: Because of thy lowliness and imbecillicie abide
with me, and fear nothing as long as thou art in my company.

MOR. They that are mighty, ought to defend the meek and lowly.

Heart.
182 Of a man stoned.
A Certain man being stoned to death of the people, rose again: who being
asked of one what did most grieve him in that stoning, said: Nothing so much as
the stone which one did throw who^ I supposed to be my friend, although it
touched me not.

MOR. The hurt done by our friends does more grieve, than that which our
enemies do.

Hurtful gain.
183 Of a Raven and a Serpent.
A Raven lacking meat, see a Serpent sleeping on a sunnie bank, at whom he
flewe down and caught him up: who turned again and byt him: the Raven
therewith nigh dead said: Ah wretch that I am, which have found such gain
whereof I peryshe.

MOR. This fable is against him, which by finding a tresure, has put him in
danger of his life.

Hurtful things.
184 Of a poor man.
A Certain poor man had nothing but a house underset with shores, which was
like to fall. It happened on a time as he returned from the fields, he found
it fallen, and because he had not wherewith to set it up again, he was so much
troubled in his mind, that he fell to mourning and weeping out of measure. But
as this poor man thus made moan, he espied a brazen pot, which many years had been hidden in ye wall, lying among the stones and rubbish, which when he had
taken up and opened, he found it full of gold, wherewith his heart hopping for
joy, he left off his weeping.

MOR. Sometime that we think hurtful, turns to our great profit and
commodity.

Jesting.
185 Of a learned man not esteemed.
A Certain learned man being bidden to the feast of a Prince, and commanded
to sit down in the nethermost rooms, when the other guestes had great fishes
set before them, but to him very small ones, he did eat none, but put them
one after an other to his mouth, then to his ears, as though he would demand
something of them, and after laid them down whole and untouched in the dishes
again: whom the master of the feast asked why he did so? he answered, two
year ago in these parties my father through shipwreck was cast away, and
what became of his body I could not afterwardrs know, I did therefore demand
of these little fishes if they cold tell any tidings of him, but they answered
that time they were not bred: wherefore I must ask the greater fishes. The
Prince hearing so merry a saying, commanded of the greater fishes to be set
before him, and ever after he placed him among his chiefest guestes.

MOR. Amongst unlearned men, learning is not so profitable as to the learned is
pleasant and merry talk.

Ignorance.
186 Of a Physician.
AN old Woman being troubled with pain of her eyes, bargained with a Physician
for a certain sum of money to pay him if he healed her: if not, he should have
nothing. The physician went about his cure, who daily came and anointed her
eyes, but she (that hour he dressed her) could see nothing, then he at his
departure, carried some thing out of the house. The old woman see her stuff
daily decrease, so that when she was healed, scarce any thing was left, to
whom when the Physician came and required his bargain, because she could see
clearly, and thereof brought witnesses, she said: Truly I rather see less
than before, for when I was blind I could see much stuf in my house, but now
that I can see as thou say, I perceue nothing of yt which I had.

MOR. Wicked persons not knowing what they do, speak often against them
selves.

187 Of a Dog.
A Certain man had two Dogs, whereof the one he taught to hunt, ye other to
keep his house, if it chanced the hounde to catch any thing, he which kept
within was partaker thereof, the other being offended, cast often in his fellows
teeth that he daily took pains, and the other did nothing, and yet he was fed
with his travail: his fellow answered and said: Blame not me but my
Master, which never taught me to labor but to eat that an other has swet for.

MOR. Young men which know nothing, are not to be blamed, seeing their Parents
brought them up so.

Immoderatenesse.
188 Of Sheep wasting Corn.
A Husbandman complained that the sheep destroyed al his Corn, whervppon
Jupiter commanded the sheep to feed temperately, and because they obeyed not
his will, the Wolf was appointed to afflicte them moderately. But when the
shepherd complained that al his flock was killed by the Wolf, Jupiter was
offended, and bad the Hunter kill the Wolf, which thing he quickly did.

MOR. No immoderate thing is continual.

Impossible promises.
189 Of the Owl and the Lark.
THe Lark came to the Owl and said: Dear sister, I pray thee bear me
company to morrow at noone, for my lover desires to see me by Sun light:
Now if I be matched with thee, I shall seem more beutiful. The Owl promised to
be there, for he was ashamed to stick with her for so small a trifle. When day
was up and the Sun did shine very clear, the Lark waited for him, but the
Owl durst not appear by Sun light, because she could not see, and therefore
came not, wherewith the lark being offended, always after abhorred and pursued
her: wherefore the Owl flies not by day for fear of the lark, but seeks
his meat by night.

MOR. None ought to promise that which he can not perform.

190 Of the Reed.
THe Reed was displeased yt not only al other trees, but sometime grass did
bear a nest, and he only of that honor was deprived: he therefore prayed a
little bird to build her nest upon him, so would I (quod she) but I mistrust thy
inconstancy, for I will not build my childrens house upon so ticklish a
foundation.

MOR. We ought not to commit our selves or our children to inconstant persons.

191 Of the Eele.
THe Eele said to the Serpent, why do men pursue me rather than thee, seeing
we are so near kin and so like? Mary (quod he) If they hunt me, they seldom
escape scotfree.

MOR They are least hurt, which use to revenge their injuries.

Innocence.
192 Of the Crow and the Sheep.
A Crow lighted on a sheep back and made a great noise, then said the
sheep: If you should do so to a dog, thou might chance catch copper. Yea
(said the Crow) I know with whom I deal, for I am to the pacient grievous, and
to the angry pleasant.

MOR The wicked strive continually with the feeble and simple folk: the
innocent is trodden under foot, but no man gainesayeth the ungodly, if he be
stout.

Enough has none.
193 Of the Ape and the Fox.
THe Ape prayed the Fox to give him a piece of his tail to cover his buttockes
withal, because that to him was a burden, would stand him in good steed
and do him much worship. The Fox answered and said, that she had nothing too
much, and she had rather sweep the ground therewith, than it should cover the
Apes buttockes.

MOR. Some have great scarcity, and some have great plenty, yet few rich men
are so well bent as to help the poor with any thing of their excess and
superfluity.

Vain joy.
194 Of the Frogs and the Sun.
THe Frogs reioysed at the marriage of the Sun, to whom one said: O wretched
kind, if we only fear the Sun beams, who will abide him if he get
children?

MOR. This fable is against those, which ignorauntly rejoice at their own
harm.

195 Of a Wolf fallen into a pit.
A Fox espying a Wolf fallen into a hole, did laugh, and rejoicing skipped
about the brinkes of the Pit, calling him foolish beast, which would not beware
of men's deceits. As he thus wanto^ly scoffed, the earth failed, and carried him
head, long in also: whom the Wolf seeing to fall said: I shall now carye a
great comfort of my death to hell, because I see the Fox (which mocked me)
perish with me.

MOR. We ought not rejoice at another misery, seeing we may fall into the same
likewise.

196 Of two Hogs.
A Certain man had two Hogs which bare so mortal hatred one toward an other,
that daily they tore each other with their teeth: but when their Master killed
one of them, the other was wonderful glad, seeing his enemy should dye
incontinent: within few days after, when he him self was drawn to death,
he tormented him self, saying: Woe is me wretch, why did I so rejoice over my
enemies death, whom so soon I follow to the same end?

MOR. None ought to rejoice, no not over the death of his enemy, seeing it is
evident that all must dye.

Judging outwardly.
197 Of a Wolf that put on a Sheep skin.
A Wolf put on a Sheeps skin, and was conversant amongst the Sheep, of whom
he daily devoured one, which thing when the shepherd had espied, he hanged him
up in an high tree, the^ other shepherds asked him why he hoong up a Sheep: Ah
(quod he) the skin as ye see is a sheep, but in his deeds he was a Wolf.

MOR. Men must not be esteemed after their apparel, but after their works,
for many are under sheep skins ravening wolves.

198 Of the Elephant.
AS the Lion passed by the wild beasts thorough the desert, they made their
obeisaunce to him as King of beasts, only the Elephant bowed not his knee,
because he could not: but some beasts envying him, reported ill of him to the
Lion, he sent for him forthwith, and said: Why art thou so stubborn, that
thou do not thy duty as the rest? My Lord, according to my power I honor
thee, but I can not kneel because I lack knees. The Lion said, if thou do it
in thy heart, it suffiseth: wherefore he condemned his accusers, and promoted
the Elephant.

MOR. We ought to give no judgment, before the truth be tried.

Labor.
199 Of an Ass.
THe Ass in the winter season was much troubled for the extreme cold that he
suffered, and that he lived only by straw, whereupon he wished for the spring
tide, that he might feed of the sweet grass. When the spring w^ come, his
master being a potter, compelled hy^ to carry clay into the workhouse, and
wood to t^^ furnace, and thence to carry brick and tile into d^uers places:
wherewith being anoyed, he long^^ for summer, hoping then to take his ease when
his master was busy in his harvest: but then h^ carried wheat into the barn,
and from then^^ home, and had no rest: wherefore he thought (...) Autumn were
once come, to have an end of hi^ travel: but he could not yet be eased of his
travel, but as then carried wine, fruit and wood: the^ he desired for frost and
snow again, that at the last he might have some ease of his travel.

MOR. In this life there is no time void of continual labor.

Learning.
200 Of a Husbandman and a Poet.
A Certain Husbandman came to a Poet, whose grounds he tylled, whom because he
found alone sitting amongst his Books, asked him by what means he could live
so solytarie? Mary (quod he) I was not alone before thou came here.

MOR. Learned men which daily are in company of such as they are, be never
alone, but when they are amongst the unlearned.

201 Of a Rich man unlearned, and a Poor man learned.
A Certain man being rich but unlearned, mocked a learned man which was
poor, by^ause that he himself with his own travail had ^athered much goods,
but he which was so learned ^as in great penury: No marvel (quod he) ^icause
thou have studied to gather riches, but I ^aue endeavored to get learning,
which does far ^xcel riches. Hereupon fell a contention between ^he rich man
and the learned, whither learning or riches were more excellent, which could
not ^e ended seeing both had many favorers, but the ryth man had most: At
length by this means it was known that learning excelled riches, thorough
civil discord being both compelled to live in banishment, when they could
carry nothing away with them of their substance they, went away into an other
city, where the learned man was hired to teach for a great stipende, and had
in honor and estimation: but he which was rich through poverty being feign
to beg his bread from door to door, confessed that in his opinion he had
erred.

MOR. The gifts of Fortune, because they pass to and fro, are far subject
to the gifts of the mind, which are proper and everlasting.

Learn by others.
202 Of the Pike and the Tench.
AS a certain Fisher angled, he so bayted h^^ hooks that the Fishes could not
percei^^ them, which the Pyke and the Tenche se^ing, were very desirous of it:
but the Pyke b^ing subtle said to the Tench: This bayte seemet^ to be good and
delicate, yet I think it is laid t^ deceive fishes withal, therefore let us
forsake (...) least we peryshe through the lusts of gluttony In faith (quod
the Tenche) it were a folly t^ leave so good a morsel for fear of nothing: I
wi^ first try it and make merry with it, and look^ thou what will hap. As he
swallowed the bayte^ he felt the deceit of the hook and would fayn^ have
retired, but the Fisher first plucked him up then the Pyke swam away and said:
Let us learn^ by our fellows mischance, least we peryshe.

MOR. Happy is he, whom other men's harms do make to beware.

Lewdness of women.
203 Of a Ielous man.
A Certain Ielous man married a Wife, who^ he knew dishonest, whereupon he
delivered her to a trusty friend of his to keep, promising him a great
reward, if he kept her so safely, that by no means the bond of wedlock were
broken* When he had tried her a few days and ^erceiued that she might hardly
be kept safe, by^^use through her subteltie he was nighe ouer^ome, went to her
husband and told him that he ^^oulde not take so great charge upon him, seeing
^^at Argus himself, with an hundred eyes, were ^ot able to keep her by
constraint: he said more^uer, if he might be put to choice, he had rather ^y
the space of one whole year, daily carry into ^he fields a sack full of
fleas, and turn them ^ll to grass, and bring them home again at e^ening,
than one day too have the charge of a ^eude woman.

MOR. No keeper be he never so diligent, can ^eepe safely a wanton minion.

Liberality.
204 Of a Liberal man.
A Frank and Liberal man toward all men, traveling far, fell amongst
thieves, who ^tanding about him, and ready to stay him, one of them cried out:
kill not this man which has much helped me, for sometime he did not only
^eceyue me gently into his house, but also nori^hed me being sick, and caused
a Physician too ^ooke unto me, with which words his fellows ^elenting,
suffered him to depart unhurt.

MOR. As far as we may, we should do good to all men.

Liberty.
205 Of the Dog and the Lion.
A Dog by chance met with a Lion, to whom he said merrily, what wandrest thou
(O miser) through woods and deserts nighe pyned for hunger? Mark how fat
and trim I am: I never take pains for it, but get it idelly. Truth it is
(said the Lion) that thou farest well, yet thou (O fool) art in bondage,
serve thou which can serve, for I am free and will not serve.

MOR. In every thing liberty far excels.

Liars.
206 Of the Shepherd and the Husband men.
A Boy kept sheep in a great Pasture, who three or four times did cry in
ieste that the Wolf was come: which thing caused the Husbandmen (out of every
quarter of the Countries) to assemble there. It chanced verily, that the Wolf
came at length, and the Boy called for help as before, but they being often
deluded, would not once stir out of their doors, whereby the sheep were all
destroyed.

MOR. He that uses lying, though he chance once to tell a truth, shall not
soon be credited.

207 Of Mercurius.
IVpiter commanded Mercurius to bestow amongst crafts men the medicine to
make them ly, which when he had well stamped and measured, he poured it equally
upon every one The shoemaker only remained, on who^ (because much of the
medicine was left) he poured all in the mortar: whereof it came to pass, that
all crafts men are liers, but most of all shoomakers.

MOR. This fable is against lying workmen.

Like to like.
208 Of an old man and his Son.
A Certain old man being thrust out of doors by his Son, lived in an
Hospital. On a time he espied his Son trauayling that way, whom he prayed,
that at the least he would send him two towels of al his lynnen, for which he
had swet full sore* who being at length moved with his Fathers prayers,
commanded a little Boy his son, to fetch his Grandfather the linen that he
required. The Boy being witty and worthy of such a father, brought but one,
whom his Father rebuked because he brought not two as he was bidden: forsoothe
(quod he) I keep the other for thee, that when thou art old and live in an
Hospital, I might send it to thee.

MOR. Look what love we bear toward our Parents, the same will our
children bear toward us.

Live in thy vocation.
209 Of a Camel.
A Camel being weary of his estate, complained that the Bulls had goodly horns,
but he himself had no defense to resist other beasts He therefore besought
Jupiter to give him horns also: Who laughed at his foolish request, whereof not
only he was denied, but also had his ears cropped.

MOR. Let every man be content with his calling, for as some hunte after
better Fortune, they happen to worse.

210 Of the Ass, the Ape, and the Mole.
THe Ass complained that he lacked horns, and the Ape that he wanted a tail.
Peace fools (quod the Mole) for I am blind also.

MOR. Some are not content with their estate, but if they wayed well other men's
misfortunes, they would quietlier endure their own.

Love of money.
211 Of a rich man.
A Rich man had two daughters, whereof the one died, at whose burial he hired
women to lament: the other said: What wretches are we, for to us this
mourning belongs, but we can not skyll thereof, and they which have nothing
to do therewith, how pitifully do they wayle? To whom her mother said:
Marvel not daughter if they lament so, for they do it because of money.

MOR. Some men for love of money, fear not to pick advantage from an others
misery.

Madness.
212 Of a mad man.
A Certain mad Man wandering through Cities, cried aloud that he had wisdom
to sell, then one offered money and required it, to whom he lent a blow and
gave him a long thread, saying: Thou shall be wise if thou keep thee as far
from mad men, as this is long.

MOR. We must have nothing to do with mad men.

Mad servant.
213 Of a Priest and his Boy.
A Priest given to belly good cheer, delivered to his Boy ten fat thrushes
upon a Spit to be roasted, saying that he should eat them al at a bit, if he
let them fall into the ashes. Within a short while after, when he returned (for
he was gone out to do certain business) he found the boy crying, who being
demanded why he wept, answered, because he could eat but nine when they
fell into the ashes, requesting that he might not be forced to eat the tenthe,
because he was full swollen more than enough. The priest being offended, as well
with the madness of the boy, as because he saw that he had lost his supper,
led the boy without the threshold of the door, and showed him three ways,
saying: Choose which of these thou will, for here thou shall not lodge this
night.

MOR. We ought not to keep mad servant in our house.

Marriage.
214 Of a young man.
A Certain young man which should marry a wife, being demanded whither he
would have her, turned to his friends and neighbors present, saying: Why stand
ye like dumb men, why do ye not pray God to help me this day? for if we pray
God to help them which neeze, where no danger is, how much more ought ye now
to pray for me to whom so great danger is at hand?

MOR. They which marry enter into great danger.

Mean life.
215 Of Jupiter.
IVpiter celebrating a marriage, received al beasts unto the feast, only the
Snaile made slow haste, the cause whereof he maruelling at, asked him why he
came not to ye feast? he answered: My house is dear to me and excellent:
whereat Jupiter being angry, gave sentence that he should carry his house about
him.

MOR. Some men had rather live hardly at home, than daintily abroad.

Might.
216 Of the Wolf and the Lamb.
AS a Wolf was drinking at the head of a spryng, he espied a Lamb far
beneath also drynking of the same spryng, whereat grudging ran hastily to the
Lamb and roughly rebuked him for troubling ye spring. The Lamb tre^bling
besought him to show compassion on him, being thereof giltlesse, alleging that
because he drank far beneath him, by no means he could trouble his drinking,
neither yet meant it. The Wolf having determined even at the first sight,
the death of the Lamb, threatened him most rigorously, saying: Thy labor is in
vain to ask pardon, for thou art always my enemy, thy father, thy mother,
and all thy cursed kindred are willingly my foes: but this day I will be
revenged of thee.

MOR. The mighty if he be desposed to hurt, easily finds occasion thereto.
A small is a great fault, if a man deal with his Superiors.

Music.
217 Of a Swanne.
A Rich man brought up a Swan and a Goose together, but not both to one
purpose, for the one should serve to sing, the other for the table. When the
time was come that the Goose should do that for which he was kept up, it
chanced to be night, so that one could not be known from the other, and the
Swanne was carried away instead of the Goose, who soong a song at the beginning
of her death, by which she showed her nature, and by her sweet singing escaped
death.

MOR. Commonly Music prolongeth life.

Necessity.
218 Of a Horseman and a Husbandman.
A Horseman required a Husbandma^ to catch a Hare, which he took in his
hands and asked the price, and forthwith set spurs to his horse: but the
Husbandman said: Make no have, for I will give it thee for a present.

MOR This fable touches those which refuse their own upon necessity.

Negligence of servants.
219 Of a Man and his Dog.
A Certain man having forgotte to shut the door where the Hens roosted: when
he arose in the morning, found that they were all killed and carried away by
the Fox: He was wroth therefore with the Dog, because he had not well tended
his goods, and bet him sore. Why, (quod he) if thou have ben negligent in
shutting the door, for whom the Hens laid Eggs, and hatched Chickens, is it
any marvel if I being in a dead sleep, and have no profit by them, did not
perceive the Fox coming?

MOR. We must never hope to have diligent servants, where the master is
negligent.

New things best.
220 Of a Soldier and his Horse.
THere was a Soldier which had a passing fine horse, and boughte an other in
goodness nothing like unto him, whom more nicely he kept than the first: Then
said he to his fellow, why does my Master keep me passingly above thee,
seeing I am not to be compared to thee, neither in comeliness, strength, nor
swiftness? He answered him: This is the course of the world, that new guestes
are best welcome.

MOR. Such is the madness of men, that they prefer new things before old,
though they be worser.

Obedience.
221 Of the Kid and the Wolf.
A Got going abroad to feed, shut up her young Kid at home, charging him not
to open the door till her return: The Wolf by chance hearing that, after her
departure knocked at the door, faining the voice of the Got, and bad him open
it. The Kid perceiving his pretense, denied to open the door, saying: Though
thy voice be like a Gotes, yet I see a wolf through the chinks.

MOR. It is good for children to obey their Parents, young men to be ruled by
age.

Offenses unpunished.
222 Of a Philosopher.
A Philosopher of the sect of Cynicus in chiding being stricken, was not
only therewith contented, but also rewarded him that struck, with a piece of
silver: Which thing when all that were present marvelled at, and said yt he was
worthy to be beaten again, ah (quod he) ye know not what I have done now,
but hereafter ye shall know: not long after as that stryker would have beaten
an other (for he hoped to gain somewhat,) he received his deaths wound, and
feeling death to come upon him, he said* how much better had it ben for me to
have been stricken again of the Philosopher, than to be rewarded with a silver
penny?

MOR. When offenders escape scot free, it does them sometime more hurt than
punishment.

Over hastiness.
223 Of the Mouse and the Cat.
A Flock of Myse had their abiding in a hollow wall, where out by chance
peeping, they espied a Cat, which sat in a chaumber looking grimly, and hanging
down her head. Then said one of them: This beast seems very gentle and
simple, for her countenance pretends holiness, I will therefore go speak
with her, and contract a perfect league of friendeship with her that shall
never be broken. When he had so said, he came nearer unto her, whom the Cat
caught and tore in pieces: the other seeing that, said: Verily, verily, we
must not credit smooth looks.

MOR. We must not judge any man by his countenance, but by his good works:
for in a sheeps skyn often are wrapped ravening Wolves.

Patience for gain.
224 Of the Sow and the Dog.
A Sow mocked a Spaniell, because he used to faune on his master, which so
often had beaten him, and plucked him by the ears, to teach him to hunt. Thou
mad body (quod the Dog) thou know not what I have gained by these stripes,
for hereby do I eat the sweet Partriches and Quayles.

MOR. We must not be grieved if our Master beat us, for thereof issues
plentiful goodness.

Patience perforce.
225 Of a Lamb and a Wolf.
A Lamb standing in an high place, rayled on the Wolf as he passed by
beneath, calling him naughty beast and ravening, to whom the Wolf turning
said: Thou do not taunt me, but the Toure whereon thou stand.

MOR. Some suffer wrong of vile persons, for fear of greater men.

226 Of a Fly.
A Fly by chance fell into a flesh pot, wherein being nigh choked, said to
himself, behold I have eat and dronk so much, and so well washed me, that now
being so full, I am content to die.

MOR. A wise man will stoutly bear out that which by no means can be avoided.

Parents.
227 Of the Ape and his two sons.
THe report is, that if the Ape chance to have a twin, she loves the one,
and hates the other: It came to pass, that she had two at a clap, who by
chance being put in fear, because she would escape the present danger, carried
yt she loved in her arms, which as she ran hedlo^g, she dashed against a
rock, and flue it, the other which she hated, sat on her rough back, and went
scot free.

MOR It chances commonly that parents bring that child to naught, whom
they make wanton, and whom less they cocker, to prove a valiant and good man.

Please every body.
228 Of an old man which carried an Ass
IT was talked sometime amongste the Popes Secretaries, that those men which
framed their life after the opinion of the common people, were in a miserable
bondage, because it was impossible to please every one, seeing they are of
sundry judgments. To which opinion one told, that there was an old man which
went to markette, with his son to sell an Ass, which he drove unladen
before him. As he passed on his way, there were men laboring by in the fields,
which blamed the old man, because that neither he nor his son did ride on
the Ass which went empty, seeing the one for his age, the other for his
infancy had need to be carried. Then the old man set his son on the Ass,
and himself went by on foot, which thing other seeing, said that he doted
for letting his son ride which was stronger, and he being old would
follow on foot: forthwith he changed his mind, and set off his son, and
rid him self. When he had ridden a little further, other met him, who
blamed him, that he had no regard to the age of his little son, but would
let him follow him as a drudge, and him self being his Father, did ride on
the Ass: wherewith he being moved, set his son also on the Ass. Not long
after he was asked by other, whose the Ass was: Mary (quod he) it is mine:
then they rebuked him that he had no pity on his poor Ass, but to set two
on him, seeing one was sufficient. Then the man being troubled with so sundry
opinions, and seeing he could not be in quiet, but still wa^ checked, he
bound the Asses four feet togithe^ and on a staff carried him on his own
shoulder and his sons to markette: whereat all m^nn wondering, laughed
exceedingly, blaming both their follies, especially the fathers. The old man
therewith chared, went to the rivers ^ide, an^ cast his Ass bound into the
water, and so soft^ him and returned home: by which means the silly old man
desirous to content every body could please none, but lost his Ass.

Pleasure.
229 Of a Fur tree and the Bushe.
THe report was sometime, that the Fur tree despised the Bushes, and boasted
of his own tal stature, that he was placed in houses, and to bear a sail in
the Ships: but they low, vile, and good for nothing: then they framed him
this answer: thou boastest much (O Fur tree) of thy goodness, and scornest
our evils, besides this thou concealest thy mischief, and passest over our
good fortune, but when thou shall be cut down with the axe, how gladly
would thou be like unto us which are void of care?

MOR. Felicity has evils to accompany her, as misery has good things. In
sum, this is safe and ^ide of care, the other is never out of fear, nor ^ide
of danger.

Perfection.
230 Of the Sow and the Bitche.
THe Sow and the Bitche contended about their nobility: The Bitche alleged
that of al four footed beasts she was the fruteful^est. The Sow quickly
replied, saying: Seeing ^hou sayste so, know thou, that thy Whelps be ^orne
blind.

MOR. Things are not judged by quick speed, ^ut by full perfection.

Perseueraunce in his vocation.
231 Of the Dog and the Ass.
WHen the Dog fauned on his Lord or the servant, they stroked him with their
hands, and made much of him: which thing the Ass marking well, sighed deeply,
being weary of his estate, yea and he thought it unjustly appointed that the
Dog should so be beloved of all men, as to be fed at his masters table, and
there unto to attain with ease and play: contrariwise, himself to carry
packes, to be whipped, to labor without ceassing, and yet nevertheless to be
hated of all men: Seeing these things come to pass by fauning, he purposed to
follow that trade of living being so profitable: and watching a convenient
time, when his Lord returned home, because he would put the thing in trial,
he ran before t^ meet him: incontinently he lept on him and knocked at him with
his heels. Then his master cried out for help, which thing his servants
hearing, ran speedely to him: and the foolish Ass^ which thought him self
civil and courteous, was well beaten with a staff.

MOR. All men can not do all things, neythe^ all things become all men. Let no
man meddle above his capacity, nor go about that, which he is most untowardly
in.

Policy.
232 Of a Lion and a Fox.
A Lion being taken in a snare, endeavored with all his force to break the
bands: the harder he plucked, the straighter he was held. The Fox having an
errand that way, and seeing this, said: O King, by no strength maiste^ thou
escape hence, but by policy, for the snare must be let out and loosed, and
not drawn in. Which when the Lion had done, he straightway loosed the snare
wherewith he was bound, and escaped free.

MOR. Policy is far better than strength.

Pore and rich.
233 Of a Wolf being hungry.
A Wolf in his old age not able any more to hunte, was sore a hungered,
neither could he ^inde any kinsman or friend which would help him with meat.
As he therefore wandered through a great wood heavily, he chanced upon a dead
carcass of an Ox, which he had scarce begone to tear, but a company of other
wolves, ravens, and crows came thither and prayed him to receive them as his
friends to partake of his pray: Then the Wolf said to him self: behold me
whom lately my brethren and sons regarded not, now strange beasts reverence,
and desire my friendship, but they do not this honor to me, but to the Ox.

MOR. A poor man is hated of al men, but the rich are honored.

Poverty praised.
234 Of the Horse and the Heart.
THe Horsie kept war with the Heart, and being often driven from his meat,
and put to the worst, he lamentably desired the aid of men, with whom he came
into the field: then he that before had the overthrow, became conqueror: but his
enemy being overcome, and subdued he himself became bond too man, feign to
carry him on his back, and a bit in his mouth. Of this fable writes Horace.

A Heart in fight excelling much
the horse, from meat him drove,
The strife was long, but horse was feign,
the help of man to crave.
The bit he took with merry cheer,
straight vanquished was his foe,
His Ryder yet he durst not cast,
nor yet his but forgo,
So he that dreadeth poverty,
and can not use a mean,
Shall lead his life in servitude,
and loose his freedom clean.
Praise not thy self.
235 Of the Ape and his young ones.
IVpiter sent out a precept, commanding all living things to appear before
him, yt he might give judgment whose offspring were the best favored: the
beasts came running, the birds flying, and the Fishes swimming thither. Last
of all came the Ape, and we him his young one, at whose ill favored buttockes
every one laughed. Tushe (quod the Ape) whom pleases God Jupiter shall have
the victory, yet in my judgment this my child is fair, and therefore of
right before all other to be preferred: whereat Jupiter also smiled.

MOR. We and ours seem good in our own eyes, but of us and our doings, let
other judge.

Prayer.
236 Of Mariners.
IT happened as many Maryners were sailing on the sea, that there arose a great
tempest sodeinly: hen every one prayed to his God for help, but one amongst
the rest, said: Ye know not what ye pray, for before these gods can go to
the Lord for our succoure, we shall perish through this storm: therefore I
do think it best to pray unto that God, which without the help of any
other, can deliver us from this present danger: Then they cried to almighty
God for help, and straight way the storm ceased.

MOR. We must not seek for help at the foot, when we may go to the head.

Praise of our own.
237 Of the Owl.
IN the assembly of birds, the Eagle said that he would choose the young ones
of other birds to serve in his court: and when every one strove to prefer his
own, the Owl said: I pray thee (O Queen) receive mine, which in beauty
pass all the rest: why (quod the Egle) what beauty are thy sons of? The
Owl answered: Of the same that I my self am. Then all the Birds laughed
exceedingly.

MOR. No child is so deformed, which to his parents seems not fair.

Praise another for advantage.
238 Of a Fox and a Dog.
A Fox being coursed by a Dog, and even at ye point to be caught, having no
way to shifte him, said: why would thou destroy me thou dog, seeing my flesh
you can not eat? Go catch rather that Hare (for there was one then hard by)
whose flesh men judge to be the sweetest: the dog harkened to the counsel of
the Fox, and let him go free, pursuing the Hare, whom because of his
wonderful swiftness he could not overtake. Not long after, the Hare met
with the Fox, blaming him for setting the Dog at him. The Fox answered him:
I marvel what thou meanest to accuse me, which praised thee so greatly: what
would thou have said, if I had dispraysed thee?

MOR. Many under the color of praising, devise utter undoing to some men.

Preparation.
239 Of the Wolf and the Porkupine.
ON a time the Wolf being hungry had a fancy to devour a Porkupine, whom
because of his sharp pricks he durst not assail, but invented a crafty wile
to trap him in, counselling him not to trouble his back with so many weapons
in time of peace, seeing that other Archers carried none with them but when
they goo to warfare: Nay (quod the Porkupine) we must suppose that there is no
time void of war against a Wolf.

MOR. A wise man ought always to be armed against the assaults of his enemies.

Preparation to dye.
240 Of an old man loath to dye.
A Certain old man desired death which came to take his life from him, to
spare him till he might make his will, and provide all other necessaries fit
for such a journey: whom Death answered: Why haste not thou prepared thy
self being so often warned by me? Mary (quod he) I never saw thee before? Why
(quod Death) when I daily took, not only those which were of like years to
thine (of which number very few remain) but also young men, children and
babes, was it not sufficient warning that thou art mortal? When thy eyes
waxed dim, thy hearing thick, other senses daily decaying, and thy body
being worse and worse, did I not tell thee that I was near at hand? and yet
thou say thou have no warning: wherefore I will no longer prolong the time.

MOR. We must direct our life, as though death were always before our eyes.

Presumption.
241 Of the Ass and the Lion.
THe Cock sometime fed with an Ass, to whom as the Lion was coming, the Cock
crowed out aloude, and the Lion straightway fled (for men say) he is afearde at
the crowing of the Cock. The Ass supposing that he ran away because of him,
went straight after the lion, whom when he had so far pursued that they were
without the hearing of the Cocks crowing, the lion returned and devoured him,
who as he was dying cried out: Ah wretch and mad body that I am, for I am
borne of none that were warriors, and wherefore have I rushed into the host?

MOR. Many men assail their enemies which upon set purpose do humble them
selves, by the which means they are slain.

Pride.
242 Of the Horse and the Ass.
Sometime a Horse decked with fair trappers and a saddle, greatly neyghing,
ran through a high way, whose running an Ass laden by chance did let, he
all raging and chewing his bit for anger, said: Ah lither lurdeyn, why
withstandest thou the Horse? Give place or I will tread thee down: the Ass
durst not once bray, but quietly avoided. It happened as the Horse ran his
race, his hoof brake, who then being paste running or making any show, was
spoiled of his ornaments, and after sold to a Tanner. The Ass seeing him
coming with a Tanner, said unto him: What good sir, how happens this kind
of weed? where is thy gilt sadle, thy studded trappers, and glittering bridle?
Thus it is fit my friend to happen to every one that is proud.

MOR. Many men in their prosperity are so puffed up with pride, that they clean
forget them selves, and all modesty, but for their presumption they soon
suffer adversity.

Proud of an others purse.
243 Of Jupiter and the Raven.
ON a time Jupiter mynding to create a king of the Fowls, appointed a day of
assembly, to the end that he which was comlyest should be appointed king. The
Raven hearing thereof, and knowing his own deformity, gathered together diverse
feathers and decked himself, that he was goodlyest of all. When the day
appointed was come, the Fowls assembled together: then Jupiter would have made
the Raven king because of his gayness, whereat the other dysdayning, plucked
every one his feathers from him, whereof he being spoiled was a Raven as
before time.

MOR. He that hangs on another man's sleeue, if he chance to fall from him, all the world shall know what he is.

Falls of pride.
244 Of a Flea and a Lion.
THe Flea came to the Lion and said: Neither fear I thee, neither art thou
stronger than I, but I pray thee what is thy strength? thou scratchest with thy
nails, and with thy teeth thou bytest, so does a woman fyghting with her
husband: but in strength I far exceed thee, and if thou will, let us go
fight. The Trumpet being blown, the Flea stuck fast about his nosethrils,
biting: but the Lion with his own nails tore him self till he was chafed:
The Flea having overcome the Lion, sounded the Trumpet, and rejoiced: but as he
flewe away, he was entangled in a Cobwebbe: and being ready to be devoured, he
lamented that he strove with the greatest Beasts, and now to be kilde by a
vile Spider.

MOR. This Fable is against those which vanquishe great men, and are
vanquished by mean persons.

Princes.
245 Of the Pecock and the Chough.
WHen the Birds would make them a king, the Pecocke prayed them to choose him
for his beauty: when they so minded, the Chough began to say: if in thy reign
the Egle pursue us, how will thou help us?

MOR. Princes must be chosen, not only for their beauty, but also for their
strength and wisdom.

Promis.
246 Of a man and a Dog.
A Certain man had prepared a Supper, to which he had certain of his
friends, whose Dog likewise desired an other Dog, saying: Friend, come
and suppe with me. Which Dog being come in at the doors, and seeing such
great cheer toward, rejoiced greatly, and said to him self: Oh what joy has
happened me of late, for I shall fill my belly so full, that I shall not be
hungry to morrow: and as he wagged his tail for joy, because he trusted in his
friend, the Cook seeing him thus do, caught him by the legs and cast him
out of the wyndow: when the Dog was fallen, he rose up quickly and ran
howling away: As he went another Dog met him, and asked him what good cheer he
had to supper, he answered: I was so out of measure drunk, that I knew not the
way wherout I came.

MOR. We must not trust in those which promise us a good turn of another man's
gift.

247 Of a Heardman.
AS a Heardman kept a Heard of Bulls, he lost a Calfe, whom in every desert
he sought a long time, but when he could not find him, he prayed to Jupiter,
promising if he would show him the Thief which stole his Calfe, to offer a
Got in sacrifice to him. It happened as he walked in a grove of Oaks, he found
that his calf was devoured by the Lion, whereat trembling for fear, he cast up
his hands to heaven and said: God Jupiter I promised to give thee a kidde if I
found the Thief, now if I escape his hands, I will undertake to give thee a
Bull.

MOR. This Fable is against unlucky men, that lacking ought, pray to find it,
which having found, they seek to avoid.

Promotion.
248 Of a man created Cardinal.
A Certain merry conceited fellow, hearing his friend to be created Cardinal,
came to greet him for his promotion: he lofty and swelling with pride,
counterfayting that he knew not his old friend, asked who he was: the other
being ready in his merry answer, said: I pity thee and others that come to
such promotion, for as soon as ye have got such honors, ye leese so your
fight, feeling and other senses, that ye clean forget your old friends.

MOR. Some being promoted to dignity, despise their old acquaintance.

249 Of Field Mise.
A Flock of field Myse appointed to gnawe down an Oak full of mast that they
might have their meat the readier, so as they need not so often run up and
down for it. Then one wyser than the rest forbad them, saying: If we destroy
our norisher, who shall give food to us and our seed in time to come?

MOR. A wise man ought not only to behold things present, but also things to
come.

Punishment of vices.
250 Of a Flea
AS a Flea was biting a man, he was taken, who asked what he was, seeing he fed
of him: answered, he was of that kind of beasts, which as nature ordained,
lived by that means, praying him not to kill him, because he could not do
much harm, whereat the man laughed, saying: I will therefore the sooner kill
thee, because it is not lawefull to hurt any, either much or little.

MOR. We must not favor the wicked, whither their trespass be small or great.

Rashness.
251 Of a Fisher.
A Certain Fisher being but a nouice in that art, took his pypes and his
nets, and went to the Sea, and standing on a rock, played first with his
pype, supposing that by his sweet melody the fishes would dance: but when he
had long tried that way, and could not prosper, he laid down his pype and
took up his net, which he cast into the Sea, wherein he drew many Fyshes.
When he had emptied his net and saw them skipping, he said: Oh wicked
Creatures, when I piped, ye would not dance, and now I have left off, ye
begin to skip.

MOR. This fable is against those which do any thing without aduisement, and
out of time.

252 Of a Currier and a Hunter.
ON a time a Currier came to a Hunter to bie a Bears skyn, for which he drew
money to have paid. In faith (quod the Hunter) presently I have none, but to
morrow I will go a hunting, and if I chance to kill a Bear, thou shall have
his skin. The currier (to refresh his spirits) went into the forest with him,
and because he would the better behold the pastime between the Hunter and
the Bear, he climbed into an exceeding high tree. The Hunter went boldly to
the Bears Den, who put in his Dogs and rouzed him. It happened that the
Bear shunned his blow, and forthwith struck the Hunter to the ground: who
knowing the nature of the beast to be, to take pytie of a carcass: held his
breath and feigned him self to be dead. The Bear smelled at him every where,
and perceiving by no means any life in him, departed away. When the Currier
saw that the beast was gone, and that there was no danger, he came down out
of the tree and went to the Hunter, whom he had arise, and afterward demanded
what the Bear said in his ear? He warned me (quod he) that hereafter I sell
not a Bears skin before I have caught him.

MOR. We ought not accounte that we have not, as sure as that we have.

Religious men.
253 Of a Wolf.
A Wolf being old and not able any longer to hunt, gave him self to religion,
put upon him a Monks attire, and begged meat from door to door* and being
rebuked by another wolf said: What would thou I should do? My se^th are
cute, and run I can not, wherefore I mistrust otherwise how to live.

MOR. Many addicte them selves to Religion because they can not otherwise live.

Repentance to laice.
254 Of a Bear.
AS a Bear scolded by chance with his wife he thrust out her eyes, but after
repenting, he was so graued therewith, that he byt off his nails. And when in
talking he said, that for the love he bare to her he had cast away his best
defense: what good (quod his wife) does this to me? Thou should have done
this before thou scratchedst out my eyes.

MOR. After harm done it is too late to repent, seeing that which is done, can
not be undone.

255 Of a simple Countryman.
TThere was a Countryma^ which as he came from market, heard two Cuckoes
aunswering one an other out of two sundry woods. And when the Cuckoe of the
other wood had near put to silence his country cuckoe, he lighted off his
horse and climbed a tree, and as well as he could, he help his country cuckoe
with his crying. In the mean time a Wolf devoured his horse: then was he
feign to go home on foot, where he complained to his neighbors, how for the
honor of his country he had help his Cuckoe, whereby he had suffeyned great
loss. Then they all with one accord paid his damages, supposing that it was
not fit that any should receive hinderance, which had traveled for their
common wealth.

256 Of the Mule and the Horse.
A Mule espied a horse gorgeously decked with a gilt byt, a fair sadle, and
purple trappers, at whose Fortune he envied much, supposing him to be happy,
because he always fared well, and went gayly: contrariwise, his own estate in
comparison of his to be miserable. For (quod he) I am ouerladen with the
packsaddle, and I am a daily drudge to carry burdens. But shortly after, he
espied the Horse returning from battle sore wounded, then he accounted his
own estate better than the Horses, saying: I had rather get my living hardly
with my daily labor, and to be clad in vile array, than after such fair and
trim apparel to be in danger of my life.

MOR. We must not envy Kings and Princes because of their wealth and
substance, seeing they are subject to many more peryls than poor men are.

257 Of a Devil.
A Diuill wandering through the world (as his manner is) marked a certain young
man rejoicing at the death of his parents, whereat he was very glad: but going a
little further he wept, seeing an other very heavy at his Fathers burial, who
being demanded the cause of so diverse affections, answered: The laughing of
the son for the death of his parents, declares that those being rich are
dead, of which number very few escape our hands: but the weeping is a token of
the fathers poverty: and the kingdom of Heaven, for the most part, is wont to
belong to those which are poor.

MOR. Too much riches do carry a man down to Hell.

Rich enemies.
258 Of the Birds.
THe Birds were greatly afraid least the Dorres should kill them with
shooting of Balls, because they heard that they had rolled together a great
heap of bals. Fear not said the Sparrow, for how shall they shoot bals at us
that fly in the air, when they can not carry them on earth but with much
toil?

MOR. We need not fear the riches of our foes, when we see they lack wit.

Riottousnesse.
259 Of an Ox and a Bullock.
AN Ox being well stricken in age, daily went to plow. It happened that a young
Heyfer which never had labored, fetched his friskes in the pastures not far
off, and scorned the toyling of the elder, boasting much of his own liberty,
that he had tasted neither yoke nor chayn, but the others neck was worn bare
with labor. The Ox presently answered nothing: not long after he espied
this royster led to be sacrificed, then he said thus to him: What end has
now thy easy life? Thy careless living at hearts ease has brought thee to ye
axe, I think now thou will rather counsel me to labor than to tolenesse, which
is the cause of thy death.

MOR. To lead an honest life there needs travel: the Sluggard and he that
is bent to riottous living, shall come to that which he would be loathe.

260 Of a Boy that would not learn.
A Boy which hated learning, being brought by his Father into a School,
could not be enticed by any fair means of his Master, to speak the fiest
letter of the Alphabete: Then said his Master, open thy mouth, for that this
Letter requires, but he gaped and spoke not. The Master seeing his labor
lost, had him sit amongst his fellows, warning them to persuade him to
speak only this Letter: then his schoolefellows exhorted him in the best
manner that they could, saying: Is it such a pain to say A? Nay (quod the
Boy) but if I speak that, he would make me learn B and so the rest. But
neither my master nor my father shall have the power to make me learn.

MOR. They which are unwilling to learn, can never be forced to it.

Servant.
261 Of the Dove and the Crow.
A Dove being fed in a dove house was excceeding proud of her fertility: The
Crow hearing thereof, said to her: Friend, brag no more thereof, for the more
thou breedest, the more care thou heapest.

MOR. Amongst servants, those are most miserable, which in time of their
bondage get many children.

262 Of the Ass and the Calfe.
AN Ass and a Calfe fed together in one pasture, by chance they heard the
found of a bell, which they supposed to be a sign that their enemies were at
hand, to whom the Calfe said: Let us be packing hence fellow, least our
enemies take us prisoners. Nay, flee thou hence rather (quod the Ass) whom
they use to kill and eat, for I care not, I know this, where soever I become
my life shall be to carry burdens.

MOR Let not servants fear much to change their masters, least the last be
woorser than the first.

Shifies.
263 Of a Merchant and a Jew.
A Certain prodigal fellow having wasted al his Fathers goods, applied his
mind to practice deceyt. It happened on a time, that he wrapped a piece of
ordure in a cloute and brought it into the market, saying that he had a
precious thing which was of such force, that if any man tasted the least crum
thereof, he should have fulfilled whatsoever he thought of. But a Jew, whose
manner is privily to mark al things, thought if he did buy it, that he would
have o^ his mind many towns and lordships when he tasted of it (because he
would be exceeding rich) he came therefore secretly unto him and asked the
price, whereunto this prodigal fellow said: Auaunt, thou shall not buy it, for
thy clothes declare, that thou art not able. The Jew said to him, how know
thou? tell me the price: he answered.700. crowns: the Jew paid him the money,
upon condition, that if he had fayde true, he should enjoy it: but when he had
tasted it, he spit it out, and said it was ordure. Then the seller having
performed his promise, pleaded the cause before the Mayor, and enjoyed the
money.

Sick folk.
264 Of a Carter.
A Certain Carter asked his wagon, why that wheel which was worst made so much
creaking, seeing none of the rest did so? The wagon answered: Sick folks
are wayward, and always complaining.

MOR. Diseases cause men to complain.

Sinners.
265 Of an old Woman.
MEn commonly will (if through their folly any mischaunce happen to them) lay
the blame to Fortune or the Devil, to excuse them selves, they do so much
follow their appetites: wherewith the Devil not contented, when by chance he
espied an old woman clymbing a tree, whence he perceived she was like to fall,
and then the fault would be laid on his neck, he called for witnesses, to
whom he said: Behold; that same old woman has climbed that tree without my
consent, where I see she will fall: bear witness therefore with me, that I
counseled her not to go up. Immediately she fell: then being demanded why she
climbed that tree, answered, the Devil forced me: then he brought forth his
witnesses, and proved that she did that without his advise.

MOR. Those men deserve no pardon, which voluntarily sinning, blame Fortune or
the Devil therefore.

Synging.
266 Of the Nightingale and the Raven.
ON a solemn feast day the Egle had the birds to dinner: after it was done,
the Eagle called forth the Nyghtingale, whom he had to sing some melody to
lyghten their hearts withal. She forthwith song sweetly, that it delited the
hearers. In the mean time a Raven passing by, and hearing this, said: I will
also sing with the Nightingale, for I have a base voice which shall be heard
far off, and he began to croake very lothsomely, which caused the
Nyghtyngale to hold her peace. The other birds were offended with the Raven
for troublyng the feast: then the Egle commanded him either to depart, or to
hold his peace: but he answered, that he would sing, and for her he would
not stir an inche. The Eagle commanded him again to avoid, which because
he stubbornely disobeyed, was commanded to be slain.

MOR. It is vain to sing, where the hearers are unwilling.

Simplicity.
267 Of the Dove and the Pie.
THe Pie asked the Dove what was the cause that she always buylt in one place
where her chickens were always taken away: she answered, simplicity.

MOR. Good men are easyly beguyled.

Slothfulness.
268 Of an Ass and Frog^.
AS an Ass laden with wood passed thorough a marshe, by chance he slipped and
fell, who not being able to arise, lamented and sighed, but the Frogs which
were in the marshe, hearing him sighyng; said: What would thou do sir,
if thou had continued here so long as we have, which for so small a time
do so mourn?.

MOR This talk may any manne use to a slothful persons, which for a little
pains is troubled, being able easyly to overcome great affairs.

269 Of a Pelican.
THe Goose and the Ducke made sometime a great feast, to the which they had
all tame Fowls, but to set out their Supper, they went into the wilderness
and found the Pellicane, whom they brought with them to their banquet, When
the feast was done, they all besoughte the Pellicane to abide with them, and
not to live so solitarily in such penury, who at length being somewhat
persuaded, continued a few days with them, and made great bankets: But when
he would have prayde, he was interrupted with their chattering: wherefore he
left their company, and lived the rest of his life in solitariness.

MOR Who so will serve God truly, must do it alone quietly.

Sluggardes.
170 Of a Smith and his Dog.
A Certain Smyth had a whelpe, which all the while he stroke on his iron,
did sleep: but when he went to meat, the Dog would straightewaye arise,
and eat the crummes that fell from the Table, or bones, or any thing else.
Which thing the Smith marking well, said to his Dog: Thou wretch, I can not
tell how to ^andle thee, for whiles I am busy in my work, thou lie snorting
and sleeping: But when my teeth go, thou startest up and waggest to me thy
tail.

MOR. Idle sluggardes which live of an other man's sweat, must be punished
according to the rigor of the law.

Strength.
271 Of the Bull and the Mouse.
A Mouse did byte a Bull by the foot, and straight way ran into his hole: the
Bull shaked his horns and sought for his enemy, but see him he could not: then
the mouse laughed him to scorn, saying: Because of thy strength despise not
every body, for now a silly Mouse has hurt thee, and escaped free.

MOR. Let no man regard his enemy.

Strife.
272 Of a Weasel.
A Weasel came into a Smiths shop, and licked ^n a fyle which lay there,
wherewith her tongue being torn, bled very much: She rejoiced greatly, supposing
to carry away something from the iron, until her tongue altogether was worn away.

MOR. This fable is against those which in strife hurt them selves.

273 Of Hares.
THe Hares sometime holding war with the Eagles, required aid of the Foxes:
but they answered, we would help you, but that we know what ye are, and with
whom ye fight.

MOR. They which strive with their betters, set little by their own health.

Stripes.
274 Of the Nut tree, the Ass, and the Woman.
A Certain Woman questioned with a Nut tree growing by the high way side,
which was always pelted with stones by passengers, why he was so mad, that
the more he were beaten, the more increase he yielded, the Walnut answered:
Remember you not the old Proverb? The Nut tree, the Ass, and the Woman, are al
under one law: which three will do nothing well without great store of
stripes.

MOR. Some men make a rod oftentimes for their own tail.

Suffering wrong.
275 Of the Bear and the Be.
A Bear sometime stinged of a Be, was so wood angry thereat, that with his
nails he tore in pieces the hiues where the Bees made honey: the Bees seeing
their hiues plucked down, their food carried away, and their young ones slain,
rushing all at once, assailed the Bear, and nigh stoong him to death. He
hardlye scapyng from them, said to himself: how much better had it ben for
me, patiently to have suffered the stinging of one Be, tha^ to provoke so many
enemies against me?

MOR. Sometime it is far better to suffer wrong done by one, than in
requiting it to procure many foes.

Thefie.
276 Of a Boy and his mother.
A Boy stole his Fellows Book out of the School, which he brought to his
mother: she corrected him not therefore, but rather made much of him: Who
waxyng elder, stole greater things: and at a time being taken with the manner,
he was straight way led to execution, whom his mother followed and lamented:
but he prayed the Hangman that he might talk a word or two in his mothers
ear, who straight way laid her ear to his mouth, which he with his teeth byt
off: diverse rebuked him that he had not only played the thief, but also used
such villainy to his mother. She (said he) is the cause of my undoing: for
if she had chastized me when I stoale the Book, I had not now ben led to
hanging.

MOR. Faults which are not at the first corrected, do increase greater.

Time.
277 Of a Grammarian teaching an Ass.
A Certain Grammarian boasted that he was so passing tine in his art, that if
he might have a sufficient reward, he would take upon him to teach not only
children, but also asses. The Prince hearing of the man's rashness, asked him
whither he thought he could teach an Ass within ten years, if he gave
him.50. Crowns. The shameless manne answered, that he would not refuse to
be slain of him, if in that space the Ass could not write and read. His
friends hearing of this, marvelled and rebuked him, because he had promised
to do a thing, not only hard, but also impossible: and they did fear, least
when the time had been expired, he should be slain of the King: whom he
answered: Before this time be come out, either the Prince, the Ass, or I shall
dye.

MOR. Delay of time is commonly wont to be a help, for those which stand
in danger.

Trying of friends.
278 Of a man that would try his friends.
THere was a certain man very rich and liberal, which had many friends whom
often times he had did to supper, to the which willingly they came, and because
he might yt better know whether they would be trusty in time of need, he
assembled them together and told them that he had foes lately vpstart, which
he meaned to destroy, praying them therefore to arm themselves and come with
him to revenge his quarrel: then every one began to excuse him self saving two,
which he accounted for his friends, and afterward loved them dearly, but the
other he rejected.

MOR. The best trier of friends is adversity.

Try all ways.
279 Of a young man and an old.
A Certain old man espied a young man gathering of his fruit, whom he gently
entreated to come down from the tree, and not to purloyne his goods: but he
spoke to the wind, for he lightly regarded his age and his words. Ah (quod the
old man) I have heard, that not only in words, but also in herbs force
consists, whereupon he began to pluck the leaves and cast them at him. The
young man seeing him do so, laughed out of measure, supposing that he doted, to
drive him down with leaves. The old man willing to assaye him by gentle
means, when he perceived that he could nothing prevail, said: I will prove
what stones will do, for in them men say, there is virtue: and forthwith filled
his lap with stones which he cast at the young man, and perforce made him come
down and depart.

MOR. A wise man ought to assay all manner ways, before he take any weapon in
hand.

Trouble.
280 Of the Lion and the Bull.
A Bull being afraid of a Lion, fled away, and by chance met with a Got, who
with frouning countenance threatened to strike him with his horns, to whom the
Bull full of wrath, said: It is not the knitting of thy brows fears me, but
yt the fierce Lion is so near at my heels, thou should feel what it were
to meddle with a Bull, and to renew his wound.

MOR. To the sorrowful ought no more misery be added, who that has bin once
in trouble, has tasted sorrow enough.

Trust in thy self.
281 Of a Lark.
A Certain Lark by chance builded her nest in a piece of wheat, that was
somewhat riper than other: whence her young ones were not able to fly when the
corn was yellowe. As she was going forth to seek meat, she warned them if
any novelty happened to be done or said, to mark it well, and at her return to
certify her thereof: after her departure, the owner of the corn came thither,
and said to a young man his son: See ^^^t thou, that this corn is ripe and
needs la^ourers? to morrow therefore by break of day. ^o to my friends,
desire them to help me in with my harvest: when he had so said, he departed.
When the Lark returned to her young ones, they ^ame fluttering about her, and
prayed her out of hand to have and carry them away, for the owner had sent to
his friends, willing them to come the next morning to reap his corn: She had
them be of good cheer and fear nothing, for if the Lord of the ground have
remitted ye matter to his friends, to morrow it shall not be cut down: the next
day she flew a broad again for meat, ye lord waited for his bidden friends, the
sun waxed hot, but nothing was don, neither any friend of his came. The^ said
be to his son, I see well that these my friends for the most part are loyterers,
let us therefore entreat our kinsfolks and neighbors to morrow betimes to
come: her Chickens were then afraid and told it to their mother: she had them
to leave off fear and care, for none of alliance would be so obedient as to
come at a beck, especially to labor. The next morning she went abroad as
before, his kinsfolks left the work undone: The owner seeing that, said to
his son: Adieu both friends and Cousins, bring thou to morrow at the break of
day two sickles, one for me, another for thee, and we with our own hands
will reap it. When her young ones told her this, she said: It is time to be
packing, for that he said with out do^ shall come to pass: for on him that
ought it, the labor is turned, not where it was required: an^ thus the Lark
shifted her nest, and the corn wa^ reaped. Hereof Ennius writes these tw^
verses.

This sentence in thy mind,
bear thou in any wise:
Look for no help of friends,
where thy help may suffice.
Trusting mortal things.
282 Of an Ass.
A Certain poor man which had nothing but (...) barrel of Wine and an Ass,
had married hi^ only daughter to a certain young man, promising him somewhat in
frank marriage which he thought to gather of his Wine and the Ass (for he had
determined to sell them) but the next night after that the bridale was kept,
the Ass died, who as he was dying, brake the vessel with his heels, and spylt
the Wine.

MOR. We must put no trust in transitory things.

Truth hates jesting.
283 Of one that played the part of Christ.
A Certain Countreyman playing the part of Christ in a play, was beaten and
evil entreated of the Jews, wherefore he flang way the cross and said: The
Devil be your God, for I will not. Then a Baker ^ooke his part, ^home the
Jews likewise did h^^d^e opprobri^usly: which thing the pacient suffered, but
an ^ther said to him, Meal stealer: then the Baker ^unswered, hold thy tongue,
or else and will overthrow ^hee with my cross.

MOR. Truth can abide no jesting, neither ^enne that are guilty willingly
hear of any ie^ting of their doings.

Vain desires.
284 Of the Heart.
A Heart beholding himself in a clear water, allowed much his fair forhead
and bread horns, but the smalnesse of his legs he condemned. As he was thus
viewing and judging, there came a Hunter upon him: the Heart fled away very
swiftly, the Dogs pursued him: but being entered into a thick wood, his horns
were wrapped fast in the boughs: then he praised his legs and dispraysed his
horns, which caused him to be taken.

MOR. Things which do hurt we do hunt after, but good things we despise.

285 Of a Countryman and Hercules.
A Countrymans Carte stuck fast in a deep mire: straight way he besought
help of Hercules. To him an answer was given: Thou dolte whip on thy horse,
and lift thou forward thy wheels, and then call on Hercules, and he will be
ready at hand.

MOR. Vain requests do not avail, which God will not hear, help thy
self, and then god will help forward.

Vaineglory.
286 Of a biting Dog.
A Certain man had a Dog which often times had byt many, whervppon he tied a
clog on his neck, that men might take heed of him. The Dog supposing that to
be given him for a commendation of his courage, despised his companions: then
one of them told him of his blindness, that he wore that clog with shame, and
not with honor.

MOR A vaynglorious fool sometime counts yt to be his praise, which is
utterly to his shame.

Valiant death.
287 Of the Hog and the Horse.
A Hog espied a barded Horse, which was set out to warfare well appointed, to
whom he said: Whether make thou such have thou fool, perhaps thou shalt
be slain in battle: The Horse answered him, though thou do nothing worthy
of praise, but being fat lie wallowing in the mire, yet a little knyfe thy
life shall dispatch, whereas great renoume after my death I have.

MOR. It is better to die valiauntly, tha^ to prolong thy life led wickedly.

Undefiled life.
288 Of the Swan and the Crow
THe Raven envied the Swanne for his whiteness, whom with all policy he
endeavored to defile and make black: and because he could not work his will
whiles the Swan waked, he practiced it when she slept. Wherefore he came in a
night the Swanne sleeping on her nest, and with his blackness polluted her and
made her black. When day was up and the Swanne awaked, who saw her self thus
painted, she washed her self continually, till she became fair.

MOR. Who so will be blissed, let him keep him self undefiled.

Undoing him self.
289 Of a Thrush.
A Thrush being caught with birdlime of a fouler, did torment her self,
saying: The pangs of death grieve me not so much, as that my own things are
my destruction: for men say, that birdlime is made of Thrushes doung.

MOR. Then are men most grieved, when their own doings do slay them.

Unequal marriage.
209 Of the Lion and the Mouse.
A Lion sometime caught in a snare, was so entangled: that he could not wind
out himself, whereupon he desired the Mouse to gnawe asunder the ginne,
promising a recompen^e for his good turn. Which thing when the Mouse had
quickly done, he required the Lion to give him his daughter in marriage: the
Lion (to requite his benefactor) granted her unto him When the new married
wife was come unto her Husband, by chance not seeing him, trod on him, and
burst him all to pieces.

MOR. Al marriages and matches unequally made, are not to be allowed.

Unthankfulness.
291 Of River.
A Certain River checked his headspring, as being a standing water, neither
having any fyshes: but him self he highly commended, because he bred goodly
fishes, and pleasantly ran through the valleys. The headspring fretting at the
unthankfulness of the River, ceased his wonted course, whereby the River
wanting both his fishes and his pleasant noise, dried up.

MOR. Some claim as their own, whatsoever they do, robbing God of his honor,
from whom all goodness does proceed.

A wise Ape.
292 Of a Serpent.
A Serpent being overwhelmed with a great stone, desired a man that traueled
yt way, to roll off the burden from him, promising to give him a great treasure
if he would do it. Which when the gentle fellow had done, the Serpent did not
only break his promise, but also said the man was worthy to die. As they thus
strove, it happened that the ape passed that way, who being chosen judge
between them, said: I can not end so great strife between you, except I see
first how the serpent stood under the stone. When the man had laid the st^ne
upon the Serpent, he said: I think that unthankful beast ought to remain
under the stone.

MOR. Unthankful men are worthy of no good turn.

293 Of a man that brake an Image.
A Certain man had a wooden Image, whom he prayed to bestow some benefit on
him, but the more he prayed, the more he lived in poverty: Wherewyth he
being angrye, caught his Image by the legs, and sloong him against a wall,
wherewith his head being broken, great abundance of gold came out, which as
he gathered, he said: thou art froward as I think for whiles I did reverence
thee, thou did me no good, but when thou wast well beaten, thou has^ yielded
much riches.

MOR. A naughty man will do much more good by beating than by honoring him.

294 Of an Ass and a Raven.
AN Ass having a galled back, fed in a meadow, on whom a Raven did sit and
picked at his sore, whereat the Ass brayed and skipped* The horskeeper standing
a far off, laughed thereat* whom as a Wolf passing by espied, he said* Alas,
if we poor wretches should do so much, we should be pursued, but at him they
laugh.

MOR Wicked men only peeping abroad ar^ forthwith known.

295 Of a Dog.
A Certain rich man, much given to hunting, did keep many dogs, whereof one bit
his son that he dyed: Their master being wroth, commanded to slay not only
the man killer, but also all the rest: then said one of them, one has
offended, but all are punished.

MOR. The wickedness of one, often hurts many.

296 Of the Nurse and the Wolf.
A Woman sometime had a child to nursse, whom she thretned to cast to the
wolf excep^ ^e left his crying. It happened that the Wolf ^assing that way,
heard what she said: where^ppon being in good hope, he waited still at the
^oore. The child at length being stilled, fell a ^leepe, the wolf returned
fasting into the couerte with a Flea in his ear. The she Wolf asked ^or his
pray. Mary (quod he sighing) I was decey^ed, a Nurse promised to cast me a boy
that cried, ^ut she did not.

MOR. No credit is to be had in a woman.

297 Of a Woman that wept for her husband.
THere was a young Woman whose husband lay at the point of death, whom with
these ^ords her father comforted, saying: Daughter, ^exe not so much thy
self, for I have provided ^hee a husband, much fayrer than he is, which
shall soon drive away thy longing for this: but ^his woman would not harke^ to
her fathers talk, ^ut blamed him for making mention so hastily: yet when her
husband was dead, she asked her father, weeping, if the young man were near,
which he said should be her husband.

MOR. The love which women have to their husbands soon, wears away, after
they be dead.

298 Of a Woman beaten.
A Certain Woman sore beaten of her husband, feigned her self dead, to make
him afraid, for she hild her breath, and lay with her face upward, not once
stirring: This wise man knowing well the fetches of women, said: The dead
beast must be flayde, and he caught up a knife, and began to flay the skin
from her feet: she perceiving the end of her dissimulation, plucked back her
feet, and straight way arose.

MOR. Women's wyles are practiced in vain against wise men.

299 Of the Widow and the grene Ass.
A Certain Widow being weary of leading a single life, desired to mary, but
she durst not, because she feared the mocking of the people, which reported
evil of those that were twice married: but her godmother showed her by this
policy, how lightly rumors are to be regarded: she commanded her to take the
white Ass she had, and cause him to be painted green, and then to lead him
through every streate, which thing at the first sight was so wondered at, that
not only children, but also old men, moved with this strange Wonder, followed
the Ass, to behold him, which being daily led through the city, they ceased
too wonder at. Then said her godmother, the like shall happen to thee, for if
thou mary, thou shalt for a few days be a byworde to the people, but within
a while after, there shall not be a word spoken of it.

MOR. Nothing is so wonderful, that in continuance of time will not cease to
be wondered at.

300 Of the Raven and the Fox.
A Raven sometime having got his pray, made a great noise in the boughs, whom
the Fox seeing thus rejoice, ran unto her, and said: I greet you with all
my heart, I have often heard reports to be untrue, but now in deed I find
it: ^or as I passed by this way, by chance I espied ^hee in a tree, I am
therefore come unto thee, being ^ffended with report: for they say that thou
art blacker than pitche, but in my sight thou art whiter than snow. In my
judgment thou passest the Swan, thou art fairer than white yuie: If thy voice
were agreeable to thy beauty, I would sooner account thee the Queen of all
birds. The Raven allured with this smoothe tale, prepared him self to sing.
In the mean while, the pray ^ell out of his bill, which the Fox caughte up,
laughing exceedingly, whereof the silly Raven, being ashamed, repented his
folly.

MOR. Eschew vaynglorie, and that venomous sect of Flatterers may easily be
avoided: but if thou covet to be magnified, master Parasite will wait on you
at an inche.

301 Of the Dog and the Sheep.
A Dog brought an action against a Sheep for a loaf of bread which he ought
him, the sheep denied it, whereupon they joined issue, then the Dog brought in
the Kight, the Wolf, and the Raven to bear witness to the debt, who affirmed
it for truth: the Sheep was condemned, whom the Dog caught, and pulled the
skin from his back.

MOR. It is well known, that by false witness many are oppressed and overcome.

302 Of a Dog and a Butcher.
SOmetime a Dog had stolen a piece of flesh from a Butcher in the market,
and straight ran away: the Butcher being cold at the heart with the loss of
the thing, first held his peace: then remembering himself, cried out after him,
saying: O vile thief, for this time run safely, thou go scotfree for thy
swiftness, but hereafter I will watch thee narrowlier.

MOR. The burnt hand fears the fire.

Escaping of dangers hard.
303 Of the Heart and the Oxen.
A Heart being pursued of a hunter, ran into an Ox stall, praying the Oxen to
hide him in the rack: they told him that there was no safe harboring, for both
their master and his servants would come thither: He answered yt he was safe
enough so that they would not bewray him: the servants came in, and mistrusting
nothing to be hid in the hey, departed: the Heart was exceedingly glad, and
feared nothing. Then one of the Oxen older and wiser than the rest, said to
him: It is an easy matter to deceive him that is as blind as a Mole, but if
thou escape our master, which has an hundred eyes, I will warrant thee:
Straight after came in the master to redress his servants negligence, looked
round about, and groping in the rack, felt the horns of the Heart, and
cried out for his servants, who straightway came, took the beast and slew him.

MOR. When one is in peril, it is hard to find a place to hide him in,
either it is that Fortune tosseth the oppressed, or that being afraid, and
uncertain what to do, thorough folly they betray themselves.

Wisdom.
Of the Hare and the Fox.
THe Hare judged him self worthy to be preferred before the Fox, because in
swift running he far passed him: the fox answered, I have a more excellent
wit, whereby I do oftener begyle the Dogs, than thou with thy swiftness.

MOR. Wisdom far passes strength or swiftness.

FINIS.

