CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE TREATY OF MARRIAGE BETWEEN ENGLAND AND SPAIN.
THe essential points thereof seem to be the advantages, and disadvantages of
such an alliance, and whether both weighed in equal balance, the one will not
oversway the other.

The advantages that England may pretend are these.

First, a great Kings daughter.

Secondly, much money.

Thirdly, safety.

Fourthly, continuance of trade.

Fifthly, the bridling of the overgrowing greatness of the States.

Sixthly, the Subjects of Spain will not be se burdensome to England being more
remote, as those of France would be that are nearer neighbors.

Lastly, hindering the Scottish faction for strengthening it self by the
alliance of France, which though it be not publicly taken knowledge of, yet
has his place among the reasons that further the match with Spain.

These and the like benefits and advantages some promise to themselves by
running the course of Spain: but of God or his cause hitherto is made noe
mention at all. And yet unless the Lord build the house, the builders labor
but in vain.

The Answer
The meanest of the household of faith are much greater then those that are
without, for they are borne to a great inheritance: these are their promises.

First God is their God, and with them has he made a covenant: nor ought it to
be forgotten that the house of Spayn is stained with incest in the match with
the last King and his own sisters daughter, which cannot be but very loathsome
to every true Christians heart: and yet to speak according to the world, the
estate of England is great enough of it self match it where it will, as it
has done in times past, and as other great Monarkes have led the way. And the
alliance of France is near, and has no ill aspect upon England, and is as
honorable as that of Spain; that of France will not prove so beneficial, and
so neither so dangerous or prejudicial.

Secondly, money will be soon wasted and melted away, but the price of it will
abide still: and let not any flater themselves, Spayn gives nothing but for
something, and where he gives much he looks for a great return: Examine
well their actions and proceedings and make use of experience: whether can or
ought money to be an essential consideration to sway the weight of so important
an Alliance.

Thirdly, is not England stronger at this time and Spain weaker then
heretofore? where then is any cause of fear? But allow that the state of
England stood in fear of any danger of Spayn? will this alliance secure them?
the fear is idle and the remedy more idle, unless any could make it good that
the love of Spain unto England (the match going forward) would prove the
predominant humor in him, that should sway his ambission, whereof the world
has so much experience to the contrary.

Charles the fifth gave his own sister in marriage to Francis the first: was
Francis ever a whit the safer for such an alliance?

Savoy has married Spaines sister, who nevertheles does what he can to swalow
him up.

France and Spain have lastly made a double match, ler it be examined whether
Spain has labored more to quench or kindle the fire in France; and yet they
are both of one and the same religion.

They err who think there is any thing to be had from a Papist for love
rather then for fear, or that Spain will ever dessist from aspiring to the
universal Monarchy of Christondome, and particularly the recovery of the uuited
provinces: for though he often strike sail and put into the harbor in foul
weather yet does he not neglect to weigh anchour again, and follow his
intended course when the season is fit for it. England does hinder his
designs; and therefore would he match with England to have the fitter passage
for him: and if he were in quiet posession of all the seventeene Provinces,
then would they be made a stable or storehouse for all things necessary, in so
plentiful and well fitted a situation, for the invading the parts near
adjoining, whereof the plots are not new, if England give way unto him, then
(disapointed of their defenses and Bulwarks) they will stand (as it were) at
his mercy and ly open to all manner of batteries: as on the other side if he be
crossed, then will things be but where they were, both for continuance and
assurance against fear of invasion; nay rather in so much the worse terms,
because he shall fail of his expectation, which commonly breeds much harshnes
even amongst the dearest friends. Let not any cast a mist in others eyes:
though Spain had left aside his wonted ambition (which none can sufficiently
assure) yet will he never loose his hope, or relent in his resolution of
recovering the united Provinces, wherein his honor and his reputation are so
deeply interessed: nor can such a great scattered body that has so many irons
in the fire be but continually armed, and still in action to the danger both of
friends and foes, as he shall find his best advantages and oportunities.

If England fear Spain, their safety will rather stand in keeping him at the
staves end then in receaving such an ambitious and new reconciled enemy and
doubtful friend into their bosom, where he shall without blows be able to
do them much more hurt by his daily practice and corrupting of the subjects,
then he can otherwise by open hostility, which he will be wary enough not to
attempt, lest they joining their foarces by sea with those of the united
Provinces, should give him too great a shake. Strange intelligence, and
corespondence with neighbor friends and allies will always prove a safer
refuge for England against Spain. And because all have a common quarrel to his
Ambition and greatness, which in him will never give way to any other
consideration whatsoever: for there has ever been and will still continue in
Spain an endless ambitious desire of the obtaining the western Monarchy
where of a great part of Christendom does yet bear the scarre, and feel
the stripes.

4. Trade will be allowed to continue and as safely without the Alliance of
Marriage as with it: for Spayn does not only reap a benefit by it; but also
will be afraid to scare or discontent England by the evil usage of the
Merchants. Else why have they so basely and abjectly begged a peace: whe^soever
he shall se his opportunity and find a greater advantage to break then to
continue in good terms with England, the Alliance will secure the merchants
no more, then if it were not at all.

5. The states may in time grow great, and their greatness may grow dangerous;
but Spayn is both the one and the other already; and this Alliance will ad much
unto it: there may also grow yealousy and unkindnes and thence open emnity
betwixt England and them, and so on the other side may the matter be so
discreetly carried, as they two may entertain good amity and correspo^dency one
with the other for common defense: for they both profess one religion and
their estate and condition seems to unite them together in a necessity of
putting out their hands one to another for mutual preservation.

Do they carry themselves now unkindly or somewhat unrespectiuly? It does not
so urgently prove that they may become enemies hereafter, as there upon to
ground a necessity of making an Alliance with a known enemy, which were no
other but to run into a present mischief for fear of a future inconvenience.
They take an Allarum at Englands joining with Spayn to their hurt; which though
it be not so meant by England, yet it is the scope that Spayn aims at and that
may make them perhaps somewhat to neglect England, but remove the cause, and
the effect will cease, let them be assured of their freindship and they will
prove respectfull friends: if they prosper and grow great, who knows whether
it be not of God, by such weak means to pull down the loftines of Spayn? and
then to withstand them were to run against a rock: the very first occasion of
their liberty was driving them to despair; which made them to take heart and
resolution to resist the violence that was offered: wherein being incoraged
with good success, and feeling their own strength, they have in time made
such further progress as is this day to be seen: better it were for England
to make use of a necessary evil, and run a course with them whereby they may
have their part in their well speeding, then to join with Spayn (a religion
and state enemy) who Allieth him self to England but for his own ends, and
must needs draw after them the overthrow of the cause of religion and ruin
the state: and will never prove but a secrett Enemy and doubtful friend. And it
must not in this place be forgotten that if true professors be justly reproved
for going to law before heathen Judges, much less may they side themselves
with any of those that are without, to the hinderance and hurt one of an other.

6. If England and France should match together, it does not therefore
consequently follow that the French should become burdensome to the State by
reason of their nearness. The laws of England allow no offices or preferments
of aliens. The french will have more hope in their own Cuntry where there is
without comparison more to be given then in England; the English seek not to
make any fortune in Scotland.

But if the French should be importunate they are also impatient: let them
find Visage de Boys, and your couldnes should wear out their earnestnes.

7. That the French with the Scottish faction may gather strength by the
Alliance of France is but a particular consideration: against which may be
opposed the greatness the Spanish faction will grow unto by a match with Spayn
to the danger of the state: this does greatly lay open the value of such
advantages as England does promise it self by matching with Spain which how
dearly they would notvvithstanding be bought will more perfectly appear, if
knowledge be also taken of the inconveniences and mischeifes that would
follovv: for the better conceiving where of, his ends are to be considered,
and seriously examined; for it is not likely that Spain a Religion and State
Catholic, who has both religion and state quarrels against England, will
yeald to give his Daughter in Marriage to England: nay rather does offer great
sums of money for composing there of; but that he looks for a great return,

Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes.

The price of this Alliance therefore will be the breaking of the match with
France, to the vveakning of both England ane France, whereby he may have the
greater footing in either, and the deviding England from his alices, especially
from the States of the united Porovinces, the making way for an other match
for his second son (whom he has a plot to settle in the lovv Cuntries, and
from thence to promote him (if he can) to the Crown Imperial) with an other
daughter of France, which would give so great an Allarum to the whole state
of those of the religion, if the pretended match with England come not
betvveen, altering in time the state of Religion, whereof if he had no hope,
neither would he harken to the match: for none must think he would treat
such an Alliance without the privacy and consent of his divines, or that they
will give their consents to that but upon great probability that it shall tend
to the furtherance of their catholic faith. The supposed Catholic religion
is known to be in Spain one of the fundamental Laws of their estate: and
no doubt Spain is a very right Romish Catholic, the further therefore that he
spreads his religion, the greater satisfaction it is to his conscience, and
the more does he underprop and increase his greatness, namely because those of
that religion that are most devout, but especially the greatest part of the
Clergy throughout Christendom have their eyes fixed on him, as upon the
greatest stay and pillar of their catholic faith: who therefore if he should
match with an heritique (for so they term us English) but with a settled
purpose by such means to root out heresy, would both vvrong his own
conscience, and loose his reputation amongst all those of his belief, to the
over great vveakning of his estate: which error none of sound judgment that
knovves Spayn, will easily beleve that he will commit.

That a change or tolleration should happen in England by means of the
intended match, is more to be feared then any can vvarrant to be impossible:
vvherin it were well vvorth the labor to find out what hope Spayn does
ground upon, and what possibility there is that the same may be disapoynted;
in the mean time very likely it is in general that there will be no means
unattempted, or left on his side, to bring his purpose to pass. And then it
must in this place be remembered, first that whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
and that sin has no promise of blessing; nor is this a work of faith. And
next that England has but too much experience of Popery, with in these fevv
years, for want of due execution of the Laws; which has bread exceeding
great bouldnes in the papists, asvvell at home as abroad.

If the marriage go forvvard they will take the more heart and greater
encouragement, no small number of subjects want teaching, and so are the more
easily shaken, many waver, and many are newfangled the more prepared for a
change: and therefore will accordingly be wrought upon. The old serpent will
seduce many Eves, and pistols will have free passage every where. The worst is
yet, that there will be party children: for the mother will give herself noe
rest till she have nusled some of them in her own religion, which would make
the way very plain and easy for a change, because the head once corrupted, the
infection will in short time spread it self over the whole body, and true
religion is unsociable to sort it self with false worship, and will soon
forsake his dwelling place.

If Spayn can procure a tolleration of religion (which must needs be follovved
with ruin of the State) he may then assure himself of sides that will
alvvayes be able either directly or indirectly to divert the state from
hindering his designs* as well in the lovv Cuntryes, as wheresoever else,
and although he should not prevayle at the first by practis, or procure a
tolleration of religion, which nevertheless the increacing number of Papists
will of it self in process of time effect, yet when he has once a faction on
foot and that many of the subjects are perverted in religion, he will
notwithstanding be in good hope that the state may be stayed, and hindered from
opposing it self against his designs by the working of his faction and the
ielousy that will be co^ceaved of the Papists within the Relme: and whether his
hopes will fayll him or no, yet if he should upon such ground make any attempt
against those of the united Provinses, that could not but fale out to the great
troble annoyance and danger of the state, especially if he send his forses by
sea; for then must England upon any such occation either rig out there Navy to
sea to se that he keep his course, which will always be a matter of great
burden and charge, or otherwise abide the danger of his landing upon their
own cousts, if he have intelligence with the Papists: wherefore it will be
always safer in such cases to be somewhat jealous then too secure.

Now the Alliance with Spayn will not only scarr and discourage in general,
the vvholl side of those of the religion abroad, to the great vveakning of the
state of England, but also breed a particular ielousy in those of the united
Provinses, when they shall se that Popery increases, or that Spayn has a
faction* or party in the Relme: whereof one of these two mischeives must
consequently follovv, either that they will make their peace with Spayn, or
keep continually many shipes of war in the narrovv seas if they be able to
hold out, especially upon the coming of any supplies by sea to the Artch Duke
during the Truce: which (as they are a people jealous and suspicious enough by
nature) may at one time or other by occationes happening grow to some
dangerous inconvenience: for betvveen two so near neighbors both potent at
sea, if there be not straight amity kept, things cannot long stand without
breaking forth into terms of open hostility. And for the state of those
Provinses, though strong by sea, Alliance, and cituation, yet are not the
foundations of it so far sure that England can with safety leave them to
themselves* for the late sects and questions about matters of religion threaten
their disunion; and Spayn that lies continually in wayt for their liberty has
his pencioners and daily practicers amongst them.

Some do noise much the ancient amity with the house of Burgundy, but that
house is changed and has not kept strok in the conditions of the Alliance, and
so ought the cause to be altered too. It was to weak for France but now it is
too strong, and England had then plots against France which now it has not*

The greatest use of Leagues and Alliances is to prevent present mischeives, or
to further some necessary enterprice: otherwise reason of state and common
experience teaches to sway even with the weaker, for the brideling of the
ambition and greatness of the stronger. They make an idle distinction who to
avoid the objections made against Spayn pretend that marriages are but personal
amongst Preinces and not real: for if there be no reallity, where is then the
good of England? if there be any who is so weak as to think that Spayn will
easily quit his interest in it.

To allege the exampell of Erance that houldeth correspondency still with his
other Allies, and continues to assist them against Sapyn, (notvvithstanding his
match with Spayn) is to as little purpose in the judgment of those who do
also know how much Spayn prevayleth in weakening their sinews, and
frustrating the effect of such assistance.

The sum is, that Spayn hopes by reason of this match so to charm England, as
it shall give way to him in his courses: and England contrariwise promises it
self the honey of the be without danger of being stung: whether of both may
come short of their recconing is at the least disputable. For Spayn on the one
side will spare no travel or charge, will use all the means and practices he
can, and take the benefit of all occasions, and advantages that shall be
offered to bring his purposes to pass: as it may be supposed that England for
his part will stand upon his watch, to prevent a mischeife that shall threaten
the state.

Spayn may (by a vigilant care and good foresight) be disapoynted: so may
England by the contrary be overtaken: for death will wear away these watchmen
that are now, and others may succeed that will not be so watchful: nay
watchfulnes it self overwatched will in time grow drowsy, and overwearied
carefulnes will grow careless.

The very best cautions and caveats must needs relent and wax old in time. In
all strife and contentions as well of the body as the mind, if one side get
ground the other loses it. Time will bring forth many accidents which may
fall out as to the good, so to the hurt of England: who (that may with good
reason be feared) will not be watchful nor have his spirits always intent
enough to prevent the practices of Spayn after so strait Alliance, that cannot
now so much as foresee them, or resolve to keep out Spayn. Whereupon the
question arises whether it be a sound course for England (not constrained by
any urgent necessity) to put the cause of religion, and their own well doing
and safety to so great an adversary, in a matter that stands upon so many
contingents. For it is no new experience that the things which we think almost
impossible, and therefore fear them least, do nevertheless often come to
pass; because neglected, and so not hindered by opposition, they creep
unawares upon us as through the mists of security. Well says the Italian
therefore Quell che non volete che sia non fate cosa per che avuenga.

To conclude, Spayn who of late was thought to decline, weak in the head, and
wounded in reputation by those of the united Provinces; yet having never been
more weakly balanced then at this present, begins now to resume his spirits,
and without timely and strong opposition, will take so deep root, and spread
his branches so far, as to overshadow all his neighbors: and deadly dangerouse
it will be for any one to sleep in such a shade.

Finis.

