AN HARBOROVVE FOR FAITHFVLL AND TRUE SVBIECTES, against the late blown
Blaste, concerning the Government of Women. wherein be confuted all such
reasons as a stranger of late made in that behalf, with a breife exhortation
to OBEDIENCE.

Anno. M.D.lix.

PROVERBES. 32. Many daughters there be, that gather riches to gether: but thou
go above them all. As for favor it is deceitful, and beauty is a vain
thing: but A woman that fears the Lord: she is vvorthie to be praised. Give
her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the
gate *

At Strasborowe the.26. of April.

To the right honorable and his singular good Lords, Francis Earl of Bedford
one of the Queen's Majesty's privy Counsel, and the Lord Robert Duddeley,
master of her highness horse, and knight of the honorable order of the Garter.
Thauth our wissheth many quiet days, the continual fear of God, and earnest
zeal in Christ's quarrel
THE most noble and excellent philosopher Plutark reports (most honorable)
that bulls flesh corrupted and rotten, be engendered Bees, of horse flesh
Harnets, and of men's serpents. Whereby not only appears the great diversity
of natures in the diversities of kinds, but also (which is no small wonder)
how of that which is most made of, and esteemed, is bred the worst and vilest
corruption, of that, which in our cies is the beautifullest work of nature,
springs forth the foulest fruit, that is, or can be found in nature. No
creature in this world is counted more excellent than man: and no monstre in
sight more ouglie, and in nature more hurtful than a serpent, so that we see
that of the fairest, comes the foulest, of the best loved, the most hated, of
the most holso^e the most venomous, and to be short, of the sinest in our cies,
the filthiest in our judgment. Vvherby God gives us to understand, that
mischeuous matter lies often hidden in fair vessels, and no little ill, where we
think to find most good. If this poisoned venim, be in the body of man, to
engender serpents: shall we think that the mind is pure? No certainly. For
though it brings not fourth (being corrupted and rotten with error) serpents,
adders, and snakes: yet be the buds of that tree, either as ill, or much
worse. For like as a man inhabiting a stinking, filthye, and unwholesome house,
situate in a corrupt and unclean air, can not be but subject to that
contagion: so these minds of ours, being lodged in so impure an harborowe,
must neades be defiled with the filthe. Wherefore the Apostle cries out, qui
in carne sunt, deo placere non possunt, so long as we remain in this flesh, we
can not please God. The cause of this corrupcion, no christian is so unskillful,
but he knows it to be the dotage of our first parents, conucied into the
veins of their minds first, and their bodies next by the venomous breath, of
that subtle serpent our ancient ennemy. Whom, while they harkned unto, they
became so charmed and bewitched: that they forgate them selves, forsook God,
and became of his dear sons, his extreme enemies, of his obediente and
loving servant, his wilful and obstinate rebels, and confederats with his
sworn enemy the devil. Here we find the cause, and we daily feel theffect,
in that we be in all things by nature repining at the will of God, ready to
follow the will of the flesh, winsing and kicking against godliness and truth,
and on the other side, ever huntinge for fleshlines and lies. Out of this
corrupted puddle of mas heart, or rather out of this forge and shop of Satan,
where sin is wroughte and shapen: breaks forth among the reaste of
monsters, (which it brings out) the horrible hydras of errors, sects and
heresies wherewith the world has fence the beginning, and to thending shall be
poisoned and infected. Hereof spra^g the curious contencions and soundry sects
of Ethnike Philosophers, as Academians, Peripatetica^s, Stoikes, Epicures,
Cyniks, and all that rabble. Here budded or rather flowed forth the horrible
and most hurtful heresies, hatched by the deuel, in the nest of man's mind, and
uttered by the to^g and pen of busy bodies, sealed up to serve Satan in this
kind of ministry. Such were in our ancettors dais, the Nycolaitans, the
Cerinthians, Arrians, Macedonians, Pelagians, Eutychians, Eunomians, Nestorians
and such other. And in these our latter days, the old festred sores newly
broken out, as the Anabaptists, the freewillers, or rather frowardewillers,
the iusticiaries. etc, and others that be new, as Adiaphoristes, Oserianistes,
Maroranistes, Papists, with infinite other swarms of gods enemies, by whom our
aduersari Satan seeks to disturb the true unity of Christ's church, to choke
the good corn of late sown in gods field, and to dim that excellent light,
which according to his secreate counsel and decree, he determined should shine
to the unspeakable comfort of his elect, in these our dais. Among these vgglie
monsters and brodes of the devils brotherhead, has of late krept out (I cannot
tell whether by will or ignorance) certain (...) which have called into question
among us such things, as good subjects before never doubted of, whether it
were lawful for women, inheritours of kingdoms, to govern and guide the same, or
no. Although this error may appear, not to touch so near the soul and
salvation of man, as some of the fornamed do: yet considering that the quiet of
commonweals is the nurse of religion and bulwark of good and faithful men:
and that the apostle pronounces against the rebellious utter damnacio^: We
can not think it to be a trifle to disturb the common ordres of policies, to
sondre the minds of subjects, by new invented contrauersies, and briefly to
make men to muse, of that they never before mistrusted. Vvherfor chaunsing upon
a book, about a year past, entitled the first blast, co^teining new broched
doctrine to disprove the regiment of women: After I had red it, I wished that
some notable learned man, would have answered it, that, like as those which be
stonge of Scorpians use to fetch remeady of the same: so this cause being
wounded, or rather a little scratted with some show and appara^ce of learning:
might be again healed with such plasters as through the truth of the matter,
true lerning ministers. And for as much as I hoped of this at some men's hands
and hard of one, which is now gone to God, that he had taken it upon him: I meant
not my self for a time to meddle with it, least that a good cause by il
handling, should in the judgment of some seem the worse. But when the length of
time taught me that he that me^t, it was taken from it, and such as could have
thoroughly don it, made no have to it: I thought it better rather by my
sclendre handling of it to show mi good will, tha^ by the common silence to seem
to wink at it. And so much the rather I took it in hand: because if no man
should do it: all our side should seem to bear with it, which I know to be so
far of: that none that I know (I speak of the learned) be further gilty in
this point, than that by there declaration they have not showed the^ selves
giltles. I know the credit, the old proverb has, qui tacet co^se^tire videtur,
he that winketh at a matter, seems to think the same. And therefore as it was
necessary that some on the behalf of al, should utter the minds of the rest, so
meant I, though more boldly the^ wisely, yet not so rashly as necessarily, nor
as I trust more rudely the^ profitably, to let the world understand that this
infectio^ is not blown in by the blast to al men's breasts, yea I dare be bold
to say that all the best learned be of the same judgment herein that this my
simple treatise shall utter me to be of. So that neither our sworn enemies the
papists shall have any longer leisure to belie us, nor our half friends which are
indifferent to be leave any thing of us, hereafter to mistrust us, nor the high
powers the^ selves in this point to fear us. we have learned and taught, we
love and like, we honor and esteem true obedience to the high ministres of God,
and on the contrary we can no skill of seditious disturbers of well satled
policies, of rash unbridled brekers of wholesome and godly laws. Thus me
think I may say in the name of al, because I know the contrary opinion to be
in few or none. Wherefore let our enemies leave of thus to charge us, in that
we deserve not, and our frindes to mistrust us, in that they certainlye know
not, or else they shall be reproved of loud lying, and these of to unfriendly
misiudging. Nolite ante tempus iudicare, judge not before the time, for hasty
judgment seldom hitteth the truth. Now when I had finished this simple
answer: I could find none to whom I might commend these first fruits of my
labors, more mete, or worthier then your honors, both for that you be no les
careful for the quiet of the state, the safety of our soueraign, and the wealth
of the whole realm, than for your own life and preseruacion, but also, that it
has pleased the geuer of all good gifts, to endue you with a sin gulare
favor and desire to advance and promote the true doctrine of Christ's cross,
which of late through the power of darkness, the me^bres of antichrists and
Satan's guard, has not only ben obscured, but clean defaced and was like still
to be if God inspired not the heart of our English Helena, and such as be about
her, to seek out and dig up his sons cross out of the do^ghil of the devils
doctrine, and to rear up again in the eyes of her subjects, to the unspeakable
comfort of al Christ's me^bres and the wonderful co^fusio^ of thaduersaries. In
the doing where of no man douteth, but that you both with a few other have and
will be ernest, hearty, and faithful laborers. And as this heavenly gift and godly
zele is common to you both: so has almighty God suffered you both to taste of the
bitter cup of affliction and adversity, (though the one more the^ the other: yet
both sufficiently) thereby teaching you plainly by practice that which is
hardlye gotten by science, that he is hable to throw down and set up, to
wound and to cure, to mar and to make, to kill, and to revive, and shortly
to do all that he lysteth without us, and we nothing neither to him, our
selves, nor other without him. Afflictio dat intellectu^ says David.
Affliction brings understanding, both how unable we be to crepe out, and
how ready he is to deliver. In this schole have you both ben exercised and have
atteined to like knowledge to understand, ad not unlike zeal to maintain,
Christ naked on his cross, the true doctrine of salvation, whereof he has now
made you shieldes of defense. Seeing he has thus ioigned you in these points
and others: I thought good with your favors, to match you in the defense of
this little work, which I have for none other respect at this time set out, tha^
to stop the mouths of some to lauase in language, and to quiet the minds of
other some, which for lack of skill, have begone to stagger. That it may please
you to grant your good will herein, crave not I, but your country, not your
country, but the truth, not the truth, but God (whose choice and decree is
hear defended) your readiness to receive that is offered, and your authority to
shield that is written. Take upon you therefore the defense of this pore
treatise, which is the defense of them, by whom we be defended all. Many
grave and sore ce^sures I am sure it must abide: but my trust is that such as
shall sinde fault, will either reprehend charitably or set out a better
spedelye. Thus am I bold to trouble your Lordshippes both with my long letter,
and my simple trauail, trusting that you will take in good part that is hear
offered you of one that honors your virtues, owes you his service, and
dailye prays to God for you. Who grant you both to be constant in his
truth, to continue in his fear, and to increase in much honor to his glory,
and your countries commodity. Amen.

FAITHFVLL SVBIECTES.
LIKE as sick or feeble bodies cannot abide any great panges or fittes, or old
cracked ships any great waves or vvindes: so distur bed and may med common
wealths are sone ouerturned and cast under foot, by soden and straung
mutations. Seeing therefore that by frovvning fortune, and Gods wrath, for
thoffences of thinabitantes, England is of late both in honor and
possessions, not a little may med, Yea, taking a fall through the negligence of
the Nurce half made a creple: It is necessary for all good men, and the duty
of all faithful Subjects, to have an eye to it, that it run not upon the
rocks, and make shipp vvrake. And as in great Cities, great head is given,
that neither by negligence of the Citezins, nor malice of evil vvillers, it be
consumed by fire, or hurt by any other casualtie: So in common vvelthes must it
be provided, that no fire brandes of Sedicion be cast into the houses of men's
hearts, to impair thobedience of good Subjects, to kindle the hearts of the
froward, and to destroy honest, godly, and comely order. For man's nature being
such, as it can hardly be brought to stupe, and easily stirred up to disturb:
All occasions must be cut of, vvherby the evil may be enco raged to cast of
the yocke of obedience, and the simple brought into doubt what they ought to
follow. Happening therefore not long agone to read a little book strangely
written by a Stranger, to prove that the rule of Women is out of Rule, and
not in a common wealth tolerable: And vvaying at the first what harm might
come of it, and felyng at the last that it has not a little vvounded the
conscience of some simple, and almost cracked the duty of true Obedience: I
thought it more then necessary to lay before men's eyes the untruth of the
argument, the vvekenes of the proufes, and the absurdity of the whole. In the
siftyng vvherof, I mind to use such modesty: that it shall appear to all
indifferent men, that I seek to defend the cause, and not to deface the man,
Seeing this error rose not of malice but of zele: and by loking more to the
present cruelty, that the^ was used: then to the inconvenience that after
might follovv. VVherin surely his doing is somvvhat to be pardoned: considering
the grief that like a good member of that body which then suffered, he selte
to his great sorrow and trouble. For lvke as the eye being full of tears, is
the more unable to se: So is the mind full of sorrow much the les hable to
judge. As we se in Euripides Polymnestor being for his mordring of Polidorus
extremeli punished of Hecuba and other vveme^ (who pricked out his eyes with
pins) cries out not only again them that hurt him, Eurip. in Hecu.
but against the whole sex that never came nere him. And in Hippolitus who
for the faut of his Stepdame Phedra, Idem in Hipp.
cursseth the whole kind. So this Author seeing the torments of Martyrs, the
murdrynge of goodmen, Thimprissonment of Innocents, The racking of the
gyltles, The banishyng of Christ, The receiving of Antechriste, the spoiling of
subjects, The mayntenaunce of strangers, The moving of vvarres, The loss of
Englandes honor, the purchasing of hatred, where we had love, the procuring
of trouble where we had peax, The spending of treasure where it was
nedeles, and to be short all out of joint: He could not but mislike that
regiment from whence such fruits did spring. Only in this he was not to be
excused (onles he allege ignorance) that he svvarued from the (...) to the
(...) that is from the particular question to the general, as though all the
government of the whole Sex were against nature, Reason, Right, and Law:
because that the present state then through the fault of the person, and not
of the Sex, was unnatural, unreasonable, unjust, and unlawful. If he had
kept him in that particular person: he could have said nothing to much, nor in
such wise, as could have offended any indifferent man. And this again would
have been considered: that if the question were to be handled, yet was it not
mete to bring it into doubt at that time, when it could not, nor yet can be,
redressed (were it never so evil,) without manifest and violent vvro^g of
the^ that be in place. For if it were unlawful (as he will have it) that that
Sex should govern: yet is it not unlawful that they should enherit, as
hereafter we shall prove. And in this point their enheritau^ce is so lynked
with the empire: that you ca^ not pluck from them the one without robbing the^
of the other. This doubt might better have been moved when the Scepter was or
shall be in the hand of the male. And so if it were found evil (as I am
persuaded it shall never be) it might without the vvronging of any be
reformed. But now being stably shed by law, confirmed by custom, and
ratefied by common consent of all the orders in the Realm: It can be no
equity to take it from them, nor any color of honesty or godliness to move
any plea against them. If nature has given it them by birth: how dare we
pulle it from them by violence? if God have called the^ to it either to save or
to spille: why should we repine at that which is Gods vvyland order? ar we
vyser the^ he in bestovving it: or so bold to alter that he purpose should
come of it? if he hable women: shall we unable them? We may not vvithsta^de
god
if he meant not they should ministre: he could have provided other, Therefore
the safest way is, to let him do his will, which can do best, which can
see plainly that vvil follow it, where we blyndly guess and do but grope at
it. Prove. 6.
Per me Reges regunt says vvisdome in the person of God, by him reign they
and not by us. It is his appointment and not ours, for though we sometime have
the election to choose or refuse this person or that (as it is in some common
vvelthes) yet because we be not our own but his: nor have our hearts in our
hands to ordein what we list, but must as wax yield to his vvurkinge:
Therefore it is more agreeable to duty, and a great deal less icopardic, to
honor his choice, rather the^ to prefer our own. Places he a woman vveake
in nature, feable in body, soft in courage, unskillful in practice, not
terrible to the enemy, no Shilde to the stynde, well, Virtus mea (says he) In
infirmitate pficitur. My strength is most perfight when you be most vveake,
if he join to his strength: 2. Cor. 12.
she can not be vveake. If he put to his hand she can not be seable, if he be
with her who can stand against her? Thou shall not take with the any great
power (says he to Gedeon) lest you think to overcome your enemies by your
own strength, and provves, Iud. 17.
and not by my vvurking and might. It is as easy for him to save by sevve as by
many, by vveake as by strong, by a woman as by a man. Iud. 5.
Yea his most vvo^derfull works are alvvayes wrought in our most
weakness, as infinite examples and testimonies do shevve. Yet mean I not to
bar policy: when without breatch of Gods ordinance it may have place,
Policy gods gift.
for pollycie is Gods gift either given man immediately of God, or gotten by
study, experience, and practice, or vvo^ne by quickness of wit. But when God
chooses him self by sending to aching, whose succession is ruled by
enheritaunce and lyneall descent, no heirs male: It is a plain argument, that
for some secret purpose he myndeth the female should reign and govern, God
wor keth in weakness.
if we consider the works of God: we shall find throughout the whole
scripture: that where was least help of man or any vvorldly means: there
wrought he greatest wonders and brought things to a most happy end. Genesis 1.
In the making and framing of the heaven the earth and all that in them is
contained, who put to his hand to help? what felovve had he to so excellent
a work? did he it not himself without any tovvardnes of matter, any help of
any means, either of angels or man? And that most bevvtifull and excellent
image of him self man, did he not shape him self of a most unmeet matter, a
piece of earth, a thing of naught, how so ever Galene folishly derideth it,
Galen de vsu partiu^
saying that nature chose the metest matter for every work? Preseruid he not
mankind, and the state of al other living creatures, by one ship? vvherin if
a man vvil search by reason and not by Gods omnipotency, Genesis 7.8.
how one vessel could hold so many couples of beasts, fowls, worms.
etc. And if it could: how so many strange, diverse, and contrary natures
should agree together pynned up in one corner: it shall appear not only
vvonderfull but also inpossible. What help was in a sort of pore men,
compassed about with enemies, mountains, Exodus 14.
and seas: to make the water contrary to nature to leave his course, and as it
were with a certain choice and judgment to give passage and safety to the
stressed, and confusion and destruction to the proud prince and his company?
Number. 20. Exodus 17. Psalm. 77.15.104.
he forsed the hard rock to yield water, as a most ple^tiful well, at the
tycke of a vvande. He saved his people by the hand of a woman poor Deborah.
He advanced them and ouerthrevve the enemies by a poor shepherde and his
sling. Iud. 5.
He cut of the head of the proud captain Olophernes by the hand of avveake
woman. Sam. 17.
It was, Judith. 13.
in reason a poor help to Sampsons strength, Iud. 16.
a number of hears growing upon his head, or an Asses iavve bone in his hand,
to destroy so many enemies and bring the people to liberty. Iud. 15.
The breaking of.300. earthen pottes, Iud. 20.
was a sclender pollycie to make so many Myriades to flee and one to kille
another. And to come to the greatest of al: it seemed to the eye of the world,
and the vvisdome of the flesh, very unlike: that a poor abject condemned for
a traitor hanged among thefes upon a cross most vylie, Math. 24.
gronyng and morning at the panges of death: should rob Satan of his
kingdom, restore man to the favor of God, vvynne the victory of death, and
make a conquest of hell and sin. This considered in it self and not taught by
the spirit inwardly: made the Jews to count it madness and the Greeks mere
folishnes. 1. Cor. (...)
What should I say of the means, whereby as by conduites this water of
liyfe, this doctrine of Gods son, was carried about the whole world,
against all reason and pollycie, by idiotes to confound the learned, by
symplicite all the vvisdome of the world, by fysshers, the fine Philosophers,
the proud Pharisees, the mighty princes and monarkes of the earth. And to come
to our days when the light of this Gospel was put out, Luther.
and Antechrist ruled and reveled in the temple of God (which is men's hearts
and conscience) armed and guarded with the power of Emperors, Sledanus.
Kings, Princes, and Laws: beyond all men's expectations, contrary to hope, a
poor friar, one man, at that time not the best learned, through the mighty
hand of God according to his unsearchable decree was able not with svvoorde
and armor, not with bands of men and power, not with favor of princes and
prelates, not with any help of man, or favor of the world: to set up the
cross of Christ, to pull down the chair of Antechriste, to restore Gods
word, to banyshe the deuels Sophistry, to make of darkness light, of lies
truth, of plain folyshnes, true vvisdome, and as it were an other Helena
to find out the cross of Christ hidden in the dungeon of deuelishe doctrine,
Eccle. hist. li. 10. ca. 7.
covered with the rotten bones of Romy she Martirs, sinful Saints, and
co^tersaited Confessores. And as we began with the matter of women so to
return thither again with the example of a woman. Queen Anne the instrument
of reuiuig the gospel King Henry.
Was not Queen Anne the mother of this blessed woman, the chief, first, and
only cause of bany shing the beast of Rome, with all his beggarly baggage?
was there ever in England a greater feate wrought by any man: then this was
by a woman? I take not from king Henry the due praise of broching it, nor from
that lamb of God king Edward, the finishing and perfighting of that was
begone, King Edward.
though I give her, her due co^mendacion. I know that that blessid martyr of
God Thomas Cranmer Bishop of Canterbury, The Bishop of Canterbury.
did much travail in it, and furthered it: but if God had not given Queen Anne
favor in the sight of the king, as he gave to Hester in the sight of
Nabucadnezar: Hama^ and his company, The Cardinal, VVynchester, More, Rochest.
and other would sone have trised up Mardocheus with all the rest that leaned to
that side. Wherefore though many deserved much praise for the helping
forwards of it: yet the croppe and root was the Queen, God works often by
contraries.
which God had endevved with vvisdome that she could, and given her the
mind that she would do it. Seeing then that in all ages God has vvroughte his
most vvonderfull works, by most base means: and shevved his strength by
weakness, his vvisdome by folyshnes, and his exceeding greatness by man's
exceeding feebleness: What doubt we of his power, when we lack pollycie, or
mistrust his help which has wrought such vvounders? Who is placed above
him says Job: Job. 36.
to teach him what he should do? Or who can say to him, thou have not don
justly? He sends a vvoma^ by birth, we may not refuse her by violence. He
stablissheth her by law, we may not remove her by wrong. He makes her a
head, we may not make her a hand or foot. Nunquid contendere cum deo est
eruditio (says Job) is it vvysdome to comptrolle Gods doings, or to break
that he has made, Job. 39.
or to pulle down that he has set up? If we vveye our own vvisdome what
folishnes it is, and considre our own pollycie how feable it is, we shall
sone leave this quarrel and yield our selves to his will. The children of
Isreal's pollycie was to have a king, 1 Samuel 8.
a iolie fellow to rule them with pomp as other nations had, and not a
poor Prophet for that was to base. I doubt not, they had these
consideracions that our polytikes have. He must be a man of courage that the
foreign enemy may fear him, to maynteine that we have, and recover that we
lost, to be with his souldiars abroad, and sit with his counsel at home:
But what followed this their godly pollycie? Marry, non reiecerunt te sed me
dicit dominus. They would not have the Prophet appointed them by God, as these
men will not have a woman ordained by nature. Therefore they had akyng at
their own asking to their own undoing. If an Ape should take upon him to
comptrolle a man, Man gods ape.
he would not suffer it, though it can somewhat countrefayte men's doing: No more
will God be taught or corrected by man, though he have a shadow of his
similitude. But lest this author should think that I make to long a flory she
before I come to hand strokes with him, as an evil fenced man, that can make a
better brag of his cunning, then when need is, use it: I mind before I say
any more of this matter, to buckle with him in his arguments, and to try what
blows he gives. VVherin if I follow not the order that he kepith leaf by
leaf, and reason by reason, which I avoid, because he follows no method:
Yet I trust so to hit the pithe of it, that all such as be indifferent shall
think him fully answered, and he him self with the boulting out of the
truth not offendid. For I have that opinion of the man's honesty and godlynes:
that he will not disdain to hear better reasons, nor be loath to be taught in
any thing he misseth: Man may sone err.
Knowing that no man's judgment is so sound, no man's wit so ripe, nor no
man's learning so perfight: but he may sumty me miss the quissy on and fall
into error. For as it is Gods peculyar property never to err: so it is a
botche in man's nature seldom to hit the treuth, as we see in all the sects of
Philosophers, Both philosophers and divines err.
Stoickes, Academikes, Paripatecians, Epicures, and all other, which lackyng
neither wit, learning, nor diligence, yet came as nere the truth as
darkness to light, and error to truth. Yea not only they: but many ancient
Fathers, (yea I might say all) not being utterly without Gods spirit: Yet
were not always without their errors as Augustine who humbly confesses it.
Hierom, Ambrose, and Origene, with the rest who can not deny it Hominis est
(says Cicero) errare labi, falli and decipi. No man can warraunt him self,
Cic. in off.
but that he shall some time swerue, and think he sees when in deed he is
blind. (...) is man therefore I doubt not will patiently hear, what may truly
be said against him, Specially saying that this attempt is not so much to
reprove him, as to prove the matter, and to satisfy tender minds, which by
probable reasons are soon wounded, and onles they hear the countrary not so
soon healed. I shall in this treatise pass over al bie matters as of Wyatt,
the Duke of Suffolk, the tyranny of such as then governed, the decay of the
Realm, and all such other appendixes which were rather ornaments to deck
then reasons to prove the cause: and will only turn the arguments out of
their cloutes and consider them as they be in them selves, A similitude.
and not as they be set out with colors. For like as a man that would bye an
house, will not so much weye the gaye Payntinge, as the suer building: So
who will judge of any matter truly: must lay it before his eyes nakedly.

1 The arguments as I remember, be these, The arguments.
not many in number, but handsomlye amplified. First that what so ever is
against nature the same in a common wealth is not tolerable, but the
government of a vvoma^ is against nature. Ergo it is not tolerable.

The second, what so ever is forbidden by scripture is not lavvfull. But a
woman to rule is forbidden by scripture. Ergo it is not lavvfull.

The third, if a woman may not speak in the congregation: much less she may
rule. But she may not speak in the co^gregacio^, ergo she may not rule.

The fourth, what the civil law forbids, that is not lavvfull: but the
rule of a woman the Civil law forbids, ergo it is not lavvfull.

The fifth, seeing therfolovveth more inconuenie^ce of the rule of vvome^ then of
men's government: therefore it is not to be borne in a common wealth.

The last, the Doctors and Canonistes forbid it, ergo it can not be good.
These (as I remember) be the Proppes that hold up this matter, or rather the
pikaxes to under mind the state. This is the cannon shot to batter the wales
of them perial seat, and to beat the crown of the true heirs head. The
blast was blovven out of season.
It is a sore enterprise to alter so ancient an order, and to change laws
of such antiquite, specially at such time as the realm is full of trouble,
men's minds otherwise disquieted, and the foreign enemies gaping for occasion
to invade and ouerrenne us: Zalencus counsel was, Zalencus law.
that who so ever would attempt to persuade the people to break old laws
and make nevve: should stand with his neck in the halter, that if he proved
it not necessary: he might be knit up by and by. And if he could prove them:
he should be set at liberty. And the Garamants in like manner appointed it
death, to alter any one of those laws, The Gara mantes.
that were made. This they appointed in their common vvelths because they
co^sidred that the breach of good laws, was the breakeneck of the country.
And shall we think it a light matter to alter a state, to pluck the chief
magistrate out of her throne, and give scope to light heads, to descant upon
their duty, according to their fancy? I would have vviss head that it had
been undone, or now it is done: that the doer would for the quyetinge of
vveake minds acknovvledge his error. But whether he does or no, I doubt not
by that time we have unfolded his arguments, seen through his whole
shop, and perused his vvares, the good subjects shall both think them not
saleable, and be satissied, and the mouths of busy bodies stopped. And as this
is don upon good conscience, and not to curry favor: so I pray God to give it
foisen in the hearts of true subjects. Well, now to the first argument: To the
first argument.
You say in your minor that the rule of a woman is against nature, because the
woman is by nature vveake, unskillful, and subject to the man. etc Well,
befoore I answer to these, we must se what is meant by this word nature,
What is nature.
how far it stretches, how it must be taken in this proposition, and then
how the rule of a woman may agree or not agree with it. Nature is nothing
else but a general disposition ingraft of God in all creatures, for the
preservation of the whole, and of ever ikind, or as Seneca says. Sen. de benef.
Quid aliud est natura quam deus et diuina ratio toti mundo vniuersisque eius
partibus inferta. Nature is nothing else but God him self, or a divine order
spread throughout the whole world, and ingrafte in every part of it, as in all
fire to be hot, all water moiste, all heavy things to move downward, al light
things up ward. The son and the moon to run their course, motu circulari.
etc. which are so set orders in the substance of every creature: as it must
needs follow that natural disposition, onles it pleseth the creator (who is the
Lord of all) to alter those properties which he has given them by nature, as
when he made of the moving water a standing wall, and the fire so to lose his
operacion: that it consumed not the bodies of the three young men that were
cast into it, and such like, Ex. 14. Dani. 3.
all which deeds be wonders and miracles, and not the work, but the
impedimente of nature. Now if this has so been ingrafted in the nature of al
men, that no woman should govern, but all women should be subjects: then
were there no more to be said, the matter were ended. But because we see by
many examples, that by the wholle consent of nacyons, by the ordinance of God,
and order of law, women have reigned and those not a few, and as it was
thought not against nature: Therefore it can not be said, that by a
general disposition of nature, it has been, and is denied them to rule. But
let us here consider, whether it be in a woman against nature to rule, as it
is in a stone to move upward, or in the fire not to consume. In the stone or
in the fire is no manner of aptness, either for the one to go upward, or the
other to preserve and not destroy; and neither can be done in either, without
violence and outward force: But in a woman is wit, understanding, and as
Aristotle says the same virtues that be in a man, 3. Polit.
sauinge that they differ. Secundum maius et minus, that is, moore in the man
then in the woman. There is the same shape, the same language, and sometime
more gifts in them, Artemisia Just. li. 2.
then in the man, as was in Artemisia (as Iustine reports) more prowes and
wit to rule the army, then in the great Monarke Xerxes. Only we can pull from
them that they be not strong of body, or commonly so courageous in mind,
grant that it is so: must they therefore be utterly unmeet to rule: nay if you
said vnmeter, then men: we would not much wrestle with you. For as Aristotle
says the man's rule is (...) that is more mete to rule. But to reason thus
women be not so mete as men, Ergo, it is against nature: is an evil
consequent. King Edward for his years and tenderness of age was not so mete
to rule, as was his father King Henrye: yet was it not against nature, onles
you pronounce of him as Story both vnlearnedlye and impudentlye said Ve
terrae illi cuius puer rex est. Story.
Unhappy is the realm that has a child to their King, as though this
word child were not there a Metaphor, but take an elder. Cambises was not so
mete to rule as his father. Cyrus: for he was a dronkard and cruel. Ergo his
rule was unnatural. It is a fallax a vitio consequentis. If it were unnatural
for a woman to rule, because she lacks a man's strength. Then old Kings
which be most mete to rule for wit and experience, because they lack
strength, should be unmeet for the feebleness of the bodi. Yea say you, God has
appointed her to be subject to her husband. Ad virum erit conuersio tua,
therefore she may not be the head. (...) 3.
I grant that, so far as pertains to the bands of marriage, and the
office of a wife, she must be a subject: but as a Magistrate she may be her
husbands head. For the Scripture says not. Thine eye must be to the man, but
ad virum tuum to thy husband. Neither owes every woman obedience to every
man, but to her own husband. Well, if she be her husbands subject she can
be no ruler. That follovveth not, for the child is the fathers subject, and
the Father the childs ruler, and as Aristotle says (whom you so much
urge) his rule is (...) that is kynglike over his child. But the husbands is
(...) that is civil, then if the child by nature a subject, may be by law
a head, yea the head of his father, and his father his subject: Why may
not the woman be the husbands inferior in matters of wedlock, and his head
in the guiding of the common wealth. Lyuie reports how Quintus fabius Max:
cominge from Rome to his Son in the war, Liu. li. 4.3 dec.
came riding thoroughe all the Sergeants and officers, vviche for the reverence
they bare to him, boothe for his honor and age, and that he was the consuls
father: gave him room, till at the last his Son the consul bad thofficer
stay him, vvhereat the old man alighted, and doing his duty to his son,
say de: I meant to try son, whether you knevv what belo^ged to the maiesti
of your office, vvherbi vvese that the father, which by nature was the sons
head, is now by order of polly cie his subiectt, and yet is not this rule in
the son unnatural. Object.
But you will say there is an aptnes in the son to rule, but the woman is
ordained to obey, and clean exempt from superiority. That I deny. Answer.
For both nature and Gods word gives her a kind of superiority by express
words, not only over beasts, and al creaturs jointly with Adam: Genesis 2.
but also over men and reasonable creatures. 1. Tim. 3.
Saint Paul speaking of young vvy dovves says let them mary, tend their
business, and rule the house (...). No man I am sure, will deny but that the
government in the house is a kind of superiorite and that over men: Onles you
will as the Buoi did, that the men shall rule the men, and the vviues the
women, or you will apoynte them such famylies as shall have no men in them.
If then they may govern men in the house by saint Paul's commission, and an
household is a little common wealth, as Socrates in Xenophon says. Then I can
not see how you can debar them of all rule, Xenopho^ in dict. and fact.
or conclude that to be heads of men is against nature. Which if you grant,
is enough for the disprouing of your minor. If you put to and say in a common
vvelthe: yet it vvil not scrue, for the proof of that is, by cause (say you)
she is the man's subject. I have shevved how, in that she is his wise, not in
that she is a vvoma^. For as you see, she may be some man's head as in her
household. But while you take this word nature to largely, you deceive
yourself vvy ttingly. thinking that because it is not so convenient, so
profitable, or mete, therefore it is unnatural. But that is to large a Scope.
Against nature diversely understand.
Wherefore that we may understand how far you stretche this word nature.
I will axe you whether you take it, as it is (...) that is, for the most
part: or all together (...) that is universal. If you take it as it is in the
order of nature, for the most part: As it is natural for an old man to have
white heeres in his age, or for a woman to bring forth one child at a
burden: and then reason, it is against nature for an old man to have black
here is, or a against nature for a woman to bring forth two children or three
at a burden: no man would allow your reasonyng. For though the one be
according to nature, as it is for the most part: yet is not the other, that
happens some time, utterly against nature. In like manner, though it be for
the most part seen, that men and not women do rule common welthes: Yet
when it happens sum time by the ordinance of God, and course of
enheritaunce, that they bear rule: it is not to be concluded, that it
repungneth against nature: no more then the old man's black heeres, or the
vvomans two twynnes. So that you see, that in this acception of nature, their
rule can not be against nature. On the other side, if you take it in a
generalite, as when so ever the stoone moves vpvvarde, it is violent, and
against nature: or when so ever the fire consumes not the matter that is put
to it: then are you further vvyde. For it chaunseth not seldom but often, not
in one country, but in many, not among the barbarous, but in the chefest
Empires, and Monarchies, and not only in them, but in the common wealth of the
Jews, more then ones or tvvyse, that women being inheritours, have ruled
after their parents, wives after their husbands: and Systers after their
brethren, as I shall at large declare. But before I come to that point, I must
vvade a little further with him in his argument of nature. Wherefore, I reason
against him thus: To preser ue common vvealths is not against nature.
what so ever preserves common wealths, and destroys them not: is not
against nature, but the rule of women has prese rued common wealths, ergo,
it is not against nature. The mayor is plain, for it is most natural to
preserve and maynteine the societe of men, seeing man and cities, which
consiste upon the company of men, be the chiefest work of God by nature,
for all other things, be prepared for that, as the chief end: That men
lyuinge together in a cyuill company, may peaceably, and quietly honor GOD
the author, and preserver of that society: So that there is no doubt of the
mayor. For the minor, which is that the rule of women preserves common
wealths, it must be proved by histories. Which I trust to make so
manifest, that not only the matter shall be out of controversy: But also that
men of indifferent judgment shall see playnlie, that this man fell chiefly
into this error, either by cause he red not, or conferred not thauncient
histories, which record this matter: I shall therefore not only out of the
Histories of the people of GOD the Jews, but also out of the Ethnikes and
Christian Stories prove, that in alages, in many countries, and under every
monarck, women have not only ruled, Many countries have been well governed by
vvome^
but happily and well: yea (which is a great matter) cmong those that in that
sex bare rule, you shall find none or very few, in whose reign their
country was the worse for their government, but much the better. Where of
the contrary, how many misfortunes, ouerthrovves, chaunges, and translations
of monarchies, have happened under the regiment of men: it is hard to number,
and impossible to declare. But hereby I mean not either to prefer or match
this sexes government with the ma^s. (For I count it in deed the more
convenient) only my meaning is to show that such kind of regiment, is not so
heinous, and intolerable, or in any wise euel, as this man makes it. Deborah
shall march in the first rank and have the first place both for thantiquite of
the time, Deborah.
the authority of the story, and the happy success of her reign. Deborah
(says the scripture) judged the people of Israel, Iud. 5.
and the people resorteth unto her, she delivered them out of thraldom, and
set them at liberty. In this vvomans doings is playnlie set out that she both
governed in peace and in war, and so did consequently all that any ruler by
civil authorite might, or is wont to do. She judged says the scripture and
she sent Barake to the war, who being of less courage or less zeal then
she was, refused to goo onles she went with him. And when they came to
encounter with their enemies, if she had not been: both Barake, and al his
soldiers, like vvite lyuered warriars had given back a^nd marred all. This
woman is counted of some of the Hebrews to be Barakes wife, and yet sent she
him to the war, gave him his commission and made him the general, whereby
apeareth that to be true, which we said before: that a woman as a wife must be
at commauudement, but a woman as a magistrate may lawfullye command, but this
example the blast blows away as a peculier example, and extraordynarie,
because we find no more the like in the Scripture, but that is no sound
reason, it is but once in the Bible: Ergo it is no suffient example? we read
not in the scripture more then once or twice that a child reigned, therefore
shall it follow that a childs reign is not by that example stablished? We
find not in the scipture that the Apostles were baptized, and yet we thinck
they were. We read but once in the scripture, that Peter checked a Magistrate,
and yet some there be that dare affirm, and write books of it, that it is not
only lawful to check, but to kill an evil Magistrate. But that you may see
that women reigned in Judah ofter, the^ at one time, though it be not
conteigned in the Bible: I shall prove out of Josephus a Jew born, writing the
Jewish history, that diverse beside this woman, governed. Johannes, ruler of the
Jews. 470. years, after the captivity of Babylon, at his death left his
wife Queen and gouernes, who ruled as it apereth rightwel, until thambition of
her son contrary to his fathers order, troubled her government: for at the
last as a wicked graft, Iosep. li. 1. de capt.
he conspired against her, and pined her in prison unto death.

Not long after, Joseph li. pri. Egesip. lib pri. cap. 12
Aristobulus being ruler of Iewrye at his death, left his wife Queen, to
govern in his place: under whose government, the land was in quiet. And
after, she crowned Alexander her husbands brother, (whom Aristobulus had
imprisoned) and gave over her title to him. Whereby it do the appear, that
she did not only govern, but had also authority to place a King. This
Alexander, dyinge left Alexandra his wife, Alexandra.
Queen of the Country: who used such mercy and modesty toward her people,
that she kept them in peax, and wanne their good will, which her husband
through his cruelty, rigor, and unmercifulness, had utterly lost. She
is much commended in the stories, for her good and pollitike government, not
only in kepinge that was left her, but also for encreasinge it, until the
church men, the Pharisees, and Priests abusinge her pitye, and devout
mind, gatte authority to empry son, murder, and kill whom they listed. Not
much unlike in this point to the late Queen Mary, who bearinge, and wearing,
Queen Mary.
a woman's heart, could not (I think) have used such rigor and extremity,
in impry soning, banishinge, rackinge, hanginge, dravving, hedding, burninge,
flesinge, and fleainge withal manner of extremity, not sparinge her own
blood, no not her natural sister: Onles she had been so bewitched, and endoted
by her Cardinal, Bishops, and Churchmen, of whom, some be gone before her,
to taste of those rewards which she and they by such extremity deserved:
And those that remain must follow, onles they wash away the spots of
blood that hang upon their Rachets, with fluds of tears of repentance. Oh
they may thanck God, The Prelates have time of repentance.
that they have this time to brethe them, and bethink them of their naughty,
and hellishe cruelty, and to call daily, and hovverly, for pardon, and
forgeuenes, for let them think that if they be not punyshed in this life: nor
repent: God accompteth their deeds so vile, and the faults so heinous: that no
temporal pains be enough, for such offenses, and therefore reserueth them to
eternal damnacio^. Oh hovvld and vvail you priests and prelates, not for the
danger you stand in, of losing your bishopriks and benefices, Note you
Prelates.
your po^p and your pride: your dignities and honors, your riches and wealth:
but for that hell has opened his mouth vvide, and gapeth to svvallovve you,
for the shedding of so much innocent blud, for the murdring of so many martirs,
and spoiling Christ's church, of so many glistering, and glorious ornaments,
commended of al men for learning, and disco^mended of none for their living.
But to return to my storye, The Queen deceived by her church men.
this Queen Alexa^dra was so inuegled of the church me^: that (as Josephus
says) she ruled other, and the Pharisees her. It is an easy matter for them
that be of devout minds, and godly dispositio^s, to be brought into error by
those, whom they think to be godly. And therefore that common wealth is hapy
(says Plato) whose gouerner is a philosopher, or a Philosopher their
gouerner, when princes be learned the^ selfs: Learning in princes.
they shall not hang alone upon the mouths of the prelates, but judge the^
selfs how true it is they teach, that they may say with the Samaritanes:
woman, we do not believe it, because thou say est it, but because we have seen
our selves. Ioh. 4.
What should we say of the Queen of Saba, whom Christ with his own mouth
commends for her desire to hear Salomons wisdom, and calls her by the name
of Queen. 1. Reg. 10. Luc. 11.
If she had unlawfully, and against nature usurped that authority: surely he
would as well have found fault with her unlawful rule, as he commended her
dilligent trauail. But Christ knowing the bounds of his office, would not meddle
with externe pollycies, tra^slating of realms, Luc. 12.
and depriving of true inheritors: No, when he was desired to be arbiter
betwixt two brethern he axed not how the pleastode, but who made him an
officer. Divines (me think) should by this example not give them selves to
much the bridle, Spiritual me^ should not meddle with policies.
and to large a Scope, to meddle to far with matters of policy, as this is,
whereupon depends either the welfare or ilfare of the whole realm. If those.
ii. offices, I mean Ecclesiastical and Civil, be so iumbled together, as it
may be lawful for both parties to meddle in both functions: there can be no
quiet, nor any well ordered commonwealth. But because this argument requires a
long treatise, I leave it and go forward with my matter. I pass over here the
sister of Antigonus and Salome, The sister of Antigonus. Salome.
the sister of Herod, of the which one was Queen of Hircania, and tho there
appointed by Augustus Caesar to rule over Iammam, Azotum, Phasalidem, and
Astaloniam, and the same regiments she after left to Iulia Tiberius mothera^d
Augustus wife. Joseph. 1. li. ca 13.
These are euidente arguments that while the Romans, at that time the
Monarkes of the world, did so bestow kingdoms upon women: they thought it
not to be against nature, for that sex to govern. Many other examples of such
regimentes there be in the histories of the Jews, which I might allege for
this matter, if I thought not these sufficient, but that it may appear, that
not only it was in use, and practice in that nation, to be ruled by that sex,
but also among the gentiles, which were rather led by the law of nature,
then hedged in with gods pollycie: I will shortly run over, some of their
profane histories. Berosus, a Babilonian borne, Lib. 5.
and for the truth of his story preferred before all the Greeks, and worthily
(for he followed no fables, as they commonly did, but the records of the
Caldies) says, that Noah which was called Ianus (for iain signifies wine,
which he invented) made his daughter Crana^ queen and gouernes of Italy, Crana
Noah's daughter.
which thing being true (as it is most like) how dare men say that their
regiment is against nature. Which that worthy father, whom God thought
amyddes his unspeakable wrath, against the whole world, not only to save and
preserve, but also to make him the author of the new world: did not only
suffer, as a thing tolerable, but appointed as an order most honest. If we
co^dempne his deed: we must also conde^pne Gods choice, who could not find, or
pick out a worthier or wvser man, to be the restorer of mankind, then him:
that should so shamefully err, as they say against nature. In the monarche of
the Babilonians, Hero. li. 1.
were very notable Semiramis, and Nicocris, both for their vvisdome and
selicite in governing, and also for the notable monuments they lest behind
the^. Semiramis, Semiramis.
after the death of her husband Ninus, fearing least the late conquestes and
countries vvoulde not be kept in awe by her son, yet yo^g of years,
unskillful in government, and not of courage mough to play the king: in the
person of her son, for the time of his nonage ruled so (as Berosus says of
her) that she pass in seats of war, in triumphs, conquestes, and vvelthe,
all that were then lyuinge, or before her. She builded Babilo^, she conquered
Ethiopia, she invaded India, whether never king nor Emperor came. Just. lib.
1.
but Alexander the great. The Other Nicocris (as Herod. reports) vviser then
the former, Hero. li. 1.
dese^did her empire against the Medes, who the^ sought the monarchy of the
world. She wrought such a vvonder in the great flud Euphrates, as al men,
then were amassed at it, and yet, think it almost incredible, for she made it
contrary to all men's expectacio^, to leave thold course, and to follow her
devise to, and fro, to serve the city most co^modiously. So that she did not
only pass all me^ in wit: but ouerca^e the elements with power. When she
died, she caused to be ingraued in her sepulcher these words. If any king of
Babylon stand innede of treasure, let him search my tomb. Nicocris byl in
her tomb.
But not onles he be in need. This sepulcher was never touched, til Darius wan
Babilo^, who digging up her grave, found nothing but a vvriting to these
effect. If thou weert not an insatiable rauenour, thou would not scrape for
riches among dead men's bones. I think that some fault will be found in these,
and specially in Simiramis, by cause she attyred her self like her son: and
that shall be thought a sufficient refutacio^ For it is the manner of the world to
blot out many good and honest deeds, with obiecting of one evil. But that can
not hurt my matter, nor help his. For so that I wyn at his hand that these
women reigned, and kept their countries in as good order, or better then any
men did: it is a great likelihod, that this sex is not so unapt to rule, as he
makes the^. Among the Masagits reigned Thomires Thomiris
a woman of such fame for her wisdom, and power: Hero. li. 1.
that Cirus that noble Persian and first monarche after the Medes, sent to her
for marriage, to whom she made answer, Thomiris answer.
that she knew his meaning was to mary her kingdom, and not her: which answer,
if Queen Mary had given to Philip: Calls, Hams, and Guisnes, had not been
lost, nor these good lady her sister, and our sovereign, so left in the
breers, besett about on every side almost, with mighty enemies, empouery
shed, and robbed of her common treasure, and her subjects so flesed, that they
must scrape nere the boones that will get any more. This Thomiris with this
answer kyndled Cirus wrath so much: Kings ca^ not bear repulses.
that (no remedy) he must upon her and have her by force, whom he could not
get by fair means. And had at the first so good luck against her: that he
killed her son, and the most part of his army. But this noble Queen, let
it not long go vnreue^ged, for coming to the field her self, and pitching a
battle against him: overcame him that had before overcome all other, cut
of his head and thrust it into a vesselful of blood saying: drink thy fill,
which have ever so thirsted blood. In this story, by the way is to be noted,
that if kings be vvovvers and no speders: there can be small hope that they
will be faithful friends after. For great men, can not bear great
repulses, specially when their power is such as they can when they will
revenge it. And a mind, or heart, where love has dwelled, if it begin ones
to hate: is like a sponge which sucketh up as much water of malice, as it
had before honey. Mother unto this great monarke Cirus was Mandane, Ma^dane.
daughter unto Astiages king of Media: who having no more children but her,
because he drempt that out of his daughters womb, sprung a tree which
shadowed all Asia: thought by destroing her child begotten of Cambises a
Persian, Hero. li. 1.
he should avoid the destenie. And therefore as soon as the child was borne,
delivered it, to one Harpagus a trusty man of his, Just. lib. 1.
to be made away, and destroyed. But Harpagus, forcasting like a wise
polytike selovve, that if he killed the child: the mother enheriting after her
father, would be on his bones for it, and call him to account: found the
means that it was saved. This man's forsight, was not much vnly ke the polly
cie of some by sshops in England, Harpagi in England
in the late queen's days, who being more wise, and less furious then the
rest: though they served at an ynche in their calling, in ambassages, to fetch
in the holy father, to minister ungracious counsel, and do all that was
commanded: yet would they not appear, to be any of the broylers of the mild
martirs, or the common hang men, as the rest vvare, least the day might come,
that Mandane, might axe account of these Harpagi, for her children and
servants, but the rest as desperate dicks, went forward in their business,
Desperate dickes, good Bishops in England.
spared none, dred no pearill, looked no further then their foot, but with to
the and nail cried down with the side, hang some, rack some, beheade some,
banish some, broile some, fetch them up with numbers of harnessed men, into the
Tower with them, spare neither kithe, nor kin, sister nor other, it made no
matter, so they might show them selfs obedient subjects to the Queen, and
disobedient traitors unto God, and the realm. Harpagi signifies raueners.
These were Harpagi in deed and furi, but not in wit and forsight. Now to mi
purpose, if it had not been an order in Media that the daughter should succeed
the father: yea in the whole Monarchy of Asia: what needed Harpagus to have
mistrusted Mandanes revenge. So that it is more the^ evident, that women might
not only enherite after their fathers, in provinces, and small kingdoms: but in
great Monarchies, and Empires, which should not have been so permitted in all
places: if it had been so much against gods forbid. If I should here tarry in
the setting out of Artemisias noble courage, Artemisia
excellent wisdom, and felicity in Government, of whom Herod makes mention: I
should easily find, Hero. li. 8
how to begin: but hardly, how to end, wherefore I say only of her, as Herod.
Just. and all other writers do: Just. li. 2.
that she was more mete to have governed that heuge army of Xerxes, which for
the greatness drank dry all the rivers it came to, then he him self was. For
when he invaded Grecia, and by the subtlety of Themisto cles was discomfited
at Salamine, and like a coward was glad to take his feet: She not only
encouraged her soldiers, so as they passed al other in the conflict: but also
gave the king such counsel, as if he had followed it: all Gretia had smarted
for it: and he undoubtedly have been the conqueroure. But he like a braynsick
beast, thinking as many do, that it had been a shame, to be well counseled or
ruled by a woman: had rather follow his own fansy, to his utter undoing: In
counsel look not to the person, but to the reason.
then her wisdom to save his country and army. And therefore he went home not
like a king, but like a cockescome, not like a conqueror, but like a coward,
not like a man, but like a mouse, in a fishers boot, with one or two with him:
which brought out so many as it is almost at these days incredible. If he
could have been as wise, as God might have made him: or as the counsel of
Bethulia at the coming in of Olophernes were: he had been the greatest that
ever was upon the earth. Judith. cap. 8.
These Bethulians when they were besieged of Olophernes: were content all the
hole Senate to come to Iudithes house, a mean widow, but a wise, and godly
woman, and to hear her, follow her counsel, and obey her. For when they were al
at their wits end, ready to give over the city like milk sops, and venture
religion, wife, and children, goods and lives, in thenemies hands: She endued
with gods spirit and heavenly wisdom, found the way through wit, prayer, and
the help of God, not only to deliver the^: but to revenge the^, not only to
save their pols, but to cut of thenemies. where was the^ this saying, which is
so much urged: a woman may not open her lips in the co^gregacio^? A woman may
be no judge? she opened her mouth, and uttered her wisdom, when they al were
grauelled, and not only that, but took the sword in her tender hand, and did
execution like a magistrate upon gods enemi. But of that place of Paul I shall
speak of at a another time at large, I may not tarry in the opening of all the
profane histories, which scrue to this purpose, least I should seem to write an
history, and not a co^futacio^. vvherfor the reader being instructed with these
shall not need but only to be put in mind of the rest that remain. Isis. Beros.
li. 5
Isis (after the death of her husband Osiris) reigned over al Egypt with so
much provision for the wealth of the realm: that she was after her death co^pted
of the^ a goddess. For as Tullie says, Cic. de na. deorum.
the folish antiquity, honored me^ as gods after their deaths, which either
exceded in power, or were great by birth, or had done some notable pleasure to
their country. Lauinia after the death of Aeneas reigned in Latio: Dido in
Carthage: Liui. li. 1. det 1. Beros. li. 5, polyb. Just. li. 14.
Oli^pias (Pirrhus daughter) in Epire: Aramea, in Scithia, Cleopatra, in Egypt
in the time of Augustus: and a Queen in Illiria, who durst venture to withstand
the Romans, when they were greatest. Olimpias (after the death of great
Alexander) in Macedonia: and infinite more, which they that be expert in
histories, know. It is a wonder, that men unskilled in the diversities of
times, and historis, dare thus ventre in so great matters: which, because they
be somewhat obscure in the Bible, therefore they think can no where else be found.
Not much unlike the common sort of Germains, which trauailinge no further then
they may se the smoke of the stouf: think that in their country is the paradise
of the world, and that in it is al things and in all other nothing, and like to
a certain. Sir Iho^ which said, by my priesthode if the Trinity were not in my
portase, I would not believe it. I make not this comparison, as though I thought
not the Bible to be a paradise. wherein are to be found all the best herbs and
fruits that be: but meaning that all antiquity of time, all histories and
monumentes, can not be contained in so little rometh. Wherefore, The knoledge
of Instories is a great piece of learning.
if men will decide weighty matters, ha^ging upon antiquity: they must not
only counsel with the Bible, but exercise them self in aunciente stories.
And therefore, Philippe Melanthon (one of the Princes of learning, at this day)
trauaileth more in these his last years, in the reading, gathering, and
setting forth of histories: then of any other kind of learning, and not
without reason. For histories (says Tullie) be the witness of times, Cic. de
orat. li. 2.
the candle of truth, the life of memory, the Lady of life, and the regestre
of antiquity. VVherfor, let no man disdain histories, or find fault with us,
though we travail in histories about this co^trouersy, for nothing better
opens it, nothing more confirms it, nor nothing sooner brings out of
doubt, that is now brought into question. Now thou see (good Reader) how
this matter stood among the Jews, and gentiles, how neither of them debarred
the heirs female, of their right, and title of enheritance, when so ever it
fell to their lot to succeed their parents, as though it had been unlawful,
ungodly, and unnatural for that sex to govern. There remains, that we run
over a few records in like manner among the christians: least the contrary
side might have their refuge and startinge hole there. Wherefore, disday ne not
to hear a few more, and so will I end with this argument. Regist. an nali. mag.
Theodora (otherwise called Helena) reigned after the death of Leo The Emperor,
in Constantinople over all Asia, as lady and Empress, and saving that she was
supersticious, and wilful (thorough the lewd persuasions of her clatteringe
Clargie, in the defense of Images) there was no great, fault to be found in
her government. In this point in deed she was more then mad. For she dug up
the bones of Constantinus her father in law and burned them for an heretic.
As the late queen did doctor Busars and others. Bulling de orig. erro.
I can not tell whether she did it with the like sole^pnite, or more spite, then
this was done in England. But it is like that she had her by sshops, and ioly
Clargie to set it forward. I read not that there was any Cardinal of counsel
in it, as was of late (by report) in the devising to burn king Henry theights
bones. If the spiritual spiders meant it without commission: it was to shameful:
if they had commission suerly it was to unnatural. But Prince and Prelates
deal it betwixt them: But for the matter she governed by the consent both of
the spirituality, and te^poraltie, and as it was thought laufully, which is
enough for my purpose. For if it were thought lauful for a vvoma^ to be an
empress, to whom belonged the managinge of the greatest part of the
world: It can not be then unlawful for a vvoma^ to rule one little realm:
and as for her faults what so ever they were, that can not vvype away her
right: Quintus Curtius. Herod. Sabell.
no more then the cruelty in Nero, and Do mitian, drunkenness in Alexander, and
Cambises, and other faults in other rulers, made them unlawful governors.
Elias said to Achab, it is thou, and thy fathers house, that troubles al
Israel: 1. Reg. 8.
but he inferred not therefore that he was an unlawful king. Saul was rejected
of God for his wickedness: 1. Sam.
and yet David so long as he lived called him the lords anointed. Christ
called Herod fox, Luc. 13. Math. 23. Marc. 12. Luc. 11.
and the Scribes and pharisees ypocrites: yet did he not impugn their
authorite, or deface their title. Wherefore, though there be some faults to be
found in this Theodora, and other: yet proves it not that they may not reign,
for it is a fallax ab accidente to say, she was naught: ergo, she might not
rule: A fallax is a deceitful argument in Logike
for that hangs not upon the rule, that she was naught, but upon the
person. As if you should say, my L. lubber of London is a tyrant: ergo he is
no by sshop. I warrau^t you, though he granted you the antecedent which he
can hardly deny: yet he would deny the consequent, or else he would call for
wily Watson to help him: In France, till of late years women enherited the
crown as in England, and Scotland, until that they meant by the law salique,
rather to defeat us of our title, then to condemn the succession as
unlawful, as you may now see by the French king. He neither thinks it
unlawful or unnatural to be lord of your co^trie by that woman's title. I
would you could persuade either him or your country men, to think that the
queen's title by cause she is a woman is unlawful, and so do your own country
good first, and let us alone with ours. And as you speed there, you might
perchance encourage us to follow when it may be done laufully. Tully says, ne
sis curiosus in aliena rep. Li. 1. off.
The voice of a stranger, is to be hard in the pulpit so long as he speaks
Gods word: But a strangers voice is not allowed in foro, in the parliament
about pollycie, by cause he is not a citezen. This I say not to philip you, as
though you meant evil to us (for I am persuaded that you love England as well as
your own country) but I mean to monish you, that being a stranger you
disturb not our state: lest you give occasion to them that know you not, of
suspicion. It is a great enterprise (and as they say no balle play) to pulle a
queen's crown of her head: and specially such a ones, as many ages have not
seen, nor many countries enjoyed, or many histories recorded the like. I would
not be wounded in conscience, with any atte^pte against her: if I might be lord
of al, that Philippe, and the french king have. Well, I must leave her for this
time, lest the remembrance of her virtues make me to forget my matter. And
that we may make an end of our recompt of histories, we will go forward:
Munste. Duke of Svveuia.
Henry Duke of Sueuia, son of Fredericus the first, called Barbarossa, married
the heir of Scicilia, and so beca^e king thereof and emperor of Rome. Co^radus
Palatinus, Co^r. Pala.
left behind him one only daughter Agnes, which was Palatinesse, and after
being married to Henry the duke of Saxo^, made hi^ Palsgraue: who in like manner
died and left a daughter called Gertrude palatinesse, who^ Otto duke of Bauaria
married and beca^e palsgraue and the same order of disce^t and succession
remains yet in the most part of Thempire. Here I might number a great sort in
Spain, who succeeded and ruled in the realm But I shall be content with such as be
of late memory, as Ioanna the mother of Charles the fifth, Ioa^na the mother of
Charies.
who reigned and governed the country not ill, as the Stories report. Mary
(the daughter of Charles called Bellator) the warrier and wife to Maximilian,
Marie.
succeeded her father in the Duckdom of Burgundy, and the cou^tie of Flaunders.
I let pas Mary, Charles sister who ruled in Flanders in our time, Tillius.
And Fraunces the french kings mother, who during the term of her sons
captivity in Spain after he had daunsed his pauino at Pauia, ruled the whole
dominion: whereby the french though they will have no heirs females: yet show
that they condemn not the regiment of women. Other there have been, and that
not a few, which have governed and enherited in diverse countries of
Christendom, with much commendacion. As Amalasinta the mother of Athalaricus,
Tillius in Chronog. Amalasinta.
when she saw that the French men, contrary to all right would deprive her
son of Province, which was his enheritaunce: delivered it up to Theodoberto,
king of the Mediomatrices, which kept it to thuse of her son, Thus was the
mother constreyned by the purposed wrong of the subjects, to seek remedy for
her sons right, and was a better gouernes to him then he to him self. An.
1552. Tillius.
Leonora daughter to the king of Aquitania, was married to Henry Duke of Gaunte,
and in spite of the French kings teethe, brought her husband Aquitanie and
Poiteaux. Adela mother to the king of France, was made Regent of the country
in thabsence of her son, while he was in the war against the Sarazens, and
governed well. This her son (for his goodness and wisdom) was called
Philippus a deo datus sent of God, and yet thought it not amiss, to put his
mother a wise woman in trust with the whole realm. And according to his
expectacio^, he took no hurt nor los by it. Tillius. 1227.
In like manner Blanch mother unto Ludouicus for his virtue named Diuus holy,
was twice made rege^t of France, while he was away in the same war. And
after his death, she had the governing of her son and the realm. It is like
that if her government had not ben good at the first: the nobles and people
would have been loathe to have had her again the second time. Not long after
that time, governed a woman in Flaunders, named countess Margarite. An.
domini. 1247.

Ioanna the nese of Diuus Ludouicus was Queen of Navarre, Tillius. 1245.
and marrying with Philip named Pulcher: made him king of Navarre, by which
means, that country came to be under the French King. And anno. 1415. was a
woman gouernesse and Queen of Naples, called Ioanna. Not only in France,
Italy, Spain, and Germany: but also in thempire have women ruled, which is
more strange, Paul. Emi li. Valor. Ansel.
because the Emperor is chosen by election, and comes not to it by
enheritance. As anno. 1301. after the death of Henrye the third. Hagne his
wife for the honor named Augusta, governed both her son in his nonage and
thempire, keeping it in good order, Bishops busye bodies in policies.
until the bishop of Colen (as those men will be busy in policies) by certain
conspiracies, pulled the young Emperor Henry the.4. from her, after what time
grew much trouble in Thempyre. Hereby we see, that in no common wealth, they
thought it a monstrous Reign, or against nature, for a woman to govern: which
error bringing our auncetors in the reign of Sthephe^ to be wicked periures
caused the^ to conspire with the said usurper to keep Mathilda the daughter of
Henry the first from the title, Poly. A. li. 19.
right, and crown of this realm, but God not suffering such an extreme wrong,
so tossed him in wars, both extern and civil, to the utter undoing of the
realm: that they were glad to grow to agreement, and suffer her son to have his
right, and the usurper had not only never a good day, so long as he reigned:
but also by the just judgment of God, first was imprisoned, and next lost his
son Eustachius, in who^ was all his glory, thinking, he should have reigned
after him: what should we say? God has not only showed his displesure and
wrath, against such as have sought, under this pretense to defeat true heirs:
but also has in this our realm, raised up great houses by their menes, as
the house of York by Philippa and Anna, which by marriage, brought the title
into the house of the Morty mares. And King Henry the.7. and all that line,
Poly.
cold not claim but by the woman, which was daughter to Henry the.6, and
mother to Richard Duke of Richmond. Charles the.8. refused Maximilians
daughter, to who^ he was betrothed, and married the heir of Britain called Anna,
despoused to Maximilian, but seduced by certain noble women, bribed of the
french King, and by that marriage, became Lord of the country, against the wills
of all the nobles. For they thought it better to marrye one, which might be
their several Lord, then to ioign Britain with such a realm, as should drown
the name of it, and bring them (as they be) to slavery: Amias was defended by a
woman, against tharmy of Maximilia^, Arnoldus
it had been else lost, as all the french men confessed, her name was Catherina
licia. A maid defended Orliance, A vvoma^ noble and happy in vvarres.
in armor, against the duke of Burgundy and the English army, and after with
the same her army led the yo^g king Charles the.7. to Rome, and there crowned
him. Before this maids time, the English ever prospered, and the french were
eue^ at the last cast, giving up the ghost, but she brought them into that
condition, that afterward, they grew: and we appaired. The first healpe of
the french a woman
Helena the Queen of the Adiabenits, ruled so wisely and godli: that after her
death, the Jews erected a monument for her remembrance at the gates of
Jerusalem: She ministered to the need of the pore liberally, in the great
dearth that than was in Jury. Eusebius. li. 2. cap. 10.
Thus thou see (good Reader) that if this man take nature so generallye, as
it may stretche to all conntries, all times and al common welthes, and then
say, it is against nature for a woman to rule: That is against the general
confente and order, engrafte by nature, in all peoples and men's minds: that
then it is most untrue. For I have proved, that neither the Jews, nor the
Ge^tils, nor yet the christians, had that (...) that common opinion planted by
nature in their hearts that it stood not with good order of nature that one of
that sex should rule. But shortly I reason thus with him, whatsoever is natural,
the same is universal. But that women should not rule is not universal, Ergo,
it is not natural. If to rule in women be unnatural: then not to rule, is
natural. But not to rule is not universal. Ergo it is not natural. That it is
not universal we have proved by a great number of histories which testify that
women in all ages, and all countries, have governed. Again what so ever is
natural has in the mind of man (...) as that there is a God, all men have
it in their minds ingrafted by nature, that al societies must be ruled and
ordered by magistrates and laws: that murder is wicked and against nature.
etc. which be common opinions in the table of man's mind, written by the
finger of God, with the pen of nature: but of this (that only men must rule and
not women when it pleases God) there is no such principle universal in men's
minds. For you see that a number of countries, decree the contrary, wherefore
it can not be said, that it fights with nature: But you will reply upon me
thus peradventure: Nature has made her a subject, Ergo, she can not rule. I
deny your argument, for nature has made the child and the servant subjects.
And yet they may rule as Fabius son: and the Kings servant may be my
master, wherefor you must understand the argument thus, that if nature have
made her a subject: in that state she is a subject, and in respect of them to
whom she is subject: she can not be their ruler. As a thilde in the duty of a
child toward his father, is his fathers subject And a servant in respect of
his master and the duty of a servant, can not be his masters head. But in
respect of Civil policy, the son bearing office, may be in that function
his fathers head, and the kings servant an other man's master, Genesis 39.
as Joseph was in the house of Putiphar. So the woman being either as a child
to her father, or a servant to her master, or a wife to her husband,
respecting these persons: can not be head over them in those offices: that is
in the office of a father, a master, or a husband. But in the office of a
ruler and a magistrate she may be this ma^s wife, that is his subject, and his
head, that is his magistrate. So that this argument by destinction is nothing,
for it is a Fallax, called ignoratio elenchi, as resolve it, and you shall see
the fault. Who so ever is one man's subject, can not be another man's ruler, or
the same man's ruler in an other respect. But awyfe is her husbands subject:
ergo she can be none other ma^shead, nor his in an other respect. This is
false, for the contradictorie is true: That a wife may be this man's wife, and
that man's maistres, and this man's subject in the duty of matrimony, and the
same ma^s head in thauct horite of office. Thus we se that al reasons well set
out, are like a well kempt buss he where never a here lies amysse, so long as
he has a house to cover him. But when he cummeth into the wind it is sone
ruffled. Or like a painted madams face, which so long as no man blows upon
it nor sweat ryseth in it: is gay glistring, but any of these means make the
wrinkles sone to appear. So a false argument decked with fair words, seems
good: but turn it naked and you shall sone see the botches.

The second Argument is this that the scripture forbids that a woman should
rule, The second Argument.
and therefore it is not tolerable, the prouses be out of tholde testament.
Genesis 2. Esai. 3.
First that after the false of Adam through the woman's intrcement it was
enjoined her, and her posterite as a penance, to be at the beck and
commandment of the man. 2 That Esai pronouceth as a curse that the rulers for
the peoples unruliness shall be children and women. 1. Cor. 14. 1. Tim. 2.
3. that S. Paul forbids the^ to speak in the congregation. Before that I
answer particulerly I must say this to them all in general, that the scripture
medleth with no civil policy further then to teach obedience. And therefore
what so ever is brought out of the scripture concerning any kind of regiment,
is without the book, pulled into the game place by the ears to wrestle
whether it will or no. For Christ faith: Luc. 12.
Quis mo constituit inter vos iudicem. Who has made me be betwixt you a
judge, as though he should say, mine office is not to determyne matters of
policy, of succession, and enheritaunce, for that belongs to the civil
magistrates. If he had thought that it had been within the compass of his
function: why and with what conscience refused he to set the^ at one, which
were at strife, and to put that out of doubt which was in suit. If he ought to
do it, and would not: he lacked charity, and did not his duty: if it belo^ged
not to him, how belonged it to any of his Apostles, disciples, or successors?
Had not he as large co^missio^ as he gave? or could he give that he had not?
But he knowing his office, as the prophet Esaie had forspoken of him to be, to
preach the Gospel, to heal the broken. etc. would do nothing without
warraunt, and therefore being axed if he were a king: he answered simply by a
plain negative. Regnum meum. etc. Math. 27. Marc 15. Ioh. 18.
my kingdom is not of this world. If his kingdom were not here: neither the
ordring of policies was his, for removing from his function the whole: he must
needs remove the part, policy is a part of a worldly kingdom, yea when they
would have taken him up to make him a king, Ioh. 16.
as one that refused that belonged not to him, he conveyed himself from among
the^. If te^peral jurisdiction belo^ged to him: why refused he his calling? If
it did not, where had Paul, Peter, or any other, any authorite to meddle with
that he refused? Seeing he said. Sicut misit me viue^s pater, Ioh. 22.
ita et ego mit to vos. He gave them no more scope then he had him self:
wherefore it is not like that Paul, or any other, would usurp a further
authorite, then he had received of his father, or they of him, and therefore
Paul, shows how far he will be followed: Saying. Imitatores mei essote sicut
ego Christi: Follow me, and harken to me in those things that I follow, and
harken to my master in, he teaches in effect, this part of policy which he
had learned of his Lord. Date Caesari quae sunt Caesaris, Mar. 12. Math. 22.
obey the magistrates and those that be in authorite, not only for fear, but
for conscience, he ly miteth no magistrates, Romans 13.
he alters no polycie, he medleth neither with Democraties, Aristocraties,
nor monarchies, nor pscribeth when there old or young, rich or poor, learned or
unlearned, man or woman, should reign. But as he finds the^, so he leueth
the^, empaireth none, alters none, disturbeth none: knowing as Christ said.
Math. 20. Luc. 23.
Principes gentiu^ domina bu^tur eis, vos au^t no^ sic. It falls not into a
disciples, an apostles, or church man's office, to meddle with such matters:
they have their princes, guides, and governors the church men be no such: 2.
Tim. 2.
For Nemo militans deo implicat se mundanis negotijs. It is enough for them to
wait upon one office, Priests of fice is over the soul.
to attend as soul priests, and not erraunt bay life's: Thus far to the
whole in general now to each reason in special where it is said: Et ad virum
erit conuersio vel desiderium tuum. I might answer it with the common
interpretacion which is. Though both in conceauing and brynging forth thy
child, thou shall feel throws and exceeding pa^gues: yet shall thou not be
hable to withdraw the from thy husband, but shall give occasion to have more.
The pain of the former shall not make the to auoy de the next. This is no
evil interpretacion, for it answers in the manner of the pain, the qualite
of the offense. As who should say, thou have intyced thy husband to turn to
thy folly: I shall therefore make the to turn to him, to thine own smarte. This
place thus interpreted makes no more for this matter then Gloria in exelsis
does prove that S. Peter say de mass: But by cause some reject this
interpretacio^: and we seek not to cauil, but to find the truth: therefore I will
admyt the other, that it makes for the wives obedience toward her husband,
that she must hang upon him as upon her guide, follow his will as the wyser,
obey his commandment as her superior, and to be short, to know him for her
head, and her self for his subject. What? Grant you this? that is enough.
yea I must needs do so for the truth else, and mine own conscience, would
reprove me. How than answer you? forsothe as I did before that she must do
all this and more, but vsque ad aras. So far forth as he comaundeth like a
husband, like a christian, and like her head. But if he pass his commission,
as if he command that is ungodly: then she may answer him, as. S. Aug. does
the ruler. Da veniam imperator Tu minaris carcerem, sed deus gehennam. Aug. and
habetur. 11 q. 4. cap. ita corporis qui resistit.
Thou will have me obey thy will for fear of thy prison and sword: but I must
obey gods will, for fear of his eternal fire and damnacion: if her husband
will command her in the public weal, she being the magistrate, and not he:
she may say to him as the co^sul said to Fabius. siste lictor. Limidec. 3
Law make my husband to obey, for hear he is not my head, but my subject, yea
if he break any law, if it were capital, she might strike with the sword, A
vvoma^ may rule as a magistrate, and yet obey as a wife.
and yet be a wife good enough for the duty that she owes to him, is not
omitted in that she observes, that she owes to the common weal, wherein he
is as a member contained. But if for her wedlock duty to him, she will
neglecte the common wealth: Then is she a loving wife to him, and an euel head
to the country. The, ii. reason.
The.ii. reason out of Esaias makes as much as for debarringe of young Princes
rule, as Ioas, Josias and our swiet king Edward (as his sister Marye held)
as it does against women, for they be ioigned together, but in deed it makes
against neither. Esaias the Hebrews Demosth.
For Esaye being worthelye called the Demosth: of the Hebrews, uses such
goodly figures of speaking, as all the scripture has not beside, as in this
place, I will take from you your honerable Senators, and your wise counselers,
and I will give you boys and women, Esaie.
or effeminate persons to reign over you, not boys in age, but in manners (as
Aristotle says of young men, Eth. 1.
that to hear Philosophy it makes no matter for their years, but for their
manners) not women in sex, but in feebleness of wit, and not such as some women
be, wiser, better learned, discreater, constanter, then a number of men: but
such as women be of the vvurst sort, fo^d, folish, wanton, flibbergibbes,
tatlers, triflers, wavering, witles, without counsel, feable, careless, rash,
proud, deintie, nise, tale bearers, euesdroppers, ruinor raisers, evil
tonged, worse minded, and in every wise, doltefied with the dregs of the
Devils dounge hill, as these minions be: such shall your senatoures and rulers
be, that shall be neither hable to rule them selfs nor you. No Deborahes, no
Iudiths no Hesters, no Ely zabethes. For sure where such be: there is no token of
Gods wrath, which the Prophet threatens here: but of gods favor, whereof we
may be assured. Therefore this argument rises of wrong understanding, as the
Vicar of Trumpenton understood Eli, Eli, lamah zabatani, when he red the
Paslion upon Palm Sunday, when he came to that place he stopped, and calleing
the Churchwardens said. Neighbors this gear must be amended, hear is
Elitwise in the book, I assure you if my L. of Elie come this way and see it,
he will have the book. Therefore by mine advise we shall scrape it out, and
put in our own towns name, Trumpington, Tru^pington lamah zabactani, they
consented, and he did so, because he understood no grew. So they that use this
place for a weapon against this matter, they fault in homonymia, not
considering that words have proper significations and translations.

The.iii. reason of this argument is out of Saint Paul, whereby, The.iii.
reason.
women be forbidden to speak in the congregation, for it is an unseemly thing
for them to speak. This is meruelouslye amplefied and urged, as though it
were so sound as no fault, nor crack could be found in it. This is the
Hercules clubbe that beats all down before it. These be Sampsons locks,
that make him so strong, wherefore there must be taken some pains in the
confutinge of it: fytste therefore, I lay this foundacy on which I laid
before, that Saint Paul, nor none of the reast of Christ's guard, meddle not
with Cyuill pollycie, no further then to teach obedience, nor have no
commission thereunto in all the whole scripture. And this being a great
matter of policy, yea the greatest (for it conteigneth the whole) it can not
be within the compass of Paul's commission, and so follows it, that Paul
either in this place meant no such matter as they gather: or if he did: he did
it without the compass of his commission, but that is unlike. For as he said
in one thing, so surely did he in all. Quod accepi a domino id tradidi vobis
Et unitatores hier estote sicut ego Christi. Well what then meant he. 1. Cor.
11. 1. Cor. 4.
This he meant. That though he ordemed that every man in the assembly
ecclesiastical about the word of God and prayer, should have leave, orderly and
in his course, to speak and utter, for thinterpretatio^ of the scripture, all
that was reveled him by the spirit of God, yet women (because they be not mete,
1. Cor. 14
neither by nature nor study to preche and interpret scriptures) he would not
have to meddle with it there. Primas. in 1. Cor 14 Theoph.
And as Primasius and Theophi: says the chefest cause that moved Paul to take
this order, was the common fault that then was in that sex. For being somewhat
instructed, by the hearing of thapostles in the misteri of salvation, in the
cross of Christ, they began to think something of them selves, and turned
that was taught to edifye with, to a iangling and tatlinge in the church when
they met, so that the congregation was thereby disturbed. For the auoydinge
whereof, Paul mente to bridle them: as without doubt, he would have done the
me^ also, if they had prophesied unorderly, or made it a matter of discord: as
it has been of late in some congregacions, where it has been revived. And
not only he debarred the women from prophesiyng: but also from any public
function in the ecclesiastical jurisdiction. What is required in a pulpit man.
For in such as shall occupy the pulpit, is required these things, that they be
mete to teach, to reprove, and convince. In teaching is required gravity,
learning, and eloquence. In reprouinge courage and sound judgment, and in
conuincynge Arts, memory and much science. And because the bringinge up of
vvomenne, is commonly such, as they can not have these things (for they
be not brought up in learning in Schools, nor trained in disputacions. Or
if they were yet because nature has made them softer and milder then men.
Yet be they not such as are as are mete for that function.) Therefore be they
unmeet for this calling. For those that be preachers, must be no milk soppes,
Preachers must be nomilck soppes.
no white lyuered gentlemen, that for the frowning and cloudy countenance of
every man in authority, will leave his tackle and cry Peccaui. They must be
of such nature, as the Poet says of Crito, in vultu grauitas, in verbis
sides. Terent.
They may not be afraid to rebuke the proudest, no not kings and queen's so
farfurth as the two tables reaches. As we see in Samuel, Nathan, Elie, Ihon
Babtist, and many other. They may not stoop to every man's beck, and study to
please man more the^ God. If heresies arise, they must have their tools ready
to mete with thaduersary and to overthrow him: which he can not have, onles
he have trauay led in many sciences, hard and read much, which things
because they be huswyues) women can not have commonly, and therefore they be
unmeet hereunto. Yea God knows so be many me^ to: for it is not enough for a
man to tell a fair tale in the pulpit, and when he comes down is not able
to defend it. If preathers and spiritual ministers be such: where be we when
we come to handgripes, (They must not only florishe, but they must know their
quarter strookes, and the way how to defend their head, their head Christ I
say, and his cross. And specially in these days, wherein Satan spiting the
happy grouthe and grenes of Gods field, sows tares and fytches of heresies
and sects continually, to choke or to empayre the good corn if it may be.
What ennemies have we of the Papists? unlearned think you? nay, who so
encountreth with them, had need have his harnes well bucked to him, or he may
chance to take a wipe: I would they were as well minded, as they be learned.
What say you now to the Arrians? which suer, are like to enfect the best
heads in Europe (I mean the Italyans) if God provide not remedy. Shall it be
easy think you for every man to join with them? I can not tell how simple
they be. But one man of that sect so distourbed a whole university in Germany,
that all the learned men there, and the Prince him self, Tubinga in Sueuia.
was not hable to scrape out that he had wickedly graven. The Swingfieldians,
the Maioranes, the Pelagians, the froward freewyll men, the Adiaphoristes, the
Osdrianistes, thenewe Marcionistes, the Anabaptists, with infinite other
swarms of Satanistes, do you think that every pulpit man will be hable to
answer them. I pray God there be many that can. I say therefore because there
is so much required in a spiritual minister: that all men be not mete for
the office. And therefore that with good reason women be debarred from it.
Albeit, at some times it pleases God to use their ministry even in this
point, Ioh. 4.
as the woman of Samaria, which was the first preacher to her cytezens of the
Messiah, and the women, Math. 28. Marc. 16. Ioh. 20. Ruff. li. 10 cap. 10. Theo
li. 1. cap. 23.
the first Apostles and messengers of the resurrection. And as we read in the
Ecclesiastical history, A certain woman under Constable. Mag. was the Apostle of
the Iberians, which turned first the King and Queen, and then the whole
country to the faith of Christ. This could not be done without some talk
in thasse^blies, nor without a kind of preaching. Yea, Theodoretus says,
that she did preach to them: wherefore me think even in this point we must
use (...) a certain moderacion, not absolutely and in every wise to debar
them, herein (as it shall please GOD) to serve Christ. Are there not in
England women think you, that for their learning and wisdom, could tell
their household and neighbors, as good a tale as the best Sir Ihon there? And
what if by occasion, not by common office, they should sumtyme make their
neighbors partakers of their gifts: were it so heinous a matter? 1. Tim. 2.
I pray you what more vehemencye uses Paul, in the forbiddynge of women to
preach, then inforbydding them to uncover their heads. He says of the one,
1. Cor. 11.
it is evil favored, and of the other: that it is against nature. As vvome^
be forbidden to preach, so be they to go bare headed.
And yet you know that in the best reformed churches of all Germany: all the
maids be bare headed, which the preachers and learned men, make no great
account of. This I say, not because I allow either (for I assure you I do
not.) But that we should not in such points, grate upon the words to sore,
as though in no respect a woman may open her mouth to edify. But if this be
utterly taken from them in this place: what makes it against their government
in a politic weal, where neither the woman nor the man rules. If there be no
tyraunts, but the laws. For as Plato says. Plato de leg. lib.
Illi ciuitatiparatu^ est exitiu^ vbi magistratus legibus inperat, et no^ leges
magistratui That city is at the pits brinke, wherein the magistrate rules the
laws, and not the laws, the magistrate: What could any king in Israel do in
that common wealth, besides the pollycie appointed by Moses? They be but
ministers, obeyed for the laws sake, and not for their own. Now what
vnhablenes is in a woman for the ministering of laws? She knows not the
laws, no more does your king. She sits not in judgment, how often does your
king? Onles you call determining matters in his privy chamber, judging. She is
not mete to go to the wars, she has that be mete, Tillius Arnoldus Just.
Herodot.
and some women have gonne and sped well. She is not of so sound judgment,
peradventure beter, and of more lerning then your king, as it happens at this
time, that you can never show in all England since the conquest, so learned a
king, as we have now a Queen. Men will not stand in aweso much of a woman as
of a man: that is their fault and not hirs. No more will they of a child, and
yet be they traitors that do disobey him. Solin. 43. cap.
Solinus writes that the neighbors of Sambri have a dog to their king, and
by his beckes and fawnings they guess what they must do. But they were foles in
obeying a brute beast, and you be Traitors in not obeying a reasonable
creature. It is less danger to be governed in England by a woman then any
where else
They are to obedient (a shrewed fault) and you to disobedient, that is no
fault. Well a woman may not reign in England. Better in England, the^ any
where, as it shall well appear to him that without affection; will consider the
kind of regiment. while I confer ours with other as it is in it self, and
not may med by usurpation: I can fyndenone either so good or so indifferent.
The regiment of England is not a mere Monarchy, as some for lack of
consideracion think, nor a mere Oligarchie, nor Democratie, The kind of
government in England. Amonarchie is vvher one alone rule An Obligarchie where
a fevv rule. A Democratie vvher the people rule. Architas de leg. and iustit.
but a rule mixte of all these, wherein each one of these have or should have
like authority. Thimage whereof, and not the image, but the thing in deed, is
to be seen in the parliament house, wherein you shall find these.3. estats. The
King or Queen, which represents the Monarche. The noble men, which be the
Aristocratie. And the Burgesses and Knights the Democratie. The very same had
Lacedemonia the noblest and best city governed that ever was, they had their
kings, their senate and Hippagretes, which were for the people. As in
Lacedemonia none of these could make or break laws, order for war or peax,
or do any thing without the other, the king nothing without the Senate and
commons, nor either of the^ or both without the king (Albeit the Senate and
the Ephori had greater authority then the King had) In like manner, if the
parliament use their privileges: the King can ordein nothing without them. If
he do. it is his fault in usurping it, and their follye in permitting it:
wherefore in my judgment those that in King Henry the.viii dais, The
Parliament in King Henry.8. day.
would not grant him, that his proclamacions should have the force of a
statute, were good fathers of the countri, and wurthy co^mendacion in defending
their liberty. Would God that that court of late days, had feared no more the
fearcenes of a woman, then they did the displeasure of such a man. Then should
they not have stouped contrary to their oaths and alledgiaunce to the crown,
against the preuilege of that house, upon their marye bones to receive the
Deuels blessinge, The receiving of the Popes absolutio^ in the Parliament.
brought unto them by satan's Apostle the Cardinal, God forgive him for the
doing, and them for obeying. But to what purpose is all this? To declare, that
it is not in England so dangerous a matter, to have a woman ruler, as men take
it to be. For first it is not she that rules but the laws, the executors
whereof be her judges, appointed by her, her justices of peace and such other
officers: but she may err in choosing such: so may a King: and therefore they
have their counsel at their elbow, which by trauail abrod, know men how fit or
unfit they be for such offices. 2. she makes no statutes or laws, but the
honerable court of Parliament: she breaks none, but it must be she and they
together or else not. 3. If she should judge in capital crimes: what danger
were there in her womannishe nature? none at all. For the veredict is the 12.
men's, which pass upon life and death, and not hers: Only this belongs
to her mynisterie, that when they have found treason, murdre, or felony, she
utter the pain limited in the law for that kind of trespass. Yea but this
she can not do because a woman is not learned in the laws, No more is your
king, and therefore have they their ministers, which can skill if they be
cruel, wicked, handmakers, and bribers, it is their fault, and not the
Princes, onles he know them to be such and wink at it. What may she do
alone wherein is pearill? She may grant pardon to an offender, that is her
prerogative, wherein if she err: it is a tolerable and pityfull error to save
life. She may mispende the revenues o^f the crown wantonlye, so can kings do
to, Where mistreies be, vvomens government cannot be dangerus.
and co^monlye do, and yet may they be kings: if on the other part, the regiment
were such, as all hanged upon the Kings or Queen's will, and not upon the laws
wryte^: if she might decre and make laws alone, without her senate. If she
judged offenses according to her wisdom, and not by limitation of statutes
and laws: if she might dispose alone of war and peace: if to be short she were a
mere monark, and not a mixte ruler, you might peradue^tute make me to fear the
matter the more, and the les to defend the cause. But the state being as it is
or ought to be (if men were wurth their ears) I can se no cause of fear, nor
good reason why Saint Paul forbiddinge her to preach, should be thought to
forbid her to rule, nether Saint Chrisost. Amb. li. q vet and no. test. and
he^tr. 33. q. ^.
Amb. Theoph. or Primassius writing upon that place gather any such thing
as you strain out of it. I know very well that Ambrose says, they may not
teach, be witnesses nor judge, and Aug. in li. 2. gen: et hab. 23. q. s. Est
ordo says he. It is a natural order in men that the women should obey their
husbands, and children their parents. Saint Hierom thought them unmeet to
judge alone by their discretion, Ergo, to bear rule and conserre in pollitike
matters with other. Nay it is a fallax adicto secundum quid ad simpliciter: for
he forbids them to judge in a respect, neither having rule by enheritaunce
nor judging and conferring with other, and you therefore gather that simply
they are forbidden Deborah judged and that lawfully, which came not to it by
enheritaunce, but by extraordinarye calling. Much more may she that to Gods
calling has ioygned thordinarie means of enheritaunce, her commons consent,
Answer to the fathers.
and confirmacio^ of laws. To Saint Austen and all the rest, which would have
women in the subjection of their husbands, is to be answered as before: that
their meaning and speaking was, of every private woman in the bonds of marriage:
And not of those which God by birth has called to the governments of realms.
Neither is it to be thought that any of thold fathers would be so injurious to
any heirs female: as to take from the^ their fathers patrimony, or that would
that al other men's daughters should have and enjoy their right: and kings
daughters should be put from their right. Either so sever thinheritaunce from
the dominion, Vvomans inheritance linked with the dominion. Nu. 27.
that they may have the one without the other, (which will be hard for you to
do) or else grant them both as you ought to do. The daughters of Silphad by
the judgment of God and not of man were enhabled to their enheritaunce: And
shall we take upon us to judge in our policy otherwise then God did in his?
Again, Saint Augustine, Hierome, the Cannon law, and Arist: meddle not with
those rules and gouernmentes, which come by lyneall discentes, coincydent and
linked with the inheritance: but with such as stand in election. Wherefore it
is to be noted, Thediuer sities of Magistrates.
that there be.iii. manner of Magistrates. One chosen by lotte, as was the house
of Saul. A another by Suffrages and election, as in Venice, Polonia, the fre
Cities of Germany, and thempire. And the third provided of God by lineall
succession, as in France, England, and other Kingdo^s. if any were to be
chosen by lotte, or suffrage: I would not in deed that any woman should stand
in the election, but men only: for I say with Aristotle, that (...) the male is
by all ly kelihod meter to rule, then the woman in many respects. And
undoubtedly in the whole number of men, might be found some one that should
in all respects, pass the best among women in wisdom, grauite, learning,
understanding, sobriety, temperauncie, hablenes to take pains, warly kenes,
justice, fortitude. etc. But when it stands in no man's election, but in his
hand that shapeth male or female, in the womb of the mother, at his pleasure:
In England God has all the voices in his own hand.
Then has man's voice no authority, by cause he has given over his right in
choosing, by common consent unto God. That he according to his inscrutable
wisdom, may choose and dispose, as he pleases. This being done, shall man
pull back his grant, or call God to account and say, Nay when we agreed, the
matter should be referred to your judgment: we meant not that you should send
us a woman to rule over us: or we had forgotten to put that in the co^dicions,
and therfote you must give us leave to revoke our grant, for we can provide
better then thus, our selfs. Were not this a folly she plea (think you) and a
mad enterprise? would he not sone answer us. Oh you presumptuous fools, Gods
answer to men's soly
that have such opinion of your own wit: who made empires and kingdoms,
dominions and rules? who preserves and mainteineth them? whose be they? yours
or mine? must you have the orderyng or I? If they be mine: why let you me not
alone with them? If they be yours: show your evidence how you came by them:
Math. 20.
shall not I do with mine what I list? Is therefore your eye ill because I am
good? Murmur ye at mine anointed, because she is a woman? who made man and
woman, you, or I? if I made her to live: may I not make her to reign? If I
apoynt her to the office? can I not adourne her, and make her hable to
discharge it? Why then (you of little faith) either fear you my good will: or
mistrust you my power? you are much worse then Saul in this point, whom I
reiectyd for disobedience. For when I sent my servant David, 1. Samu.
young of age, and no Gyante instature, with his sheep hoke and his slynge:
Saul would have armed him with his own armoure? But when David threw it of
and went his way naked against his enemy, a great high monstre, in
comparison of him: Saul mystrusted not as you do: murmured not as you do,
saying, ah this poor boy is not hable to be our champion, and to defend our
liberty: but he prayed for him, and wyshed him well in the name of Jehovah the
lord of hosts. It is I tell you all one to me, to save with many or few, with
armor or without, by a woman or by a man. The maicstie of god represe^ted by a
vvoma^ no les then by a man.
What lets, that she may not as well represent my majesty, as any of you
all? If I be best represented by the shining ornaments of the mind, and not
the outward sturdines of the body: why may not she have at my hand that any
of you have? wisdom to govern, justice to punish, cleme^cie to pardon, Dansel.
13. Number. 22.
discrescion to judge. I that could make Daniel a sucking babe, to judge
better then the wisest of the lawyers: A brute beast to reprehende the folly
of a Prophet: and poor fisshers, to confound the great clerks of the world:
can not I make a woman to be a good ruler over you, and a mete minister for me?
What vnly kelihod se you in her? are your eyes so dulle? or your minds so
malycious? that you cannot or will not see those Iewelles, wherewith I have
decked her? is that rare learning, that singular modesty, that heavenly
clemency, that christian constancy, that love of religion, that excellent
wysdom with many more of my graces, nothing in your sight? I showed you the
like toward in a man of late: but for your own unworthiness, I took him from
you: And will you now, I have given you this: make your selves unworthy to
enjoy her? Leave of, leave of, your own pollycie, which is but folly, and
embrace my ordinance, as it is your duty. For I pulle down whom I will, and
set up whom I will. Though God speaks not thus to us audibely: yet suer, he
needs must thus speak in our conscience inwardly. Wherefore let us leave of to
dispute, and begin to pray, We must pray for the Queen's estate and not
dispute of her right.
that it may please him to stably she her seat among us, and to send her
long life and quiet reign, to defend her and us from invasions abroad and
conspiracies at home, to give her grace to seek his honor, and maynteine the
truth, to guide her heart in the choice of her husband, and to make her
fruitful, and the mother of many children, that this Realm may have the
graftes of so goodly a tree, That our children and posterite may see hirs
occupying her throne, with honor, joy, and quietness. The remembrance of her
virtues carries me away from my matter: wherefore I return. And because Ari. is
thought to be of such authorite in this matter, Answer to Aristo.
let us a little examine his words (...) that is the male is moore mete to
rule then the female, well, what infer you? ergo the woman unmeet. I deny
that argument, you should rather say the woman is not so mete, that we could
grant you, and not a whyt hurt our cause: for otherwise no man will reason, as
to say this man is better learned then the other: ergo the other is unlearned.
Chalk is whyter then cheese: ergo cheese is black. No man that knows what
comparison is, will bring two contraries in one comparison, as to say pitche
is blacker then snow, or fire is whotter then water. But if they compare two
things together they must be such as they have in one qualite or property
maius et minus. As I say right. A man is more mete to rule then a child. That
is not by affirmacion and negacio^, as because the one is apt, therefore the other
is not, and even so of a man and a woman, he is more mete: therefore it follows
not that she is utterly unmeet. And therefore Plato Arist. master not a whit
wurse learned then his scholar, Plat. in Timeo.
says: Magistratus vtriusque Sexus preficimus nuptijs, our manner is to make
officers of both sexes to order marriage. And saint Paul as we have declared,
gives them a kind of government (...) to govern the house. And likewise
Aristo, Arist. in Eth. lib. 8. Cap. 10.
him self in the Ethikes. So that neither Philosopher, nor Apostle, deals
with them so hardly as you do. But Arist. 3. polit: says, that cities be evil
governed by women. What, by all or by some? if he say by all, we can reprove
him by many instances: if he say by some: we can say the same of men. So that
you se: that these be no oracles which you bring in out of Aristotle, whereby
(if you have no better authority then this) you can not put them out of
possession. In this point I can not but think you much blame wurthy, not that
maliciously (as many do) you pervert the sayings of the authors: But for that
negligently, you pass them over without waying and understanding their
sayings, without conferring and matching place with place, and saying with
saying. For if in the citinge of Aristotle you had ioigned the Ethikes with the
Pollitikes, I surely believe, that you would have made him none of your jury in
this matter. Lib. 8. ca. 10. Vt supra.
For in the Ethikes handlinge the kinds of rule, what is a Monarchy, what an
Aristocratie, and what a Democratie, says of the rule of the man and the wife
thus: Viro cum vxore ius id intercedit, quod est in optimorum potestate. Nam
pro dignitate ijs in rebus imperat, quae dignae sunt viro. Quae autem feminam
decent: eas ei tribuit. Qu od si in omnibus presit vir ac dominetur: in
paucorum potestatem fit mutatio, quoniam contra dignitatem facit, non qui est
praestantior. Interdum etiam mulieres praesunt cum amplu^ patrimonium
consecutae sunt. The rule and kind of government betwixt the man and the wife
says Arist: A Senate vvher mani rule together.
is like the government of the chief, or of a Senate. For the man according
to his wurthines, rules in such things as becomes him, and the wife in
such as is meet for her. If so be the man will rule and bear the swaye in
all: Then is the rule changed into an Oligarchie, that is, where a few bear
the stroke, An Oligarchie is where a sevv bear the stroke
and herein he does otherwise then becomes him. Sometime women also having
great and large patrimony bear the sway. In the which words I noote first,
that the Philosopher leaves a kind of rule to the woman, which is hers so
much by nature, as the husband pullinge it from her, enters into a kind of
tirannie and violateth the most natural and best order. As those do which
turn an Aristocratie to an Oligarchie that is the better into the worse.
Secondly if I would grate upon the words, and take the advantage of the
comparison: I might near gather an equal authority betwixt the wife and
the husband. For every man knows that in the rule of the chief, which is
called Aristocratie (whereunro he likeneth that in Marriage) there is equality
and none usurps upon an other. But I will not so follow the advantage of
mine argument: that I will confound gods apoyntmente. Thirdlye it appears
plain by this place of Aristotle: that in his time it was a common order that
women enheritoures, should rule their lands, houses, and possessions (Which
is our case) and yet not be thought to do again nature in so doing: These
things considered, you must needs not only be thought to deal to straightly
with this sex by plucking from them all, when your Philosopher gives them
some, but also to be much ouersene in ouerseing and perusing your authors. But
least Aristotle should keep us to long from matter of more weight and
authority, I will return again from the Philosopher to the Apostle. If you
reason in this place of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 14.
No^ permitto mulieri loqui. I suffer not a woman to speak in the congregation.
Ergo, not to rule, thinking that it is formal, a minore ad maius from the
less to the more: your logike and divinity both do fail you. For it is not to
be taken thus, Paul forbids her the les for her unaptness, Ergo, he debarreth
her of the greater. But in deed it is contrary wise, he forbids her the
greater and more chargeable function which is the spiritual ministry and
preaching: therefore it follows not that he shuts her from the les, which
is extern policy. No man I think doubts but that the Ecclesiastical
function is greater and more chargeable then the other, The church man's office
of more charge tha^ the temporal rulers.
for the one concerns the body, and the other the soul. The one reaches no
further then outward acts, but the other pearceth to the heart and thoughts
That binedeth in earth the body, this fettereth boothe in heaven and in
earth, the soul: The one as Saint August: says, threatens prisones, the
other eternal damnacy on. Aug. and he^ tr. n.q. ca. ita corp.
The one may be executed by deputies: the other must execute him self de
manu tua. etc. To the one is required justice and no great learning: the other
can not be without great lerning and knowledge. Ezech. 3. and. 33.
The One treteth of the world, the other of heaven, the one of things temporal,
the other of things eternal, and to be short, the one belongs to this life,
and the other to life everlasting. Wherefore what will serve the one: will
not serve the other. For they be not (...) A good churchman might be a good
ruler as Samuel was: but every good ruler ran not be a good churchman. Thus we
see that Saint Paul thrustinge that Sex from the greater function and
office: does not also disable it to execute the other which is less. But you
will say in England she must have both. How can she discharge both, if you make
the one so hard? I answer that in deed both belong to her but not in one manner.
For in the one (as pollicye) she has a function, How the Queen may ouersee the
church, and yet be no priest. Exodus 32.
that is she must be a doer: in the other she has thauthority and oversight
but not the function and practice as we se in the commonwealth of the Jews.
First betwixt Aaron and Moises. Moises comptrolled Aaron, but yet he executed
not Araons office, he offered no incense nor sacrifice ordinarely, he meddled not
with tharke, nor any such thing as belonged to the priesthode, he ware not the
garments, he ministered not the sacraments, and yet had he authority to
redress his faults, as it appears in the matter about the calf, Exodus 4.
and by the commission which he received at Gods hand Tu eris illi in deum and
ille erit os tuum. Thou shall be his God and he thy speech man. Well but
Moises aucthority (say some) was not over the priests, because he was a
prince, but in that he was a priest, and so was it lawful for him to meddle
with church matters, because he was a church man. This hold they, that would
have priests to be kings: and not kings ouerscers of priests. There grounds
to prove him a priest: be these. First that the psalm calls him so. Psalm.
98.
Moises and Aaron inter sacerdotes eius. etc. Moises and Aaron among his
priests. Secondarely, that saint August. upon the same psalm says so. And.3.
that to the Hebrews, and in Exodus he is said to sprinkle blood upon the
altar. Last of al, that a prince can not give to an other, that he has not
him self: and therefore if he be not a priest he can not elect, nominate,
ordeine, or correct priests. To these I answer shortly, and first to the
first. In the Psalm how so ever the old interpreters gave it, we read in the
Hebrewe Cohanim, which is a word indifferent to the chief priests, or
thechief princes, wherefore such as do best understand that tongue, give it
thus. Moises and Aaron inter ministros eius. Moises and Aaron among his
ministers, and to prove that it may be so, the scripture calls David his
sons Cohanim. ministers. For no man is so fond to say, 2. Sam. 8.
that a kings sons were priests. Yea the best among the Hebrews
interpreting this word, give it in Chorei sheino. Moises and Aaron inter eos
qui inuocant nomen eius. Moises and Aaron among those, that called upon his
name. Thus we see that this place truly understand makes no whyt to prove
Moises priesthod. To the exposition of S. Aug. whose words be these. Aperte
enim in illis literis Aaron nominatur sacerdos: de Moise non ibi dicitur quod
sacerdoserat, sed si hoc non erat quid erat? Nunquid sacerdote mayor esse
poterat? Exproprat Psalmus quia et ipse sacerdos erat. Moises et Aaron etc. In
that place Aaron is plainly called a priest: but of Moises it is not said that
he was a priest. If he were not that, what was he than? Could he be greater
then a priest. The Psalm does utter it that he was a priest. To this
exposition, I say mine answer, is that saint August. Not understanding the
Hebrewe, was easily deceived, and being wrapped in these two places of
scriptures, wherein there seemed co^tradictio^, leaves the^ at a jar as he
found the^, the one to say he was: and the other he was not: which manner of
interpretacion, and reconciliation of scriptures, how it is to be lyked: I
leave to the learned reader to judge. 24. Exodus Heb. 9.
3. That which Moises is reported in Exodus, and the Hebrews to have done as
a priest, it hurts us nothing. For he might do sometimes that
extraordinarely, which be longed to the priest, as we read that kings readde
the book of the law, and yet were no priests. Yea, all the children of Israel,
at their coming out of Egypt, did as much as this came to, for every one
spri^kled blood upon theit door posts in the passover, and yet they could not
all be pristes. And this sprincling of blood upon the altar, was but a
solemn ceremony, for the time done, and not such a function, as than was
proprely appointed to the priests. But to put the matter out of doubt. If
Moises were a priest, than were there two high priests at ones, which
could not be, by the law, and also Moises must needs be in feriour to Aaron,
because Aaron, and not he: is there called the high priest. Thus we se how
lightly, light arguments may be answered, and I would wyshe, that as easily,
obstinate men could be satisfied. The last is of as little force as the rest,
and therefore I say to it shortly, that it is grounded upon a false principle, or
maxima, which is that none can give to another that it has not it self. We
see that as the phisicions say, the brain being the origin of the senewes:
gives to the whole body, sensum and motu^, sense and moving, and yet by their
opinion lacks it self. Again, the earth gives to all fruits, (...) which
Arist. says: is spe^s motus, that is, that they should grow and move to a
greater quantity, and yet the earth it self, neither moves toward bygnes
nor increaceth one way nor other. And if a prince may give to a lawyer,
authority to plead law, though he can not plead him self and prescribe a
Tanner how he shall tanne, though he tanne not him self, being neither a lawyer
nor a tanner, why may he not I pray you in like manner, constitute, apoint,
correct, and ouerse the church men, though he be no church man him self. But
the meaning of these me^, is to drive princes from ouerseing them, that they
might in the mean time live out of subjection. And now the name being odious,
because their dissolute life, has purchased them an evil name, they think
(when no shifte else will serve) that princes will not meddle with the
authority, les they should be combred with the priests infamy. What the
Princes authorite was over the bysshoppes and priests aperith in the.2. of the
kings, 2. Re. ca. 12
where Ioas checketh the bishop and priests for not bestowing the offeringes
upon the reparation of the the temple, and enioyneth them to do it. If the
prince hadd not this authorite over his bisshoppes and priests, why should S.
Paul have said omnis anima. Let every soul be subject to the higher power:
Romans 13.
he says not al temporal souls, or al save priests: This authorite kept the
princes and emperors after christ's time, until the beast of Rome made the^
worse the^ beasts: as apearith by Co^stantinus Magnus, who was the moderator of
the great counsel of Nece. And by Iustiniane which writes to Peter the
master of his chapel matters, Neceph. lib 8. Tripart. hist. cap. 5
where he says Iuuemus, we command that all Bishops and Priests do not
from henceforth whisper their Service, but so pronounce it with an audible
voice, that the people may hear and understand the^. etc. In novel consti
123.
This Emperor, even in matters of the church, took upon him thauthoritie to
appoint them an order in their Service, how dare then our proud prelates
(very fools in deed to them that were then) wrestle with the Prince in this
matter? But to our matter we see by these examples, that the Princes had
authorite in spiritualties to ouersee them and order them: but meddled not with
the function in executing, for that belonged only to the Priests: Lo, I trust
you now perceive, how the functions do differ. But thautorite over both may
lawfully be in one. And that makes not the Prince being a woman, utterly
unmeet to govern, because she has in sum repect to do in both. This I
have said by the way lest our adversaries the Papists, should snatche this
at my hand while I thus sever thoffices that I mean (as they do) to pull
from the Prince the oversight and government of the church. I may not tarry
longer in that matter at this time. A time shall come peradventure when it
shall be more largly handeled. In the mean time, I return to my purposed
argument: Furthermore where it is said thou shall choose a King among thy
brethren, and not among thy systers. Deuteronomy. 17.
And thereuppon is inferred, that we may have no Queen. It is the like reason
as if a man should say. Mar. 2.
Christ said Veni ad vocandum peccatores ad penitentiam, that is I am come to
call men sinners, and not women sinners. Therefore, either women be no sinners: or
if they be, they shall not be saved: or as one resoned examinet se ipsu^ homo,
let a man examine him self: and the^ communicate, ergo, 1. Cor. 11.
women may not. And Christ shall at the latter day say, Venite benedicte and
not Benedicte. Therefore the women shall not com in heaven, or nearer to this our
purpose, Math. 18 Luke 18
si peccauerit in te frater tuus. If thy brother offend the never so often.
forgive him: hereupo^ I gather, that I need not to forgive mi sister. In all
to^gs (...) or (...) has a singular good grace, and specially in the Hebrew
tongue where Ach which signifies a brother does not only comprehend also a
sister but a nephewe to. Ach. signifies, brother, sister and Nephew.
And through out the whole scripture the masculine comprehends the feminin,
or else sure we must say with the phrenitik postellus: that women be not yet
redeemed, but men and that they must have a woman to dye for them, as well as men
had Christ. Postellus phrensy.
That place of Scripture, which commands a brother to be a king among the
Jews, had no relacion to a sister, as these me^ make it, but to strangers.
For it follows non constituus regem alterius gentis. Thou shall not make the
a king of a strange nation. For the people of God, having no neighbors that
worshipped the true God as they did: could not have chosen any stranger to be
their king, but they should have been in danger of swaruing from God, and
falling to Idolatry. And therefore was it necessary, to apoynt (...) great
coat to England, no more than you would apoint the English law, which is the
little cote to Rome our law must direct us, because it best agrees with our
country, we have no further to do with the civil law then in arch matters, that
is for testaments, marriages and such other, as for lands, and enheritance,
pains for offenses and many other points touching the law: ours does
meruelously jar with the civil law, as we shall in some points declare.
Wherefore to burden us with the civil law? is as much as if you should
persuade the Scotts to use the Garamantes law, to kill men at.50. and women
at.40. because the country being somewhat barren, can not well norish such, as
by their age can do no great good. But that you may see, that the civil law,
and ours, agrees like harp and harrowe: we will confer them in a few
points. And because this matter whereof we treat, concerns enheritaunce: we
will first speak of inheritance. In England the Eldest son inheriteth, the
sathers lands only, saving in Gauel kind. And in mi opinion it is good
policy, for the continuance of houses. For nothing sooner destroieth great
houses, then the division of then heritance, as it appears in Germany, The
division of inheritance, destroys noble houses.
and will more hereafter to our posterity, when the young brothern shall not be
made abbottes bishops, and cardinals as they have hitherto been. In the Civil
law, the children succeed indifferentlye in their fathers patrimony, in fendis
the sons, and in other both sons and daughters l. max. vit. ff. sancimus C.
de lib. praet. Ite^ in Autent. de hered. ab intest in princ. et in. ff. (...).
et ff. cum filius. Just. de hered. Where you see not only our law far to
disagree with this: But also that the civil law grants enheritaunce to the
females, which, you would pluck away. The cyuill law, gives the father
power over his child in lyse and death, specially, that which is called Ius
vetus, as it aperith Le. 2. C. de par. qui fill dict et le. in suis Edelib. et
posth. C. de pat: ptate^. But in England if any father should kill his son:
he should be try sed up for his labor. The cyuill law makes the children of
traitors, Infames, but commits them not to perpetual prison, as they do in
England. In the cyuil law, the king, or lord of the soil, Tit de legtute.
ff and lo. and Ti. Just. de le. app. tut.
has nothing to do with wards or tutorshippes, but the next of kynne, if the
father in his life time apoynte none: but in our law, the king has the
wardeship of all that hold of him in capite or knights service. And as it was
granted to the crown, upon a necessary respect: So must it not be pulled
away, VVardeships are not rashly to be pulled from the prince
so long as the same cause remains. It was given him at the first, in
consideration of the great charges in war, and the small revenues that
belonged to the crown. And though such orders seem hard, thorough thabusing
of the^, by some gredy guts: Yet the realm, having always, almost
contynuall wars, with the French, or Scotts, or both: who so ever goes
about to pull from the crown such helps: unwittingly, makes a breach for the
enemy to invade us. Wherefore I would wish, that such as out of gods book
will comptroll the kings exchequer, should well understand the matter, before
he brought it into the pulpit. In the civil law, Co^st. Just. l. fin. C. qu^d
tut. velcur esse desinu^t.
the tutorshippe endith in the males at.14. years of age, and in the females,
at. 12. But our law keeps him in nonage until. 21. years. The cyuil law by
ndeth not him to marry, by the force of his wardship, where his Tutor will:
L^nec sil. Cde nup. I sisil. famile si puel tut l. in co^ uict. C de nup.
C. de nup. Marriage must be free and in his own choice, and may not be
compelled by his father, much less by this tutor. But in England, he tutor
has his marriage, or makes him to pay tor his liberty, how that comes to
pass, and how in different it is, let the lawyers answer. I meddle no surher,
but to she we that it is so. The cyuill law so sauoreth life: that it
grants a traitor his advocate to defend his innocence, L. seruu^ ff publ.
vi castr. nu. 5 Bart.
but in our law he can have none to speak for him, but him self. For the
fault is counted (and that justly) so heinous, that it takes from him, all
manner of help, to put other in fear. Again, the cyuill law co^dempneth no
man, onles he either confess the fault, or be openly conuicte by witness
sufficient. But our law commits it to the veredict of 12. me^, indwellers
in the country, where the trespass is committed, The trial of capital crimes
by 12. men.
who pronounces guilty if they think so, whether he confesses it or no, and
often times rather upon their own conscience, then any great witness or other
evidence. This order as it was in it self at the first without corruption: was
marvelous concionable and godly, and in my judgment much better then the cyuil
order. For they to wring out the confession of the fault committed, are driven
to use torments, and to puny she before they have tried the fault, wherein
they are often ty mes deceived, by rackynge those which have not offended, and
dryuinge them for pains of torments to say that they never did, as I have
hard, happened at Tubinga, in the wirtenberg land, Against racking.
that a man was broken upon the whele for murdring an other, which after was
found a live, the smarts of the torments made him to confess it, and lie of
him self. In monument whereof his image stands yet in a glass wyndowe of the
church, even as he was upon the whele. Again there was in England, an
Italian, not long agoo, who (as they say) passed through all the torments in
Venice, and escaped without confessing the fault, which in deed he had
committed. On the other side our. The quest mongers.
12. men the questmongers, being indwellers in the country, and men of skyll,
shall learn by the circumstannces, as by the life of the man, the common fame
of the people, or their own search in the matter: whether he be such a one or
no, and so without racking, wresting, and tormenting, the deed may be found.
But in deed at these days it is grown to great corruption, and that through
one special means, or two which be these. If there be any noble man dwellinge
in the country either a Duke, a Marquis, an Earl, or Baron: The iuries and
quests corrupted
He shall lyghtlye have in his retynewe all the cobbes in the country, which
be the questmo^gers, and if any matter be touching him, his man, or his
friend, whether it be a crime capital, or Nisi prius, sent down for lands:
the case shall wey as he will. The freholders reteinours to great men
For his deteynors must needs have an eye to my lord, though they should go to
the devil for it: and so be some innocents knyt up, and some offenders
delivered, some titles of inheritance lost, against al justice and right.
Another is, if my lord will not offend the Statute of retynewe: then must the
high Shrife be his friend: And the under thief (vndershrise I should say) his
man. He empaneleth the quest either such as dare not displease my lord, or
for good will, will not. And so that way betwixt the high these and
vnderthese, my L. and the curstmongers, The corruption of the Sherifs
poor me^ are out weyed. This corruption if it be not looked to: will not make
this order (which was the best that could be) to be the wickedst that can be.
But as I said, in it self (me think) it has much more justice, equytie, and
indifferency, then the cyuill or rather cruel rack has. If I should peruse
and compare all points wherein ours differ from the cyuill: and show that for
our country it is much meeter, I should never make an end. Wherefore these
shall be sufficient, to show that you must bring our own weyghtes, to weye our
matters by, and not strangers, or else we must take you for an evil Clarke of
the markett. Therefore if you will judge well of our municipall matters: you
must let us alone with our own coat, and give the great boy his. Now I
pass to certain inconveniences which are thought to come of women's rule. The
inco^ueniences that follow vvo men's rule. The first.
Many inconveniences do commonly follow the rule of women and their
enheritinge of kingdoms, as the loss of holds, and ancient possessions as
experience teaches of late days, by the departing from Hams, Guisnes, and
Calyce, with all that we had in France, besides the daungeringe of the
realm to be governed by strangers, which thing of late was much feared, and
not unlike to happen. For the first, it is to true: that in that womans reign
England was put to a sore plunge through her wylfulnes: which would move war,
when she might have been at peax, upon no just cause, but because (as you would
have her) she would show her a loving worm and an obediente wife, rather then a
catefull gouernes. That follye was accidente to her person, England has
hitherto taken greater loss by men's rule then by vvomens.
and not proper to her sex. But admit it to be through the fault of a woman:
have we not had as great, and greater by men? who lost old Brytaine to
Julius and the Romans? men. Who lost it again to the Saxons? men. Of whom
wone it William conqueror? of men: who lost it to the Danes? me^, who lost
Normandy, Brytanie, Gascoigne, and Guine, and al our right in France? men,
who lost Bulloigne, Bullenois and all the rest? a man. Who killed the Scottish
King, when Henry. 8. was in France? a woman or at the least her army? who
brought in the light of gods word into England? a woman, who lights now
again the candle after it was put out? a woman, whereby it is evident that we
have, not yet so much cause to complain of loss by them, as by men. And in
our histories which we have before cited: we may see many common welthes
by women enlarged, or at the least well preserved, but few ey there much
weakened, or utterly destroyed. Onles you tell me of the destruction of Troy,
which notwithstanding, was rather through the folly of Paris, then any rule
of Helena, and as for this loss we have now, I doubt not, but as the old
fathers are wont to say, that as by a woman came death: so by a woman was
brought fourth life. In like manner as by a woman's (whether negligence, or
misfortune, I wot not we have taken this wou^d (so by another diligence and
felicity, we shall have it again healed. If every man could persuade him
self of as good success by her as I do my self: I doubt not but the
French, and the Scotts both, should have their hands full, I pray God
our vnthanckfulnes make us not to fare the worse. The.2. inconvenience.
The next and greatest inconvenience and danger to be feared is, that if a
woman inherit: the realm by marriage shall be transserred to strangers. A
great matter I confess if it so be, yet GOD may do with his own what he
list. Scitote (says the Prophet) quia deus est dominator in regno hominum, et
ipsius regnum est, and cuicunque vult dabit illud: if he will translate it,
Ecclesi. 10.
who can let it? Yea in another King Henry's days. And some translation and
ioigning of realms may turn to much good, and the wealth and tranquillity
of many. As if we had had a King for your Queen, or you a King for ours, it
had been a goodly translacion: to have united both realms in dominion,
regiment and law, as they be in nature, language, and manners. I suppose a great deal better for your country, the^ as it is now, thus to be matched, yea
subjected and slaued to the proudest, vntruest and the most tirannicall
nation, The heny yokes of the french
under the son. I except not the Spaniardes, whose dominion the Italians in
Millane, Naples, Scicilie, and elsse where: can much better brouke and abide,
then the light and inconstant French, Caesar. in comment.
as Caesar calls them. If you and we had ioigned together: it had made no
great matter, on which side the king had been, so he had been religious. I
grant if all things answer, it is better ioignynge at home, then choosing
abroad. As if he be no very base or mean person, if he love and fear God, if
he be of the same religion, The orna mentes of an honieborie ma.
endued with good and commendable qualities of wisdom, Justice, Manhood,
Temperaunce, gifts of languages knowledge of Countries, pitiful, merciful,
constaunte, sobre, no hearer of flatterers, continent, not prodigal, but
liberal, no extorcioner, etc. Such a one if God should lot any Queen, were to
be preserred, to any abroad. Onles all these, might be found in a stranger,
and thereto iouned nobility and auncientnes of lynage, and the nation being
such, as use not to rule cruelly, but rather fatherly, then lordly. For by
such a one could come no great harm, but very much good. As for example,
if your Queen, should have found out some German, or some such other,
whose Gouernmente is not rygorous (as in deed theirs is not) their hearts not
ambytious, the same Religion, good bringing up, a man of actiuitie, whose
auncetoures have been religious, lyncked with many Princes, either by
Consanguinitie, Affinity, or sure Society, and league, of whom there could
be no doubt of conueying the treasure to any other nation, or bringing in of
his own country men to oppress the Subjects (as undoubtedly the Spanyardes
and French would). Such a one I say, if God appointed: I see not why the
name of a stranger, should be odiouse, it is religion and likeness of manners,
that ioigne men together, Such as be of the same faith be no strangers.
or at the least should so couple them: that agreing therein, we should not much
stick in the rest, In the kingdom of heaven, is another Jew nor gentile man nor
woman. A stranger if he be a goodman, is as dear in the fight of God, as he
that is born in the midst of Edenbrough. This I speak, not because I shute
at any one, for that were not only malapartnes, but madness. But to answer mi
objection, which is, that tealmes be undone by the matchinge of Queen's with
strangers. Mu^sterus in Tab.
Scicilia, as the histories report, was quietly and happily governed, so long
as the Duke of Sueuia marrying the heir, had it in quiet possession. But after
a Pope of Rome, as the duke passed through Italy, to set order in Scicilie,
had by conspiracy murdered him, it fell every day more and more to decay. So
that it stands not so much in the choosing of a stranger, as what he is that
you choose. He is one of our brethren, if he be a faithful Christian, it is
manners, faith, and behauior, and not nacyons that make men strangers one to an
other. A man in his own country, at home, if he be not of the household of
faith: is a stranger. And contrary wise, where there is one faith, one
baptisine, and one Christ: there is narrower fraternite then, if they came out
of one womb: But to conclude, we must commit all this to God, Subjects may
vvish but not vvringe Queen's to marriage.
who has the hearts of rulers in his hands, as the floods of waters, and will
so dispose them as shall be most to their peax, to the realms good, and his
honor, let us not meddle with bridelinge of Queen's in marriage this way or that
wai, we are none of those to whom it shall be said, who shall give this woman.
Now thus thou see good reader, that all this wind shakes no corn, that this
bold blustering blaste, though it puffs, and blows never so much: Yet can
it not move, or ones stir the suer grouded rock of verite. And though it be
the property of Northre^ blastes to cool and freese: yet in the hearts of
good christians, faithful subjects, and true Engly shmen, well warmed with
natuall love, and defended with the walls of wisdom, obedience, and duty: it
can do nothing. It may peradventure make a sewe weak redes to wagge, which
will stir at every little puff of wind: But the strong and hard Ookes sure
roted in loialtie, and grown to a just perfection in the discipline of duty:
will never stir a leaf for it, considering that this blaste is sent out of
Aeolus at the request of dame disobedience, to hindre good Aeneas, say ling to
the port and haven of quietness and loyalty. Though thou warte not disposed of
thy self, either for opinion of thauthor, or for the novelty of the matter,
to stand to thy tackle against this storm: yet I doubt not, but now by me
rather put in mind of that thou know, then taught that thou wart ignorant
in: thou will sone conte^pne this gale of wynd, A recapitulacion.
and take it to be nothing, but as it is named very wind indede. Thou see
it euy dently proved, that it stands well inoughe with nature and all good
order, with justice and equity, with law and reason, with Gods and man's
ordinance, with custom and antiquity: that a woman leafte by her
progenitors, true heir of a realm, having the consent of her people, the
stablishment of law, ancient custom, and Gods calling, to confyrme the same:
may vndoubttedly, succeed her auncettors lawfullye reignyng, in lawful
succession, both to enheritance and regiment. Thou see no scripture is
against it, truly vnderst ande, but rather both in example and practice, and
also in express word and meaning, altogether with it. Thou see no law
whereto we be bound, to debar this sex of this right: but in every wise to
grant it them, as it shall come to their course. And that the rule being
joined to thinheritaunce, can no more be plucked from it, saving justice
inviolated, then thy soul from thy body, and thou yet alive. Thou see last
of all, that thinconueniences that be feared, be rather bugges to fear babes,
then matter to move men and specially christen me^, which look not so much to
tharme of man, as to the help of God for their safety: which trust not in
horse and harnes, glayues and gunnes, and such other worldly means but in
invocation and faith, and in the mighty arm of God, Psalm. 147.
Who delights no more in the legs of a goodly made man, then in the
lamenes of a creeple, Nor in the rugged looks of a desperate warry our: then
in the mylde countenance of a wise VVoma^. Wherefore the matter standing so,
that whosoever rule, man or child, male or female, God must be our shilde,
fortress, and bulwark: Let us do our duty by trusting him, We must cast our
care upon God.
and he will do his, by helpyng us, and so much the rather, because that now, it
is more like the glory shall be his, if the victory be ours, Then if we had some
great Goliath, some lusty champion, to take the matter in hand. For the next
way is, to make him shrink from us, to put either our whole trust in any other,
or so to part the praise with him: that his majesty shall have one piece, and
our policy another. We may not part with god
How often cries he to the Israelites. Nay, go to now, call upon your gods to
help you, let me se what they can do for you. Run to your leaguefellowe the
Egiptian and king of Assiria, in whom you have put your trust. Let them shyld
you, against those euyls that shall come upon you. Wherefore let us say with
David, Hii in curribus, Hii in equis, nos autem in nomine domini inuocabimus.
Trust who will in their stout kings: Psalm. 19.
we call upon our God to help our good Queen. Now thou art persuaded, thou true
Engly she heart, that thou may and ought to take, esteem, and honor one
of this Sex appointed of God to rule over the, for thie natural, and lawful
sovereign: it is thy part to know and learn, and after to do and perform all
manner of duty to her, which occupies by most just title, thimperial throne
of this Realm. And that thou may the rather, the willinglier, and gladlier
do it: I mind by Gods grace, to treat a little of the duty thou oughest her, of
the good hope thou may conceive of her, and the fruit of doing or balkynge
thy duty toward her. Which. iii. things, while I run over: think it
not long, for I mind not to make any long discourse. There is no man either of
wit so dull, of understanding so ssender, or of malice so obstinate: but will
and must confess, that God by nature, have so ordained all things: that
mankind should not only rule, and have the dominion over other creatures,
which be not of nature so excellent as he is, but also, one man over an other:
that some ruling and some obeing, concord and ttanquilite might continue. For
if al should ruie: there should be none to obey. Or if all should obey: there
should be none to rule. Some be made to rule and some to obey.
Wherefore, God has so disposed his creatures in this world: that such as he
will deck and beautify, with his singular gifts, should by rulyng other, that
lack them, be means to aid and help them. For God so cares for the
preseruacion of this godly and comely frame of his, the world: that he will not
leave it without means of order, where by it may contynew. And though it be
his peculiar property, to have dominion and rule, as the only king and
monarke: yet because our dulnes can not conceive his bryghtnes, nor our
infirmity his majesty (as the people of Israel say de to Moises, Exodus 20.
let not the Lord speak to us but thou) therefore he communicates not only
his power, Deu. 20. Exodus 22.
rule, honor, and majesty to men: but also his own name, calling them Gods:
that by their manhod, they might confer with men, as men, and by their name
and office, represent a dyuine majesty as God. Psalm. 81. Psalm. 28.
Ego dixi dij estis, say eth he. I say you be Gods. Again. Deus stetit in
sinagoga deorum. God stood among the assemble of Gods, that is magistrates.
Thus it pleased God to adourne his anointed with so noble a name: that we
which be of nature rebellious, should behold in the^ not only flesh and blood,
which they have common with us, but also a dyuine and godly majesty, which
they have given the^ of God. So that we should rather fix our eyes upon their
office, which is gods: then upon their person which is man's. If this order
were not in nature, al things would grow to confusion, while every man, as
he were of greater power: so could and would oppress such as were of less,
(...)
(as Theodoret says) the great fishes eat up the small, and the weaker
beasts, be the strongers pray. Therefore, it is not said without great cause
of the apostle: that the Magistrate is for our good. For he defends our
bodies from the murderers, our goods from the rauenoure, and our lands from
the oppressor. Seeing then that God by nature, To. 13.
has thus placed Magistrates in deed to be watchmen to keep our cities, to
preserve our land from thenemy abroad, and conspirator and oppressor at home:
we should be to much ingrate: if we should not love him or her, that cares for
us, and to obstinat if we should not obey them that rule not for their own
pleasure, but for our commodity. Hereto we be exhorted by many places of
scripture, whereunto, if we herke^ not: we provoke gods vengaunce to gush out
against us: out of whose most holy mouth, they come. Let every soul (says
Paul) obey the higher power, as ordained of God: for who resists the power,
To. 13.
resists Gods ordinance. In which words is contained both a precept and a
pain. A precepte, in that he commands all to obey, exceptinge none, neither
priest nor Monk says Chrisost. Chrysostom. 10. hom. 23
which must as well obey, as the lay itie. A pain, in that he vttreth them to
be gods rebels and adversaries, which do resist the power ordained of God. For
who violateth the ordinance: violateth the ordeiner, which was God. But
because almost none doubt of this, that they must obey (onles it be a few
dissolute Anabaptists) and many be ignorant, wherein they should obey:
therefore did Paul him self not omit to teach, that they must be obeyed in
honor and paimentes. Cui vectigal, Obedience consists of. ii. things.
vectigal, cui honor, honorem. For it is not enough to pay them their due, as
a man pays his hirelinge, or his miller for grindinge his corn: but he must
also yield him his due honor, why che must first come from the heart, and
then be uttered in outward humblenes. The Persians thought there kings and
rulers to represent such a divine majesty: How the persia^, honored their
kings.
that they fell flat on their faces before their sovereign. And the same we
read to be used among the kings of Jury. The like whereof, the histories do
report of the Turks, that they have not only as much honor given them as
the kings of Persia had: but also who so ever speaks to him, at his goinge
from him, How the Turks honor theirking.
never turns his back upon him, but goes backwarde so long as he is in
the same place with him. Few I think will allow this, yet must they learn
hereby, that great honor is due to that estate, and think it no Idolatrye
as some men use to term it, either to bare thy head or bow thy knee to the
chiefest minister of God, yea if thou do it not thou make an idol of thy
self, To knele to a prince is no Idolatry.
while thou liftest up thy baseness to that heighte, that thou will not
stoop, where thou ought, nor give honor where thou should. What is
else to make an Idol of thy self, but to honor thy self, where thou ought
not, and pull down Gods Majesty, where thou should not: Ah we be all
Adams children, yea and the deuels to, if we go no further: But Adams
children, be distinct in degres, Degrees of men.
even by the ordinance of God. As we read through out the Bible: Mat. 12.
and Christ in the new Testamente confirms it, saying: give to Cefar that
is his. And the apostle: go before one another in honor. To. 12.
So that they may rightlye chalendge it, and we be bound to yield it. But this
will not be onles we first bow at home in our hearts, and learn to stoop,
say inge in our selfs. What? thou art a subject not called to honor,
Therefore thou must not pearche up, before thou beist called: And could
thou, if thou warte in the same place suffer (if it were not for thine own
sake, yet for the dignities and office sake) to be without honor? If we can
thus reason with our own proud stomachs: we shall soon leave of to be
Adames children, and become Gods and the Queen's obedient subjects. The heart
(I say) must be framed and brought into the circle of obedience: Obedience
spryngeth from the heart.
and then will all the reaste follow. Thy knee shall bow, thy Cap shall of,
thy tongue shall reverently speak of thy soueraign, when and where thou
ought. For like as the fountain being clear, or trobled the water that goes
from it, must be good or bad: so the heart being in order, the reaste can
not be out of order. Thy tongue must be dedicated to God, to speak well and
reverently of his minister, for else as Solomon says: he will make the birds
of the air to utter thy rebellion. Furthermore, it is thy boundeduti to give
her, The.2. part of obedyence. Dein. 1. olymth.
when she calls for part of thy goods that as Demosth. says, by parting with
a little: thou may keep the whole. Is it not better to healpe the mother and
mistres of thy country, with thy goods and body: then by withholding thy hand,
and nigging, to make her not hable to keep out thine ennemy? had thou
rather that thy ancient ennemy, the proud french man, or untrusty scot, should
come to ransake thy coffers, to deflour thy wife, to ravish thy daughters, to
beat thy childrens brains upon the walls, to fire thy house, to spoil thy
goods, drive away thy cattle, enjoy thine enheritaunce, cut thine own throat,
and bring thy country to naught: then that the Queen's officer should take
the.20. part of thy possessions, for thy defense? If thou will not have these
mischiefs to happen thou must do thy duty in paying with a frank and free
heart, without grutching or groaning, specially, seeing thou gatherest all that
thou have, in her peax. Should thou that art a husbandman follow thy
tillage, reap thy corn, and enjoy it: if thou wart not defended by her
diligence? Should thou that art a grasier keep thy fat Bullockes and
flocks of sheep, til they were fat: if she were not thy shephearde?
Should thou that art a merchant carry out, and fetch home, to thy exceeding
gain, thy merchaundise: onles she were thine Admiral? Could the Lord or
gentleman enjoy his rents, if she defended not the tenauntes? Could the
bishops ruffle in their robes, keep their great houses, and have their
thousands yearly, withal the rest of there superfluity: if she were not their
bulwark, and took care for them, while they care not for her? And to be short
there is none that should enjoy his own: if her protection were not. If thou
mystrust the my spendyng of that thou geuest, and she takes: thou art to
folish. For could she that in all her lyse, has lived upon her own, so humbly
without pride, so moderately with out prodigality, so may denly without pomp:
now find in her heart, in unnecessary charges to lashe out thine? VVilt thou
have a taste, how prodigal or pompous she is? I pray the then mark these two
points which I know to be true (although in that Sex they be strange) vii.
years after her fathers death, The queen's sobriety in aparel.
she had so proud a stomach, and so much delighted in glisteryng gases of the
world, in gay apparel, rich atty re and precious jewels: that in all that
time, she never looked upon those that her father left her but ones, and that
against her will. And after so gloried in them: that there came never gold nor
stone upon her head, till her sister enforced her, to lay of her former sobre
nes, and bear her company in her glisteryng gaynes. Yea, and than she so ware
it, as every man might se, that her body carried that, which her heart
misliked. I am sure, that her maidenly apparel, which she used in King Edwardes
time, The po^pe of english ladies abated by the queen's example.
made the noble men's daughters and wives, to be ashamed, to be dressed and
painted like pecockes, being more moved with her most virtuous example: then
with all that ever Paul and Peter wrote, touching that matter. Yea this I know
that a great man's daughter, receaiuinge from Lady Marie before she was Queen,
goodly apparel of tynsyll, cloth of gold, and velvet, laid on with parchement
lace of gold: when she saw it, said, what shall I do with it? mary said a
gentle woman wear it. Nay quod she, that were a shame to follow my lady Mary
against Gods word, A young ladies answer.
and leave my lady Ely zabeth, which follows Gods word. See that good
example, is often times much better, then a great deal of preachinge. And this
all men know, that when all the ladies hent up thattire of the Scottish
skyttes, at the coming in of the Scottishe Queen, to go unbridled, and with
their hears frownsed and curled and double curled: she altered nothing, but
to the shame of them all, kept her old may denly shamefastness. etc. An
other thing to declare, how little she sets by this worldly pomp, is this.
That in all her time, she never meddled with monye but against her will, but
seemed to set so little by it: that she thought, to touch it, was to defile her
pure hands consecrated to turn over good books, to lift up unto God in
prayer, and to deal alms to the pore. Are not these arguments sufficient to
make the think of her: that she will neither call to the before she has need,
nor mispend it vaynely afafter she has it? An exhor tacion to liberality.
Wherefore if thou bear the heart of a christian: thou wylt ministre to
christ's lieutenaunt willinglye, and gladly. If thou bast the mind of a true
subject: thou wylt not see thy sovereign lack. If thou haste the forcaste of
a wise man, thou wylt be content with a little, to purchase safety of the
whole. If thou have the stomach of a good english man, thou wylt with body and
goods, keep out the foreign ennemy, which would be glad, through thy
disobedience, to salute thee at thy gate: wherefore be not covetous, where thou
should be lyberall, nor unkind, where thou should be thanckfull, nor
waywarde, where thou should be forward. Take to thee, the stomach of a
free palfraye, and not the froward touches of a restie jade. Li. demori
It is the property of the one, says Seneca, to goo forward lustelye with the
Shadow of a wande, and of the other, to run backwarde, put you never so
much the spurs to him. Now by cause our nature is so dull, that it can not
be stirred up without some hope of benefytte: Therefore I will briefly show
what good hope there is, by all lykely hode, of this godly gouernesse. And to
the intent, I might appear to say of her for conscience sake, what I think
and know, without suspicion of flattery, or hope of benefyt: Therefore I
have suppressed my name: that my pen might be the freer. VVherfor if thou
thi^kest that either I speak more then I think, or do that I do for any hope
of benefit: thou do me wrong in misiudging: and her great injury in not
believing. If I should rehearse al things which might put us in hope of her
good, godly, and virtuous reign: I should peruse her wholle life paste: But
that were to long and rather perteyneth to the Story to be written of her,
The queen's bringing up.
then to this argument, wherefore I will only touch one or. 2. things to give
goodme^ good occasion, to guess at the rest. It is known to al me^ how
vertuosly and virginly keshe has been brought up what wise, honest, discrete,
sober, and godly women she has had about her, how she has been trained in
learning, and that not vulgar and common, but the purest and the best which is
most commended at these dais, as the tongues, arts, and gods word, wherein she
so excedingly profited, as I my self can wytnes, that. vii. year past, she was
not in the best kind of learning inferior to those that al their lyse time had been brought up in the universities, and were counted jolly fellows. So that it
is like, that now, she is not meanlye instructed and armed with good letters.
If then learning and the conversation with such as be wise and honest,
fashioneth and frames the mind (as Plato says) and makes it tractable as
wax, to prynt in good images of virtues and modest manners: And commonly, well
tilled land brings forth good fruits: we must needs conceive great hope, yea
in a manner be assured: that as she has passed many of our kings, and alour
Queen's in these good studies and Sciences: so she must needs exceed them in
the rest of her life and govern meant. And that you may understand that there
has not been, nor is in her, learning without nature, and knowledge without
towardnes, to practice: I will tell you, what I have credebly heard, and
assuredly believe of her. For I would wyshe of God, that all men knew by her
as much as I do: that they might conceive of her the same opinion that I have.

Her first scholemaster with whom I was familiar, a man very honest and
learned, The Queen's schole masters answer.
emongst other talk, which we had of her (for I was curious in questioni^g and
he gentle in answeringe) told me once, that he learned eueri day more other,
then she of him. It seemed to me a mystery, as in deed it was, but because he
would not keep me in doubt, he thus expounded it. I teach her words (quod he)
and she me things. I teach her the tongues to speak: and her modest and
maidenly life, teaches me works to do. For (says he) I think she is the best
inclined and disposed of any in all Europe. It seemed to me a goodly
commendacion of her, and a witty saying of him, and therefore not to be
forgotten: In like manner, an Italian, An Italia^s saying of the Queen
which taught her his tongue (though that nation lightlye praise not out of
their own country) said once to me that he found in her. ii. qualities, which
are never lightly yock fellows in one woman, which were a singular wit, and
a marvelous meek stomach, I would have thought that these men had thus
commended her, because she was their mistress: but by certain knowledge other
ways I understood: that it was true, and that they might have said much more,
and not have lied. This disposition and godly towardnes being in her then, can
not now be but much increased by continuance of study, having about her such
as fear God, increasing in years, and taught by affliction, which as (David
says) brings understanding, and in a another place. Psalm. 104.
Bonum mihi domine quod humiliasti me It is my great profit Lord that thou
have brought me low, The Queen's adversity.
for hereby I have learned thy law, and of this I think no English man is
ignorant: that her affliction has been far above the condition of a kings
daughter. For there was no more behind, to make a very Iphigenia of her, but
her offering up, upon the altar of the Scaffolde. How she behaved her self in
those storms and tempests, let them witness, who being her adversaries:
had the muynge of her. I will say nothing, though I could say much: But
this I see, and therefore must say, that than she must needs be in her
affliction marvelous pacient: which shows her self now in this prosperity
to be utterly without desire of revenge: or else she would have given some token
or this day of remembrance, how she was handled. It was no small injury that
she suffered in the protectors days, when certain venymous vipers spued out
their poison against her to dymynishe her honor: The Queen's assliction in the
protectors days.
But God her father and defender, made her so much the more to enter in to the
hearts of good people: how much the earnestlyer they went about to harm
her. Was it no wrong think you that she sustained of late days, to be first a
prisoner in her own house, and guarded with a sort of cutthrotes which ever
gaped for the spoil of her house, that they might have been fyngeryng of sum
what? Then with great solempniti, The Queen committed to the Tour.
with bands of harnessed hangeme^ (happy was he that might have the carrying
of her) to be setched up, as the greatest traitor in the world, hoisted into
the tower, there kept not like a kings daughter and a Queen's sister: but as
one that had come out of Turkey to betraye England. What assemblies and
counselles? What examinacions and rackynges, of poor men was there, to find
out the knyfe that should cut her throat? what gaping among my Lords of the
clargie, to see the day wherein they might wash their goodly white ratchettes
in her innocent blood? thinckinge that then none should be spared, for they
saw the blood of the father wash of the Scaffold, the daughters blood, the
husbands, the wifes, the younger brothers, the elders, and so one after an
other, till the hangemanne was wearye. When they saw that so much wood was
spente in Smith field about holy Martirs sacrificed to the God in the box:
that poor folckes for lack died for cold in London: when they saw the
streates of London so decked and adourned with Gallows, and behanged with
gentlemen's carcases: that my L. of London could not have place to goo a
procession: when they saw all these notable tragedies wherein no respect was
had, neither of sex nor kynred, neither of age nor innocence, neither of
noble nor unnoble: had not these ratchetters good cause to hope: that this
blessed woman should have followed, and so they have been out of fear of this
day, which is come upon them?

What mente those charitable Churchemenne think you toward her? when they
could not be content, to suffer Sir Thomas Wiat upon the scaffolde (even at
the hour of his death, betwixt the axe and the block, when it is like men
will not lie) to discharge her, of that was laid against her, and unburden his
own conscience of that, he thought at that time he stood guilty in, for
hurtynge her to save himself, when he testified to the people that she was
clear. Cried not weston, believe him not, be leave him not? For the rack has
wrounge out other manner of matter. Oh tyra^nes, and rake helles. Was he rather
to be believed upon your cruel rack, than now, upon the scaffolde. when he
feared the tearyng of his flesh, then when he might look for helles tor
mentes? when it stood upon the loss of his carcass, than when he must danger
his soul? Did you not here, utter your mischeuous minds, and meanings, that
you cared not, though he went to the devil, so you might have been ryd of her.
These be the comfortable goostly fathers, which must be at a man's clbowe, when
he is ready to dye. Whose regard of the Soul is such: as they must needs have
their ghostly child, even with the last breath, lash out most shame full lies,
to maintain their malice, and murder. These fellows ca^ use Confession to
serve their turn, for the destruction of such, as they would have out of the
way. If their Confession served not to such purposes, I warrant you, they would
not set a blewe point by it. Thus had she the whole world against her, with
all the spyte and malice that could be devised: And yet she is so far offro^
sekyng reueng: that I am surely per swaded, that she prays for the^. Are not
these great tokens thou good subject, of much mercy to follow? Mark her
coming in, and compare it with others She comes in like a lamb, and not
like a Lion, like a mother, and not like a stepdam. She russheth not in at the
first chop, to violate and break former laws, to stir her people to change
what they list, before order be taken by law. She hangs no man, she behedeth
none. She burns none, spoileth none. I wisse if my L. Cardinal had known her
cleme^cy: he would not have made so much have in dying so sone to follow his
mistres, My L. of London vviser the^ the Cardinal.
and to be out of the danger of this. I like my L. of London better: for
though he have deserved a great deal more: yet he neither renneth away, nor
hangs him self, nor nothing, but trusts to find grace, which never
deserved any. But you will say that this Queen has no such advantage against
men, as the other had, and therefore is merciful whether she will or no: you say
well but not al, is there no advantage to be taken, think you? I will not
affirm, because I am no lawyer. But I will axe this for my learning of the
lawyers, whether it be a fault by statute to take away the title or any part
of it which belongs to the king or Queen's style? as to take from it by no
order of law, but by private authority, this part supreme head of the church
of England. If it be a fault, of what force were the writtes, whereby the
Parliament was called, that took away the supremacy, if the writtes for
lack of words of form, were not good in the law: by what authority did that
parliament repeal. K. H. and K E. laws or make any new? by what authority,
if they were not sufficiently called, received they the bishop of Rome? And
after by his authority, broiled, and murdered so many martirs? Surely if the
first were unlawful, the last can have no warraunte, if the lawyers find this
to be so: has then the Queen none advantage against men think you? if it
be so: then must you confess, that there is a marvelous mercy and no rigor,
an exceeding patience, and no desire of reueng in her. If it be not so: yet
might she find good quarrels else to deal more hardly with some then she does.
In Queen Mary's first days the bisshoppes that were married were thruste out of
the parliament house before any law, and all married deanes and archedeacons
out of the convocation, many put out of their lyuinges and other restored
without force of law. If that were lawful for her: why is it not lawful for
this? Yea some noble men and Gentlemen were depryued of those lands which the
king had genen them without tarying for any law: lest my Lord of
Winchester, should have lost his quarters rent. Many churches were changed,
many altares set up, many masses said, many dredges sunge, before the law was
repealed, all was done in post haste. Some for fear peradventure that they
should not else have had the blestered mass, whole five years in the
worship of the five Gaudees of the blessed virgin Mary. Now we see that
things be done with more aduisement and less haste, although there be a
better warraunte for this then for that. For she knows that to be true
which Seneca says, Velox consilium sequitur penitentia. But the devil is a
diligent fellow, he bestirreth him in his matters, for he ever mistrusteth he
should come to late. Romans 2.
Contrariwyse God is longanimus of great patience, and makes his to be the
like, rather to look for amendment: then by and by to seek destruction and
revenge. Wherefore she being gods chosen instrument to represent here among us
his majesty: walks wisely in the steps of him that has called her, and
studieth diligently to represent a lively image in her mortalite of his
incomparable and infinice majesty, by using correction without severity, by
sekyng the lost with cleme^cie, by governing wisely without fury, with weying
and judging without rashenes, with purging il rumors with deliberacion, and to
conclude, in doing her duty without affection. Besides forth it is not the
lest toke^ of all to persuade us of her happy and godly procedinges, that she
piketh out some such couselors to serve her (and I trust will do more) as be
neither of common wit nor common experience, of whom some by travail in
strange countries, some by learning, some by practice and like authority in
other rulers days, some by affliction either one way or other: for their
gistes and graces which they have received at Gods hand, be men mete to be
called to such roumes. And if any man thinks there be inter azimos fermentum
let them leave that to God and time, and descant not to far of it. Herein she
well puts in practice that is counseled by Ecclesiasticus, saying
consiliarius sit tibi vnus de mill. Eccl. 6.
Culle out of a thousand a cou^sellour, for it is no matter of small weight to
choose counselors as it aperith by the counsel and success of Roboam which
was of two sorts. 1. Reg 12.
Thauncie^t men and Senators gave him counsel and advise to keep the people in
order by love, gentleness, and cleme^cy, the other advised him not to spare but to
lay about him to chop of their heads, to tower the^, ha^ge the^, burn the^,
away with them, dead me^ do no harm, and to make his little finger heavier upon
his people the^ was his fathers body. These ware lusty laddes these were such:
as would wine all our lose all. But they found at the last as other that have
followed them very Hieroboamites as wrissles, VVyn chesters and some other their
scholars yet alive, that as Horatius says vis consilij expers, Horat. in od.
s.
mole ruit sua. fearsnes without wisdom, and counsel, cummeth to a so lishe
end. I doubt not but her majesty if she could, would choose her counsel of
the nobilyte, she being her self the head of that order and patroness: but if
she shall epsy out meaner men of greater experience, farther reach, and more
science, then they be: it is not to be feared, but the^ nobles both for their
own safety, and the Queen's, would gladly lotte to them selfs (though she
would not require it) such as might put them in mind of things they
remember not, either because they have not exercised and beaten their heads
about it: or by lookyng to their lordships have not had leisure to studdy for
policies. But wise men by study and noble men by birth, will make such an
harmony in the common wealth: as neither French nor Scotte, shall be hable to
interrupte the concord: and it to be hoped that neither the one part in
respect of their nobility, will contempne the other for their baseness nor
envy the^ for their wisdom: nor the other part through thadmiracion of their own
gifts, set light by the honor and au^cie^tnes of the peers. 1. Cor. 12.
Learn a similitude says Paul of the body of man, how each member is not the
head, and yet has his necessary use in the body, wherefore if some be wiser,
and some nobler, some richer, and some porer: I doubt not but like good marmers
they will all consider, that they must all travail to bring the ship of the
commonwealth, the Church of Christ, and the Queen's realm, to a quiet port,
which will not be: if they strive, who shall tend the sail, and who the helm,
who shall sound, and who cleanse the Pumpe, who shall do this, and who shall do
that. Iosephe with King Pharao kept by his counsel all the kings people from
staruinge, a mean man and a stranger, pulled out of Prison, where he lay for a
great crime. Genesis 41.
And Daniell governed Chaldea better then all the Princes there, and his service
was more acceptable to the king then all the rest: Mardocheus by the help of
Hester, Hester. 8.
kept Assuerus from the foulest murdre, that ever was devised. And yet he was
but a mean man to be of a kings counsel, being not only a stranger, but
also such an abiecte, as satte at the kings gate without office, dignity,
countenance, or any estimacion, yea and of such a stomach, as he would not
stoop to the proudest of all the reaste. M. Haman, who was, domine fac totum,
Which had like to have cost him the best ioynte he carried about. Wherefore
if mean men be called to that honor: let no man repine at it. For
sometime under a homelye coat, lies hidden much treasure, and pure gold is
found among much dross. Pro. 21.
A wise man says Solomon climeth up into the cities, of the strong and
mighty, and destroieth all the strength that he trusts to: if I had but.
10. Nestors, said Agamenon Troy could not stand long. Consideringe then that
as well in the choice of counselloures as in all other things our most dear
sovereign takes that way: as all godly wise men must needs account the
best: and gives us by these buddes and flowers, so great hoope of singular
fruit: we may if we be nor stoones in sense, and monsters in malice, cheer
and feed our selves with the good success, we hope to have by her. One thing
there is that makes my heart to blede in my belly for her: That when al her
progenitoures commonly have found their realm in quiet: She good Lady
receives it at the hand of her sister entangled (I will not say oppressed)
with foreign wars, the french on the one side, and the scots on the other, which
sucking out of their auncettors, poisoned breasts, immortal and dedly hatred
against this realm, lie in wait like thieves, to invade and to spoil it. In
token whereof the french freke, as it is said after truce was taken: When he
hard of.Q. M. death kept still his Germains about him, upon hope that if there
had been any stir in England, he might have set in a foot. And for that purpose,
had willed the cardinal of lotharing, to confer with our churchmen, to se what
might be done, whether he did so or no God knows: but it is certain that the
cardnall had such commission: but God has dispatched their devises. And
besides that she is thus left: who sees not the realm not Philipped, but
flesed for Philips sake, by mainteining all the last summer, such a navy on the
seas, and an army on the land, besides some tokens of love that passed (I am
sure) from the Queen to her spouse, to show that she was a loving wife: Alas
what remeadye? it is a miserable case: Psalm. 10.
but this will be the help, first to flee to God, and say on every side. In do,
mino confido, quomodo dicitis animae mae transmigra in montem sicut passer. Our
trust is in God, though the French and scots, and the devil him self had
conspired against our souerein, which is anima nostra, our life and comfort.
Shall not we with God and policy, be hable to do as much for the preservation of
our country, as Philip of Macedonie did with policy alone? Gemistus. Princes
of il beginninges, often make good endinges.
who coming to his kingdom in as il case and worse, then this virtuous Lady
does to hers, having the Illyrians, the Paenyans, the Thessalonyans, the
Boetians and the Atheniens, in his neck: so used the matter by making peax with
some, by leaguinge with other, and by war with the rest, one after another,
that within.iii. years space, he gatte again that his ancettors had lost, and
made al his enemies to stoop, and not long after became themperor of al Greece.
2. Samu. 3.
In like manner David entered into his kingdom, when the Philistines had made a
meruelus slaughter in Israel, and killed king Saul and his sons in the field,
and yet with in a while, he recovered the losses, and had the better of al his
enemies round about him: So I doubt not, but God shall send this Judith grace
and power, to cut of Holophernes head, and this Deborah to save her people, and
knock out Siceras brains, com he either out of france, or out of scotland. But
so much the sooner: if al men like true subjects, put to their helping hand,
knowinge that it is their quarrel as well as hers. Come of you bishops, away
with your superfluities, Advise to the bishops.
yield up your thousands, be content with hu^dreds as they be in other reformed
Churches, where be as great learned men as you are. Let your portion be
priestlike and not princelike. Let the Queen have the rest of your temporalties
and other lands to maintain these wars which you procured, Bishops lands.
and your mistress left her, and with the rest to build and found schools
through out the realm: that every parish church may have his preacher, every
City his superintendent to live honestly and not pompously, which will never
be, onles your lands be dispersed and bestowed upon many, which now feadeth
and fatteth but one. Remember that Abimeleck, when David in his banishment would
have dined with him, 1. Sam. 21
kept such hospitaliti: that he had no bread in his house to give him, but the
Show bred. where was all his superfluity to keep your pretensed hospitality?
for that is the cause that you allege, why you must have thousa^ds as though
you were commanded to keep hospitality, rather with a thousand, then with a
hundredth: I would our country man VVicliefes book which he wrote deecclesia,
were in print, and there should you see that your wrinches and cauillations,
be nothing worth. It was my chance to happen of it in ones hand that brought
it out of Bohemia. Lay to your hands, Advise to the noble men.
you noble men, and rather sell a piece of your enheritance to help the Queen,
then by a little backwardnes to ventre all, and to se a proud French man, your
heir, or a Scot, the steward of your lands, learn you of thauncie^t senators
of Rome, and let your wives, take example by theirs, to set more by your
Prince, then your pomp, by your country, then by your curiosity and unsitting
superfluity in apparel, diet, and other vnnecessaries. Liui. 3 de.
These Romans of whom I speak being stressed and almost brought to the
last cast, by the long and dangerous wars of Hanibal, and the French, did
not only like loving fathers to their country, bring in their money and goods,
without hinching or pinching, to relief the charges of their common wealth: But
also partly by honest persuasion, and partly by their good example, provoked
the noble matrones their wives, to bring in their ouches, ringes, chains,
bracelettes, and other iewelles, to be bestowed in the necessary defense of
their country. Oh you English ladies, learn here rather to wear Romain
hearts, then Spanish knaks, Advise to the ladies.
rather to help your country, then hinder your husbands, to make your
queen rich for your defe^se then your husbands poor for your garish
gainesse. If every one of you would but employ your ringes and chains, or the
price of your superfluous ruffes, furs, fringes, and such other trinkettes,
upon the necessary defense of your country: I think you should make the queen
much richer, and habler to mete with your enemies, and your selfs much the
honester, and reddier to withstand Satan which this way goes about to sift
you. leave of your pride and leave a good example as the Romain ladies did to
your posterite, of love to your country, loyalty to your queen, To the
Gentlemen
and honesty toward God and man. Be liberal you Ge^tleme^ and think it not
enough to serve the queen with your bodies, but help also with your goods.
Suffer not the Gentlemen of France to make you their slaves. Some of you know
what natured men they be, beware that the rest feel not. It will be a shame and
to great a vilanie for you, which in all ages have been hable to hold their
nose to the grindstone, now either for sparing of your goods, which is
niggardie, or fear of your lives, which is cowardice, to be their pezantes,
whose lords your Auncettors were. Look to this gear you. Lawyers, which for
a little spending of your breath in chatering in the Chancery, and common
place: become the Lords of your cu^treis, and leave your sons so great
liuelodes as they be noble men's matches. Some in sport call you drudges and not
judges, but I think in god earnest that it is contrary that you make you and
your lords and al other drudges. In this your so great gain forget not what you
owe to your prince, by whose protection you have had leisure to study, and now
time to plead. If your country be not kept in peax, your law will be little
worth, neither your copes nor coifes will serve to any use. I would you could al
find in your hearts to be as liberal toward your prince as some of you have
been of late to the orders of Friars. Be no niggardes you merchants of your
gains to releue the queen, To the marchau^ts
for if you be: the vengeance of God will come upon your hurdes and ba^kes,
the tratling Scot shall knock out your chestes botoms, Jacob. 5.
shall enjoy your machaundize, meet out your veluets and silks, carry away
your clothes, brenne your fair houses, and rule in your city of London, which
the lord forbid: In like manner you Farmers and Franklins, you yomen and rich
Cobbes, abroad with your rusty ryals and your old Angels, which you hourd up:
for the ruste of the^ shall be to your conde^pnacio^, because you couetously keep
Gods creatures from their true use, wherefore they were made. They are called
currau^t and not slepaunt. Help your country with the^, let the queen have
part of the^, that you may peaceably enjoy the rest. wherefore hourd you them
up, and for whom? Psalm. 38.
Thesaurizas nescie^s cui co^gregas. I am sure your meaning is thereby to leave
your sons and heirs, lands and possessions, pastures well stored, houses well
furnished, and honest soms of money to marrv your daughters. But if thou best
not liberal toward the defense of thy country: who shall be thine heir? The
pocky french man and the scoruy Scot: thine old gold shall be carried away into
France, thy son and thou shall be made gally slaves. And where thou think
to marry thy daughter richelye: thou shall see both her and her mother defiled
before thy face miserably. Thy sons enheritau^ce shall be chains in the gally,
wherewith he shall be fettered, a whippe upon his bare skin, if he row not to
the death, and an horse lofe and water for his daily diet. Oh think upon
this, think upon it, you hourders and hyders of Gods creatures. Let not
that mucke of the molde, those rustye Royalles be dearer to you, then your
country, your Queen, your wife, and children, your own bodies and lives.
What a spyte were it, that you should be the Treasurers of your mortal foes,
that you should keep for them to carry away, To the husbandmen.
and hyde from your Queen to enryche the robber. And you husband men which
have Gods plenty, abundance of his blessings. Stick not to help your
natural country so much as you can. God is benificiall unto you, be not
unthankful to his chief minister. For like as the springes and brooks run
into the sea: so must all men's trauail turn to the defense of his country.
If the springes should withholde their water: at the last the sea should lack
So if every one of you hold back your hand: what shall become of your country
and next of your selves? The Philosophers say that the son draws up the
moistnes of the water in the sea, and thereof makes the clouds which after
according to the will of God, be carried over all the face of thearth to water it,
and of that water, which comes from the clouds, rises the springes and
ryuers, so that neither the sea can be without the springes, nor the springs
with out the clouds, nor the clouds without the sea. Lo what a mutual
contributio^ here is in helping one an other. In like manner if you yield not to
the defense of your country, part of your fruits: it shall be ouerru^ne for
lack of help with your enemies, and what shall then become of you? If you
yield liberally to your head, she shall be hable by Gods grace to defend you
with her souldiars, so that you may ear in hope, sow in suertie, reap with
joy, and eat with plenty. Is not this sea of yours, your countey and queen,
by many means sucked dry think you? Is it a Small charge to maynteyne a
number of ships against the French that they have no leisure to land in
England, and invade you? To maynteyne an army in the borders, to keep the
country from burning and spoylynge? What say you to the building of block
houses by the seas side, the provision of harnes, gunnes, and weapons for the
war, to the kepinge about her, a great counsel of wiseme^ to debate for your
wealth and safeguard, to the sendinge ambassadors hither and thither, with a
thousand more charges which were to long to reckon: From whence must this come?
but from the fruits of the earth, which by quietness you gather: and without her
defense you must lose. Oh you count it a great matter, to give. 3. or. 4
shillings in the pound. Oh England, England, thou know not thine own wealth:
because thou see not other countries penury. Oh if thou saw the pezantes
of France, how they are scraped to the bones, and what extremities they
suffer: thou would think thy self blessed (as in deed thou art) which haste
rather fathers and mothers to thy gouernoures, then Kings or Queen's. The
husbandman in France, all that he has gotten in his whole life, louseth it
upon one day. For when so ever they have war (as they are never without it)
the kings soldiers enter into the poor man's house, eats and drinks up all that ever he has, gives their horse his corn, so long as it lasts, without
paying a farthinge, and never departs so long as there is any thing left in
the house. This was the manner: How the french pezantes be handled.
but this king has amended it with the wurse, for his soldiers come not
thither, but his rakehels thofficers, which pare them even to the bones, the
poor man never goes to the market, to sell any thing: but he paieth a toll,
almost the half of that he sells: he eats neither pigge, gose, capo^, nor
hen: but he must pay as much for the tribute of it there, as it might be bought
for here: h. Ovnhappy and miserable men that live under this yocke. In Italy
they say it is not much better, The husbandma^s state in Italy.
the husband men be there so rich: that the best coat he wears is sacking,
his nether stocks of his hose, be his own skin, his diet and fare not very
costly, for he comes to the market with a hen or two in one hand, and a
dosen eggs in a net in the other, which being sold and told, he bieth
and carries home with him, no Biefe or Mutton, Veale or sea fish, as you do:
but a quarte of oil to make sallettes of herbs, wherewith he lives all the
weke followinge. And in Germany though they be in some better case then
the other: The countrymen in Germani.
yet eat they more rotes then flesh. For what cheer so ever they have beside,
they are sure of rotes and stinckinge herbs, which they call crowte. Thus
these men live and think them selves happy: if they may have enough of this.
Now compare them with thee: and thou shall see how happy thou art. They eat
herbs: and thou Beef and Mutton. They rotes: A comparing of the English man
with other country men.
and thou butter, chese, and eggs. They drinck commonly water: and thou good
ale and bear. They go from the market with a sallet: and thou with good flesh
fill thy wallet. They lightlye never see any sea fish: and thou have thy belly
full of it. They pay till their bones rattle in their skin: and thou layest up
for thy son and heir. Thou art twice or thrice in thy life time called upon
to healpe thy Country, with a subsidy or contribution: and they daily pay and
never cease. Thou live like a Lord, and they like dogs. God defend us
from the feling of their misery. I am a fraid our grutching and groaning, will
make us to taste of this whip, as it must needs come to pass, if thy head
have not wherewith to defend the: these will be the fruits of thy disobedience
We live in paradise. England is the paradise and not Italy, as commonly they
call it. For they have figs, The fruits of England and Italy.
Orenges, Pomgranates, Grapes, Pepons, Oil, and herbs: and we have Sheep,
Oxen, Kie, Calves, Co^nies, Fish, woll, Lead, Clothe, Tin, Leather, and
infinite treasures more, which they lack. We have plenty of all things: and
they scarcesitie of all things. Oh if thou knew thou English man in what
wealth thou live, and in how plentiful a Country: Thou would.vii. times
of the day fall flat on thy face before God, and give him thanks, that thou
wart born an English man, and not a french pezant, nor an Italy an, nor Almane.
What will follovv our grutching.
If thou beiste not thanckfull to God, and liberal to thy Queen and Country:
the poor pezante of France, shall enjoy thy wealth: and feel how happy
thou art, and thou shall taste of his miserye to know how unhappy he is.
The French shall teach thee to eat rotes and Acornes: saying thou canste not
find in thy heart to do thy duty, to them that mainetaine this thy wealth,
Thou must learn to drink water, if thou come under his yocke, and spare
thy Barley and Ootes, for his great horses. The Scotts in spite of us, The
folly of the Scotts.
have made him their head: but they shall tell me or it be long, how wisely
they have dealte, hauer cakes will be good manchet with the^ within a while.
Joshua.
God that defended his children of Israel from the Amalechits the Palestines,
the Iebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and all the rest of their enemies
defend us from the slavery and misery of that proud nacy on, that cruel
people, and tirannous rulers. Furthermor for the sauegard of your country, if
you be called to the wars, grutche not nor groan not at it: go with good
wills and lusty courages, An exhor tacion to manlines in the vvarres.
rather to mete them in the field, the^ to tarry til they come home to you, and
hang you at your own gates. Play not the milk soppes in making curtsy, who shall
go first: but show your selves true English men in readiness, courage, and
boldness: and be ashamed to be the last, fear neither french, nor Scot. For
first you have God, and al his army of angels on your side: you have right and
troth, God is English.
and seek not to do them wrong, but to defend your own right. Think not that
God will suffer you to be foiled at their hands, for your fall is his
dishonor, if you lose the victory: he must lose the glory. For you fight not
only in the quarrel of your country: but also and chieflye in the defense of his
true religion, and of his dear son Christ, not against men of the same
religion, which might make theuent doubtful, but against his ennemies,
Antechristes friends, the Turks confederates, ethnikes, Idolaters, and very
helhounds. If there were nothing else to provoke gods fury and extreme vengaunce
against that turkish Valesius the french tiraunte: The french Turk.
but that he roigneth him self in league with Christ's sworn enemy the Turk:
were it not enough to kindle, yea to inflame the wrath of God against him? is
he a king or a deuel, a christian or a lucifer, that by his cursed confederacy
so encourages the Turk, that he now dare be bold to venture upon Polonia, a
Christian realm, which has received the gospel. And that way to come into
Germany. Oh wicked catise, and fierbrand of hell, which for thincreasing of his
pomp and vayn glory (which he shall not long enjoy) will betray Christ and
his cross, The french is Christ's enemy and the Turks Friend.
to his mortal enemy. Oh folish Germains which se not their own undoing.
Which conspire not together with the rest of christen Princes, to pull out
such a traitor to God and his kingdom by the ears out of France, and
hang him against the son a drying: The devil has none other of his side
now, but him to mainteyne both the spiritual and the temporal Antechriste,
the Pope and the Turk: GOD can not long suffer this, though he wynke a while
at his wretchedness, and suffer him to scourge us and other, until we know our
selves: And after undoubtedly he will pull his feathers, he will cool his
courage, as he did Nabucadnezer, and others whose example he follows:
wherefore seeing he has forsaken God like an Apostata, and sold him self to
the deuell: let us not doubt but God will be with us against him: when so ever
he shall seek to wrong us, and I trust will now in the latter age of the
world show his might in cuttynge of this proud Holophernes head, by the
hand of our Judith: Oh blessed is that man that loses his life against such a
Termagaunt: yea more blessed shall they be that spend their lives against him,
then against his great master the Turk: for the Turk never understood the
cross of Christ, but this Julian Apostata, is named a deuelles name:
Christianissimus. And is in the very heart of Christendom: and like a
traitorous Saracene is Christ's enemy. The french manhod is not to be feared.
Secondarely what people be they with whom we shall match: are they Giaunts,
are they conquerours, or monarks of the world? No good English man they be
effeminate Frenchmen: Stout in brag, but nothing in deed. They be such as
you have always made to take their heles. They be your slaves and tributaries:
whose Castles, Cities, and towns, you have possessed, whose armies you have
not ones but.500. times disco^fited, whose noble men you have manfully killed,
spoiled their country, brent their cities, taken their kings, and crowned
your own, in the chiefest city of their dominion, as their own histories do
testify. Tillius in Chrono. Cuminius de bello Burgund. Pol. Virg.
Remember our auncettors victories at Crauantum, at Vernolium, about Amias, in
the borders of Normandy, at Cressiacum, at Dagincourt, when some time they
killed. 2000. some time. 3000. When they had in the fiielde against us to
help them the king of Boheme, the king of Scotts, the king of Nauare, the
Duke of Lotharinge, the Duke of Flaunders, and 26. strange earls. Till. an.
1339.
Yea their histories do confess that we have sorer handled them: then ever
the Romans wereable to do. At this day the Germans that come home out of
their wars say: That the Fransois are more afraied of the Engly she then of
any nation: The Englisheme^s fault.
And it is no marvel, for we have through Gods help ever had the better of
the^: Only this was our fault, which was also Hanniballes, that we could
conquer them when we list: but we could not use the victory, in keeping
that we had got, which was our negligence and not lack of manhood. In our
time what good forune have we had against them? How did King Henry the eight
Scourge them? In his youth, wanne Turwyne and Turney, and in his age
Bulloigne, Blackneste, New haven, Tholde man, and all that country. When
durst these meacockes mete us in the field? or if they did: went they not
weepynge away? This courage was in our Auncettors, that they thought it a
sport to war with the French men: They contempned them as dishe cloutes: and
shall we fear them as co^querors? They invaded them in their own country:
and shall we suffer them to brag us at our own gates? They have left us this
glory for our enheritaunce: The common report of the English.
and shall not we leave it to our posterity? It has been always said of
Thenglishe and yet is (as of the Ombri) that either they will win or they
will die. Oh shall we suffer this honor to be taken from us in our days?
Shall not we leave it as well to our children: as our progenitors left it to
us? Tusshe fear neither their horse nor their gunnes: For when they have the
seas at their backs, in stead of their fox holes, wherinto they always
crepe, and the black byll at their noses, our arrows in their sides, and
English men's lokes in their eyes: they will be so perplexed that they can not tell
where to wind the^. Then remember that for this.110. years our au^cettors
have scourged the^, and kept this noble isle spite of the devil and them. Saving
that William of Normandy crept in among us through the cyuill war of two
brethren, He rald and Toston. Tillius polyd.
And yet what did he? He lest his posterity to reign, which were rather by
time turned to be English: then the noble English, to becomme French, as
our tongue and manners at this day declares, which differs very little from
our Auncettors the valy aunt Saxones. We be the Saxons posterity.
We have a few hunting terms and pedlars Erenche in the lousye law, brought
in by the Normanes, yet remaining: But the language and customs be English
and Saxonyshe. I can not tell what French blood is left. But if there be any
French hearts, I would they had to it the Mall Francois, which is their
country men's enheritaunce: Besides this you have the pidlyng Scotts, which
are always French for their lives. So we have had them always, we never had
to do with the one, but we had the other busy against us. For they have been
and are to us as the Philistines, Iebusites, Amalechites. etc. were to Gods
people pricks and thorns in our sides, to keep us from pride, or as the
Samnites, were to the Romans rather to exercise us in wars, then that they
were ever hable to do us any displeasure: how often have we invaded them, even
to the heart of their country, made notable slaughters, killed their kings,
taken their nobles, and did in manner what we list: our victories of late days
as Flodo^ field, Musselborough field, Saint Catherines day and other, declare
that our borders need more to sear the stealyng of their cattle: the^ any
inuadig of our country. And that where to they trust most: shall be their
greatest co^fusio^, and greatest help, I mean the coming in of the French men
into their country. For nether the begerlines of the land, will be able to feed
the fine mouthed french me^, nor the nature of the Scotts can long suffer their
yocke, and so will they together by the ears. Thus have we nothing to dismay
us, but al thing to encorage us. God to fight for us, the strength of our land
the courage of our men, the goodness of the soil, to give us to maintain
war, the wekenes of our enemies, over whom we have rained, and triu^phed, the
right of the quarrel. And to conclude all likelihode of victory to make us
rather to conte^n the^ then fear them. Wherefore, if thou beist a man: shrink
not. If thou beist a good Subject, seek no excuses. As one did, when a Noble
man mustred his men toward Bolloigne. One, among the rest, which desired to
tarry at home, either because they hadd some disease, or were in some part lame,
or had some such impediment seeing that diverse were excused, desired that he
might tari at home also. Nay says the noble man, thou art a tall fellow,
young and lusty, hable to the King set uice, thou must needs go. Alas sir quod
he, I have an impediment, I cannot go. What is that said the noble man. Mary
my heart fails me sir, quod he. Yea says the noble man, is that thy
impediment, in deed thou can not have a wursse. But I will remedy the of
that with an halfepeny halter, if there be no other help. Such white liuered
milk soppes be no true Englysh, for they lack tholde English hearts.

Now therefore, it is all our duties, to be in every wise be obedient to gods
liuetenaunt our souereign, in forwardnes, and helping her both with our goods
lands, Our duty of obedience.
and bodies, when need is, every man in his calling. If we do not: we first
provoke Gods wrath against us, to pour down his vengeance upon us, either
by sickness and plagues, or by openinge the mouth of the earth, and hell to
swallowe us, to the dongeon of damnation, Nu. 16.
as Corah, Dathan and Abiram, or to send us a tira^t, in stead of a louiug
Queen and mother to reign over us: or by turning the heart of the prince
through our unkindness, churlishnes, and rebellion, from us. That where as she
loved us, and trusted us: she must be grieved and suspecte us. And what
provoke Princes to be lions, and severe, yea makes them tyrants? but the
frowardnes, the churlishnes, the kicking and disobedience of the unnatural
subjects, as Thucy dides says of Harmodius, and Aristogeiton, Thueyd. li. 6.
which by the cowarde kyllinge of Hipperchus made Hippias to be a fraied, they
would do the like to him. And thereupon gat him a guard about him, cut his
subjects shorter, gave them less liberty, showed them the less love, joined
himself with other kings, to make him strong, made harder laws. Where as
before he ruled curteouslye, brake no old laws, nor vexed them not. The
frowardnes of the people is a great matter to alienate the princes mind from
them: wherefore, if thou wylt have a good king or Queen: play thou the good
subject. And if they be of nature inclined to clemency: provoke them not to
fury. If they be not: rather study to win them by obedience, then to
exaspetate them by Rebellion. It is for the sins of the people that God
suffers tirantes to reign. For if the people did their duty: God would
reward them with mercy. The gain of disobedience.
By disobedience to thy head, what gainest thou? but first as I say, Gods
wrath, next thy rulers displeasure which as Solomon says: is death. 3. Trouble
of thine own mind, while thou kickest against the prick. Pro. 16
Then the danger of thy country, in that by thy disobedience, thou openest
agate, to let in thy common enemy, both to thy countries and thine own
undoing. Thou prouokest thy prince to hedge the in, with many laws, which is
first thy deserte, and after thy hurt. For as Arcesilaus said, Arcesilaus
where there be many Phisicians and Poticaries: it is a sign there be many
diseases: So where be many laws: Then gather what we be in England.
it is a toke^ of much disobedience. Last of al, thou art sure, if God punish
the not here: yet shalt thou not go scott free in the world to come. Look upon
the Jews at this day, who for their rebellious and unquiet nature, are
scattered abroad in the world, theircities destroyed, Joseph de capt. The
rebel on of the Jews.
their country desolate, and their name abhorred. And who redeth Josephus shall
se, that it could not be otherwise. For there was never under the son such a
rebellious people. I grant that the chief cause was, the refusal of Christ,
but God punished that sin with a another by sending them vnbuxome hearts,
wherbi they might purchasse their own destruction. As it came to pass at the
last, to the terror of all rebellious and seditious nations. Thucyd, Polyb. Lin.
What made Scicilia that noble i will to be so tossed and turmoiled, as it was?
First betwixt the old Atheniences the Lacedaemonians and after that betwixt the
Romans and Carthagiens: but discord among them selves, and diobedie^ce to
their rulers? Scic lia.
what made the romans so sone to overthrow Greece: but that many cities
refused to be governed by the Atheniens and some other by the Macedonians and
others by other, Thucyd.
so that it was an easy matter to win those countries, that by civil war and
disobedience had lost and undone them selves: what made either Dane or Normand
to set his foot in this noble realm: England conquered by discord
but werines in the subjects of their own natural rulers, and malicious
desire to have innouacions? This has been the undoing of all countries to be
loath to obey, and ready to rebel. Contrariwise where good concord, and
brotherlye unity, where loyalty and obedience is: there must neades be a
sure state, what preserves co^monvvelthes.
as Solon being asked what preserved a common wealth, answered when the
subjects obey the magistrates, and the magistrates the laws. This has kept
the Venetians commonwealth so long, and so many hundredth years in tranquillity
and honor, in that they have sought to reverence good laws and obey their
maiestrats, not because their Aristocratie is the best kind of Government (as
by no means it is nether by reason, experience, nor judgment of Philosophers.
Let us therefore contend with them, in that preserves them, which is humble
obedience, faythfulnes, The calof the sedicicus.
and true service to our country, and the head thereof. And think that it is
the call of Satan, that moves us to the contrary, to entangle us like a
cunnyng fouler, vsinge such a voice as we like, in the net of destruction, both
of body and soul. If we obey, and do our duty: all the blessings of God shall
be poured upon us. We shall live in peace both of body and mind, with
leisure and liberty to serve God freely, without fear of thennemie to
encombre us in our possessions, All good things follow obedience.
ordrede of Antechriste to vex our conscience. Our land shall have Rain and
sun shine in dew season, our corns and fruits shall prosper, our cattle
and goods shall encreace, our bodies shall be without diseases, our minds
quiet with out crosses, our wives shall not be barre^, our children no
unthrifts, our servants no loyterours, nor pickers, our neighbors not
envious but louinge, our counselors wise and prudent, our men of war
courageous, our preachers faithful and not lordlyke, our lawyers not covetous,
our justices no bribares, our lords and noble men no fools, our officers no
ha^dmakers, and our governors no tyrauntes. For where as God says else Dabo
vobis regem in ira inea. Ose. 13.
I will give them a king when I am angry, to anger them: He shall then say to
the contrary, Constituam super illos vnctum meum qui regnabit inter illos in
aeternum. I will apoint them a prince that they shall never be weary of, nor
that shall deal with them discourteously. Do you not hear how lame^tably your
natural mother your country of England, Engla^des voice to her cluldre^
calls upon you for obedie^ces saying. Oh, remember remember my dear children
in what case you stand, your enemies be round about you, like insatiable
rauenours to pluck me from you, to cast you out of my lap where I have this.
110 years like a faithful mother nourished you, a time sufficient for me I trow
to know you, and you me. I have been and am glad of you, I delight and rejoice
in you, above all other peoples. In declaracio^ whereof I have always spued out
and cast from me Danes, French, Norwegia^s, and Scotts. I could brook none
of the^ for the tender love that I bare unto you, of whom I have my name. I
never denied to minister to you my singular commodities, which God has lent me
for you, as corn and cattle, land and pasture, wull and cloth, Englandes
liberality toward her children.
lead and tynne, flesh and fish, gold and silver, and all my other treasures:
I have poured them out among you, and enriched you above all your neighbors
about you: which make them to envy you, and covet me. Besides this God has
brought forth in me, the greatest and excelle^test treasure that he has, for
your comfort and all the worlds. He would that out of my womb should come that
servant of his your brother Iho^ VVyclefe, who begat Husse, who begat Luther,
who begat truth. What greter honor could you or I have, Christ's second birth
in England.
then that it pleased Christ as it were in a second birth to be borne again of
me among you? And will you now suffer me, or rather by your disobedience
purchase me, to be a mother without my children, and to be made the nurse of a
sort of infideles Idolaters and Turks? Can I abide to be with out you, or can
you be content to be without me? Oh God grant that I never se the day that the
basterdly broad of ambytious french men, eat and enjoy the fruits which I
prepare for you my dear children: Let me rather satisfy my thirste with
their effeminate blood, then they should pluck from you my motherly breasts:
Stick to your mother, as she sticks to you. Let me keep in quiet and feed
as I have done your wives, your children, and your kinsfolks: Obey your
mistres and mine which God has made lady over us, both by nature and law.
You can not be my children, if you be not her subjects: I will none of you, if
you will none of her. If you love me you can not hate her, as my hope is you
do not: if you obey her, honor her, and love her, be you assured that I will
not fail you at your need, with any of my good fruits that you can require: I
will fill your bosoms and your mouths, your wives, and your children, with
plenty. And if your enemies come against you, I will sound so terrible against
them, that their hearts shall fail them to come of the Seas and tread upon
me. I will not suffer so vile a nation to remain quietly, or to have any
fotinge in me: wherefore as a friend I exhort you, and as a mother require you
(my dear Englysh children,) to knyt your selves together with brotherly love,
and with unfeigned obedience, to defend me and my gouernesse against those your
ancient enemies, which ever were in fear of you and yet be. If they attempt
any thing against me, play the men, and honor me with the sacrifice of
their heads and carcases. Then shall I think that you be no mungrelles but
the true posterity of my ancient children the old English me^, which by
their valiau^tnesse made me lady of France, and gouernesse of al their chief
cities, follow your fathers steps, and dele^d your mothers honor. Be no slaves
where you have been lords, nor subjects, where you have been rulers.

Thus good true hearted English men, speaks your country unto you, not in
word but in deed. Wherefore give no dulle ear to her, nor harken not to any
vain blastes or voices which may draw you from the love of your country,
from the saving of your selves, and and the defense of your sovereign. You
shall find love for your obedience, faith for your truth, care and study to
keep you, for your ready good will to obey her. Let no enchauntment bewitche
you. Let no spiririte deceive you. Let no stranger make you strangers to your
selves. You see their reasons be trisles and their words but wind, which goo
about by their blusterynge blastes to blow you, first from your duty to
God, which commands you to obey your Rulars, next from your faith which
you owe to your prince, for that care and love which she bears toward you.
And last of all from your quiet and country: which you can not enjoy, but by
doing your duty in obeying. Let us therefore good brethren I bescche you in the
tender mercies of God, in the bowelles of Christ, stop our ears from
hearing, stay our minds from conceauing, and shut up our mouths from
uttering any such venyme or poison: which these mountbankes bring out of our
enemies land, to insecte, poison, and corrupt us, under the pretense of
playsters to salve us.

Let us hear God rather then man, which cries and commands upon pain of
dampnacion, to obey his lieutenau^t and supreme officer: Against who^ we can
not kick, but we must be Gods enemies, false subjects, and Satan's servants.

Let us seek to requite her with thankfulness, which studieth to keep us in
quietness. Let us daily call to God with lifted up hearts and hands, for her
preservation and long life: that she may many years carry the sword of our
defense, and there with cut of the head of that Hidra, the Antichrist of Rome,
in such sort, as it never grow again in this realm of England: that Gods
glory may flory she, good men's conscience may beat rest, this noble Realm in
honor, and the Queen's Majesty in long selicitie, which God grauut. Amen*

pseudonymous printer's device of John Day, featuring a hand holding a birch
twig emerging from a cloud above a globe or orb (not in McKerrow) Who so
knows the Lords Will and does it not shall be beaten w many stripes Luke XII



