THRIFTS EQVIPAGE: Viz.

Five Divine and Moral Meditations, OF 1. Frugalitie. 2. Providence. 3.
Diligence. 4. Labor and Care. 5. Death.


Prou. 28. 19. He that tilleth his Land shall have plenteousnes of bread, but
he that follows idle persons, shall have poverty. LONDON, Printed for John
Teage, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the
Ball. 1622.

I Meddle not with news of Parliament,
Court-Fauourites, or Kingdoms government;
I on Kings secrets, and affairs of State,
Nor know, nor need, nor care to meditate:
Let gods, who have the charge of all, bear sway,
The Muses must not censure, but ob^y.
I sing what most I wish; what is that? to thrive,
Without least wrong to any man alive:
A grateful Work to all, to young and old,
That seek to get or to increase their gold:
But why goes Death then with this thriftie train?
Because I hold, it is the greatest gain
To die well: For we no man truly call
Or rich, or happy, till his Funeral.
To the Author.
Virtue thine Object, thou her Subject art;
Thou deck'st her in thy verse, she decks thine heart:
Each the other does deservedly set forth;
From thee her praises flow, from her thy worth.
R. C.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, LORD MAYNARD, MY very good Lord.
TO whom should I these pleasing pains commend,
My Muse has ^ane Frugality to trade?
But to the Muses dear and noble friend,
Who, as in Honor, seeks to thrive in Grace:
Who, truly nob^e, honors his Place;
Nor f^r his Place is only honored:
Whom should the Muses more desire to grace,
Then whom they have up in their Bosoms bred,
And who with bount^ous gifts them ^ath reguerdoned?
Such Bounty is true Thrift: Thus thou do lay
Thy treasure up in heaven; thus thou do gain:
By giving of some fading goods away,
True honor, which for ever shall remain:
If thou will pleased be to entertain
Thrift and her train, into thy Patronage,
I boldly dare in her behalf maintain,
She is fair, bounteous, sober, grave and sage,
And fit to counsel thee, in Youth, in Strength, and Age.
Next, Providence shall guide thee and (...),
In all wherein (...) hand is diligent,
And holy Care and Labor shall direct
Thy Counsels to a just and good (...),
To hau'n of Rest, to harbor of Content:
And if thou please to read Deaths Meditation,
Thou shall perceive her as an Herald sent,
To summon thee to heavenly habitation,
To blessed Bride and Bridegroomes marriage-consummation:
Most happy end of all, that rightly run
Their courses in the days of vanity!
With Wisdoms study Solomon begun,
But ends all with this Epithalamic:
Sweet Swan-like Farewell of Mortality!
Taste of true Joy which ever shall remain!
Then know, it is thy highest Dignity,
This Earnest sure, of heaven on earth, to gain;
Which I will pray for, Thou must labor to attain.
Your Lordships most devoted in all affectionate duty and service, Robert Aylet.
MEDITATION 1.
Of Frugality, or Thrift.
MY Muse now fares like some plain country Maid,
Walking in fairest Garden for delight,
With all variety and choice arrayd,
Of herbs and flowers to please the Sent and Sight;
Who with the choycest flowers does first bedight
White silken pillowes of her bosom fair;
But after their rich colors her inuit,
With them to deck her head and golden hair,
That as she them adornes, so they may all begay her.
For when Brides garden first I entered
Of Graces, for delightful meditation,
I only some choice Flowers gathered,
For holy Life, and heavenly Contemplation:
But passing forth with choice of Delectation,
Such sweet and rich variety I find,
Fit to adorn my life and conversation,
Out of those pleasant knots I cannot wind,
Which with new choice of flowers and herbs delight my mind.
But amongst all the fragrant herbs and flowers,
That in the Graces garden do abound,
I find none of more sovereign grace and powers,
Than this of Thrift, which next I do propound:
An herb indeed that is hardly to be found,
Because she most what in a corner grows,
And matteth low upon the fattest ground,
And many her mistake for likely shows,
But scarce one of an hundred that her truly knows.
Oh heavenly Muse! that taught the shepherds swain,
(As he his flocks was following great with young,
To feed them on fair Iordans flowrie plain)
Diuinest skill in Tunes and heavenly Song;
With some such holy Fury touch my tongue,
Whilst I now of Frugality do sing;
Who, though she little does to me belong,
Yet if thou help^ to touch my harsher string,
I may teach some her practice, whilst her praise I ring.
She is that Virtue, or that golden Mea^e,
'Twixt Avarice and Frodigalitie,
The constant Moderation between
Base Niggardize, and wasting Luxury.
We Temp^rance, Abstinence, and Modes^y,
With Continence, in this word THRIFT contain;
And yet exclude not Liberality.
Who does to name of (...) frugi
frugall man attain,
One of the highest Titles due to man does gain.
And such indeed have only right fruition
Of all such fruits, as God to man does send;
Who prudently here weighing their condition,
Preserve the Substance, and the fruits do spend:
Who flocks and cattle diligently tend,
Grass, Vines and Corn that in the fields do grow,
To them their lambs for clothing, Wool will lend;
From Goats and Kine great store of milk shall flow,
To feed their household, and large gifts abroad bestow.
There is a Thrift in Substance, and in Grace;
One temporal, the other spiritual:
They that the one, without the other, trace,
Do neither of them find perpetual:
God is of both the Cause effectual;
Apo^lo water, Paul may plant and sow,
But God it is that work to all in all:
As all spiritual Thrift from him does flow,
So, by his blessing all in substance thrive and grow.
This did the Laban
Churl by good experience prove,
So long as he good Jacob could retain,
He saw great blessings come from heaven above,
And therefore sought him ay to entertain:
Whilst Joseph with the Egyptian does remain,
All prospers in his house, and in his field,
And in the prison h^ does favor gain,
Because all well succeeds that he does wield:
By heavens sweet influence the earth her fruits does yield.
Thrift eldest daughter is of Temperance,
By Prudence nursed in her tender years,
But when to riper years she does advance,
A Standard under Fortitude she bears:
She, graced by these three most noble Peers,
By their advice directs her actions right,
By Temperance she feeds, and clothing wears;
By Prudence store prouides with wise foresight;
By Fortitude against Fortunes blasts she stands upright.
She moderateth all delights and pleasure,
Not that she us forbids all sports or play,
But makes us recreate our selves with measure,
That from our selves they take us not away:
As he that moderates, upon the way
His ^iercer Steed, is said to use him right;
Not he that let us him run about and stray:
So only he does pleasures use aright,
That serves not them, but makes them serve to his delight.
For she not only is a Moderation
In meats, and what to clothing does pertain,
But she eke moderates our recreation,
Lest for it we do lose a greater gain:
She does too much of any thing refrain,
And cuts off all luxurious vain expense.
If thou to thrift and riches would attain
Here, seek not to increase and raise thy rents,
But moderate Desire, and vain Concupiscence.
I ever from Frugalitie exclude
All sordid baseness, want of aliment,
She out of plenty always does seclude
Some few things necessary for Content:
For to be frugall and magnificent,
May both well in a prudent man combine,
Else Thrift no daughter is of Temperment;
I only those for frugall men define,
Who use their store, but suffer it not to decline.
I often do find in some a simulation,
Or ostentation of Frugality;
When great men follow thriftie imitation
Of those, which are of meaner quality:
And this may be too much Rusticitie,
Be it in Diet, Vessels, Ornament;
Best rule for Thrift in all, is Modesty:
For where it meets with one that is provident,
He Is temperate, modest, frugall and magnificent.
But the most dear and faithful friend to Thrift,
Is careful Husbandry, and Providence:
This is the thriuing Virtue, which is grift
On stock of Labor, Care, and Diligence.
This brings in sewell to Magnificence,
And like good huswife fetches food from far.
The thriftie handmaid of Beneficence,
In Summer for the Winter takes care;
And, ere she builds, Materials does abroad prepare.
Fie on the lazy Gras^opper, that sings
All Summer, and in Winter sterues for cold,
Unlike the frugall Pismire, which still brings
In new provision, ere she spend her old:
Like many youthful Gallants, who their gold,
In summer of their youth do sport away;
But when their coin is spent, and land is sold,
Too la^e, find Ryo^ cause of their decay:
But prudent Thrift foresees and shunnes such evil day.
By civil Law, the mad and prodigal
Are interdicted the administration
Of their own Goods; and have Curators all,
To manage their estate in frugall fashion:
And so long must they both abide Curation;
The furious till he gets his wits again,
The Prodigal, till he to emendation
Does of his Manners and his Thrift attain:
It Is good for Commonwealth, none spend his state in vain.
One, Thrift unto the Temples does compare
Amongst the Heathen, which, most sure Asyle,
And Sanctuaries for all Debtors were:
Another likes a thrifty man, ere-while,
To ground well compast, and well tilled with toil:
For as such lands grow foul by slothfulness,
But fruitful, where the plough does stir the soil:
So men grow gross and foul by Idleness,
But pure and healthful by laborious Thriftinesse.
Heathen, such fruitful frugall men compare
Unto the gods, who had so little need,
Though they had all, that they it all could spare
To mortals, who did here their blessings need:
Far otherwise it is with our rich-mens breed;
They nothing spare, but spend even all and more,
Their Flesh and Lusts luxuriously to feed:
Thus they, in plenty swimming, are but poor,
When those that have but little, yet have greater store.
This their rich misery does not proceed
From any fault, that is in outward store,
But from Lusts and Cupidities which breed
In Soul and Body, as I said before:
Like some in fits of Agues, who the more
Cool Beer they drink, the more they do desire,
Their drinking thirst increases: He therefore
Must purge the humors, cause of all this Fire,
Else drink till he burst, he grows within the drier.
Me thinks I rightly may this Thrift compare
Unto the seven ^at Kine on Nylus shore,
Or those seven goodly ^ares of Corn, which were
To Egypts Monarch signs of Thrift and store:
The blasted ears, and Bullockes lean and poor,
I liken unto Prodigality:
Who all the fruits deuowers up, and more,
That are provided by Frugality:
Thus she with her own bowels feeds her enemy.
As when the Air suckes immoderatly
Up moisture from the ground, the clouds do fall
From thence again on Earth most lauishly:
Even so, when Misers here do lick up all,
For to enrich their heyers therewithal,
Soon as the long-expected day does come
Of their most welcome, tearelesse funeral,
Their wealth all lauishly about does run,
Till their rich cloud be spent, and they be quite undone.
It is most terrible, prodigious,
To see an Earthquake, with dread violence,
Swallow a Country, City, Town, or House;
Yet Prodigals, often by profuse expense,
Do swallow Towers, Houses, Farms and Rents:
Then they, says one, them vomit up again,
Not truly sell them; for they have long since
Them spent in drinking, lusts and pleasures vain;
They only now are faint to spue them out for pain.
Many good precepts find I of the wise,
Us to instruct in true Frugality;
But David does the only way advise,
In his most sweet diuinest Psalmody:
He shall have plenty and prosperity,
That fears the Lord, and scatters to the poor,
His name be blessed to Posterity.
He that disperseth shall have greater store:
For goods-disposer gives him all his wealth therefore.
Abels first frugall man I of do read,
Who gave the fairest firstlings of his Flocks,
Because there was no poor that then had need,
To him that gave him all his store and stocks.
This gave to Isaac great and castie Shockes,
When in one year he reapt an hundredfold:
Jacob, that went out with a staff, now stocks
All Shechims country with his Herd and Fold:
The land of Canaan scarce can all his substance hold.
The Heathen say, that heavenly Providence
To mortals here for labors Blessings sell:
And therefore do require all diligence
Of all, that would have all things prosper well.
Of Abstinence and Continence some tell,
That give a man with little, much content;
Which of another inch will make an ell,
By whom naught lauishly on Lusts is spent,
But only needful wants of Nature to content.
Fabricius thus with little, does despise
Great Princes presents, and the gifts of Kings:
His Flocks him cloth, his Farms with food suffi^e.
Scranus is his plough a-following,
When as the Senate comes, him news to bring,
That they him their Dictator had elected.
Brave Curious, who, for Empires managing,
Was after of all Consuls most respected,
Dwelt in a country-Cottage all alone neglected.
More royal's sure Content in Poverty,
In little homely B^^res, which can defend
Us from Suns heat, and Ayers injury,
Then glistring Towers, where they waste and spend
In pomp and luxury, what God does lend:
There, costly Dainties often with poison wound:
Here, without cost, the earth sound Cates does send:
There, golden Vessels, purple Beds are found:
Here, all the flowery banks do rest and quiet sound.
When Alexander, in a little Tun,
Saw a great Tenant with content of mind,
The Cynicke, Lo, says he, that here does wu^
More rest, than I in all the world can find:
I covet all, he nothing less does mind.
They surely have more pleasure, and less pain,
Who are with little unto Thrift inclined,
Than they that seek a world of wealth to gain,
That they may more indulge to ease and pleasure vain.
One praises hunger, as best sauce to meat,
Because it cost him least, yet sauour'd best,
And always with delight did drink and eat,
Because he never did without hunger feast.
Some only live to eat, drink and digest,
But we ought only eat and drink to live;
To live to feed, is to be like a beast:
Who would in reason more, than sense, be thrive,
To body needful things, to Soul must plenty give.
Xantippe's said once Socrates too blame,
For that he often made an inuitation
Of greatest friends; yet's fare was still the same,
Avoiding always costly preparation:
Soon he replide thus to her allegation:
If, as they seem, they be our friends indeed,
They will respect our Thrift; but if for fashion
They make a show: let us to our selves take heed,
And not spend our estate, them daintily to feed.
These patterns are of frugall abstinence,
Which, as you see, the Heathen even adore;
Now see the holy fathers providence
To raise themselves to plenty being poor:
No^, Abraham, Booz, and a thousand more,
Live upon Tillage, Grazing, Husbandry,
And tend their flocks, come, cattle, grass, and store:
Yea, Kings did hereunto themselves apply,
To join Magnificence with this Frugality.
Even after Saul anointed is a King,
He follows the Cattle from the field,
And they that death to Ishbosheth did bring,
Came to buy Corn; it seems he Tillage held.
None e're did so magnificently weld
A Scepter, as did royal Solomon,
To which his Thrift such wondrous store did yield:
To his sheepe-shearing sprucest Absolon,
Inuites even princely David, and his eldest son.
See how great Princes, and the sons of Kings
Are not ashamed of Frugality.
Priests lived indeed of Tithes and Offerings,
And therefore looked most to Gods husbandry:
Paul had a trade, although a Pharisie;
And though he to the Apostleship attain,
Yet works he in his Trade and Mystery,
His living with his labor here to gain,
Nor will he charge the Church, though bound, him to maintain.
The Apostles all were Fishermen, and gained
Their living, by enduring wet and cold:
Divines think, Joseph blessed Jesus trained
In his own Trade, till he thrice ten years told.
I could be yet three times as manifold,
This Virtue with examples to commend,
But I had rather be a little bold,
And you persuade her practice to intend;
One's for her praise, but this is counsel for a friend.
Oh what a happiness it is to live,
And do much good, without offense, to all!
To eat secure those cates our ground does give,
To lie so low, one can no lower fall.
Yet have even there Content imperial:
No wickedness can enter such a Cell,
Highest delights, that can a Prince befall,
This private Cottage may afford as well,
Where care not half their sorrows unto thee will tell.
To many, Ri^t from mean to great estate,
Is not an end, but change of Misery:
The fault is in the Mind, (not in the Fate,)
Which is the same in wealth and poverty:
Who only mind change and variety,
Live ill, because they still begin to live:
They rightly here enjoy prosperity,
That so much pleasure to their Bodies give,
As they not for, but in the Body sought to live.
Happy is he, who never saw that one
With whom he would exchange his mean estate;
Most miserable, who to that are come,
They things, which were superfluous of late,
Have now made necessary to their state:
Such are even slaves, not masters of their pleasure;
They love their ills, which is the hardest fate.
Alas! there is no remedy nor measure
Of Vices, when as men esteem them as a treasure.
No good befalls a man under the Sun,
The which his mind is not prepared to lose:
No loss more easy is to any one,
Than of the things he has no need to use:
He Is never poor, who Natures rules does choose;
Nor rich, that lives by Opinion:
Natures desires be finite; boundless those,
That false Opinion depend upon,
Loathing no Sallet: Hunger likes an Onion.
Sure he is best, to whom with sparing hand,
God gives sufficient, let him wish no more:
In need of things superfluous to stand,
Is miserable want, in greatest store.
Excess oppresses many, who before
With little could have lived and been content:
These, though they have enough, yet still be poor,
Because they first beyond their compass went:
This evil prudent Thrif^ betimes seek to prevent.
Who is not made in Husbandry to sweat,
May sweat in Arts or Laws political;
It Is fit all earne their bread, before they eat:
Nothing is more expensiue, prodigal,
Than to have nothing here to do at all:
Want of employment, Ease, and Idleness,
Have caused more noble Houses here to fall,
Than Fortunes blasts, or Enuies bitterness.
Let him not live to spend, that nothing does profess.
Then let him never live, that does profess
What Is worse than nothing, basest Usury:
Herein is certain profit, I confess,
But always with another misery:
Is this the virtue of Frugality?
By others losses to increase our store?
Then so is rapine, theft, and robbery,
Selling of Justice, which often bring in more,
Than all the frugall Trades I named have before.
Since Nature with so little is content,
Who here would use unlawful Arts for gain?
We are but Stewards here of what is sent,
If we our Talents use aright to gain,
We twice as many shall of God obtain:
But if to hide them in the earth we choose,
Or spend them on our Lusts and Pleasures vain,
They shall be taken from us, who them abuse,
And given to such as shall them to Gods glory use.
But I so worldly Thrift have followed,
That I forgotten have to thrive in Grace,
And as it in the world is practiced,
Must put her off unto the second place:
For I so near have finished my race,
I must defer this to another time:
God grant we may them both aright embrace.
Now, like good husbands, knock we off betime,
And be at work to morrow in the mornings prime.
BEhold! how Birds for morrow take no care;
Secure, God will due food for them prepare:
Can woorthlesse Birds be confident of meat?
And is a farthing-Sparrowes Faith so great,
She knows, but by Gods will, she cannot fall?
And shall Gods sons, Christ's images, once call
In doubt their Makers will, to do then good?
No sure: who lends them life, will give them food.
MEDITATION 2.
Of Providence.
THe frugall Husband, which I erst described,
So soon as Titan with his glistring Beams,
Begilds the locks of stately Pines, which hide
The tops of Mountains from his hotter gleames;
Walks forth amongst his cattle, flocks and teames,
His Land to open to Suns mellowing heat,
And feed his Herds along the silver streams,
To drink and bathe, when they their fill have eat,
That fat they him may feed, that now prouides them meat.
Thus early rising; as the Proverb says,
Brings Thrift in body, in estate, and mind;
The early riser spends in health his days,
And by his diligence does plenty find;
And in the morning better is inclined
To Prayer, and diuinest Meditation:
Thus, in a threefold Cord, he Thrift does wind;
He drives Sloth far from his habitation,
His Soul in Grace, his Body (...) by recreation:
For these respects the Husbands country life
Transcends the City trades mechanical,
Or shows at Court, where reign^ Ambition strife,
Or Merchants which on hazard stand or fall:
For though Thrift in estate these often befall;
And Thrift in Grace, in many there we find,
Yet scarce a strong sound Body amongst them all,
They want pure air whereby the bloud's refinde
And wholesome exercise to co^ntry life assigned.
Well as I could, I rich Frugality
Did late, as her beseemed well, array:
I next describe four of her company,
Which always with this thrifty virtue stay:
The first two well I name the daughters may
Of Prudence, Providence, and Diligence,
Next two themselves from Temperance convey,
Thrifts Sisters, Abstinence and Continence:
Of these four I would sing, and first of Providence.
Oh! thou by whose most powerful only Word,
All was of nothing made and finished,
And of this All, made man the little Lord,
That by him All might well be ordered:
Who hayers of our head have numbered,
Nor let the least Sparrow fall to ground,
But as thou have before determined,
Make heavenly Wisdom in mine heart abound,
That I may wade, not drown, in Providence profound.
There is Divine and humane Providence,
Divine is infinite, unlimited
Transcending Reason, more than Reason Sense,
And may to glorious Sun be likened:
The Stars who thence their light have borrowed,
Does humane Providence resemble right,
Which by divine is aye enlightened,
And though like Stars it often appears bright,
Yet when the heavenly shines, it is obscured quite.
Then pardon, Reader, if my Muses eye
Dazeled with glory great, and splendor bright
Of Providence divine, here to descry
Unable is the dark obscured light
Of humane; as indeed I ought by right:
When I come to her Sister D^l^gence,
I may recover well again my sight,
My Muse now rapt with heavenly Providence
Can not descend to highest humane excellence.
But that I may describe her as a Grace,
And link her in the virtues golden Chain,
^ her the Almighties Scep^er call or Mace
Which does all Peace and Order here maintain:
The bounteous hand, which al things does sustain,
Whose eyes for nourishment up to her look,
Who iust's rewards, and eke the wickeds Pain
Does register for ever in a book:
Thus, as Gods Truth and Love, she fer a grace is took.
Thus one eternal powrefull Providence
Here gouernes all things being by Creation:
The necessary Age, is, wanting sense,
Receive their motion by her ordination:
The voluntary by her moderation
Are aye disposed, and ruled by their own will,
Which will she uses as a Mediation;
No man against his will does good or ill,
Though without Grace we of our selves no good can will.
Sure Ad^m in pure innocence was free
To eat the fruit forbidden, or abstain:
Else justly how could he condemned be,
Except he had a power to refrain?
But since that gu^lt original did stain,
With him, all imps which from that stock proceed;
We still retain freewill, none dares gainesaine,
But it is only unto evil deed,
Grace only by New birth a will to good does bre^d.
Schools may dispute; the Truth is plainly this:
As we are men, we power have to will,
As men corrupt, we always will amiss,
As borne again, to good we have a will.
Thus Nature Freewill gives, Sin bends to ill;
Grace unto Good: But now I seem to stray
From Providence divine, to man's freewill,
But this as needful show I by the way,
How Providence does voluntary agents sway.
Her Nature yet more plain to understand,
We must conceive the worlds great Marischall,
As he made all things by his mighty hand,
So he for ever them disposes all
By Providence; not only general,
By which the Spheres in their due motions ride,
And Summer and the winter seasons fall,
But as he by his special does guide
And orders every thing, that does on earth betide.
And this we call divine Necessity,
Free from Coaction, which does all dispose
To proper ends, yet with free liberty
Of Will, the things we do to leave or choose:
Thus in respect of God, that future knows
As present, all effects are necessary,
And, in respect of second causes those,
To us contingent are: Last voluntary,
As they respect man's will, and motion arbitrary.
God wonders sees in Moses weeping face,
When Pharao's Daughter him in Arc does find,
As she by chance, did wash her in that place,
And's mother for his nurse, by chance assigned;
And when to leave the Court he was inclined,
His Brethrens ^^uell bondages to see,
He went forth with a free and willing mind;
Lo thus in this example all the three,
Divine foresight, man's will, and Chance in one agree:
And therefore when of Fortune you do read,
With reference to man it understand,
Who most to the event of things take heed,
Not to the Cause, Gods most Almighty hand:
Else Chance and Providence can never stand
Together in the Almighties government;
Who being Cause of all he does command,
Them orders all unto a sure event,
Though far above man's limited intendemen^.
Of things indeed which seem by chance to be,
The Order, Cause, Necessity and end
Are hid, in Gods close Counsel and Decree:
We only able are to apprehend
By the event, how God does them intend:
Thus Clerk's a threefold working do observe
Of Providence; which far their reach transcend,
And yet they all to one same end do serve,
To show Gods glory, and his creatures to preserve.
Thus means and second causes she does use,
Often works without, by power immediate,
And often to work against means she does choose:
Two last men call Necessity or Fate,
Because the Cause they can not calculate:
(Oh richest Wisdom, Knowledge without bound
Of the Almighty! without time, or Date,
Thy Judgments no man able is to ^ound,
Beyond all men's conceit, thy counsels are profound.)
Like this is that Philosophers assign
To Counsel, Nature, Chance and Providence;
By Counsel, they meant Will and Reasons line;
By Nature, force of heavenly influence;
By Chance, when they below beheld events,
But not their Cause: Last when some Grace did fall
Past Natures, Chance, and Counsels evidence,
That Special Providence divine they call,
Not but they understood she had her ^and in all.
Sweet fruit of Providence to be persuaded,
That all below is ordered by Gods hand,
Nothing by Chance: Thus when we are invaded
By Foes, Death, Hell, we most undaunted stand:
We, God prime cause of all things understand,
Respecting yet inferior in their place,
Which always wait upon the first's command,
And all are to the glory of his grace,
Whereby God his elect does aye in love embrace.
Oh what inestimable quietness!
From hence arises to a godly mind,
Though evils without number him oppress,
Which like so many Deaths he then does find,
Knowing not how his wretched self to wind
From Cruelty, which him fast follows,
And does so fast with cords and fetters bind,
That every minute threateneth his Death;
And scarcely suffers him to draw his languid breath.
Yet if this Light of heavenly Providence
Shines to his Soul; then all Anxiety,
Fear, Care, Distrust, are banished quite from thence,
And he releeu'd in all extremity:
Then knows he that one gracious Majesty,
Here by his power so directs all,
By wisdom rules, and by his Bonity
Disposes so, that nothing ever shall,
But for Gods glory and his own good him befall.
To fleshes obloquy, some giving way,
Confess the highest Powers govern all,
But that with mortals here they use to play,
As we at hazard toss a Tennis-ball:
Some all would have by Chance and Fortune fall;
Some others grant that God does all incline,
But that man's wit, and will must work withal,
These men with God in government, do join
And his most constant purpose to man's will confine.
Some, to excuse God, grant that Power divine
Permits evil, but not with his will,
And suffers Satan here to blind the eyne
Of Reprobates; but no ways ill does will,
But sure God willingly permits ill,
Since by his power he goodness able is,
To draw from ill, his purpose to fulfill;
For thus did Pharaoh wilfully amiss,
Yet God turns all to's glory, and his chosens bliss.
As Suns pure beams exhale from filthy Oose
Foul vapors, which no whit the Sun defile,
So does Gods Providence of ill dispose,
Yet of no evil he partakes the while:
And as not in Suns Beams, but in the soil,
The matter of the vapor does consist,
So in man's heart is Bitterness and bile,
And not in God, who evil does resist,
Or turns such evil into Goodness, as he list.
Thus Kings, Priests, Rulers, Elders all combined
Against the Lord, and his anointed Son:
And Pilat^, Herod, Jews and Gentiles joined,
To do what God decreed to be done:
But they meant wickedly even every one,
The people a vain thing imagined,
To crucify the Lord of Life they run,
But God, we see, thereby has quickened
The members all, whereof he is the glorious head.
As when we see fair Phoebus gentle beams,
United in a burning glass, inflame,
We use not to accuse Suns gracious gleames,
For such offense, but Burning-glasse do blame,
Wherein, without the Sun, 's nor heat nor flame.
So when we see the wicked man abuse
The fairest gifts of Nature to his shame;
The Author of them we must not accuse,
But wilful man, that does them here unduly use.
Good, Powerful, Wise, Disposer of all things!
So w^se thou all Disorders ordrest right,
So good thy Goodn^s good from evil brings,
So powerful all subsist upon thy might:
How should an ignorant, weak, wicked wight,
Conceive thy Wisdom, Power, and Providence?
Much less by Simile it more inlight,
It far surpasses mine intelligence:
Things known I do admire, the rest I reverence.
But I by Providence divine am led
To pass the bounds of f^ugall meditation:
Pardon, great Clerks, that I have meddled
To taste a mystery, by Contemplation,
Worthy your argument, and disputation:
I was desirous to resolve my mind
In this high point of heavenly moderation,
Wherein most wondrous comfort I do find,
To see how things on earth are first in heaven designed.
Who can suppose this world so perfect, rare,
Not governed by one powerful providence?
Since all which without moderat^urs are,
Consisting of the four first elements,
Can not continue; Houses, ^enements,
Without a tenant, ruin and decay:
Vnpruned Vines do loose their excellence,
Man's Body fails, when soul does pass away;
So would this Universe, should God forbear a day.
As members of a man aright do move
First by his understanding and his will,
So does this Universe by God above,
And all concord his pleasure to fulfill:
Who duly wait on Providence, he will
Make happy here, and blessed evermore:
Not that he does the careless idle fill
With blessings temporal, or heavenly store.
Who will not row on Sea, shall never come ashore.
It is a dangerous and impious thing,
Thus to dispute with Providence divine,
Mine arm nor good, nor bad, to pass can bring,
All Is done by the Almighties firm design:
The written Word must be our square and line,
Gods secret purpose, and revealed Will
Confound not by a vain conceit of thine:
Thus Thieves may, blameless, true men rob and kill,
And say they but Gods secret purposes fulfill.
For Providence does not us mortals tend,
As mothers infants newly brought to light,
Which have no strength themselves then to defend
Against ayers injuries, or foreign might:
But as the Father that his Son has dight
With strength, and weapons against his enemies,
Directs him to order them aright,
And to defend himself from injuries,
Religion never negligent and idle lies.
They that are godly and religious,
With Providence sweet Diligence do join,
God that without our selves has fashioned us,
Without thy self saues neither thee nor thine:
And therefore prudent men provide in time,
Against all future want that happen may;
When therefore we for morrow do design
Things necessary; none can justly say,
Or judge us too much careful, for the following day.
The Lord of all did needful things provide,
Therefore the bag false Judas carried,
The Loaves and Fishes which he did divide
Amongst five thousand which him followed,
The Apostles carried for their daily bread:
Paul temp'rall Alms provides for his Nation,
Where he the spiritual had published:
Joseph from N^le comes to make preparation,
To save alive old Jacob and his generation.
Of these learn to provide things necessary:
Of Beasts to shun and to avoid all ill;
Who near things hurtful to them do not tarry,
Nor nigh unto those places travel will,
Where they into a Ditch have lately fill;
The Bird escapt, eschewes the Fowlers gin,
Nor will be tempted more with all his skill:
The fish that finds the hook the bait within,
Thence to provide against such danger does begin.
Things past, for future, are sound documents,
He that is wise, the evil does foresee,
And hides himself from many nocuments,
Which can not by the fool avoided be:
Most admirable, virtuous, wise is he,
That things foreseeing wisely can provide,
Nothing on earth without a cause we see,
Though them the highest Wisdom so does hide
They can not by our feeble reason be descride.
The World may be compared to a Stage,
We mortals to spectators, they that stay
Without to see her antique equipage;
Do truly as they ought behold the play:
The curious that about the Stage do stray,
And pry into the secret tyring room,
Are by Stage-keepers often driu'n away:
All must not into Natures secrets come,
Although she many Mysteries reveal to some.
How dares proud man inquire so curiously
Of Gods ^id counsels, and his secret will?
The Bethshemites into the Arc did pry,
And God with sudden vengeance them does kill.
Provide thee good things, and avoid the ill,
So may thou many live, and happy days,
Presume not to be wise above thy skill,
By Gods revealed will guide all thy ways,
His secret Counsels search not, but admire and praise.
And yet because God all does here dispose,
Thou like a senseless Idol must not stand:
God gave thee not for naught, ears, eyes, hands, nose,
A will to do, a wit to understand:
Employ these always by his just command,
The whole success leave to his Providence,
Acknowledge all good blessings from his hand,
And labor, with all care and diligence,
To thrive in Goodness, Grace, and all Intelligenc^*
But above all from murmuring refrain,
Or magnifying fl^shes arm or might:
So axe may boast, that it along has lain
The Cedars; and the Plane may claim, as right,
That by it is work thy roof so fair was dight:
So may the rod of Moses brag and boast,
It all the Wonders did in Pharao^s sight:
The Asses Iaw-bone, that it slew an host:
But most the house, when Samson pulled down the post.
On whom we ought to cast even all our care,
To him we must ascribe the Praise of all:
In his hand both our Souls and Bodies are,
By Power of his Breath we stand and fall:
From him all was, is now, and ever shall:
Of all the things done underneath the Sun,
The Eecl. 8. 17
Wiseman sought a reason natural,
But was as blind, as when he first begun,
Though first he thought he could discover any one.
Gods counsels shall for evermore endure,
His thoughts stand firm in every generation;
Our hearts he fashions, and conceiueth sure,
Our works* and secretest imagination:
Who to the Rau'ns gives food and sustentation,
So gouernes all, they nothing here shall need,
That wait on him with patient expectation:
With temporal and heavenly he does feed
All those, that crave aright of him spiritual ^eed.
In number, measure, weight, he does dispose
Of all things; He preserues both man and beast:
When care and pains may save thee from thy foes,
Use diligence, to God commit the rest:
And when thou art so mightily distressed,
Thou can no help in arm of fles^ behold,
Upon his providence that made thee, rest:
That in thy mothers womb thy members told,
And in his Book has every one of them inrold.
Good counsel gave that Heathen, Have a care
Unto thy self; most of thyselfe take heed:
He meant, Lusts and Corruptions which are
Within us; which to us most danger breed:
With others we deal warily indeed,
Lest they deceive us by their subtilty,
But our own vile affections little heed,
Although we have no greater enemy;
Thus we escape Gaths sword, and on our own do di^.
The Jews may with their Orator conspire
Paul's ruin; nothing shall to him befall,
But to advance his Crown, and Gospel hier:
So as his bonds in Caesar's Judgment hall,
Are manifest and famous amongst them all:
To the Elect, and those that truly love,
Nothing but for the best shall ever fall:
This by examples thousand I could prove,
Happy who finds it written in his heart by love.
The Lions want and hunger may endure;
Who se^kes the Lord, wants nothing that is good,
The Angel of the Lord him keeps secure,
From his own lusts hels fury, wickeds mood.
This of the weakest may be understood.
If ought here passes thine intelligence,
Suck thou the milk, and leave the stronger food.
Here ends my song of heavenly Providence,
Next, follows her attendant humane Diligence.
MEDITATION 3.
Of Diligence.
WHo, with a prudent heart, and godly mind,
Will take a view how things are wrought below,
In all effects shall good and evil find,
As cause is good or ill, from whence they flow;
Thus God first Cause of all thy actions know,
As they be good; thy self as they be ill;
Which does Gods power and goodness greater show,
In using here man's vile corrupted will,
As second cause his sound, good purpose to fulfill.
All evil then comes from man's vicious will,
Not moved thereto by mere necessity,
As senseless Agents are to good or ill,
But gives consent thereto most willingly:
By Natures Light we good from ill descry,
But this us only leaves without excuse,
When seeing better we the worst do try,
And thus God of man's malice makes good use,
And he is justly punished for his abuse.
Oh man's perverseness! grant him least freewill,
And he becomes vain, proud and insolent:
D^ny him any power to do or will,
And he grows lazy, slothful, negligent:
First kind are meritorious, impudent,
And merit for themselves and others will,
The other Epicure-like, take content
In pleasure, eating, drinking of their fill,
Or in an idle, melan^^^lique sitting still.
But Diligence, the Grace I next propound,
For this last evil is best remedy,
This Viper which most dang'rously does wound
Our souls with senseless spiritual Lethargy,
And brings too aspish-lazy Accidy:
Most perilous, because we feel least harm.
Oh, this is Satan's subtillest Lullaby,
Our souls with stupid laziness to charm,
And then of spiritual arms and weapons to disarme*
Thou that have promised endless happiness,
To all which at thy coming thou dost-find
Intent unto their Masters business,
And diligent in body and in mind,
Make all my Souls and Bodies powr's inclind
To Diligence, whilst I her praises write,
Unloose the chains, the fetters strong unbind
Of Sloth and Dullness, which, to blackest night
Lead blindfold, drowsy souls that take therein delight.
Vigilance, Industry, and Diligence
So like indeed one to another are,
My plainer Muse scarce sees a difference,
And therefore all will but as one declare;
Our souls and bodies powers they prepare,
In every noble Virtue to transcend,
Nothing on earth that is admirable rare,
Without these can be brought to perfect end,
On these do honest care and labor aye attend.
For godly, just and necessary cares
Are parts substantial of Diligence,
And as she for the future thus prepares,
Having to Truth and Justice reference,
She is a Grace of wondrous excellence:
But if she spring from Envy, emulation,
Ambition, Fear, or other base pretense,
She is a curious base abomination,
The busy vice that author is of desolation.
Industry best agrees to the mind,
In which she frames a quick Dexterity,
In Arts and Sciences the right to find,
And they that know her wondrous energy,
In Physic, Law, and in Divinity,
Know, that she tends the nearest to perfection,
And is to humane imbecility
Most sound defense, secure, and safe protection,
Against Satan's Malice, their own Lusts, and worlds i^fectio^.
We well Dame Nature may the Mother name
Of noble Industry and Diligence,
Yet often we see their wondrous force does tame,
Things against Nature, without violence;
All other Virtues glorious excellence,
Which we in Heroes justly do admire,
Have their Beginning and Perfection thence:
Where Industry and Diligence conspire,
Wants nothing that we can in mortal man desire.
For as she many evil things amends,
So is she of all good the consummation,
Most dissolute base manners she commends
Soon, unto honest thrifty reformation.
An infirm body by exercitation,
And Diligence, becomes strong and sound:
She frees Old Age from grievous molestation
Of painful sharp Diseases that abound.
Fields of the diligent are fruitful eu^r found.
For by this Diligence all well succeed,
No idle hour on her head does shine,
She her best hours spends with prudent heed,
And all her business aright does line,
She finds to all things an appointed time,
Except it be for Sloth and Idleness.
If idle words be judged such a crime,
Much more the loss of times high preciousnesse,
Which cannot be regained with cost and carfulness.
Wherefore good fathers of a Family,
First rise, and latest go to bed at night:
And those that love the Mus^s company,
Do use their eyes to read by Candlelight.
Artificer, good-Husband, Merchant, Knight,
And Magistrate, this Virtue does defend.
Nothing so difficult, but by the might
Of Diligence, is conquered in the end,
Therefore in all affairs she is our surest friend.
But non^ more enemies than Negligence,
Sloth, Dullness, Carelessness, and Idleness,
Impurest mire of foul Concupiscence,
The forge of Lust, and draught of filthiness;
Whence come all Vices, Sin and Wickedness,
Which turn men into Beasts, like Sirens charms.
Oh Sloth! the nurse and mother of excess,
Like Statue standing still with folded arms,
And never moves to good, for fear of future harms.
Unnecessary Burden on the ground,
Who when he has consumed all his own,
Deuoures his friends, and then a thief is found,
More false, yea, than a beggar bolder grown;
For though the beggers-bodies hands are sown,
And's mind is all on sloth and idleness,
Yet often in his mouth Gods Name is known:
But God all honesty and shamefastness,
He loathes that is possessed of sloth and sluggishnesse.
A Sluggard is unto himself, and all
A most pernicious wicked enemy,
By Sloth his mind and body soon do fall
To sicknesses, and all impurity:
He is the bane to all good company,
The stinking Sepulcher of one alive,
Shadows of men! Tons of Iniquity,
Whose soul^s base ease, of Reason does deprive,
Whilst, as a Swine with Mast, their bodies fat and thrive.
We Sloth, like Lazy Ass, at home do find:
But listen out, you loud shall hear him bray,
Just like a coward dog of currish kind,
That does at harmless Pilgrims bark and bay;
But comes a Wolf, for fear he runs away:
Like fearful Heart, when as he comes to fight,
But as a Lion greedy of the prey;
All day asleep, but in the dead of night,
He woorrieth the fould, for hunger and despite.
Oh Diligence! perfection of all,
When as thou do with truth and virtue dwell,
But if to Vice and error thou do fall,
Thou passest H^ggs and Furies all of Hell;
Hels waking Cerberus is not so fell,
As popish priests, who compass Sea and Land,
Into Cymmerian darkness to compel
Those that in Sunshine of the Gospel stand:
Thus diligently they obey their Lords command.
Oh would we be for Truth as diligent,
As they for errors and traditions vain!
But I have too much of my hour spent,
Against the Vice, the Virtue to maintain.
To Diligence I now return again,
Which like heavens glorious Sun does never rest,
But like a giant runs his Course amain,
Until she of the garland be possessed.
This life's no mansion, but a way to heavenly rest.
In heaven are many Mansions, here we stay
Only to finish that for which we come,
If trewan^like we spend our time in play,
And be with drink, or sleeping overcome:
Oh! when our fatal hower-glasse is run,
And we are called to render our account,
Of good and evil in the body done;
Our debts, alas! will all our wealth surmount,
And our Omissions more than numbers up can count.
This Diligence is like one in a Mine,
That digges much earth a little gold to find;
Like Silkeworme, who her slendrest silken twine,
By Diligence does on a bottom wind:
Like husbandman, who little sheaues does bind,
Wherewith he fills his Barnes and Garners full:
Like little stones by Mortar fast combined,
Raisd to a Temple large and beautiful:
Like mighty hosts which Dukes of single men do cull.
Some by a night-Owle, and a Dragons eyes,
This virtue Diligence have figured,
And therefore Poets Fables do devise,
The Golden-fleece so highly valued,
Kept by a Dragons diligence and heed.
The Golden-fleece, the Kingdoms Peace I call:
The Dragon, him by whom all is ordered:
For on whose shoulders such a charge does fall,
He must be vigilant, and diligent in all.
This Virtue is indeed most sovereign,
In highest Rulers which the Public sway,
Who are set over us for our own gain,
If them as Gods Vicegerents we obey:
They keep continual watch both night and day
For all our goods, so they be diligent:
God grant such Rulers ever govern may
His little Fold within this Island pent,
To joy of all our friends, and foes astonishment.
The Latins, Diligence derive from Love:
For he that loves, does even all fulfill,
Yea nothing hard or difficult does prove
To him, that knows it is his beloueds will;
Whose hearts this glorious Grace of Love does fill,
They here despise all losses, grief, and pain:
Let heavenly love into mine heart distill,
I worlds discouragements will all disdain:
For Diligence on earth, I love in heaven shall gain.
This love in David's heart does so aboun^,
It from his eyes and eyelids did expel
All sleep, till he a resting place had found,
Wherein the Lord of life might always dwell.
This made the Mount of Sion so excel,
That it the glory of the earth became.
This diligence makes all to prosper well,
Though but a spark of Loves celestial flame,
It gains us love in heaven, on earth eter^^ll fame.
Oh blessed Paul! had I thy eloquence,
Thy indefatigable pains to sound,
Thy wondrous travel, care, and diligence,
Thy Masters will to know, do, and propound.
How many Sees of Bishops did thou found?
How did thou preach by day, and work by night?
How diligently Heretics confound?
And even in Hels, Worlds, Tyran^s, Jews despite,
By Diligence declare the power of Loves might.
Should I the Fathers lives trace to the Flood,
And into Egypt, follow them from thence;
From thence, through wilderness to their abode,
By Iordans banks, in Houses, Cities, Tents,
They all are Maps to us of Diligence:
From Genesis unto the Revelation,
Their Pilgrimages all have reference,
To new Reu. 21. 1^
Jerusalem, Saints habitation:
And we all stones, and Builders on that one foundation.
As God, so we must work before we rest,
We may not cease till all be finished:
In heaven we shall enjoy eternal Rest,
Which by the Sabbath was prefigured.
The Spouse may seek, but finds not in the Bed
Her Bridegroom: he is like the nimble Hind,
He must be Ca^. 3. 1.
diligently followed:
But if by Diligence we once him find,
Cant. 2. 8
He skipping comes over hills, and mountains like the wind.
But if I only speak of Diligence,
And image-like to others point our-right,
Yet live in Carelessness, and Negligence:
I, like the blind, may others Lamps inlight,
But stray and wander all the while in night.
Our life's a moment here, if we regard
Eternity: A cloud to heavenly light:
Like drop unto the Ocean compared,
Is earthly Joy, to that which is in Heaven prepared.
The Air without motion putrifies:
The standing-Poole becomes unsavory:
The hottest Fire without blowing dies:
The Land with thorns and weeds does barren lie,
That is not exercised with husbandry.
Thy house and household stuff do soon decay,
Except they be emploid continually:
Thy lockt-vp garments are to Moth's a prey:
All things not used, like Steel by rust, consume away.
Look on the nimble Motions of the sky,
How all move diligently to their end:
Look on the Beasts that creep; the Birds that fly,
How they no time to Idleness will lend:
Earth, though the dullest Element does spend
Her strength, for all the Creatures preservation:
The Creatures even their blood and life do send
To man, for Life's and Bodies sustentation.
Thus all are diligent here in their occupation.
Oh man! though Lord of all, who yet art borne
To labor, as the Sparks do upward fly,
To learn here of thy Vassals do not scorn,
But eat thy Bread in sweat continually.
In Labor did the Fathers live and die,
To do Gods will was Christ his drink and food,
Not to dispute thereof with subtilty,
And nice distinctions, which do little good,
But make things easy erst, now hardlier understood.
One thing is necessary, do and live:
Practice and Knowledge, must go hand in hand:
The gods for labors, blessings here do give,
Not curious knowledge: They that understand,
And yet forbear to do their Lords command,
Thereby most inexcusable become,
When all before the dreaded Judge shall stand,
More then shall hear the final dreadful doom,
For things omitted here, than things which they have done.
Like Plutarchs Lamiae, we are quick of sight
Abroad, at home we lay aside our eyes:
If each his own affairs could order right,
That town would soon to wealth and honor rise:
The street, where each his door sweeps, cleanly lies.
I do not here forbid all foreign care:
To pair of Compasses I like the wise,
Half of their thoughts at their hearts center are,
The other, round about, do for the public care.
The Cynicke, that he might his hate express
To Sloth, would often tumble up and down
His Tun, to keep himself from Idleness.
Base Commodus, of all the Caesar's known
To be most wicked, was not of his own
Nature so vile: but when his youth by ease,
Into contempt of Business was grown,
This was the Empires fatal last disease,
Which lost the Caesar's all their fathers did increase.
Oh cursed Negligence! that do confound
Souls, Bodies, Churches, Cities, Families;
No gracious Thrift will grow upon thy ground,
Thy field like wilderness all barren lies.
It Souls, like deadly Opium, stupifies:
It with diseases does our Bodies fill,
Pulls down our Temples, which did dare the skies,
Lays open the City walls to Victors will,
And through houses roofes rain-droppings makes distill.
Bewail with me the ruthful Tragedy,
That Sloth has made within this holy Land,
I mean, those Abbeys, etc.
Houses fair of Sanctity,
Which like so many Pyrami'ds did stand,
Erected first by holy Founders hand:
First raisd by Diligence, now razed to ground
By Sloth, those lazie-belly-gods to brand
With shame, whose Idleness did thus confound
Those Places, where Gods holy Worship should abound.
Behold, with Solomon, the sluggards field,
Which all ore-growne with Moss and Bushes lies,
Whilst Rents and Sales to him abundance yield,
He looks not after Industries supplies,
Like Grasse-hopper, he skipping lives, and dies,
Or sterues, if Winter brings Poverty:
The industrious Ant, and Be he does despise.
Oh Sloth! the sink of all iniquity,
That changest men to swinish Bestiality.
Awake you sluggards, you that power in wine,
The day's at hand, when you account shall make;
As of your works, so of your idle time:
To some employment do your selves betake,
And sail not always on the idle Lake:
It is a filthy, muddy, standing poole,
No good, or honest mind can pleasure take,
To row at ease in such a muddy hole,
Though there his vessel's subject to no winds control.
Oh you, whom God, even gods on earth, does style,
Withdraw not from the weight of government
Your shoulders, nor let Ease your souls beguile
Of time, which should be in devotion spent:
Rulers must most of all be diligent,
All evil cleaues on them by Idleness.
Look on all States, and foreign Regiment,
They all corrupt by Ease and slouthfulnes,
But flourish, and grow strong by frequen^ Business.
You heau'nly-Watchmen, of whom I desire
Rather to learn, than teach you ought to mend,
Mark only what Paul does of you require,
With diligence your selves and flocks attend;
God made you overseers for that end:
As naught more than assiduous Exercise
Of Soul and Body, does from sins defen^,
So nothing fills them with iniquities,
More than this sluggish sloth, and idle vanities.
Elian does of the Egyptian Dog report,
That when he drinks, he never stands still
By Rivers side, lest poisonous beasts him hurt,
Who li^ in wait, him whilst he drinks, to kill:
Oh could we see the poisoning serpent still,
Waiting occasion with envenomed sting,
Our bones with Lust, and Luxury to fill*
And us by sloth, and idleness to bring
To carelessness of God, and any holy thing.
That thus would wind us from all Diligence,
Like lazy Sluggards, only to rely
Upon the Almighties care an^ Providence;
But lo, the Israelites send first to spy
The earthly Canaan, which did typifie
That heavenly; whither, through this Wilderness,
We must not hope to pass so easily;
They wanne the cities which they do possess,
With pains and Diligence, not sloth and idleness.
This was their way, this also must be ours;
Priests feet the floods of Iordane may divide,
Their trumpets throw down Iericho's proud towers:
But Ai will many bloody blows abide.
He little thinks Hels force, that never tried.
The Amalekites, and Moa^ will assay
To stop thy course to Iordans fruitful side:
Thou must with Diligence maintain thy way,
And fight with hardy resolution night and day.
Lord grant I may, like Paul, be diligent,
Who wrought his own, and all the Souls to save,
That with him in the ship to Caesar went:
And though he knew, that God, who to him gave
Even all their lives, his promise would not wau^*
Yet see, he leaves not any means untried.
Lord grant me Diligence aright to crave,
And Patience thy leisure to abide,
So nothing that I ask, shall be to me denide.
My Muse would feign aboard, but Diligence
Would never let my Meditation end,
And blames me sore, that I with Negligence,
Too brief the story of her Praise have penned;
But Care and Labor next I must attend;
Which two, with Diligence, go hand in hand:
God, better luck, me in their praises send!
I now will drive my little Boat to land,
And rest, that I more stoutly may to labor stand.
MEDITATION 4.
Of Care and Labor.
MY freer Muse now like a Faulcon flies,
Who having stoup't a Mallard at the Brook,
Remounts again up to the azure skies,
And for a second Souse at him does look:
But suddenly she has that prey forsook,
And towreth at a Heron in the Air:
So though at first my Muse had undertook
Fair Abs^inence; yet seeing Thrift does pray her,
To sing of Care and Labor next, I will obey her.
This Book indeed I wholly did intend
Unto the honor of Frug^lity,
And moral virtues that her Grace attend:
But so my Muse does love her liberty,
And at the fairest is so used to fly;
She will not leave her heavenly Meditation,
For any Flower of Humanity:
Her food divine of holy Contemplation,
For any earthly Good, Content, or Delectation.
I grant indeed, that moral Meditation
May much amend our manners, and our mind,
But no such pleasing taste and sustentation,
As in divine, the soul of man can find:
And therefore though I often am inclined,
The Praise of moral Virtues here to sing,
My freer Muse that will not be confined,
Runs straight on (...) string,
Else I, in others (...) not meddeling.
And yet I hope no wiser Clerks will blame
My boldness, here to taste, by meditation,
The Mysteries, whose knowledge they proclaim
To us, as necessary for Salvation:
Thereby to square our Lives and Conversation.
And though indeed my Writings I intend,
For others minds and manners reformation,
Yet if hereby I may mine own amend,
I have attained more then half my wished end.
It is no part of holy Contemplation,
To seek revenge for undeserved wrong;
Meekness and Patiences meditation
Have taught my Muse to sing another song:
God send me more Wit, them a better Tongue.
Now Thou, that Adam in his uprightness,
(To show, that Labor does to man belong)
Did place in Eden, it to plant and dress,
Help me, the praise of Care and Labor to express.
Care's an attent intention of the mind,
To any thing that is needful to be done,
Which good and honest for our selves we find,
And may unto the public profit come:
Labor puts Care in execution,
And is our minds and bodies Enargy,
In any business by Care begun:
For when to Business we do apply
Our selves, we call that Labor, Pains, and Industry.
Care comes from Wits chief Vigor, Strength, and Light,
And ready, watchful evermore does stand:
Labor, the Bodies Faculty is hight,
Which does perform the thing we have in hand:
Where these two powr's of action do band,
We Actors and Directors call them may;
One does what work the other does command:
For as the Body does the Soul obey,
So Labor is to noble Care obedient ay.
L^bour and Care, simply considered,
Nor good, nor ill are, but indifferent,
And not amongst those Virtues numbered,
Which in the Court of Love are eminent:
But for they nothing, that is excellent,
Can without Care and Labors help attain,
All in their Company take great content,
And honor much amongst Loves royal train:
And glad is she, that can their best acquaintance gain.
Care's like an old experienced General,
Too weak to fight, yet orders all the Host:
Labor is lusty, valiant, young, and tall,
And strikes, where foes he may endanger most:
Care has an eye about to every Coast,
With all advantages to win the day:
And though more sweat and blood it Labor cost,
Yet which deserves best, it is hard to say;
Neither had won the field, had one but been away.
When Jupiter an Hercules would frame,
Three nights at once he with Al^mena lay:
Thus to beget one that should Monsters tame,
Men lost, to lengthen out the night, a day:
Besides, the pangs of Birth her so dismay,
It little failed, but she had borne her last.
By witty Fictions, Poets thus bewray,
How it Jove's ordinary strength surpast,
A true Id^a of high Labor here to cast.
And thus they make Jove, Hercules his Sire,
Who must on earth all Labors undertake;
And cleanse worlds Stables from impurest mire,
And Jove of him a mighty god should make.
To tell what for immortal Honors sake
He did, were too long for a Meditation:
He made the yron-gates of Hell to quake,
And Atlas-like, bare up the worlds foundation,
What can be more for Care and Labors commendation?
He was not fostred in his younger years,
With Pleasures, wanton Ease, and Idleness,
But fought with Lions, Tygres, Goats, and Bears,
Lust, Rapine, Tyranny, Unrighteousness.
No high thing is attained by Slothfulness.
Then spoke great Alexander like a King,
By calling servile Sloth and Laziness,
But Care and Labor highly honoring,
Which in small time to him worlds Monarchy did bring.
No good thing without Care and Labo^r grows,
With them is Thrift, without a barren Soil:
Labor increases strength, and who her knows,
Does pass through hardest iourneys without toil.
Labor our fiercenes^e natural may spoil,
But raises Virtue: Labor does restore
Those that are fallen: things hardest reconcile,
She Virtue by employment furthers more.
In all a^chieuements Captain Labor goes before.
And Pleasure follows: for observe these two,
Delight and Labor though much differing
In nature, yet they linked together go;
Delight, I say, still Labor following:
For things we labor most to pass to bring,
We joy in more, then those which us befall
By Chance, and without Pains and laboring.
That conquest is mo^^ glorious of all,
Which has endangered most the H^ste and General.
No solace without Labor: no man gains
The Honey, without danger of the Sting:
He that will have the Kernel, must take pains
To break the shell: who, sweetest Rose in Spring
Will gather, fears not Bushes prickeling:
But he that in his bosom hides his hand,
Whom honor, profit, fear, nor shame can bring
To action, but does all day idle stand,
He hates all Virtue, and is hated by their Band.
The Roots of Arts are bitter, but they bear
The sweetest fruits: we can no Good obtain
But by hard Labor. Thus if we prepare
Us quiet Peace, what happiness we gain?
The Minds and Bodies rest, them fits again
For Cares and Labors new: as Bow unbent,
Or Lute-string loosed to a lower strain,
That it may be up to a higher pent,
And that the Bow may shoot the stronger newly bent.
God here has placed on our either hand,
Commodities and Discommodities:
These near, those far, Labor 'twixt both does stand:
To these a way prone and precipite lies,
Who comes to those, great difficulties tries,
Which they by Labor only overcome.
Labor which wise men's wishes here supplies,
And does to them the trustiest Guide become,
Even from their infancy, unto their resting Tomb.
Worse than the vilest Infidel is he,
That will not care nor labor for his own:
How many goods and benefits there be,
To men on earth by Care and Labor known;
So many ills by Carelessness are sown:
Base Carelessness and Sloth! But I before
In Diligence their Pedigree have shown:
I sing the virtue of the vice no more,
She to my Muse yields matter most abundant store.
For Care and Labor is the very ^orne
Of Amalthea, and all plenteous store:
She brings good-husbands store of grass and corn,
And plentifully feeds the hungry poor:
She makes the Shepherds lambs grow great and more,
She is the stay of Trades and Merchandise;
As good on surging seas, as on the shore:
All needful things she by her hand supplies:
Labor most active is, Care politic and wise.
Like Ab^shai and Ioab when they fought
With Ammon, and the Syrians on the plain,
Both constant, noble, resolute, and stout,
Both striving, that they may the day obtain:
If that the Syrians ground on Moab gain,
Then Abishai must help: if the Ammonite
Prevail against Ab^shai: Ioab again
Must succor him, with all his force and might.
Care, Labor thus, from loss, each mutually acquit.
L^bour between the Graces and the Mind,
Is as the light 'twixt colors and the fight:
As without light the Eye is always blind,
So without Labor dwells the mind in night.
And as the Lord ordained has the Light,
To be the mean here colors to discern,
So Labor, he appoints the medium right,
Whereby the mind may Grace and Virtue learn,
And join them fast together by a force inter^e.
And as all l^fe and active strength proceed
From feeding, so from Labor all our good:
And as Men, to prolong their life, do feed,
So good-men have for good to Labor stood.
As necessary to our life is food,
So unto honesty is exercise;
And as none will expect fruit from the wood,
Except he blossoms first thereon espies,
So there is no hope of Age, that pains in Youth despise.
As is a woman's fruit without a man,
So fairest hopes are without Labor vain:
Many have hotly at the first began,
But Courage want to the end it to maintain:
Like some rash Summers storm, or dash of rain,
That corn beats down with sudden inundation,
But soakes not half so deep in flowrie plain,
As showers that fall with sober moderation:
Things violent incline to sudden alteration.
And as we nothing to our healths do find
More dangerous, than Ayers alteration,
So naught more hurts the Body and the Mind,
Than change to slugg^shnesse from recreation.
Delight or Labor, without moderation,
Destroy men's bodies, and their wits ^onfound,
Like Nightingales, that take such delectation,
Sweet notes above their fellows to propound,
Their spirits fail, and they are dead with singing found.
Many will labor, but they soar too hie,
Or else most basely s^nke down to the deep;
They either will into Gods secrets pry,
Or down into Earths baser bowels creep:
A few or none true moderation keep;
They either diue for profits base and vain,
Or clime up to Gods secret Mountain steep:
In both their steps no longer do remain,
Then way of Bird in the air, or ships upon the Maine,
You that the Muses Secretaries are,
And pen the counsels of the King of Kings,
I know your Labor, Industry, and Care,
To understand and publish holy things:
Which unto you such Joy and Pleasure brings,
As we that feel it only understand.
Yet mount you high, Sol fries your waxen Wings;
If low, them Nept^ne wets with wauing hand:
The golden Mean 'twixt two Extremes does always stand.
Frail mortal man! if thou with fleshly Eye
Behold'st the Sun, thy sight is dazeled,
Much more with brightness of Divinity,
Is thy Minds weaker Eye astonished:
Glory shall him amaze, that will aread
The Splendor of eternal Majesty:
Man's Mind, here with corruption limited,
Has no such ample large capacity:
No mortal sees me (says God) but he must die.
Some Meats the appetite do more provoke
To eating, we of them must take most heed;
Such are the Labors which are undertook
For too high Knowledge, or w^rlds baser meed:
For these provoke our appetites indeed
Unto Extr^mes, from that fair golden Mean;
Which do our Callings here so far exceed,
To which corrupted minds so much do lean,
They always fall into a curious Ex^^eme.
Base wretched Cares! whose Labor is in sin,
Which bring us terrors in true pleasures steed,
Incessantly here taking pains to win
Base Mammon, and this worlds unrighteous meed*
Or an ambitiou^ humor base to feed,
Or their mean House to highest pitch to raise,
Or for Revenge, or lustful wicked Deed,
Or to gain popular applause or praise,
And be a precedent unto succeeding days.
As greater Fowls, though they be strong of wing,
With bodies burden are so weighed down,
They cannot mount like nimble Lark in Spring:
So minds of men to these worlds Cares fast sown,
Soon like this world, are gross and heavy grown:
And though they might, by noble Industry,
Be raisd again to understand their own;
Yet stupid, senseless on the dunghill lie,
Drunk with foul Ease, and this worlds base Commodity.
These lovers of the world, though they wax strong
In things ter^ene, in heavenly weaker grow;
For worldly honor they will sweat and throng,
Bu^ to win Crowns in heaven are dull and slow:
For worldly Gain they ought will undergo,
From heavenly, least reproach or shame will bend:
For Princes favors they whole days will woo,
But not one hour to God in Prayer spend:
Thus present Shows, not future Glory, all intend.
What Labor hard, what time can we think long,
Which does to us eternal glory gain?
To have our wills no labor seems too strong:
For Virtue, we will not least delight refrain.
Think but what holy Labor may obtain,
A certain hope, and sweet remuneration,
Of which, the Saints, forsaking Pleasures vain,
Have by their lives given plenteous commendatio^,
Here laboring all, whilst they lived, in their Vocation.
Here Plenty makes me sparing: read the acts
Of all the holy Fathers till the Flood,
From thence, to Egypts Bondage: next, the facts
Of Moses, Iosuah, Kings and Judges good:
Have they not all for Labor stoutly stood?
This shunning Labor by a Hermits Cell,
A late device is of Romes lazy brood,
To mumble Prayers, and their Beads to tell,
But take no Care for neighbor, Church, or Commonweal.
Is this Paul's Watching, Pain, and Weariness,
Thirst, Hunger, Scourgings, Nakedness, and Cold;
Perils by land, by water sore Distress?
Besides, his outward labors manifold,
His inward Cares the Church in Peace to hold?
A living man lie buried in a tomb;
Lest worldly (...) and labors him withhold
From contemplation of that heavenly room,
Where never such a slothful, idle wretch shall come.
Brave active spirits! though in Contemplation
I spend much time, yet I your lives do hold
To be more worthy praise and admiration,
You bring to us all good, and ill withhold:
You, whose great cares and labors do uphold,
Like Atlas shoulders, civil Government:
Your Splendors we, your cares cannot behold,
Who know the Care and Weight of Regiment,
Would never envy them, their glory and content.
O Muses Darlings! do not then abuse
Your heavenly Numbers, (which the Muses lend
To honor of Authority to use)
Their names with blots and infamy to blend.
Your Muse not able is to apprehend
Their deep Foresight, that States and Kingdoms sway:
With care and labor they at Helm attend,
That sleep and sing in ship you safely may:
No gentle Dog will at his Keeper bark and bay.
Great Keeper of this famous British I Will!
How do thou care and labor for our ease?
Besides Kings ordinary Pains and Toil
In Government, thy Writings do increase
To largest Volumes, for the Churches Peace:
For Christ's pure Spouse, and thy dear Kingdoms weal:
Thy Watchings, Prayers, Labors, never cease,
Else blos'mes of Vines, the F^xes soon would steal,
Or wild Bore root up all thy Church and Commonweal.
When in his large, wise, understanding heart,
We, for our Good, such cares continual see,
What secret Malice can a man pervert,
To deem that in his Love, and Wisdom he
Advance will any to Authority;
But whom he every way does able find,
To care and labor for the safety
Of Church and Kingdom, to his care assigned?
Wise Masters best discern how Servants are inclined.
Great Peers appointed, by this Master wise,
To Rule his Kingdom, and adorn his Hall,
Of him learn Labor and brave exercise,
And do not unto idle gaming fall:
The Bane of Court, Town, Country, Church and all:
Oh spend the time you from emploiment spare,
In Tilting, Hunting, Arms, Arts Liberal,
And so with Piety your minds prepare,
To labor in your charge, and have of heaven a care.
Besides examples of your earthly King,
Look on our Lord that sits in heaven above:
Who here on earth was always laboring,
Now as our Head himself he does approve,
Most careful for his Spouse and dear^st Love.
See his Disciples, Saints and Martyrs all,
How careful and laborious they prove,
In Writings, Preachings Counsels general,
Relieuing poor in want, redeeming Saints from thrall,
Amongst these Lights of Labor, with me look
On one, though little, yet of wondrous might,
Who, Dauid-like, takes stones out of the Brook,
The proud Goliath in the front to smite:
Oh how do thou most valiantly acquit!
God and his Church, against Rome's railing Host,
And that Augean stable purgest quite,
Though it thee mickle care and labor cost:
Of this would Her^'les more, than all his labors boast.
Could Sloth her self that sweet Delight but taste,
Which comes of Pains and honest exercise,
Her precious time and strength she would not waste,
In Idleness and worldly vanities.
But like to nimble ^arke wo^ld early rise,
Who mounting first to heaven Devotions sings,
And afterward her business applies,
So long as Light lends use of eyes or wings,
And then in ^est enioyes fruit of her trauelling^.
Most sweet Delight! at night when wearied,
We end the Cares and Troubles of the day,
When private, public having profited,
We down our selves with Peace and Comfort lay:
Not like rich Mizers, to their Souls, that say,
In this abundance lie thee down and rest,
When ah! Who knows but even that night away,
His Soul forth from his Body may be pressed,
And he all unawares over taken in his nest?
Unnecessary Labors, worldly Cares,
Which on themselves, not Prouidenc^ depend,
My Muse to them no such great favor bears,
As here amongst the Graces to commend.
All things created serve unto their end,
For which God at the first did them ordain,
And all unto his Glory do intend:
Why then should man be slothful, idle, vain,
So long as here on earth he does in health remain?
He has a mind firm, valid, raised on high,
Able to soar above the Firmament,
And by sweet Contemplation to descry
The heavens swift motion, Order, Government:
All things are subject to his Regiment,
In squallid Sloth and ease yet down he lies,
Till thou who first did frame his earthly tent,
Do raise his mind to heavenly exercise,
Which may by Care and Labor him immortalize.
Not a^xious, unprofitable cares,
Base offspring of Distrust and Diffidence:
With present, always, discontent; and fears
Vain, future wants, or childrens Indigence,
Distrusting thus Gods gracious Providence,
Which fills with open hands the mouths of all,
Whose eyes look up to his Beneficence,
And Lillies clads in colors natural,
More fair than Salomons rich robes imperial.
He that this all did first of naught ordain,
And now it gouernes by wise Providence,
Is by his Bounty able to sustain,
All those that labor with true Diligence:
Sure he will give abundant recompense
To all, who careful, faithfully do here
Rely on him, without least Diffidence:
He for his Foes did spend his blood most dear,
Why then should Friends distrust his Providence and Care^
Kindle thy Love then in my frozen breast,
Frame in my mind a study and desire,
To follow thee, that can direct me best,
By thy command to march on or retire.
Awake me from Slouth's filthy dirt and mire,
Lest darkness me fast-sleeping apprehend,
From which to Light again i^ no retire,
Let me no hour unprofitably spend,
Nor pass one day unfruitfully unto mine end!
That faithful servants blessing on him light!
Whom Thou so doing, when thou come shall find,
Grant, whatsoever hour of the night
My Lord and Master comes, my soul and mind
May to continual watching be inclined:
But lest I labor here too long in vain,
I next will pass unto my Port assigned,
To Death; the end of all my Care and Pain,
To grave, where, till the final doom, I must remain.
There quiet I shall sleep and be at rest,
With Kings, which here their houses filled with gold,
And Emperors, which all the world possessed,
Yet all too straight ambitious thoughts to hold:
There small and great, free, bond, rich, poor, young, old,
Oppressors, prisoners have like fruition
Of rest: All turn again to dust and mould,
As small an Vr^^ then limits the Ambition
Of Popes, and Caesar's, as of Beggars mean condition.
MEDITATION 5.
Of Death.
COme, let us shake hands, we in the end must meet:
I have provided me this goodly Chain^
Of Graces, at thy coming thee to greet,
For thou will not for favor, gold or gain,
Thy fatal stroke, one moment, here refrain:
Well, close mine eyes, and dim my Bodies Light,
These shining Gems for ever shall remain,
My soul for to enlighten; Oh! then smite,
It skils not when, nor how, so as my heart stands right.
Ah! why look thou so pale, as thou did fear?
Thee, before men and Angels, I forgive,
I wish thee not a minute to forbear,
I never shall the Life of Glory live,
Till thou vnlock'st the door my soul to give
Enlargement from this Prisonhouse of clay,
For which she long has struggled and did strive,
Yet still the Flesh, the Spirit down does way;
And fitting it is I should my Makers leisure stay.
Thou earthquake-like this prison house must shake,
Before my Soul be loosed from her ^ands,
And make my K^^pers tremble all and quake,
Lo then a holy Angel ready stands,
To save her from he^s-watches grizly hands:
And though heavens sudden Light my Soul amate,
She forward goes, and nothing her withstands,
A joyful entran^e to most happy state,
Thus pass we through Deaths-doore, in at heavens narrow gate.
Welcome, as sleep, to them that right thee know,
And easy as a Downy-Bed of Rest,
But thou most gastly-terrible do show,
To those, that thou do unawares arrest:
Sweet hau'n to Souls with worlds winds, waves oppressed;
A Rock to those that swim in sweet Delight;
Sweet host of Saints, who with perfumes has dressed
The Beds, wherein their Bodies, all the night,
May rest, till Trumpets sound, awake to glorious Light.
To Poor thou show thy honey, hid'st thy sting,
The Rich thy Sting, but no^ thy honey see,
Like Iailour thou do good and bad news bring
To Souls, that in the flesh imprisoned be;
One must dye ever; the other shall be free.
Thou that do Death, to thine, by dying make
The Messenger of such great joy and glee,
Direct my Muse, in what I undertake,
That I may Death discern, ere Death we overtake.
What Is Death but a divorce or separation,
Of Man and Wife, that never could agree,
From Bed and Boo^d, and from Cohabitation?
The guilty Flesh pays Costs, the Soul is free;
Yet Both ere long shall one another see,
Freed from foul Sin, the cause of all their strife,
And shall in Wedlocks Bands reioined be,
To love, and live, for aye, like Man and Wife,
A holy, happy, quiet, and eternal Life.
But this I of the first Death understand;
(Lord! of the second, never let me taste)
This is the way into the holy Land,
That does into continual darkness cast:
No mortal Sense did ever see or taste
The seconds anguish, terror, horror, pain:
The first is short, the second aye does last,
Age, Sickness, men to dye the first constrain,
The Devils in the second, souls and bodies chain.
This, sets willing souls from bodies free,
That, souls in bodies holds against their will,
By this, from Bodies weight we quited be,
That, with such weight of sin the soul does fill,
As to the Pit infernal press it will:
This, takes good men away before their time,
Lest they be ouer-whelm'd with too much ill,
That, seizes on the wicked, for their crime.
That leads down to Hell, by this to heaven we clime*
The first, has only power in the grave,
Second, in Hell; One, us depriues of sense,
By the other, sense of endless Pain we have,
Both, have one name, yet see their difference.
Sin mother is of both: In innocence
Had Adam stood, Death never had been known,
But second Adam has removed long sense
The sting of this first Death, even by his own:
Thus from a Plague, Death is to Saints a favor grown.
Christ meets her as Esau on the way,
And gives a charge unto her rougher hands,
No evil against Jacob to assay;
Thus turns he to embracements all her Bands;
Death, made by Sin our mortal foe, now stands
Our first fast friend, to bring us unto bless;
And though awhile our carkases she brands
With vile corruption, and R^ttennesse,
Our souls the whilst ab^de in joy and happiness.
All first Death gets, is Rottenness and Dust,
A Body only, in corruption sown,
To kill seeds of Concupiscence and Lust,
That it more glorious after may be known,
Our earthly part thus turns to her own,
But shall again a heavenly body rise,
And as at first, be with the Spirit one,
Which long has lived in joyous Paradise,
Waiting till Christ her mortal should immortalize.
Alas! why should we then be so afraid,
Here to endure a little grief or pain,
Be it on Rack, or Bed? so I be laid
Safe in my Grave, my soul thereby shall gain;
Lord! grant me Faith, and Patience to maintain
Hels last encounter, when my Soul is shaken!
The holy Martyrs did not so complain
Of Pain, when Soul was from the body taken,
As when their Conscience by tentation was awaken.
This Death, though painful, quick dispatch does make,
The second, has eternity and pain,
They rightly at Death's horror, quake and shake,
Where griefs within, more than without remain,
Whose conscienc^ them more terribly do strain,
Than any outward torment they endure,
Who sees heavens most incomparable gain,
And can thereof by Faith himself secure,
Is certain, Death can naught but good to him procure.
For body frail, one like his glorious head
For pleasures, profits, hopes and honors vain,
(Whereby than eased, we are more troubled:)
Eternal rest, and freedom from all pain,
Were thou, my Soul, but sentenced to remain
In this frail body, yet a thousand years,
Oh! how would thou of weariness complain,
And maladies thy Flesh about her bears,
And seek Death as a blessing even with many tears?
Yea should this life last without tediousness,
Oh! Do but think that as thou more do sin,
Thou addest more unto thy wretchedness,
For Death at first, by Sin did enter in,
Who would not leave these loathsome rags! to win
That glorious, shining roabe of Righteousness,
Thou shall not lose thy Body, but thy Sin,
Thou it again shall meet in happiness,
Corruption shall indeed be changed, not thy Flesh.
As Golden Ore, in Finers fire cast,
Is not consumed, but cleans'd from dross, and tried;
So substance of the body does not waste,
Only by Death is purged, and purifide.
Should Souls here in their Tabernacles 'bide,
With all infirmities till Day of Doom,
How weary would they be, of rest denide,
And wish their Bodies sleeping in their Tomb,
Until the joyful Day of Resurrection come?
So long as here our Bodies do remain,
They have like Wool one ti^cture natural,
But Death them dies all in purple grain,
To make them Robes for Sprites Celestial,
For we in heaven like Kings and Princes all
Shall reign in new Jerusalem for ay,
The Grave us like each side of Red Sea wall,
From cruel Egypts bondage on our way,
Does to the Land of heavenly Canaan convey.
As he, who for ill-doing lies bound,
Trembles and quakes when loosed from his bands,
He must before the Judgment Seal be found,
To give account for works done by his hands,
But he most stout and resolutely stands,
Whose Conscience him of evil does acquit:
So men rejoice, or fear, when Death commands
Them to appear before the Judge upright,
There to receive just doom, for things done wrong or right.
As water-drops, which fall in Fountain pure,
Die not, but are preserved incontinent,
So Bodies perish not, but ay endure,
Only resolved to their first Element:
Our spirits fly to heaven whence they were lent.
As drops of rain which from the heavens descend,
Are all into the womb of Tethys sent:
So Saints dead Bodies to Earths bowels tend,
Whence drawn up by Sons heat, to heaven they re-ascend.
What is our Life? a wind, a course to death:
They that on Earth the longest course can gain,
Run in the end themselves quite out of breath,
And no more but their courses end obtain;
To which, they that live fewer years attain.
God here to men does life, like money, lend:
Which at our Day we must pay back again.
As without oil the Lamp no light does send,
So when our humid's spent, our Life is at an end.
As Pilgrim with long travel wearied,
Lays down his Flesh to sleep in darkest night,
But Visions houering about his head,
Do show unto his Soul most heavenly Light,
And does with Dreams his spirits so delight,
He wishes often the night would ever last:
So fares it with the new-deceased wight,
When in the grave his Body sleeps fast,
And Angels have his Soul in Abra^ams-bosome placed.
As Stars of heaven, which first in East do shine,
Arise, till their Meridian they have past,
But do from thence as fast again decline,
Till they into the Western Seas are cast:
Even so vain Mortals, here are all in have,
Till they their highest pitch of strength attain;
But that once got, they fall again as fast,
And downward to the grave descend amain,
Some here a shorter, some a longer course obtain.
And as he is happiest, whom the swiftest wind
Brings soonest to the Port, and hau'n of rest,
So's he, that soonest in the grave does find
Harbor against worlds storms, which him infest.
Death does but like his brother Sleep arrest
The weary wight, where he a longer night,
Himself in grave, than in his bed may rest;
And yet no longer, than till Christ our Light
Awakes us, to enjoy for ay his glorious sight.
To all that labor, pleasing is the end;
The Traveler inquireth for his Inn:
The hired Servant, when his Year does end:
The Husband, when his Harvest does begin:
Merchant of his Adventures coming in:
The Woman, when her ninth Month does expire:
So Saints, of Death have ever mindful bin:
For where is our Treasure, there is our hearts desire,
And where our Crown is laid, our eyes do ay aspire.
Therefore the dying Saints like Swans do sing,
Foreseeing, that they in the grave should rest
From Labors, and be freed from the sting
Of Sin, which here their lives did most infest:
Why should we with Deaths fear be so distressed?
When as the Lord of Life himself did die,
That we from sting of Death might be releast;
Even Sin, the Cause of all our Misery,
And made Death our first step to true Felicity.
The truth hereof the sacred Pages seal,
When that which commonly we dying call,
They call it sleeping: For Christ did repeal
The Act of dying, by his Funeral:
Thus Patriarchs, Prophets, Kings, Apostles, (...)
Lie sleeping, till the final Resurrection,
From Ad^m, to the Judgment general,
All to this fa^all Lord must yield subjection,
And sleep s^cure and sound under his safe protection.
The Wiseman therefore, better does commend
The Day of Death, then of Nativity;
By that, our pain and labors have an end;
This, the Beginning is of Misery:
The Lord of Life, who Life and Death did try,
Proclaims endless Blessedness to those,
With rest from labor, in the Lord that die:
Blessed whom he to live in him has chose,
But till their Death, from Labor they have no repose.
See, but how wiser Heathens entertain
This fatal stroke, this last neces^ity:
How they on Birth-dayes, loud lament and plain;
At Funerals, make mirth and melody;
For that begins, this ends all misery:
No man, say they, that does not Death despise,
Can here on earth enjoy true Liberty,
They only saw an end of miseries,
But lo! heaven stands wide open unto Christians eyes.
Ah why should Painters limme Death with a dart,
Time with a Sith, before him cuts all down,
Death does but lance, and play the Surgeons part,
Time fells the Corn, that is ready to be mowne.
Alas! what Cruelty has Death us shown?
Thou art but as a Servant unto time*
To gather Fruits which, he says, ripe be grown:
In Wine Press thou but treade^t out the wine,
To barrel up in Tomb^s that there it may refine.
As we green Fruits more difficultly pull,
Than those we find hang ripe upon the tree,
So youthful Sprites of heat and vigor full,
More hardly die than they that aged be:
This is the greatest difference we see,
Between their courses that are short and long,
Both go the broad way of Mortality,
Death, like a mighty wind here lays along,
As weak and hollow El^nes, so Cedars stout and strong.
Who is so strong whom she has not cast down?
Look all the generations gone and past,
Their ancient Monuments by Books are known,
In Gra^e their Bodies all to dust do waste;
The Jews long-life more eagerly embraced,
As 'twas a type of endless happiness,
But since Christ in his youth of Death did taste.
All Substances fulfilled, their Figures cease,
Now happiest he whom Death the soonest does release.
Happy, though clouds of stones thy head infold
Like Steph'ns, so open heavens show pure and clear,
And though a Trance like Paul's so fast thee hold,
That whether thou without the Body were,
Or in the Body, thou can not declare.
Though thus Death does like sleep they flesh arrest,
The joys of heaven shall to thy Soul appear,
Not to be uttered: Lo, they are best
By Negatiues, not by Affirmatiues expressed.
No eye has seen, no ear has ever heard,
No heart conceive, no tongue that can recite
The joys, the Almighty has in heaven prepared,
For them that here do live and die aright:
Oh enter Soul into thy Lords delight!
This joy thou can not in thy self contain,
For thou art bounded, that is infinite;
Who enters, shall for ever there remain,
And for these finite Cares, Joy infinite obtain.
Oh! who can know this Death, and be afraid?
Although amongst the pots thou lie a time,
Thou like a silver Dove, shall be arraid
With golden feathers, which like heaven shall shine.
But ah! Thus with my self I do divine,
Without least peril, by free Speculation:
But should Death seize on this my brittle Shrine,
And offer me to act my Meditation,
How should I tremble at my houses desolation!
That which is now familiar to my thought,
Will bring me then Amazement, Horror, Fear.
Alas! this battel's not so easily fought,
Except Jehovah on our side appear.
Did think, Death would with Complement forbear,
And only thee delight with Meditation?
No, he will try what courage thou do bear,
And seize upon thy Fleshes habitation,
It laying waste, till all in Christ have restoration.
Then as I feel this outward man decay,
Grant I may strong and stronger grow within,
And by a constant daily dying may
Be armed, against this strong man enter in;
That though he seize upon this man of sin,
My inward man may like the silver Dove,
That newly has escaped the Fowlers ginne,
Fly to her Lord and Savior above,
And be embraced in his blessed arms of Love.
Oh! there I shall enjoy eternal rest,
And happy Peace, which here I crave and miss,
And wander further more and more distressed.
What if some little pain in passage is,
Which makes frail flesh to fear Deaths pallid kiss?
That paine's well borne, that endless ease does gain,
And from Sins cruel slavery dismiss.
Sleep after Toil, faire-weather after rain,
Peace after War; ease is most pleasing after pain.
We all are wanderers weary of our way,
And hasting to the Grave our certain home:
This world's the Flood which does our passage stay,
Till Death
Charons boat to weft us over, come.
Who Life did limit by eternal Doom,
And times for all things has established,
Appoints each Sentinel unto his room,
And so the terms of Life has limited*
None may depart, but by their Captain licensed.
Nefarious wretch! who with flagitious hand*
Dares violate the Temple God did raise,
A Mirror here of all his Works to stand,
His wisdom to commend, and goodness praise:
He that appoints the great worlds nights and days*
From her Creation to last Reuol^tion,
Determins all thy small worlds works and ways,
Who wilfully then hasts his dissolution,
Seeks to gainsay his Makers constant resolution.
The longer life I know the greater sin;
The greater sin, the greater punishment,
Yet if thou Souldier-like art entered in,
Thou must go on with stoutest hardiment,
And not depart without commandment.
Oh lie not down, and thee to rest betake,
Ensuing ills of liu^ng to prevent*
Though life has naught that can her loved make,
Yet gives it no just Cause that thou should it fo^sake:
And yet, O sinful man! do not desire,
To draw thy days forth to the last degree,
Until the measure of thy sinful hire,
Be heaped up with all impiety,
Against the day of Wrath and Jealousy,
Whilst thou this sinful Body bearst about,
Laden with Sins, and foul Iniquity,
Their numbers more and more increase no doubt,
Most happy he whom Death the soonest helps out.
Despair not yet, frail, silly, fleshly wight,
Nor let Distrust amate thy manfull heart,
Nor Satan's malicing dismay thy sprite,
Thou in thy Saviors meri^s have a part,
Oh why should thou despair, that certain art
Of Christ thy Savior? Lo! in him is grace,
From thee for ever to remove Hels smart.
And that accursed handwriting to deface,
No sins can be so great, but Mercy may have place.
How then should any wretched wight be won,
To spoil the Castle of his life and state?
Is It not Gods doing whatsoeuer's done
In heaven and earth? Did he not all create
To live and die by his eternal Fate?
Who dares then strive with strong Necessity?
That constant holds the world in changing state,
All ought be willing here to live or die:
Life, Death, ordained are by heavenly Destiny.
Then witness Death, that willing I lay down
My Body, sure to put it on again;
My fleshly Baggage, for a heavenly Crown,
My earthly Bondage in the heavens to reign.
I leave this Tent of brittle clay, to gain
In heaven a mansion holy, spiritual.
Lo, my corruption here I down have lain,
For incorruption, pure, Angelical,
And for a heavenly Parlour, changed my earthly Hall.
Lord, this I crave, Direct me in the way,
So shall I certainly attain my end:
If well my Part on mortal Stage I play,
Saints, Angels, my beholders, shall commend
My Action: God and Christ shall be my friend:
And when my flesh to Natures Tyring-^oome,
From whence it came, shall quietly descend:
It there shall rest until the Day of doom,
And then in heau^nly Quire a Singing-man become.
Sweet Death, then friendly let me thee embrace:
He truly lives, that living, learnes to die:
Now smiling, like a friend, I see thy face,
Not terrible, like to an enemy:
But I with Prayer end my melody:
Lord grant, when Death my pass^ng-bell does ring,
My Soul may hear the heavenly Harmony
Of Sai^ts and Angels, which most joyful sing
Sweet Hallelu^ahs to their Savior, God and
(...)*
FINIS.
TO thee, poor Bird, in Cage imprisoned;
How like am I, by Ag^e visited?
I cannot use my horse, nor thou thy wing,
And therefore both sit still within, and sing.
My Muse has with my Body Sympathy:
If well, I learn to live; if sick^, to die.
Of dying young.
THis world a banquet is, we, conviues all,
Where most, by Drink, to sin and surfeit fall.
Who dies young, is like him that does rise
From banquet, ere the wine his wit surprise.
FINIS.

