A LETTER SENT FROM A banished Minister of Jesus Christ, unto the faithful
Christian flock in England, most necessary and comfortable to al such, as be
burdened With persecucion or heaviness of mind for the Gospel and testimonye
of Jesus.

Lord increase our faith.

John. xvi. In the world you shall have affliccion, but be of good cheat, I
have overcome the World.

Prynted at Roane by Michael VVodde, the.iiii. of Ianuarye. Anno Do. M.D.LIII.

THE GRACE AND FAVOR of our Lord Jesus Christ, the charity of God, and
communication of his holy spirit, rest in you (dearelye beloved) to the
confirmacio^ of your life in godlynes, unto the end. Amen.
IT was not without an vrge^t cause (loving friends) that our savior Christ
preachi^g his excellent Sermonin the mount to his disciples, Math. vii Luke vi,
and.xiiii.
did knitte up the same with the symilitude of a wise and folish builder. The
one building upon the rock, the other upon the sand: The one buylding
remaining, the other utterly decayed, by the impetuous rage of rain, wind
and floudes. wherein it behooves us, to consider principally.iii. things.
First, that the beginning of Christian religion, consists in diligent
building, and not in idle living. Secondly, the cause why we must build, is to
the intent, that in time of need, we may have a strong castle, and invincible
fortress, to fly unto, in all our necessities, thereby the better to be
preserved from the power, tyranny, and sudden invasion of all our enemies.
Thirdly, in this similitude, we are admonished, that as vereli as we have built
our tower, and that as verily as it stands: so certainly shall therain
descend, the wyndes blow, and the floods arise against it, to try the strength
and situacion thereof.

We the Christian flock of England (brethren) by the merciful providence of
God, for the space of.vi. or.vii. years have enioied a wonderful calm and quiet
time to build out tower (god his name be praised therefore) much like the
Halcio^ dares, when the Haltion birds do hatche and bring forth their young
ones, void of al stormy te^pestes. For so has God ben accustomed to deal
with his Church, namely to nourish the members thereof, during their infancy,
in a wonderful calm and quietness, till they be grown up into perfect men:
able to receive strong meats, and tha^ does he alter their diet, from swetenes
to towernes, from pleasure to pain. and from quietness to adversity. Such was
the security and quietness of the church of God, Gene. vi.
while the Arc was in building, in the days of Noe: but immediatelye after,
there followed such a tempest, as overwhelmed the whole race of the earth. ii.
Para. v
Such was also the quietness amongst the Israelites, while the temple was in
buildyng, in the days of Solomon: but immediatelye after, there followed such
a division, as subverted the whole la^d. Such also was the calmenes and
quietness of the church, during the presence of Christ, in the flesh: in so
much that his disciples wanted no manner of thing, Math. ix.
neither could they moan or weep, while the bridgrom was with the^, but after
he was ascended, their ple^ti war turned into scarciti, and their mirth into
mutning. Such has been the calmenes of other realms, whereas the gospel from
time to time has been preached, as Germani. and other places, and namely of
this realm of England, that a greater has not been heard of, nor known:
wherein no enemi durst apear without rebuke, to hinder our fortificacio^ in the
same. Wherefore let us not now meruel, nor yet be abashed if our heavenly
father deal with us his children, as he has dealte with our predecessoures,
from the beginning: That is, after a calm, to stir up a tempest, after
quietness, trouble: and after security, and ease, travail and pain, to try
our building withal, Math. vii
whether it be situated upon the rock Christ, in the purity of his gospel,
through perfect faith and godly life, to remain evermore: or else upon the sand
of the vanity of this world, in the decres, co^stitutio^s and pleasures of
men, through hypocrisy, forth with to be overthrown. Fot as S. Paul says:
a time will come, i. Cor. iii.
wherein the fire of tribulation, shall try eueri man's building, whether he have
builded gold, silver, or precious stone: either straw, hay, or timber. And me
think brethren, I se the same time appear, as it were Helias his cloud,
rising out of the sea, iii. Regu. xviii,
being as yet no bigger tha^ an hand: but forthwith I fear me, it will spread
over all this land. where fore with the prophet, let us gird up our loins, and
run in time to our tower, before the storm descend: and therein, if the same
be builded upon the rock Christ, we shall not only find consolation, but also
preservation. And for this purpose, ii. Tim. ii.
we are called in the scriptures wariours, and soldiers. wherefore now that the
battle approaches, wherewith the enemies purposes to beseage our fortress:
let us not as Cowards wax faint hearted, running away before the blows, but
rather as men, tepleate with an invincible courage and boldness, let us stand to
our takling, in holding fast the ploughe of our profession, whereunto we have
put to hands: and thus not in confydence of our own strength, which is
nothing, but in the force and strength of our captain, under whose banner we
have promised to fight, which was never overcome, beaten down, not put to
flight: but by suffering has subdued al his enemies, and by a cross,
vanquished his adversaries. And as he our head, has gone before, the straight
pathe, and narrow way unto eternal life: even so must we his members follow
the same race, if we will in herit his kingdom. And for this purpose, says S.
Paul, Romans viii
are we facioned unto the shape of the son of God, not only to reign with
him in glory, but also to suffer with him in misery. For as he says in
another place: If we die with him, li. Tim. ii.
we shall also live with him if we be patie^t, we shall also reign with him. But
if we shall deni hi, he shall also deni us. For the affliccio^s of this life, are not compatable to the glory of the life to come. This is the only wai brethren,
that the church of god obtains victory by, not as worldli princes do by
subduing, but by suffering: not by drawing out the swerd with Peter, but by
having our heads stricken of with the same: not by imprisoning, and binding of
other, but by being imprisoned and bound one selves. For as Christ's kingdom
was not of this world, as he himself witnesses, no more is out force, strength
and inheritance here. For our portion in this life, is but as sheep appointed to
the slaughter, and as pilgrims, traueling through mani tribulacio^s,
necessities and miseris, Psa. xliiii i. Pete. ii.
toward the land of promise, being compassed about with enemies on eueri side.
But they with all their malice, shall not anoye us, nor yet hinder our journey,
if we continue faithful, but rather further the same. Yea, the lord will never
forsake us, but by day go before us, in a cloud. and by night in a pillar of
fire. And although Moses for our unworthiness be taken from us: Exo. xiiii
yet will the Lord stir up a Iosuah, to lead us into our inhentaunce, in
throwing out our enemies before our faces. Here is set forth (brethren) the
tragedi of our lives. Let us be contented withal, and above al things, let us
auoy de murmutatio^s against the higher powers, who are Gods instruments, to
work his will: whether it be life, or death, good or evil, least we perish
with the rebellious Israelites in the desert. Furthermore, Nu. xiiii. and.xvi.
if we do depeli consider the great utility that the cross bri^geth to the
church of god, we have rather occasion to wish for it, and to rejoice when it
comes, the^ to repine and murmur. For by it our fou^dacio^ is tried, our
faith confirmed, our knowledge increased, co^tinua^ce in prayer exercised,
being from the wicked and hipocrites separated, whereby the dross and
corruption of our life is beaten of, as the rust of iro^ with a hammer. For if
we lie still as rustye yronne, and be not brought under the hammer of
aduersiti, we consume away, and serve to no use. For gold is not purified, but
by fire. wherefore if we desire to be pure, let us not the^ despise that fire,
whereby we at made pure. For hitherto we have experienced a christian life, as
Children practice the feats of war, by signs and shows without any bloody
battle, in triumphing before the victori: but victory is not optained with
loss and danger. Christ our head, lost his humayne life, to optaine victory
for us, and to triumph over our ennemies: and do we think to optaine the
same, by sytting in securiti and ease at home in our houses? passing our time
in pleasures, ease and joy, with our wives, children and friends, environed
with our riches, lands, and possessions, without coming to the battle without
hasarding our lives. without for sakyng our countries, without passing the
seas? No truli. For as S. Paul says. no man that warreth; ii. Tim. ii
entangleth him self with worldly business, and that he may the better please
him, that has chosen him to be a soldier.

Now brethren, if there be a battle toward, as we suppose, let us show our
selves worthy soldiers, considering the worthiness of our Captain, whom we
serve, who did not let to abando^ his incomparable glory, and to clothe him
self with our miserable humanity, for our commodities: therein optaining
victory, not for him, but for us. So likewise, let there be no worldli thing so
dear unto us, as may once retorte, or strai us, from faithful serving of our
lord and prince, whose servants we are by profession (and I trust by eleccion)
without any mutacion, Romans viii
continuing in probation, the end whereof is glorificacion. What is he
brethren, that would not be contented to have the seed of tribulation sown in
his life, when it brings forth such plentye of good fruit, as patience,
experience, and hope which shall never be confounded. These are the vtilities,
profits and commodities, that adversity brings to the church of God, with a
great deal more, which I am not able to recyte, for want of experience, in
that behalf. wherefore let us not despice the cross, when it comes,
considering the benefits thereof: but rather obey the council of the wise man,
where he says: Eccle. ii.
My son, if thou will come into the service of God, stand fast in
righteousness, and fear, and arm thy self to suffer temtacio^. Settle thine
heart, and be pacient, and shrincke not away, when thou art entised. Read for
your consolation the hole chapter, for therein is briefly described, what ought
to be the life of a Christian, and whereunto he must prepare himself, even to
the cross of tribulation, as to the only souerigne medicine to cure al our
festered diseases. On the other side brethren, for our farther comfort, in the
days of our trouble, let us often call to remembrance, not only the great
loving kindness of our everlasting god and father, wherewith he has always
loved us: but also his omnipotency, and mighti hand, wherbi he only rules and
governs al his creatures, every where: So that nothing is, or can be don
against his providence, purpose and will. For all thing serve him at a beck,
Esaye. xxxiiii.
yea he puts a bridel in the mouth of tirants, so that although they
pretend to make a long race, yet does he stop them suddenly, as it apeareth by
Senacherib, when he purposed to destroy Jerusalem in the time of king
Ezechias. For the wicked and the ungodly, are nothing else, but the instruments
of god, where by he works his pleasure: As witnesses the prophet Esaias,
Esaye. x.
calling them Axes, Sawes, Rods, and Staves which can proceed no further, then
it pleases their owner to use them to his glory. Satan could not molest Job,
til he had license, no. Job. i. ii.
The devil could not so much, Mat. viii.
as enter into the poor Hog, without the commandment of Christ. And shall
then his wicked members, anoye and hurt us, the children of god, without the
leave and license of our father? No truly. wherefore let us comfort our selves,
for we are dear unto him, ^acha. ii. Math. x.
as the Apple of his eye. The hears of our headdes are nombred, and the race
of our life is lymyted. So that, if all the world would conspire, to abridge
the same, they shall not be able, til our hour come. And when it comes, it is
the final end of all our sorrow, misery, calamity, and pain: and the
beginning of all our joys, felicities, and pleasures. For during the time of
this life, Christ promises us nothing, John. xv. and.xvi.
but afflictions, sorrow, and weeping: But he bids us be of good cheer,
sayi^g, that our sorrow shall be turned into Joy: what need we fear, Mark.
iiii Luke viii.
as long as we have Christ with us in our bote? although storms and te^pestes
do arise able to ouerwhelme us? And if he, during the calm time, do fall a
sleep in our hearts. by over great security, and confydence in our own
strength, yet in the time of our aduersitye, if we ernestly call upon him, he
will suerly awake, and help us: not only in rebuking the winds, and sees our
ennimies, but also bringing us to a quiet harbor, even the kingdom of his
father, purchased for us thorough his bloudde.

And thus I end, being bold to touble you with this my long letter, wherein
are contained many words, but few sentences: But as it is, take it in woorthe,
and according to my rudenes, I have supplied your honest request, in
perfourming my promise. And where there is no better, be content to accept a
little water from the hands of your friend, to quench your thurst with al,
instede of good wine.

The Lord bless you, prosper and increase you in knowledge, wisdom and
understanding, preseruyng you faithful unto the end. Amen.

The spirit of Christ be with you and comfort you al, to his glory. Amen.


