A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES-CROSSE the second day of June, being the last
Sunday in EASTER Term. 1622.

BY THOMAS AILESBVRY Student in Divinity.

HIERON. in MATTHEW. Quoties diem illum cogito, toto corpore contremisco.

LONDON, Printed by George Eld for Leonard Becket and Robert Wilson, and are to
be sold near the Temple Church, and at Graies Inn new Gate. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, AND REVEREND FATHER in God, JOHN, by divine
providence Bishop of LINCOLN, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of ENGLAND.
OF all created things (Right Honorable) which do in their kind set forth the
Creators greatness, Coeli enarrant, etc: And in the firmament the Heavens
glory; the Sun, In Sole posuit tabernaculum suum: And in the Sun these
three, The glorious light, piercing beams, and refreshing heat thereof draw
with them most admiration.

Man an earthly Sun, amazeth man to consider what is in man: But when these
three, Learning, Virtue, and Honor, meet in one man, as in one Center, who can
but admire, who can but to such a man owe, and tender all obseruancie?

From hence is that Scitum of a knowing man; Honorem esse escam, Doctrinam
hamum, Virtutem rete amoris.

But quorsum ista? Say that all these (as all must say who will speak the
truth) not only are, but do after a goodly proportion shine in your Lordship;
shall it not be said presumption in me (who am as yet but a twig of the
Leviticall Tree,) to offer my fruits (which may seem perhaps but leaves,) and
that first of all to your Self, who are so firm, so fruitful, and so
profitable a root, both in our Church, and Commonwealth?

Yet because both Church, and Commonwealth do truly say that of You, which
St. Bernard hoped he might say of his Eugenius, In te facta est mutatio, non de
te; nec priori statui tuo successit promotio, sed accessit: I repair to your
Lordship, though I bring no more to you then Noah's Dove did to him; A little
branch in my mouth; being very sensible, that seeing it sprang from a tree in
Gods garden, that the only putting forth of your hand may not only take me
that bring it into the Arc; but give to it growth with a plenteous blessing;
which being all my suit to your Lordship;

I humbly beseech the God of heaven, to assist you with his grace, foeliciter
currere, ac foelicius in Christi pietate consummare, to the great good of
Church, and Commonwealth here, and to the unspeakable good of your own soul,
and body hereafter.

Your Honors unfeignedly devoted in all observance, and duty, THOMAS AILESBVRY.

TO MY MOST worthy Friend.
SIR:
GRati est cui multum debes, ei plurimum velle debere: All that know me, know
that I owe you much more then my self: And God the searcher of the heart, is
privy to my grateful acknowledgement thereof.

I dare not express your kindness, nor your name: for I am well acquainted
how pleasing it is to you to do well, and unpleasing to hear thereof: having
learned with Seneca: That, Qui dedit beneficium, taceat; narret qui accepit.

The knowledge of the ill success of hiding Talents in the Earth, and your
especial desire to read, as well as to hear; have moved me to suffer this
Sermon to be printed. The good therein is Gods, and his grace working in me:
The perfection is his, the imperfection mine own: For we have this treasure
in earthen vessels.

My chief intention was to please God, and to aim at his glory: But I know
not how, an affection of humane affectation has interserted it self: As that
man thinking to satisfy nature with food, unawares offends in gluttony. Per
expositionem patefeci dona; per confessionem detego vulnera: In my Sermon I
laid open what Christians are to practice; and in this confession what in me
they are to pardon. God give a blessing to mine endeavors, and a pardon to
mine infirmities, and multiply his grace upon you, and yours in this world;
that when these temporary means fail, you may be received into the
everlasting habitation.

Your Servant in Christ Jesus, Thomas Ailesbury.

Faults escaped in printing, which the Printer prays the courteous Reader to
correct with his Pen; the Author being absent.
Fol. Lin. Fault. Correction. 5. 23. pasturing pastoring. 9. 22. arescet
arescit. 25. 1. And the and that the. 29. 5. caught into caught up into. 29.
27. Ea- Eagles. 36. 18. * ^ 34. 1. but special but by special

A SERMON PREACHED AT Paules-Crosse.
LVKE 17. verse 37. Vbicunque fuerit corpus, illuc congregabuntur and Aquilae.

Wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together.


THAT Adam did eat of the fruit of the forbidden tree, by faith we constantly
believe it, by experience we woefully lament it. But the Habet curiosam
cognitione^, and adhuc incompertam. Pererius in Genesis lib. 3. q. 2.
species, or kind of fruit that he did eat; if it were a Pomegranate, or a
Fig; if it were a Grape, or an Apple, holy Scripture has not expressed. The
substance of his fault, that he did eat, is recorded; but the circumstance,
what kind of fruit he did eat, is not at all revealed. That lawless eating
has occasioned a lawful judgment; which Christ in the Gospel has
positiuely declared; but the time when, and place where that judgment shall
be, is not by him in any place disclosed: And therefore when his Disciples
would have pressed him to it, by a bold, and curious question, Where shall it
be Lord? our Savior in my Text shapeth such an answer, that needs an
explication: Intimating thereby Gods counsels to be as deep waters, which
mortal men may not think to draine in the hollow of their hands. Vbicunque
fuerit corpus (says he) wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles be
gathered together.

David prophesied of Christ, Psalm. 78.2.
Aperiam in parabolis os meum: that his lips should distill parables. In this
Text in part his prophecy is fulfilled: And parables have in them what
Fulgentius generally applies to the Scriptures; In S^ripturis abundat; and
quod robustus comedat, and quod parvulus sugat, Fulgent. ser. de Confessor.
Et quod robustus comedat, and quod parvulus sugat: Meat for the great ones,
milk for the weak ones: And that of Diuinus sermo, sicut mysterijs prudentes
exercet: sic plerunque superficie simplices refovet: habet in publico vnde
parvulos nutriat, seruat in secreto unde mentes sublimium admiratione
suspendat. Greg. epist. ad Leandr. affix. fronti Moral. in Job.
Gregory agrees with every parable; That which may nourish the little ones,
habet in publico; That which suspendeth with admiration the profoundest wits,
seruat in secreto: It is a deep, and yet a shallow Ford: vbi Agnus ambulet,
vbi Elephas natet; where the Lamb may wade, the Elephant may swim: Therein are
mysteries to exercise the prudent, and histories to give understanding to the
simple.

Some parables the holy Ghost Intus and feris. Greg. hom. 9. in Ezech.
in the Scripture has written within, and without: expressed, and expounded;
and that partly by Christ himself: as that of the seed, and some others; and
partly by the Apostles, but chiefly by Saint John; who was both scriptor, and
interpres, (as learned Tonstall. lib. 1. de Euchar.
Tonstall styles him) he thought not fit to pass over the sayings of our Lord
surda aure; but recorded what our Savior spoke; expounded what he recorded:
For a view whereof take these ensuing particulars.

expressed. expounded. Ioh. 2.19. Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it. Ioh. 2.22. This he spoke of the Temple of his body. Ioh. 6.55.
For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. Ioh. 6.63. It is
the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. Ioh. 7.38. He that
believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of running water. Ioh.
7.39. This he spoke of the Spirit, which the believers should receive. Ioh.
12.32. And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all after me. Ioh. 12.33. This he
spoke, signifying what death he should die.

Now as we are happy in these infallible expositions of Christ, and his Eagle:
so hence are our tears; that this Text (a parabolicall proverb) has deserved
that worth, twice to be recorded by two several Evangelists; and yet not once
to be illuminated by any divine exp^sition. Insomuch that the Ob^c^ta and
clausa sunt omnia; in sudore tamen v ltus nostri e^amus panem. Aug. in P^^l 7^.
bread thereof, that is, the meaning, is to be eaten in the sweat of our
studies. I may say of it, what Hieron ad Pau^in.
Hierome did of the seven short Epistles of the four Apostles; it is mystical,
and succinct: brevis pariter, and longa; short, and yet long: brevis in verbis,
longa in sententijs; short in words, long in the diverse, but not adverse
expositions thereof: And of them I shall deliver none other then those, which
the ancient E^gles of the Church have delivered; and which may methodically be
reduced to four general Expositions: In the progress whereof, O God my
Redeemer, that have the key of David, openest where no man shuts; shuttest
where no man opens: Thou that openedst thy mouth in parables, open the mouth
of me the speaker; that this parable may at this time be opened to this
Assembly.

The first Exposition.
Origin. tract. 30. in Matthew.
Origens, who has sensed the body to be the Church; the Eagles the Doctors;
the gathering together, sensus, and consensus; the harmony, unity, and
consent in points of faith. And to that in Matthew. 24 28.
Matthew, this is very probable: where Christ premonisheth his Disciples; Take
heed that no man deceive you, verse. 4. Many shall come in my name, saying, I am
Christ, and shall deceive many, verse. 5. Many false Prophets shall arise, and
deceive many, verse. 11. Then our Lord prescribes rules how to avoid them: If
any man shall say, Lo here is Christ, or there is Christ, believe it not,
verse. 23. If they shall say, Ecce in deserto; behold he is in the desert, Go
not forth: behold he is in the secret chambers; believe it not, verse. 26. Then
he demonstrates as it were with a finger, where he is, that is, where the
Eagles are: mark their flight, it guides you to the light: for vbicunque
fuerit corpus, etc.

Secretae Scripturae recte Solitudines appellantur: Scripture secretly
expounded is a secret wilderness. Basilides (says Origin) tells me Christ is
here: Marcion, he is in the secret chambers: Valentinus, behold he is in the
desert: and bring Scripture with solitary expositions to confirm their
singular opinions. But I believe them not, Sed nos illis cre^ere non debemus,
nec exire a prima, and ecclesiastica traditione, nec aliter credere; nisi
quemadmodia Ecclesiae tradiderunt nobis. Origin: vt supra, and tract. 29. sub
fine.
and repair for the Catholic verity to the Church, where the pasturing
Eagles are.

No Scripture (says 2 Pet. 1.20.
S. Peter) is of a private interpretation; which is to be understood, not
ratione personae, but ratione modi: A private man may expound, but not in a
private manner; by stamping new expositions upon holy writ, diverse ab Ecclesiae
consortio Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit profanus est: Si quis in
arca Noe non fuerit, peribit regnante diluvio. Hieron. epist. ad Damas. pap.
. It is profane to eat the Paschall Lamb out of this house; to gather the
flowers of interpretation without the limits of the Churches garden. If any
Father, or Doctor, shall broach any solitary exposition against the Torrent of
the Church; we reject it; Noverint Catholi^ se cum Ecclesia Doctores recipe e,
non cum Doctorio is ^cclesia fidem se deserere debere. Vincent. Lyr. contra
Nov^t. c 23.
it being the property of the faithful, to receive the Eagles with the body;
the Doctors with the Church; and not to forsake the faith of the Church with
the Doctors.

Ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas? Does the faith depend upon
the persons; or the credit of the persons upon the faith? We ought therefore to
embrace, what the Church holds; The Church to hold, what the Apostles have
delivered; The Apostles having delivered, what Christ taught; who taught
nothing but what he received of the Father; as Quod E^clesia ab Apostol^s,
Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo accepit, sine dubio tenendum. Tertull.
praescript. advers. haereses.
Tertullian justly prescribes.

Origin himself, whose house was Vincent. Lyr. vt supra.
illustrata martyrio, famous for martyrdom, himself adorned totius doctrinae
magnificentia, with all the magnificence of learning; yet when he began to set
on foot private Tenets, and Glosses: Origenes in acre dom^num gloria pro
daemonibus impudenti crucifigit mendacio. Bernard. ser. 54. in Cant.
As, that the pains of the damned should not be eternal; and that Christ
should be crucified in the air again for the devils; as he was on earth for
man; herein we reject this Eagle, because he was not gathered to the body.

Vincent. ^yr.
Tertullian a worthy Ancient, famous for his Apologies for the Christians; for
his writings for the Christian faith; whom S. Cyprian reverently esteemed as
his master; Da magistram.
yet when this Eagle began to doat in his old age upon the dreams of
Montanus, and his associates; who held themselves equal to the Apostles in
divine revelations; we say; Hic magister non tenetur; and herein reject this
Eagle, as gone out from the body.

But when the lightning shall shine from the East unto the West, when the West
and Eastern Eagles, the Doctors of the Greek, and Latin Church shall meet in
one harmonicall center of agreement; as they did in the four first General
Councels; we think it more then common insolency to dissent from them: But
when the lightning has shone in the West, and darkness upon the face of the
East: and when the Western Eagles shall decline from the Church, we leave
those, and cleave to them that are gathered to the body.

S. Hierome in his time complains to Damasus, how the Hieron ad Damas. pap.
testatia vasa, vel lignea. Non vastitas Elementi liquentis, and interiacens
longitud^ terrarum etc. Nunc in Occidente Sol Iustitiae oritur, in Orient
Lucifer ille, qui ceciderit, posuit thronum suum. Idem vt supra.
Eagles of the East had degenerated: nothing but weeds, sour grapes, thorns,
and thistles growing in their garden: therefore he had his recourse to the
Sun, that then shone in the Western Church: not the depth of the seas, not
the length of the earth, could separate him from this light, for says he,
Wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together.

But as his complaint was of the corruption of the East; we justly resume it,
bewayling the now declined estate of the Western Church: That the Eagle of
Rome, the Patriarch of the Occidentall Church, has taken her flight from her
body; lamentably musing with the Prophet; How is the faithful City become a
harlot. Rome, ancient Rome, L^tius praesideres religione divina, quam
dominatione terrena. Leo in Natal. Apostolorum Petri, and Pauli, ser. 1.
famoused more for thy religion, then conquests: sacked thou art of thy
precious margarite of faith, and verity: That thy Pope is Reverendiss.
Episcopus Winton. in respons. Apol. pro Iuramento Fidelitatis contra Bellar.
alius a Christo, another from Christ, we doubt not: But if alius ab
Antichristo, another from Antichrist, we deservedly call it into question.

The like complaint make we of the inferior Eagles of Rome, of their new
devised expositions to uphold their drooping, and dying cause: To instance but
in one, (who is in stead of all) Cardinal Bellarmine, who has translated
Christ into the Pope: That Stone, that corner Stone, that precious corner
Stone, and sure found^tion, which ^say 28.16.
Esaias the Prophet foretold: and 1 Pet. 2.6.
Peter the Eagle applied unto Christ, Jn Histrionica sua praes^t^o^^ affix in
^^o^^e l^b. de Rom Pont^f.
Bellarmine has squared it for the Pope: He can convert omnes into solos:
Christ says of the Chalice, Matthew. 26.27.
Drink you all of this; that is, (says he) Clarissime patet verba illa ad
s^los Apost^lo^ pertinere. Bellar. de Sacram. Euchar. lib. 4. c. 25..
Re^^at^igit^r.
the Priests alone: and manducationem in Monarchiam; Acts 10.13.
Peter kill and eat, ergo Peter was Head of the Church: Therefore we reject
this, and such Eagles; because they have not kept them to the body.

And hereby we descry the Brownists, and Separatists to be no Eagles: those
erring stars that have no fixed motion in the Churches orb; who in stead of
reso^ting to the body, do cut off themselves from us by a schismatic rent.

Expos. in Matthew 24.
S. Chrysostom observes, that our Savior says not, exite; but nolite
credere: go you out; but believe them not: But like an expert Captain,
prohibites all excursions from the Churches bounds, nolite exire, go not out:
Believe them not, avoid heresy: Go not out, take heed of schism: Say our
Church be deformed, yet she is not infectious: Say the chafe is mingled with
the wheat; Do we for the chaffes-sake forsake the threshing floor of the Lord?
Saint Greg pastoral. part. 3. admonit. 23.
Gregory notes, that our Lord in the Gospel ioynes salt, and peace together;
Mark. 9.50.
Have salt with your selves, and peace one with another: Sal sinc pace, non
virtutis est donum, sed damnationis argumentum. Let your salt of doctrine
season the Church with a peaceful union: for the one without the other, is not
virtuous, but vicious.

But most of all that Father, Bishop, Martyr, S. Cyprian, in that admirable
Treatise of his, De vnitate Ecclesiae, h^th battered this forlorn error: Hanc
vnitatem qui non tenet, tenere se fidem credit? Solis multi radij, sed lumen
vnum. Rami arboris multi, sed robur vnum: de font vno rivi plurimi defluunt,
numerositas licet diffusa videatur, vnitas tamen seruatur in origin. Cypr. de
unit. Ecclesiae nu. 4.
The unity of the Church he that holds not, does he think he holds the
faith? Many beams issue from the Sun, yet but one Sun: diverse Rivers
stream from the fountain, yet but one head: many branches arise from one
root, yet but one tree; break off a branch, fractus germinare non potest, it
withers, it dies: separate a River from the fountain, praecisus arescet, it
dries up: and so no having of God for our Father, unless we take the Church
for our Mother.

Let not Novatian a Separatist boast of his moral gifts, and rectitude of
faith, which otherwise may be in him: Christianus non est, qui in Ecclesia
Christi non inest: He is no Christian, that is not in the Church of Christ: He
may give all his goods to the poor, and his body to be burned, yet Non erit
illa fidei corona, sed poena perfidia. Idab. nu. 12.
occidi potest, coronari non potest: If he die without the Churches limits,
killed he may be, crowned with martyrdom he cannot be. Hitherto Cyprian.
Certes this sequestration shows them to be no Eagles, who are not gathered to
the body. All this while have I fought under Origens banner; I leave him now,
and proceed to the second exposition.

The second Exposition.
ANd that's of Hi^^on. Comme (...) in Matthew.
Hierome, and The (...). in l^c. (...) homi^us proper no^ mortius est in casam
positas. Matthew 24. Job ^9.2^. (...) a (...) (...) which s^^nti^s to^^^^ (...)
^^l.
Theophylact, who conceive by the body to be meant Christ suffering, and dead
upon the Cross: by the Eagles the Saints, whose garments are washed in the
blood of the Lamb: and by the gathering together, the efficacy of his
passions: Wheresoever the dead body is, as S. Matthew has it; and in Job,
Wheresoever the wounded, or slain is; which reading Th^ophylact keeps, not
(...), but (...); to which also Hae^ ^^^tia (...) similitud^ c^^^ris ^^^u^
^m^^a. Bez^ ann. l. ^ 1 C^^a^er.
Beza does assent, not the body, but the carcass, to which the Eagles are
gathered.

Holy Scripture proclaymeth that Christ suffered, that Christ died for us upon
the Cross: witness the lib. 1^. 3^.
Tormentors, that abstained from breaking of his legs, because he was dead
already; witness Joseph of Matt^. 27.58.
Arimathea, that petitioned to Pilate for his body, wownde it in linen
clothes, laid it in a grave, which was signed with the common signet, where it
abode three days till the resurrection: witness himself, he bowed his head,
Job. 19 30.
(says the Scripture) and gave up the Ghost: He bowed himself, whom the
Crucifiers could not bow; and gave up the Ghost, gave it unto his Father, who
gave it unto him. Quod amittitur necessarium est, Ambrose.
quod emittitur voluntarium: In amission the act is necessary, in emission
voluntary: Quis ita dormit quando voluerit, sicut Jesus mortuus est quando
voluit? Who could ever fall asleep so when he would; as Christ died when he
would? Aug. tract. 119. in Johan.
Quis ita vestem deponit, quando voluerit, sicut Jesus mortuus est quando
voluit? Who ever laid aside his garment so, when he would, as Christ stripped
himself out of his flesh, when he had a will so to do? Quis ita cum voluerit
abijt, quomodo Christus cum voluerit, obijt? Who so willingly departed any
whither, as Christ out of this world, when he saw his time? according to that
prediction of Esaias, Oblatus est, quia voluit: whereof S. Bernard gives the
reason; Ipse oblatio, and offerens; He was the Priest, and the Host; the
sacrifice and the Sacrificer: Natus est, and datus est, passus est, and mortuus
est: no reason of his birth, and death, but his charity that made him will; his
will answerable to his charity.

In the Psalm. 40.8.
40 Psalm: Sacrifice, and burnt offering thou would not have, but a body
have thou ordained me: which latter clause though it answer not the Original;
yet the (...).
Septuagint so translate it; the Apostle to the Heb. 10 5.
Hebrews so quotes it; and Aug. enarrat. in Psalm. 39.
S. Augustine so reads it.

A body have thou ordained me: a true body, not a fantastical, as Manicheus;
a terrestrial, not a celestial body, against Valentinus; a body that might
really suffer, and not appear to suffer, against Hilary; Lib. 10. de Trin.
a body like unto our body, because the Host of our redemption was to be, and
nostri generis socia, and nostrae contaminationis aliena, says Ser. 3. in Not.
Domini.
Leo; like unto us in nature, for whom he suffered; unlike unto us in sinful
nature, for which he suffered.

The Deity was impatible; no passion, no sorrow, no grief, could fasten upon
the Godhead: the sting of death could not pierce the divine substance: God
could not suffer, could not be wounded, could not be nailed to the Cross,
could not dye; Cum mortis aculeum non possit accipere natura Deitatis; suscepit
tamen nascendo, etc. Leo ser. 8. de Passione.
therefore suscepit ex nobis, quod possit offerre pro nobis; He took that of
us, that he might offer for us: a body capable of the Cross, of the passions
upon the Cross, of the death of the Cross.

He took it, and he offered it, like unto the Moon, acceptam refero, all the
light received from the Sun by reflection, she communicates unto us
inferior creatures: Verbum caro factum est, the Word was made flesh, there he
took it; and that flesh w^nt the way of all flesh, for he died; and so
offered a body, that might, and did suffer; a body that might and did dye upon
the Cross: His nativity was praeludium passionis, a passage to his passion:
Borne he was, that he might live; live that he might work; work that he
might suffer; suffer that he might die; die that we might live, and be borne
again: and so came he from heaven to the womb, from the womb to the Cratch,
from the Cratch to the Cross, from the Cross to the grave: And thus (...) was
turned into (...); a body into a dead body, He died for us.

And though by death Christ's body was without soul; yet not without God. Vnio
naturarum indissolubilis.
The soul for a time was parted from the body; The Godhead never was
distracted either from soul or body: The dissolution was in one of the
natures, not of the natures: for if the natures had been divided, there had
been a double subsistence; and so by consequence a double person, which was
the Heresy of Nestorius: The Godhead is wedded to the Humanity without all
possibility of divorce: Our Saviors soul in his Agony, felt not the
presence of the Godhead; yet non soluit vnionem, though subtraxit visionem; Leo.
the vision was eclipsed, the divine union was not dissolved: The body in the
grave enioyes not the soul; yet though the soul departed, the union was not
parted: The passion of Christ (says S. Austen) was the sleep of his
Divinity: and by the like proportion may I say, The death of Christ was the
sleep of his Humanity: yet here is the difference; In the passion, the Humanity
was forsaken of the Deity, but apparently; the body of the soul really: Life
was separated, yet the Hypostasis remained. So great is the union betwixt God,
and man, Vt nec supplicio possit dirimi, nec morte distingui; Leo.
That neither death, nor passions could break it asunder.

The Schoolmen observe, that there is Vnum per vnitatem, and vnum per vnionem,
The Father and the Son are one by consubstantiall unity: God and man are one
by Hypostaticall union; In the Father, and the Son there is alius, and alius,
not aliud, and aliud, a personal difference, but a natural unity: In Christ
there is aliud, and aliud, not alius, and alius, a natural distinction, but a
personal union. The Godhead in one act assumed the Manhood both soul, and
body, and as vna est assumptio, so vna est vnio, the union is but one; by
virtue whereof he is united to soul, and body. For a demonstration hereof,
Bonauenture Bonav in 3. Sent. did. 21.
observes in that union three things; 1. Actio vnibilis; 2. passio vnibilis;
and 3. relatio vnibilis: the first is whereby God assumed man; so the Word was
made flesh: the second, whereby the humanity subsisteth in the Deity: the
third, as there is a double relation had to soul, and body: So Christ is
united by one act, but yet by a double relation to soul, and body: double in
power, in the assumption of the humanity: double in act, in the dissolution of
the humane nature.

Thus we see the body without a soul by death, but not without the Godhead:
disiointed, not disunited: dissolved in nature, not divorced in person: So we
have seen the body made a carkas, let us now see the collection, the gathering
together.

Four things in Christ to us are very obseruant: 1. his calling; 2. his
inuiting; 3. his gathering; 4. and his drawing of us: For the first he says,
Mat. 8.28.
Venite ad me, etc. Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, etc.
For the second; Luke 14.17.
He sent his servant at supper time, to inuit the guests, etc. For the third,
Mat. 23.37.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee together, etc. And
for the fourth, John 12.32.
If I be lifted up, will draw all after me. Oh the perverseness of man! Christ
calls; we stop our ears at the voice of this celestial Charmer: he
inuiteth, but we make excuses: he would gather us, but we would not: yet when
these will not serve, (O rare mercy!) he draws; Trahit inuitos, B^rn.
and facit voluntarios: He draws us unwilling, that he might make us willing
to be gathered.

I am now speaking of his gathering together, and see with what passion, and
compassion he speaks to Jerusalem: Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37.
and O Jerusalem, I would gather; and how often would I gather thee; gather
thee as a Hen, and as a Hen her Chickens; her Chickens under her wings: The
damnable obstinacy of the Citizens that did refuse it.

See how opposite Christ is unto Satan: Christ he gathers, the devil
disperseth: Christ gathers as a Hen, the devil disperseth as a Lion; Christ
under his wings, the devil within his jaws.

The Prophet David's prayer was, Psalm. 17.
Protect me under the shadow of thy wings: then were Christ's wings displayed,
when his arms were stretched out upon the Cross; then were his arms, and
body open to embrace thee; opened indeed, by the nails, by the spear, by the
thorns; and so he did both cor, and brachia, and latus aperire, says In Lucam
14. cap.
Stella: opened all for thee, that heaven might be opened to thee; see the
gathering together.

The Eagles then, the Saints must, and do resort to this body, and let it be
our practice, to resort unto it, by a commemoration of his death, by an
application of his merits.

Domine quid est homo? Lord what is man? that thou should thus remember him?
Man, forlorn man: man, rebellious man: man, sinful man: And, homo, quid est
Deus? Man, what is the Lord? that he should remember thee: the Lord that made
thee, re-made thee: the Lord that gave thee life, died for thee, etc. It was
Opus sine exemplo, gratia sine merito, donum sine pretio, charitas sine modo,
says mellisluent Bernard: A work not to be sampled, grace not to be merited,
a gift not to be prised, charity not to be measured: While the first Adam
Dormit Adam vt fiat Eua^, moritur Christu vt fiat Ecclesia. Aug.
slept in the garden, Eve was framed: while the second Adam slept in the grave,
the Church was formed: when the body was a carkas, were the Eagles gathered
together.

Jesus esto mihi Jesus.
That Jesus would be to us a Jesus. This it is to build our nests in the clefts
of the Rock: The Rock is Christ, the clefts are the wounds of Christ: to
build our nests, is by interesting our selves through faith in his merits: Vt
ille August.
sit salus in te, qui suscepit vulnera propter te: That he might be a plaster,
an Antidote to thee, that was wounded for thee: and remember, Leo.
Non itur ad Christum, nisi per Christum: no flying to Christ but by Christ:
therefore he says, John 14.6.
I am the way, the life, and the truth. I am the way which leads to the
truth; I am the truth that promise life; I am the life which I lay down for
the life of the world: Clamat errantibus, Ego sum via; clamat dubitantibus, Ego
sum veritas: clamat lacescentibus, Ego sum vita: Bernard.
Christ is the way for us to walk, truth us to direct, life us to refresh.

These things considered, let us take our Eagles wings, that we may be safe
under the protection of his wings; and fly unto the body: So where the body
is, shall the Eagles be gathered together: And thus much for the second
exposition.

The third Exposition.
THe third general Exposition, Chrysostom. Theoph. St^lla. Ferus. Maldonat.
expos. in Loc. and Mat. 24.
wherein the major part of Interpreters agree. That in these words an
adumbration of the last judgment is contained: For in the precedent verse,
Christ speaks of the Verse 30.
day, and that day and his day, when Verse 31.
the Son shall be revealed. And compares it Verse 37.
to Noah's time, the old world, and the flood; To Verse 40.
Lots time, Sodom, fire, and brimstone: and tells us, how some shall be
acquitted, and others condemned; Two men laboring in the field; the one shall
be received, the other refused: V^^e 41.
Two women grinding at a mill, the one shall be accepted, the other rejected:
And then shuts up all with this Epiphonema; Vbicunque faerit corpus, etc. and
so here is vbicunque for vbi, corpus for Christus, Aquilae for animae; nothing
expressed, yet all prefigured: an answer that needs an answer: a resolution
that needs an explication: with a, Lord show us this parable: Wheresoever the
body shall be, etc. there is the Cortex, the husk: but wheresoever Christ shall
be, etc. there is the Medulla, the sap. The body then is Christ the Judge, the
Eagles are the Saints, the gathering together is the general Judgment: This
is the Center, whereunto the Circumference of my meditations is to be gathered
together.

1 Iu^^.
The body is Christ, Christ is the Judge: as humiliauit scipsum, to dye for man,
to be judged by man; so exaltauit cum Deus, to judge his Judges: and so is
fulfilled that of the Apostle, The stone which the builders not only
improbauerunt, but reprobauerunt, not disliked, but utterly refused, is become
the head stone in the corner.

In the John 5.22.
fifth of John, the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
the Son: the Father has surrendered, and resigned all judgment into the
hands of his Son: And therefore he says, The Father judges no man, but the
Son. Before it seemed by Christ's words the Father did, what the Son does
not; the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that he does:
tanquam Pater faciebat, and Filius videbat, (says Augustine) as if the Father
were the Worker, the Son the Spectator: there I beheld Patrem facientem,
Filium expectantem: the Father the doer, the Son the looker on: here I see
Patrem vacantem, Filiu^ iudicante^: the Father at leisure, in vacation; the
Son judging in a full Court, Quid hoc est paulo ante putabamus facere aliquid
Patrem, quod non facit Filius. Aug. tract. 21. in Joan.
(Lord) thou art the profound word of the Father, I am shallow man, and
understand thee not: (Blessed Savior) I hear thee speaking of thy self; I
judge no man, there is another that seeks, and judges: ille quaerit iniurias
tuas, ille iudicat de iniuriis tuis; who so meet to seek after thy wrongs, and
to judge them that have wronged thee, as thy Father? How can it be then that
the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son?
turbamur hic, turbati desudemus, desudantes purgemur: we are troubled here,
being troubled, we sweat to enucleate the mystery, and in descrying thereof we
are purged. All judgment is therefore given to the Son, not that the Father
will cease to judge: But because Pater occultus erit, Filius manifestus: The
Father shall judge, but not be seen to judge; the Son shall judge, and be
seen to judge: because he shall judge in the habit of a man.

Act. 10 42.
Him, says the Apostle, has God ordained to be Judge of the quick, and dead:
where you may see his commission, and his circuit: his commission, derived from
the King of Kings: Constitutus a Deo: him has God ordained: his circuit, the
largest that ever was; Judge of quick and dead: that is, of the just, and
unjust: so Lyranus. Of the immortal souls, and mortal bodies, so Ruffinus.
Of the dead before, and of those that are found alive at the resurrection; 1
Cor. 15.
for we shall not all die, but shall be changed; so Caietan. Large it must then
needs be, that is extended unto all.

We see then by this time, what we are to answer to that Question discussed in
the Schools: If Christ in forma humana, shall judge the world: out of doubt
he shall come again in the same manner, that he went from us into heaven:
Acts 1.11.
Veniet, and sic veniet, wi^h a body, with the same body, the some body, with
the same skarres: as Chrysostom teaches.

He has given all judgment unto the Son: the Father could not give it to
the Son as God, which was his own by nature; neither could Christ receive
that, which as God he never wanted: Datum ^tem^ Patre (...) iudi^iumait, (...)
quia potestatem ^anc^, se na^ra no^ habeat, sed per ^spen^ tronem v^ homo Cyril
in Joan. l^b. 2. cap 140.
But the Father has given, and the Son received as man: as man shall he
come in the Clouds; as man shall he sit upon the throne; as man shall he
denounce the sentence; as man shall he be seen of all: the Godhead shall be
perspicuous to the godly only: But Christ as man, shall lie open to all men's
eyes; to the faithful, to the unfaithful, confusis, and confisis, to the
confessors, to the crucifiers: according to that of the Prophet, Zach. 12.10.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced.

Christ as God, Tolle^ex of in Joan. ^. animad^ers. 20.
judges with the Father in common; as man, alone: some works there be which
Christ does in carne, and yet cooperateth with the Father: Some works which he
does per carnem, wherein he works alone, and the Father by him: as we say
truly Mary's Son created the world, Christ in carne created the world, but
not per carnem, by the flesh. So Christ in the flesh, raised Lazarus; but not
by the flesh. So Christ suffered by the flesh, (for the Deity could not be
touched with passion) but triumphed in the flesh: So the Father and He as one
God shall judge together in the flesh; but not by the flesh: in which respect
as man he shall judge alone.

Part. 3. q. ^6. a^tic. 2.
Aquinas gives three reasons for it.



Sedebit Iudex, qui stetit sub Iudice, Augustine.
damnabit reos, qui falso factus est reus: There shall he sit to judge, who
stood here to be judged; and condemn the guilty, who falsely was accused to be
guilty.



This question in Schools begets another, viz. whether, this judicial power
were given to Christ, as man, freely, or purchased by his merits? The
Schoolmen answer, that it was given to him, gratia capitis, by the grace of
personal union: For when God assumed man, he infused into the Humane nature
all those graces the Humanity was capable of; and yet they say it was merited
by him too. He humbled himself to the lowest; therefore God has exalted him
to the highest. (...)
What hinders (says Tho. Aquin^^ but that one and the same thing may be due
by a double title; of gift, and purchase? Christ on earth was both viator, and
comprehe^sor: extra^er^num, and in termino; abroad and yet at home: therefore
being in a meritorious estate, and his merits of an infinite value what was it
that he could not m^rit? (...)
Bonaue^ture makes a twofold merit: 1. Whereby a thing is due which was not due
before. 2. Whereby it is due more ways then it was before. The praemium
substantiale, though it were given him by grace, and so due: yet he might
purchase it by his merits, and so make it more ways due then it was before.

Thus we see all things plead for Christ to be the Judge: It belongs unto him
essentially, as God: personally, as given from the Father: and meritoriously,
whereby Christ, by virtue of his merits may deservedly claim it. So have we
seen the body, Christ the Judge: I proceed to the ^^gles, the parties to be
judged.

By (...) Eagl^s are meant the Saints: And of those Saints there is a fourefold
exposition related by (...)
Maldonatus.

S. John speaks, (...) 15.^0.
They follow the Lamb whither-soeuer he goes. The Lamb is the body: The
following is the gathering together: These are they, that have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb; he that sits on the
throne dwells among^^ them, and the lamb shall feed them for evermore in the
midst of the throne: Their P^stor the Lamb: The place of pasture, in the midst
of the throne.

Sancti (...).
1 The 4 17.
Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught ^p together with them in
the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord.
And again; 1 C^^. 15.5.
We shall not all sleep, but shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye. Hereupon many of the (...) 10. (...) 42.
Ancient have thought, that some at that day shall pass without death to life;
though David say, Lord, who is that man, that shall not see death? Shall he
deliver himself from the power of the grave? And the Apostle tells us, that it
is a statute agreed upon in the Parliament of heaven; Heb. ^^.
Statutum est omnibus mori, all to die, and so to judgment. But S. Paul
seems to determine this doubt; though a sleep shall not be, yet a change
shall be in stead of sleeping: Shall not sleep; that is, so long as others that
have lion long buried; so (...) men. and A^selm. in 1. Cor. 15.
Occumenius. ^ta dormitio breuissi^na, non tamen nulla; so (...) men. and
A^selm. in 1. Cor. 15.
Anselmus; Shall not all sleep, that is, continually, but shall be awaked, so
(...).
Lorinus; to meet in the clouds the Lord of glory.

Sa^^^ v^^rtes (...) Do^^^^^
Matthew. 25 31.
Then shall you see the Son of man come in glory, and the holy Angels with
him, in the clouds, in majesty, and great glory. For qualis Rex, talis
praeparatio Regis, says the Author of the imperfect perfect work upon
Matthew: and Dignitate domini honorata sit conditio serui; The glory of the
Judge shall be eminent in his followers, and the Saints shall be glorified in
attending upon the Lord of glory. Of this says the Apostle, C^^^s. 3.4.
When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear also with him
in glory.

the Eagles are meant all the Saints, Sanct^^ g^^ere.
from the first day of the world till the last day: Heb. 11.2^.
for they without us shall not be made perfect. These elect Eagles shall come
from the four quarters of the world, and shall sit down with the Patriarchs
in the kingdom of heaven.

Thus we see all agree, that by the Eagles are meant the Saints only: therefore
he says not the Vultures, or such foul Fowls, though it be their property
likewise; but the Eagles are gathered: In them to note the regalitie of the
Saints. And this the (...) o^d. (...).
Gloss observes; duo quaerentibus vnum respondet; of the two laborers in the
field, the Disciples demand, where the one, and the other shall be: Christ he
answers for his, that they shall be gathered; and leaves them to understand
what shall become of them which are none of his; they shall be rejected.

It Is true, the Eagles do not rise alone, but they shall be gathered alone. The
Vultures shall appear, the wicked shall arise, but to condemnation. Damnable
is that Rabbinicall conceit; that none shall rise, but those that shall be
saved. And the wicked by this corporal death shall be utterly extinct in
soul, and body; grounding themselves upon those mistaken words of the Psalm.
1.5. (...) a radice (...) which signifies to ^^e or stand.
Psalm, The wicked shall not rise in judgment: non, quod non resurgant; sed
quod in iudicio non resurgant: he says not, that the wicked shall not rise;
but in judgment they shall not rise, says Hieron. in Psalm ^.
S. Hierome: they shall not Cyri^l. Hierus. Is^g.
rise (...), but (...), says Cyrill of Jerusalem: As Felons, whose fact being
evident, are placed at the bar; not so much to be convicted as to be
condemned: Their sins, their conscience, etc. shall so accuse, that the Lord
Judge will not make any great inquisition to find out their fault, but
presently proceed to sentence.

Greg. Moral. in Job. lib. 26.
S. Gregory observes, that of the wicked and the godly, the Eagles and the
Vultures, there shall be a fourefold manner of proceeding in judgment.

Quidam iudicantur, and pereunt; some are judged, and condemned, perish by
judgment: such as have drawn near unto God with their lips; but are far
from him in their hearts: Idem ibid.
Professionem fidei retinentes, opera professionis non habentes: Hold ng a
profession of the faith, but not works of that prof^ssion. These men's cause
shall be heard, I was hungry, but you fed me not, etc. Such men shall be
weighed in the scales, and shall be found to be light; shall perish in
judgment.

Quidam non iudicantur, and pereunt: Are not judged, and condemned; perish
without judgment: Notorious sinners, that would not be curbed upon any terms:
Of them the Apostle speaks, (...). 2.12.
As many as have sinned without the Law, shall perish without the Law. Greg^
supra.
Neque enim necesse est lege perimi, qui lege nunquam potuit teneri: No nec
ssitie that the lawless liver should be tried by a l^w; as his life knew no
law, so his death shall be without law; shall perish without judgment.

Quidam iudicantur, and regnant, are judged, and quitted, saved by judgment.
Secular men that use the world, are often foiled in the world, and recover by
repentance. Their cause is heard; Esuriu^, and ded^stis mihi; I was hungry, and
you fed me etc and the sentence pronounced for them; Come ye blessed of my
Father, etc.

Quidam non iudicantur, and regnant are not judged and reign, saved without
judgment. Saints that have transcended ordinary holiness, having abstained
from things lawful, because not expedient; that they might be the more at
liberty to serve the Lord. Such were the Apostles: (...). 1 ^8.
Peter to Christ; Ecce reliquimus omnia; Behold we have left all, and followed
thee: Christ to Peter; You (^o many as have thus followed me) shall sit upon
twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Thus we see the Saints
shall not rise alone, but shall be saved alone: The Eagles only to the body
shall be gathered together.

It is not amiss in the next place, to consider, wherein the Eagles do
resemble the Saints; and that is in five properties ensuing Gorr^n. expos. in
locum, and Matthew. ^4.
.

Micah exhorting the people to repentance, bids them Micah 1. vlt.
to enlarge their baldness like the Eagle: Mary Magdalen did more then cast
her feathers, when she converted her eyes, her hair, her lips, feathers of
wantonness, into pledges of Repentance: Her eyes that allured in my, distild
rivers of tears: Her hair that ensnared many, serves her for a Towell to wipe
her Saviors feet: Her lips which had enticed many, serves her to kiss, and
not cease to kiss the same feet, her tears had washed, her hair had wiped:
And so, Quot oblectamenta, tot holocausta, says Gregory: The baits to vanity,
are converted into Holocausts of Repentance.

Psalm. 103.5
Who renews thy youth like unto the Eagle. Re^o^at one novi homin^^
The E^gles break their bills upon a stone, and so are renewed in their age:
The rock is Christ, upon whom the Saints break their hearts by repentance,
and so in their souls are renewed. Paul had c^st his bill, and feathers too,
when he said, Galath 2.20
Now I live not, but it is Christ that lives in me. Extinctus fuit saeuus
persecutor; and viuere cepit pius Praedicator, says Homil. super Si quis vult
venire, etc.
Gregory. The sword is turned to the word, persecuting into preaching; and he
that breathed out threatenings against the men of God, breathes out Gods
threatenings against the men of this world: and so was renewed like unto the
Eagle.

V^^^o is la^^tate. (...)
The pure in heart can see God: but the light shines in darkness, and the
darkness comprehends it not. Our Lord (...)
pronounces the Disciples eyes to be h^pp^, Bl^^^ed are the ^yes that se^ the
things that you see, etc. A special prerogative that has been d^n^^d to
Kings, and Kings desiring to see: to Prophets, and many Prophets, which hau^
not seen them. (...)
Beat^^on quia diuites, etc. Blessed, not because you are rich, you are great,
you are mighty: but because you have seen; have seen Adam and his lost by
sin; Adam and his recou^red by Christ; have seen God become your Savior;
and shall see your Savior come to judgment.

(...) 39.27.
Does not the Eagle mount up, (...).
and make her n^^^ on high, says Job. So is it with the S^ints, as their
conversation, so their contemplation is as high as heaven: Humble hearts, yet
lofty thoughts, that reach the skies. (...). 5. de (...).
S. Bernard observes, that in the glass of contemplation there are three steps
to the divine vision: 1. Ascensus: 2. Excessus: 3. Raptus: The first natural,
whereby the Philosophers in the Glass of the Creatures have ascended to the
knowledge of one Creator. The second of grace, whereby the faithful in the
glass of the Scriptures, know God as their Creator, and Redeemer. The third of
glory, when the Saints shall see him face to face, as Paul that was caught into
the third heavens, and there heard words not to be expressed. Prima visio
optat: Secunda odorat: Tertia gustat. The vision of nature wishes for that of
grace: That of grace does but salute that of glory: But in that of glory shall
we see and taste how gracious the Lord is.

Prou. 30.19.
the way of the Eagle in the air: V^e occultatione.
See them fly we may; discern their way we cannot. The Saints, their good
works are seen of men, but their intention, with what mind they do them, is
not discerned. Greg moral. in Job, lib. 8. c. 127.
S. Gregory notes, that our Savior says; Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, etc. yet he adds again, Take heed that
you do not righteousness to be seen of men; which he reconcileth, sic opus
fiat in publico, vt intentio maneat in secreto: Let your good works shine, but
not your intention. Seek not your own glory; but that the spectators may
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Thus have we viewed these fainted
Ea-Nothing lets but that now we may pass to the gathering together.

Matthew. 13.
which shall gather the wheat into his garner, that is, the elect into his
kingdom; and in another place, the Matthew. 24.31.
Elect shall be gathered from the four corners of the world: The world, the
corners, the utmost coasts thereof shall be searched, that the Saints may be
collected. The Eagle of a most swift slight, this gathering shall be speedy; In
a moment, in the tw^nckling of an eye, at the last trumpe. And the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4. vlt.
Raptemur in nubibus, we shall be caught together in the clouds: as the
lightning that cutteth the Hemisphaere from the East to the West in a moment;
so shall the coming of the Judge be, such shall the gathering together of the
Eagles be.

Here by the way, I may not scatter, what Elector^^^ e^t co^ r^ga^^, p^o^^m^^
^^di^e ^ast Math 24.
Ferus has gathered: How the godly are said in holy Scripture to be gathered,
and the wicked to be dispersed. Gather thy Saints together, (says the
Prophet.) Psalm. 68.1.
Let God arise, and his enemies shall be dispersed, says the same Prophet. The
wicked are as chafe which the wind shall scatter. Psalm. 1.
The godly are as the Eagles which shall be gathered together: The memory of
the wicked is likened unto ashes, because of their dispersion: but the just
shall be had in perpetual remembrance.

But the place. The place is that the Disciples most desired to know, in which
they are least resolved; no set place set down where these Assizes shall be
holden, but generally intimated, Vbicunque etc.

Hilar. in Mat. 24. Canon. 25.
S. Hilaries opinion is; That he shall there judge the world, where he suffered
for the world. Illic claritatis adventus expectabitur etc: Most fit that his
glory should be there splendent; where it was most dazzled with ignominy: where
he dyed as a malefactor, thereto judge malefactors: where the Cross was,
there the Tribunal to be. Therefore he says, Where the dead body is, there
shall be this gathering, this assembly.

The Schoolmen generally affirm, That the place shall be the valley of
Iehoshaphat, grounding themselves upon that of Joel; Joel 3.2.
I will gather all nations together, and will bring them down into the valley
of Iehoshaphat, will plead their cause etc. And Ribera comentar^n Joel. cap. 3.
Ribera is so vehement for this opinion, that he demands, Qua front? With what
a face any can reject it? It being so suitable to the letter, that Nihil fere
certum, aut exploratum habebimus in Scripturis.
we shall have no certainty in the Scripture, if we forsake it.

That there is such a valley known by that name, on the Nor^h-side of
Jerusalem, and at the foot of Mount Oliuet, Historians relate. But why it has
that denomination, seeing Iehosaphat was not there buried, but in the City of
David, none of them declar^.

Supplem. 4. p^rt q 88 art. 4. Res ondeo, dicendum, non potest multum per
certitudinem sciri, sed probabiliter potest colligi ex Scripturis. Calvin. and
Gualter. in Joel.
Aquinas after he had said what the Jesuit out of him has repeated, and
somewhat more; yet does not certainly determine, but probably conjecture that
to be the place.

And with Riberaes leave, it is more consonant to the literal sense; That God
will deliver his people from the hands of the Assyrians, to whom they were now
captiuated: And that he might comfort them the more, he does allude to that
miraculous victory 2 Chronicles. 20.
that God gave to Iehosaphat. For listen Ribera, as the Lord did then cause a
civil discord, and mutiny to arise in the Enemies camp, wherein the children
of Ammon destroyed those of Mount Seir, therefore the place was called the
valley of Beracah, or blessing: So is the Lord able to deliver you out of the
Assyrian yoke, and to gather you from among the Nations.

Therefore whether Christ shall judge in the air, or on the earth, in Mount
Caluary, or in the Valley of I^hosaphat, we place it inter scita Scholae, to be
discussed in School^s, not inter articulos fidei, to be embraced as an Article
of our belief.

The circumstance of the place, where, m^kes me call to mind the time when the
day of judgment shall be, which is ^s much or more uncertain then the former,
so sealed up, that Math 24.3^.
of that day, and hour knows no man, no not the Ang^ls (says our Lord) but
my Father only: It transcendeth the knowl^dge of man: It transcendeth the
knowledge of Angels; and (as it seems by Saint Mark^ of the Son too; who
adds, Mark. 13.32.
not the Son, but the Father. Of man there is no marvel, who is ignorant of
many things he is bound to know: Neither is there any great scruple of the
Angels; for though they see him that sees all things, yet in him they do not
see all things, but thos^ objects that concur to their Beatitude; as the Non
(...) ad intel^^^^ (...) alia, (...) 14 (...)
Schoolmen have bounded that (...)
too too large spe^ch of Gregory.

All the doubt, all the scruple, and difficulty lies in Christ, how he should
be said not to know the day of judgment: Some have thought this clause (neque
filius) to have been crowded into the Text by the Arrians, and Agnoaetae.

Lib. 8. Epist. 42
S. Gregory ad Eulogium lays down three expositions of the Fathers.

viz. Whatsoever you do unto these, you do it unto me. So it will be, Christ
knew it not in his members, that is, the Church knew it not. But this is justly
discarded by Bellar. lib. 5. de anima Christi. cap. 5.
Bellarmine: for if Christ had not known it but in his members; why does he
add no man, no not the Angels; seeing men, and Angels are members of the
mystical body.

Abraham; Genesis 22.12.
Now I know thou fear me; that is, I have made thee, and all that know thee,
for to know it: As we say, now the Sun shines clearly, now it is darkened:
not that ever claritie is separated from the body of the Sun; but that
sometimes his light, and beams are withdrawn from us. So we say, it is a
joyful, or sorrowful day: not in it self, but because it is to us either
joyful, or sorrowful. So our Savior knew not th^s day, because he has not
made us to know it.

in natura humanitatis, but not ex natura humanitatis: The man-Christ knew it;
but not as man: in ipsa, but not ex ipsa; in the manhood, but not by the
manhood; but special privilege of revelation.

The (...) 4. q. 1. (...) 4. (...).
Schoolmen tell us of a twofold knowledge in Christ; in verbo, and in genere
proprio: The first, whereby he sees all things in the eternal Word: The
second, whereby he sees them in themselves: And this again is twofold; either
infused, or acquisite: His infused knowledge was powered into his manhood in the
act of his conception, when all knowledge the finite creature could be capabl^
of, was granted unto him, wh^reby he discerned all things. But besides this, he
had an acquisite, and experimental knowledge; whereby experience acquainted
him with many things that practically he knew not before. And in this respect
(if in any) may he be said not to know the day of judgment.

^^^^nst Vbiq (...)
One thing more occurres unto me: Christ says not, Vbique corpus; but
Vbicunque; not that his body is every where, but wheresoever: As he took on
him the nature of man, so that nature was finite, had all the properties of a
created nature; therefore had an vbi, was contained within the limits, the
superficies, and bounds of place. Therefore local motions are ascribed unto
him in the Scripture; where he is said to descend, and ascend, and go unto the
Father. And after his resurrection; Surrexit, non est hic; He is risen he is
not here; therefore he is not every where.

The monstrous and new sprung error of Vbi quitie (as (...) carnal cap. 12
Bellarmine excellently observes) euerteth all the Articles of our Creed, that
we believe touching the manhood of our Savior: of his conception, how could he
be contained within the straites of blessed Mary's womb, if he be in all
places? how was he nailed to the Cross, if every where? how wrapped in linen
clothes? how intombed in a Sepulcher? if his body be so spacious that it
knows no limits, how ascended he into heaven? and Acts 3.2^.
how do the heavens contain him? if he be not contained in any compass.

It is true, we acknowledge a Communication of properties, and that not
Rational, but Real; yet not of the natures, but personal union; not
inherently in the natur^s, but personally in the person of the Son of God: So
we say that Christ is every where, and that the Virgins Son created the
world, not by the propriety of natures, but by the communication of properties:
as Non per proprietatem naturarum, sed p^r communicationem proprietatum. L^b.
3. Sent. di^^. 22. ^. 2. Al^d est diuinitatem communica^ humanitati, aliud
inhabitare. Bellar. lib. 3. de Incar. Christi. cap. 16.
Bonauenture acutely. Neither are we ignorant of that of the Apostle, In him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily: yet it is one thing to dwell, and
another thing to be communicated: because of a man's dwelling in a house, the
house cannot be said to go, to speak, etc. but the man dwelling in the
house: so not the body every where, but the Godhead dwelling in the body.

There is a being of Essence, and a being of Subsistence: the Essence of the
Humanity is finite, because a creature. But the being of subsistence having
none of it own, because it subsisteth in the person of the Son of God is
infinite; so the finite humanity does infinitely subsist in the Godhead; and in
a sense may be said to be every where: This with Zanchy do I conceive to be
the mind of some of the Germane Divines, and especially that learned Chemnitius
(...)
.

Christ's body then is locally in one place, but personally in all places, Salua
vtriusque naturae proprietate, says the great Council (...)
of Calcedon, it has his vbi, not vbique, not every where, but wheresoever: so
says my Text; Vbicunque fuerit corpus, etc. Wheresoever the body is, thither
will the Eagles be gathered together.

Thus have I now done with the absolute, and Theoreticall explications of this
Text: pass I now unto those more respective, and passionate applications,
wherein I shall implore for Heavens assistance, and your patience for the
continuance thereof.

(...) Comment. (...)
Gorran, is the prey of Eagles: The Eagle (says Job lib 6 3^.
) seeks her prey, her eyes behold it afar off, her young ones also suck
the blood; and where the slain is, there is he. The immaculate Body that was
slain, the precious blood that was spilt, the Eagles and the young ones, the
fa^thfull, and the faithful branches, do eat the one, suck the other, and
are refreshed.

In the Io^ ^6.35.
sixth of John, I am (says Christ) the bread of life, he that comes unto me
shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. The Jews
did eat of that food, the like to which no Nation did ever eat; yet they
loathed this spiritual Manna, the like to which they never tasted. This bread
(says Aug. tract. 26. in Joan.
S. Augustine) is the bread of righteousness: and accordingly does our Savior
speak, Blessed are those that hunger and thirst after righteousness: and to
come home to Christ, this righteousness is Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30.
who is made unto us righteousness, says the Apostle: And this righteousness
is Manna from Heaven, Quam dat Deus, non quam sibi facit homo; Aug.
which God gives, not which man does. This bread then is Righteousness; this
Righteousness is Christ; this Christ is the Body; this Body is a dead Body; on
which the holy Eagles feed, and are refreshed.

If Ioh. 6 51.
any man shall eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: the bread that I
will give is my flesh, which I give for the life of the world. If any man eat
of it; not qui premit dente, but qui credit mente; not orally by the body, but
mentally by faith; the efficacy of it, he shall live for ever.

The woman Ioh. 4.
of Samaria, when Christ told her of the water, that he would give, which
should so quench her thirst, that she should never thirst again: Lord (says
she) give me of this water that I never thirst: She had but a carnal conceit.
Let us lift up our souls, our hearts, our affections, our all, to feed on this
bread of life. Christ says, non in solo pane, etc. Mat. 4.
Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. Dives fared delicately, but his soul was starued; one drop of
the water of grace would have yielded more comfort to his tormented soul, then
all the variety wherewith here he was satiated. How many of us glut the body
with pompous fare, and in the interim suffer the soul to perish for want of
spiritual food. Oh suffer not your souls, your selves to perish: here is
refreshing, Aug vt s^p^^.
Qui vult viuere, habet vbi viuat, habet vnde viuat: He that would see, and
live many good days; he has where he might live, wherewith he might live.
Labor (says our Lord) not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat
which perishes not. Sic homo laboret in terra, vt postea regnet in Coelo: Oh
man so labor in this world, that thou may live in the world to come: Behold
a Creator become a Redeemer; a Redeemer took a body; that body made a dead
body, for the Saints to feed on, and be refreshed.

Amb. ^^. expos. ^^lo.
al^a petit, humilia de^clinquit: A ^a^^^^^us conco^^. cap 123. pa^. 84.
Princely bird, of a piercing sight, a swift, and lofty flight: understanding
the Saints; who are Kings over their affections; rule their passions; contemn
the world; and mount aloft after heavenly things.

H^^^ (...).
she is ever mounting upwards, and sets light by the things that are below: She
never condescendeth to any of these inferior things, but when necessity
compels, not when superfluity lures her: Just so is it with the Saints of God,
that use this world as if they used it not: wherewith to supply their necessary
wants, and no farther.

Such Eagles were, Zacheus, that left his extortion, Matthew his
toll-gathering, Peter all: Nec invtilis commutatio omnia relinquere proco qui
supra omnia, says blessed Ber. de^am. super E^ce reliq^^mus etc.
Bernard. A happy change to leave all, for him who is worth more then all: for
what fruit, or profit is there in coveting those things that will away. Quae
etsi non deserant, deserenda sunt; says Leo ser. 5. in Ep^p^. Dom.
Leo. Say they leave not us, yet we must take our leave of them.

The Eagles catch not at flies; the Saints catch not at the flies of this
world, that fly away, and leave nothing behind them, but remorse of
conscience; Quod tangit, the thing that did touch them with pleasure passes:
Quod angit, the sting that pricks them still remains. How much do many, that
would be accounted Eagles, degenerate from these celestial Eagles, that are so
grafted, so linked to the world; so screwed, so glewed to their riches: When
they are awake, they sigh how to come by riches; when they are a-sleepe, they
dream how to preserve them securely: And so nec vigiliae laetae, nec somnus
securus, says Saint Hom. de mis: and duabus Viduts.
Chrysostom; neither quiet when they are awake, nor well at ease when they are
a sleep.

Contemn, contemn this world: If riches increase, set not thy heart upon
them: Praefat. affix. lib. de Consid. ad Eugen.
S. Bernard hoped of his scholar Eugenius, (though he were advanced from a
poor Monk to be Bishop of Rome:) that In se facta est mutatio, non de se: In
that change, he was not changed. The Saints though their estates be changed,
yet they are not changed: Their desire is not to be rich unto this world, but
unto God. He is truly rich that abounds more in mercy, then in substance: In
giving, then in taking: In commending his riches to heaven, C^^^sost. vt supr.
rather then to this world. Qui ad hoc viuit vt operetur, ad hoc operatur, vt
in aeteruum viuere mereatur: That lives to work, works to merit; merit,
that he might live for ever. Hitherto Chrysostom. And hitherto of the first
property, wherein we are to imitate the Eagles.

Sursum corda, to mount with the Eagles. The spiritual man has his
eleuations, whereby he is elevated above himself: so David, (...) 5.1. P a. 12
1.
I lift my heart unto thee: and in another place, I have lifted up mine eyes
unto the mountains: Some lift up their eyes without their hearts, as the
Pharisie, that drew near with his lips, etc. Others, their hearts without
their eyes, as Annah, that prayed in her heart, without any vocal sound: Some
lift up their hearts, hands, and eyes, inward integrity, and outward
profession; of whom the Apostle speaks, (...)
our conversation is in heaven. And vere clati, quorum conuersatio in coelis,
says Gregory. Such a one was S. Paul; In terra positus, a terra extraneus:
Lived here, yet a stranger while he lived here. The Saints live here, but have
their conversation in heaven: Corpore ambulamus in terra, cord habitamus in
coelo, says (...).
Anselme: Their bodies here, their hearts in heaven; such is their elevation.

The Saints as they have their elevation, so have they their ascensions. Esaias
inuites us to it: Esaias 2.
Come let us ascend into the Mountain of the Lord. And Psalm. 15.1.
David demands, Lord who shall ascend into thy holy Mountain, or who shall
dwell in thy holy hill? Heaven is a hill; therefore we must climb: Heaven is a
mountain; therefore we must ascend. Faith, and good works, prayer, and giving
of alms ascend; Let my prayer be directed into thy sight as the Incense: And
to Cornelius, Thy prayer, and thy almsdeeds have ascended, or come up before
me.

We are grafted (says Romans ^.
the Apostle) into the similitude of his resurrection: So by the same Analogy,
are we inserted into the likeness of his Ascension: ( Preached on Sunday next
aft^r Ascension day.
The F^ast of the Ascension st^ll bleeds in our minds.) Let us therefore erect
the eyes of our hearts to that height, whither Christ is ascended. It is the
Apostles own Reason; Col^ss. 3 1.
Seek those things that a^e above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God: Thither direct your thoughts, whither Christ is ascended: Ad aeterna
praedectos, peritura non occup^nt: Let not momentary affairs possess your
souls, that from eternity are elected to eternity: Let not deceitful snares
make us slack our pace: And those vanities, and sins, that may seem fair
and profitable to entice us: Non amplect^nda nequiter, sed transcunda sunt
fortiter, (says V^^m v^ritati^ (...) sall^^^ ill^ ^h^e non ^^^^dent and (...)
fidel^b^s haec ^^mp ra^^^ ^^^^ra^^ur, vt p^re ^^^^ri se in hac valle mundi
^^^^ant: in qua etiamsi quaedam commoda blandi^ntur, non ampl^ilenda nequiter,
sed transeunda sunt fortiter. Leo ser. 2. de ascens. Dom.
Leo:) Let us not wickedly embrace them, but valiantly let them go: Heb. 12.1.
Let us lay aside every weight, and sin that does so easily beset us, and run
with patience the race that is set before us. Let us shake off the fetters of
sin from the feet of our affections; the dust of vanity from our wings, and
fly unto the Lord like unto the Eagles.

gathering together. A general assembly, the greatest Assizes that ever were
holden, where and when all of us must make our personal appearance: for we
must all appear before the tribunal throne, 2 Co^. 5.10.
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. When the Lord of heaven shall send forth his
process, no Non est inuentus, shall be then returned; no appearing by
Attorney; no pleading by an Advocate; but corpus cum cousa shall be then
produced.

This mystery was revealed unto S. John: Re^. 20.12.
And I saw all both great, and small, stand before the Throne, and the books
were opened, etc. Though never so great, yet they shall appear before this
great one; neither shall the small ones be excluded: Great in grace, great in
dignity, great in worldly preferment, great in sins, howsoever great: Small
in the worlds eye, small in humble thoughts, how small soever, they shall
appear. No exemption, no exception, no privilege, all within the compass of
the Lords Jurisdiction, all of us owe suit and service to this Court: For we
must all appear.

And there we must be accountable for the things we do here in the body. The
works that we now do shall give in evidence; if good, for us; if bad, they
speak against us. The tree shall be known, and judged by his fruit; and as it
now falls, so it lies. No adding to what we have not done; no retracting
that we have done: Too late to go buy oil when the Bridegroom is come; or to
get a wedding garment, when we have set footing within the wedding house; no
place for tears, no time for repentance: Poenitebit, sed frustra poenitebit;
The wicked shall be pensive, but their repentance comes too late.

Call to mind our incorruptible Judge, who will not be embraced with gifts,
allured by favors, withdrawn by promises, deceived by ignorance; to whom all
things are naked. Say not (says Bernard) the walls are round about us, we will
sin: Esto quod nemo te videat, non tamen nullus; Be it that no man see thee,
yet he sees thee, who is both testis, and Index: Chrysostom. lib. 1. de
prouidentia Dei.
Neque enim tunc ouina pellis lupum; Our sheepskins shall not then cover our
wooluish affections: Neque sepulchri dealbatio internam coinquinationem; nor
the outward painting, our inward rottenesse; 1 Cor. 4.5.
for then the Lord will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest the counsels of the heart.

Consider also, that our case is life, and death, and that not temporal, but
eternal; all is at the stake: If the sentence make for us, then are we most
happy; if against us, most miserable. In the sentence of consolation, Math.
25.34.
every word has his efficacy of comfort: there is a loving call, Come ye; a
divine blessing, Come ye blessed; a fatherly affection, Come ye blessed of my
Father; a retribution of reward, receive ye; an assignment of a kingdom,
Receive you the kingdom; a preparation of glory, prepared for you; eternal
predestination, from the beginning of the world: I have chosen you from the
beginning of the world, therefore have prepared you glory: have prepared glory,
therefore have assigned you a kingdom: have assigned you a kingdom, for you
are my sons, and I am your Father: I am your Father, therefore you are
blessed: you are blessed, therefore come ye: What a Iubilee of joy will this
cause in their blessed hearts? They cannot but say within themselves, Thy word,
O Lord, is sweeter unto us, then the honey, or the honey comb.

Ve^. 4^.
And in the sentence of condemnation, every word strikes dead unto the heart:
First a separation from God, Go ye: a malediction, Go ye cursed: a prison,
Go ye cursed into: the sharpnes of the pain, Go ye cursed into fire: The
durance of the same, into eternal fire: the grim society, with the devil and
his angels. This is durus sermo, a hard speech, who can endure it? No repealing
of this sentence, no appealing from this Judge* Now the Lamb speaks in mercy,
who will not hear it? Then the Lion shall roar in justice, who will not fear
it?

Remember this, remember thine end, and thou will not sin. David made Gods
judgments his object, his eyes were never off them; Psalm. 18.22.
all his judgments are in my sight: And Solomon the son trod his fathers
footsteps; ^^^^s. 3.17.
I said in my heart, God shall judge the righteous, and the wicked: So all the
Saints with S. Hierome, seem to hear always the trump to sound, with arise
ye dead, and come to judgment.

Here is a memento for all; great, and small shall arise; great, and small are
to remember it: to both of which I am a debtor, and now with Gods permission my
debt I will discharge.

First, you whom the Lord has made great, 1. To great ones. An exhortation to
the Judges.
by communicating a parcel of his Regiment, look upon him who is unto you,
author, and exemplum: he that did erect you, is a pattern to direct you: your
authority is great, your place eminent, your charge is great, and let me speak
it with your favor, your account shall be great.

Cum crescunt dona, crescunt rations donorum: Greg.
when our talents are enlarged, our account is increased: the beasts and such
unreasonable creatures, non iudicantur, quia non iudicant: Ber.
They are not judged, because they cannot judge: it is not so with man, whom he
has endowed with reason to discern, and so made every private man a private
Judge: much less with those whom he has set apart to be Judges. S. Bernard
to Lib. 1. de Consid.
Eugenius Papa, Blanditur cathedra? sonat tibi officium, non otium: does the
chair flatter thee? it calls to mind thy duty, not idleness. What though thou
art seated in an eminent place, where thou ouerlookest all? Enim vero
prospectus iste procinctum parit, non somnium: it tells thee thou had need to
look about thee; what place left for retired thoughts, where causes, and
cases; non leges, sed lites; Solicitudes, and vexations of minds, and spirits
are still before you: Et finis horum quid nisi aranearum telae?

Vt supra.
The same Father demands of the same man, when art thou free? Vbi tutus? Vbi
tuus? where art thou safe? where art thou thy self? Are not you always
possessed with cares, troubles, tumults: whither will you turn you from them;
Cicero pro Archia Poe^a.
pernoctant vobiscum, peregrinantur, rusticantur: day, and night, at home and
abroad, they ever attend you: Certainly to a man that soberly considers these
things, Your Honors are rather to be pitied, then envied. And he rather
commiserateth your daily encumbrances; then repineth at your splendent
dignities.

My Reverend Lords, though these cares continually beat at your doors, yet let
contemplation of spiritual things modestly prompt you; That withdrawing your
selves from the sea of worldly affairs, you may with the Israelites Exodus
14.13.
stand still upon the shore, and see the salvation of the Lord.

St. Agustine spends a noble Chapter lib. 10 de ciuitate Dei, cap. 9.
of a noble work wholly upon this subject: Though many are tied so to attend
worldly affairs, that in neglect thereof, they should neglect their duty to
Prince, and Country; yet none are so to be oppressed with business, as to
forget their duty to God. He is not worthy to be a Bishop qui praeesse
dilexerit, non prodesse: that loves more to command, then to be commodious. He
is not worthy to be a Judge, that loves more the praeheminence of his place,
then to do good in his place. Wherefore Ocium sanctum quaerit charitas
veritatis: Love of heavens truth desires a holy leisure: Negotium iustum
suscipit necessitas charitatis: necessity of earths charity undertakes just
affairs. So carry your selves betwixt contemplation, and action, Vt nec
subtrahatur ista suauitas, nec opprimat illa necessitas: that the necessity of
your actions do not eclipse the sweetness of your meditations; nor your
meditations cause you to slack your just occasions.

Give me leave to commend unto your thoughts two things: Psalm. 82.
I have said you are gods: and he has an eye after you, for it is in the same
Psalm, He judges in the midst of gods; or in the middle he judges the gods,
as Hieron. expos. Psalm. 81. (...)
Hierome reads it, and the Original Hebrew will bear it: Awake then ye men
of God, that are placed in the presence of God: how dares corruption approach,
bribery draw near, perverting of justice enter into the presence of the
all-seeing eye? think on this; The Lord does behold your actions.

mortal gods: Be not puffed up with your high authority, and title: you shall
dye like men, you shall rise like men, you shall give an account like men, you
shall be judged like men; your now ouer-seer shall be then your Judge; and who
is present at your actions, shall sentence you accordingly: Remember; you
amongst these Eagles shall be gathered together.

Secondly to the small, to all: remember that of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3.10.
When the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, the elements shall melt
with fervent heat, and the earth burn up: what manner of men ought you to be
in holy conversation and godliness? Suppose now you should see (as God knows
how soon you shall see) the heavens to vanish with a great noise; The Elements
with fervent heat to be dissolved, and the earth in a fiery flame: Tell me,
what holy thoughts, and chaste conversation would then possess you. Saint A^
^^arrat. i^ Psalm. 49.
Augustine expounding those words of the Psalm, Our God shall come, fire shall
go before him, and in his presence a mighty tempest. Does (says he) the fire,
and tempest fright us? let us be changed, and there is no cause of fear: ignem
palea timet, auro quid facit? The Chafe of sin shall be consumed, the gold
of piety shall be refined: stipulas ad te congeris? veniet ignis. Why heapest
thou to thy self combustible matter? Cast away thy sin, the fire has not
whereon to burn, wherewith to work.

It Is very obseruable Christ never treats of this subject, but he adds a
special caveat; In Saint Matthew he concludes with the good, Math. 24 45.
and bad servant, the one expects his Masters coming, and is blessed;
The Other, smites his fellows, eats, and drinks with the drunken, and is
accursed. And in this Chapter, Remember Luke 17.32.
Lots wife, desist not in doing good, lest in looking back to Sodom. Thou art
intercepted; thy affections metamorphosed; and thou never turn from Sodom.

Forget not the sodainnesse of his coming, as a thief in the night, nothing
more unexpected; as the Lightning, nothing more swift; as the twinkling of an
eye, nothing more speedy. Luke 17.26.
As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the son of
man. Noah's time, and ours alike in sin, alike in eating, drinking, alike in
chambering, and wantonness: The Preachers tongue would be defiled, Christian
ears would be offended, at the nomination of those things that are done in
secret. The face of the world in Noah's time was grown so filthy with sin, that
the Lord was constrained to wash it with a flood: The dross of sin in our
time does so abound, that it must be purified with fire; And as then the
unexpected flood came and swept them all away, so the unlooked for fire shall
come when many least dream thereof.

Noah's Fabric was a real Sermon, therefore Saint Peter styles him the
Righteous Preacher: How many Noah's, Math. 3.
and John the Baptists cry unto us, Now is the axe laid etc. Me thinks I hear
the sons of Lamech scoffing at Noah, and his Arc, saying, what means this
fellow to sail on dry land: yet they could not laugh him out of his faith: we
daily hear the scoffs of the insensible wicked at religious exercises; but
Woe unto you that laugh now, for you shall howl, and lament. Me thinks I see
the sons of Lamech, how they came wading to the Arc middle-deepe, craving
admittance, but were denied; Methinkes I foresee the Hic-scorners of this age,
knocking at Heaven gate, craving an entrance, but are repelled; with a Depart
from me ye workers of iniquity.

Is then the hour so sudden? and nigh at hand? what means sin thus to
flourish? still gluttony, still carnality, sensuality still, still pride,
still usury, oppression, grinding of the poor; still all, and more then all: I
say no more, but with John the Baptist, Repent, and amend, for the kingdom of
God is at hand, When these Eagles shall be gathered together.

The fourth Exposition.
THere is yet the fourth sense of these words, which I have reserved for a
conclusion of all: and that is Gregory's anagogicall sense; who interprets
them of the life to come: Christ with his body is corporally ascended into
heaven; thither shall the Eagles be gathered Q^ia ^oe^est^ sedi incarnatus
ve^er redemptor praesideo: electorum animas cum ca^ne soluero: ad coelesti:
quoque s^b ^ua^^: Greg. mo^al. in Job. lib. 39. cap. 14.
: He is enthronized in the heavenly seat, thither will he lift up his chosen
also. This is that which he speaks in Ioh. 12 26.
John; Where I am, there shall my servant be: and in the Apocalypse, To him that
Reu. 3. last.
overcomes, will I give to sit with me in my throne: Our throne Christ's, and
Christ's the Fathers throne; where we shall sit; not without him, but with him;
with me in my throne: None shall be with him, but his servant; none shall sit
on his throne, but he that overcomes: none shall be gathered, but the Eagles.

There shall our Eagles eyes behold him face to face, The Angels see him, and
yet desire to see him: Satiantes desiderant, desiderantes satiantur: Greg.
they behold him their fill, yet still desire to behold him, and in his sight
there is fullness of Joy. This Pomgranate without dead seeds, this Rose without
prickles, this wine not mingled with water: In Gods presence the Seraphims
burn with charity, the Cherubims are splendent with knowledge. The Quire of
Saints and Angels sing Lauds, Hymns, and spiritual songs. Peter at a glimpse
of this glory in the holy Mount cries out, Bonum est, it is good for us to be
here: then Ecce quam bonum, how good a thing it is to be here for evermore.

Philip by a heavenly instinct, says, Ioh. 14.8.
Lord show us the Father, and it suffices; God is all-sufficient to suffice.
Honors, riches, etc. are insufficient. They that have mounted to the top of
the^ think still vnum deest, one thing is wanting to perfection: Oh miserable
men how gape we after transitory and insufficient glory, and neglect that only
which is immortal.

You have your fruit in holiness says the Apostle, but the end is eternal
life: Romans 6.
Bonus finis vita aeterna, quae finem non habet; a good end indeed, of whose
goodness there is no end; there joy without sorrow, clarity without obscurity,
security without wavering, plenty without surfeit: Who will not mount with the
Eagles to be gathered to this glory? Infuse, infuse into our hearts thy grace
(o Lord) that with the wings of Faith, Hope, and Charity, we may fly unto
thee, that we with all thy Eagles may be gathered to thy Kingdom, with thy
Son; there to live for evermore. To whom, and unto thee, (o Father) with thy
blessed Spirit, three persons, one invisible, and indivisible God be praise,
and glory for evermore, AMEN.

Laus Deo qui dedit velle, and perficere.

FINIS.

