JOSEPH, OR, PHAROAH'S FAVOVRITE.

ECCLES. 39.1, 4. He only that applies his mind to the Law of the most high,
and is occupied in the Meditation thereof; shall serve among Great men and
appear before the Prince.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard. 1623.

To the right honorable and reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.
WHat need I any other Dedication?
Thy life and Joseph's are but one narratio^
He kept King Pharohs Seal which was his Ring
Thou art the great-Seale Keeper of our King,
And art the nearest servant to his Throne,
And in his seat of Judgment sitst alone.
By him the kingdoms weight, Church, peoples care
Committed to thy equal Balance are,
Thus as to Pharoh Joseph was at Nile,
So art Thou to the Monarch of this I Will:
God make thy service like good Joseph's prove,
And thee reward with Pharohs Grace and love,
So Thou shall give thy Master high content,
And make us happy in thy Government.
Your Lordships most humbly devoted ROBERT AYLET.

THE FIRST BOOK OF JOSEPH.
Of him, whom God by brethrens envy sent
From Canaan to Egypt, to prevent
Great dearth; I sing; thou that did him protect
In all his travels, me in mine direct.
NOw dwelt the holy Patriarch Israel
At rest, in Canaan in his fathers cell,
For Esau now did in mount Seir reign,
One country could not all their flocks sustain:
And having many storms and dangers past,
Now hoped in quiet to have lived at last,
Freed from his brothers hate and menacing,
From Labans cruel gripes and coveting,
His tears for loss of Rachel now were dride,
For Dina's rape, and Simeons homicide,
His sons abroad, in Peace their flocks do tend,
Joseph at home, his father does attend:
When lo! an envious Spirit (which did reed,
In holy Jacob, Isaacks promisd seed,
Which he to come of Joseph most did fear.
Because he to his father was so dear)
One day amongst the sons of God appeard,
Before the Lord, desiring to be heard:
And thus began: Dread Thunderer: be just,
Have thou not raisd up sinful man from dust,
To make those heavenly Mansions, ay his own,
From which thou Angels in thy wrath have thrown
And damned? yet we but once did thee displease,
But he offends each hour, yet lives at ease:
Jacob in Isaacks Tents does quiet live,
As with his Blessing he him Peace did give;
And though by thy Decree man ought attain
To Joys of Heaven, by sorrow, care, and pain*
To him thou so benign and gracious art,
He sees the Pleasures, never feels the smart;
So as it seems it is thy determination,
To make base Man for bliss, Us for damnation:
How have thou blessed him on every side?
His Children many, his Possessions wide;
His flocks abound and cover all the Land,
So thou do bless all works that pass his hand:
Well may he serve thee for so great reward,
But touch him, thou shall see his slight regard,
Vex thou but him, or any of his race,
And he will thee blaspheme unto thy face:
When thus, the Almighty; say thou what thou can,
Jacob's a matchless, just and perfect man,
Who fears God, does good, escheweth ill,
Try him or his, so thou no blood do spill.
Thus now had Satan his desires attained,
By Jacobs Angel till that time restrained;
And since for blood he could not get permission,
He privily sowes Envy and Sedition,
Which make often greater rents in Church and State,
Then open enmity and known debate:
Simeon and Leui, once his Instruments
Of murder, under covered false intents,
With the two handmaids sons shall kindle hate,
And Envy, for to overthrow the state
Of simple Joseph, who in honest sort,
To Israel brought his brethrens ill report;
And in plain meaning did to them unfold
His dreams by day, which God by night had told:
Which enuiously this Sp'rit interpreting,
As if he of his Brethren would be king;
And for because he was to Jacob dear,
And tales to him, as they suspect did bear*
He by their malice labors cunningly,
To ruin Jacob and his Family
In Joseph's loss: Thus did the envious Fiend
Project destruction, God a blessed end.
Little hereof thought good old Jacob, when
He him to Sichem to his brethren
Does send: where wandering he at last was told*
That they at Dothan pastured their fold
On side of hill which Sol with cheerful eyes,
Salutes and comforts soon as he does rise;
Under a stately Oak, whose arms dispread,
From Sun and Rain all under sheltered,
Near fairest meadows and the River side,
These Brethren with their Flocks in Tents abide,
More healthful, pleasant, fruitful, spacious plain,
Was not in Canaan to be seen again,
Where whilst their Flocks do feed, they have good leisure,
To leap, dance, caroll, sleep, and take their pleasure,
And they that feel within diuiner motions,
In private shades may fall to their devotions,
And imitate the plumed heaun'ly Quire,
Who in sweet notes Gods goodness do admire;
Hither comes Joseph, where he first admires
The places fertilenesse and fair attires,
For his own coat, all party colored,
Seemd naught to that the ground apparelled:
But his ten brethren him no sooner spy,
But lo! here comes the dreamer, all do cry
Come let us kill, and in some pit him cast,
Then see how all his Dreams will prove at last.
And when our father misseth him, we will say,
Some wicked beast devoured him on the way:
And had not Providence withheld their knife
By Ruben, they then taken had his life:
Full glad to see his Brethren was the child,
And with a pleasing face upon them smilde,
As little thinking by them to be sold,
As they at Nile his glory to behold,
As cruel Cain against his brother rose,
When nothing less good Abel did suppose:
And as fierce Simeon came most cruelly
On Sichem looking for affinity:
So Jacobs sons unawares on Joseph run,
Who kindly to salute them then did come,
One bends his fist, another draws his knife,
Another swears he will tear from his life.
Wretch! says another, thou come for a spy,
That thou returning home may tell a lie,
And us disgrace in our old fathers ear,
And be alone his joy and darling dear:
Lo, says another, we our sheaues must bring,
And do to thee obeisance as our king:
One says, thou art the Sun, we stars of night,
And must all bow, whence we do borrow light:
Then stripping off his party colored coat,
They blindfold him, and on the shoulder smote:
And said, since thou diuin'st and dreamst so right,
Reckon now which of us thee last did smite.
Whilst Lambe-like he before the sharer lies,
Mute and amazed, yet thus at last replies.
Ah brethren dear, though now too late, I prove
The peril's not so great in Hate as Love:
Cain mortal hate did to his brother bear,
For that his offerings acceptable were,
My father hardly escaped mine Uncles knife,
Because he was Rebecca's dearest life:
So did you and your mother mine despise,
Because she gracious was in Jacobs eyes;
Now him, that never did or thought you ill,
Because my father loves me, you will kill:
To him once, I confess, I did relate
An ill report I heard, not for least hate
Or malice that my brethren I did bear,
But that you knowing it, might better clear:
That which my father did but folly deem,
To tell mine idle dreams, will you esteem
It capital? oh brethren dear, forbear,
If not for love or pity, yet for fear
Of vengeance, which will follow fratricide,
Cains curse shall ever on that house abide,
If all consent your Brother here to slay,
Jacob has lost eleu'n sons in one day:
And whence shall then that blessed one proceed
God promisd in our father Isaacks seed?
That cursed Cham, from whom these nations come
Which here inhabit, never yet have done
So foul a sin; nor Nimrods cruel sword
Was ere in his own brothers blood engor'd:
A brothers sight rough Esaus fury chaces,
And makes him fall to kisses and embraces.
Look on my youth, not half so loath to die,
As to be slain by brethrens cruelty,
Look on my innocence. Behold my tears,
Respect your and my Fathers grayer hairs:
Who cannot but with grief and sorrow die,
For loss of me by Brethrens Butchery.
Oh! never hope this murder to conceal,
For though you your own lips should all up seal,
These beasts, stones, trees, my blood to heaven will cry
For vengeance, on this bloody Felony:
And that which now you think in secret done,
Shall be made plain and clearer then the Sun.
Now Isaac like I lie under your knife,
And willingly as he could leave my Life,
Were I persuaded 'twere the heaun'ly will,
But herein Satan's purpose you fulfill,
And your malicious envy satisfy:
But Lord accept me as I guiltiesse die.
These words proceeding from a Soul oppressed
With anguish, wrought so in his Brethrens breast,
That though they willingly all wish him slain,
Yet each from bloodshed would his hands retain.
Wherefore they him into a dry pit cast,
With cold and hunger there to pine and wast,
And suddenly they sit them down to eat,
Never pitying Joseph that must sterue for meat:
So have I seen ten hounds of bloody kind,
Who long have chased, to kill the harmless Hind;
When they have lodged her in the hunters gin,
Whence never one escapes, if enterd in;
Turn to their Lodge, where for their labors meede,
They on the heart and bleeding intrailes feed.
Poor Joseph had thy Brethren now thee slain,
Thou long since had been rid out of thy pain:
But whilst thou seek'st by tears thy life to save,
Thou now art buried quick within thy grave:
What can thou look for in this Dungeon vast,
But even with cold and hunger here to waste?
Deprived of Suns most comfortable Light,
And evil Spirits with horror thee to fright,
Yet as a favor this was done to thee,
Thus are the wickeds mercies Cruelty.
But Lord! the child to heaven cries from the pit,
And does to righteous Judge his cause commit;
Lord thou do know how innocent I die;
Me save, and pardon their iniquity.
As when fierce Caine, (out of base envying,
That God should best accept his offering.)
Had Abel slain; His blood to heaven did cry,
So this child's grievous Lamentations fly
Into Gods ears, who sends the Ishmaelites,
First persecutors of the Israelites:
From Brethrens malice Joseph to set free,
And save his life, though lose his Liberty:
So he that late escaped being slain,
Is raised up out of the pit again,
Whom to be rid off, and for present pay,
His Brethren sell to be conueid away.
And now large shadows from the Mountains fall,
And Heaven with his black mantle couers all,
Phoebus for rest in Sea his Steedes bestows,
And from her Sea of rest the Night arose:
When Jacobs sons amongst themselves devise
To cover their inhumane cruelties:
And as we ever see that one foul sin
Begets another, to lie hidden in;
As some their foul adultery to hide,
Have first used Drunkenness, then Homicide;
So these unjustly against their Fathers will,
One of the Kiddes then in his Flock do kill,
And dipping in his blood the colored coat
Of Joseph, it unto their father brought,
And say; Now see good father do thou know,
Whether this be thy Joseph's coat or no?
As Turtle dear, when seeking for her love,
She finds at cu'n the feathers of a Dove,
Begoard with blood late party colored gay,
Concluding now her mate has been the prey
Of cruel hawke, sends out most piteous cries,
And in those dearest blooded feathers dies.
So good old Israel, whose dimmer sight,
Could scarce discern of colors by the night,
Yet seeing Joseph's coat begoared red,
Which lately was so finely colored:
For whom, though long he looked, and did enquire,
Yet saw nor heard least news of his retire.
Cries out, it is Joseph's coat with blood defild,
Some wicked beast devoured has the child.
I sent him out alone unwittingly,
And therefore guilty of the cruelty.
So grievous were his groans and lamentation,
They turn to sorrow all his habitation,
And though his sons and daughters all arise
To comfort him, the best they can devise,
Yet still the good old man does groan and cry,
Joseph is lost, I in his coat will die.
He with wild beasts is into pieces torn,
I Will sooner cease to live, then cease to mourn.
Father says Dina then, th'vnlucky maid,
Why should you without cause be thus dismayed?
Before times I have often heard you say,
Gods Angel you conducted in your way,
From hence even unto the Assyrian plain,
And thence from Laban brought you home again;
Oh why should you despair then thus and fear,
As God of yours had not as great a care?
What because here a bloody coat you see,
Must it be Joseph's needs? or if it be,
He may, whilst he from cruel beasts did fly,
Forsake his coat to escape more speedily:
He that this coat found loose upon the ground,
Not any sign of murdering him found,
Nor found he either hand, head, foot or bone,
Only this bloody coat lay all alone;
Blooded it seems with jaws of cruel beast,
Which on some other prey had made his feast:
"Thus can the whole to sick good counsel give,
"And easier it is to teach well, then to live:
But Ruben, Judah, all his sons may rise,
And daughters all to comfort him devise,
He rends his clothes, puts sack cloth on his loins,
And for his Joseph long time weeps and pines,
And mourning will go down unto his grave
To Joseph, whom he here shall never have.
Mean while to Nile the Midian merchants hie,
Laden with Balm, with mirrhe, and Spicerie,
When Joseph, whom if they could truly prize,
Was far more worth than all their merchandise;
Did bondage base unto his noble mind,
More bitter, then death to his body find;
But having none to whom to make his moan,
Goes sighing, sobbing to himself alone,
Until a merchant willing him to cheer,
That he might fairer look, and sell more dear,
Enquireth of his parents and his kind,
To put more pensive thoughts out of his mind;
Know; says the gentle child, my parents came
From Heber, whence we Hebrews have our name,
The fourth from Sem, first of that blessed seed,
The Almighty chose mankind again to breed:
My Father Jacob who the Birth right bought
Of Esau, that Gods Blessing set at naught,
Was Isaacks son, even Abrams blessed seed,
In whom all Nations happiness may read.
My Mother Rachel, now deprived of Life,
Was Isreal's first Love, but second Wife:
Laban both Son and Father in one night,
Deceau'd; of's wife him, me of my Birth right:
For when his thoughts in nuptial Bed embrace
My Mother Rachel, Lea's in place:
Whereby my Brethren me in years surpass,
But I them in my Fathers love and grace;
For envy hereof, Lo! they me have sold,
Thus briefly I my state to you have told.
The Children of the Bond woman were glad,
They one now Bound of the Free-womans had:
But whilst such talk makes shorter seem the hours,
Behold they now may see brave Memphis Towers,
Turrets which seem to dare the Starry skies,
And Temples which like Tops of Mountains rise,
Whose Phanes and Spires all guilt, with radiant gold,
They shining like the Lamps of heaven behold,
Which often with reflecting splendour bright,
Seem to obscure Sols clearest heavenly Light.
When thus the Lad. Good Masters, So must I
Now call you, and will serve you chearefully,
Tell me what glorious Buildings yonder be,
Whose like in Canaan I did never see;
Which seem, except mine eyes me much do fail,
Like to a City that on Sea does sail,
Or Noah's Arc which floting on the Flood,
Preserved all kind of Creatures with their food.
Boy, says a Merchant, This is Egypts Plain,
Where never yet did fall a drop of rain;
The Waves you see are seu'n-fold headed Niles,
Which now does Ouer-flow the richest soiles,
Whence ever Sol by his all quickening heat,
Raised Corn and Grass, for Man and Beast to eat:
There where you see the Flood like Seas appear,
Will be a Harvest twice within a year.
Beside, no mortal wight could ever wish,
Then Is there more plenty of most dainty Fish:
Abram the Father of great Ishmael,
(From whom our Nation) Famine did compel
For succor to descend, into this Land,
Where he is said to make them understand
The Nature of the highest Deity,
Forms, Laws, and Natures of the Starry sky,
And first them taught to measure out their year,
By Suns just course: For it does plain appear,
That they till then the Moon did measure by,
Which makes them bost of such antiquity,
And reckon in their annual Computation,
Thousands of years before the Worlds Creation:
But though he gave them in all Arts direction,
Yet never brought they one to such perfection,
As that we call Divine Astronomy:
For in this Country best they might descrie,
The forms and orders of the Lamps of Night,
Where never Clouds obscure them from their sight.
First in Caldea Abram learned this skill,
And grew so well acquainted with Gods will,
He knew all things, they say, by Revelation,
Past, present, future, from the Worlds Creation,
Till that last minute that it could expire,
Which as by Water erst, shall be by Fire.
Indeed, says Joseph, I have heard it told,
The first man Adam prophecide of old,
The worlds destruction twice, for sins just hire,
The one by Water the other by the Fire,
Seth therefore Adams scholar and his son,
Not knowing which was first: of earth and stone,
Two Pillars built; The earth against the fire,
The stone to stand against waters raging ire:
Where Arts, which long Experience had observed,
He unto future ages fair preserved,
The earthen pillar perished in the flood,
The stone the waters violence withstood,
These Heber finding after published
In Syria, where first learning flourished:
Till Abram, who herein did all excel,
Came down to Egypt, and as you do tell,
Conuerst with one they called Mercury,
Whom, with these Arts, he taught the mystery
Of one trine Godhead, and the worlds creation,
Who read the same unto their neighbor nation.
Whence now they are, and shall in time be spread
Through all the earthly globe inhabited*
Thus they discourse, as if they would foretell
Of Gentiles all, which after should excel,
In Arts and Sciences; which now dispread,
As men, through all the earth on which we tread:
For as the earth empeopled was below
By Adam, so all Arts and Learning flow
First from the Hebrews, unto every nation,
As Rules and Precepts come by observation:
But now the cittie's towers obscure the skies,
And make them hold their tongues, and use their eyes
The splendour of those buildings to behold,
Where they the second time good Joseph sold.
The end of the first Book of Joseph.
THE SECOND BOOK OF JOSEPH.
Never did Adam more lament and plain,
For Abel, by his cruel Brother slain,
Then Jacob mourned for fairest Rachels Seed,
Nor would by any means be comforted:
All Day the field his Lamentations hears,
All Night his Couch he watreth with his tears:
And if least slumber close his blubbring eyes,
Him thinks he sees a cruel Bear surprise
His dearest Joseph; crying out for aid,
And starting up, awakes, much more afraid,
His Spirit's thus spent, his Body wearied,
With groans, and tossing up and down his Bed:
Lo, aged Isaac, who had long been blind
Of's fleshly eyes, but yet of clearer mind,
Comes to his comfort, being thither led
By Benjamin, who to him ministered.
Long stood he mute, and to the grievous moanes
Of his blist Jacob, ecchoed with groans,
Till's heart with sorrow ready now to break,
With words all weight, he thus begins to speak.
Dear Son, the staff and comfort of mine age*
The blessed fruit of holy Marriage,
Far more to Me, then to thee Joseph dear,
Mine only Son, by Promise, But thou here
Have Benjamin, by thy beloved wife,
Fair Rachel, whilst she lived thy Joy and Life:
Not that I Joseph dead or lost do fear,
God that of me and Abram had such care,
Has no less of thee and thy blessed seed,
In which all happiness is promised.
And if of all, of him especially
Who is the chief of all thy Family:
To whom the Sun the Moon and Stars must fall,
Whose Sheafe his brethrens Sheafs must worship all,
Of these two dreams I was a due obseruer,
And read thence he shall be a great preserver,
A figure of that Savior great, which shall
Himself by losing save himself and all.
Thus was I once lost to my faithful sire,
When on the Altar kindled was the fire,
The knife was ready lift up by his hand,
To sacrifice my Life at Gods command:
Thus thou as lost, for more then thrice seven years,
Revail'd were by mine and Rebeccas tears,
When Esaus wrath thee drove to Siria plain,
But God Almighty brought thee home again:
And I presage before the revolution
Of thrice seven years, God will the whole solution
of Joseph's dreams with Joy to thee unfold,
Which shall revive thy spirit then being old:
Before great Blessings God does Crosses send,
That we may on his Providence attend,
And see the riches of his grace more clear,
Which hardlier here obtained, we hold more dear*
Thus Isaac does interpret Visions dark,
As great Mathuselah at building the Arc,
Who lived until the year of the inundation,
As plain appears by Ages Computation.
Good Israel was wonderfully moved
At sight of those, he reuerenc'd so and loved,
His Benjamin but newly taught to stride,
Of his blind Grandsires steps then being guide,
Both which seemed two good Angels to him sent
From heaven, to ease his grief and discontent:
Wherefore soon rising on his weary bed,
Having his Father duly honored,
He answers with a piteous sigh and groan,
Joseph is gone, and I am left alone:
Dear Rachels first borne, whom to make my wife,
I was a servant best part of my Life.
After we had been married fourteen years,
Rachel and I, with Prayers, Vows, and tears,
Begged him of God: Then did my years expire,
Which Laban for my two wives me did hire:
One daughter and ten sons I had before,
By Leah seven, and by my Handmaids four,
But I my Joseph prized them all above,
As I his Mother more then theirs did love:
And though I churlish did mine Uncle find,
In many things herein he was most kind,
To pay me wages ere my work was done;
For I had Rachel ere that I begun
My first years Service, whereby seven years seemed
But a few days, so I her love esteemed:
No man had ever more experience
Then I of Gods good grace and Providence,
When I was first to Padan Aram sent,
I only with my staff forth from thee went
To Bethel, where the Almighty Lord to me
Appeared by Vision, promising to be
My God, and to my Seed the Land to give,
Whereon I slept; which firmly I believe.
Then did I vow, so he would me protect
Safe in my Journey, and my ways direct,
Giving me Bread to eat, and Clothes to wear,
The Tenth of all I had, to offer there:
God gave my asking, and abundance more,
So as I thence returned with stock, and store:
And though I long forbear my Vow to pay,
God never me forgot, unto this day.
I confident, beyond all hope, can prove
I him shall see again, whom so I love,
At the last day: till then, he is dead, and gone,
No hope before of Resurrection.
This is his colored Coat, begored red
By Jaws of Beasts, which on his Carcass fed.
Were I now blind, I happy were, then could
I not this dismal spectacle behold.
But if, says Isaac, he has changed his Tent
For heavenly home, why should you thus lament,
As without hope? since now he is at rest,
Let likewise the remembrance of him rest.
Weep you, because your loss turns to his gain?
Your mourning cannot bring him back again.
God, our chief comforts often from us does rend,
Lest we too much on outward means depend.
It may be, you your love so on him set,
You thereby did your love to God forget:
Then Is Justice justly him from you has rent,
And Mercy gives you cause now to repent.
But whether Joseph living be, or dead,
Let little Benjamin stand in his stead:
What your affection so to him inclined,
You even the same in Benjamin shall find,
Of Rachel both begot in marriage bed,
Only this last she never suckeled,
For in the pains of Birth she left her life,
Thus he a tender nurse lost, thou a wife:
This Isaacks rubbing on an ancient sore,
Made Israel lament more then before;
So as the child who still was standing by,
To hear such mourning weeps for company:
And as a Parret, newly taught to prate,
The voice does of another imitate,
So cries the Boy; good Father, Ioseph's gone,
And I alas! here left am all alone.
It Is this fine colored coat he wont to wear,
Good father let us it to Joseph bear,
(For that was ever under Jacobs arm)
He may have need thereof to keep him warm.
These pleasant reasons from the witty child,
Old Jacob of his sorrows so beguiled,
He was content a while his heart to ease,
The better this his dearest Boy to please.
And since he Joseph thought dead, and at rest
By little he his Lamentations ceast,
But ever little Benjamin would cry,
To let him go to Joseph by and by.
My Boy says Jacob, if that thou will go
To Joseph, thou must first as Joseph do,
Be a good Boy, serve God, thy prayers say
At Morn, at Night, and oftentimes a day:
All lying, swearing, idle talk forbear,
Duly obey and serve thy Parents dear,
To any, nor of any speak least ill,
And always be obedient to Gods will:
For so did Joseph, therefore I had given
Him this fine colored coat, But now in heaven
He is most gloriously by God arraid,
And sees all Joys and Pleasures can be said.
By this the Boy to imitate grows feign,
Joseph in all, for hope of Joseph's gain;
If Jacob any thing would have him do,
Say Joseph did it, he would do it too,
If he from any ill would him retain,
Say Joseph would not do it, he would refrain:
All which he so well ordered, that in fine,
The Boy was measured all by Joseph's Line,
And Jacob so delighted therewithal,
He leaves his couch and comes down to the Hall,
Where ever Benjamin his darling dear,
Was ready with his prattling him to cheer,
Till in the end his love so on him set,
Makes him all grief for Joseph's loss forget:
And pleasure take in Benjamin now more,
Then he in Joseph ever did before.
So does one for his wife often weep and cry,
As, after her, he would not live but die,
Forbeares his meat, till time of mourning past,
Then cheares his spirits, and falls to his repast,
And suddenly a second marriage proves,
Whom he more dearly then the former loves,
And so his dear affection on her sets,
He all his former sorrows quite forgets.
Thus lived old Jacob many happy years
With Benjamin, but wisely he forbeares
Him to adventure once out of his sight,
Lest as good Joseph him befall it might.
Twelve times through all the Signs the Sun had past,
And now through Gemini was making have,
When he more kindly on his Paramore
The Earth did shine, then ever heretofore:
Which made the superstitious Cananite
Adore this Planet, as a God of might,
And by Religion of his own devising,
To worship the Sunne-setting, well as rising.
And amongst other their Inventions vain,
Dan Phoebus to leave Delos I Will they feign,
To court the Nymph of Iordane for his Bride,
And her to honor with his fertile side.
Therefore her Banks he richly does adorn,
And Hills and Valleys fills so thick with Corn,
The eared Lands seem a continued plain,
Whose ears of Corn stoop to the ground again,
And she proud of the honor of his rays,
Her bosom all with fragrant flowers begayes,
The more him with sweet savors to delight,
And seem more fair embellisht in his sight:
Which made the Hills and Dales to laugh and sing*
And all the Birds with sweetest warbeling,
With them to tune sweet ditties to his praise,
Whose heat and Light diuides the night from days.
Seven times this Giant his full course had run,
And ended, where his travel he begun,
Whilst Iordans Nymph continues in his grace,
Which Canaan made the happyest fruitful place
Of all the Regions, where Suns fertile heat,
Does cause the Laborer with Joy to sweat*
But as we always after Drowth see Rain,
War after Peace, and after Pleasure Pain;
So after plenteous and fruitful years,
Great famine, want, and scarcity appears
In Canaans Land: For seven years being past
Of Plenty; Famine all the world does wast.
Therefore, they that of late Sols marriage feigned,
Now of his wrath and Jealousy complained,
That he which with his Beams late cherished
All fruits, the Earth in fruitful bosom bred,
Was so inflamed with Jealousy and Ire,
As if he all the Earth would set on fire:
So as he either would her seeds not daigne
To quicken, or if that the hopeful grain
Promised a fruitful harvest at the last,
He in his fury all would burn or blast,
Thus did those heathen of Gods wonders fable,
And vainly construe his works admirable.
But good old Israel who, like Lilly-white
Amongst the thorns, feared God and did upright,
The glory they did to the Creature give,
Gave the Creator, who does ever live,
And looking to the Author of this store,
For this his greater plenty, honors more.
And takes the Famine for a Chastisement
To man for sin, that so he might repent.
But as the plenteous store did nothing breed
But Pride and Follies vain in Canaans seed,
(Excessive rioting, Lust, Drunkenness,
Amongst the rich: Niceness and Idleness
Amongst the poor: who swinishly even all
The Acornes eat, but look not whence they fall,
Consuming all the Corn their land them bears,
Not laying up least store for dearer years,
But loathing and despising courser grain,
Transport it as superfluous for their gain,
So when the Earth denide like store to bring
All fall to grudging and to murmuring,
And Sol whom, they so honored at the first
For his high favors, for his Fury cursed:
And those which late so plenteously were fed
In the first year, are like to sterue for bread.
Yea holy Jacob though he were exempt
From Canaans sins, yet in their punishment
Does bear his share, and now for want of Bread
He fears the ruin of himself and seed.
And though he sole relyeth on Gods grace,
Of which he had good trial in like case,
Neglects no means to make supply of store*
But thus bespeaks his sons, I heretofore,
When plenty in your fields did so abound,
Wished that a man amongst you might be found,
Who wisely would for future wants provide,
But folly it is for Had I wist to chide,
We hear there is store of Corn in Egypt land,
Yet one does gaping on another stand;
Oh have you thither Bread from thence to buy,
To save alive us and our Family.
The brethren ten, (for Jacob would not send
Down Benjamin with them) do soon descend
To Egypt, where near Memphis on the way
A grave old Sage they overtake in gray,
Who seemed by his grave gestures and his motions,
To be a Hermit, now at his devotions.
As Isaacke going out one Eu*n to pray,
Seeing his servant lighting on the way,
With fair Rebecca vaild, and all her train,
Left his devotions them to entertain;
Even so this Sage, whose eyes on heaven were plast,
As they would thither ere his body have,
Seeing these gentle strangers there alight,
And him to mutual courtesy inuit,
Leaves his devotions, and of them enquires,
(Knowing they Hebrews were by their attires)
In their own language, what, and whence they are,
Which true and plainly they to him declare:
And farther tell him that a famine sore
Had now consumed their Corn and all their store,
Compelling them from Canaan to go down
To Egypt, where they knew none, nor were known.
Therefore says Ruben, may we you request
Us strangers to inform, as you may best,
Of your condition first, next of your king,
Your country, and your form of governing:
And if, as Fame reports, here is store of grain,
And how and where we may the same obtain,
For here, even as at home, we see all wast,
No future harvest, nor least sign of Past,
And therefore with my brethren I desire
To know the cause of what we so admire,
Without a Seed-time or a Harvest, Plenty.
And Garners full, although the fields be empty.
Brethren said Trismegist, for so he hight,
I first must here lay open to your sight,
That Being's his goodness Power and Providence:
By which we all have Motion, Being, Sense,
Who, the first cause of all, does things dispose
By Second, these we see, that keeps he close:
I am a Priests and Princes eldest son,
For Priests and Princes are in Egypt one,
And to the Sun, as was our country guize,
Was consecrate to offer Sacrifice,
Great Trismegistus was mine ancester,
A King, a Priest, and a Philosopher:
Soon as my Tongue men's words could imitate,
And, though with little understanding, prate,
My parents me instruct to learn by heart
The rules of Wisdom, and the laws of Art,
The aspects of the Stars, their several ways,
Conjunctions, Orders, Interposings, Stays,
Flying of Birds, Beasts intrailes, and in fine,
All that might make with them a sound Divine.
And well I profited, for ere least hair
Of Silver, with my Golden did appear,
The wisest, I of all my Peers was deemed,
And most in Temple and in Court esteemed:
Could best of all expound the hardest Theames,
Tell men their Fortunes, and interpret Dreams:
Thus I the Oracle was many a year
Of Egypt, and of all the Countries near;
Till that high Wisdom which things future knows
As present, Them by Dreams to Pharoh shows.
Fast by a River side him thought he stood,
Whence came up seven fat Kine, well flesht and good,
And other seven ill-fauour'd Lean, that hour
Came up, and all the fair ones did devour:
Again, he slept, and saw seven ears of Corn
On one root, well-set, rank, and goodly borne,
Which seven thin blasted, spoild and eat up clean,
Then Pharoh waked, and lo! it was a dream.
The Morning come, and he sore troubeled,
His Sonthsayers are all assembeled,
Pharoh thereof to us makes declaration,
But not a man can give th'interpretation*
Our Spheres, Spells, Circles, Birds, nor Sorceries
Had power to discern these Mysteries:
Then Pharoh moved, and thenceforth grieuing sore,
Forbeares his meat, and comes abroad no more:
Until his Butler, raised again to grace,
Who had forgot his friend in wretched case,
Till twice twelve times the Moon with borrowed light,
Had filled her horns (for friends once out of sight,
Are even as soon out of a Courtiers mind,
"Such Courtesy in Court most Scholars find):
Thus said to Pharoh, Sir you cannot yet
Choose but remember, how you did commit
Me and your Baker to your Stewards ward,
For some misdeeds, which you of us had heard:
Where in the Prison we a young man found,
In whom diuinest wisdom did abound,
For we a several Dream had in a night,
Which told to him, to us he read aright;
The Baker to the Gallows, I to Grace
Should be restored, and all in three days space:
This of our Dreams th'interpretation was,
All which you saw most truly came to pass.
Thus ends the Butler: Pharaoh glad to hear
Of ought might ease his longing, wishd him there,
Who quickly sent for, shau'd, appareld white,
As him became to stand in Pharohs sight,
Heard, and as soon his Dream did right expound,
Which by nine years experience true is found.
For these seau'n fair Kine, and rank goodly ears,
He did interpret seven fat fruitful years,
The seven thin sterued which did them deuower,
Seven years of famine* In a lucky hour
For Egypt: for thus store we up did lay
In fruitful years, against this evil day:
And not sole happy for our temporal store,
But spiritual: For many who before
(Long led in ignorance and error blind,
Till they Gods Truth by good experience find)
To stones and stocks, Sun, Moon, and Stars did fall
Now worship God the maker of us all:
Of which, for ever (blessed be his name)
A thankful one I, though th'vnworthiest, am.
And having all vain worldly joys forsaken,
Now to devotion sole my self betaken.
Thus ends the Sage: When Judah, holy Sire,
Hearing thy words, Gods goodness we admire,
Happy that God has kindled in thy breast,
The holy Fire these flames do manifest:
But tell us what became of that great Sage
Which of such store and famine did presage:
You told us how the Butler him neglected,
But how has Pharoh his desert respected?
For great ones, for the most part, do despise
The poor, though they be never so just and wise:
And though the Land is by their wisdoms guarded,
They are not long respected or rewarded.
That Is the end, says Trismegist, for which I told
The rest. When as King Pharoh did behold
Such heaun'ly wisdom, in such youthful years,
(For scarce six Lustres in his face appears,)
Who counseled him with speed for to provide,
A man of understanding, that might guide
His under Officers, through all the Land,
To store up plenty under Pharohs hand:
The fifth part e'un of all their Corn and seed,
To feed his people in the time of need:
The saying seemed so good in Pharohs eyes,
And all his Servants, that they soon devise,
(Because no man in Egypt could be found,
In whom the Spirit of God did so abound)
To place him over all his house and Land,
That all might be even as he should command,
Thus now he with the King is all as one,
He only sits above him in his Throne,
Him then most sumptuously apparelling,
He made the Lord and Keeper of his Ring,
The which he used, as the public Seal,
For all his private state and Commonweal:
And his second Charet bravely placed,
And with the highest princely honor graced:
This is the Man has stored up in the Land
Great heaps of Corn, in number like the Sand:
For as the Sands cannot be numbered,
No more the Plenty he has gathered.
Now twice the Sun has his full course nigh past,
Since all our Lands have barren lien and wast;
Nilus no more our Fields has watered,
Nor fertile dewes our fruits have cherished:
And now the dearth in all the Land is sore,
As well amongst the Richest as the Poor;
The Garners opened are, and thence is sold
Great store of Corn; Nor does this Prince withhold
From strangers his Provision; For well-ny
All Regions hither come them Corn to buy:
This man will you for Money Corn afford,
For he is wise, gentle, just, and fears the Lord:
But, whilst the Sage to them this tale relates,
They unawares approach near Memphis gates,
Then to his Cell returns the aged Sire,
They have into the City to enquire
More of that Prince, by whom the Corn was sold,
Where they their Brother though unknown, behold.
The end of the second Book of Joseph.
THE THIRD BOOK OF JOSEPH.
NOw is the time that all the Sheaues must bend
To one, now raised on high upon his end,
The Sun, Moon, and Stars eleven must now
To him they meanly erst accounted, bow.
For Joseph now by due desert and right,
Is placed in honors Chariot shining bright,
And all the Corn, the Treasure of the Land,
Under his sole disposing and Command:
For this same Joseph which the Hebrews sold,
Is he of whom great Trismegist erst told:
Who Corn had heaped up numberless like sand,
And was the Ruler over Egypts land,
When lo! the brethren ten before him brought,
Low bowing to the ground, him thus besought:
Great Lord! whose wisdom and deserved grace
Giue's thee in Egypt even the second place,
Whose Prudence, honor, glory and renown,
Through all the habitable Earth is known,
Vouchsafe to us thy Servants now such grace,
As thou have done to many in our Case:
We Brethren all, one man's Sons, come to buy
Corn to relieve us and our Family,
Except we by thy Clemency be fed,
We and our Race must die for want of Bread.
The Lord of Egypt then who them did know,
But was unknown, Himself strange rough does show,
And now remembering well his Dreams of late,
For which these, that thus honor, him did hate,
Thus answers: See! you have a fair pretense,
To buy you Corn and Victual from hence;
But you are come into the Land as Spies,
To see wherein our strength and weakness lies:
Is It like ten Brethren should so far descend?
None left at home their houses to defend,
Or are you all without a house or home,
And masterlesse about the Country rome?
Truly, says Judah, we twelve Brethren be.
All one man's sons, of which thou ten do see,
The least, at home, does with his Father stay,
But no man knows, where the other is this day:
To buy food are thy Servants hither come,
For us and for our Families at home:
By this, says then the Prince, the truth I Will know,
Whether you, as I say, be Spies or no:
For, by the life of Pharoh, no man home
Shall go, before your younger Brother come:
Take them to Prison, till his coming tryes
The truth: By Pharohs life you are but Spies.
Then he three days commits them to ward,
Whilst of an answer they themselves prepared.
Thus, as Gods Minister and Substitute,
He vengeance on their sins does retribute,
Sins now forgot, because so long since past,
But though God's slow, he pays them home at last:
Yea then, when they themselves think most secure
For Joseph's wrongs, he pay's them home and sure.
Happy who make right use of Chastisement,
Which is to hate, forsake Sin, and repent:
But, they in Prison, Joseph does advise
Alone with God, how he may best devise,
Them for their foul offenses to correct,
And yet his aged Father not neglect,
Whom feign he would relieve with store of grain,
But fears his Brethren will not come again.
The third day therefore, thus says Joseph, hear,
Do this and live; for I the Lord do fear:
If you be true men, as you all affirm,
Leave one man bound, the rest all home return,
With Corn for to relieve your Family,
Then bring your brother, And not one shall dye,
But traffic here as true men in the Land,
And I will free your Hostage from his Band.
His word prevailed, But they in conscience
Pricked for their cruelty, and foul offense,
Long since committed against this Lord unknown,
And thinking God now pays them with their own,
Thus one to other to complain begin;
Ah! how did we against our Brother sin,
When his Souls anguish did to us appear,
And he besought us, yet we would not hear:
Therefore on us, this trouble now does fall,
When Ruben thus; oh! did I not you all
Not to offend against the Lad desire,
And now you see God does his blood require:
Little think they that Joseph by does stand,
And all their speeches plainly understand,
Who turns and weeps, yet soon returns again,
So Friends afflictions tears from friends constrain.
Then taking Simeon he him binds with bands
Before their eyes: And secretly commands.
To fill their Sackes with Prouender and Grain,
And put their Money in their Sackes again:
So they return with Conscience tiring more,
Then all the Miles from Nile to Iordanes shore,
As when ten horse men rouing out for prey,
Lose one of their dear fellows by the way,
Though with rich Spoils they to the camp return,
All for him lost, lift up their voice and mourn;
So mourn these Brethren nine for Simeons chain,
Their brothers loss was greater then their gain:
But when Gad in the Inn his Sack vnbindes
For Prouender, and there his money finds,
Their hearts them failing, all are sore afraid,
That they as Simeon likewise were betrayed:
Ah! What, say they, has God upon us brought
For all the wickedness which we have wrought?
This thing upon us all is justly come,
But most especially on Simeon:
Who was the cruellest, and rather would
Have Joseph slain; then to the Merchants sold:
But when at home they to their Father tell
All that to them in Egypt had befell:
And how that they for Spies were taken there,
Imprisoned three days, and put in fear;
And that the Man there still kept Simeon bound,
Till by inquiry all the Truth he found:
And seeing also every man bring back
The money, which he carried, in his Sack:
The good old man was wondrously afraid,
That Simeon even as Joseph was betraide:
And said, my sons you laugh mine age to scorn,
You have my Simeon pawned or sold for Corn,
Else where should you provide such store of grain,
And yet bring all your Moneys home again?
But when they farther told him in a word,
How rough and stern they found the Egyptian Lord*
And that their bringing Benjamin must try,
Whether or no they came the Land to Spy;
He thinks they likewise seek him to deprive
Of Benjamin, his dearest son alive:
Wherefore he thus Laments and makes great moan,
His brother's dead, and he is left alone;
If mischief him befall upon the way,
You bring my head to grave with sorrow gray:
The Dearth grows great, Corn's spent, Jacob in vain
Them bids for food to Egypt have again;
We dare not see, say they, the Princes face,
Except our youngest Brother be in place:
We straight will go, so him with us thou send.
But ah! says Jacob, what did you intend,
By telling of the man you had a brother?
Alas, says Judah, how could we do other?
He of our state and kindred did inquire,
Saying, what lives yet your aged Sire?
Have you a Brother yet? we told him so,
Ah! how could we what he intended know?
But send the Lad with us, we instantly
Will bring you food for all your Family:
I am his surety, him of me require,
For ever let me bear thy blame and ire,
Except I bring him back: The fault is thine,
Else we returned had the second time.
Father, says Ruben, let my Sons be slain,
Except I safe do bring him home again.
As in some Siege when Famine grows so great,
That Mothers their own children dear do eat,
One close her dearest Darling up does hide,
Lest others her compel it to divide,
And rather chooses even to sterue and pine,
Then cleave her tender infant in the Chine:
So when the Famine now grows grievous sore
In Jacobs house, and like still to be more,
He steruing rather chooses to abide,
Then part with his dear darling from his side;
But when he saw himself, and all his race
With dearest Benjamin, in equal case,
That all for want of Bread must sterue and die,
Except from Egypt they had new supply;
He said to them: Since needs it must be so,
A present of my hands take ere you go,
Balm, Spice, and Myrrh with best fruits of the land,
Take likewise double money in your hand,
And that brought back return, as it is right,
It may be it was but some ouer-sight,
And take your Brother with you, and arise,
God send you favor in the Princes eyes.
To free my Simeon, and this my delight,
Thus of my Children I am robbed quite:
With that he poured out a flood of tears,
But hungry Stomachs had nor eyes nor ears,
But took the Spice and money in their hand,
And haste with Benjamin to Egypts Land,
From Hebron, three days Journey, pass they right
To Memphis, where they lodged all that night,
Early 'n the morning, when as Joseph sat,
Dispatching Suitors and affairs of State,
Amongst the other suitors in the Hall,
He first one of his Brethren spies, then all;
But most his dearest Benjamin he ei'd,
And therefore bids his Steward soon provide,
And take those Hebrews to some private room,
For he would have them dine with him at noone:
It Is fit that those whom God to Place does call,
Should be to strangers kind and hospital.
Then brought to Joseph's house, they are afraid,
The money to their charges should be laid.
When Judah thus: The money we did find
In our Sacks mouths, when we did them unbind,
We have brought back, with money eke to buy
New Corn for us, and all our Family:
Peace, says the Man, your Father's God you sent
That treasure, I was paid and well content.
And forthwith Simeon out unto them brought,
Who each saluting other, as they ought,
Enquire at first of one another wealth,
But Simeon chiefly of his Fathers health:
Then are they to a stately Parlour brought,
All hanged with curious Arras richly wrought
By Joseph's Bride, To whom he had made known
His Kindred, there in curious colors shown,
(For, as her Lord, so she no time mispends,
But duly with her Maids, her work intends:
Lo! Joseph is the Pattern of her life,
Thus a good Husband always makes a wise):
The Deluge in the first piece was contained,
Where, but the Arc, naught on the floods remained,
But they abated, Lo! there comes forth,
All living ceeeping things upon the earth,
With such variety and cunning wrought,
As plainer folks them living would have thought,
So skillful Art does Nature imitate,
The Dogs do seem to run, the Lambs to bleate*
Here Noah offreth on an Altar built,
Of all clean Beasts to cleanse sins foulest guilt;
Good Sem, Arphaxad, Selah (of whose race
Came Heber, whence the Hebrews) next had place,
And Pelag next, who first diuides the Land,
Reu, Serug, Nahor, Tarah next do stand,
From whence comes blessed Abraham, by whom
The blessed Seed of Sarahs womb should come:
Here Angels him salute, with God he walks,
And as two friends with God familiar talks,
Here Sarah laughs to hear from her dry womb,
Seed like Sea sands, all numberless, should come:
Here Isaack's Circumcised, Here sacrificed
By Faith, but for his blood a Lamb sufficed:
Rebecca skins on Jacobs hands here cleaues,
Here Is Brother of his Blessing he deceaues:
And blessed, straight flies from his brothers wrath
To Laban, where he both his daughters has:
Here he returns, whom soon as Laban misses,
With anger he pursues, but parts with kisses:
Here wrestles he with God, lo here he meets
His angry brother, who him kindly greetes:
Before one Sheafe, here ten Sheaues seem to fall,
Here Sun, and Moon, and Stars, it worship all;
Here are ten Brethren playing in the shadows,
Whilst all their flocks are mowing of the Meadows,
Like lively Shepherds all do dance and sing,
That Woods and Hills with Ecchos seem to ring:
When comes a Child in party-colourd Coat,
Them to salute, but all fly to his Throat,
And like so many Butchers 'bout a Lamb,
Seek to bereave him from his dearest Dam,
Of all the stories they did there behold,
This had most life. For Joseph's wife had told,
With her own hands, it here so cunningly,
A man would think he saw the Picture cry,
And on his knees with vnfeign'd Innocence,
To beg his Life of their Maleuolence.
This made their eyes those curious sights forbear,
And ghastly one upon another stare,
And so amazed them, they now surely thought,
God all their wickedness to light had brought:
But now that Joseph is returned they hear,
Therefore their Present ready they prepare.
As Abram when he had recovered
His Kinsman Lot, and Captives with him led,
Returning by the way with Bread and Wine,
Was met by great Melchizedek divine,
And blessed, for that God now by his hand
Had saved the Prince and People of the Land;
Even so good Joseph who by pains, not sword,
Had saved alive the Egyptians and their Lord,
And daily from fierce Famine succored
Such as had died else for want of Bread,
Was met with Presents coming to his Hall,
And blessed as the Preserver of them all.
Amongst the rest these Hebrews louting low
Their Present offer him, who straight would know,
How they did all, and if their Father old
Lived still in health, of whom they last him told:
And what is this your Brother young, said he,
Of whom you told me? They all answered yea.
God bless my son, says Joseph, and retires,
To weep for Joy, now having his desires:
But washing's eyes and face, he does refrain,
And to his Brethren soon returns again,
So calls for meat, he by himself alone,
The Egyptians by themselves are placed each one,
His brethren by themselves (For Egypts Nation
Are ranked as their ages do require,
Which made them this due order all admire;
To all then from his Board he messes sends,
But five to one on Beniamins he spends,
Lo thus they all eat, drink, and made good cheer,
Till they had drowned all sorrow, grief and care.
But Joseph; who amidst his feasts does mind
Those, that abroad for hunger steru'd and pinde;
Thinks of his Father old, and does command
His Steward for to fill, straight out of hand,
The Hebrews sacks, so full as they can thrust,
And put their moneys in their sacks, as first:
And in the youngest's sack his silver Cup,
So in the morning, e're the Sun was up,
They with their Camels laden are let go,
But e're they thence are gone a mile or two,
Up gets the Steward, and them after hies,
Whom ouer-taking, thus aloud he cries:
Ah! why have you rewarded ill for good?
My Master of his Grace has given you food,
And you his Cup wherein he drinks wine,
And wont to Prophecy and to divine,
Purloined have, oh it is evil done.
Good sir, says Ruben, Think not any one
Of us would do such thing: the money found,
Last time, when we our sackes at home unbound,
Was brought to thee again, most truly told,
How should we then or Silver steal or gold?
Dye let him wheresoever it is found;
We Bondmen to my Lord for ever bound.
He says the Steward, shall be bound, where we
The Cup shall find, the other shall go free:
Then taking down their sackes, they do begin
To search from Ruben, even to Benjamin,
There was it found, then all their clothes rend,
And back again unto the City tend.
As Theefes who by the owner ouer-take,
In fresh pursuit, with goods about them take
And brought before the Judge, all mercy cry,
Without defense, for such their Felony:
So they to Joseph brought; before him fall,
And only unto him for mercy call.
What have you done, says he, know you not, I
Am able to divine and Prophecy?
Ah! Judah says, what shall thy servants say,
Or do? How can we clear our selves this day?
God has made plain thy servants wickedness,
We are thy Bondmen all, we must confess,
As likewise he with whom the Cup was found,
Nay, God forbid, says Joseph; he be bound
Who had the Cup, The rest depart in peace
To your old Father, haste, why do you cease.
My Lord, says Judah, we have no defense,
Yet let me speak one word without offense:
At our last being here, thou did inquire
Of this our Brother, and our aged Sire,
And we, thy servants, true and plainly told,
We have a Father which is very old,
Who also in his age begat our brother,
The only child alive now of his mother,
His Brother's dead, and therefore more beloved,
By this my Lord, then answered, shall be proved
The truth of all your sayings, Bring him hither
That I may see the Brethren all together:
We answered, if the Lad should but depart
From his old Father, It would kill his heart;
My Lord replied, except he to this place
With you return, forbear to see my face;
We coming home, this to our Father show,
Who to buy Corn again would have us go,
But, we replied; except the Lad we place
Before the Man, we may not see his face:
Ah! says our Father, you my sons well know
That I had by his Mother, only two,
One's dead, and gone, if this away you have,
You bring my head with sorrow to the grave:
Now if thou us unto my Father send,
Without the Lad, on whom his days depend,
Soon as our Father misseth him he dies,
And we be Authors of his miseries.
Besides, I surety for the Lad became,
And if I bring him not, must bear the blame:
How shall I then my Fathers face behold,
Without the Lad be there, except I would
Bring on my Fathers house such wrechednesse,
As no man's Tongue is able to express:
With that like Iordanes floods his tears do fall,
And as he wept, so wept his Brethren all.
But Joseph then no longer could refrain,
But biddes forbear, there may not one remain
Within with him, whilst he himself declares
Unto his Brethren, with such cries and tears,
That the Egyptians and Pharoh hear
His loud laments, and scarcely can forbear
To mourn with him, who kept them all from mourning:
But Joseph to his Brethren soon returning,
Says, I am Joseph; does my Father live?
Fear not my Brethren, I you all forgive.
As when a King, that he discover may
Some traitrous plot, his body does array
In such an habit, as none can descry
Him from one of that close Conspiracy,
Till hearing all the Traitors Coniuring,
He shows himself to be their Lord and King.
So that they all stand mute and in a maze,
And ghastly one upon another gaze:
So stand the ten, one looking on another,
To see so high their late betrayed Brother:
Thus at the last, the wicked men shall hide
Their face at sight of him they Crucifide,
When on his Throne his glory they behold
Like Joseph's, who shall like to him be sold.
But Benjamin poor harmless innocent,
After he had endured this chastisement,
At hearing Joseph's name lifts up his eyes,
And louder now for Joy then Sorrow cries:
So shall the innocent at last appear,
To be absolved by their Brother dear.
Then Joseph says, my Brethren all, draw near,
I am your Brother Joseph, do not fear,
That very Joseph you to Egypt sold,
But be not grieved therewith, nor do it hold
A cruel thing; For God me sent before,
For to preserve your lives with millions more:
This is the second year, five are behind,
When none shall reap, or mow, or sheaues up bind,
God sent me to preserve your Progeny,
And save you by a great delivery:
Not you, I say, but God me hither sent,
And made me here, to your astonishment,
Great Pharoh's Father, and given free command
Ore all his House, and over all his Land,
Have to my Father; Tell him in a word,
Thus says thy Joseph, God has made me Lord
Of Egypt: Tarry not, but soon come down,
And thou shall dwell on Goshens fruitful down:
Thy Children, Childrens children, and thy flock,
Beasts, Asses, Camels, all thy store and stock:
Lo there I sustenance for thee will find,
For those five years of Famine yet behind:
Your own eyes see, and Beniamins behold,
I all in your own tongue have truly told.
My glory here then to my Father tell,
As you have seen, and hither have to dwell,
So weeping he upon the neck does fall
Of Benjamin* and he on his, so all
He kisses, and does after with them talk,
Familiarly, as they together walk.
As when a Treasure in the earth is found,
Fames Trumpet does it far and near resound,
So Fame this news in Pharohs Court does tell,
Which pleased him and all his servants well:
Therefore he thus to Joseph, out of hand
Thy Brethren send with Corn into their Land,
To bring their Father and his family,
That they may eat my Lands fertility.
Besides, I will my Charrets thou command
For to convey your Father to my Land,
With Wives and Children, let them leave their stuff,
Egypt shall furnish them with store enough.
Then Joseph, hasting them away to send,
Peace by the way does thus to them commend:
I will not now things past commemorate,
Your grief and sorrow more to aggrauate:
For God has turned your morn of grief and sadness,
Unto a day of Feasting, Joy, and gladness,
Yet patiently my loving Counsel hear,
And, by your former harms, learn to beware:
Let not that wicked Enuyer of mankind
Breed discords, strifes, or quarrels in your mind,
Nor question or dispute one with another,
Who Is most in fault for selling of your brother:
Each of his sin unfeignedly repent,
And give God glory, who me hither sent,
And all the evil you against me thought,
Turning to good, this great deliverance wrought,
I send now Charrets by the Kings command,
To bring my aged Father to this land:
Ten Asses laden all with Egypts good,
I likewise send my father for his food:
And ten she-Asses lade with corn and bread,
That by the way, you may thereof be fed:
Changes of Raiment I to each assign,
These five my dearest Benjamin are thine;
With these three hundred silver pieces: So
He has his right, yet you no wrong I do.
Let not your eye, cause I am good, be ill,
It Is reason good enough to say, I will:
Yet Nature may inform you of another,
He is my only brother by my mother.
Envy him not, because he in mine eyes
Most gracious is, nor shall he you despise.
Brethren, in love and amity combind,
Are like small sticks we in a faggot bind:
No force them bends, whilst they remain in one:
Disioynd, a child will break them all alone.
Have; Fare-you-well; fall not out by the way
W'offend against my Father by your stay,
Lo! thus they fly from Nile to Iordans shore,
To tell their Father all you heard before.
Joseph is yet alive, says Judah, and
Is Governor of all King Pharohs land:
Alas! says Jacob come you me to flout,
Joseph now lives in heaven, I make no doubt,
He was the Prey long since of cruel beast,
I have his bloody, Coat still in my chest.
Ah! says Dan, to Gods glory we confess,
(Who has laid open all our wickedness)
That we our brother out of envy fold,
When we at Dothan pastured our fold,
To Ishmaelites, who after for their gain,
In Egypt, where we found him, sold again:
His colored Coat which does with thee abide,
We dipped in blood, our fowlest sin to hide:
Lo! now thy sons on knees before thee fall,
And for this our offense beg pardon all:
Joseph vnaskd, our trespass did remit,
Therefore good father also pardon it.
As Indian merchant on the sudden told,
His ship is safe arrived all lade with gold,
Which long since to be cast away he feared,
Because he never tidings of her heard,
First wauers, and it hardly can believe,
Fearing lest he too sudden credence give,
But when he sees the Porters bringing in
The golden Oar, and Ingots, does begin
For to revive: Even so old Israel
Misdoubts, when first he heard his children tell
Of Joseph's life and glory great at Nile;
But when he thus had wauered awhile,
And saw the goodly charrets Joseph sent,
To bring him and his household from their tent
To Egypt; and his dearest Benjamin
Confirmed it all for Truth: Behold within,
The old man's spirit does again revive
And cries with Joy: Joseph is yet alive,
God pardon you all your Iniquity,
I will go down and see him ere I die.
The end of the third Book of Joseph.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF JOSEPH.
NOw Jacobs tents abound with such great store
Of corn, which they had wanted heretofore;
As if God had heau'n's windows opened,
And to his chosen thence had rained bread:
Which he as lib'rally participates,
Unto his Neighbors and Confederates
Of whom then taking leave, soon as he might,
He to Bersheba iourneyed that night,
Full twenty miles; where freed from heathen eyes,
He to his God might offer sacrifice,
And says thus to his sons: this is the place,
Where the Egyptian Agar first found grace,
When as Gods Angel made her see the well
Which saved the life of her and Ishmael.
Here let us up to God an Altar rear
For sacrifice: that God which did appear
To Abraham and Isaacke, also may
To us appear as well upon our way,
And in our Journey us direct aright:
Then in a Dream and Vision of the night,
When sleep his bodies senses seized all,
God to his Soul does Jacob, Jacob, call.
I am the God unto thy fathers known,
Then fear not into Egypt to go down,
For I will go with thee, and make thee there
A mighty people: Therefore do not fear,
But they shall come again: And Joseph's hand
Shall close thine eyes in the Egyptian land.
Then early from Bersheba all arose,
And in the Wagons all themselves dispose,
(Sixty seven which with Joseph and his sons
Before in Egypt just to seu'nty comes)
Leaving the high montanous craggy hills
Of Pharan, near the Arabian rocky shells
Upon their left hand; bend down, on the right
To that which the Egyptian sea is hight,
Where a plain way from thence to Egypt guides
Ore Sihor, which from Canaan it diuides
By South, as great Euphrates does divide
Chalde, by North, from Canaans fruitful side.
Here Jacob, who does all occasions take,
Gods promise certain to his sons to make,
Thus tells them: By this Riuer's is bordered
The land God promised to Abrams seed;
From this Egyptian River, all the lands
1. Kin. 4.21.
Are given us, even to great Euphrates sands,
A King of Iudahs seed one day shall reign
Genesis 15.18 called there the river of Egypt. A city so called.
Ore all from Sihor, to the river maine;
Sihor on South, shall border Iudahs side,
Euphrates, Dan: so sure as God did guide
Joseph to Egypt to provide us grain,
He to this land will bring us back again:
Then by this Proverb men shall understand,
From Dan unto Bersheba all the land,
Oh how can you incredible this deem?
Who have in Egypt, Joseph's glory seen;
That harder was then this to bring to pass:
This promisd, but that never hoped was,
Then, fording Sihor, they through Kedar past,
A country barren, savage, wild and wast,
Called so of Kedar, son of Ishmael:
Here Jacob eke occasion seeks to tell Genesis 25.13

Of Gods great goodness, them a land to give,
Not fruitless, barren, where the dwellers live,
As here, of Couin, Rapine, Theft and spoil,
But a most pleasant and well watered soil,
Where plenty both of corn and wine do grow,
A land which does with Milk and Honey flow.
Besides, what cause have we our God to praise,
Who us conducts through these most dangerous ways,
Amidst these Robbers, without fear or dread,
As late he at Bersheba promised.
There was a city, Called Ostracina or Cheres.
built of costly matter
A goodly outside, but it wanted water,
Like to a lamp, that shines fair and bright,
But wants the Oil, that should maintain the light:
Or like some outside gallants complement,
That lacks minds inward grace and ornament.
From Kedar passing toward Casius mount,
They up unto a goodly city mount,
Where stood a goodly temple dedicate,
To Jupiter, thence Casius nominate:
Not that huge mount which does in Syria lie,
Which one reports to be near four miles high, Plin lib. 5. cap. 22.

This city even on Egypts border stands,
And is the utmost of the Hagarian lands.
Here Jacob grieves at the abomination
Of his near kindred, and his neighbor nation
His uncle Ishmael, who with him came
By Hagar, from the loins of Abraham,
And in his flesh received the Circumcision,
But fallen to foulest heathenish superstition.
Oh my dear sons! beware; I speak to all,
How you to foul Idolatry do fall,
Leaving that God, which made the heavens alone,
To worship Idols made of wood and stone;
And, by religion of man's vain devising,
Adore Moon, Planets, Stars, Fire and Sunrising.
How are we bound, above all other nations,
To bless God for our often preseruations!
But most for that God us has given his light,
And chosen us to worship him aright,
This Idol, whom these heathen Casius name,
With Hammon Jupiter's the very same,
In Canaan worshipped; even that cursed Cham,
From whence the Cananites receive their name,
Whom holy Noah in malicious pride,
As Ishmael good Isaacke, did deride.
Now five times had Auroras tresses bright
Chased away the shadows of the night,
Since Jacob came from Hebron with his train,
And now was iournying on his way again
To Egypt, when thus Ruben does begin,
That place where we last lodged, is the In,
Where Gad his money in his sack did find,
When he for Prouender did it unbind,
Lo there before us is the fruitful down
Of Goshen; there above is Ram'sis town:
Not one more pleasant, spacious, fruitful plain
For pasture is in all the world again;
There Pharohs pleasure is, that we shall keep
Our Camels, Asses, all our flocks and sheep:
Not ten miles thence are those two cities great,
Which Pharoh houlds for his Imperial Seat.
The one called On, Egypt's Metropolis,
The other Memphis, whose large circuit is
By measure seventeen miles and more about,
But On is three miles larger out of doubt;
One with three thousand paces measure may,
Betwixt these two huge cities, the midway,
There Is Joseph's country house, whence to the court
He at his ease and pleasure may resort.
Whether the King lie at his Memphian Bowers,
Or in his stately Ons more princely Towers:
If God shall guide us on our Journey right,
Thou may see yet thy Joseph's face ere night.
Then Jacob sends out Judah, from that place
To Joseph, rightly to direct the face
Of Jacob, and of all his sons and train,
And hasten back to bring him word again.
Then Joseph takes his Chariot for to meet,
His aged father, and him duly greet:
As when good Jacob at Mahanaun met
Gods host, in order like an Army set,
When Esau threatened his last overthrow,
So does the glory of these worthies show, Josephus ad Heroum oppidum Iacobo
occurrit. Ios. lib. 2. Antiq. ca. 4.

When they do both in Goshens plain appear,
And each unto the other draws near:
Joseph begins to welcome his great Sire,
And Jacob Joseph's glory does admire,
And but they Idol worship both abhorred,
They one another surely had adored.
As when this Jacob after twenty years
With Laban spent, to Isaacke old appears,
They each in other wondrously delight,
So do these Worthyes two in mutual sight,
Joseph forgets his honor and his state,
And weeps on Jacobs neck, even as he sat,
And Israel forgets he was his son,
And as did Joseph, would to him have done.
Clouds may, not Muses can express their tears,
So long forbearance mutually endeares
Them each to other: but old Israel
To Joseph says, since I may with thee dwell,
And see thee in such great prosperity,
Lo! willingly I am content to die.
So have I seen a fair and tender Lamb,
Purloynd by wicked hand from loving Dam,
Long mist, at last, when both do meet again,
With loving Bleatings fill both hills and plain*
Josephus ibidem.
Yea so the old man with joy was extaside,
It wanted little but he there had did,
But pious Joseph, with great care and pain,
By chafing brought him to himself again.
Both being then in Ioseph's Chariot plast,
Jacob begins thus with Gods favors past:
Many all done by Chance and Fortune deem,
And little of Gods Providence esteem,
I wish such would in all my life observe,
How all men's actions here Gods purpose serve:
It was not Chance made Esau set at naught
His birthright, for a mess of Potage bought:
Nor the devise alone of my dear mother,
That got my fathers Blessing from my brother;
For's anger kindled thus, it forth me drives
To Laban, where I children get and wives.
'Twas Labans churlishness and avarice
Enriched me, by a new and strange device,
Colors before his yeaning Ewes to spread,
Which made white sheep bring Lambs discoulered,
These he to me for wages did allow,
And suddenly they to a number grow.
The murmuring of Labans sons constrain
Me with my household to have home again,
Whom Laban follows with an angry heart,
But God us made good friends before we part.
Lo! Esaus fear at Peniel by night
Brought me to wrestle with the Lord of might;
Whose blessing so away his fury chases,
He turns his threats to kisses and embraces.
Simeon and Leui, cruel instruments,
From Sichem made me to remove my tents
To Bethel; where my house of Idols cleared
I up an Altar to The Almighty reard;
And paid my Tenth as I to him did swear,
When first from Esau's wrath I fled or fear,
And saw a Ladder, which from Earth did tend
To heaven, whereby the Angels did descend:
Now last thy brethrens envy spite and hate,
By selling thee, have saved my life and state;
For but for thee, we all had perished,
Amongst the Cananites for want of Bread.
That God causd all these things, it is most clear,
For in the most he did to me appear,
As late when I to Egypt should descend,
Thus all does on Gods Providence depend.
Long did I thee as dead lament and plain,
And never hoped to see my son again,
And so did Isaac thy dear Gransire grieve,
But never would, that thou were dead, believe,
In God he was so confident and bold,
And in the dreams, which thou before had told,
As if, though blind, he had foreseen this day,
But now in heavenly Joys he lives for ay.
Some ten years since, him dying in his bed,
I and my brother Esau buried.
Oh! my dear son, my soul is much delighted,
As to relate, even so to hear recited
Gods goodness, toward his; therefore unfold
How God preserved thee since thy brethren sold
Thee to the Ishmaelites: for thrice seven year
Are past, since I least news of thee did hear:
Good Jacob had no sooner made an end,
But Joseph was as as ready to commend
Gods care and Goodness in his preservation,
From all his troubles: in this next narration.
I know not whether, by their fault or Fate,
It often befalls great men in the state,
Rich, wise and happy in their Princes grace,
Comely in body, beautiful in face,
To be conjoined to a wanton wife,
Which sowreth all the sweetness of their life:
This was the fault or Fortune of a Pear
Of Pharohs, to the King his Master dear;
My master Potiphar, who, as I ween,
Had in his youth a skillful Merchant been,
And Stewarded so frugally his own,
That Pharoh wise, to whom all this was known,
Mad him chief steward; they that can hold fast
Their own, their Masters treasure seldom wast.
He that did by experience understand,
How things are hoist up, bought at second hand,
Hearing that Merchants stored with spicery,
Were come to town, goes his own self to buy
The King his masters, and his own provision,
,, Thrift stands not on nice court-like superstition.
Amongst some other wares then to be sold,
A fair young Hebrew lad, he does behold,
Adorned and set out in the fairest guise,
As horses to be sold at higher prize.
A price once pitchd, and I by running tried,
As some do horses, ere they buy them, ride,
Was sold to Potiphar, who for his table
Me bought, as we our horses for our stable*
I of this change was most exceeding glad,
For now I ease for pain and travel had,
For hard fare, Good; but as a grateful mind,
Returns ay thanks, where Benefits they find,
So did I my good Lords munificence
Requite with Industry and diligence:
And for I found he pleased my Master best,
That pleased my Mistress well; above the rest,
I to observe her was most diligent,
And all means used to give her best content:
So that by Prudence more then taking pain,
I both their Loves and Favors sought to gain.
For who so will observe, shall ever find
Best way to please* is to observe the mind
And the affection of men of state,
And thereunto themselves accommodate:
Therefore a bliss on good men to attend,
But misery on wicked to depend,
Both proved by me, who, for my service true,
Was by my Lord preferred to honor due,
And for like service to my wicked dame,
Was brought to prison, obloquy and shame.
This my fair Mistress, (for no other name
I give her willing, ay to hide her shame,)
Some mean mechaniques daughter seems to be,
First matched in her own order and degree,
But raisd to wealth and honor from the dust,
Thinks all to little for her Pride and Lust:
And as a man that stands on steeple high,
His equals erst does now like Crows descry,
So she now clambred up on honors Spire,
Thinks all to low her greatness to admire.
Soon might I in her scornful looks descry
Her haughtiness, and my base slavery,
But bearing then an honest gentle mind,
Omit no service that may favor find,
Which so succeedes, that ere the Crescent bright
Had filled her horns with brothers borrowed light,
I by my diligence of her did gain
Sweet smiling looks, in stead of proud disdain.
And now the envious spirit, which sought of late
To ruin by my Fathers love, my state,
Me by my Mistress lust seeks to intrappe,
And dandle in vile sinful pleasures lap.
Damnd spark of hell! Base counterfeit of love,
And those pure warming flames from heaven above,
Which so true lovers hearts in one unite,
That they enjoy, without offense, delight:
Therefore true love, like morn is fair and bright;
Lust like an Ympe begot of blackest night;
But later days, since Rapines did abound,
Do Lust and Love most wickedly confound*
This baser Lustful Love the Spirit did choose
(As he did first the Serpent to abuse
The weaker Eve) this proudest dame to train
To taste the fruit forbidden by deaths pain,
And kindling in her eyes first lustful fire,
This Sense presents it with her foul desire
To Reasons brighter eye, which soon that flame
Makes to return into her cheeks, with shame.
Reason with this base Passion striued long,
Put one weak, as the other grows strong:
But naught so checks her Pride and courage brave,
As stooping to an hated Hebrew slave:
That she who now did sit in highest grace,
Should thus her honor great and state debase,
As to become a vassal to her slave,
Pride many women's chastities does save.
But now the violence of lustful flame
Had seared the Reason of the Egyptian Dame,
Who waiting till her Lord to Court was gone,
Thus, smiling, set upon me all alone.
Fair Hebrews son, whose equal never I
Yet saw, nor do I think Sols searching eye
In all his travels from the East to West,
A Beauty sees with thine fit to contest,
Not that hereby I vnderprize mine own,
Mine no Superior, Thine has never known
An equal, and though Fates us up did rear
In sundry Climates, yet since now appear,
In one Horison, Suns so equal bright,
Let Us each on other shine with mutual light,
Let thy bright Beams upon my Beauty shine,
I on thee will reflect both thine and mine:
Dear servant, do not thou my grace despise,
Thee I alone can make to honor rise,
Thou see how Potiphar alone does stand
In Pharohs grace, and rules both Court and Land.
To the I love, I dare be bold to say,
I Potiphar, the Court and Kingdom sway:
See then thy happiness, a slave of late,
In me to rule all Egypts glorious state:
And if the Fates us send a lucky heir,
Which may like to his Parents seem most fair,
All hearts he by thy Beauty shall command,
And by my right inherit all our land:
Sweet Joseph, let not frownings cloud thy face,
Sour looks thy glorious Beauty do disgrace.
Let Us take the occasion now we are alone,
As Bodies so our souls to join in one.
So may we with good likelihood suppose
Bright Phoebus with fair Cynthia to close,
When joining for their mutual delight,
They seem eclipsed to the vulgars sight.
As when some lustful Prince alone, unseen,
Does tempt the faithful handmaid of his queen*
To win her to his will and wicked lust,
The modest maid considring well the trust
Of her great Dame; whom if she so offended,
She justly were of God and man condemned,
Prays and intreates his awful majesty
Her not to force to such iniquity,
And break the sacred Laws (for lustful rage)
Of faithful trust and holy marriage;
So I poor wretch, whose fresh and youthful chin
Fine softest down, to shadow did begin,
Strangely amazed, and grieved at this foul fact,
Abhorring even the offer as the act:
Yet with all due respect and reverence,
Did show my duty and obedience:
And thus replide: dear Mistress, you shall find
Me ready ay, to satisfy your mind,
In all, where I may justly you obey,
And not my heavenly Masters will gainsay.
My master all commits unto my hand,
Nor knows he, how his own state does stand,
No man is greater in his house then I,
Nor does he to my custody deny
Ought but thy self; because thou art his wife,
His only comfort, dear delight, and life:
How can I to this sin then condescend,
And not against my fathers God offend?
The simple rude, says she, a sin it call,
But here at Court, it is no offense at all;
Those that are most severe against this vice,
Delight it most, Oh it is a deep device
Of Politicians, to make a law,
To hold their children, wives and fools in aw,
When they, then keep it, nothing less intend,
But at their pleasures diversely offend:
I know not one brave spirit in Pharohs Court,
That this esteems of other then a sport,
And yet their fair young lusty able wives
Must, like reclused virgins, lead their lives;
For my part I have learned this by kind,
Such measure as men meet us, they shall find:
Then blushing she does Tears like Pearls distill,
For she had tears and Blushes at her will.
But I replide, good Madame, be content,
I cannot to your arguments consent:
To prove from Greatness, lawfulness to evil,
Is for to draw a Pattern from the Devil,
Who is the greatest worldly Potentate,
Yet no excuse it is him to imitate:
For great men's faults they are vnsearch'd, unknown
To me; I have enough to mend my own:
They that severely judge sin, yet delight
Therein, they judge themselves, and yet judge right:
And who do thus Gods judgments just abuse,
Must never hope, that greatness shall excuse,
Will you, because men wrong your sex, offend,
Your Maker? God such wickedness defend,
Embrace true chastity of flesh and mind,
Which honors men and graceth womankind.
But notwithstanding she, from day to day,
Me wooes, yet would I not her voice obey,
But shunned, by all good means, her company,
Till one day she occasion did espy,
I being in my closet all alone,
And in the house not of the household one:
Then all enraged with Fury heat and Lust,
Like hungry Hawke that has a Partridge trust,
She on my garment ceasde immodestly
And cride, come sleep with me, or else I die.
Not Rachels loss, my Brethrens rage, nor yet
The fear of Famine lying in the pit,
Nor Midians bondage did me so perplexe,
As now this woman's furious Lust does vex,
Who as the cruel Serpent's said to wind
About the noble Elephant by kind;
So winds this wicked monster, woman's shame,
About me to my sorrow and her blame
What shall I fly? she me too fast does hold,
Shall I cry out? for shame be it not told
A manlike heart did for a woman cry,
Oh who can but bewail my misery!
Should I but now to dalliance consent,
Me follows honor, pleasure, worlds content,
But if that I this offered grace reject,
Bondage, disgrace, a prison I expect,
But fearing more divine revenging hand,
Then rack, disgrace, imprisonment or band,
Taking more pleasure in a conscience sound,
Then all wealth, honors, joys she did propound,
Acquit my body, though I left behind
My garment, and out of the rome do wind:
So have I seen some modest country maid,
With some uncivil usage much dismayed,
Closely her Aprons strings, to escape, untie,
And left it with the clown, away to fly.
Who can the Leopards fell rage display,
Chasing a Pilgrim fast upon the way,
And laying on his Cloak her cruel paws,
Even ready to devour him in her Jaws,
Who struck with sudden terror and affright,
Forsakes his Cloak and scapes by winged flight,
May tell the rage of this most cruel Dame,
Who now has nothing left, but spite and shame:
Then raging, that her Beauty which she prized
Above all others, should be so despised,
She calls her Servants in, and to them told,
How that base Hebrew slave was grown so bold,
And proud of hers, and her dear husbands grace,
That now he did aspire into his place;
And would have slept with her, had she not cride,
All which his garment left here testifide,
Which up until her Lords return, she laid,
Then with my Coat her malice she displaid;
For which my Lord, me into Prison cast,
My days in pain and misery to waste;
Thus lightly crediting the accusation,
And his false Wifes most guilefull simulation,
He by his rashness lost a servant just,
And still maintains a strumpets Pride and Lust.
But as a six-squar'd Dye, or carved stone,
How ever cast, stands still upright, all one,
So was I constant in Adversity,
As resolute in my prosperity:
That God which me had erst delivered
From Brethrens Fury, and me honored
In time of my unjust captivity,
Me leaves not now in this Calamity,
Oh happy they! whose Conscience them acquit,
That here they suffer wrong for doing right,
So but a while Gods leisure they attend,
They sure shall have a good and happy end:
Let Tyrants rage, they God as gentle, kind,
In Prison, as in Paradise do find:
Wherefore though I was of my Coat bereft,
My masters Grace, and Favor, and now left
In stinking dungeon, yet I felt no harm,
God gave me power my Iailours hands to charm;
And sent me in the Prison-Keepers sight,
Favor and grace for Potiphars despite.
For now that former diligence, which gained
Me favor with my Lord, like trust obtained
Me in the Prison, so that to my care,
Lo all the Prisoners committed are:
The Keeper looks to naught under his hand,
God ever prospers all I did command.
About this season, as it often befalls,
Great Favorites in Court have sudden falls,
By their own faults, or others accusation,
Or by their Lords dislike and alteration
Of Favorites: Two Lords of high regard
In Pharohs Court, committed are to ward:
The Keeper these does to my trust commend,
That I with diligence should them attend:
These wanton Courtiers which had formerly
Lived all in plenty, ease, and Iollitie,
Acknowledging nor serving other God
Then Pharoh, and now chast'ned with his rod;
As without souls this change of Fortune bear,
But I by all means sought my charge to cheer,
And told them, if indeed they guiltless were,
The iustest King of Heaven would find them clear;
And if they had through frailty him offended,
So they their sins confessed and amended,
He even as willing was them to forgive,
As they in's Grace and favor here to live:
How earthly Kings our bodies might enchaine,
But still our souls in Freedom did remain:
With many such good words I sought to please
My charge, who found therein no little ease,
And grew less heavy; till both in one night
Had several Dreams, which did them much affright,
Which soon as I had heard, I right aread,
And as I told, so all things followed.
Such Visions are not like Dreams natural,
Which ordinary us in sleep befall:
They in our Souls deeper impressions leave,
Then such as commonly the Sense deceive;
Which in the Fantasy worst revel keep,
When Common-sense the Master is a sleep;
And do the Imagination vain delight
Sometime with hope, sometime with Fear affright,
Working most on the affections of the mind,
When Sleep the Bodies senses fastest bind,
For even in Sleep, Grief, Joy, Fear, Hope, Hate, Love,
The souls affections wake, and lively move.
God often by such Visions tells men plain,
What things they ought to do, and what refrain,
Sometimes by Dreams to them are promised
Great Blessings, and great curses threatened:
God often thus shows one his determination,
And gives another the interpretation,
Thus unto me two Dreams by night he told,
Which, as they prove, my Grand-sire did unfold,
Thus Pharohs Servants first, and next their King
See things to come, But the interpreting
Was given to me, which done, I told them plain,
Interpreting to God as Dreams pertain:
And now who thinks, but that I thought it long
Yet two years to abide in Prison strong?
After I had so well interpreted
His dream, whom now the King so honored,
But having learned with Patience to attend
Gods leisure, and to hope unto the end,
Even at that time, when as I least expected,
So long of Pharohs Cup Bearer neglected,
He that does all things here by weight and measure,
On whom they all attend to do his pleasure,
By one poor Dream but from an heathen King,
What Is long before decreed to pass does bring:
I raised to Grace, the World from Famine quite,
The Butler does acknowledge his ore-sight:
South sayers weakness is discovered,
And God is all in all acknowledged,
My Brethren bold are to Repentance brought
For all the wickedness, which they had wrought:
And this my wicked Mistress may reclame,
And bring her to acknowledgement with shame,
And make my master see his foolish passion,
And learn to Judge by better information:
My two first Dreams prove true which I had told,
My Fathers spirit revived now being old:
Pharoh thus gains the wealth of all his Land,
And must acknowledge it from Gods own hand,
Thus all the parts of this sweet sacred story,
Are for man's good, but end all with Gods glory,
All these are now the Consequence and Theames
Of mine, of Pharohs and his servants Dreams.
See farther here, Satan's Maleuolence,
And man's will freely serve Gods providence:
Satan sought by my brethrens Cruelty,
In me to ruin Isaacks Family.
My brethren me of wilful envy sold,
And for the twenty silver pieces told,
The Midian Merchants bought me for their gain,
And into Egypt meant to sell again:
God hither sent me Grain here to provide,
Else thou and all thy sons for want had did:
Thus Satan sought dishonor of Gods name,
And all for this my Brethren rightly blame,
Goodmen such Merchant's Couetise detest,
That buy and sell Gods Image as a beast:
But God who is only powrefull, good, and wise,
From all these evils makes the Good arise.
But I thus having in great Pharohs grace,
Obtained the first, in Realm the second place:
First pray to God me to direct aright,
To use this favor and my borrowed Light;
Nor sought I mine own honor, wealth, and praise,
But his, who did me from the Dungeon raise,
And therefore, first take care for public good,
Providing against the Future Famine food:
Wherefore, I first through Egypt Circuit ride
And garners great in every place provide,
In those seven fruitful years to fill with store
Of every Grain: And since it is no more
Virtue to purchase, then preserve, no tide
I slipped, but did most carefully provide,
To kill all Vermin, cut off all excess
Of Gluttony, and beastly Drunkenness:
Abate all needless Beasts, Dogs, Mules and Horse,
Rid idle Rogues and Vagrants, which are worse
Then Catter-pillars to consume the store,
To rob the richest and to sterue the poor:
No Corn out of the Land let I go out,
But buy in rather from the Coasts about,
And many Forests which before did ly
All waste, I unto Tillage did apply:
Thus I proceed, and God so blessed my hand,
That all things prosper over all the Land.
But when the years of plenty all are past,
And all the Land of Egypt lies waste,
So that they live of former years remains,
Which them perhaps a month or two sustaines,
The people first of Pharoh seek supply,
Who them to Joseph sends; I suddenly
Set open the Barnes, and sell for money out
The Corn to all the Nations round about.
Now is the time indeed, that I might buy
Castles and Lands for my Posterity,
But I all money bring to Pharohs hand,
To be the strength, and sinews of the Land:
If Pharoh will bestow on me a Place,
Or money to buy Land, I of his Grace
Will House and Land, as I my Office hold:
Strangers in purchasing may be too bold.
When all their money's spent with buying bread,
One year with Corn I them for Cattle fed:
But when the next year they in need do stand,
I will for Corn their Bodies buy and Land,
But all for Pharoh: whereby growing strong,
He and his Empire may continue long:
And to establish more his Segnurie,
From Place to Place I will each Colonie
Transplant, who on the East of Nile abide,
I will remove unto the other side:
Thus Pharoh Lord of Egypt shall be known,
By Seisin, none shall say this is mine own.
Thus have I seen when Want or Waste compel
A Gallant his Inheritance to sell,
(Lest any right in him should still be thought)
Give place to him that has the purchase bought,
And in another Country dwelling hire,
Whether he with his household may retire.
Thus will I do with all the Common Lands,
But for the Sacred in the Prophets hands,
To Muses and to Learning dedicate,
Or to Religious uses consecrate,
I think it Sacrilege indeed to touch,
Could all by this example learn as much:
And let the Priests their Portions freely eat,
Whose Brains in youth for understanding sweat,
Their age in Prayers and Persuasions spend,
To save the Good, and wicked to amend.
When I seau'n years have furnished them with bread,
I in the eighth will furnish them with seed
To sow their Land, The fifth of whose increase
Shall be the Kings: The other four in Peace,
They and their Households eat: And this shall stand
For ever as a Law in Pharohs Land:
The Priests Lands only shall be ever free,
For to the Lord they consecrated be.
Now, as I said, when I did Circuit ride,
And Egypts Land suruai'd from side to side:
One thing of greatest use I did observe,
Which does perpetual memory deserve,
Which, if it once were rightly understood,
Would force all studious of the public good
To do, speak, write, of this most rare invention,
Till to effect they brought what next I mention:
A piece of Land an Istmos, Bar, or stay,
Twixt Midland-Sea, and the Arabian Bay,
Supposed some Sex aut septem miliaeria a capite Delta admare rubrum. Gorop.
Hisp. lib. 6. Herod plus distantiae po^it. lib. 2.
ten Miles over at the most,
Adioineth fast unto the Egyptian Coast,
Which if one by a Channel did divide,
Both Seas might each into the other slide.
This if it were once Psamni. thus Egyptorum Rex hoc tentauit, sed oraculo
interpellatus desutit. Herod. ibidem.
nauigable made,
Would bring, to Kings and people of each trade,
Such wondrous gain as cannot be expected,
With endless fame to those which it effected:
For it would open an easy way and pressed
To sail from Europe, Affricke, Asia-West
Within few days to the rich Indyes place,
Which hardly now is done in three years space:
How might all dwellers on the earth hereby,
Soon be enriched by their Industry?
When by this Channel Merchants might convey,
Exchange of Merchandise so near a way,
Even from the Northern Isles and Western Lands
To China, Ganges, and the Indian Sands.
This project I to Pharoh did commend,
Entreating him this princely work to intend,
But some base minds, active in naught but ill,
Men of acedious spirits, and little skill,
Who are most forward ay to vilisie
All works of Honor, Art, and Industry,
Were ready this most noble work to stay,
Saying a Bear, or Lyon's in the way.
This Isthmos, say Eedam significat aggerem perpetuu^ nullo modo rumpendum:
Gorop. lib. 6. Hisp.
they, is ordained by fate,
To bar these Seas that they should never meet,
But evermore remain a fatal Damme,
Betwixt them both; and therefore called Eedam.
A fancy vain, which from mistaken name
Some superstitious wisards idely frame,
For it is not called Eedam, and though it were,
Who for this name would this attempt forbear?
For Eedam notes in language Cimbrica seu Germanica. Gorop.
which they mean,
A Dam significat aggerem fluctibus Maris and aquarum oppositum. Gorop. Herm
lib 4. Ee. significat firmum.
firm strong watercourse great Banks between;
So from that name they might more truly gather,
This Isthmos should be a firm current rather.
For waters course; which I more boldly say,
Because not Eedam it, but Hebraite sic vocatur and sic vocandae est.
Eetham ay
Was called, and so is still; by which is meant
That with his double Etham dicitur vel ab Hebraeo Thaam (permecathesin) quoth.
significat geminum quiae inter duo maria positum est: vel ab Ethah quod
significat curro quia Etha^ olim futurus est locus vbi mare currat.
side the Seas close pent,
Shall one day have a Current fair and great,
In which the waves of both those Seas shall meet,
And have so large a passage, Ships may turn,
As they go to the Indies or return.
And whereas these fantastique men do dream,
This to effect impossible does seem.
They without reason, selfe-conceited, wise,
Against the public profit this devise;
High Athas mons. celissimus factus est nauigabilis a Xerxe, Plut. Just. and
alij.
Mountains, Rocks of flint have bin made plain,
And forced to yield a passage to the Maine,
Yea who knows not that far more harder Quales sunt obelisci 4. quorum v.
nusquisque erat 480. cubitorum longitudine.
things,
Have been effected by the Egyptian Kings,
But never any of such Eminence,
Nor any that could bring such recompense
As this; For little labor, cost and pain,
Would to the whole world bring infinite great gain.
Another let they tell as fond and vain,
That if this Bar be cut, the Arabian Maine
Does rise so high, his waves would ouer-flow
All the Egyptian plains, they ly so low:
But I upon my view could not descry
Twixt Sea and Land such inequallitie:
But howsoeueuer Earth, stones, and that does rise
From digging of the Channel, would suffice
To raise Sea walls, for a most strong defense,
Against the waters rage, and violence,
And more secure on either side the shore,
From ouerflowing then it was before,
But though I have small hope to win this Nation,
To cut this shorter course, for Navigations,
Yet when that King to whose high Scepters sway,
All Nations, will they, nill they, must obey,
Shall rule as well over Asia 'nd Europes Lands,
As China, India, and Arabian Sands.
Some potent Monarch will himself alone,
Or many Princes joining all in one,
Will take this Noble enterprise in hand,
And make this shorter passage to each Land,
If not for the ease and good of Navigations,
Yet for Gods Gloryes farther propagation,
That so his Words and Wisdoms glorious sound,
May through all Corners of the Earth resound,
This for the public good I have made known,
In Egypt, as I now to thee have shown,
Now whilst I for the Public take such care,
Pharoh at home a help does me prepare,
A Princes daughter, Egypts ornament,
For whom King Pharoh with her Father sent,
And welcomes thus: Great On! who by thy place,
Art to me next, and second in my grace;
Joseph is first, whose merits to display,
To light a candle were in clearest day:
All Nilus Borders do resound his fame,
And honor most-deseruedly his name:
Strength, youth, and vigor in his face appears,
And wisdom in his heart of graiest hairs:
His Beauty, as his Virtue has no pair,
Him would I match with Asenah thine heir,
I know he is a stranger in this place,
And wants Possessions, yet in Pharohs grace,
And he thou know deserves at my hands,
To have a part in all my Goods and Lands.
The reverend Priest replies: Dread Sovereign,
Lo! all the Place and honor I obtain
In Egypt, I acknowledge from thy grace:
Which is enough to raise to highest place
The meanest, But thou do a match propound,
Where Virtues more then honors do abound:
Amongst the many Favors thou have done
Thy Servant, this I deem the highest one,
A Priest to be so gracious in thy sight,
To match his Child with Pharohs Favorite:
May't please your Grace to ask the maids consent,
But by her looks, I see she is content,
For then her veil (where modestly she shrouds
Her radiant Rays, as Sol does his in clouds)
Put off, such heavenly Beauty did disclose,
As if another Sun in Court arose,
Which as the Rising Sun the Courtiers all
Adore, and like a Queen before her fall:
Then Pharoh says, her taking by the hand,
By silence thy consent we understand,
Good daughter, thou art like thy Parents fair,
As of their Goods, be of their Graces heir:
A fitter match for Joseph none can find,
If to thy Bodies grace thou suit thy mind,
So, as thine outward Beauties heaun'ly shine,
Thine inward shall b' Angellicall divine,
Oh! Labor to be glorious within,
So Gods, man's Joseph's favor thou shall win,
The King forth with then sends for me in haste,
And first repeating all things as they past,
With his own hand her gives me for my Bride,
Assuring us for ever to abide
As loving, as our Fathers natural:
When humbly I upon my face did fall,
And first gave thanks, as duty did require
To Pharoh, next unto her holy Sire.
As when Garden Adam all alone
Saw Eve, flesh of his flesh, Bone of his Bone,
He her embraced, kissed and so highly prized,
As if all Beauty were epitomized
In his fair Rib, now with the Body met,
(Two Suns, which but for sin had never set)
So I, who, though in honor, was alone
In Egypt, till I met my flesh and Bone,
Sweet Asenah, in whose fair eyes and face,
I saw my mother Rachels comely grace;
This Egypts Gem, whose eyes I did behold,
Like radiant Diamonds fair set in Gold;
Embrace, kiss, love her, and her Grace admire,
And set her as the Bound of my desire:
Thinking I now did reap with treble gain,
The Crop of all my travel care and pain.
Then in the presence of the Court and King,
I courted her with this speech following.
Fair Lady whose high Grace and Beauty seen
To me your servant, may become a Queen.
Yet art, (such is thine humbleness) content
To be poor Joseph's: without complement,
I am all yours, nor do I less esteem
Your worth, because you it so meanly deem:
Our Sexes duty to your Sex I know,
Is you to Court entreat and humbly woe,
But since that service you to me remit,
I will so much remain more in your debt.
My time is precious, therefore let me show
To you in brief, what Joseph's wife must do.
It is not this worlds false, vain glittering glory,
So full of hazard, lubrique, transitory,
At which I aim: It Is an eternal place,
Where we shall live for ay in blessed case,
Whether the gods, The Egyptians wont to serve,
Can never bring you: He that will preserve
This Land from Famine by th'interpretation
Of Pharoh's Dreams, must bring to this salvation*
One God with Joseph must his wife adore,
One God one true Religion, and no more:
God jealous is, no Idol-stocke or stone,
May be his Rival, God, and Truth is one:
These worldly shows delights and vanity,
As Mortal with our Mortal Bodies die,
The Pleasures which I speak off ay remain,
Eternal thus for Temporal we gain.
This God my Fathers with their wives have served
Who to this day from dangers me preserved,
This God me from the dungeon deep did raise
To be thy Husband, him for ever praise:
Madame, your King and Father are content,
But your own mouth must show your free consent.
When fairest Asenah long silence breaks,
And as an Angel sent from Heaven thus speaks:
Good sir such is my due and filial awe,
My Fathers judgment is to me a Law,
Much more my Sovereigns: But such worth in you
I see and hear of, I should rather sue,
But for my Sexes bashful modesty,
For such an honor, rather then deny:
Nor shall I meanly of my self thus deem,
To honor him, whom King and Realm esteem
Their Father, and the Kingdoms Favorite.
What greater Grace befalls a mortal wight?
Sir, that Religion, which my holy Sire
Taught me his child, informed my souls desire,
Worlds Glory, Pomp, and vainenesse to despise,
But thy Religion makes men heavenly wise,
And brings them by an upright conversation,
To happy ever lasting habitation.
Therefore as thy Religion our transcends,
As aiming at more high and happy ends,
So greater is my Joy and happiness,
To match, where I it truly must profess.
So sure as that (whereof thou did divine
By Dreams) shall come to pass, so am I thine:
Thy God shall be my God, and mine thy Nation,
In earth, grave, heaven one be our habitation:
What thou approu'st as good, the same do I;
With thee, Sweet Hebrew, let me live and dye.
Pardon: A woman's Tongue knows no content,
Yea, is enough to express a Maids consent.
Lo thus Hearts, hands, words, wishes, ioin'd in one,
Two by Consent, become one Flesh and Bone.
Then princely On begins: Lo God has tide
These two in one, Let no Man them divide:
Dear Daughter, I to Joseph thee commit,
Thou therefore must thy Fathers house forget,
And people: so shall sons before thee stand,
Fit to bear rule as Princes in the Land:
That God whom Pharoh, On and Joseph serve,
Who, as he all things made, does all preserve,
God who of things to come to Pharoh told
By Dreams, which none but Joseph could unfold,
When God him from the Dungeon did advance,
To save us by a great Deliverance,
God Author sole, and end of happiness,
This holy Marriage and this Union bless
Of the Egyptian, and the Hebrew Nations;
And make them happy in their Generations,
And honor ay in heaven our Sovereign King,
As he his Servants honors in this thing.
The King thus pleased in royal pomp and state
With sumptuous Feasts and shows does celebrate
Our Marriage day, where all with Music rings,
And King and Court a happy Hymen sings.
Happy I hope though with an Heathen Dame,
Whose Grace and Virtues I the rather name,
That you may know we here as elsewhere find,
Some good as well as bad of womankind,
As a loose wicked wife of Potiphar,
So a most pious child of Putiphar:
But why should I time in her praises spend,
Since her own Works, her best of all commend,
God me has given, by her, two lovely Boys,
Before the Famine, which are all my Joys:
Lo! here she kindly comes with all her train,
Her welcome Father for to entertain:
For now they all at Joseph's gate arrive,
Where Pharohs Pears, and Servants all do strive,
How best their Loves and Service show they may,
To add more honor to this happy day.
When Asenah, first kneeling down, begun
Oh holy Father, of a blessed son,
Bless me thy Daughter; Blessed shall they be,
Whom thou do bless: As welcome now to me,
As dearest Joseph to his Fathers sight.
All Egypts glory yields not such delight.
When Jacob, Daughter; Fitter it is for me,
To your great state, to bow my humble knee,
But rightly you of me a blessing crave,
No other Dower to bestow I have,
The Lord on thee from Heaven all Blessings shower:
But Jacobs tongue not having farther power,
Now to express his Wondrous Joy and Love,
His eyes produce abundant Tears to prove
His joyful soul, for Joseph's happy state,
When Joseph's Steward tells him it was late
And supper time: Wherefore they all addressed
Themselves, in their due order, to the feast.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF JOSEPH.
Soon as Aurora, with her blushing face,
Vsherd the Giant out to run his race,
His longest Journey from the East to West,
Good Joseph, though he ouernight did feast,
Even all th'astates of Egypt with their train,
His father in more state to entertain,
Gets up and with his servants all repaires
Unto a chapel by, to public prayers,
Which Pharoh had given Joseph there to serve
God, who from famine Egypt did preserve,
No time to men of action is so free
For their devotions, as the Mornings be,
Especially for those that live at Court,
Where they make Dinners long, but Prayers short,
But they done; Joseph does his speech direct
Thus to his Brethren: you perhaps expect,
That I, now for mine own and houses grace,
Should raise you all to honorable place,
And make you Lords at least in Pharohs land,
But if you wisely things will understand.
And know that honor ladeth more then graces,
If wealth and virtues answer not your places,
No grace nor honor can give such contents
To you, as quietly to live in tents.
You that have had your Breeding in such sort,
Cannot observe the Niceties of Court:
They, whose ambition would be over all,
The higher climbed often take the greater fall:
Equals envy* Superiors such disdain,
Inferiors malign, all seek their gain,
Grace and Preferment by another frown;
Who get up seek to thrust the other down.
Courtiers are Dials, whilst Sol on them shines,
Observed of all, else but as painted Lines.
Many Court-honour only do admire,
And as another heaven on earth desire:
These only look on outward splendor, shown,
Our inward cares and dangers are unknown,
None would envy our glory and content,
Knew they the weight and cares of government:
They Altas burden on their shoulders brare,
To whom committed is the public Care,
Besides most stand in such high slippery places,
I would not have their hazard for their graces.
I speak not to dehort from government
The wise, for fear of griefs and discontent,
Under this burden they must bow their back,
Lest if the wicked rule all goes to wrack:
But who are prudent, moderate and wise,
Are rather raisd for worth, then seek to rise:
And such like tubs on their own bottom stand,
Nor need the least support of others hand;
When they which want this true worth of their own,
No sooner clamberd up, but tumble down,
The first like fixed Stars stand firm and fast,
Last make fair shows, like Comets, but son wast,
Their matter is pure elementall fire,
Of these ambitious humor and desire:
Such is the Humor of Ambition vain,
For grace and offices to take much pain,
Wherein they never comfort take nor rest,
So fear of loosing does their mind molest:
When could they their fair Fortunes use aright,
They Freedom might enjoy with much delight.
I five of you, my brethren, will present
To Pharoh, who I know has an intent
To give you any honor you require,
But you his Favor only shall desire,
And tell him plainly how you have been bred,
And herds and cattle all your life time fed.
(My reason is, for that this occupation
Is here in Egypt of small reputation)
Desiring you of his high grace may hold,
Some pastures only for your flocks and fold,
Where you may serve God free from care and strife*
And pray for Pharohs long and happy life:
Should I you all now raise to Dignity,
Ones Folly ruin might the Family;
Many united stronger are then one,
But it is most: what more safe to stand alone:
Especially so high; where one man's fall
May make a breach, and so endanger all.
Oh happiness, if known, of country bowers!
Where in Devotion they their freer hours
May spend, and with Groves citizens sweet sing
Diuinest praises to the heavenly King:
Where free from plots and undermining Arts,
All may the Truth speak boldly from their hearts,
(For to a goodman it is no little pain
To flatter for the greatest grace and gain)
There may they see their Lambs grow great and more,
And heavenly blessings on their stock and store;
There may they see corn thrive upon their lands,
And God to prosper all works pass their hands:
Happy whose lot falls in so fair a ground,
Such pleasures are at Court but seldom found;
But lets make have, my brethren to the court,
My business is long, my time but short.
And now had Phoebus climbed up to such height,
His beams did warm the world, as well as light,
When Israel old; with travel wearied,
Slept sound, till waking, he much wondered
(Thinking himself at first in his own tents)
To see such costly gorgeous ornaments:
But soon remembering where he did abide,
He turns to Leah lying by his side:
And thus begins, Dear wife! should I suruay
Gods blessings from my birth, unto this day,
And in a sum his benefits recount;
They would my days, nay even my hours surmount.
His Goodness, Wisdom, Four, Love in those past
Shined several, but all now in this last:
Goodness in drawing so much good from ill,
To work the sound good purpose of his will:
His power herein is manifestly shown,
In raising up the meek, and throwing down
The proud; his heavenly wisdom did foresee:
And told us all by dreams which now we see:
The Stars eleu'n to Joseph bowed long sense,
Now we the Sun and Moon him reverence:
And lastly here appears his wondrous Love
That all for's glory and our good does prove.
Thus Israel does Gods benefits recite,
Beginning in the morning even till night.
But whilst he thus Gods Bounty magnifide
Like fairest Ewe with twin Lambs by each side,
Comes Asenah, on either hand a son,
Smugge, lively, like two Rabbets newly run:
Which seemd their mothers graceful steps to guide,
As two trim Squires that lead to Church a Bride,
The tender boys, whose mothers pious care,
Before had taught themselves aright to bear,
Down on their knees before their Grandsire fall,
And sweetly to him for his blessing call:
The good old man whose heart does dance for joys
To see his Nephews, thus begins, sweet boys,
Which like two fairest July flowers shown,
Or buds of damask Roses scarcely blown.
Oh these my daughter give you more content
Then Egypts wealth and costliest ornament.
Me thinks they hang upon each arm of thine,
Like two fair Clusters on a fruitful Vine.
These shall renew our dying memory,
And us revive unto Posterity.
Behold I see in little Ephraims face,
My dearest Rachels lovely looks and grace.
Manasses like to Joseph does appear,
Who above all his brethen was my dear.
But oh! my daughter, how much am I bound
To you, for undeserved favors found;
But Joseph more; a Princess of your state
So lowly to descend to be his mate?
God make him worthy of your grace and love,
And that he may as acceptable prove
To you his dear, as he was wont be blessed
With highest favors, always of the best.
For he at home in Bondage, Prison, Court,
In grace was always with the better sort.
I Potiphar the Jailer, and the King
Best loved and trusted him in every thing:
Then Asenah? I wish you were observed
Here, my dear father, as you have deserved:
As for your son no nobleness of birth,
Nor Egypts dowers can counteruaile his worth,
Who me has taught the vanity of state,
Me worthy make as happy of my mate;
Such is his worth and nobleness of mind,
I wonder not that he should favor find
Amongst the best: But shall I you entreat
To tell your daughter, what you use to eat,
For here you all must as at home command,
We but desire your will to understand.
Daughter says Jacob I was never nice
Nor dainty to consume things of high price,
That Is always best you easiliest can prepare,
Better are homely Cates then foreign fare.
My herds my food, my sheep my clothing bread,
No better wear I, nor no other feed:
Six score and ten years have I been content
To live on milk, fruits, and such nourishment:
Yet few or none that to mine age attain,
So strong of body are, and free from pain:
But above all, the weather being fair,
I love to walk abroad in freshest air;
After my mornings draught to stir, is good
For to refresh the Spirits and warm the blood,
This is the way diseases to prevent,
I thank God, I near knew what physic meant.
Thus whilst they talk in plain familiar sort,
Lo Joseph unexpected comes from Court,
And tells his father, how he did present
His brethren to the King, who is content
Them to employ according to their breeding,
In looking unto sheep and cattle feeding,
And now he much desires to see your face,
And with all Courtly honor you to grace:
I ( Jacob says) with all my heart will go
To that good King, that Joseph honors so,
But I desire of him no greater grace,
Then to live in his Land and see thy Face,
I hope he likewise will conceive my breeding,
And leave me to my flocks and Cattle feeding.
Joseph his Father then to Pharoh brings,
Who doing first Obeisance due to Kings
Begins, oh! blessed, blessed thou ever be,
That raised my Joseph to such Dignity,
From Dungeon where stocks did his Limbs enroule,
And yrons entered even into his Soul,
To rule all Egypt by thy borrowed might,
And be alone great Pharohs Favorite.
And blessed be ay for thy Benignity,
Who sauest me and all my Family
From perishing; Alas! for want of food,
God render in thy Bosom all thy good,
And double thy Forefathers days upon
Thee, and thy seed that sit upon thy throne.
Thus ends the Sage: when Pharoh thus replide,
How much more cause have I to bless the tide,
That noble Joseph did to Egypt drive,
To save me and my people all alive:
Come hither Jacob, let me thee embrace,
How can I but love thee, and all thy race,
Whom now as Cause and Author I do see
Oh Joseph? Father of all mine and me:
It joys me Israel most exceedingly,
When I thy son in ought can gratify,
To whom my Kingdom, Life, and all I ow,
As thou and thine, and all the people know:
God sent thy Joseph, as a man before,
To lay up here against this famine store,
For had we not by his foresight been fed,
We, thou and all, for want, had perished.
Thy Joseph does inform my Senators,
And Wisdom teach unto my Counselors:
Well may he rule then ore my house and Land,
And all my substance have at his command,
I am to this by Providence but led,
God has indeed thus Joseph honored.
Thou seemst of no less wisdom and defert,
Then good old father, tell how old thou art,
And in what course, thou have worn out this term,
I ask not to examine, but to learn:
Examples more then precepts teach to live;
Good King, says Jacob, thou do even revive
My older age to hear thy wondrous love
To Joseph, whom more then my self I love.
But seeing thou inquirest of mine age,
Know that the days here of my Pilgrimage
A hundred and full thirty years have been,
The days are few and ill which I have seen,
Nor have I yet attained to the age,
And days of my forefathers Pilgrimage.
Two things I studdy here especially,
The first to live well, second well to die,
For what is all our life once gone and past,
But even a way unto our happy last.
The term from whence to all flesh is the womb;
That whither all do hasten is the Tomb.
He happiest here who finds on the way,
Fewest impediments his course to stay.
Some pass through sickness, poverty, some wealth,
Honor, preferment, pleasure, strength and health,
Some equally of both participate,
This is the mean, yet safe and happiest Fate,
The highest I did ever here aspire:
And in this state I still to live desire.
The highest honors to your Grace are due,
For God has with a Kingdom honored you,
Whereof you have your self most worthy shown,
In looking to Gods glory, not your own.
Wisely therefore, I speak it to your praise,
You honor them, whom God would have you raise,
And in your Kingdom prudently depresse,
Those whom God hates for their wickedness.
Thus needs your Government must happy be,
When King and Senators in one agree,
The proud to cast down, and to raise the just,
So may the Rulers one another trust.
God that from Famine us delivered,
And by a dream foretold, thee counseled
Both for thy land, and household to provide,
And all the world, which else for want had did,
Feed thee with inward and spiritual grace,
And give in heaven an everlasting place,
For this, I your poor Beadsman, night and day,
Will in a homely country cottage pray.
Pharoh much joyed, would feign have entertaind,
And him at his own board with bread sustaind*
But good old Jacob modestly denide,
And said, How long have I on earth to bide?
I cannot now of good from ill make choice,
Nor music judge by instrument or voice,
Why should I be a burden to the King?
And he reward so my small-meriting,
But let my son for me before thee stand,
And ready always be at thy command.
Good man, says Pharaoh, I have given command
To place thee in the fattest of my Land,
The Land of Goshen be a habitation
To thee, thy children and thy generation
There is best pasture-ground for them to keep,
Their Camels, Asses, Cattle, Gotes and Sheep.
To raise to place of honor I desire
Thee and thy sons, but they of me require
Still to be Heardsmen: wherefore the most bold
And active, I make Rulers of my fould.
Then Jacob blessing Pharoh did depart
Out of his presence with a joyful heart.
Seu'nteene years after in prosperity,
Lived Jacob and did greatly multiply,
And Joseph in his former Grace did stand,
Still under Pharoh ruling all the Land.
Nor might be ere out of his masters sight,
Because he was his only Favorite,
Till one day Joseph, absent from the Court,
Pharoh bespeaks his servants in this sort.
Nere thrice ten times the Sun with panting horse
Has run through heaven his swift and yearly course,
Since first arose in this our hotter clime,
That hebrew Sun, which ever since did shine,
And all the time he did in court appear,
We have had Spring and Summer all the year,
I cannot eat by day nor sleep by night,
Without his Beams most comfortable bright:
That honest man, in whose ingenuous face,
A man may read what in his heart has place,
Now, by my life, I higher do esteem
This Hebrew, then great Egypts Diadem.
Nor is it to the least of you unknown,
He has been better to me then my Crown,
And bears still for me, to all men's content,
The weight of all my kingdoms government,
In those seven years of Famine and of Store,
When his employments greater were and more,
If he were but one day out of my sight,
I certain was to hear from him at night,
But now of's light has been near three days pause
Yet no man here will tell to me the cause.
When thus the Butler (who by Pharohs grace
Restored was as he dreamed to's former place)
Dread Sovereign! some small clouds do in this sort
Shadow his beams, which wont to shine at Court:
But no defect in his ay-constant light,
He Is still the same, and shines as ever bright.
Joseph at home for Pharohs health now prays,
To Isreal's God, these are his mourning days.
His father old now sleeps in happy rest,
Who dying made to him this last request.
My dearest son the honor of my race,
If in thy sight thy father has found grace,
(For though thou art my son by true relation
Yea I am subject to thy domination)
Now graciously and truly with me deal,
Not for my private, but our common weal;
Well do I know that our posterity,
Will soon admire fair shows and vanity,
And not regard the land of happiness,
The Type of future and of present bless,
Therefore to me, my dearest Joseph, swear,
Thou will not me in Egypt here enterre,
But safely carry to the land of Rest.
With my forefathers there my Bones to rest,
It may be ours will sooner hasten thither,
Where all their Fathers Bones do lie together.
Then Joseph swear and Israel worshipped,
The Fear of Isaac sitting on his bed.
These words he me desired, with many tears,
That I would publish in King Pharohs ears,
And License of thee to that end obtain,
Which done he would to Court return again.
When Pharoh thus: Is that good old man dead,
Like apple ripe in Autumn gathered?
We all must follow, who can tell how soon,
Some fall at night, at morning, some at noone?
But I desire, if any here can tell,
How that good old man did, that lived so well,
For most what it befalls mortality,
As they have lived here, even so to dye.
Good Joseph, says the Butler, thus me told,
That Jacob growing weak, as he grew old,
He Ephraim and Manasses his two sons,
Takes with him, and unto his Father comes,
Wherewith his weakness greatly comforted,
He takes his strength, and sits up in his bed.
And thus begins: My son, my Joseph dear,
The God Almighty did to me appear
At Luz in Canaan, where he did me bless,
And promise to my seed much fruitfulness,
Assuring me to make a mighty Nation,
And give that Land unto my Generation:
For those two sons God here has given to thee,
Before my coming, thou shall give them me,
As Simeon and Ruben, they are mine,
Thy Children since begotten, shall be thine;
These two, I mean, shall be two Tribes, The rest
In these Tribes names, shall be of Land possessed*
For I a double portion thee allot,
As my First borne: Because I thee begot
Of Rachel dear, my first, my lawful Wife,
Who on my hand in Canaan left her life,
Her there, alas! I buried on the way
To Ephrata, called Beth'lem to this day.
But what are these two Lads? my Joseph dear,
My sons says Joseph God first gave me here:
Oh! bring them me says Jacob to this place,
Before I die, to kiss, bless, and embrace:
Sweet Boys! Good Joseph, I nere thought indeed
To see thy face, but now I see thy seed:
The old man then, though he were dim of sight,
His left hand on Manasses, and his right
On younger Ephraim lays, and wittingly,
Thus blesses Joseph in his Progeny:
God in whose sight I here have walked always,
Who all my Life-long fed me to this day,
The God of Abram, and great Isaacks dread,
And the Angel which has me delivered
From evil, bless these Lads, and let my name
With name of Isaac and of Abraham,
Be in them named and in their Tribes renewed;
And grow on earth even to a multitude.
But it displeasing was to Joseph's sight,
To see on Ephraims head, him lay his right,
And on Manasses his left hand to place;
And would his First borne with the right hand grace,
But Jacob nould, but said I know indeed
Thy Firstborn shall be great: But lo! the seed
Of Ephraim, shall be greater far then he,
And a more strong and mighty people be.
Thus aged Jacob blessed them both that day,
And said in thee let Israel bless and say,
God send thee Ephraims and Manasses store,
But Ephraim he Manasses set before:
Then said he, Lo! I die, now out of hand,
And God shall bring you to your fathers land,
Then ere he did, he swan-like sung this song,
Most sweet, because he lived not after long.
Jacobs last blessing.
Since, my dear sons, I have not long to dwell
On earth, come hither: and I will you tell,
What shall come on you in the latter days,
Assemble and attend your Fathers Says:
Ruben
My first borne Ruben, thou that art the might,
And first beginning of my strength by right,
Thou should have all my Power and Dignity,
Which thou have lost by thine iniquity:
Unstable water! thou shall not be head,
Because thou wentst up to thy fathers bed,
For then indeed thou did my couch defile,
And thy true right of firstborn lost the while:
Simeon and
Simeon and Leui, Brethren, instruments
Leui.
Of cruelty, near to your fathers tents,
My soul come not near to their congregations,
Mine honor join not in their machinations,
Who in their Wrath the Sichemites slew all,
And in their Fury dug down a wall:
Cursed be their wrath, for it was void of shame,
And Fierceness which was cruelly to blame,
Lo! I their seed in Jacob will divide,
And them abroad in Israel scatter wide.
Judah
Judah is next, whom all his brethren praise,
Thine hand be in thine enemies neck always,
Thy Fathers Children thee shall stoop before,
Lo Judah like a Lions whelpe shall rore,
My son comes like a Lion from the spoil,
Who laid him down, and couched himself awhile,
Even like a Lion or a Lioness,
Who dares awake him from his sleepiness?
The Scepter from his race shall never start,
Nor a Law giver from his feet depart,
Till the Messiah come, who to him shall
By his great power the Nations gather all;
Lo! he shall bind his Foale unto the Vine,
His Colt unto the Branch, His Cloak in Wine
Is washed; His Cloths with blood of grapes bedight,
Eyes red with wine: His Teeth with milk are white.
The Sea-Haun's Zabulon shall dwell beside, Zabulon.

And's Border even to Sidon shall divide,
Like a strong Ass shall Isachar couch low
Between two burdens, Isachar.
And for he does know,
That rest is good in such a pleasant Land,
Shall stoop and be another to command.
Dan shall be Judge and one of Isreal's Tribes, Dan.

A serpent by the way him well describes,
Or Adder in the path, horse-heeles to gall,
Until he make the rider backward fall:
To be a Iudge's a dangerous Vocation,
Lord I have waited long for thy Salvation.
An host of men God down in war shall cast, Gal.

Yet they shall overcome him at the last.
Aser from fattest Lands his bread shall bring, Aser.

And shall enjoy even pleasures for a King.
Napthalim is as nimble as the hind, Napthalim.

But favor seeks with pleasing words to find:
Ioseph's like plant by well, whose boughs are small, Joseph.

Yet run up flourishing upon the wall:
With shooting many Archers have him harmed
And with sharp Darts to's hindrance him disarmed;
But he stands fast, his arms are made so strong
By God, to whom all strength and power belong,
His glory all his Brethrens does excel,
And he is become a stone in Israel:
His Fathers God shall help him from above,
And the Almighty with his Blessings prove:
With Blessings that from hight and depth shall come,
With Blessings of the Breasts and of the Womb,
To thee thy Fathers Blessings be more strong,
Then those that do from mine, to me belong:
From the utmost hills they light on Joseph's head,
That from his Brethren once was severed.
Benjamin.
Benjamin like a Wolf shall spoil: The prey
He shall divide by night, and eat by day:
Thus Jacob of each several prophecide,
What should to their Posterity betide:
Some call it his last will: Then to them all,
He dying spoke these words in general.
We all are Pilgrims on the way, our home
Is Heaven; as all men enter by the Womb,
So through the Gate of Death, we all must drive,
Before we at this City fair arrive:
Lusts of our youth, Infirmities of age,
Make few and ill our days of Pilgrimage,
All spend like Lamps, some blown out with a blast,
Some waste, some melt, some hold out till the last:
Like fruit all blow, bud, grow green, ripe, then fall;
Bud, blossom, green, or ripe, we perish all:
And turned to dust, are under Deaths subjection
In Grave, until the day of Resurrection.
Even as our ages, so we change our mind,
For those things we do most delightful find
To Childhood, Youth disdaines; our Youth-full fires
Accord not with our riper years desires:
Old Age in none of all the three delights,
The reason's plain, we serve our appetites:
Truth and Religions path we leave to tread,
And follow as our Lusts and Pleasures lead;
Which alter with our bodies constitutions,
And these are sensual, beastly resolutions:
But who does his affections measure by
Right rules of Reason, and of Piety,
Them never alters, but is still the same,
All tending to the glory of Gods name:
No change of state, age, health, wealth, constitution,
Can alter such desires and resolution.
This Life's a minute to Eternity,
Like mite unto the Globes immensitie,
Like drop compard unto the Ocean Maine,
Yet here we either all must lose or gain;
Upon this mite, drop, minute does depend,
All Bliss, we aye continue as we end.
All Gods most gracious, glorious promises,
But types and Shadows are of future Bless;
Phari on Land, us to the Port to light;
And guide our Barks through worlds dark misty night,
In all our voyage, through worlds Ocean-wast,
Are many Rocks and dangers to be past;
Without are Satan and the Worlds infections,
Within, our Lusts, vain, frail, and vile affections,
Which like so many Traitors readiely
Against the Pilot ay to mutiny;
But most in danger of them all we stand,
When nearest we approach unto the Land:
So some escape the boistrous raging Sea,
And near the Port do wrecke upon the Lea:
I looking back my span like days behold,
Like a fantastique Dream or tale new told,
And were I now them to begin again,
I should all worldly vain delights refrain,
Yea could you see heavens Joys by Faiths clear eyes,
You would with me Worlds Pleasures vain despise,
And run fast to the mark you set before
Your end; to live with God for evermore.
As the air is hottest nearest to the Sun,
Brooks deeper, nearer to the Sea they run,
So nearer to your end; do you aspire
To grow in grace, and glow with heaun'ly fire;
Now go I hence, and shall be seen no more,
Have mine examples always you before,
So Isaac followed faithful Abraham,
I holy Isaac, from whose loins I came,
What we did well do you the like: But when
We did amiss, observe we were but men.
Oh let your wisdom shine with your gray hairs,
Most of you now draw near to seu'nty years,
Joseph is fifty seven, a child even when
The most of you, were grown up to be men.
Seau'nty seau'n years a single life I led,
God since has seau'nty to them numbered;
The youngest nor the strongest have no power,
To add a minute to their fatal hour.
Defer not of Repentance then the date,
Now is the time, to morrow is too late,
Count all men's ages that on earth remain,
More die before, then to your days attain,
And should you old Mathuselaes surmount,
The longer life, the greater your account*
I will not exprobrate offenses past,
Repent, amend, and turn to God at last,
Leave off to sin, his Promises believe,
You cannot ask so much as God will give,
You are a chosen seed, a holy race,
Not by desert, or worthiness, but Grace.
Oh make it known to all your Generations,
God us has chose before all other Nations,
To walk here worthy of this Grace divine,
And like to purest heavenly Tapers shine,
In this worlds mistie dark obscured night,
Whose evil works abhor to see the light.
Expect not worlds vain glory, Pomp and state,
Those that live Godly here, the world will hate,
But God does ever them most highly prize,
Who here are meanest in the wickeds eyes.
The World will you deride, and say that this,
But some vain, peevish, single humor is,
Or some light idle motion, which does rise
From some mean, ignorant, conceited wise,
Despise their censures, for I certain know
The spirit, whence such heavenly motions flow:
What care I how their worldly wisdom deem,
Of them, So they with God be in esteem?
Oh! were my words now written in a book,
That who, so list to learn, on them might look,
Or with a Diamonds point engraven plain,
On Adamant, for ever to remain.
I know that my Redeemer true and just
Lives, and shall raise us at the last from dust,
And though the worms my skin and flesh destroy,
I God shall in my body see with joy,
Even with mine own; and with no other eyes:
But now my spirit begins so high to rise,
As if she meant to leave this habitation,
And fly to heaven, by holy contemplation;
Often has she strived to rise before this day,
As weary of her brittle Tent of Clay,
But has been by the weight thereof deprest,
But now she feels her self from thence releast,
I cannot last, my Lamp so fast does spend,
And now burns clearest, nearest to the end,
Farewell dear sons; my Blessing on you all
Continue to your after-Ages shall.
Oh God of Life; now thou do me deny,
The Power to live, me willing make to die.
These all are those twelve Tribes of Israel,
Which good old Jacob blessed and wished well,
Besides the blessing to each several,
Wherein he told them what should after fall:
And now as Joseph erst he made to swear,
So charge he even all his Children there,
To lay him in that place of Burial,
Where his forefathers were interred all:
Thus when his swan-like song was at an end,
And all commanded that he did intend,
He plucked up his feet into the Bed,
And was unto his people gathered.
Oh happy man! says Pharoh, God me send
Even such a life, and such a happy end.
Lo, farther Pharoh did that day command,
That all his Peers and Nobles of the Land,
Should go with Joseph and his Brethren all,
To honor holy Jacobs funeral:
Where they seven days made so great Lamentation,
They drove the Cananites to admiration:
And after he was buried in this sort,
Joseph returns again to Pharohs Court,
His Brethren unto Goshen, where in peace,
They Lived, and did mightily increase,
Till Joseph was an hundred ten years old,
So that he Ephraims children did behold,
To their third Generation, and the seed
Of Machir, eldest of Manasses Breed,
Sat on his knees: Then says he, lo I die,
But God will visit you assuredly,
And in that Land, a place for you prepare,
As he to Abram, Isaac, Jacob swear,
Then, as I swear to Jacob, to me swear,
Thither my Bones with you from hence to bear,
His Brethren swear: So Joseph, as I told,
Did honorably being very old,
Whose Body they imbalmed in a Chest,
And after carried to the land of Rest:
Where they erect a Pillar on his grave,
And thereupon this Epitaph engraue:
FINIS.
JOSEPH'S Epitaph.
HIs Fathers Darling, mothers dear delight.
Object of Satan's malice, Brethrens spite:
To Master just; chaste, faithful to his Dame:
In Prison free, co^demn'd, yet void of blame:
From Dungeon raisd to highest reputation,
By Wisdom, Counsel, Dreams, and Diuinatio^:
Thus God by him a great deliverance wrought,
In saving them, who his destruction sought:
A diligent, wise, provident Obseruer,
And therefore of Mankind a great preserver.
In Padan borne, In Canaan nourished,
In Midian bound, in Egypt honored,
From whence his soul flew to eternal Rest,
His Bones here in like expectation rest.
He saved from Famine, King, Priests, People all,
For which his seed and Nation they enthrall:
Unworthy Egypt! of this sacred Vrne,
Who such rewards for merits do return.
SUSANNA was of all thy Poems best,
But JOSEPH her excels, as she the rest.

