GODS WARNING TO HIS people of ENGLAND.

BY THE GREAT OVERFLOWING OF THE Waters or Floudes lately happened in
South Wales, and many other places.

Wherein is declared the great losses, and wonderful damages, that happened
thereby: by the drowning of many Towns and Villages, to the utter undoing of
many thousands of people.



At London printed for W. Barley, and Io. Bailey, and are to be sold in
Gracious street. 1607.

Gods Warning to his people of England.
MANY are the dombe warninges of Destruction, which the Almighty God has
lately scourged this our Kingdom with; And many more are the threatening
Tokens, of his heavy wrath extended toward us: All which in bleeding hearts,
may enforce us to put on the true garment of Repentance, and like unto the
Niniuits, unfeignedly solicit the sweet mercies of our most loving God:
Therefore let us now call to remembrance the late grievous and most lamentable
Plague of Pestilence, wherein the wrath of God took from us so many thousands
of our friends, kindred and acquaintance: let us also call to remembrance the
most wicked and pretended malice, of the late Papisticall Conspiracy of
Traitors, that with powder practiced the su^uer^on of this beautiful Kingdom:
And lastly let us fix our eyes upon these late swellings of the outrageous
Waters, which of late now happened in diverse parts of this Realm, together with
the ouerflowing of the Seas in diverse and sundry places thereof: whose
fruitful valeys, being now overwhelmed and drowned with those most unfortunate
and unseasonable salt waters, do fore-shew great Barrennes, and Famine to ensue
after it (unless the Almighty God of his great infinite mercy and goodness
do prevent it.) But now oh England, be not overcome with thine own folly: Be
not blinded with the overmuch security of the self, neither sink thou thy
self in thine own sin: For since the general dissolution of the whole
World by Water: in the time of Noy, never the like Inundation or watery
punishment then happened now here related, to the great grief of all Christian
hearers, as by this sequel it shall hear appear.

Upon Tuesday being the 20. of January last past, 1607. in diverse places
as well in the Western parts of England, as also in diverse other places of the
this Realm: there happened such an ouerflowing of Waters, such a violent
swelling of the Seas, and such forcible breaches made into the firm Land.
namely into the bosoms of these countries following. That is to say, in the
Counties of Gloucester, Sommerset, together with the Counties of Munmoth,
Glamorgan, Carma^then, and diverse and sundry other places of South Wales. the
like never in the memory of man, has ever bin seen or heard of: The sudden
terror whereof struck such an amazed fear into the hearts of all the
inhabitants, of those parts, that every one prepared himself ready to
entertain the last Period of his lives Destruction: Deeming it altogether to
be a second deluge: or an universal, punishment by Water.

For upon the Tuesday being the 20. of January last, as aforesaid, about nine
of the clock in the Morning, the Sun being most fairly and brightly spread,
many of the Inhabitants of those Countries before mentioned, prepared
themselves to their affairs, some to one business, some to an other: every man
according to his calling. As the Plowmen setting forth their cattle to their
labors, the Shepheardes feeding of their flocks, the Farmers ouer-seeing of
their grounds, and looking to their Cattle feeding therein, and so every on^
imploid in his business, as occasion required. Then they might see and perceive
a far of, as it were in the Element, huge and mighty Hills of water, tumbling
one over another, in such sort as if the greatest mountains in the world, had
overwhelmed the low Valeyes or Marshy grounds. Sometimes it so dazeled the
eyes of many of the Spectators, that they immagined it had bin some fogge or
miste, coming with great swiftnes toward them, and with such a smoke, as if
Mountains were all on fire: and to the view of some it seemed as if Myllions
of thousands of Arrows had bin shot forth all at one time, which came in such
swiftness, as it was verily thought, that the Fowls of the Air could scarce
fly so fast, such was the threatening furyes thereof.

But as soon as the people of those Countries, perceived that it was the
violence of the Waters of the raging Seas, and that they began to exceed the
compass of their accustomed bounds, and making so furiously toward them:
happy were they that could make the best, and most speed away, many of them,
leaving all their goods and substance, to the mercylesse Waters, being glad to
escape away with life themselves: But so violent and swift were the outrageous
waves, that pursued one an other, with such vehemency, and the waters
multiplying so much in so short a time, that in less then five hours space,
most part of those countries (and especially the places which lay low,) were
all overflowed and many hundreds of people both men women, and children were
then quite devoured, by these outrageous Waters, such was the fury of the
Waves, of the Seas, the one of them dryuing the other forwards with such force
and swiftnes that it is almost incredible for any to believe the same, except
such as tasted of the smart thereof; and and such as beheld the same, with
their eyes: Nay more, the Farmers, Husbandmen, and Shepherds, might behold
their goodly flocks of Sheep, swimming upon the Waters dead, which could by
no means be recovered.

Many Gentlemen, Yeamen and others, had great losses, of cattle, as Oxen, Kine,
Bullockes, Horses, Colts, Sheep, Swine, Nay not so much as their poultry about
their houses, but all were overwhelmed and drowned, by these merciles Waters:
Many men that were rich in the morning when they rose out of their beds, were
made poor before noone the same day: such are the Judgments of the Almighty
God, who is the geuer of all good things, who can and will dispose of them
again at all times, according to his good will and pleasure, whenever it
shall seem best unto him. Many others likewise, had their habitations or
dwelling houses all carried away in a short time, and had not a place left
them, so much as to shrowde themselves in.

Moreover, many that had great store of Corn and Grain, in their Barnes and
Garners in the morning had not within five hours space afterward, so much as
one Grain to make them bread withal: Neither had they so much left as a lock
of Hay or Straw to feed their cattle which were left: Such was the great
misery they sustained by the fury of this watery Element, from which like, good
Lord I beseech him of his infinite mercy and goodness to deliver us all.

The names of some of the Towns and Villages which suffered great harms and
losses hereby were these. (Viz.) Bristoll and Aust, this Aust is a village or
town some 8 miles distant from Bristoll upon the Seauerne side where all people
are Ferryed over, that come out of Wales, into those parts of Gloucester and
Sommersett-shire.

All the countries along on both the sides of the River of Seauerne, from
Gloucester to Bristoll, which is about some 20. miles was all overflowed, in
some places 6. miles over, in some places more, in some less.

Moreover, all or the most part, of the Bridges, between Gloucester and
Bristoll, were all forcibly carted away with the Waters: besides many goodly
buildings there abouts much defaced, and many of them carried quite away:
besides many other great losses of al kind of Corn and Grain, and cattle
that were then lost.

At Aust, many passengers that are Ferryed over there now, are feign to be
guided by guides, all along the Causies, where the water still remains for
the space of 3 or 4 miles, or else they will be in great danger of Drowning, the
Water lies as yet so deep there.

Many dead Carcasses, both there, and in many other places, of the country, are
daily found floating upon the Waters, and as yet cannot be known who they are,
or what number of persons are drowned, by reason of the same Waters, which as
yet in many places remain very deep: so great was the spoil that thief
merciless Elements there wrought and made.

In Bristoll was much harm done, by the ouerflowing of the Waters, but not so
much as in other places, many Cellars and Warehouses, where great store of
Merchandise was in, (as Wine, Salt, hope, Spices, and other such like Ware)
were all spoiled. And the people of the Town were enforced to be carried in
Boats, up and down the said City about their business in the Fair time
there.

Upon the other side of the River of Seauerne, toward a Town called
Chepstow, upon the lower grounds, was much harm done, by the vyolence of the
Water,

There was in Chepstow a woman drowned in her bed: and also a Gyrle, by the
like misfortune.

Also, all along the same coasts, do to Gold-clyft, Matherne, Callicot-Moores,
Redrift, Newport, Cardiffe, Cowbridge, Swansey, Laugherne, Llanstephan, and
diverse other places, of Glamorgan-shire, Munmoth-shire, Carmarthen-shire, and
Cardigan-shire: many great harms were there done, and the Waters raged so
furiously, and with such great vehemency, that it is supposed that in those
parts, there cannot be so few persons drowned as 500. both Men, Women and
Children, besides the loss of abundance of all kind of Corn and Grain:
together with their Hay, and other provision which they had made for their
Cattle.

Moreover, there were in the places before mentioned, many thousands of Cattle,
which were feeding in the low Valeyes, drowned and overwhelmed with the
violence of the furious Waters: as Oxen, Kine, young Beasts, Horses, Sheeps,
Swine, and such like, the number is deemed infinite: yea, and not so much as
Turkies, Hens, Geese, Duckes, and other Poultry about their houses, could once
escape away, the Waves of the Sea so overwhelmed them.

And that which is more strange: There are not now found only floating upon
the waters still remaining, the dead Carcasses of many men women and children:
But also an abundance of all kind of wild Beasts, as Foxes, Hares, Conyes,
Rats, Moules and such like: some of them swimming one upon an others back,
thinking to have saved themselves thereby, but all was in vain. such was the
force of the waters that ouer-pressed them.

In a place in Munmoth-shire, there was a maid went to milk her Kine in the
morning, but before she had fully ended her business the vehemency of the
waters increased, and so suddenly environed her about, that she could not
escape thence, but was enforced to make shift up to the top of an high Bank to
save her self, which she did with much ado, where she was constrained to
abide all that day and night, until 8 of the clock in the next morning, in
great distress, what with the coldness of the air and waters: and what with
other Accidents that there happened unto her, she had bin like there to have
perished: had not the Almighty God of his infinite mercy and goodness, preserved
her, from such great perils and dangers, which were likely there to ensue
unto her.

But there placing her self for saueguard of her life as aforesaid, having
none other refuge to fly unto: the Waters in such violent sort had so pursued
her, that there was but a small distance of ground left uncovered with Waters,
for her to abide upon: There she remained most pitifully lamenting the great
danger of life that she was then in, expecting every minute of an hour, to be
overwhelmed with those mercylesse Waters: But the Almighty God, who is the
Creator of all good things, when he thought meet, sent his holy Angel to
command the Waters to cease their fury: and to return into their accustomed
bounds again, whereby according to his most blessed will and pleasure she was
then preserved.

In the mean space, during the continuance of her abode there, diverse of her
friends practiced all the means they could to recover her, but could not, the
Waters were of such a deepenes about her, and Boats they had none, in all
those parts to succor her, such was their want in this distress, that many
perished through the want thereof.

There was a Gentleman of worth, dwelling near unto the place where she was,
who caused a goodly Gelding to be sadled, and set a man upon the back of him,
thinking to have fetched her away, but such were the deepenes of the waters,
that he durst not adventure the same retired.

At last some of his friends, devised a devise, and tied two broad troughes the
one to the other, (such as in those countries they use to salt Bacon in) and
put therein two lusty strong men, who with long Powles (stirring these troughes
(as if they had bin Boats) made great shift to come to her, and so by this
means, through Gods good help she was then saved.

But now (gentle Reader) mark what befell, at this time, of the strangenes of
other creatures: whom the Waters had violently oppressed: for the two men which
took upon them to fetch away the Maid from the top of the Bank, can truly
witness the same as well as her self to be true, for they beheld the same
with their Eyes.

The Hill or Bank where the Maid abode all that space, was all so covered
over, with wild Beasts, and Vormin, that came thither to seek for succor,
that she had much ado to save her self, from taking of hurt by them: and much
a-doe she had to keep them from creeping upon and about her, she was not so
much in danger of the Water on the one side: as she was troubled with these
Vermin on the other side.

The Beasts and Vermin that were there were these. (Viz)

Dogs, Cats, Moules, Foxes, Hares, Conyes, yea and not so much, as Mice and
Rats: but were there in abundance, and that which is more strange: The one of
them never once offered to annoy the other: although they were deadly enemies by
Nature the one to another: Yet in this danger of life, they not once offered to
express their natural envy: But in a gentle sort, they freely inioyed the
liberty of life, which in mine opinion, was a most wonderful work in Nature.

But now let us leave this matter touching this Maid, besides the other
accidents before rehearsed and let us return again to these watery miseries:
The counties of Glamorgan, Carmarthen and Cardigan, and many other places in
South Wales, have likewise borne the heavy burden, of Gods wrath herein: And
many were the lives of them that were lost through this watery Destruction.

Many there were which fled into the tops of high trees, and there were
enforced to abide some three days, some more, and some less, without any
victuals at all, there suffering much cold besides many other calamities, and
some of them in such sort, that through overmuch hunger and cold, some of them
fell down again out of the Trees, and so were like to perish, for want of
succor. Other some, sat in the tops of high Trees as aforesaid, beholding
their wives, children, and servants, swimming (remediles of all succor) in the
Waters.

Other some sitting in the tops of Trees might behold their houses overflowed
with the Waters: some their houses carried quite away: and no sign or token
left there of them.

Many of them might see, as they stood upon the tops of high Hills, their
Cattle perish, and could not tell how to succor them, and their Barnes, with
all their store of Corn and Grain quite consumed, which was no small grief
unto them,

Many people and Cattle in diverse places of those Countries, might have been
saved in time, if that the countries had been any thing like furnished with
botes or other provision fit for such a sudden Accident, as this was, which as
God himself knows, was little expected of them, to have fallen so suddenly
upon them.

But seeing the countries were so unfurnished with Boats much harm was done,
to the utter undoing of many thousands.

Some fled into the tops of Churches and Steeples, to save themselves, from
whence they might behold, themselves deprived as well of all their substance,
as also of al their ioys, which they had before received in their wives and
Children. Also whole Reekes of Pease, Beans, Oats, and other grain were
seen a far of, to float upon the Water too and fro, in the Countries as if
they had bin ships upon the Seas.

The Foundations of many Churches and houses, were in a manner decayed, and
some carried quite away, as in Cardiffe, in the county of Glamorgan there was a
great part of the Church next the Water side eaten down, with the Water, many
houses and Gardens there, which were near the water side, were all overflowed,
and much harm done.

Diverse other Churches lie hidden in the Waters, and some of them the tops are
to be seen: and other some, nothing at all to be seen, but the very tops of
the Steeples, and of some of them nothing at all, neither steeple nor nothing
else. Also many schools of young scholars, in many places of those countries,
stood in great perplexity, some of them aduenturing home to their parents were
drowned by the way: Other some staying behind in in Churches, did climb up to
the tops of Steeples, where they were very near starved to death for want of
seed and fire: many by the help of boards and plankes of Wood, swam to dry
land and so were preserved from untimely Death, Many had Boats brought them,
some 10 miles, some 15, some 20. where there was never seen any Boats before.

Thus God suffered many of them to escape his yrefull wrath, in hope of their
amendment of life: Some men that were riding on the high ways were overtaken
with these merciless Waters, and were drowned.

And again many have bin most strangely preserved.

As for example, there was in the County of Glamorgan, a man both blind and
bedriden and one which had not bin able to stand upon his legs in ten years
before, he had his poor cottage broken down by the force of the Waters, and
himself, Bed and all carried into the open fields, where being ready to sink,
and at the point to seek a resting place, two fathoms deep under the Waters:
his hand by chance caught hold of the Ratter of an house swimming by the
fierceness of the Winds, then blowing Easternely he was driven safely to the
Land, and so escaped.

Also in an other place, there was a man Child of the age, of 5. or 6. years,
which was kept swimming for the space of two hours, above the Waters, by
reason that his long Coats lay spread upon the tops of the waters, and being
at last, at the very point to sink: there came by chance by, (floating upon
the tops of the Waters,) a fat Weather that was dead, very full of Wool: The
poor distressed Child perceiving this good means of recovery, caught fast
hold on the Wethers Wool, and likewise with the wind he was driven to dry
land, and so saved.

There was also in the County of Carmarthen, a young Woman, who had four small
Children, and not one of them able to help it self: And the Mother then
seeing the furyes of the Waters to be so violent to ceaze upon her, threatening
the Destruction of her self and her small Children, (and as a Woman's wit is
ever ready in extreamities) she took along Trough, wherein she was wont to
make her bread in, and therein placed her self, and her four Children: And so
putting themselves to the mercies of the Waters, they were all by that means
driven to the dry land, and by Gods good providence thereby they were all saved.

Many more there were that through the handyworks of God were preserved from
this violent death of Drowning, some on the backs of dead Cattle: some upon
Wooden plankes: Some by clyming of Trees: Some by remaining in the tops of
high Steeples and Churches, other some by making of speed away with swift
horses, and some by the means of Boats, sent out by their friends to succor
them: but there were not so many so straungely saved, but there were as many in
number as straungely drowned.

The low Marshes and Feany grounds, near Barstable in the County of Deuon
were overflowed, so far out, and in such outrageous sort, that the country
all along to Bridge-water, was greatly distressed thereby, and much hurt there
done: it is a most pitiful fight to behold what numbers of fat Oxen were there
Drowned: what flocks of Sheep, what heardes of Kin^, have there bin lost, and
Drowned in these outrageous Waters: there is little now remaining there, to be
seen, but huge Waters like to the maine Ocean: The tops of Churches and
Steeples like to the tops of Rocks in the Sea, Great Reekes of fodder for
cattle, are floating like Ships upon the Waters, and dead Beasts swimming
thereon: Now past feeding on the same, through the rigor of this Element of
Water: The tops of Trees, a man may behold remaining above the Waters, Upon
whete Branches, multitudes of all kind of Turkies, Hens, and other such like
Poultry were feign to fly up into the Trees to save their lives, where many of
them perished to death, for want of relief, not being able to fly to dry land
for succor, by reason of their weakness.

This mercylesse Water breaking into the bosom of the firm Land, has proved
a fearful punishment, as well to all other living Creatures: as also to all
Mankind: Which if it had not binne for the merciful promise of God, at the
last dissolution of the World, by Water, by the sign of the Rainebowe, which
is still showed us: we might have verily believed, this time had bin the very
hour of Christ his coming: From which Element of Water, extended toward us
in this fearful manner, good Lord deliver us all. Amen.

FINIS.
By William Jones of Vske Gent.

