The Passionate Morris.

London, Imprinted by Richard Jones. 1593.

To the Gentlewomen and others of England.
ONce more (most beautiful damsels) I am bold to presume of your wonted favor,
thereby being lead to a performance of a vowed duty, where a kind zeal
binds to offer the acceptance of a serviceable good will, there a careful
feate that forewarneth to incur the hazard of offense, makes the heart to
stagger between hope and despair: hoping through the kindenes of your gentle
dispositions, to obtain a defense against injurious cauillers, and fearing by
an ouer-bolde presumption, to offer offense to the affable sweetenes of your
sovereign courtesy. But seeing my desire to be possessed of the better
cordial, makes me hart-strong to suppe of that potion which is likest to
lengthen my welfare, the same being an assured confidence of your continual
carefulnes, in shrowding with your affection the slender substance of my
humorous Morris.

It is not long since for Tel-troths Newyeeres-gift, I presented unto your
liking Robin good fellow his news, with his inuectiue against Loves most
injurious enemy Jealousy: which though it was a token to gratify the day, yet
if with indifferent judgment the matter therein contained be considered of, I
doubt not, though it was a New-yeeres day toy, it may prove a many years help
to hinder that hagges enterprises. The work took his title according to the
time of his creation but shall Robins prescriptions be followed; the patients
malady shall continually find it a gift to signify the good beginning and
prosperous proceeding of many new years unto them. But now to send Tell-troth
packing, Honesty has thrust himself into your service, who though at the
first sight he may seem a crabbed companion, yet let me beseech you to stay
your censure til you have thoroughly tried what is in him, and if then he shows
not himself a diligent pleaser of your immortal virtues, memorize in the
Cronicles of Disdain the same of that runnagate simplicity, and let me for
his fault be banished from your good thoughts to everlasting ignominy.

I was rather desirous to travel altogether invisible, then to have had a title
which might give light to the understanding of me your unworthy professed
Author; but since the higher powers deny me that privilege, I am content to
subject my self to the opinions of courteous dispositions: beseeching you to
bear with my vain, for that the vanity of this age regardes no other, nor
would any be content to hear of faults, unless they be told them in
meriment. I protest there is nothing scandalous therein, nor which is meant to
offer injury to any, only my purpose is, that if you should know any like unto
any of those in disposition, that either you forewarne them those monstrous
injurious vices, or account of them as pestilent foolish wretches. To shun
tediousnes, I commit m^ intention to your mystical consideration, my work to
your courteous protection, my self to your favorable opinions, and your
sacred selves to the heavens tuition.

Yours in service and affection most loyal A.

THE PASSOINATE Morris.
IN the month of March, a time as fit for wooing as May is pleasant to sport
in, Honesty traveling as his custom is, to search such corners as good
fellowship h^unteth, it was my hap, coming into Hogsden, to light upon a
house, wherein were met such a troop of lovers, as had not the hall been
wondrous big, a multitude should have been forced to stand without doors. Yet
though the room was so spacious, as an army might have lodged therein without
pesterment, notwithstanding it was so well filled at this instant, as all the
place Honesty could get amongst them, was to sit on the rafters on the top of
the house, which fitted best my humor, that desires rather to see then to be
seen. There seated in my Majesty (as ready to hear news, as the pick thank
is forward to tell news) I might easily perceive my lovers mated, as if they
meant to make March birds, every man having his sweet heart, and every couple
their corner. There were of all sorts, and in many manners sorted, some
batchelers sewed to widows, others to maids, widdowers likewise wooed some
maids, and othersome widows, there was age and youth coupled together,
equality of years courting each other, and diversity of dispositions, arguing
to make a sympathy.

Amongst them, I lent my ears first to a couple that had chosen forth the most
secret corner in the house, which were not worst fitted for years; for it was
a youth of three and twenty, that had matched himself with a maid of
eighteen: he holding her upon his knee, with his right hand clasping hers,
and his left about her middle, made many proffers to win her favor, and
breathed many sighs to show his love, he vowed constancy with protestations,
and confirmed with oaths the pleadge of his loyalty; he showed her how long he
had loved her before he durst tell her of his affection, how many iournies he
had made with loss of labor, and how many complaints to the God of Love not
finding any remedy. He made her privy to the many hours he had at sundry
times spent in watching to have a sight of her, showing unto her how joyful he
were, had he, perchance, but seen any creature belonging to her fathers house,
yea were it but the little dog that turned the spit. Many times (quoth he) have
I looked up to the window, imagining I have seen thy picture engraven in the
glass, when with long gasing to view the true portrature thereof, I have at
last recalled my self, by letting my soul see how mine eyes were deceived, in
expecting that true form from the glass, which was only pictured in my
heart. Then would I sorrow to my self, and power forth such passions into the
air, as my heart, bring over loaded with the extremity they would force,
would constrain me to sit down, ending my speech with such sighs, as my
breathed sorrow would no less darken the air, then a mistie fogge does
obscure the sky. But at last, coming to my self, I would return home,
locking up my self within my lodging, a close prisoner by the commandment of
love; where to pass away the time, I would write passionate lines, amorous
ditties, pleasing fancies, pleasant rounddelaies, and doleful drerelayes. Now
would I think to win thee by letters, anon I thought it better to pen
speeches, but suddenly, both misliking me, I would throw my self upon the
bed, so long thinking which way to obtain thee, as in the end I should fall
into a slumber. Yet amidst my rest, my thoughts concerning thee were restles:
For then should I dream sometimes thou spakest me fair, repaying my kindenes
with sweet kisses, granting my requests and forward to do my will: but
awaking from forth that sovereign elusion, looking to find thee, I should
feel the bed-poastes, that hard hap, turning my glad heart to a new bread
sorrow, which was the more painful, by how much my dream was pleasing: at
another time, I should think, that suing to thee for savor, thou would
bestow frowns, and profering my service, thou would offer skornes. If I
sighed, thou would smile, laughing at my tears, and ioying at my grief,
requiting every kind demand with so cruel answers, as if thy bitter words
could not force me to leave my suite, thy skornefull farewels should frustrate
my will: offering to touch thine hand, me thought thou profereds thy foot, and
stouping to catch that, being glad of any thing, thou would in a rage fling
from me, and leave the door barred against me. There should I sit till my
teeth chattered in my head, and my heart aked in my belly: then should I shake
for cold, and sigh for sorrow, when thinking to knock my legs against the
ground to get heat, I should kick all the clothes off me, being in the end
constrained to awake through cold. At what time that cold fare would better
content me, then the former flattering cheer did please me, being as glad it
was false, as I would have been glad if the other had been true. Many like to
these did I endure before my acquaintance with thee, not knowing any means how
to obtain the same of thee, until happily finding thee in a summers evening
at the door, I presumed to enter parlie with thee, offering my self your
servant, which had been a tweluemoneth your sworn subject, doubting of your
patience, though you seem to be a pattern of pity. How and after what order
I have since that time besought your savor, your self shall be my judge, for
I list not to rehearse my daily shifts, to show my zeal, my manyfolde
conclusions to obtain your company, my gifts to woo the servants, and my
presents to gain your good will. But to be brief, thereby to come to that I
like best, one whole year I loved thee before thou knew me, and three more
are passed since first I spoke to thee: yet then was I as near as now I am,
and now as far off as I was then. Say therefore sweet, since to stay longer
yields but little comfort, shall my suite now end with the verdit, You love me?

To which long preamble, shut up with so whot a conclusion, she no less
prepared herself to answer him, then Friar Tuck used ceremonies before he
song mattens. She cast her eyes up to Heaven, as if she had been making her
prayers to love, sighing so bitterly, as I thought her placket lace would have
broken, then to the matter thus she answered. Alas gentle sir, I must confess
I have found you kind, and you have been at a great deal more cost then I
could wish you had, your suite has been long, and my kindenes not much, nor
do I hope you e^pect more at my hands then you have had, before my friends
have granted their good will. Maidens are modest, and must not be prodigal of
their courtesy: children are bound and cannot consent without their parents
counsel: pardon me therefore I pray you, if I say I love you not, since my
father knows you not, and think not much if I desire you to leave to love
me, until my mother give me leave to like of you. At which time assure your
self I will be as ready to perform your will, as they shall be forward to
wish me that good, and thus in the mean time, I hope you will rest satisfied.
This was a shroade bone for my passionate youth to gnawe on, that being so
stricken on the head as his heart aked therewith, thought to ease his sorrow
with this reply. Ah my sweetest sweet (quoth he) Think not on thy fathers
counsel, seeing a greater friend craves his deserte, nor let me rest their
leisure without pity, that has thus long remained constant unto thee. I love
thee nor for thy friends sake, though I love them for thy sake: nor do thou
loathe me for their pleasure that lives but at thy pleasure. But sweet and
sovereign of my heart, as thy thoughts be not tied to their wills, so let not
thy love be linked so fast to their liking, as their mislike should end my life
by removing thy love. Say my goddess, and therewithal as he was proceeding,
she cut off the rest with this short answer. I beseech you sir to leave off
your courting, unless you entend some other conclusion then as yet I can
gather: for of my faith love you I will not, nor consent I dare not without my
friends give their consents first, and thereupon she thrusted through the
throng and poasted out of doors, leaving my passionate lover to say his pater
noster alone, where we will leave them.

What I thought I will tell you, and I hope you will not doubt of the matter,
for that Honesty speaks it. One years love without acquaintance, and three
years suite to be never the nearer: either he was a bad lawyer, or she a
monstrous unjust judge: but be it, both a passionate Ass, and a peevish wench
were well met. But mark his folly and her cunning, he building Castles in the
air and setting trappes in the Sun to catch the shadow of a coye queen,
was pleased by her, with wagging his bawble, and ringing his bell, while she
picked his pocket and cut his pursse. A proper piece of service of a passionate
Soldier, and a pretty sleight of a flattering Slut: I would we had more of
them, nay why wish I that, since the world is too full of such already? Yet
of my honesty, she was as fit a match for such a fool, as might be found in
the world. A great deal of fond fancy repaied with a sharp short denial,
and three years affection rewarded with an ounce of flattery, mingled with a
pound of discurtesie? a good cordial to comfort so kind a heart. Oh the
subtilty of the devil, that under the shadow of obedience, couers y^ craft of
cosonage. It is hot love that buildes on friends liking, and pestilent
affection that relies rather on the mothers love, then on the Lovers loyalty.
Such as stands so curiously on their Parents good will, having dealt so
craftily without their consent, are worthy by Honesties doom to stand in a
Cage, until either their friends good will be got, or her sweet hearts license
obtained for her delivery. And this is too good, for that the kind Ass will
too too soon release her: I think this punishment would be worse welcome unto
her, namely, that she be bound from marriage, so long as she has kept him
without his answer, which will so pinche her prodigal desire, as either she
will forswear honesty, or never commit the like knauerie. Oh there is a
company of minions which delight to have many suitors, that they may brag
amongst their mates of their diversity of lovers: they think it commendable
to have store of customers. But knew they so much as I know, they were better
to go once in a fortnight to Greenes Cunnyberries, then to have such resort
to haunt their companies.

Honesty honors the consent of Parents, but abhorres such love as is built on
their liking, if there be no remedy but that either they shall like, or thou will not love, let him have thy Fathers good will before he obtaines thy
countenance: for doubtless she that will entertain lovers, and repay their
courting with kindenes, will care as little for her friends counsel, happening
on a mate she can fancy, as the horse will for hay, that has his manger full
of prouender. And what is the cause why so many stand so curiously on their
friends consent? naught forsooth, but the presumption of a double bait, that
being sure of their countenance, they may be assured of an other dinner if
their own likes them not; or otherwise to have a hole to hide a For in, for
that her own den is not secret enough. If her Husband controlle her for any
misdemeanour, or reprove her of any dishonest behavior, then on goes her
pantoples, building the reckoning of her honesty on her fathers countenance, so
far presuming of his bounden duty for the match making, as if he kept the
keye of her huswiferie. Her long tongue vtters large speeches, standing at
defiance under the banner of her Fathers defense, and his house must be her
Castle to keep her from her Husband. This is the commodity a man shall reap
by such a match, and this is their meaning that would cover their rebellion
with the cloak of obedience. Is not he well preferred that is so well married,
and how can he mend it? Marry no way but this, that he which is mated with the
like inconvenience, to learn more wit against the next time, striving in the
mean time to please both her and her friends, since he had so much reason to
woo both her friends and her to be bound to so bad a bargain.

It is folly (quoth a wise man) to be sorrowful for things irrecouerable, and
Honesty thinks it madness to repent for deeds done, whereof her self is
culpable: can any man be so witles (especially in matter wherein wisdom is so
much required) as to do, and wish undone in a moment? yea d^ubtles, Honesty
knows such, they being the hot spurs of our age, that think every day a
twelve month until they be married, and after they are matched, every hour
seven years, until they are parted. It was hot love that will be so soon
cold, some of you will say, but I say, if it bad been hot love (as it was
burning lust) it would not have been so soon cold. For whereas y^ proverb
goes, that hot love will be soon cold, it is meant by such affection as wants
matter thereby to continue longer. For as that is the purest wood which yields
the perfectest heat, and y^ purer it is, the sooner it will be it own
destruction, leaving the sitters by without fire, unless a fresh supply be as
need requires, added; so will our hot love (whose kindled affection is come
unto it perfection, the heart being on such a blaze, as every part of it is on a
light flame) decay (as reason and nature requires) unless new faggots of
kindenes, add fresh matter for fiering, the supply thereof remoning all
suspicion of want of affection. How pure y^ love is, where there is so light a
regard of proffered kindenes, as my Fathers will or my Mothers leave must be a
Spur to my liking, let every one judge that knows love.

But ^n my opinion, as I confess that the duty we owe to our Parents, may
do much where the knowledge thereof binds to obey, so must I confirm that
love is a duty himself, b^nding to so great obedience and tying with such
strong conuaiances, as he remoues all thoughts of lower duties: I tearming al
duties lower, for that by commandment those duties must be rejected in
respect of the loving duty that a Husband shall require. Now how far my nice
Mimon was from knowing this duty, her coye demeanor and cunning behavior
has manifested. Yet how happy was my youth at l^st to be rid of such a
monster? And monster may I term her in respect of her lewd behavior; for
was it not much better that her inconstancy should have been known before he
was fast linked unto her, then it should have been found when it had been
incurable? Doubtless it was a good cause he had to double his orisons unto love,
for so lovingly preserving him from so pestilent a prittie-bird, I should have
said pricking-burre, or paultry bauble.

But to come to my second couple, which were seated opposite to these in an
other corner, being a lusty widdower that was courting a gallant wench, both
of them being highly beholding to nature for her liberal skill in their
making, which were thus placed. She was set down ouerlooked by him standing
before her, having ^ne of his hands leaning on her lap, and the other resting
on the w^l, having thereby (as I guess) the more liberty to use his pleasure,
in bestowing kind kisses and loving favors: so he wa^ seated, and thus he
began to sue. Fair Maid (quoth he) I know my experience to be greater then
your practice, for that I have tried, rules me by reason: having loved and
lived with my love, until by the fates I was bere^ued of that fruit, so well
liked I of my last loss, as my former good hap breeds an assured hope of the
like good fortune, that being a help to further my will, and a mean to make a
now choice: which change, what good it shall yield, your self shall challenge,
whose good report has bound me to commence my deserts, to receive their
censure by your doom. To boast what I am were frinelous, for that your friends
are already privy to my estate, and to say how well I love you were booteles,
for that women love to try ere they trust, yet unless I should say more then I
have said, I should seem to say nothing: though to say more then is spoken
already were ^eerely foolish For thus stands the case, I have made choice of
you for my second wife, and have already your friends good will, there restes
therefore nothing but a confirmation of your duty, in agreeing to that they
have confirmed: thus conuning to a full point, he closed up his period with a
brace of smirking kisses, which wrought with his Lover, as a strong pyll does
with a sore sick patient: namely, they forced her to answer him thus
threwdely. The assurance of your good fortune Sir, has made you highly
beholden to her deity, that dancing in the morris of good matches, you
should be led by her to so good hap: but belike it was over good to continue
long, either her kindenes being ouermatched with your inconstancy, or your
good hap over ruled by fortunes cruelty: They ever change and lightly never
but for the worse: which the rather seems so unto me, by the sure knowledge I
have of your second choice, that is so far unequal to your reported first
match, as I know your liking would not remain long, or my misliking would come
too too soon; because I am not able to follow what you^ first wife has
performed, and you will be unwilling to bear with the wants your second choice
must be enriched with. But peradventure I mistake your meaning, for where as I
think you sue to have me to your second wife, you s^eke but to have my good
will to live with my freende, (...) good s^r my duty (as you say) must not
gainsay their pleasure, nor will I for that matter, but with all my heart if you
have their license for your board, have my good will to obtain your bed there
also, for their house is at their own commandment. Then doubt I not (replied
he) to have you for my bedfellow. But that doubt I (answered she) for that I
know the contrary. Why dare you (quoth he) to disobay your Fathers
commandment? No (said she) so it be for my commodity. It shall be both for
your profit and prefe^ment. Make me to believe that (quoth she) and then
peradventure it may be a bargain. Why woman (said he) I deserve your better.
Take her (answered she) and I will not be matched to your inferior. Why then I
see you do scant love me? I use it not (quoth she) and yet I swear I will
mock you, rather then marry with you. With which being highly displeased, he
bestowed three or four crabbed terms, being liueries of his choleric long
tongue, and so departed.

A shame go with him, thought Honesty, whatsoever she thought, and with all
such Lovers; lovers? with a halter, lubbers I may better term them. What
monstrous matches are such as are shuffled up after the self same order?
Suppose she had been fearful and durst not to have resisted the receipt of
what she lothed, imagine she had been foolish and could not have judged of
affection? think she had been forward, and would have been glad of any one?
alas poor wretch, I pity the supposition, what should I have said to the
confirmation? I know assuredly she should have sighed whatsoever I had said,
and mourning should have been her companion, what ere had been my
communication; he would have daunst with her portion, while she had drooped
through want of affection; he would have loathed her company, for that she was
not a daily commodity; her life should have been like the hacknies that are at
every man's commandment for the hire, and her joy as momentary as the
flourishing green grass in July. Pitifully should she have lived, punished by
him without pity, and this is my reason of the possibility; for that it is
most likely he loved her not, and how well any body use them they love not, let
them speak that suspect not. Now that he loved her not, may be proved both by
his kind of wrong, careleslye suing unto her, peremptorily usurping her
Fathers authority, which was a band to lie her to obedience, though a bad
mean to obtain her courtesy. For affection is not to be limited, nor love to
be compelled, but co^trarily, hatred follows fear, and fear forerunnes
mislike, and how we love those we regard not, judge they that woo and obtain
not? But this custom is too common and over cruel, namely, a wooing of
friends, and a constraint of love, I would not say, compelling, but for fear
it should have been taken for compelling. Were Honesty a Iust^^e, they should
either lie in the stocks a fortnight, or marry her I would match him with,
which should seek a wife after this order. I think verily he would rather
stay his stint by the heels, then be bound to the other inconvenience; and yet
he could find in his heart to bind another to y^ bad bargain. This is
charity, yea and never a whit of honesty, being so far from civility, as
the Millers craft is from true dealing. Now truly truly, to deal as we would
be dealt with, is sent to the hedge a begging, and neighbourly love is made a
hacknie, being so worn to the bones with seeking a good Master, as his skin
will hang on the bush shortly.

I have heard a report of a passing kind man, that complained of his wife at
a Sessions, for pissing a pot full, judging thereby she was dishonest, and that
same man shortly after burying his wise, sued to a maid, after the manner
aforesaid: he had obtained her friends good will, and were at a point for the
Maidens love, yet on a time she was troubled with the head-ake, at his being
with her, whereof he so misliked, as in the morning he went to the Physicians
to have their opinions to what disease it could turn, and upon their report
left her. I am assured I have erred in no point, unless I have mistook the
last, putting the Physicians opinion in the room of his own bad meaning; it
was no disease indeed that misliked or misled him, but it was of the Fathers
pursse, not of the Daughters head: well she was well provided for in missing of
him, and if he sped any thing the better, let him boast of it, but Honesty can
judge no better of the remnant of his companions, then his action gives the
verdict of him, which is as bad as may be.

But to another that happened on one that had the too thank, with whom he would
not matry for fear the hollownesse of her tooth should corrupt her bre^th, and
so annoye his cold stomach. It was cold indeed, and I would such stomachs
might be heated with read hot gold, as cheerful as scalding lead. Well to
a third, he liked her parents well, for that they were honest and godly, and as
well of the maiden, because she seemed modest: to be breef, he could find no
saulte in either of them, only his fear was that the Daughter would be
somewhat shrewish, for that she had a long nose, and thereupon gave her over.
If her nose had been long enough, I think ^he might have smelt a knave, but I
am assured she knew^ a churl, and so let her claim him wheresoever she sees
him. Yet one more of the same stamp, and so we will leave them. This was a
wooer in grain, who had gone so far, as they were at next door to he asked in
the Church. The wedding apparel was bought, the day appointed, yea and I may
tell you, many of y^ guess bid, only there was no assurance, for that he
abhorred: but it fortuned that before the day there dyed a rich man that left a
welthie widow, to whom he made so secret love, as he won her good will
within a fortnight after the death of his predecessor: well, notwithstanding
to save his cou^terfeit credit, and preserve his hypocritical honesty, he
resorted daily to his old sweet heart, with whom upon some small reason he fell
at ods, using her so unkindly in speeches, as he drew tears for sorrow. Glad
of this, though turning his earnest into jest, he called her unto him, in the
presence of many of her Fathers servants, then swearing that if the took him
not about the neck and kissed him, he would never marry with her as long as he
lived. Which y^ young Gentlewoman refused to do, partly for that he had
injured her highly, but y^ rather least such fondnes should seem immodestie to
the servants: upon whose denial, in a great fume he slung forth of the doors,
and in a rage as if of spite, within one fortnight after he matched with the
widdowe aforesaid. But to tell you what a life she lead with him, were to hunt
from the purpose, yet assure your self it was so bad, as y^ world judged this
maid never better blessed then in not being bestowed ne cast away upon him.

Such and of the same sort are these money-woers, that sue first to the Father
to save labor, for speed they will, and if they miss in one place, they
know another where they will practice. And how can it be judged otherwise,
seeing their meaning in using that mean importes no less: for think they, if
I have the Fathers good will, the daughter will be easily won, and if I
miss of his, I save that time and labor, in suing to the maid, besides the
gifts I should bestow. Ha ha, I have him by sent, and what think you of him?
in faith no otherwise then Honesty believes. You smell a Fox, I and a rank
one too, whose breach is so stainde with this gilding matter, as it may easily
be judged what muck he loves. Alas good hearts, that are coupled with such
bad minds, this is love? true, but what love? covetous love, hateful
dissimulation, hipocriticall affection, and what not that is contrary to the
sweet sovereign love, which sues for kisses and not for co^ne, which craves
the heart and nothing e^se; for with it al she has is his, and he that will
look for more, I would he had a halter, and he shall not want it in hell,
howsoever he speedes here. Fie fie, marriages for the most part are at this day
so made, as look how the butcher bies his cattle, so will men sell their
children. He that bids most shall speed soonest, and so he has money, we care
not a fart for his honesty. Well it has not been so, and I hope it will not be
long so, and I will assure you, loves commonwealth will never flourish until it
be otherwise. Why, it is a common practice to ask the father what he will
give with his child, and what is that differing from cheapening an Ore? And it
is as common, that if she be fat, it is a bargain, but if lean, she must stay
another customer. Out alas what love is this, in faith if I might have sped
better in another place, come to notice after I have bought your daughter, she
shall pay for it, or I will make dice on her bones. Apittifull partnership,
where there is no greater love, and how can but one of them be undone? He will
use her ill, because he loves her not, and she cannot love him for not using
her well; for whom we fear we hate, and what then? He will practice her
end, she will wish his death, and while they live together, it will be so full
of heart breakings through quarrels and contentions, as woe to them both, I and
to the third too, that was so forward to make so bad a match. But howsoever
they two speed, I am assured she will speed worse, as for her husband, he
will not want ercuses to defend his knauerie, and her Father must believe him,
because of her former credit given unto him; so that contented she must be, how
discontented so ever she lives, and bear it she must, until her heart break,
which happy day must end her misery, and set my crafty wooer at liberty.

Thus much for my second corner, and now to my third couple, which were ciuilly
seated on a benche together, they being the one a batcheler, and the other a
widdowe, which was wooed by him after this like order. It were folly forseeth
(quoth he) to use circumstances, since you are so well acquainted with the like
practice: but to leave them and come to the matter, which is (as I think) the
best mean to please us both, you shall understand that upon the good report
your honest life has deserved, I have conceived so good liking of you, as I
should think my self happy, if I should speed no worsse. I thank you
(answered she) for your good will: but surely Sir, I think you have deceived
your self. For peradventure you imagine, or it has been untruly reported,
that I am the woman, which indeed I am not, namely ritche, for that my
deceased husband made some show to the world, but if that be your thought, I
assure you, you are deceived. You mistake my meaning (replied he) for it is no
such matter; I respect not so much your wealth, as I do your matronlike
modesty, my self is young, and I have a trade, and am, I thank God, of my
self able to maintain a woman. But I do rather desire to match with your
like then with a younger, for that you know better, both what belongs to a
man, as also to use thriftely what I get. And moreover my self is not so
young, but that I am meeter to match with a widd^we then to marry with a
maid, and would be most glad, if it might be my good hap to speed with you.
I cannot tell (quoth she) what your good speed may be; I know you not, and
therefore I hope you will give me leave to enquire of you, which done I will
send you your answer by such a day, in the mean time I wish you well.

I mary, Honesty, and what then? no marry these, forth she went to her broker
to will him to search after his substance, using that manner which usurers can
best disclose, which is their practice in putting forth their money. This was a
passing commodity, for what better then a ritche widdowe? but that foolish
inquiry spoiled all: had she thankt him heartily, desired farther liberty,
and had made search into his estate secretly, she had showed her self the
wiser: but so bluntly to say, give me leave to enquire of you, showed as bad
bringing up, as might be possible. But tut, I like her the better, because she
could not dissemble, for she alas did but follow the common trade, doing with
the ape, but what she had seen done before her. She had heard her husband
instruct his prentices to make a profit, and she thought she might try the
same for her own good. I would she and others knew what was good for them,
they would then rather respect the man then money. But this covetousness spoils
all, though I would I had more, is too much in our mouths, for followed she
not the greedy desire of adding muck to much? might she not as well have
lived with this man, that had a trade as good, yea much better then her
husbands was, as she did before with him? She had no children, suppose she
had, they were provided for well, and what greater charge would this have
brought? he had a care to live, or else he would have sought to love without
respect; for who knows not that she is as able to satisfy a man's desire, that
has little, as she that has much, if we only regard pleasure? Take this on
Hone^^ies credit, that he that buildes his love on such reason, as having
little, he will chose one that has somewhat, will prove a better match unto
thee, then him that brings mountains. Beware when lou^ is vpholden with
maintenance, if the heart remembers, I am thus much beholden unto her, she
loved me or else she would never have matched with me, she made me a man,
being before worse then nothing, how much better might she have done, if she
had not been led with affection, and such like: It will also remember the
duty this kindness requires, even like for like, least the worse cry shanie
of him. How happy should parents be, were this in their rememb^^nce at their
mariges making? how blessed should their children be, if the like practices
were used? and what a flourishing commonwealth would that be, where equality of
birth (which always should be regarded specially on the man's side) should be
linked to abundance, whereby the number of gentle beggars should be decreased,
and the misgouernement of wealth will be avoided. One man should not have his
cofersful, and twenty want it that better deserve it. How many able men should
we have (if this were used) to serve and set forth men for the princes service?
where now I am but one man, and I am bound but to my stint, to find one man's
charge, though I have five men's livings. But no more, this is too serious for
Honesty, and I marvel how I fell into this vain, since I studied to be
pleasant. What, think you, did my widdowe after her search of inquiry, for
you must think that the b^tcheler longed for his answer? Marry though she was
not a fore in her speeches, yet she proved no less in her doing, for now
she kept her house as closely as he does his hold craftily. She mislikt of
the man, for what cause guess you, if you knew as much as I know, you would
swear, not for lack of honesty, or because he was vnthristie. But will you
know why? he had not the hundreds lying by him, as the report went she had
left her, and therefore she thought it needeles any one should lose so much
labor, as to fulfill her promise in carrying his answer. Yet if that were
all, it were well, I and it had been well for him (for the saving of shoo
lether) if she would have spoken with him at his coming to fetch it: But my
widdowe would not be within, or else she was busy: and thus was his kindenes
requited. Now ^^e of the devil, is this a meet reward for affection, nay
suppose it be no more, the good will was it well requited? Me thinks that if
his dog had come, h^e deserved better entertainment then to have been beaten
away, and she had dealt better if she had sent himself away with a crabbed
answer, then so vn^anne^ly to use him by sleeueles ercuses. And well it were
if she had no more fellows, but out upon them, there are too many such, whose
coye nicenes e^presse their mischievous fondness, for speak they will with any
man that come, unless a Herald fore runs the sewtor.

In my opinion, and it shall be grounded upon reason, such widows are
worthy to sit while their breeches grow to their seats, as refuse to answer
all conuners of what degree soever, and because I promised you reason, th^^
shall be it. Who knows not that whosoever su^s for the like match, wins a
thousand incombrances with his good speed, for he that knows not that care
shall be mingled with his best contentment, shall fall into a pit before he
beware of it. And who, were it not for his souls health, would embrace such an
inconvenience for a little commodity? I and the best marriage, is but a little
commodity, in respect of the continual carking that comes with it. If then,
as who says it is otherwise, a man makes so great suite for so small hearts
ease (respecting the earthly pleasure) deserves not he a good countenance, or
at least a welcome that longs for so bad a bargain? In my judgment, and it
shall ^umpe with mine opinion, that woman ^^ much more beholden to the man that
would match with her, then to her parents that have brought her up; for they
did what ere they did, of duty, and this does what might be undone of mere
devotion. Why, think the best you can, think for your selves, suppose one
that has nothing comes to crave your love, did he only respect your wealth
without his own welfare (and he that thinks to have welfare without dealing
well with you, he reckens without his hostess, and shall find a new bil of
charges) had he not much better to hazsurd the taking of a purse by the high
way? Yes doubtless, for were he by that means brought unto misery, he might
have death at his call, to rid him from extremity: but now being grieved
incessantly, he may seek for death, but meet with the devil, hope for an
end, but feel the want of it continually. Yet come we to one further point,
imagine some men that be ouer-unruly, desire to have access into your
company, if you know them for such companions, I would hold you unwise to
admit them into your presence, but shall your heart but say, I suspect without
trial, you cannot out-runne the crime of want of descretion. It is best
therefore, you that fear such resort, to harbor your selves, during the time
of the heat of the market in such places, as the countenances of your
protectors shall prevent suspect, and disparage the practice of such indecent
behavior; or otherwise to appropriate unto your houses such helps as shall
be likely to forestall the like mischief. That every one may be answered is
Hone^^ies meaning, for unless they be, they have not their due, nor do ^ou
show your selves to de enriched with that cur^esie, which wi^dowes descretion
does challenge. For let me tell you, and ensure as many as know it not, that
a man shall find more pleasure in lying in the camp, being daily threatened
with the bullets of his enemy, then in lodging with a wise, unless his wisdom
be the greater. And I know you look for my reason, then for this cause, for
that their inconstancy breeds more fear then the shot brings hurt, and their
tender heart will crave more government to content them, then the other will
ask forecast to prevent the danger they bring with them. For a steel coat
resistes the harm of a musket, but what garment shall out stand her threatening
of the horn? That man amongst Soldiers is counted accursed, that is stricken
with a great shot, and that husband thrice blessed among married men, that is not
continually wounded with some misdemeanor, or other, he shall epsy in his
wife? well, I say no more, because I am a batcheler: but Honesty must speak
the truth, or shame will follow him.

It is wisdom to look before lepping, but extreme folly to stand upon
nothing: he or she that makes many doubts, shall never want care, and she
will il rule a charge that cannot charm a knave. Speak the devil fair and he
will be satisfied, and what woman knows not how to flatter? It is good to
know vice, that we may shun that evil, and as good to try the honesty of
wooers, that you may not speed the worse. You shall often find a kings heart
clad in a threadbare coat, and a senators wisdom harbored in a youthful
head: virtue goes not by birth, nor descretion by years, for there are old
fools, and young councellers, counterfeit knaves and crabbed churles, the one
being clad in a lambs skin, and the other kept warm with Fox furre. Nature
makes, but fortune clothes, a rich knave therefore may march in the habit of a
true meaning gentleman, when poor Honesty must go as he is able, be it in a
mouldie cassock. I have heard it credibly reported, that there was a rich
widdowe fell here in England, which had left her living enough to maintain a
younger brother, and unto her did resort such an one, as had not sildome flung
out at a booty, nor would have cared much if it had been his father, so he had
met him in a convenient place. This young gentleman (yet not ver^ ^oung, for he
was about forty) came unto this widdowe, to crave her good will, using as
speedy terms as he desired quick speed. He told her his name, so well
known throughout the country for a shifting liver, as he spoke no sooner then
he was well known unto her. Whom she used courteously, answering him after
this order. I hope gentle sir (quoth she) you will give me leave to answer you
as speedely as you bluntly ask the question: And with all my heart (replied
he,) for that is my desire. Then assure you thus much (said she) that if there
were no more men in the world besides your self, I would not marry with you.
A short and sower answer (quoth he) yet let me assure you, that only such an
one (naming himself) will have you, and so took his leave, departing in as
good order, as she had in kind manner used him. Shortly after at a meeting
with many of his companions, he craved their aid, finding them as forward to
perform any thing he should require, as he would wish. Unto whom he showed
his whole intention, the rather desiring their helps, for that they had been
partners with him in as great hazards, well agreed upon the match, they rode
toward the widows house, coming thither in the evening about supper-time,
when it was very dark, whereby their company could not be descried. They
knockte at the gate, and was answered by the porter, that being asked who was
within, certified them according to his knowledge. Him they so hampered, as
gagde he was and bound, being laid forth of the way, which done, they passed
further, entering the hall with their drawn swords, where they found all the
servants at Supper. They had no weapons near them but bones, being unmeet
instruements to resist armed men; and dogs they were not to be won by such
baits. Therefore easily one by one they were bound and laid on a heap, the
wooer in the mean time with two of his mates, being in the Parlor with the
widdowe that was guarded with two suitors, being Gentlemen of account in that
Country; he unmasked hims^^fe, for they had al visards, and told the widow he
was come for her: at what time one of them grew choleric, and I think it was
he that was likest to have sped best, for he was placed on the benche nearest
to her heart, and drew his poyniard, the best weapon he had at that instant,
making as if he meant to darte the same; but upon better consideration had, be
put up his Dagger, and was contented to be hound with his fellow. All of them
being bound they got ye Widow forth, and bound her with a towel behind one
of them, having before their departure hid all the Saddles and turned forth the
Horses out from y^ house. Over a long plain they rode so through a wood, where
being out of greatest danger, he himself the wooer got up before the widdowe,
entreating her to consider of their estates, not so much he himself respecting
his own weal, as he regarded his friends welfare, whom he had drawn into
that desperate action. But it was all in vain, for agre^ she would not, she
swear rather to dye then to consent, which seemed little to remedy his
affection. Well, in short time they were come to a place prepared for y^ nonce,
where they found a good fire with a Parson, and other good company, assembled
together about the same matter. It was a wonderful rainie evening, so that all
of them were thoroughly wet, but there she wanted nothing she could desire, nor
spared he kind words to win her good will, which was so long in granting,
as before the obtaining of it, Hue and cry was followed into that Town.
Whereof he having notice, came to her with his last hope, w^lling her, that as
she was a woman, either then or never to consent to the saving of all their
lives. When she seeing no remedy, but either she must relent or they repent it:
will you (quoth she) be good to my boy Tom? for she had one only child called
Thomas. To say I would (replied he) in this extremity, might be said to be
but flattery, but assure thy self I will, and much better then I will boast
on: upon which agreement, they were forthwith married. Soon after he called
her aside, and told her she was now his wife, whose credit was her good
regard, we shall, I know (quoth he) be brought for this before ye counsel, at
which time unless you use y^ matter thus cunninglye as to affirm this was
your own practice, to show your love, and shun a bad report, we shall
notwithstanding smart for it. Which she promised to do, and did indeed no
less, all them being shortly after apprehended and brought up to answer it at
the counsel Table, where she told so good a tale for him and his fellows to
the effect aforesaid, as the fault was remitted and they discharged. Now that
you may understand how well he requited this her kindness, she lived with him a
long time, and yet less then a dosen years, and dying left this good report
of his usage toward her: namely, that never woman lived with a more kind man
then she had found him, with other such probable tokens of the certainty
thereof, as a Country can witness the same. Him self lived not long after her,
at his death leaving her son Thomas five hundred pounds by the year, over
and above his own Fathers living, which he himself had purchased by his good
husbandry.

What say you to this unthrift? was not she put to a shrewde trial? she was
and it proved passing well. Wherefore then should younger brothers be rejected, or
why they that have little be unregarded? surely because the heart is covetous
and mistrustfull, and women's minds are aspiring being never contented. They so
much thirste after preferment, as often they ouer-leape amendment, and iumpe
just into a worser predicament.

Many look so long for abundance of mucke, as as they fall into a quagmire of
miseries, having silver to look on, though wanting money to supply many wants,
having a fair show and a shrewde keeper, one that has more then enough, and
yet will not part with any thing: Honest^e knows many of these, and they feel
more then I can tell you. Who goes for the most part worse shod then the
Shoomakers child, and who has less mone^ in her pursse then she whose
Husband has most in his chest? But for that I am some what straied out of my
way, I will return to my first widdowe before my shoes be quite worn: My
forenamed Bacheler that neither by himself or his friends, could speak with
her to know her answer, devised this conclusion, to send her a Letter by a
friend, not so much for the matter there in set down, as that y^ might be a
mean to entice her to be spoken with, which indeed^ proved to some purpose.
For to the Messenger she came, and after notice given from whom the Letter was
sent, gods Lord (quoth she) did not my friend give him his answer? No, replied
the Messenger, for he craves no more by this Letter. Surely (quoth she) I
thank him for his good will, but I am not minded that way. What way (replied
he) not to marry? Yes said she, but not with one so young. Now you shall
understand her simple excuse, cleanly made, for in a man's judgment it would
not be thought there was much difference between their ages. And as it was
gathered after, she meant one way, and the Messenger took it an other, for she
meant young in substance, though he understood it for years: as after further
talk she plainly expressed. What shall Honesty say more of her? in sooth
nothing but to pray either for the amendment of her and her companions, or
else that this punishment may be inflicted upon them: that is to say, that they
may be so haunted until they deal better, as they may not peep forth of
their houses, without as much wondermen as the Owl has that flies in the day
time. And do they deserve less, that make fools? it has been a fustie
saying, Qui moccat moccabitur, and until that prove true by practice, as i^
falls out true often vnlookte for, we that are to speed shall never find
better. If all men will agree to Honesty, we will keep a Cronicle of such
wenches, my self will be speak the registreship, and though it be no great
office, yet it may do much good. But now to a fourth kind.

Which were a thrise-made, not a threed-bare Widdower, and a five times left
Widdowe, both of them being so much in Fortunes books, as they were endowed
with the thousands. They soon agreed upon the matter, and within a short time
were married, unto whose house having heard them boast of their substance, I
often resorted to see what good cheer they kept, I was twice there together in
Christmas time, but never could see hot meat, yet good store of cold by
reason they had had four days before many guests. But since the holly days
hoping for hetter fare, I found him and she set at a couple of red. Herring,
and a slice of barrel butter, cold fare as I thought for a tuesday supper.
Alas how were the servants dieted, when they had no better? I would have
thought ye fault to have been in her, until she said unto me, that she was
sorrye she had no better fare for Honesty; when the old Churl replied, hold
thee content wife, he is welcome, I thank God I have this for him. I thank
your worship said I, though I thought, I beshrewe the Churles heart. But there
of force must I lodge too, for that I had over far home, and he that had
fed me so hungerly, had found talk enough to keep me with him till
midnight. I must confess I lay better then I had supped, lodgde in the next
Chamber to themselves, there being nothing but a thin wall between us. After
my first sleep I heard them two very loud, and though I did not greatly
desire to be a partaker of their secret, yet I could not choose unless I had
been either naturally or artificially deaf. They were at so hot words, as
he cried, out upon thee old beggarly whore, with other most shameful terms,
she thereby being forced thus to complain. Alas that ever I was borne to see
your face, I was no beggar when I met with ^ou, for I brought with me as good
as twenty thousand pounds, which now being at your disposition, you deal thus
crabbedly with me, meeting together in respect but yesterday: what hope rests
to me of the end, seeing the beginning is so bad? you diet me with hardmeat,
and cheer me with crabbed usage, I can neither have a penny in my pursse, nor a
good shoe to my foot. I grieve to hear my servants repine thereat, though I
cannot amend it, and for that I tell you of it which may redress it, thus you
revile me. Hold thy peace old whore (quoth he) or I will make thee, if they
like it not, let them mend theirselues, and either charm your tongue or I will
clapperclaw your bones: with which cooling card, she was glad to be quiet, as
I guess, for I could bear no more of her at that time.

Now Honesty having leisure to think of what he had heard, still harpt of y^
twenty thousand pounds, which as I thought, was meeter to have made a King,
then to have pleased a churl, with y^ I condemned his cruelty, and pitied her
chance, so long thinking on her hard fortune, as I fell a sleep, taking up
the remnant of my mornings nap. Well, before I rose my old carle was up, and
before I was ready gone ahroad, when suddenly coming forth of my lodging,
forced to pass through his Chamber, I found the good old woman shedding
tears so abundantly, as I could not but grieve for company. But seeing me,
she rowzed up her self and would have shadowed her discontent, yet at last
assured I had heard the ^arre, she said she was sorry I had been disquieted,
the which I excused, saying, I was more grieved for her then for my
disquieting, for had that been the worst, Honesty has been far worse
troubled. Ah good sir (quoth she) this is their fortune that are covetous, for
I had enough left me to have lived like a woman, if I could have been so
contented: but aiming at dignity has been my destruction, and longing after
promotion has brought me to this misery: my last Husband was accounted a good
householder, and companion to the best in the parish, but he being gone, and my
hope to become a Lady, has led me to this ill bargain. Ah gentle Honesty,
I was no mean woman when I met with him, but he thinks, for that I have
turned my Cloth to silk, he has made me happy. How happy had I been, if I
had never seen him, but too late it is to wish, and folly to complain, for
that it was my own choice that has matched my self with such a churl. He
clothes me in gay coats for his own credit, but with them cloyes me with
multitudes of discontentments: abroad he is gone, and perchance I shall not
see him till bed time, nor are such tricks plaide seldom, when he leaves
nothing, what need soever we should have of any thing, but what the household
provision is, the best being no better the^ your yesternights fare. If he
brings any body home with him, we must run to the Cooks to save fiering, nor
can a bit of bread be eaten without an account given to him, he scarcheth every
corner, ^ chides for every candles end he finds misplaced, and if perchance
he hap on a crust, he will make as much stir as if it were the loss of a
Cow: he will pry into the grease pot, and hunt after the Tappe droppings, to
be brief, the cream pot should be ouerlooked by him every day once at the
least, and his fiering surueied as often, a Chief cannot be cut without his
leave, nor a stick be burned without grutching. Nor do I so much grieve at
this in respect of my self, as for that my servants want their due, their want
being more irksome unto me, then this scant: for what will they let to
report, and who can blame them? or who will stay in such an house, and not
without reason? so that daily discredit is heaped on us and continual care for
looking after new servants never from us. This is my greatest heart break, and
my suit to have this redressed is our only breake-peace. He sumes when I
inform him of what I have heard, and stampes when I tell him it is not well,
nor will I tell thee all, for that this is too much, nor should thou have
known of thus much for me, except his crabbednes had made the path. But hark
he is come in, for the passion of God hide thy self, for if he should know
thou were not gone, he will mistrust us, and smart I shall for us both.

Now the Devil break his neck, or God amend him, thought I, yet for fear of
her harm I was content to be locked up by her into a closet, where I was
co^straind to stay while y^ teeth chattered in my head, before we could be rid
of him. W^ll, at last by good fortune a companion of his fetched him forth to
dinner, who being gone, I was let forth, an extraordinary fire being made for
my welcome down; and to make me a mends, she had sent a bracelet she had, of
which he knew not, to paune, providing so good fare for my Dinner, as I was not
at better all the Christmas. But while we were eating of it, our mirth could
not be much, her fear was so great of his coming home, but we making as quick
speed as our teeth would let us, after we had done I thanked her, taking my
leave and departing. Well, my back was scarce turnde, when she bid her men and
maids to bestirre them that the kitchen might be dressed up and the remnant of
our Christmas fire to be quenched and cast into the privy, least his search
should find out the brandes, and that breed no little disquietnes to them
all. Alas poor wretch thought I, how many servants are there which live at
more ease and stand in less awe then thou do? Is this a wives protion?
doubtless no, but a just plague for covetousness, for they which cannot use a
benefit when they have it to a good purpose, shall want it when they would,
and seek it when they cannot find it. Covetousness shall not escape hell, for
how far I pray you was she from it? her good days died with her matching
with him, and if there be any purgatory between us and hell, she was in it,
and thereby at the next door to that dungeon. I would but all covetous minds
were plagued but with a dram of the like discontent, I would have theirs but
a seauen-nights punishment, whereas she must endure peradventure seven years
torment. Honesty thinks such a mess of misery would bring them to a banquet
of happiness at their delivery from that wretchedness. If many of our coye dames
that cannot be content with any thing, and are so curious, as daily dainties
seem nothing unto them, were but pincht a while with her morselles, I am
persuaded it would save their husbands a great deal of charges in their diet
thence after, and would make their servants much happier, by being freed from
much needeles labor. Their houses would be pulled down, and the delight of
their curious poked ruffes would be set aside, they would not respect ye
superfluous dishes they use, nor regard their superstitious curiosity in
rubbing y^ ^^owres of their houses: what should I say more? they would use
obedience toward their Husbands more, and brawling with their servants less,
they would think of their own happy lives and pity others; they would
seek to please, and be more easily pleased; they would live contentedly, and
be thankful for so great prosperity.

The fish that has b^^ne stricken with the hook, fears the bait; the child
that has burnte his fingers, dreades the candle; the horse that has been
punished with the spur, suspects the wagging of the heel, and the
apprehended thief, begins to think on the halter. What delight brings sweet
things unto them that never tasted of sharp sauce? or what an indifferent
opinion carry they of prosperity, that have never been in misery? The
vnridden Colte bites the snaffle while the old horse is glad to play with the
bit, and they that are used to shackles, wear the^ without much annoiance: for
that it is use that gets experience, and experience that brings profit. When a
cursed Cow has short horns, harm is less suspected, and if a crabbed cur be
musled there can be no danger. There are both baits to entice, and bobbes to
make to forbear: allurements to win, and corrections to drive away; and he
that thought this to be needful, knows best to use it, which happens always
to unbridled nouices: once good speed eggs us to a second adventure, and if
twice a thief has escaped the halter, he will never leave until he purchase
tiborne. My last Husband was so good, makes some so desirous of a second, as
their hasty bargain bringes over late repentance. Like will to like, quoth
the Devil to the Collier, and some will never be satisfied until their
mouths be filled with Clay. He that has enough seeks for more, and so I
carry a great countenance I care not how I am beloved. Indeed what cannot
money do that will buy any thing, and yet honesty will purchase that which
all the muck in the world cannot compass, namely a good report for ever. Who
knows not that the couetons man cannot line quietly, and why will we not know
that the aspiring mind shall be brought low? The love of your wealth is in
your own hands, but the key of your wits kept by a higher guide. You may
chose a rich man and hunt after an honest (yet riches and honesty go
sildome together) but to say it shall be for your weal must crave another
leave. He that gives all things can give thee both, and if thou will taste of
his liberality, built on his charity, suspect not and speed well, fear and
speed ill, let therefore all thy care be built on his kindenes, and thou will
be better contented with a kind beggar then a crabbed churl. To take heed by
another man's ha^me is a loving warning, but if thou will needs try, take the
hazard. When our neighbors house is on s^er, we have need to bestirre us, and
he that sits still at such an e^tremetie, is worthy to taste of the like
misery. To look ere we lep is good counsel, yet to look heartily and lep
faintly, makes many to fall into a ditch dangerously, well a word to a wise man
is enough, and there are few women but have store of wit, if they add
discretion unto it. Honesty therefore wishes them to use it so well as they
never speed ill.

A sift forte now follows, which was a couple standing in the midst of the
company, both of them being of equal years. He was a young civil gentleman,
no less proper then he seemed wise, his discreet government beautifying
both; but she, though she had wit al will and was very proper, yet lacked she
the other step to wisdom, namely discreetenes in her behauior. Her immodest
fondnes gave suspect of uncivil lightness, so that her ouerforwardnes seemed to
ouerlay her lovers affection. She would hang about his neck before all that
company, as a jack of Napes does sitting on the bear herds shoulder, and
kiss as openly as a dog scombers carelessly. She followed him at heels like a
tantinie pigge, and hong about him as if pinned to his slieue. He could not
stir without her company, nor scarce go to make water, but she would awaite
on him. Thus much did she not let to do openly, and therefore I had the more
desire to see how she spent her time secretly: which was as contrary as might
be, for whereas she would be mad merry in his company, in his absence she
would be as mad melancholy. She then would sit in a corner, as a dog does
that is crept into a hole, h^uing done a shroude turn, wetting her couch with
tears for the lack of her sweet heart, as a child does the bed for want of a
chamber pot. But being in a good vain, she would pen passionate sonnets, and
in that humor did I once take her when she had newly finished this amorous
dittie.

SAd is the time while my dear love is absent:
Eise wail my miss and tongue bewailes him wanting:
Heart bleedeth tears that do increase my torment,
And yields forth sighs which set it self a panting,
While he is absent, such is my delight
As is the sailors in a stormy night.
If I chance sing, with sighs my songs be graced,
And in my tunes my groans my baces be:
Grievous complaints are for the trebles placed:
The means be tears, the tennor misery.
Four parts I bear and want the fifte alone,
Which is my joy that with my love is gone.
When I should speak, my tongue forgets it talking:
When I should write, my fingers are b^nommed:
When I should go, my feet have lost their walking,
And every part is dead of sense bereaved.
Nor can I tell what is the cause of this,
Excep^ because my heart with him gone is.
Thus days are nights to me while he is wanting,
And meriest songs are plaintes for joy departed:
My mirth is moan, my sorrow succor wanting,
And senses gone my body have vnharted.
So that I live alive as being dead,
And by his absence sole, this death is bread.
After the selfsame order spends she her well spent time, yielding such
bitter sighs, while she is setting down the like passions as a horse does
hearty neeses, that is troubled with an extreme cold. Then pausing a while on
that she has done, weighing the estate of her lamentable case, she castes her
self upon her bed, b^ea^hing against the fates the rancor of her heart after
(...) ^anner. Unjust and cruel sisters, that have prol^ng^^ my days to endure
this misery; is this the force of your ^^cree, to decrease my joy by
increasing my d^yes? Have you drawn to this length the thread of ^^ life, now
to cut the same with so sharp an edge-to^le? Cruel and unkind are ye so
crabbedly to deal with a poor virgin, suffering me to live to endure this
cruelty. There making a full point, would she lie gasping as if she were
giving up the Ghost, till at length having gathered wind, she would thus
begin to murmur against Fortune. Unconstant dame, so much delighting in
mutabilitie, as all thy joy is to alter chances. How wavering is thy wheel,
and how uncertain thy favors, the one still turning, and the other never
remaining long where so ere they are bestowed? Was this the pity of your
heart, to set down so unmerciful a doom, as I should always rest unhappy?
You whirle your wheel about to please your self with the turning, tossing
thereby unto me one misery upon another: then casing me of that burden, to
make the next seem more displeasing unto me, thou shows me my hearts joy, and
sets me on the top of delight to behold the difference between weal and woe.
But from thence thou throwest me as quickly down, as I was joyfully seated,
letting thy wheel rest as ouerlong, while I lie in the dungeon of vnceasing
pain, as it did too too little stay at the height of my pleasure. Thou gives
me kind words, and cruel fare, happy sightes and horrible heart-akes, thou
shows me rest and sees me with trouble, setting me at the table of daiuties,
yet binding my hands least I should touch them, so far am I from tasting of
their sweetness. Unkind and unconstant fortune, what chance had m^nkinde to be
charmed to thy beck, and wherein are we more unfortunate, then in being forced
to obey fortune? To which interrogation, her self would answer with a flat
mad fit, cursing her parents that begot her, her birth day wherein she was
brought forth, the nurse that gave her suck, the cradle that lulled her a
sleep, death for that he ended not her days, and her self for that she was.
Now tearde she her hair from her head, anon she vnapparelled her self to her
smock, then like a spirit would she dance the Morris about the chamber, and
soon sossing her self down by the fires side, sit no les senceles then her
actions had been witless, a long time resting as in a trance. But at last as
ouerlate coming to her self, she would, looking on her self, seem to be
afraid of her self, sorrowful to see the fruit of her forsaken reason, and
rising would soon make her ready. Being ready she fell upon her knees,
crying the Gods mercy, and pouring forth abundance of tears, in token of her
penitencie. And after that being indeed in her rightest mind: she took her
lute singing to her singering this sonnet.

WHat booteth love, that liking wants his joy?
Grievous that joy which lackes his hearts-content:
The sight of sweet in tasting of anoy
Ads but more grief to former hearts-torment.
What sweet in love to live debarred of love?
Sour is that sweet as honny mixed with gall:
Love with unrest the heart to passions move
That sighing sing, and singing sigh withal.
While eyes behold the pleasure of my heart
Heart joys through eyes in gayning of that sight:
But when that pleasure from mine eyes does part
Heart parts with joy and rests in heavy plight.
And tongue may sing a hei ho for my heart
That through mine eyes does find both joy and smart.
Which music would be so metamorphosed, as in truth her singing would turn
to sighing, and her playing to complaining, when in a rage she would throw her
lute down, beginning to dilate on her loves unkindness, that could be so cruel
to stay four and twenty hours from her. Now found she fault with her self
for being so fond on him that forbeared so carelessly her company, and by and
by in a great rage swearing to forsake him, she settled her self to frame a
railing letter for a last farewell. But before she had scarce written an
unkind word, she pausedon the matter, casting both pen ink and paper from
her, yet upon her second advice about she goes with a fresh charge to pen a
crabbed charm, and had gone so far as she had set down, Fie unkind wretch.
And there again in a doubt of going forward or leaving the rest undone, she
gnawed so long upon her pen in studying what to do as she had eaten it almost
quite up. But at last with a resolution she played the woman, falling into so
kind a vain of scoulding, as she had charged him with a thousand
discourtesies for missing one nights resort unto her. And as she was
concluding her color with a protestation, never to desire to see his face
again, in came one of her sisters with news that Master Anthony was below.
Which so quite purged her of her melancholy, as in a rage she rent the paper,
and cast all her anger with it into the fire, posting with such haste to her
sweete-heart, as in stead of running down she tumbled down a whole pair of
stayres. Which bad beginning was carelessly put over with the conceived joy of
his presence, she entertaining him with a kiss, for that he was not forward
enough, to bestow on her the like favor. But ere long, she began to perceive
that Master Anthony was changed, being nothing so frolic of his kindness as
he had been, and it was no marvel. For some report of her fore-used fondnes
was come to his ears, that being no small frost to my his former affection; so
that his only coming was to make that conclusion she was of late imagining,
soon finishing in wise and discreet terms that her suspect was penning. Upon
whose departure, with the paune left of his resolution, my minion fell into a
sound, there being such a stir for her recovery, as what for running for
aqua vitae, posting for ale, plying warm clothes and such like, there was no
less rule then is in a ^auerne of great resort. Here forsooth, says she that
had the aqua come quickly, By and by answered she, being called that went for
the ale, the rest no otherwise replying to every question and command. Well
at length life was got in her, though no words could be drawn from her, but
being got to bed, she song ere long like a bird of Bedlam.

In which fit I left her, more pitying her peeuishnes then her passions, the
rather less regarding either for that I knew that violent fit would not stay
long. But to tell you what Honesty thought all this while, for I know that is
your longing, and if you be shrowe any body, blame her for not letting you have
your will sooner, by keeping me so long there against my will. For unwilling I
was to stay there so long, and as loath to leave her before she had left at a
full point. That you might know all was my wish, and since I have mine now, you
shall not be long without your will. She never sighed heartily, but I laughed as
merely, being as often ready to piss my breeche for joy, as she was to shed
tears, which came from her as had at commandment. And wherefore was Honesty
thus uncharitable think you, rejoicing at his neighbors misery? Surely
because her self was so foolish to be so disquietly moved with nut-shels:
would it not have made a horse break his halter, to see her mumble to her
self as an ape mowes at his own shadow. Doubtless, may I speak it without the
suspect of arrogance, Honesty has as much hold of his civility, as a mare
has of her honesty, and yet I might as well be hanged, as be kept from being
merry when she mourned. A Camelion cannot change her self into more kind of
colors then she would use change of motions. Sometimes she would walk with
her hands clasped and her eyes cast up to heaven, as if she were sent for,
with all speed to render an account of her passions. Anon she would run
about the chamber like a hare that had lost her way: then by and by would she
houle like a kind dog that had lost her master. After that girne like a
Monkie that sees her dinner, and ere long be as dead as a door nail, lying by
the fire side as a block does at the back of a chimney. And this last simile
proves not worst, for she burned no less through the cinders of too kind
affection, then the logge does with the help of charke-coles.

Was not this a monstrous fit, that had so many motions? Why if Honesty should
tell you how she would sometimes bite of her own nails, knocking the wall
with her feet, praunsing on the ground, and lepping of and on the bed, you
would think he had to do with an unruly jade. Fie no she was a mankind
creature, and I would not offend them for a kingdom: but this Honesty is such
a pestilent spie-fault, as he cannot see a wench out-start the bounds of
modesty, but straight he hollowes the sight of a striker, thinking it
impossible that if she want maidenly behavior she can have womanly honesty.
Well I know some will say he is a pick thank, but were not they
shonne-thankes they would speak better of Honesties son. But thus much for
Honesties credit, and now again to my cract-loue, that had crauled so far
into affections extremity, as she had lost the habit of her customers
courtesy. I went once more of devotion to see her, because I left her in so
extreme an agony: and it was within two days after. Whom then I found
clasped within a new lovers paws, as iocunde with him of mine honesty, as
ever I saw her pleasant with Master Anthony. And what thought Honesty then
think you? in faith no otherwise then I am assured you do now. I thought upon
such fondnes, the prouer be was builded, hot love will be soon cold, but
enough of that in another place, and thus much more of her at this time.

She was as glad I warrant you of a lover, as a weried ^ade is of a fair way,
and he being tired is not more glad of a stable, then she was desirous of a
bab^ll: it is only, for rhyme at this instant, and therefore let it pass (I
pray you) with your favor; but whether it does or no, I beshrewe my name if I
get any blame. For my tongue will not amble out of the truth, though I should
dig out my guts with the Spur, Beware least you offend. There is one
still at mine elbowe, and says I must take heed how I diffemble, since
Honesty is become a deity. I would I were not, or went not so unvisible, for
then I should not craule so easily into maidens chambers, and hear them boaste
of so many favors bestowed by them on this day, so many kisses given to one,
another unloosing her garter, yea and she thought he went not high enough.
Well but that I am merciful, and will not name you that are so immodest as to
boast of such lightness, for if I should, I should quite fray away many of M.
Anthonies companions, from bestowing them affections on so liberal whipsters.
But I say no more for shame, hoping I shall have no cause to speak of the
like again, you will become so civil, then thus much for you, and now to
another.

This way a coy dame whose nice strangenes moved me not to the least
admiration: she stood just at the door, to whom not so few as twenty had in
my vein made suite. They were of sundry sciences, and of all degrees that had
took the denial of her, which made me the rather to admire the cause, and to
obtain my longing, I lodged my self that night under her bed. When she was
laid, and one of her mothers maids with her, she began thus to parley. Wot
you what Nan (quoth she) how many suitors thinks thou have I sent packing to
day? Not so many (answered the maid) as you did the last time you were there.
Yes faith girl double (replied she.) And found you so many faults in these
(quoth Nan) as you did in the other? Nay I trow wench (answered she) I let not
them pass in whom I discover not many ouer-stippes. And what were their faults
I pray you, quoth the girl? Some of them had store of wealth (answered she)
but little honesty, other were honest enough, but too too hard favored; some
had good faces, and b^d bodies; other being proper, had crabbed countenances,
some were amiable for favor, perfect of body, yet ill legged; other which
were well legde, shaled with their feet or were splafooted; and to b^ brief,
they that trod right were either clouterly caulfed, tree like set, spindle
shankte, or bakerly kneed; only there were two e^quisitely shapte, whereof one
was too tall, and the other too too low. Thus much for their parts, and now to
their properties.

They that were wealthy were meanly qualited, and they that had many good
properties were moniles: some had good toungs and spoke well, having as ill
gestures, others were rich and seemed wise, those I suspected to be wenchers.
And to make as short work in telling thee of them, as I made speedy haste
in sending them packing; either I mislikte their estates, scorned their
personages, lothed their want of qualities, or could not away with their kind
of wooing. But shall I be so bold (quoth Nan) to ask you one more question? I
twenty and thou will, for in faith I have no list to sleep. In sooth
forsooth, then (quoth the girl) what manner of man shall he be, with whom you
will match? Mary such a one (answered she) as shall be the only matchles
creature in the world. But how will you meet with him replied Nan? As he
shall light upon me by Fortune. But Fortune is blind (quoth the wench) and may
lead him to another in stead of you. Yet as she is blind (replied the other)
so is she a Goddess a good supporter of my chances, and I know my report is
set so near her elbowe, as she cannot forget me if s^^ would.

I marry sirs you talk of a wench, and what was this of a proud one? is it not
great pity but nature should have compassion on this neat creature, and
shape for her a mirror of mean worth? Now of my troth Honesty likes such an
one, and why think you? I will tell you my reason, and if it iumpes with your
conceit, say you met with a kill Crow. I am assured that they that are of
my mind shall escape a great deal of trouble, for of mine honesty, if I
should light on such an one, I know certainly I should be quickly rid of a
near nushap, in being prevented of matching with a nice ninnte, by a nice
body: for not being the paragon of the world, would keep me from marrying
with the only paltrie one of y^ world: whether then think you such to be
profitable members of a common wealth? Howsoever you think, Honesty has said,
he thinks them hurtful to none that escape the^, for y^ their folly one^y
hurtes themselves, doing good to others, in the like manner as he has told
you. Trot you and you will to try your Fortune, and run to woo such curious
customers, but say I bid you take heed, least you resist good luck, by being
importunate to woo them, with whom you shall win a mass of manner-les
Monkish tricks. And I speak especially to you, that hunt after monsters of
modesty, desiring to have the maidens you would match with, as very matrones
as your mothers. Beware you light not upon an over wearied conceipted
sollom-bird, being one that has been so curious to be talkte with of any as
having lived over long without one, is become glad of any. Honesty knows
such, and you may be troubled with such, and how can you think your selves
unworthy? In faith ill conceited birds, if you think your selves so unwise,
as you are unable to govern a wild wench, you will show your selves more
foolish, if you match with a nice no-maide. But what said Honesty? be there
any such? I that there are, ordained for the nonce, to nurture such noddies. It
is as easy to be mislead by hypocrisy, as it is folly to trust to an
uncertainty, and it is more uncertain to know now a days whether a woman be
honestly modest, or knauishly coye, then whether a Smithfeelde horse will prove
good, or iadish.

See how I have a tale by the end of a ninnie of my now handled maidens
quality, which was a Misers Daughter in the low Countries. Who was so proper a
piece of flesh, as I can tell you we have not many Oyster women that out goes
her in hook shoulders. By report she was a lovely one, but that she was
monstrous blobber lipt, and stoopt somewhat unreasonably in the upper part of
her backside, but that is no matter, her father was richer then most in that
Country, and why should not she think her self the properest of a thousand?
of Honesties word so by likelyhoode she did, and if you say not so anon, then
say I have heard a lie. She thought her self so proper, as none under a Burges
his eldest Son might sue unto her, and he too to be no faulty gallant; for
he with all comers should be so surely sifted by her, to see whether they trod
their shoes aw^y or no, as the Miller does the grist before he mingles chalk
amongst it. She would have a fling at their heads, to see whether they were
round like a ball, or long like a bottell, and so from every part, til she
were past the undermost part of their Pantoples. And in all of them she would
be sure to find some fault or other, the least being a sufficient cause to cut
off their proceedings. Thus dealt she so long, as at last her doultish age was
unawares come upon her, making her fustie curiosity a shameful mockery
throughout the Country; so that the general report of her bruted ignomynie
made her grow glad of any company: and now feign would she b^ married, though
loath to increase her shame by matching with far worse then she had refused
being offered, and therefore thinking to hinder the make-speede of murmured
ignominy, with a crafty color of a continuing care to couple her self to
one of Fortunes darlings, she concluded there should be a Lotterie, and whose
chance it was to be drawn by her should only possess her w^thered self. You
must think that many were glad to win her, for whom almost will not wealth
woo to a bad bargain? My story reports that of all sorts, some for pastime
and others for profit, ^ut their scrolles into fortunes budget, and on the day
when my minions draft should be manifested, who should have her by lot, but
such an one as Tom-witles is, that will cry if one offer to take away his babble.

A suitable mate for so long a search; there was but one grand fool in a
Country, and see how Fortune had kept her for him. Now such chance follow like
curious coye wenches, and may never wiser persons match with them. And are they
not think you the meetest for them? For they desire to have them, that have
the smallest faults, and Honesty thinks it y^ least fault in a man to be a
fool. Who is more proud then a fool, and what woman more coy for the most
part then she that has least reason for it? The Crow likes her own bird
best, though it be the blackest, and would not we have women think well of
themselves? I pray you let them have their wills, or they will whether you
will or no; and if you like them not you may leave them, and with as good
reason as they will be sure to deal so with you, unless you highly please
them. The Ass has a curious eye, and y^ makes his pace so slow; for short
legs will trippe at every stone, and what, she is not afraid to fall on a
stone? And reason too, but they will never be happy, until Tom fool and his
fellows be banished for throwing stones at them which often hurt their bellies,
whereas their falling breaks but their knees. Alas poor asses that your eyes
cannot keep you from burdens, as they make you ouer-leape often unknown
diamondes. But what are more precious then pleasing thoughts, and what fancies
are more full of pleasure then those that most extol our selves. This
arrogancy is an infectious pestilence; for we get pride one from an other, as
we purchase the plague in a mortality. But once more return we to the merry
talk of our coye Maiden.

After a long progress passed in description of the sweet heart she would have,
being such an exquisite proper qualited Squire, as is scarce one in a whole
Country, y^ maid sell with her to this point: Now of my troth (quoth she) by
your leave I am not of your mind, for such a matchles fellow is as meet a
bait to entice many women to do his wife wrong, as a fair woman shall have
suitors to do her Husband a shrewde turn. And therefore as I would not wish to
be matched with such a crabbed piece of flesh as none can fancy, so desire not
I to hold a mark for every one to shoot at, the rather for that there are
few men which will refuse a kind offer. Beware when the woman wooes, if she
be perceived to be forward to some dispositions, she shall not want the
offering of a bob: so that the bobbing babble shall bob the fool with her own
curious choice. Which knauish quip did so nip my Mistres Daughter on the head,
as in troth she left arguing and fell hard to scolding.

This is bobbing with a witness thought Honesty, but surely it were pity it
should not be true in some cases, and in those only would I wish it true, that
strive so far to out-goe their fellows in superexcellent obiectes.

Beware the Fox that has the smoothest skin, it is sign his coat is old,
and his wit not young, he will be sure of a goose in store, when many of his
neighbors shall want one. I know some, about whom Nature has bestowed so
long time in shaping fair faces with proper bodies, as she has at last for
haste been constrained to let them pass with imperfect hearts. She must
perform her stinte, and a time is limited her to fashion every child; by
reason the^ they must have the purest hearts, y^ have the vnl^kest shapes. I
know what you will say, and thereby will only seem to gainsay Honesty, for
that it is a Proverb, C^ooked without, and crabbed within. Of tr^th I must
confess, that it is very likely, though not always true, (for no workman but
has sometimes a mischaunce happen to his most curious work, after the
finishing thereof, either by a fall or such like casual chance) that a halting
body has a dissembling heart, and a misshapen creature a crabbed disposition,
and we do find it commonly, that under foulest aspects are hidden the fairest
hearts, though I know women account black things to be of least worth. But
search again and look what dye is more perfect, or what will take soil
sooner then the milkelike white? well, the maidens proposition pleased Honesty
ouerwell, as you may guess by my long stay upon it, but I will assure you it
displeased no les my young mistres. Alas it is a little thing that will not
displease them whom nothing can please, and shall we think a wench could
possibly please her long, unto whom so many men were disliking? Now surely he
shall have a new account, that reckons on less then this: namelye, that his
matching with such a minion, which was so curious to be pleased, will crave as
great care to be kept pleased, as a jade will require art to be kept from
tiring. Nor do I say she will be tired, I would rather be driven to affirm he
shall be iaded, though with such an one as will never be tired.

But let such as my Mistres Many-mislike is, take heed least by their coye
kindenes, they kill their hearts whom they would gladly save after, with all
their art, and cannot. How easy is it to put that away with our little
singer, which we would willingly recover again with both our hands? I have
known some Faulkoners that have been so curious in dieting their Hawks, as a
nice curtesan is of her fare, and yet sometimes they have searched a whole day
after the killing of a carrion Crow, and mist of it too. The fair lastes not
always, and such as lightly regard a good bargain when it is proffered, may
try the market a twelve month after and miss of the like offer. The rolling
stone gathers no moss, nor the running fancy is worth the catching. They
shall be sure to meet with a fickle heart, that match with such a wavering love,
and an unconstant affection is better lost then found. And for that I am entered
into the path of vnco^stancie, I will come to a seventh enemy, which a couple
harbored that stood behind the door.

He was a Prentice that had four years to serve, which I certainly
understood afterward, though at that instant I geste no less by his
fearefulnes to be seen: well, these had so wooed and won the one the other,
as sure they were, having remained so by the space of three years: yet now
there was dislike grown between them, first springing from the woman that
was discontented that she had already lost so much time, being yet bound to
endure a longer stay. Who knows not the certainty of her presumption
confirmed by an order of the City of London, (which is, that if any man
standing bound for the serving of years, entangle himself and marry before
the term of his years ended, he shall double his prentiship) and therefore
must she either out-stay the^, or bind him by the hasty match to seven years
more service. Upon this inconvenience mislike harbored in her bosom, having
tied that with her tongue which she could not loose with her hands; so that mad
melancholy she was for the match made by her self, that took so small
delight therein.

Now I would all might be served with y^ same sauce, thought Honesty, that so
soon tying themselves, desire as soon to be loosed: and it is great marvel
when it falls out otherwise, especially in these days, wherein constancy is
made a hackney. Lingering love breeds mislike, and how can that love be
faithful, that is fastened with so slender a thong. There is a thing which
maintains the coherence of two hearts, which if it be long wanting, our love
will prove but watrish affection: I mean that certainty of an everlasting
happiness, with an assurance of a continual earthly pleasure. There comes many
fair Horses into Smith feelde in a twelve month, which make many that are
sped already, to wish themselves unprovided, to deal with them; for all men
have not keeping for two Geldings. It is time that makes a jade known, and our
knowledge y^ wishes him further from us. Many things must alter in seven
years, for that wonders happen in a moment. In one day a beggar and a King are
made equal, both the pomp of the one, and the poor estate of the other being
buried in dust. Losses come soonest unlooked for, and the worst bargains are
gotten with the greatest search: need raises the market, and much inquiry
after a commodity engenders suspect there is scarcity thereof. What cannot
gold do, and may it not then easily convert a heart that longes after it?
There are many entising baits that change many minds, and who will not strive
for the golden Apple? only except those that know they cannot get it, though
they are deserving thereof, which impossibility must needs hatche misery. How
be cormorants more plagued, then by a disappointment of their purpose? They
that forestall markets, make often times but bad bargains, as well as the
sluggard that comes a day after the Fair.

Is it not folly to strive to keep a wet Eele by the tail? or what commodity
arises, of holding the Devil by the great toe? the one is ouer-quick, and the
other wondrous strong: and in Honesties judgment a known loss, the sooner
it comes the less it greeues, and better it is to be without company, then to
be matched with an enemy. Slipperie ware is not y^ best Merchandise, and what
requires more care, then Glass that is most brittle? I know you will say a
womans heart is as tender, and y^ I think no less. Then since we must hazard
our welfare, that are constrained to deal with such pure metal, being tied to
that traffic, let us not bestow all our hope on a peec^ we know must stay so
long by us, before we can make profit thereof. Honesty is rather a professed
solicitor for a woman, then a counselor to a man: but for that both men and
women are troubled with the like diseases, let them use my plaster that like
best of my knowledge. Where love strikes the bargain, their liking cannot
start back, but unless he be bound by his agreement, affection is a fickle
fellow. What surer covenant then settled love? But they which respect not their
word, will hardly regard an oathe. Honesty is all, for he is the father of
constancy, and a fig for that love which must be tied by the law. If we
foster a snake she will sting us by the bosom, and he that sues for an
enemy, is worthy to have his pate broken with want of honesty. A tedious
suite makes rich lawyers and leesing clients, and a desire to have all, makes
us often to loose all.

I have heard of a Gentleman, that tied himself to a poor maid after the
manner aforesaid, meaning to marry with her after the death of his father,
for that he durst not do it while he lived. He maintained her passing
bravely, running himself greatly into debt, through the large expenses she
lasht out. Which curious and rich setting forth, made many to look after her,
which otherwise would not have thought on her. A blazing star presages
alteration, as the Astronomers hold it, and doubtless a proper woman gayly
apparelled, breeds miracles in men's minds. A prancing horse moves wondering,
when a sure nagge only pleases the rider; so while she lived according to
her birth, few or none regarded her, but now set forth as ready for sale, her
gallantnes engendered thoughts of some great portion, to be fallen by an
unlooked for accident. Nor will friends let to speak, to make a friend speed
well, and hire of the same mind gave forth, that it was so indeed; upon which
report many wooers were drawn to try their fortunes, and amongst them a
rich farmers some set in his foot to hazard his hap. Whom her parents and
friends so well liked, being his fathers only child, as they began to
persuade their daughter to take it while it were offered after this manner. Tut
wench (quoth they) while the grass grows the steed starues, and as soon goes
the young steare, as the old ore to the market. Young heads are fickle, and
suppose he should play false, how should we remedy it? Gold bies law now a
days, and may not a bribe eat up a sure title, as we have heard a fat hog
did a poor man's glass of oil? He that can give most shall be sure to speed
best, and you know daughter, your father is not able to wage law against so
rich an enemy. Why woman, you have not seen him this fortnight, and how
know we but he has a wife in a corner? By our Lady girl, such windefalles
happen not often, as is this day put into your mouth. By cock and pie do as
you will, but if you do refuse this proffer, we will deny you our blessing.
Which counsel stroke so deep into her conscience, as it sent packing all the
affection her protested loyalty had promised, and turned it so to the farmers
son, as in short time he married with her.

By that time as my minion had been married three or four days, thither comes
posting my out-ioynted Gentleman, of whose stark staring mad coffeehouse
upon the hearing of his willow gift, Honesty lists not to stand, since you
can imagine it was great, but what remedy? What wise man would sue for a
false-hearted beggar, or what gain should be got by the recovery of a broken
pipkin? In seeking to have plagued her, he should have punished himself,
adding but shame to the loss of a greater expense, and in the end recovered a
flap with a fore tale. Well I pity him because of his kindness which was so
crossed, but if Honesty hears of any such kind asses hereafter, he will make
as good sport thereat, as the boys do at the fool of a Morris. Are they
not worthy to lie by the heels that purchase the countertenor with so plain
a pricksong? I warrant you it prict and pincht him too, but his father was the
more ^illing to release him, for that he hopte that loss had gaind him more
wit. Honesty could tell you of a thousand that have been served after the same
order, they having promised to stay one for another, some a year, others more
or less, whereof some have had their hope sound within a fortnight of their
day, and then thinking themselves nearest to have their wills, in come takers
pu^^ing their noses quite besides the sweet sent of their forespoken
bedfellowes. This can be no small grief to a kind constant heart, that has
peradventure refused many good likely hoods to stay for such a light huswife.
He that will think himself sure to a woman, or she that will build on a man's
constancy, till the parish priest has said God give ye joy, and the brides
bed has borne it first nights w^ight, he is not of Honesties mind, though I
wish it were otherwise.

It is as good to be assured of the borne, as to be made sure to an
unconstant heart, for they that look for les shall be disappointed. God forbid
Honesty should say it were impossible, that two may love constantly unmarried
seven years, but he may above that two say, such are scarce found in seven
ages. Walk but to Westminster, a place in faith where constancy is as little
used, as wit in Bedlam, and yet there (I warrant you) you shall have your head
filled with tales of unconstant lovers. Go likewise to Poules (a path as well
haunted with hunters of honesty, as Kemps head is sometimes pestered with
knauerie) and blame Honesty if there you hear not outeries of wavering
wenches. Long lanes and broad streets, little cottages and manner places, are
at this day by report bolstred with naught so much as with unconstant minds.
Whereby what through the sorrow, Constancies complainte moves and the grief
honesties broken pate procures, it is great pity we should not have many
knackes to know knaves by, and as many Iigges to gird garish girls with. I
peticoate laue, is a pocket full of new fasshions, the drift whereof, is that
first comers should be first served: but they mean no comers which enter not
the placket. In Shooleane there is one that selles running lether, the virtue
whereof is maintained with liquor of a careless heart, so that he or she that
cannot play light of love, shall not be customed there. Withdraw your selves
to Crooked lane, and of Honesties credit you shall find more traps to catch
Rats and Mice there, then constant lovers in S^ordich Church at midnight.

What shall I say? since the art of Cony-catching has forestalled good
invention: but fie on the devil that drives such wits to so bad a bargain, as
to be forced to spend their time in no better studies. They have need of good
intelligencers that shall intermeddle with tricks of Coningshifts: for mine
own part, I had rather wade to the middle in Loves whirle-poole, then to the
anckles in the brook of inconstancy. And yet force perforce, by Loves
appointment, I must have a fling at her followers. Let them fly to the
gallows, for Honesty that loves her so well, and my fling will drive them to
a worse place, unless they leave her. Up hill and down hill is a very
troublesome labor, but up the ladder and down the rope ends many ones
misery. What steeper way then to the height of offection? and how many often
post up and down between that and the valley Likings-recantation. I recant now
a days follows Loves heels like his shadow: it is a halting crackhalter,
and a hurtful hinderloue, and best he shall be known by his stumpe foot. I
mean not a mishapenledge, but a resting love, that either makes such a full
point in the beginning, as he can go no further, or else stands at a stay two
or three quarters, not knowing whether it were best to go forwards or
backwards. Extremes are as dangerous as stretches: for as many joints are
out-set or cracked by the one, so many incurable hurts are received by the
other. Honesty thinks a seven nights space is too short a time to fasten a
true lovers knot, but he that out stays y^ month may learn as much in that
time as is needful to be known. A longer time is pleasing to them that have
bars to hinder their forwardnes, but he that may go on without hindrances,
if he aims at a longer respite, take it on Honesties word, he works but
upon advantage. They that build their affection upon reason, are like to
remain most constant: for where a condition of profit binds the suitors, there
a long day will not likely be broken. But this reason craves wisdom, the
experience whereof must a wait on Loves followers, the pr^ctise being nothing
but this, a care in our choice to maintain the maine chance. That is, that
they which have little, do fancy none but such as have somewhat, and they
that have nothing, either to match with such as have enough to serve themselves
and others, or else to fit still in the chimney corner. Al must measure their
liking according to the depth of their desire, to the end they may live with
contentment, which will (I warrant you) nourish constancy.

Now follows another sort, which are not the least enemies Love has, being
our common courting lads, who take such pleasure in their pregnant wits, and so
great glory in their ready tongues, as a wench cannot peep forth the doors,
but they must have a fling at her beauty. First comes, fair lady God save
you, and then follows, that the sight of such a blazing Commet makes them
stand at the gaze, for that such sights are seldom seen. After ensues their
application, falling from the celestial creatures to their earthly Goddesses,
extolling their beauties to such a height, as when they can go no further,
having forgotten their way backwards, they fall down headlong, breaking the
neck of Good reason. Then come they to the good parts of their bodies, and
from thence to a supernatural view of their hidden virtues, building upon the
proverb, A fair face cannot have a crabbed heart, though many of them find by
experience, but crabbed entertainment to proceed from those their celestial
objects: yet the most, what through their quick conceits, false protestations
and usual resorting into their companies, bring many into such a fools
paradise, as they harp on nothing but marriage. And marvel not, seeing we have
many so forward wenches, that if a man look but earnestly upon them, they
think verily, he is inamoured of their beauty: but shall he speak and say he
loves them? my father, my mother and all my friends must be made privy to his
proceedings, for I know he will have me.

Alas light hearts that are lead away with every kind blast: know ye not that
our age flows with fine wits, that must borrow their practice of such like
patients? Do not many men cheapen that mean not to buy, and think you to want
such customers? How many come into a Fair with never a farthing in their
purses, and yet for fashion sake will ask the price of a costly piece of
work? Our tongues stand us in little charges for reparations, and seeing they
wear not, we will not spare to wagge them. But this is best known to you
women, whom nature binds to the greatest practice, having given you no other
weapon; yet I may tell you, men cannot want that instrument, especially in
their wooing matters. But did many of both kinds use it less, both you and
they should speed never the worse, for you should miss of many fond faithles
speeches, and they should march without as many kind hit home floutes. They
should not playing with the fire, be burnt with the flame, and remain helples
through your careless pity: nor should you be intrapt in the snares of their
smoothe words, decreasing your glorious beauty by hopeles conceits of
obtaining your withed happiness.

Many honest minds taken at their words, are bound to bad bargains, when on
the contrary part, a cracked credit regardes neither his own reputation or
another welfare. How east is a free horse tired, a good edge-toole spoiled,
and a kind heart surfeited? Adull jade will rather be spurde to death then
break his pace: and with a bad knife we may assay to cut any thing, without
doing it much harm, but woe be unto that heart, whose mildenes makes it
self subject to a counterfeit kindness. You shall sighe forth your sorrow,
while they smile at their good success, they building their assurance of being
no losers on your good dispositions, that serve for stables, to rest their
hopes in: your good natures must be but roumes for hacknies that never know
their masters, and your kind hearts to serve for mangers to feed their had
conceits. Their trotting shall fasten to your heads ^eapes of proclamations,
the clauses whereof shall breed thousand of doubted miseries and ten thousands
of careful heartbreakings. Their counterfeit friendship shall hinder faithful
and loving proceedings, hurting affection by hindering it from it desarte, with
keeping it from receiving the due of requital. That bootles constancy shall
banish faithful loyalty by crabbed crosses, and purchase to it self, through
a haples conclusion a cart-loade of careful extremities. True-meaning thereby
shall be deceived on both sides, and kind-heartednes plagued with ouer-sureset
affection. Love shall be banded away with the racket of dissinmlation, and
beaten at last into the hazard Despair by his sporting enemy. What a great
loss will follow such a chase, and how great expense of hearts grief, must
ensue so shroude a game, guess you that lie condemned in the like charges?
Only Honesty pitties such a pastime that ends with so small pleasure, and will
now come to give you warning of what he has seen happen in the like cases of
little conscience.

There was one of this society that had so courted up a wench, as through a
potion of pleasure he had given her, her belly rose like a blown bladder.
Belly round she was, so that through his craft her credit stood upon cracking,
which she perceauing entreated her physician, that as he had tasted of her
courtesy, so he would save her honesty, declaring that she was with child as
the truth was. Of my faith (quoth he) what care I? You might have took better
heed, you are best to make haste and get a father for it. I hope (answered
she) you will not serve me so: are these your fair promises, and can your
vows be so slightly passed over? Have you not made love to me by the space of
a quarter, being used kindly of me, and can you find in your heart thus
cruelly to requite my extraordinary favor, putting me to shifts in this
extremity? Is it possible your professed whot love should be so soon cold, or
that your large promises should turn to so little performance* I cannot think
you being a man can be so cruel, as to cast away a poor maiden. Away beast
(quoth he) thy persuasions are as bootles as thy thoughts, and I am assured
thou art not so foolish as to build of any thing I have said, or of that I
have done but as of a jest, if thou do, it will be a bad foundation, and
with that he flong forth of the doors, leaving my maimed-maide in a bad taking.

Do you term such doing jesting? thought Honesty, if Chaucers iapes were
such iestes, it was but bad sport; well a sport it was, though it proved a
sure earnest, and who knows not that sweet meats crave sour sauce? Her
laughing lye-downe, came to sad rising-vp a shrewde sport to turn to such
sorry p^stime, and if such an earnest penny cannot bind a bargain, naught
will hold the like chapmen but a halier. Now Tiborne and Wapping wait on such
for Porters, as post to markets, so to jest with lac'st-mutton. If saying had
been all, she had been foolish indeed to have regarded a fools speeches,
but seeing he crept so far into credit with her, as he cracked her placket
lace, how could he of conscience call that jesting? Does Honesty talk of
conscience to B^ls bailiffes, that have no care of any thing but to save their
cassokes from being his purchase? Now fie of all the Beadles of Bridewell, if
they spare such a sporter coming under their correction, without double the
dole they punish one of Baals common Priests with. I would their blewe coats
might fall to be Hindes fees, unless they give such four lusty lashes at
every kennell and streets corner they pass by. Why under the cloak of honest
satisfaction, to allure an honest mind to lewd corruption, is no less theft
then robbing of Churches, only the Clerks consent seems in the one to crave
some tolleration over it does in the other. Then you will say they deserve both
to be hanged, and so would Honesty say, but that their christianity merits
charity. But of my troth if Honesty were a Justice, such as sue after the
selfsame order, should either marry with the^ they have deceived, or hang
without them, my minion going unpunished for that time in hope of amendment.
Love is a kind heart, and marriage is a sweet baire what then will not such
promises gain of a faithful lover? This jesting turns to lingeing love, when
the weakest has surfeited in affection. Sweet speeches have vowed everlasting
constancy, and running in the pleasant meddowe of kindenes it grows lusty,
spending the remnant of his wooing to win unto such bad fare: courting ends
with such a charge, changing professed love into burning lust. Love looks to
be maintained with kindenes, and when he has got what words can affoorde,
then falls he to jesting, which turns contrary to Chaucers meaning, to y^
satisfying of a leachers lust in earnest. But too too much of this, except it
were better, and once more return we to our mel^ncholly left mardemaide.

She poor soul set so lightly by in her forty weeks reckoning, so thought
on her present hard hap, as she quite forgot her account, whereby now she was in
a worse taki^g then before: for if being put to her oath, she should miss of
that, his counter oath would make but a so so end for her, and therefore thus
she bestirred her self in the matter. She made her case known to a friend,
and falling down upon her knees, entreated him for the passion of our Lady to
stand good help unto her, to draw her mate to marry with her. Who being a very
honest man y^ had some care of her credit, labored so effectually in y^
matter, as what through promises and a piece of money, he made it a match, so
that what through a little honesty my man was endued with, and a piece of
money my maiden was endowed with, we had a choptlodgicke. Now woe unto such
wooed spouses, if their mates want altogether honesty, and they have no money,
and this might have perchance won the standing in a white sheet without so
good a master. Take heed girls how you trust to such helps, for Honesty
can tell you they are not ordinary. It is harder to find one such in every
parish through a Country, then to find a honest woman in a house of
Westminsters Hospitality. Alas how many honest men's children come to decay
through this practice? Talk with any corrupted Virgin, and excepting one
amongst twenty, if they all not agree that such enticements were the procurers
of their misery, never believe Honesty for a halfepennie. Beware if a rich
marriage be offered for a reward of breach of honesty, there are few that
will not consent to leacherie with such briberie.

But the opening of an other wound remains, with which love is hurt by his
courting enemies, for they which have been once deceived by flattery, will
hardly be drawn to believe sincerity, whereby the faithful suitor is hindered
from his due. The beaten dog shuns the stick, the tormented patient fears
the Pothecaries drugs, the child that has been sore whipped for a fault, will
fear by offending to hazard his breeche. Who is more wary of his welfare,
then he that has been in greatest extremity? and if love has been wounded
with a dissembled affection, he will be afraid to enter into an action from
whence the like sorrow may flow. What gives greater hope of constanice, then
vowed loyalty? or what seems sweeter then sugered flattery? Affection
springs of kind usage, and love settles on a continued show of professed
zeal, which being sure set, cannot be removed without great danger, except
wisdom be a helper. What sorrow danger brings, and what care coffeehouse
harbors he knows not? But of the vnceasing harts-greefe with the tormenting
soure-sauce which seasoneth the destruction of entire affection, none can
judge, save those that have tasted thereof: only it may be imagined by y^
effects that have followed the like causes (as by the untimely death it has
brought to some, a deprivation of their wits to others, languishing diseases to
many, namely, the green sickness, the mother, and such like: and lastly, to ali
mad melancholye fits) that they which are favored with the least mishap that
comes through want of their longing, are rewarded with the loss of a present
welfare, having that supplied by a gift of sighing heaviness. Now after y^
freedom from such a mischief, who will not swear to fly from the like
danger? And since flattery cannot without dangerous trial be known from
faithful freendship, who will not shun both, fearing to mistake the one for
the other? If a kind heart has been deceived by a crooked knave, clad in the
robes of a courteous lover, she will ever after mistrust the habit, for that
it is impossible to know the heart. Who can forbid the Tailor to use his art?
and do you think that any one for an advantage will let to try his craft?
The Devil can change himself into any shape, and the only means to know
him (as is said before) is his stumpe foot.

Liking will not be long a doing, and love that follows is but little, whereby
he brings no great harm, but all the mischief comes with desire, which swelles
the affections, and predominates over love and liking: he makes the mis-rule
and keeps the open Christmas, he desires the sport, and main^^ines the
pastime, so that though he be long in coming, and stays but little in his
Lordship, yet the remembrance of his iolitie is not forgotten a long time
after. He keeps his custom every year, and a year with him is but a short
space, so that after he comes to his full age, he makes many Christmasses: for
Desire is not short lived. It is therefore this lingering love that does all
the harm, because by him Desire is only begotten. He that beating the market
is willing to buy, will not stand long a bargaining, when he has met with his
liking, for fear a francker customer step between him and his longing: but
if he be careless, he will not deal without a good penniworth. Very easily then
is the mischief of repentance taken from women, seeing a true-meaning suitor
may be as quickly discerned, as a careless chapman may be perceived. And how
fondly do they entrude themselves into the needles hazard of great discontent,
that will let their love run so far without reason, as it cannot be called
back without great grief at the least. Though a buyer be not able to give the
seller his asking, yet will he be earnest to have it at such a price as he does
offer, and although this loving customer be not of ability to answer thy
friends expectation, yet shall he not be forward to be possessed of thee? he is
but a watcher for advantages. So that if either his ability be such as of
himself he can maintain thee, or be thy possibility so great, as by his good
endeavor he may win a living, thy friends good will by the possession of
thee, thy affection is too too cold, if thou keeps him lingering without his
longing, and his devotion is small, if he be not an vnceasing suitor for it.

And truly in Honesties mind (and pardon me I pray you with whose conceits
it iumpes not) those matches shall prosper best, where lone is rather respected
then wealth: provided there be a care had of the likelyhoode of possibility
which must come with one of them. But shall one that has nothing join loving
issue with an other that has or is like to have as little, he having no means
to make a living, he shows himself to be afoolish follower of repentance, and
an uncharitable procurer of an others wretchedness? There are many good wits,
that wanting matter to work on, wade into the trial of dangerous conclusions,
which otherwise being employed would become profitable members of a common
wealth. All cannot be heirs, and many younger brothers children are but barely
left, though they have had good bringing up, which nothing hinders their
gentry, only now a days it is a bar to their preferment. For men will
sooner match their daughters with my young master arich Cobblers Son, though
they be their heirs, then with a Gentleman of a good house being a younger
Brother. Heerby comes the decay of a ancient gentilitie, and this y^ making of
vpstart houses; heerby those that have had good bringing up, must either go to
plough and carte, being drudges to such drones, or their natures, disdaining
that, and more abhorring to beg, lead them to lewd practices to maintain
the state of their birth. And did you Fathers which are to match your Children,
know the hart-breakings many parents (which have been of your minds) have
found by trial, then would the fear of uncivil behavior, which springs by
succession from their carterly progenitors, turn your greedy desire of golden
gain to a joyful gaining of your posterities happiness.

But fie of covetousness that is the root of all mischief: for men that have
enough to make their Daughters Gentlewomen, by matching them with houses of no
small antiquity, will, with the desire they have thereunto, woo men of great
living with large offers, to match their sons and heirs with them. Who being
drawn thereunto, will use them their wives mee^^ly well during the life time of
their own and wives Fathers, for that their estates are by their great
portions better maintained, and their best friends thereby well pleased. But
let your Daughters beware after your and their Fathers death (when all hope is
taken away of a further gain, and a search made of their ancestors alliance)
for then seeing the baseness of your pettigree, and y^ noble descents of their
predecessors, that corruption of blood which you with your corruption of money
has made, and their Fathers covetousness has purchased to their succession,
will (as for the most part it does in the like cases) move such
hartbreakinges, as either quarrelles of diuorcement or suits of separation will
surely follow. When on the contrary part, if respecting gentry, thereby to
advance your houses, you would match the^ with Gent. younger brothers (of whom
there ought to be less regard, the chief house being maintained) your
Daughters portions, being the only maintenance of their estates, would be so
strong a help to increase their affection toward your children, with
purchased happiness to their posterities, as knowing no household quarrelles can
be without charges, they will be glad to study to increase the sweetenes of
unity, thereby to continue everlasting prosperity to their following ages.

Honesty knows what the fairing-monger will say, when he shall hear of one
so flat against his opinion touching marriages, not letting to affirm that it
is most necessary that the consent of parents should be last sued for, and
little regarded in respect of love, especially seeing his Pamphlet buildes so
diuinelye on farre-fetcht arguments, to prove the contrary. Therefore to
prevent him, and to provide against the great danger their matches-making
procure, Honesty must tell him and assure all those that are of his mind,
that were the world like unto that wherein Abraham lived, or were Fathers of
these days of his disposition, his argument drawn from the gift of Euah to
Adam by God and such like might seem to prove some thing. But seeing these
times in effect are quite contrary to those, and the dispositions of men in our
days, altogether disagreeing to theirs of that age, his time had been better
spent in a work to some other purpose. For a little to seem to fly from my
matter, and to have a fling at him; how many Fathers now a days are there so
careful of providing convenient mates for their children at a seasonable time,
as our great Grandfather Abraham was? Again, how many have children that are
so obedient to bend their love to their Parents liking as was Isaac? Oh Sir,
you are deceived, our young ones are of riper wits, and far forwarder then
Children were in those days, and our old ones are of more covetous minds and
far forwarder to be drawn to their childrens good: for what greater good then
to enjoy them they love? and what will offend our parents more then to entreat
that? he sent his servant to search forth one of his next kin, not to enquire
after one that had most wealth, and should some children entertain no love in
our time until their parents procured it, nor sue for a match before their
friends made it, it were requisite their honesty should be great, or I know
what will follow. Yet again, Fathers live not now adays ordinarily above a
hundred years, whereby they have a long lasting government over their
Children, but behold it is far contrary, and therefore it requires contrary
proceedings. And lastly, (for that I will not be long at this time in this
matter) the holy writ bears not such sway in our consciences, as it workt
wonders in theirs of those days, and therefore to help our weakness in the
want of that warrant we must use the means, love, to draw us to that
everlasting happiness.

But once more to my courting companions to make as speedy an end with them,
whose haire-braine fancying and fickle affection, is no small hindrance to
loves proceedings. Honesty having set down the means to find out their
knauerie, has also provided a batte to beat down such flattery, the
instrument to find out their dissimulation, being a search into their
lingering, and the clubbe to match their clubbe feet, a loathing of their
company. But to come to the punishment I would have such to be plagued with, in
my opinion, and by Honesties doom, they are worthy to be set for
scarre-crowes in new sown fields; and the rather thus goes my judgment, for
that seeing they are so skillful to do harm in towns and cities, if that
bad-used wit were forced to be employed about that commodious doo-good, they
would invent excellent means to prevent the spoil the ravenous birds commit.
Their pregnant wits and cunning devices to catch women's affections that far
exceed crows in reason and discretion, confirm they would be strange, and
therefore profitable; yet because it is somewhat too bace, though their
practices are as beastly, I will end with them with this resolution. That they
are as worthy to stand in white-sheetes in Churches, for leaving women in
desperate cases, having drawn them into that fools paradise of
ouer-passionate affection, as they that poison strangers bellies: This would
make faithful suitors happy, constant lovers joyful, and conrting dissemblers
fearful.

Honesty, having noted these enormities harbored in lewd dispositions
shuffled into this Morris, at last lent his ears, and bestowed his eyes,
joining with him his best understanding to search into the natures of y^
remnant, to see whether y^ multitud were mixed with these in bad conceits. But
behold so contrary practizes were performed by them, as those proceedings are
disagreeing to the furtherance of perfect unity. Amongst these did I behold
Love dandled with sweet music, and constant affection vphol^^n with modest
demeanor. The sovereigns of Virginity displayed their heavenly dignity, by
the imperial colors of matchles beauty, ground with the Ambrosian oil of
celestial courtesy; and the matronly deities proved their ethereall
discreetnes, in following the heavens prescriptio^ for Loves true imitation. I
saw Kindenes matched with Goodwill, Affection lin^ed unto Liking, and Love
embraced with Loyalty, Virtue leading the^ to eternal happiness. They liked
not for a moment, loved not upon advantage, nor wooed but with a good
intention. These shaked not hands with hateful hearts, nor used smoothe
tongues with dissembling thoughts. They courted not kindly, to corrupt
shamefully, ne protested with vows, to wound with words, and kill with deeds,
but hand and heart went together, and the tongue uttered their passionate
conceits, their heart loving them as faithfully as their tongue labored to
win their courtesy. And you no earthly creatures, though joined with men for
their eternal good, (you heavenly saints I mean, masking in the shadows of
terrestrial shapes) you beautify this crew with your divine motions, whose
minds ar^ only inritched with the true wisdom that vpholdes Loves welfare.
Your sacred actions, aid his simple followers, and naught but your careful
kindness binds men's weak affections from inconstancy. You make their prayers
effectual, their request gayning through you the safety of their longing.
Your pity brings them to piety, and your alms relieues them from the
captivity of Despair. Destressed Honesty is soly harbored within your
milke-white bosoms, and were it not for your bountiful charity, his end
would be tormenting beggerie. Your allablaster pappes do wholly minister
moisture to my consuming welfare, and from their sugered teates do I only
draw my liquor of life, so that by your motherly kindness to decaying Honesty,
they reap likewise their bliss, that would give me my baine, recovering
contrary to their wills the remaynder of their weal. For how marches the
passionate soldier without you sound the alarome of his good-speede? or how
fares the amorous gallant, except you play the galliard of acceptance?
Unfortunate eyes, your pearcing fightes shall be cruelly cursed, and unnatural
usage shall be offered to your obedient hearts, for seeing and adoring
celestial objects, unless their relenting pity take mercy on your destressed
abiects. And blaspheming tongue, thy unbridled impudency shall heap upon thy
own back a bundle of intolerable miseries, by being forced to utter execrable
slanders against them for their hard hearts, that were purchased to work your
hard hap through your own injurious folly. Passions of discontent must
please your fancies, and sorrowful poems must grace your music; deep sighs
must strain your heart strings, and direful sorrow lull you a sleep, when
visions of new destresses must disquiet your greatest happiness, and dreams of
fresh vexations forbid you the least ease. You shall suc in vain, because you
have delighted in vanity, and hope without obtaining, for that your heart have
harbored dissembling, except these goddesses, whose goodness is unspeakable,
vouchsafe to minister a plaster of pity to your loving piety. It is their
courtesy that must make you chereful, and their good conceits must cherish
your dying mirth; their liking must honor your affection, and their grateful
kindness must advance the zeal of your protested loyalty. It is in their
choice to change your chance, and in their power to bridle Fortune, for that
the Fates, being their sisters, are at their calls to set down your
destinies. If they say they do hate you, beware, for they can hurt you, but if
they affirm they love you, strive to continue your present happiness, and fear
to lose the proffered blessedness. Why are women accounted weak, but because
their nature is pure? Or wherefore are they necessary but that men cannot live
without their company? When we are succorles they comfort us, being melancholy
they cheer us, and they are the means to redeem us from the gates of hell.
Being mad, their musical tongues chase away the evil spirits, being bewitched
their love charms the tormenting devils, and being swallowed up by the gulf
licentiousnes, the heavens have created the^ the help to redeem us from that
hellish furnace.

Thus much for their power, and now a little of their properties. O sacred
mercy (never more honored then in the pitiful bosoms of these feminine
deities) thou holds thy chief harborow within their passionate besomes, and
only art nourished in their relenting hearts. Thou singst within the closets of
their pitiful consciences, and reioycest within the castles of their
celestial souls: thou live with them secure, and makes through them
multitudes of miserable wretches possessors of the highest happiness. Thou
bears the sighs of suing sweet-hearts, and comforts the pinching grief of
pining lovers. Thou meditates of their vows, and studies to requite their
careful affection with kindest courtesy. Thou pittiest the foolish maladies of
fond nouices, and sorrowest at the weakness of many men's wisdom. Thou striuest
to do no wrong, that thou may be free from injury, and labors to shun
suspect, that thou may be without misdoubt. Thou studiest to repay that thou
may reap thy due, and keep thy day that thou may be well dealt with.
Yea much more and so much the better for man, thou pitties them that would
spoil thee, and forgiues them that would hurt thee: thou wishest them well
that would dereaue thee of thy weal, and love them (which is thy only fault)
over entirely that esteem of thy proffered kindness too too carelessly. Yet let
discretion have the second place with you, for she guides them by reason, and
that gouerns men with wisdom. She knows when to charm with sweet melody,
and when to correct with loving persuasions: she uses to dandle virtue, and
reprove vice, to embrace good and fly from evil, and willingly to subject
obedient imitation to wholesome counsel, as also dutifully to desire liberty
from stooping to injurious doctrine. She searches into the depth of subjected
seruise, and discovering whether it be offered of courtesy, or proffered of
knauerie, regards it according to it value, and rewards it with it full worth.
She teaches to like ere they love, and loving to increase or deminish the
heat of their fancy, according to the proportion of kind coals that
nourishes the fire of their affection. She persuades to lance, courting to
the bones, to find out the danger, and seeing what likelyhoode either of weal
or woe is likest to ensue, thee shows them what is good to withdraw the
putrified liking, and what is wholesome to preserve the sound love. And she
studies to make them happy, by wishing men their welfare, to make them
constant, by endeavoring to increase a spark of loyalty, and to make them
honored by instructing them in the true rules of modesty.

And now step in further thou beautifying modesty; for thou addest no small
renoune to their adored natures, nor does thy bashfulnes meanly adorn their
highly prised excellencies: thy rosy blusshes bring no small honor to their
admired beauty, nor ever dies that sacred stayning color, until by man's
corruption, that maidenly mark be extinguished. Yet then (but ah that man
should do so much) thy decent sobriety aduanceth the dignity of their womanly
chastity, and thy matronly behavior displayeth the soueraintie of their
motherly nurture. Thou gives examples that imitated, prevent occasions of
enticing offers to draw to folly, and escapes the injurious slanders of
suspicions searchers, y^ hunt after shows of sensuality. Thou maintainest
peace at home, escapest suspect abroad, and keep thy lovers heart from
harboring jealousy, the chief procurer of greatest misery. And thou gainest
liking and encreasest affection, receiving love and loyalty with an assured
pledge of neuer-dying constancy. Neither art thou everlasting gods, a
stranger to mens-helpers; for thou withal the virtues wait upon these
beautiful spectacles, and they with the Graces extol those the earths miracles.
Their praises are unspeakable, for that their worth is invaluable, and their
desartes unrequited, because through man's weakness misprised; but such and so
great were the adorned excellencies of these human deities, as their
practices laid open their princely courtesy, and their performances made
their lovers happy. And men rejoiced through their faithful affection,
studying to requite women's everlasting kindness with the reward of neuer-ceasing
constancy. Men used heavenly wisdom to obtain liking, and careful behauior,
to confirm love being purchased, and women were forward to bestow modest
kindness, being faithfully dealt withal, and effectually requited proffered
courtesy, neither being too too coye, or showing themselves over forward to be
won. But briefly, and so to end, every one of them rendered like for like with
proofs of neuer-altering affection, they thereby gaining unto themselus the
sugared sweetness of celestial amity, and tying unto their kind thoughts, the
affections of their well-willers, with everlasting constancy.

FINIS.

