Injunctions exhibited the (...) day of ANNO. M.D.XXXVIII.
IN THE NAME OF GOD AMEN. by the authority and commission of the most
excellent Prince HENRY by the grace of god king of ENGLAND and of FRANCE,
defensour of the faith, lord of Irelande, and in earth supreme heed under
Christ of the Church of England. I Thomas lord Crumwell, lord Privy
seal, vicegerent to the kings said highness, for all his jurisdiction
ecclesiastical within this Realm, do for thaduauncement of the true honor of
almighty god, increase of virtue, and discharge of the kings majesty grue and
exhibit (unto you) (...) these injunctions following, to be kept, observed, and
fulfilled upon the peynes hereafter declared.

FIRST THAT ye shall truly observe and keep al and syngular the kings hyghnes
Injunctions, given unto you heretofore in my name, by his gracis authority,
not only upon the peynes therein expressed, but also in your defaulte now after
this second monicion continued, upon further punishment to be straytely
extended toward you by the kings highness arbitrament, or his vicegerent
aforesaid.

ITEM that ye shall provide on this side the feast of (...) nerte coming one
book of the hole Bible, of the largest volume in english, and the same set
up in some convenient place within the said church, that ye have cure of,
where as your parysheoners may most commodiousely resort to the same, and
read it. The charges of which book shall be ratably borne between you, the
person and the parisheoners aforesaid, that is to say, the one half by you,
and the other half by them.

ITEM THAT ye shall dyscourage no man privily or apertly, from the readinge or
hearing of the said bible, but shall expressly provoke fiere and exhort
every person to read the same, as that which is the very truly word of god,
that every christen person is bound to enbrace believe and follow, if he look
to be saved, admonishynge them nevertheless to avoid al contention and
altercation therein, and to use an honest sobriety in the inquisition of the
true sense of the same, and to refer thexplication of obscure places to men
of higher judgment in scripture.

ITEM that ye shall every sunday and holy day through the year* openly and
plainly recite to your parishoners twyes or thries together or oftener, it need
require, one particle or sentence of the Pater noster or Creed in english, to
the intent they may learn the same by heart: And so from day to day to give
them one like lesson or sentence of the same, tylle they have learned the hole
Pater noster and Creed in english by rote. And as they be taught every
sentence of the same by rote, ye shall expound and declare the understanding of
the same unto them, exhorting all parents and householders, to teach their
children and servants the same, as they are bound in conscience to do. And
that done, ye shall declare unto them the ten Commandments one by one
every sunday and holy day, til they be likewise perfect in the same.

ITEM that ye shall in confessions every lent examyne every person that
comes to confession to you, whether they can recite tharticles of our faith,
and the Pater noster in english, and here them say the same particularlye,
wherein if they be not perfect, ye shall declare to the same, that every
christen person ought to know the same before they should receive the
blessed sacrament of the altar, and monysshe them to learn the same more
parfytely by the next year following: or else like as they ought not to
presume to come to goddis bourde, without perfect knowledge of the same, and if
they do, it is to the great peril of their sowles, so ye shall declare unto
them, that ye look for other Injunctions from the kings highness by that time
to stay and repel all such from goddis bourde, as shall be found ignorant in
the premysses, whereof ye do thus admonysshe them, to the intent they should
both eschew the peril of their sowles, and also the worldly rebuke, that they
might incur hereafter by the same.

ITEM that ye shall make or cause to be made in the said church, and every
other cure ye have, one sermon every quarter of a year at the least, wherein
ye shalpurely and syncerely declare the very gospel of Christ, and in the same
exhort your herers to the works of charity, mercy, and faith, specially
prescribed and commanded in scripture. And not to repose their trust or
affiaunce in any other works devised by men's fantasyes beside scripture. As in
wandering to pylgremages, offrynge of money, candels, or tapers to feigned
relics or images, or kyssing and lickyng the same, saying over a number of
beads not understood ne minded on, or in such like superstition. For the
doing whereof ye not only have no promise of reward in scripture, but contrary
wise great threttes and maledictions of god, as things tendynge to ydolatrie
and superstition, which of all other offenses god almighty does most deteste
and abhor, for that the same dyminysheth most his honor and glory.

ITEM that such feyned Images as ye know in any of your cures; to be so abused
with pilgremages or offrynges of any thing made thereunto, ye shall for avoiding
of that most detestable offense of Idolatry, forthwith take down and deleye,
and shall suffer from hensforth no candels tapres or images of ware to be set
before any image or picture, but only the light that comenly goes a cross the
church by the roode lofte, the light before the sacrament of the altar, and
the light about the sepulcher, which for the adornynge of the church and
divine service, ye shall suffer to remain still: admonyshynge your
paryshioners, that Images serve for no other purpose, but as to be books of
unlearned men, that can no letters, whereby they might be otherwise admonyshed of
the lives and conversation of them, that the said images do represent. Which
images if they abuse for any other intent, than for such remembrances, they
commytte ydolatrie in the same, to the great danger of their souls. And
therefore the kings highness, graciousely tenderynge the weal of his
subiectis souls, has in part already, and more woll hereafter frauayle for
thabolyshynge of such images, as might be occasion of so great an offense to
god, and so greatte a danger to the souls of his loving subjects.

Item that in all such benefyces or cures as ye have, whereupon ye be not your
self resydent, ye shall appoint such curates in your stead, as both can by
their ability, and woll also promptly execute these injunctions, and do their
duty otherwise, that ye are bound to do in every behalf accordingly, and
may profit their cure no less with good example of living, than with
declaration of the word of god: or else their lack and defautes shall be
imputed unto you, who shall straytely answer for the same, if they do
otherwise.

ITEM that ye shall admit no man to preche within any your benefices or cures,
but such as shall appear unto you to be sufficietly licensed thereunto by the
kings highness, or his graces autorite, by thatch bishop of Canterbury, or the
bishop of this diocese, and such as shall be so licensed, ye shall gladly
receive, to declare the word of god without any resistance or co^tradictio^.

ITEM if ye have heretofore declared to your parishioners any thing, to
thextolling or setting forth of pilgremages, to feyned relics, or Images, or
any such superstition, ye shall now openly before the same recante and reprove
the same, showing them (as the truth is) that ye did the same upon no ground of
scripture, but as one being led and seduced by a comen error and abuse, crept
in to the church through the suffrance and auaryce of such as felt profyt by
the same.

ITEM if ye do, or shall know any man within your paryshe or else where, that is
a letter of the word of god, to be read in english, or sincerely preched, or
of the execution of these injunctions, or a fautour of the bishop of Romes
pretensed power, now by the laws of this realm justly rejected and
extirped, ye shall detecte and present the same to the kings highness, or his
honorable counsel, or to his vycegerent aforesaid, or to the Justice of
peace next adioynynge.

ITEM that you, and every person, vicare, or curate within this diocese, shall
for every church, keep one book or registre, wherein ye shall write the day
and year of every wedding, christenynge, and buryenge made within your paryshe
for your time, And so every man succedynge you likewise, and also there inserte
every persons name, that shall be so weddid, christened, or buried. And for the
saufe keeping of the same book, the paryshe shall be bound to provide of their
common charges one sure coffer, with. ii. locks and keys, whereof the one to
remain with you, and the other with the wardeynes of every such paryshe,
wherein the said book shall be laid up, which book ye shall every sunday take
forth, and in the presence of the said wardeynes, or one of them, write and
record in the same, all the weddynges, christeninges, and burienges made the
hole weke before. And that done to lay up the book in the said coffer, as
before. And for every time that the same shall be omytted, the party that shall
be in the fault thereof, shall forfayte to the said church. iii.s.iiii.d. to
be employed on the reparation of the same church.

ITEM that ye shall ones every quarter of a year read these, and the other
former Iuiunctions, given unto you by authority of the kings highness openly
and deliberatly before all your paryshioners, to the intent that both you may
be the better admonished of your duty, and your said parishioners the more
incited to ensue the same for their part.

ITEM for as much as by a law establyshed every man is bound to pay his
tithes, no man shall by color of duty omitted by their curates, deteine
their tithes, and so redubbe one wrong with another, or be his own judge, but
shall trewely pay the same, as has been accustomed, to their persons and
curates, without any restraynte or dimynution: And such lack or defaulte, as
they can justly find in their persons and curates, to call for reformation
thereof at their ordynaries and other superiors hands, who upon complayute and
due proof thereof, shall reform the same accordyngly.

ITEM that no person shall from hensforth, alter or change the order and manner
of any fasting day, that is commanded and indicted by the church, nor of
prayer or divine service, other wise than is specified in the said injunctions,
until such time as the same shall be so ordered and transposed by the kings
highness authority, The eues of such saynctes, whose holydays be abrogated,
only excepted, which shall be declared henseforth to be no fasting days.
Ercepted also the commemoration of Thomas Bekket, sometime archbishop of
Canturburie, which shall be clean omitted, and in the stead thereof the
feriall service used.

Item that the knollynge of the Auees, after service and certain other times,
which has been brought in and begone by the pretense of the bishop of Romes
pardon, henseforth be left and omitted, lest the people do hereafter trust to
have pardon for the saying of their Auees, between the said ^uollyng, as they
have done in times past.

Item where in times past men have used in diverse places in their processions
to sing, Ora pro nobis, to so many saynctes, that they had no time to sing
the good suffrages following, as Parce nobis domine, and Libera nos domine, it
must be taught and preached, that better it were to omytte Ora pro nobis, and
to sing the other suffrages, being most necessary, and effectual.

AL WHICH and syngular Injunctions (...) minister unto you, and to your
successors by the kings hyghnes authority, to me committed in this part,
which I charge and command you by the same auctorytie to observe and keep,
upon pain of deprivation, sequestration of your fruits, or such other
cohercion, as to the kings highness, or his vicegerent for the time being,
shall be seen convenient.

Thomas Berthelet Regius impressor excudebat. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


