ENGLANDS COMPLAINT TO JESUS CHRIST AGAINST THE BISHOPS CANONS. OF THE LATE
SINFUL SYNOD, A SEDITIOUS CONVENTICLE, A PACK OF HYpocri^ts a Sworn
Confederacy, a Traitorous Conspiracy against the true Religion of Christ, and
the Weal Public of the Land, and consequently against the Kingdom and
Crown. In this Complaint are Specified those impieties and insolences, which
are most notorious, Sca^tered through the Canons and Constitutions, of the said
Sinful Synod. And confuted by Arguments annexed hereunto.

Psalm. 94. 20, 21, etc. O Lord shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship
with thee, which frames mischief by a Law? They gather themselves together
against the Soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. Esa. 3. 12,
13. O my people, they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way
of thy paths. The Lord stands up to plead, and stands to judge the people.
Ezech. 22. 24, 25, etc. Thus says the Lord, Thou art the Land, that is not
cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation. There is a Conspiracy of
her Prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring Lion, ravening the pr^y: they
have devoured Souls: Her Priests have violated my Law: they have hid their
eyes from my Sabbaths: Her Princes in the midst thereof are like Wolves
ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy Souls, to get dishonest
gain, etc. Printed Anno Dom. 1640.

ENGLANDS COMPLAINT TO JESUS CHRIST, AGAINST THE BISHOPS CANONS.
OATH hope of Ier. 14. 8, 9.
Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why should thou be as a
Stranger in the Land, and as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a
night? Why should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot
Save? Yet thou, o Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy Name,
leave us not. Yea, ver. 7.
o Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, yet do thou it for thy
Names sake: for our backeslidings are many, we have sinned against thee. And 2 Chronicles. 19.
we know not what to do* but our eyes are toward thee. Esa. 63. 15, 16.
O look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of
thy glory: where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels,
and of thy mercies toward me? Are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our
Father, thou o Lord art our Redeemer, thy Name is from everlasting. Esa. 26. 1^.
O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by
thee only will we make mention of thy Name.

And now, o Lord, we thy People, inhabitants of this sinful Land, out of the
depth of our miseries, and from under the burden of our manifold afflictions
and oppressions, which we worthily suffer for our iniquities from thy righteous
hand^ (for Thou have Psalm. 66. 11, 12.
tried us, and melted us in the Furnace, even as silver: Thou have brought us
into the net: Thou have laid affliction upon our loins: Thou have caused men
to ride over our heads: So as to whom shall we go for Hos. 6. 1.
healing, but to thee, who have smitten us: to whom for binding up, but to
thee, who have broken and torn us?) we do therefore in this our humbled estate
present our complaint before thee, the Genesis 18. 25.
Judge of all the world, yea before Thee, who have a Heb. 4. 15, 16.
feeling of our infirmities, having been in all things tempted like as we are,
yet without sin, to that end, that we might come boldly to the throne of
Grace, and obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need And although
we thy People have had of long time, and still have much matter of complaint
unto thy Righteous Throne: yet now above all other, when the Throne of Iniquity
frames mischief as by a Law. For a Synod has been by Authority of late
holden, wherein such things have been concluded and confirmed, as tend to the
utter rooting out of all true Religion, and that under the veil of deep
hypocrisy, double iniquity. And now o Lord, give thy People leave even to
spread this whole Synod before thee, as once King Ezech^^^ spread the
blasphemous letter of the Enemy before the Lord.

And forasmuch as the said Synod has been both called, authorized, and
confirmed in all the Canons and Constitutions thereof by the King, as himself
declares by his own Act both before and after the said Canons; wherein he
professes himself to be thy Deputy (o King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) we
therefore think it our duty, first to purge our selves of that stain of
disloyalty and disobedience which the King charge us withal. For they lay it
to the charge of some of us at the least, that we suspect our King of being
perverted in a Superstitious way of Gods worship, as if he intended to bring in
some alteration of Religion in our Land, against his sundry public
Declartions and Sacred professions before Him, whose Deputy (says he) we are,
against all, and every intention of any Popish Innovation. Now for our parts,
we do appeal to thy righteous judgment, O searcher of all hearts, whether we
have been apt causelessely to suspect or surmise the least evil of our King,
but on the contrary, have been ready to interpret all his actions in such a
sense, as persuading our selves, whatever things were amiss in Church or
Commonweal, or whatever Innovations brought in, yea although under the name
of Royal Authority, yet the King was ignorant of them, and his name therein
abused by some bad Officers about him. Yea, how unwilling are we to this very
day (notwithstanding the late Synod so called and confirmed by the King) to
conceive the least sinister thought of him. So as we are apt to think that
those Innovations brought in since and under his Reign, have either crept in
by stealth and by degrees without his knowledge, or been craftily suggested as
being no Innovations at all, but rather renovations of the decays of the old
Religion (so ^ulgarly called) being induced thereunto by the ancient use
thereof retained in some places of the Land, since the Reformation, as
especially in the Ro^all Chapels, and Cathedralls, though not confirmed by any
Law, as the use of Altars, Images, and the like. But now when we see with open
eyes to our hearts grief, those things to be concluded as by a Law (Canons of
Prelates now being made binding Laws) and so confirmed by the Letter^ Patents of
the King, for him, his Heirs, and lawful Successors: O Lord, what shall we
think? Nay, when we see a strict Oath enjoined and imposed upon all Ministers,
of what style, or rank soever, and upon all graduates in the Universities,
etc. to approve, and preserve the Doctrine and Discipline or Government, as it
stands now established in the Church of England: and knowing, that by public
Acts, Edicts, Decr^es, Declarations, Books, etc. (set forth and published in
the Kings Name, and patronized by his special Authority Royal) the
Sanctification of thy Christian Sabbaths, the Morality of thy holy
Commandments, the Doctrines of thy Grace and Gospel, with the preaching
thereof; all preaching on thy Days in the afternoons, and all true
Catechizing, mainly cried down: and that all thy painful, and godly Ministers
are persecuted, suspended, deprived, cast out of all, and can have no remedy
either by course of Law (which is stopped) or by the King himself to w^om they
complain: and that the Prelates of late more especially usurped a false Title
to their false Government Ecclesiastical by claiming their Prelaticall
Jurisdiction from thine own divine Authority; So as we cannot be any longer
ignoran^ (except we will be wilfully blind) that the Doctrine of the Church of
England established in Queen Elizabeth's days, has now suffered not only an
Innovation, but an utter eversion and extirpation of the very foundations
thereof: And this Innovation, this eversion, being now finally concluded on in
a Synod, confirmed by the King, and enjoined to be Sworn unto by all those
aforesaid: and besides all this, the King himself professing, that he has
diligently with great contentment and comfort read, and considered of all the
said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions of the late Synod aforesaid,
and that he finds the same such as he is persuaded will be very profitable to the
whole Church and Kingdom: And thereupon does propound, publish, and straightly
injoyne by his Authority and Letters Patents, the same to be diligently
observed, executed, and equally kept of all his Subjects within this Realm:
Now o Lord, all these things weighed and laid together, Solemn and Sacred
Protestations against Innovations on the one side, and a mighty flood of
Innovations on the other side, which by Royal Authority have made a terrible
universal invasion and irruption both into thy Spiritual Kingdom, and this
Temporal, threatening speedily to sweep all away at once: what shall we think?
Or what shall we say? Would thou have us still to dream or imagine, that
here are no Innovations at all brought in either of Doctrine, or
Ecclesiastical Government, and all because the King has so frequently, so
solemnly before G^d, and Angels and Men, protested to the contrary? Or, that
the Innovations concluded in this Synod, are therefore no Innovations, because
ratified and confirmed by the Kings Letters Patents, and by all the strength of
Royal Authority, and because commended by the King to be such, as he is
persuaded will be very profitable to the whole Church and Kingdom? Or may we not
rather think, or rather most certainly believe, that (for the iniquities of
the Land) oppression in the State, persecutions of thy Ministers, effusion of
innocent blood of thy Servants, open Profanation of thy Sabbaths, and that by
public dispensation, yea in a word, a contemptuous trampling of all Laws
divine and humane underfeet; nay yet more^ (more especially, as the orginall
source and cause of all the rest) a damnable Apostacy from the Gospel, joined
with a desperate League with Rome, too palpable to be seen, so as Antichrists
Religion is embraced instead of thy True word and Gospel: for this, for these
crying sins, is it not lawful for us to think at least, yea to believe, that
thou in thy just judgment restrained and withheld from us the benign
influence of the Kings heart, and have so far (for a time at least, for our
humiliation) given him up to be Seduced by the Prelates and their Romish
faction, and to be guided and led by their Councels, as refusing to hearken to
any true Information of his most loving and loyal Subjects, (whereof we have
had of late lamentable experience) he will rather hazard all his Kingdoms,
then either displease them, or disobey their Councels? But yet, o Lord, seeing
thy judgments are unsearchable, and thy ways past finding out, we will not
take upon us to judge in so deep a matter, only thou have said, you shall know
them by their fruits.

But Lord, the King says, He does these things, by his Prerogative Royal, and
Supreme Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical. Holy and Righteous Lord, have thou
given to any mortal Creature, to any Kings on Earth, any such Prerogative
Royal, any such Supreme Authority over thy Church, as to alter Religion at his
pleasure, or to confirm the alteration of the true Religion for others
pleasure, to make void by Edicts or Declarations the Saving Doctrines of thy
word, thy holy Commandments, thine eternal Law, or to sit in thy Throne, over
the Souls and Consciences of thy People, captivating and oppressing them under
the burdens of humane inventions, and Superstitious Ceremonies* Nay, have thou
not expressly Col. 2. 8. to the end of the Chapter.
forbidden thy People to subject their necks under any such yoke, as being a
denial of thee our King, and of our Redemption by thy precious blood* Such
usurpations therefore of man, we do, (o only Sovereign of our souls) even
before Angels and men utterly renounce. Esa. 26. 23.
O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by
thee only will we make mention of thy Name. And, Lord, be thou our Judge
between us and our oppressors in this thing, and give thy People holy courage
and zeal to use all lawful means for the upholding of this thy Sole Royal
Sovereignty over our poor Souls and Consciences, against all Antichristian
usurpations to the contrary.

And last of all, whereas our King says, that he has called, and given free
leave to this Synod to treat and agree upon certain other Canons necessary for
the advancement of Gods Glory, the edifying of his holy Church, and the due
reverence of his blessed Mysteries and Sacraments (which words are taken out of
the Act for Conformity in Queen Elizabeth's Reign.) If it shall clearly appear
by this our Complaint following, that the things concluded in the said Synod,
be neither for the advancement of Gods glory. nor the edifying of his Church,
nor the due reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and S^^raments, but quite
contrary: then, how the Kings Authority extends to the confirmation of those
things therein so concluded, do thou, o Lord, Judge.

In the next place, we present our Complaint before thee, o Lord, touching the
most material Canons concluded by the ^^id Synod, and confirmed by the King.

The first is: Concerning the Regal power.
(...)

(...) or absolute, as all Tyrannical States, as that of the Turk; seeing the
Kingdom of England is ^empered, seasoned, and conditioned with good Laws,
which are the ordinary rules of good and just Government of the Subject, the
due execution whereof in the administration of the Kingdom is an essential
part of the Kingly ^ffice, which cannot be separated one from the other. To
this purpose King James in (...) Speech at (...)
Speec^es in Parliament expressly distinguishes between an absolute Monarchy,
not bounded with Laws, but depending only on the will of the Prince; and the
King of England who (says he) does by (...) that by Oath, ^nter upon the
Kingdom to (...)

of their Estates: let him but call a Parliament, and yield to the redressing
of their heavy grievances, and he shall find us his People most ready to yield
him all manner of necessary due Support; yea abundant, more then necessary.

^

Yet Nevertheless, Subjects have not only possession of, etc. Again, what
assurance of true and just right, title and property to, and in all their goods
and estates can this their Canon, as it were by Canon Law, make unto the
Subjects of England, when all then practices both in the Ecclesiastical and
Civil Government are such, such the courses of their Courts whether
Ecclesiastical, or mixed, as consisting of Ecclesiastical and Civil Judges
together, but still where the Ecclesiastical bear the maine Sway, even there,
where they be fewest in number) such their usurped, illegal, extravagant
power, such terrible Precedents filed up in their Courts, which stand for Laws
and ruled Cases, for all that come after; and the like: as no Subject in the
Kingdom can secure himself, that any one thing, or all that he possesses,
are his own? For the best and surest Tenure, by which every freeborne Subject
holds the right and propriety of his goods, is the Law of the Land. But let the
Subject be brought into one of their Eccl^siasticall Courts as aforesaid
(whether into their High Commission, or other Courts where the Arch-prelates
sit party Judges) and be his cause never so just, never so innocent, never so
clear, as against which no Law of the Land does lie, yet, first of all in
those Courts he cannot have any benefit of the Law at all, and consequently,
where those Ecclesiastical Judges set their Fangs, they will tear a man out
of all his est^^e, yea out of his Skin, and pull his flesh from his back, and
break him and his all in pieces. So as at those Boards, where these harpies
sit, against whomsoever complaints are served in, being such especially as when
the Eccl^siasticall teeth against them, how quickly shall they and their whole
estates be swallowed up as it were at one morsel? And to the end, that the
Civil State may be subservient to the Ecclesiasticke, these Ecclesiastics have
their care in every b^^te, and their finger in every pie, where any thing may
be plucked from the Subject, by hocke, or by crook, that so, as their
Ecclesiastic Government, is Tyrannical, so they may advance the Civil to hold
correspondence with it: So as now the whole Government taken together, is
reduced to certain Tall^s, even as all Religion is served up upon a
Court-Cu^bord at the end of the Chan^cel, whereof anon. And (as is noted
before, which least it be forgotten, we mention again) whatever Conclusions or
Orders are made at those Tables, or Boards, (^e they never so foul and
shameful) they are fixed and filed up for perpetual Laws in all such cases
for time to come; yea and when they please, where they want a Precedent for
some extraordinary feat to be done, they can with a wet finger make a new Law
for it. Hereof if we take but a few instances, it will easily appear what
truth there is in the words of this Canon, which seem to give to the Subject
what ever right and title, and true property of estate does or can belong unto
them. For, first, we have late Precedents to show, that no Freeman of London,
after he has served his years, and set up his Trade, can be sure long to
enjoy the Liberty of his Trade, but either he is forbidden longer to use it, or
is forced at length with the rest of his trade to purchase it as a Monopoly at
a dear rate, which they and all the Kingdom pay for. Witness the
Sope-businesse. Again, no Doctor and practitioner in Physic is sure to hold
his Profession, whereby he and his should live, when once he comes into the
High Commission. Witness Dr. Bastwicks case. Item, no Minister is sure to hold
his freehold, his Benefice (which is by Law his freehold) if once he be
quarrelled in the High Commission, yea or in other inferior Ecclesiastical
Courts. Witness manifold Precedents in the Land. Item, none can be sure that
his goods are his own, when all, and more then all are taken from (...)
Witness Mr Henry Bu^ton, one of the foresaid three. Item, none can be sure of
his right and title, propriety and interest, which the Divine Law, and Sacred
Ordinance of God has given a man in his own Wife, but that one of these Boards
shall (...) him, as by virtue thereof, being confined to perpetual (...)
prison, his Wife shall be perpetually separated from him, so as if she shall dare
to hazard her life in a far^e ^ourney by Sea which She would do) to have but
a sight o^ her Husbands face, she must be sent Prisoner back again, Witness
the case both of Dr Bastw^cke, and Mr Burton aforesaid. Many more instances
might be brought. But these Summed up together, let any English Subject now
resolve, what assurance o^ true and just ^ight, title and property to, and in
all their goods and estates, or in any of the particular instances
forespecified, this false and wicked Canon can give him? Let him be but brought
before one of these Boards, and he shall be stripped of all. They will pretend
this, and that I wot not what, he^nous crime, ((...)) as they did against those
three aforesaid, when they could not prove any such thing. And Mr Burtons Case
in particular, being a Minister, was so clear (his defensive Answer being
orderly admitted in Court, and before the day of (...), by the Courts order
expanged by two of the Judges o^ that Court as Impertinent and Scandalous) as
they could object nothing against him at the Censure, but proceed against him
Pro Confess^, all his fault being his refusa^l to answer (...)
Interrogatories, which if he had done, he had betrayed his Cause, and laid both
it and himself open to the just lash of the Court, by assenting to the
condemnation of his innocent Cause, before it was heard. Which one Example well
weighed, what Cause so innocent, so just, can look to escape Scot free? But
thus we see, o Lord, and thou better see, what truth these Canonists have in
them, whose words pretend all right to the Subject, and whose deeds do
practice the bringing of all men's souls, bodies, and estates under the yoke
of an universal Tyranny. To proceed.

For the third (the setting up of an independent coactive power Papal, or
popular, which undermines they say, the Royal Office, and cunningly overthrows
the sacred ordinance of Godthis being meant of the State of Religion: if it be
Papal, it is altogether unlawful, as being Antichristian: but being according
to thy word, every Christian State is bound to (...) it up, and maintain it,
and no Christian King ought to hinder, or oppose it. But as for all Pre(...),
it is merely Papal, and Antichristian; though not in the first degree, the
Pope usurping an universal power over all the Churches in the world) yet in a
second, Every Prelate in his Diocese exercising a Papal power, and so does
cunningly undermine the Royal Office, and overthrew Gods Sacred Ordinance, who
has given a power and charge to Kings to suppress all such Ecclesiastical
Tyranny over the souls of his people. And whereas they say, the Royal Office,
is the Sacred Ordinance of God: we all acknowledge it; and that this Ordinance
of God comprehends in it not only the institution of the Superiority of Kings
over their people, but their Special office of Government, as it is limited
and establish^d upon those Laws and Covenants, and Conditions agreed upon
between the Prince and People: These are a Special part of thy Divine
Ordinance,
that Kings should govern by a Law (as Deuteronomy 17. 18, 19, 20. Pro. 31. 5.) and
that they should inviolably keep those Oaths and Covenants, that they have
solemnly made with their people. And therefore, they which persuade Kings, that
they are no way boun^, but have liberty to rule as they list, by an independent
Prerogative, these are they, that are traitors, both to God, and to the King,
and to the Realm, and to the peace, and prosperity thereof.

For the Fourth, For Subjects not to bear Arms against their King offensive,
or defensive, upon any pretense whatsoever, as being a resi^^ing of the Powers
Ordained of God: First, we hold, that no private person ought to take up arms
against his Prince: but Secondly, if a King maintain a Faction about him,
which go about to oppress ^s whole Kingdom,
and People in their Law^ and Liberti^s, and most of all in the true Religion,
so as he will not rule them by the good Laws of the Kindome, but seeks to make
all his Subjects Slav^s; by bringing their souls, Bodies estates (...) a
miserable bondage: is it not now high time for the whole State either to labor
to heal the breach, or if necessity (when there is no other remedy) to stand
up is one man to defend themselves and their Country, until the Faction
shall be (...) cashe^ed, and so the King reform himself, and renew (...)
Covenant and (...) of the Kingdom to the good and just (...) of the People.
And whereas ^i is point trencheth upon the Scots, at this time, what do they
stand upon, but in the first place, to free their Religion from Antichristan
usurpa^on, (...) Psalm. 72. 4.
(...) which otherwise by (...) and Tyranny would be brought to (...).

And for the F^st and last, that all Ministers do declare this Consatution of
the power of Kings, to the people yearly: Ought not Ministers to consider,
that they are also members of the Commonwealth, and live under the Law
thereof? And being Subjects, ought they not to teach the people, that they love
and h^nour the King, and chearefully pay all such taxes, as by Law are due unto
him, forasmuch as we all live under a Law? And (...) the other side, ought not
all Court-preachers to tell the (...) christian and Lawless Government. And
this, o Lord, we conceive of this first Constitution, so far as we are able
to apprehend: committing the whole judgment thereof to thy uner^ing wisdom.

The Second is, For the better keeping holy the day of his Majesty's most happy
Inauguration.
Ah, Lord; can this be to the honor of our King, when the annual memory of
his Inauguration is saine to be forced? What Canon or Constitution is for the
continuation of the joyful memory of Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed memory,
which yet to this day cease not? But o that our King would consider that word
of thine, 1 Samuel 2. 30
Those that honor me, I will honor, and they (...) and then they might have
spared this Canon for the King^s day. No, no if these things be not reformed, a
Ie^^ 1. 15. and 2. 2.
black day is hastening on a pace; as thou, o Lord, have threatened in thy word
for such Sins. And with thee there is no respect of persons. Ier. 22. 18* 19.
30.
King Ieh^jachim lived without being desired, and had the (...) of an Ass; and
it was written upon him, write this man childlesse, A man that ^h^ll not
presper in the Earth, nor should be lamented, being dead; nor should any of i^
Seed prosper after him. O how terrible art thou, o Lord, to proud and obstinate
Sinners, when not Kings Crowns and Scepters can secure of defend them from thy
just hand? And how fearful a judgment is that, when thou Job. 12. 21.
powrest contempt upon Princes, and weakenes^ the power of the mighty?

The Third Canon is: For suppressing of the growth of Popery.
O Lord, do thou not see in this whole long Canon the naked hypocrisy of
this Synod, clothing it self with many same figleaves of pious pretenses
(forsooth) for the suppressing of Popery? Yea Lord, their ^ypocrisie is so
palp^ble herein, that all the world sees that this Constitution was purposely
made to blind the eyes of the simple in these stirring times, wherein they see
their Popish practices to grow into such hatred and detestation with all the
Kings good Subjects. What other, but these practices, have been the co^les that
have kindled the fire in our neighbor (...) to make the greater report (but
without shot) in so hotly assaulting the Tower of Babel: because in so doing,
it may make the world believe, that contrary to the Doctrine of Canterbury)
there is no Salv^tion for Papists out of the Church of England; and then let
all Court Papists look to it; and withal, the President must (...) a great
part of his Relation, which he has written in favor of Papists, especially
(...) silly and ignorant, to whom he grants Salvation in their R^^igion: he
must also retract his Saying, that the Church of England and of Rome are one
and the same Church, and hold one Faith and Religion undifferent: he must also
(...) that, wherein he assemeth with his Jesuit, Relat. p. 375.
that none ^^ght to come to the English Church, then and there in that manner
to worship God, that is resolved of the truth of the Roman Church; or to the
like effect: and the Relator himself holds the truth of the Roman Church, for
he affirms it to be a true Church. With many other new leaves which he must
turn over, upon this sudden motion of suppressing the growth of Popery;
which if cordial, they should first have rid all Churches from Images,
Crucifixes, (...) Altars, and the like, least in bringing Papists to Church,
they should but change their Latin Popery into English Popery. And now, o
Lord, we beseech thee to judge of the hypocrisy of this selfe-styled Sacred
Synod, which under a pretense of suppressing the growth of Popery, do indeed
supplant the true Faith and Religion amongst us, that so instead thereof they
may at length, as fast as they can, set Idolatry up in her throne, and full
(...). For besides all this, that is said, have they not set out many notorious
Popish Books, as that called the Femall Glory, which makes the blessed Virgin
to be a Goddess to be adored, and called upon, or prayed unto, the whole Book
being a very pack of Idolatry throughout, and set out in English, and allowed
by one of the Prime Prelates Chapleins? So also a Book of one Shelford Priest,
whose 5 Treatises are notorious gross popery; with many other of the same
branne, or meal, which have been published by Authority, and never any of them
yet called in. And some that have been called in, as Cozens Orisons, and Salis
his Devotions, and others, yet go current up and down, and are in every Papists
pocket. Now if these holy men of this Sacred Synod had intended indeed to
suppress the growth of Popery, they should have caused heaps of bonefires to
be made of the Books in Smithfield. But in all things touching this point, how
ridiculously and palpably they have discovered their hypocrisy, especially the
President and Father of the Synod, do thou, o Lord, judge.

The Fourth Canon is, Against Socinianisme.
Behold here, Lord, another devise, to set simples a wondering, what this
Monster, Soci^^isine should be, which most men in England never so much as once
heard named before, and which England I hope^ is free enough from, unless a
certain neighbor to it, which they call ^rminianis^ne do not hale it in, as
it has done many other Heresi^s. For as for the Remonsirants; or A^minians,
they profess society and communion with the Socimans rather then with the
Orthodox Protestants, whom they call Ca^vinists. Yea and in sundry of their
Heresies they border near upon them, as maintaining Justification by works,
and that we are not bound to believe that we shall rise again with these our
bodies glorified, and the like. So as does not the Synod mistake the name?
Should they not have said, against Arminianisme? Or perhaps they name the
Damnable and Cursed Heresy of Socinianisme, both because they would make the
people believe it is that, which has so much been cried down by Preachers
under the Name of Arminianisme, and yet they will save Arminianisme harmless,
to which they have been so much beholden: and also because Arminianisme does in
many things Symbolize with Sccinianisme, under which it may the more easily lie
hid. But for Arminianisine sake, the President has, in a Declaration in the
Kings Name before the 39 Articles made the Articles touching Grace, Election,
Predestination, etc. to speak as well in favor of it, as of the truth it
self. Or would they prevent the contagion of Socinianisme, as also of
Arminianisme? Call in those Orders, which restrain young students in the
University for reading our Protestant Authors.

The Fifth Canon: Against Sectaries.
In this Canon they name Seperatists, whom especially they mean, as
endeavoring (as they say) the subversion of the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England: on these they lay load in good earnest indeed, and on all
those, that shall print or publish Books especially against the Discipline and
Government of the Church of England. This is indeed their fair Goddess Diana,
of which these Craftsmen, who get their great Incomes by her, are so jealous,
and do so furiously thunder against the opposites. And surely, o Lord, if thou
do not at this time help, they poor people, who cannot with a good
Conscience (if but rightly informed) hold communion with these men in their
Discipline and under their Government, must needs go to wrack, and be utterly
spoiled they and theirs.

The Sixth Canon: An Oath enjoined for the preventing of all Innovations in
Doctrine and Government.
Ah Lord, here is the filling up of the measure of all iniquity, (...) ol all
cruelty and tyranny. When they have brought their plots to pass, when
established and settled their Innovations both in Doctrine and Government, then
these hypocrites come with (...) for the preventing of all Innovations in
Doctrine and Government. This for the Title of the Canon. And that they may
exalt their hypocrisy to the height, that it may appear to all men, they
further say: This Present Synod being desirous to declare their sincerity and
Constanc^ in the profession of the Doctrine and (...) in the Church of England,
and to secure all then against any suspicion of ^^volt to Popery, or any other
Superstition.) Decr^es, etc. Now, Lord, can the hypocrisy of Rome it self in
that Mystery of Iniquity, packed up in the Council of Trent, surpass this
notorious hypocrisy of our English Prelates in this their Synod? The veil of
their soul hypocriste is the pretense of Sincerity, and Constancy in the
profession of the Doctrine and Dis^^^ine already established: they have now
already established a new Doctrine and Discipline in the Church of England, and
so they are desirous to declare their Sincerity and Constancy in the
profession of the same. O holy Lord, who is able to deal with these impious
hypocrites, but thy self alone? And now that they have ^^tained their ends in
a good measure (for they do not mean to stay here, till they have finished the
Tower of Babel to its full height, by degrees, after a while) they do this to
secure all men against any Suspicion of revolt to Popery, or any other
Superstition. For when the Revolt to Popery and the Superstitions thereof, is
now in a good measure already made, then would they have all men to be secure
against any revolt to Popery. But what need men to fear, when the danger is
already past, and without remedy? They have set up their Altars; they gently
entreat adoration thereunto, and that by the same arguments that Papists use to
color over such Idolatry, till they have learne^ in fuller terms to express
themselves with a We will and Command: they have set up their Images, and
Crucifixes in Chapels and Cathedralls, and that over the Altar; for all other
Churches to conform thereunto; they have published Books in English full of
most gross Romish Idolatry and Supers^tion; they have cried down the due
Sanctification of the Christian Sabbath Day, and have laid open the s^^dg^tes
to all pro^anesse to break in, by public ^^^spensation of profane Sports and
Pastimes, that so they make the Lords day the (...) day; and to make way for
such profane Sports, they have universally forbid all preaching in the
^^^ernoones upon thy Holy Day; they have made thy holy Commandment for the
keeping and Sanctifying of thy Day of none effect, and that not only by their
profane practices, but professedly by their Book's published by Authority; they
have by Edicts made the Articles of R^^^^gion of the Church of England
concerning Grace to be of none authority: they have set forth R^lation of a
Cont^^^^nce, by Will of Canterbury.
Books, wherein they profess that the Church of England, and of Rome the whore
of Babylon are one and the Same Church, professing one and the same Faith and
Religion; and go about to Father the Antichristian Iurisdict^^^n and
Government of Prelates, upon the Divin ^^^ution, and upon the practice of thy
holy Apostles; and do cry down the Authority of thy Sacred word, as an
insufficient witness to prove it self the word of ^od, and as a dead and
dumb judge and insufficient to determine doubt and Controversies in points of
Faith, and so do set up (...) Authority above the Scripture; they have cast
out all, or most of those godly and painful Mino^^ers of thy word, which were
as so (...) lights, and pillars in the house of our God, because they stood in
the gappe, and in the way of these men, to hinder their wicked attempts in
overthrowing of all true Religoon; and if any good Ministers be yet left, that
have escaped their fingers, here is a hellish plot will hurl them all out at a
clappe: these with many other their Inn^ vations they having now brought to
pass, now, now would they have all men to be secure against any revolt to
Popery Now they declare their constancy and Sincerity in the Doctrine and
Discipline established.

And hereupon they proceed to their Synodicall Decree saying,

This present Synod decrees, that all Archbishops, and Bishops, and all other
Priests and Deacons in places exempt or not exempt, shall take an (...) against
all Inn^vations of Doctrine or Discipline. And the (...) I, A. B. do swear,
that I do approve the Doctrine and Discipline, or Government established in
the Church of England, as containing all things necessary to Salvation: And
that I will not endeavor by my self, or any other, directly, or indirectly,
to bring in m^ Popish Doctrine, contrary to that which is so established: Nor
will I ever give my assent to alter the Government of this Church, by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now
established, and as by right it ought to stand, nor yet ever to Subject it to
the usurpation, and Superstitions of the Sea of Rome, etc.

And if any shall refuse to take this Oath, after the first month, he shall be
suspended from his Ministry: after the second month, from his Ministry and
Benefice: and after the third month, deprived of all his Ecclesiastical
promotions whatsoever, and execution of his function which he holds in the
Church of England. And so this Oath extends to all Graduates in Divinity,
Masters of Graduates, or licensed practitioners in Law and Physic, all
Registers, Actuaries, Proctors, Schoolmasters, all that enter into the
Ministry, or into a Benefice, etc.

Thus Lord, it is not suffi^^^ for these men to alter both the Doctrine, and
Discipline of the Church of England (as aforesaid) and to make the Discipline
and Government of Prelates more Antichristian, then it was before, by adding a
new claim of Divine Authority to their Antichristian Iurisa^ction,
blasphemoully fatheri^g it upon thee: but they must have all this Sealed with
an Oath of all such Persons, as aforesaid, that so by so many condu^^ pipes,
the whole Land may be poisoned, and at once universally enthralled under a most
miserable bondage. And now subscription (which were too much, and against all
Law and Conscience) is not sufficient. For all Ministers, and others of any
degree forementioned, must swear to the ratifying of the (...) of the Articles
of Religion, as aforesaid: to the setting up and bowing to Altars, with all the
other Ceremonies and Innovations about them: to the maintaining of an Anti
christian Tyranny exercised by the Prelates, under the name of Christ and his
Apostles: and so in Sum, they must become Sworn vassals to these Tyrants,
and Sworn Enemies to thy Majesty and Kingly Sovereignty, to thy word and
Scepter, to their own Salvation, and the Salvation of thy people, and so
proclaim themselves to all the world, the most base and vile Slaves, that ever
the earth bred. Yea the most of them (such especially as know anything; and
this time of light admits of no plea for ignorance in any man) must of
necessity (if at all they take this Oath) Swear against their own Consciences,
and so in no small degree sin against the Holy Ghost; whereby their Sin becomes
unpardonable, when once their Conscience is ^eared to impenitencie and their
selfe-damnation sealed up to destruction. Besides all this, if they look upon
temporal respects, are they sure the King of this Land will be always of the
mind, to maintain and continue such an Hierarchy? What, if God should be
pleased in mercy to hi^ Church, to open the eyes of the King, to let him see
now he and his State is abused by this Generation of Prelates, so as to ^^ot
them out? Again, though the Office o^ Kings be ^^mortall, yet their persons
are not: another King may succeed that is of another m^^d. And above all this,
we believe, o Lord, that the intolerable outrages, and high flown presumptions
of these Prelates against thee, and thy Church, and against the whole State of
the Land, are most certain, clear, and immediate forerunners of their most
fearful ruin. And therefore, let thy fear, o Lord, be upon all thy
Ministers and People of the Land at this time, and let thy grace be sufficient
for them, to arm them with a holy courage, zeal, magnanimity, undaunted
constant res^^tion to stand out in a Christian defiance against this most
damnable and desperate Oath, least the taking of it bring certain wrath upon
the takers, as the making and imposing of it shall certainly bring upon the
makers and imposers of it, to their utterdestruction. But (alas!) o Lord, have
not these Prelates already made way for an unwer^all admittance of this their
Cursed Oath? For where is fearce one good Minister left, of a true bred
masculine Spirit, whom these men have not rid out of the way? And those that be
left, are they not for the most part such as either prefer the fleshpots of
Egypt before Canaan? Or such, as have already de^^led their Consciences with
ab^sing their Ministry to the public obeying of wicked Commands of these their
great Masters? as in the public reading the Book of profane Sports on the
Lords day: forbearing to preach in the Afternoones: admitting of Altars in
their Churches: and perhaps bowing unto them: not (...) to preach freely the
Doctrines of Grace, to the strengthening of the faith of Gods people, and
inflaming their love toward God as the 17 th Article says) and to the
confounding of the enemies of Grace, and that cursed Faction, that now
reigns? So as Ministers, having universally defiled their Consciences, and
abased their Ministry in these things (for such as refused, are already cast
out) are already prepared and sitted to do any other base^ service, that these
their Masters shall command, their Conscience being by this time made wide
enough to swallow down this monstrous and damnable Oath, which could not
possibly have been forged in any other Shop, but in hell it self, not by any
other workmen, but by Devils themselves in the likeness of men. But, o Lord,
thou who Iud^ 24.
only art able to keep (...) thine from saking, and to ^^reserve them
faultlesse before the presence of thy glory with joy; who Esa. 26. 3.
wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose ^^nd is stayed on thee; because he
trusts in thee: if thou have a remnant left, which have not received the
mark of the Beast, but have kept their garments pure; or if any, who through
fear or humane frailty have abased themselves in any of the things aforesaid:
restore them by repentance, and establish them all by thy Grace, that they may
so stand for thy Truth and their Salvation here, as they may one day stand
undaunted before the Son of Man at his appearing.

And further we note out of the words of the Oath, That they are to Swear they
do approve the Doctrine and (...) line established in the Church of England,
as containing all things necessary to Salvation. Now will they say, that the
Discipline, or Government of the Church of England contains any thing
necessary to Salvation, seeing herein they join it with Doctrine, as
containing together all things necessary to Salvation? Nay, is not the
Discipline and Government, any enemy to Salvation, seeing it is altogether
Antichristian, Tyrannical, and a mere usurpation, and in the whole practice
of it, and in all the Rites and Ceremonies, against the word of God, and
against the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, and a most notorious and
pestilent persecuter of the true Saints and Servants of God, and a rooter out
of all true Religion and godliness out of the Land. Is it not Antichristian,
and usurping Christ's Throne and Sovereignty over the Consciences of his People,
which is expressly and directly contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, so as the
subjection thereunto is clearly proved by the Col. 2. 8, etc*
Apostle to be a denying of Christ, and so a loosing of Salvation? And for the
Doctrine of the Church of England, how can it be said to contain all things
necessary to Salvation, when the most principal Articles of Saving Grace are
made of none effect, and are forbidden to be preached to the people? And
suppose all the 39 Articles were entire, and not corrupted, but preserved in
their true sense, agreeing with Scripture (as Article of Consecration of
Archbishops, etc.
some of them are not) yet they cannot be said to contain all things necessary
to Salvation. For only the holy Scripture, which is the only ad. quate Rule
of Faith, contains all things necessary to Salvation, it being a clear
Commentary and exposition of it self, and a Rule whereby to try all humane
writings of Divinity whatsoever. Thus the matter of the Oath it self is most
false, and blasphemous, which with all the rest we refer to thy judgment, o
Lord.

Again, A man must swear, not to bring in any Popish Doctrine, ^n^rary to
that which is so established. We conceive this to be no (...)

Church. Secondly, for Bishops, we find the name indeed in (...)ture, but not a
Diocesan Bishop, but such a one, as (...) (...) a particular Congregation, to
feed the flock of God, as thy (...)
(...) teaches. And we find Deacons also, but no Archdeacons. And to set
Archdeacons over Presbyters, is not only an incoug^^ity and disorder, and so
not right, as it ought to be: but also a (...) Antichristian guise and
usurpation. As for Deanes, they are of a later institution. And as for
Archbishops, they confess, that the Apo^^es were all equal; how come they
then to be superior to other Diocesan Bishops, who claim to be the Apostles
success ^^ By this reckoning, an Archbishop should have been superior to the
Apostl^s. So as this Archiepiscopall Government, stands not rightly
established, as being in a more Superlative degree Antichristian, then ordinary
Bishops; nor can he with them shift or put off their Government to be
Antichristian and Papal, the Metropolitan of all England being that over
England, which the Pope challenges to be over the Church Catholic. And that
the present Arch-Prelate carries himself as the Pope of England, whose Canon
is a Law, let but this wicked Synod witness, whereof he is the Papal
President, and this Papal Oath withal, which is drawn up and imposed on all
Ministers, after the manner of that Oath, which Paul the fourth added to his
Council ^^ ^rent, for all his Clergy to take, and so to Swear to all the
Doctrines and Canons concluded in that Council. Thus, o Lord, we could not, but
in this perplexed case open our minds, and (as the Prophet says: Ier. 20. 1^
open our Cause before thee.

The Seventh Canon: A Declaration concerning some Rites and Ceremonies.
This Canon is generally for an uniformity in will worship throughout all
England, and particularly in the introducing of Altars in every Church, with
the Service about it. The Canon for this, first pretends, how it were to be
wished, that unity of Faith were accompanied with uniformity of practice in the
outward worship and Service of God. Now this outward worship is merely of man's
devising, a will worship, and expressly forbidden and condemned by the Col. 2.
Apostle, and therefore no Service of God: So as the uniformity herein
overthrows not only the unity of Faith, but the faith it self, as Col. 2.
And again, such will worship of man's invention, is a fruit of the pride and
presumption of man's aine and graceless heart, and so cannot be truly called
the Service of God. For our God hates all such service, as himself has not
commanded and prescribed in his word; according as thou (...).

Again, this S^^d pretends for this their wished uniformity in (...) worship
two things: 1. the avoiding of suspicious fears of Innovation by the weak: 2.
the hope of Papists, of Englands backes^^ding into Popish Superstition; and
both, by reason of the Situation of the Communion Table, and the approaches
thereunto. And might not the Synod then with more ease, have removed quite
away, both the fear of the one, and the hope of the other, in leting the
Communion Tables stand, where they were wont to do? When a Stumbling block
stands in a dark way, whether is it not better (for the preventing of
stumbling) to remove the block, then to write upon it, Beware of this
Stumbling block? Shall not every man that passes that way, sooner break his
Shinnes, or bones, then ^ake notice of the writing for prevention? And can
every one take warning by the Canon to avoid the offense, so well, as if the
Scandal were quite taken away? When in Ezek^^ his time the people began to
worship that monument of the brazen Serpent, the good King brake it to pieces.
And is it not better (...) ^e now Altars to be set up in all C^^^^es throughout
England ^^^ hereupon the Synod tells us (for it is conscious enough of it)
(...) Papists slatter themselves with a hope of our backe^^ding into their
Popish Superstition. Do they so? How come they thus to hope? From the seting
up of your Alt^^s, you will say. And to what purpose then is your former Canon,
for Suppressing the growth of Popery, when this Canon will make them grow
faster, out of a hope of Englands backes^ding to them, then the former will
Suppress their growth, for fear of all the empty charge thereof, or for any
counterfeit shows these men can make of winning them to our Church? unless the
Altars be of more force to do it, when they see especially those
Superstitions, or rather Idolatrous approaches thereunto. But the Synod calls
their hope, a vain hope. That Is the Synod^ vain hope, or rather hypocritical
dissimulation: For they know it to be most true, and the Papists have reason so
to hope, as some of their own Authors in their late English pamphlets have
jea^^ngly writ of Englands back^^tiding to Popery, as of a thing, whereof
England is grown now adays very ambitious. And for the fear and jealousy,
which they say the weak have hereof: have not the wisest men in the King^^^^e
the like fear and jealousy, and that upon just causes and grounds? And
suppose the weak only were offended with such things: why did not the wise,
and Sacred (...) rather remove the Scandal, then slappe them in the mouth with
the Fox tail of (...) (...) Canon, or smoke out their cries with the charge
(...) (...)
The strong (as says the Apostle) ought to bear with the (...) of the weak,
and not to please themselves.

But the Synod tells us, That the standing of the Communion Table (...) way
under the East window of every Chancel or Chapel, i^ (...) its (...) nature
indifferent, neither commanded, nor condemned by the word of God, either
expressly, or by immediate deduction, and therefore that no Religion is to be
placed therein, or s^ruple to be made thereon.

First, if it be a thing indifferent, why do they trouble me Consciences of
their weak^ brethren with it, who hold it to be a thing Scandalous? This is
against the Apostles Rule, even the rule of Charity, tending to the destruction
of men's souls. Secondly, if a thing indifferent, why are they so eagre for it,
when it may as well be forborne, and especially at this time, when both the
Kingdoms, and the wisest men therein, are so troubled with it, the ^eace
disturbed, the State distracted, and the Kingdoms hazarded? Thirdly, if it be
indifferent, why do they not so leave it? Why do they alter the nature of it,
turning the indifferency into a necessity, as they do with all their other
Ceremonies, which they profess to be in their own nature indifferent, yet
turn them out of their nature, and make them necessary, and so intolerable
burdens to men's Consciences? Yea why do they force all Ministers to take a
Solemn Oath, that they approve these things, as necessary to be observed?

But neither is this they so urge, a thing in its own nature indifferent,
namely, whether the Communion Table stand Sideway under the East window of
every Chancel. For, first, it is a Communion Table, and therefore to stand in
the midst, where all may sit about it, as about a Table, and thus it is rightly
and properly a Communion Table: it is not a Communion-Cubbord, or a Communion
dresser, to stand Side-way to the wall. That Is no Communion Table. And
consequently such a standing Sideway to the wall of every Chancel is by
immediate deduction condemned in the word of God. For the word of God calls and
commends, and commands this by the name of the Lords Table, and so it commands
withal the proper use of it, as of the Table of the Lord: but the standing of
this Table Sideway to the wall, takes away not only the nature, and indeed the
name of a Table, but also the proper use of the Lords Table, where every one of
his family is to sit about it. As David says; (...) 28. 3.
Thy Children like olive plants round about thy table^. For such is the right
and proper use of a Table. And therefore, as the Scripture commands and
commends unto us the Lords Table, with the right use thereof, as is suitable to
the nature of it: So by necessary consequence, and immediate deduction, the
Scripture condemns any such posture or placing thereof, as altee^ both the
nature and use of the Lords Table. So as it is not a thing indifferent, whether
the Table stand sideway to the wall: for it ought not so to stand, seeing it is
a perverting of the nature and use of the Table of the Lord, and so a
perverting of the Lords Ordinance.

Again, not indifferent for all Chancels alike: for in many vast Churches the
People cannot hear, when their Priest says or sings his Second Service at his
new Altar, as he is enjoined: unless the Ordinary be more merciful to the
Congregation, were it a mercy to communicate with Superstitious worship and
Service.

Again, the word of God Eze. 11. 12,
expressly condemns in his people the ^mitation of the heathen in their
Idolatry, or Superstition, or to do after their manner. So as such guises are
not things indifferent. Now for the standing of the Communion Table sideway to
the East wall, is to place it like to Popish Altars, which are Altars of
Idolatry, like to those of the heathen; and so is a fair inducement by degrees
of their Idolatrous Sacrifice too, for all the fair pretenses the Synod makes
to the contrary. And does not the Synod confess, that at the time of
Reformation of this Church from that gross Superstition of Popery, it was
carefully provided that all means should be used to root out of the minds of
the people, both the inclination thereunto, and memory thereof; especially of
the Idolatry committed in the Mass, for which cause all Popish Altars were
demolished? Then we ask thy Synod, why they are here so zealous in seting up
the Communion Table sideway to the East wall after the manner of Popish Altars:
Seeing before they pretend such care and zeal for the suppressing of the
growth of Popery, and for the bringing of Papists to the English Church? Where,
when they come, and presently see a thing set up sideway at the East end of the
Chancel, just like their high-Altar, and seeing withal the people, or Priest
lowly lowting unto it, or devoutly bowing before it, or toward it: are they not
hereby straight put in mind of their old Romish Idolatry, enough to make them
presently to turn Papists again? Where is then the careful provision of this
Synod, that all means be used to root out of the minds of such both the
inclination and memory of the Idolatry of the Mass, for which cause our
ancient Reformers caused all Romish Altars to be demolished? (...)

times in the place, where the Altars formerly stood, but in time of of; (...)
in the midst of the Church or Chancel. And yet the ^^u^ction did not
necessarily tie the Table to stand at all other times, saving at the Communion
at the end of the Chancel, but for most conveniencie, according to the
discretion of the Minister and Gardians. And certainly the good Queens intent
never was, are could be, that that standing so at other times, should be a
precedent for aftertimes, to introduce Altars again, there to have a fixed
station, and so to become a stumbling block to Protestants, and a laughing
stock to Papists, causing the one to fear Innovations, and the other to hope
our backesliding into Popish Superstation. And that the Table has stood so
ever since unremoved in the Royal Chapels, there is not the same reason of a
Chapel, and of a Church; a Chapel wanting conver^ent room to place the Table
in the midst. Although this was to be imputed rather to want of Care in the
Deane of the Chapel, then want of room in the Chapel, as in many other
things besides. And as for Cathedra^ Churches, most of them had the Tables
standing in the midst of the Chancel, until of very late days, and under this
Kings Rugne, wherein our Prelates have been more stick^ing then ordinary to
erect not only Altars, but Crucifixes, and Images in all Cathedralls. And now
their project plainly appears to be this, that by these Mother Churches as
they call them, they might introduce Altars into all other Churches, to verify
the Proverb, Like Mother, like Daughter. And whereas they name ^ome Parochial
Churches to have had Altars, this has been but of late days too, since this
fashion began to be renewed. But when they have Summed up all together, it will
not amount to the acquitting this Generation from illegality, or from more then
suspicion, and that ^ust, both of Romish Superstition, and ^dolatry to boo^, as
also of a great Innovation of the State of the Church both in Doctrine and
Discipline. For first, for the Royal Chapel what are they to an universality?
If the King should have Miss in his Chapel, must therefore every Church in
the Land have so too? And so for Cathedralls, what are they, bu^ as i^ were the
Chapels, or Chancels of the Bishop, D^ane and Chapter? Parish-Churches they
are no^; no nor yet Mother-Churches, as whereof other Churches are begotten,
but are (...) the very dens of the Dragon, and the Styes, to fa^ (...)
be^^^^^ for the slaughter. And because some Par^^hia^ Churche^^ by some
Ministers of the Bishops Faction have lately (...) Altars: is this sufficient
to acquit them of ^^^egalify^ of (...) of R^mish Superstition and Idolatry, in
making hereupon, a Canon for the sitting up of Altars in all the Churches of
England? Dare these (...) bring this their metal to be tried in a
Parliament-Tes^, where they should find Refiners of suffi^^^ judgment to sever
the (...) silver, (if there were any) from the dr^sse? But when they have se^
up their Tables Sidewayes to the Easti^^ll: shall they stand there fixed? Shall
they not be movables still, as in Queen Elizabeth's time, and according to her
Injunction at least be ^^t in the midst of the Church or Chancel, a^ the
Comm^^^? For this, they tell us, We judge it fit, and convenient, that all
Churches and Chapels do conform themselves in th^^ particular, to the example
of the Cath^drall, or Mother Churches, saving always the general liberty lest
the Bishop by Law, during the time of the Administration of the holy Communion.
A plausible Persuasion of these Hyp^^^es. They think it fit: therefore who
will not think it so? They heartily commend it: and what is this but a
Command? Pe^^^anagke E^s^^.
A (...) necessa^. But thy holy Apostle, o Lord, in the same C^^. 2. 2. 4.
Chapter, where he speaks against Rites and Ceremonies, w^^nes thy people to
take heed that they be^^^ oncun^vented p^^^anolegia, with ^^ticeing words, or
fair speeches. And what fugared words be here in (...) Canon, to merce thy
People to (...) Idolatro^^ and Superstitious Rites and Ceremonies? here
commended? For what be these Rites and Ceremonies? namely, as the seting up of
a (...) high Altar, so adoration thereunto. This is that which these Hypocrites
think and commend for very fit and behoofull pretending therein Service done
to thy Majesty, when it is indeed a Service that pleases them, and which to
thy dishonor, and against thy will and word, they will force upon thee. As the
Heathen man said of the false Gods in his time, Pythaga^^^ Eus^b. Praep^^.
Euang lib. 5. Cap 8.
spara gnomen a^ nagkazethai theous tais anthropinais Boulais doul^uein) that
the Gods against their mind were constrained to serve men's wills; namely in
man's devised will worship. And thus do these imitators of the blind Heathen
force thee to serve their (...), while they set up a service of their own
fancy, as both in seting up Altars, and commending worship to them, though
pretended as done to thee. Even as the false Oracles of old, (...) Cap. (...)
(Ten apsukon hulen ^ebem prosetation) commanded men to worship a piece of
wood, or such like matter, wherein was no life. But these lying Oracles, these
Hypocrites pretend such worship is to honor thee withal. O bold impiety! O
notorious hypocrisy* These are the Men, that trample thy word under their
feet, that cast it out of the Church, that stop thy Ministers mouths, and
consequently thy peoples Ears that they cannot hear thy lively voice speaking
unto them to the Saving of their poor souls: and instead hereof they give
unto them a flappe with a Fox-tayle: for instead of honoring thee in thine own
Sacred and Saving Ordinance, they commend to thy People these Superstitious and
Idolatrous Services, as the fruits of their pro^d and profane Popish hearts,
which they commend as most fit and beho^full. Now Ezech. 20. 4.
will thou not judge them, o Lord? Will thou not judge them? Cause them to know
their abominations: and give them the reward of selfe-pleasure. Now we know,
that all Cathedral or those Mother Churches, have their Altars fixed, and
never removed, no not in time of Communion: by this Law of Conformity
therefore, all Parechiall Churches must have their Tables fixed, and never to
be removed, no not at the Communion. And so being fixed, they cease now to be
any longer Tables, but put on the nature of Altars, which stand perpetually
fixd. Only here is one help peradventure for it, if the Bishop be pleased to
give liberty to Parishes to remove the Table into the midst ^^r the Communion;
this liberty always Saved. So as here is all the hope of Parishes in this
matter. Yet what hope, when the Bishop shall answer such Suitors, Ye are a
sort of Puritans; will you be wiser then your Mother Church, or wiser then the
Sacred and holy Synod, who judged it fit and convenient, that all Churches and
Chapels do conform themselves in this particular to the example of the
Cathedral, or Mother Churches? And though the Law give him a general Liberty
in this to grant it, or no: yet he holds himself rather bound by the Canon in
this case, not to give liberty, then dispensed to take and use liberty by the
Law.

But yet for all this the Synod gives one remedy, as to think never a whit the
worse of the Table, or to be out of conceit with it, because being thus fixed,
it seems to be quite turned from a Table into an Altar: for it adds: And we
declare, that this Situation of the Holy Table, does not imply, that it is, or
ought to be esteemed a true and proper Altar, whereon Christ is again really
Sacrificed: but it is, and may be called an Altar by us, in that sense, in
which the Primitive Church called it an Altar, and in no other. A Holy Table,
do these holy men call it: but shall we think it ever a whit the holyer, that
it stands now fixed sideway to the wall? Yes: for it is now an Altar: yet not a
true and proper Altar, as whereon Christ is again really Sacrificed: no, so
the Papists in some sense will say for their Altars. But what say they to this:
do they not mean it is such an Altar, as without which the Sacrifice, or
offering upon it it is not sanctified^ Or is it not that Altar, whereof the
Apostle speaks, ^lib. 13. 10.
We have an Altar, etc? If it be not that Altar, why do they suffer Dr.
Pecklingtons Christian Altar, so to pass under their Authority, which says,
that this Altar is necessary, as without which no Sacrifice we offer, is
Sanctified? And why do they suffer other Books, that say, The Apostle meant
this Altar, when he said, We have an Altar? When therefore this Synod calls in,
and damnes these Books which by maintaining these Altars of wood and stone,
do overthrow and deny the only Altar Jesus Christ: we may think, that these
men have some good meaning, when they say, that this Situation of the holy
Table does not imply, that it is, or ought to be esteemed a true and proper
Altar, whereon Christ is again really Sacrificed. But it is, and may be called
an Altar by us, in that sense that the Primitive Church called it an Altar. Now
who knows how far these men extend the Primitive Church? Perhaps down to
Innocent 3, who first established Transubstantiation, now above four hundred
years ago, For as for the purest estate of the Primitive Church, as in the
Apostles times, the Table of the Lord; was never called an Altar at all,
properly or improperly. The Scripture calls it only the Table of the Lord. And
some hundred years after the Apostles, C^^^st^ans had no Altars at all, no not
in name, which the Heathen did object unto them. So as the Primitive Church in
the purest time of it had not so much as the name of Altars. And our Communion
Book does not once name it an Altar. How comes then this Synod to be so bold,
as to call the Table an Altar, and teach, that it is, and may be so called* And
what if some Fathers called it so* As they were a little too free (though
meaning no harm) in their allegorising, which the Romanists have made
advantage of, to advance their Idolatry. And Lord, thou shall try the spirit of
these men, whether for the love they bear to Rome, and to bring England to a
perfect Reconciliation with her, they affect to call it an Altar, rather then a
Table; though the time is not yet ripe for them, fully to manifest themselves,
and to display their Roman Colors in open fields. But for us, we ought not in
any sense to call the Lords Table an Altar, seeing the Scripture calls it only
a Table, and never, an Altar: and seeing also it is an easy inducement to
Popish Idolatry and Superstition, to which use all Papists use it, and which
use this Synod, by all signs shows it self easy to be entreated to bring up
again in the Church of England.

For in the next place, they make an Order for railing in this Altar, to
separate it from the rest of the Church, that none do touch it, as if it were
more holy, and the matter thereof more precious, then any other part of the
Church. And by this means, though they pretend the prevention of profanation,
yet they labor to beget in the Peoples minds some high and reverend opinion of
this their Altar, as of some extraordinary holy creature, or rather divine
thing, that so they may with the more facility, and less se^up^e be brought to
yield adoration thereunto, when ever they but look upon it, or approach it, or
pass by it; of which they tell us more anon.

And the next thing is, that all that will receive the Communion, must come up
to present themselves before this Altar upon their knees; condemning the usual
manner of the Ministers carrying the bread and wine about the Church. But they
called this Altar a Table, but even now: and is it so suddenly swallowed up in
an Altar, as in stead of sitting about the Table (which is Christ's own
ordinance, and the proper use and posture of guests about a Table) now men must
kneel before the Altar, as before some new God-Allmighty? So as thine
ordinance, o Lord, is here quite perverted, and from a Table-Communion turned
into a Superstitious Altar-Service. Whereas if the Table were set in the midst,
and the Communicants did come and sit round about it, as many as could at a
time, and so did eat and drink the Lords Supper, this is Christ's own
ordinance: but to come and kneel before an Altar, this is not according to
Christ's ordinance, nor is it aright to eat the Lords Supper at the Lords Table.

The last tging is, after many fair pretenses and preambles (as of the Church,
the house of God, dedicated to his holy worship, to put us in mind of the
greatness and goodness of his Divine Majesty, and the like) the Synod thinks
it very behoofull, that all do reverence and obeisance both at their Coming
in, and going out of the Churches, Chancels, or Chapels, etc. And the motives
which the Synod uses to persuade all People hereunto, are sundry. As 1. It is
not with any intention to exhibit any religious worship to the Communion Table,
the East, etc. or in the Celebration of the holy Eucharist (as they call it)
rather the Lords Supper) upon any opinion of a corporal presence of Christ's
body there, etc. Now from these words (though the Synod do not expressly and
directly Order, that men in doing such reverence and obeisance, do set their
faces toward the Altar, Eastward, where it stands) yet we learn plainly
their meaning to be so, in that they say, not with any intention to exhibit any
religious worship to the Communion Table, or East: Ergo toward the Table, or
East, men must do reverence, s^ it be not with intention of Religious worship.
But by their leaves, Intention, or not intention, so to bow, so to do
reverence to, or toward this, or that place, is no less, then flat Idolatry,
whether it be done to the place it self, or thereby to God. For God will not
be worshipped in or by either an Image, or any representation of his Majesty or
Divine presence; as if God were fixed to this or that place, all which is
forbidden in the Second Commandment. And being done to the creature, as to the
Table, or Altar, or toward the East, being done in the Church, which they say
is the place of Gods worship, must not all such external worship there
exhibited, be a religious worship* So as whether People intend any such thing,
or no, as by doing obe^rsance to the Table, to exhibit religious worship, yet
the worship it self so exhibited in the place of Gods worship, is, must needs
be a religious, yea and divine worship. So as here is flat Idolatry committed
by authority of this holy Synod. Or will they call this adoration (for
adoration it is) a civil worship* This is no less an absurdity, and gross
profanation of things Sacred, to give them a Civil worship. Therefore seeing the
Synod will needs have a worship so exhibited, and this is not (say they) with
any intention of a religious worship: let them tell us what kind of worship
they mean. Unless their meaning be this, that it may pass for a religious
worship, as of the body, so the intention of the mind be wanting; that so a man
may commit Idolatry not yielding a religious worship to the creature outwardly
with his body, so as his mind be free from intention, that he meant no harm by
it. And the like reason there is for bowing, or kneeling at the Communion: this
is a religious worship, or adoration: and it is done, as to some imaginary
corporal presence of Christ on the Table, or to the Elements themselves, or to
the Table. But to be done as to Christ's corporal presence, the Sy^^d would
have that opinion forborne. It remains then, that the adoration, or religious
worship to be done, though not intended, either to the Elements, or to the
Table, or to the Altar, or to the East; for now all the Communicants are upon
their knees all looking that way.

But say they, secondly, this worship is for the advancement of Gods Majesty,
and to give him alone that honor and glory, that is due unto him. Is it so?
And is it not then a Religious worship, that is so exhibited, that is done for
the advancement of Gods Majesty, and to give him alone that honor and glory,
that is due un to him? Certainly this must needs be a Religious and Divine
worship, and that in a high degree. And being so, shall the Synod be ashamed,
or afraid to allow men an Intention of performing this Religious worship, when
it is for the a^vancement of Gods Majesty? Will God accept of a Sacrifice, that
wants a heart? Or how is God honored by our Service, when it is done without
an Intention? But here is yet a worse matter in it, that marres the Synods
intention for the advancement of Gods Majesty. And that is, All this worship
(call it what they will) is a mere will worship (of which before) and so of
which God says, Math. 15. 9.
In vain they honor and worship me, teaching for Doctrines the precepts of
men. And the Synop cannot but confess, that all this Court-Ceremony is the
upshot of this their Canon and Constitution: a Commandment of men therefore:
and so abominable in Gods worship and Service.

But thirdly, This say they (to wit, this outward reverence in Gods worship)
must needs be pious in it self, profitable unto us, and edifying unto others.
Must needs? Upon what necessity? For first, can that be pious in it self,
which God has absolutely forbidden and condemned, as abominable to be used in
his Service? And such is all invention of man in Gods worship; as before.
Secondly, Profitable to us, say they. Wherein profitable to us, to disobey and
dishonor God in our fancifull devises? Or profitable, in that sense, wherein
the Pharisees taught children to cast off all honor to their Parents, Saying
unto them, Math. 15. 5.
It is a gift, by whatso^ver thou might be profited by me: and honor not
his Father or his Mother. So, how can that be Nilutile, quod non honestum est.
Cic. Offic.
profitable to us, which is dishonorable to our heavenly Father? And thirdly,
for Edifying unto others: how Edifying? Surely no other way, but as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 8. 10.
If any man see thee, that have knowledge, sitting in the Idols Temple, shall
not the Conscience of him that is weak (dikodometheseta) be edified (as the
word properly signifies) that is, imboldened to eat of things offered to
Idols? And just such Edifying unto others, is this will worship of the Synod,
whereby they being men of knowledge and learning, do edify or imbolden simple
people to follow their practice, and obey their Precept, in giving reverence
and obeisance in the Church, that is, religious worship to a stone Altar, or
wodden Table, which is Idolatry, though colored over with never so specious
and fair pretenses, as without any intention of a religious worship: which is
the ordinary apron of ^igleaves, wherewith the woman of Rome would cover the
nakedness of such her R^^^. 17 4.
Spiritual fornications, and filthiness of her ^bominations.

But Fourthly, This (say they) has been the most ancient custom of the
Primitive Church in the purest times, and of this Church also for many years
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The reviving therefore of this ancient and
laudable Custom, we heartily commend to the serious Consideration of all good
people. How? Has this been the most ancient Custom of the Primitive Church in
the purest times, to common Idolatry with Stocks and Stones? For what were
those purest times of the Primitive Church? Were they not the Apostles own
times? Were not th^se the purest times of the Primitive Church? And will they,
dare they say, or much less, can they prove, that the Apostles, or the Church
in their time used any such custom? Fie for shame, that a Synod should dare,
without blushing, to vent such abominable lies. For if they mean it of the
times of the Church after the Apostles, those certainly were not the purest
times, as wherein many Supersitions began quickly to grow up, to strew the way
for the coming of Antichrist, the Mystery of Iniquity beginning to work even
in the Apostles days.

But this Devotion was of ancient custom in this Church also for many years
of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. That Is true indeed; I my self, when I was a
^ad, have seen old women very observant in such obesances toward the E^st,
both coming in, and going out of the Church. They would not miss it. But ye
must undestand this was a place, where they had not Scarce one Sermon in Seven
years: So as, it was no marvel if still they walked in darkness, when they
wanted the light to shine forth unto them in the preaching of the Gospel, which
where it comes in the vigor of it, drives away all darkness of error, and
spiritual blindness, as the Psalm. 104. 22
Sun arising chaseth the wild beasts into their dens, as David says.
Insomuch, as we have seen and known by abundant experience (blessed be our God)
that in all places of the Kingdom, where sound preaching has been, all such
Superstition has been packed out of the Church. But this riddance could not be
expected for some of the first years of Queen Elizabeth, when the Land was but
newly crope out of Popery, and Preachers were but Scarce, and the old race had
not, could not put away the old leaven, or cast off the Slough of Popish
Superstition. And therefore the Synod says truth in this, that for some
years, yea in some places, many of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (which was
toward the beginning of her Reign) these Superstitious customs were in use.
And had the Royal Chapels, and Cathedralls had as sound preachers in them
usually: as other Parochial Churches in the Kingdom, that would have ripped up
the rotten bowels of Popish Supersition, so fairly painted over in goodly
Images, Crucifixes, and the like unremoved in those places: there had not by
this time remained one Romish ragge, whereof this Synod might make a coat for
the Church of England now to be fashioned by.

But now the Coat is made up, all the Skill will be how to persuade this whole
Church to put it on. Yea it is so little and strait, as being measured and
patternd by two or three Chapels, and a few Cathedralls, it will be very hard to
force it upon Englands broad back, without extreme pinching of it, or tearing
the Coat. Now for this, in the last place, this Courteous and kind Synod,
whereas it might command, is pleased to stoop so low, as to entreat, yea
heartily to entreat, again and again: We (say they) heartily commend this to
all good and well affected people, members of this Church, etc. And a little
lower again: The reviving of this ancient and Laudable Custom, we heartily
commend to the serious c^nsideration of all good people. And for this, reason
persuades us to believe, that the Synod is cordial in redubbling such hearty
Commendations of such Romish relics and so Laudable Customs, to all good
people. First, because good people will not easily be drawn to such things,
without some strong motive, nor with that, neither. And secondly, could their
hearty Commendations prevail in this, it would greatly conduce to a speedy
making up of that Reconciliation between the Church of England, and of Rome, so
greatly desired and labored in the Primates Late Relation, the President of
this Synod. Who tells us there more plainly what we may understand here by
Commending; for (says he, page 7.) there is a Laudendo praecipere, by Lauding
or Commending (...) Command. And therefore they stick not to be so Liberal in
their hearty Commendations of this brave piece of Service. But why should now
this Spirit be conjured up again, or this dead Coal of Romish zeal revived,
having for so long a time lain consopited, yea dead under a heap of ashes,
never to have kindled flames, or troubled the world again. Why should this
Satan of our peace, which had been so long bound, now be let loose again, to
set Kingdoms in a combustion ^ Surely they told us before, uniform^ty is to be
desired. How ^ In a conformity to the Royal Chapels and Cathedrals. But were
it not every way better, that those few should give place, and rather conform
to the Generality of all the Churches in England, where these Superstitions had
been cast out, and all quiet: then that the Generality should conform to a few,
to endanger the whole State, and hazard the loss of all^

But in the last place, they come with a pretty handsome Close, saying, In the
practice, or omission of this Rite, we desire that the rule of Charity
prescribed by the Apostle, may be observed, which is, that they which use this
Rite, despise not them who use it not, and that they who use it not, condemn
not those that use it. O Lord God, Psalm. 74. 10.
how long shall the wicked blaspheme thy Name? For ever? Can they not be
content to abuse thy People, in leading and drawing them into all manner of
Superstition, but they must usurp the Apostles rule, and pervert it to the
maintenance of such blind and damned Rites? The Rule of the Apostle is for the
use of things in their own nature indifferent, as eating, or not eating,
wherein Charity is to preserve peace: but it gives no countenance at all to
things altogether unlawful in themselves, and no way indifferent; as before.
And had these men true Charity, they would be so far from pressing these
things to a general use, as they would rather altogether suppress them where
they are used, as being a Stumbling block to the whole Land, upon the which,
if not removed, the whole Land must stumble and fall. And therefore had this
Synod had any one spark of an Apostolical Spirit in it (as they show it to be
altogether Apostaticall) it would in the first place have rather observed the
Apostles Rule, for a man not to put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall
in his brothers way: then breaking this Rule of Charity, have abused the
Apostles words, to prescribe to a whole Land a Rule of false Charity. But to
thee, O Lord, do we commit the judgment of this whole Cause, which we can do
no more, nor less but complain of to thy Majasty, the righteous judge of all
the world.

Canon 8. Of Preaching for Conformity.
This Synod here, for the more strenthening of their Canons, and the more
facilitating of the way to Conformity thereunto, must injo^ne their Priests
(whom they have in their chain fast bound by Subscription, by Oath of
Canonical obedience, and by Oath of this Synod, to the observation of the
Decrees thereof, and other their Lordships commands) to preach for Conformity,
and inspeciall, for conformity to the Canon immediately forefoing, which this
Canon immediately succeeds, as pointing them to that before: as follows in
the Canon: the tenor whereof is: Whereas the Preaching of Order and Decency,
according to S. Paul's rule, does conduce to Edification: it is required, that
all Preachers (as well beneficed men, as others) shall positively and plainly
preach and instruct the people in their public Sermons twice in the year at
(...) (...) Souls from the yoke of such vile Slavery, unless you have so
much courage in you as to deny to do these base (...) d^udgerres for these
your T^^kemasters, though you be Suspended for it, and loose all you have
Strengthen, (...) Lord all th^^e, to stand fast in thy truth, and not to betray
it with them^^^^ their People, and the whole State of the Land.

Now passing by the 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th Canons, as of (...) moment, in the
13th. Of Excommunication and Absolution not to be pronounced but by a Priest.
Herein first we may observe what kind of Excommunications and Absolutions have
been usual in our Prelates (...) extreme abusie and prefanation of Christ's
Ordinance (...) of his Church. Which Ordinance, as it does (...) belong to the
Prelate (whose whole Order (...) ^eere usurpation) so it is most basely abused,
(...) and their Officers. So as here is a Reformat: (...) at the best is stark
naught, as being an (...) usurpation. For in this Canon they take away all
power from every (...) of his Congregation, to whom with others appointed by
the Parish, according to Gods word, belongs the power of Ecclesias^call
Censures. And in this Canon also, he that is absolved, must become more bound,
then ever he was before, because first he must take an Oath, de parendo Juri,
and stando Mandatis beclesiae: of obeying the Canons, and standing to the
Commands of the Church. So as his Absolution becomes his bondage: when now in
stead of Gods Commandments, he must be subject to the Churches Canons,
Decrees, and Commands: which is an Antichristian Tyranny: and more now then
ever before, for this Synod sake.

Again, omitting the 14 th and 15 th Canon, the 16 th is concerning Licenses
to Marry. So as this Canon is to maintain a Doctrine of Devils, mentioned by
the Apostle, as namely forbidding to Marry (be it either to some sort of men,
as Romish Priests, or to all sorts of men at certain times in the year) ^^ as
at such times (which altogether contain almost half of the year) without the
Bishops Special License, no Man or Woman may Marry. Thus it is clear, that
herein these Hypo^rites the Sell Gods free Ordinance for money, and so
maintain a Doctrine of Devils. And thus far of the Canons of this Synod.

The Conclusion of all which is, the Kings avowing, approving, confirming, and
injoyning these Canons to be observed of all respectively, according to the
tenure thereof in all and every part. Hereof we will say no more, then we have
said in the beginning of our Complaint, committing all Judgment unto thee ^
righ^^^ Judge of all, and (...) beseeching thee withal, that (...) wilt judge
the Cause of thy People, when now thou see (...) their strength is gone, and
to take them and their and thy Cause into thy holy Protection, to vindicate
both them, and it, (...) thy own glorious Name from the cruelty and reproach o^
Men.

Amen.
Here now follow some Predictions of, and some Contradidictions unto this late
Synod, observed and collected out of the Relation of a Conference by William of
Canterbury.
Prediction. 1.
F^^^^ in his Epi^^^ Dedicatory to the King, he says: The King and the Priest,
more then any other, are bound to look to the Integrity of the Church in
Doctrine and Manners, and that in the first place. For that is by far the best
Hone. in the Hive. This we see now fullfilled; whereby we come to know who is
that Priest, and what that Integity of the Church in Doctrine and Manners,
concluded in this late synod; but whether as in a Hive of Bees, or in a (...)
or Hornets nest, as wherewith whole Kingdoms (...) the world judge.

Prediction. 2.
And again, ibid. To deal clearly with your Majesty, these thoughts (of the
external worship of God) are they; and no other, which (...) make me labor so
much, as I have done, for D^cen^y, and an (...) of the external worship of God
in the Church. Thus we see that the whole plot and project of the Primates
Book, was thus to alter, and thus to settle the Doctrine and Discipline, and
external worship in the Church, as we have seen effected in the late Synod. So
as it appears, both this Synod, and the things concluded therein have been a
good w^ile a hammering is (...) Forge.

Prediction. 3.
And in the Relation it self, page 155. To the (...) ( to wit, the Prince, and
the Clergy) principally the power and direction for Reformation belongs.
Princes have their parts by their Calling together of the Bishops, and others
of the Clergy to consider of that, which might seem worthy Reformation: And
the Clergy did their part in the National Synod, of 62. And the Articles
there agreed on, were afterward ^^^firmed by Acts of State, and the Royal
Assent. Here is another Pattern of this late National Synod: but that this
wants the right leg, to make it go upright and pass current for a National
Synod, namely the confirmation by the Act of State, to wit, the Act of
Parliament; (...)
as before is noted. So as here is also one Contradiction, overthrowing this
National Synod; consisting of the two Provincial, Canterbury and York. Both
together want the Act of Parliament to confirm it a National Synod, to bind
the whole Nation, which the Synod presumes to do, both in Ministers and People.

Contradiction. 2.
Relat 205. Emperors and Kings are Custodes utriusque Tabalae: they to whom
the (...) and preservation of both Tables of the Law for worship to God, and
duty to man are committed. A Book of the Law was by Gods own command in Moses
his time was to be given to the King, Deuteronomy. 17. The Kings under the Law, but
still according to it, did proceed to necessary Reformations in Church
Businesses, and theirin commanded the very Priests themselves, etc. This being
so, that the Kings under the Law had the care of the preservation of Gods Law
and Religion committed unto them, to preserve them safe and sound, and where
any corruption had crept in, to reform Religion, but still according to Gods
Law, and that not one jot to vary from it; how comes this Synod of Priests (
being assembled by Royal authority, and commanded by a King under the Gospel
to treat and agree upon some Canons necessary for the advancement of Gods
Glory, the edifying of his holy Church, and the due reverence of his blessed
Mysteries and Sacraments) to be so bold, as to agree and conclude and enact
such Canons and Constitutions, as are directly against the Law and word of God,
to the great dishonor of God, the ruinating of his holy Church, and the great
abuse and profanation of his blessed Mysteries and Sacraments? And herein we
call heaven and earth to witness, and the Lord Jesus Christ to be Judge,
whether this Synod has dealt faithfully, or no with the King, or between him
and his people, and that also in these perilous times. The Lord open the Kings
eyes, to see how both himself, and his people, are abused, and his Kingdoms
embroyled and endangered by these his Prelates and Priests,

That Synods may err and foulely too, this of 1640. proves with a (...). If
any Canons of it be sound, the Sixth has poison enough to infect them all.
It Is such a Cockatrice egg as was ne^^^ laid in England before, (...) that
eats of a dies. I will here a little ^^bowell this Oath, and show you the
mischief in it.
THis Oath is contrary to the Title of it, which is, An (...) injoynd for the
preventing of all Innovations in Doctrine and Government, being a grand
Innovation, such as neither we nor our Forefathers ever heard of. Besides it
has in the body of it an et ^^^era, an expression yet unknown to the Christian
(...) Pagan world: Archbishop Arundell, Judge 1930. provided better for the
Clergy in his days, in that ancient Constitution, (...), and sub obtestatione
divini judi^j inhibemus sp^cial^^^^ (...), Cu^uscunque gradus status aut
condition^, existat (...) ^^usiones aut proposi^^^^ de ^ide Catholica, aut
ben^s (...) sonantes praeter necessarium Doctrina^^ facultatis suae, in Scholis
(...) extra, disputando aut communicando, protestat^^^e per^^ss^ (...)
permissa, asperat (...) quodam verborum, vel ^er^^^rum (...) test B. Hugone de
Sacrum Saepiu^ quod been dicitur non been intelligit^^r. If harsh and novel
expressions may not be used in familiar discourse, much less may they be
crowded into an Oath. The Israelites said of the Levites Concubine, there was
no such deed done nor seen from the day that the Children of Israel came up out
the Land of Egypt unto this day; consider of it, take advise and speak: that
same may be said of this Oath. There was never such a deed done or seen since
we came out of spiritual Egypt. Consider of it, take advise and speak what
shall be done to these Innovators.

It Is against the King and his Prerogative Royal, who by the Statutes and
Customs of this Kingdom has power to appoint any of his natural Subjects to
exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under him, as appears by
Stat. 1. Elizab. cap 1. and Stat. 25. Hen. 8 cap. 19. and 37. Hen. 8. cap. 17.
but this Oath spoils his Majesty of all such power, investing only
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, etc. with Ecclesiastical power, and so takes
from his Majesty what his Predecessor Henry the had, who gave a Commission to
Lord Cro^^^d to (...) cise under him all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, as you
may (...) in Mr. Fox his Martyrologie Volume 2. pa. 1000. Printed An. 1597.

It Is against the Oath of Supremacy, in taking of which we acknowledge the
Kings Majesty to be Supreme Governor of the Church, in all Causes, and over
all persons Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil; and the King by Law having power
to alter Church Government, and to delegate whom he pleases of his Subjects to
exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as appears by what is foresaid, and
still is in practice in the High Commission, in which are always the Lords of
his Majesty's Privy (...) If the Oath be once lawfully taken, what new power
can discharge it? in such a case they may as well Unchristian me as unsweare me.
How can any honest sworn Subject take this New Oath without manifest danger
and great suspicion of per^ary; for having sworn before for the King, in case
he alter the Government, by virtue of this Oath I have sworn against the King,
set up Oath against Oath, myself against my Sovereign; and that which is yet
worse, must not repent of it: For I am sworn from ever consenting to what his
Majesty has done And is that all? No, I must dissent and become a Schismatic,
and Seperatist for ever: Neither is that all, but I must take up Arms twice a
year at least, and Preach for the Hierarchy, and their present Government,
against my Sovereign, and that he has charged. This I am bound to by virtue
of the (...) Canon, and if not, by the Oath of Canonical obedience. And in
case a Minister refuse or neglect this, it is Suspension by his (...), and if it
be done, who knows but it may c^st Hang^^ tuum, for resisting Supreme Authority.

Again, this Oath is a plot to swear in the conceit of Epis^^pacie to be jure
divino: of late they have stepped off from their ancient foundation, thinking to
weakness, either to depend upon humane Laws, or Princes favors: and have
published to the whole world, that their standing is by divine right: and
therefore (...)

(...) Lib. 3. dis^in^t. 39. Act.
Now this Oath will hinder the alteration of the Church Government to a better.
For being once sworn to: Melius non mutabis pejus. Christ's Kingdom must be
kept out, Antichristian Offices, government, rules, and ways of proceeding be
established in the Church, and that by an Oath. If the Book of Common Prayer
would better the Discipline, and do much wish therefore to have public
Penance restored, this Oath contradicts it, and tells us that we have all the
Discipline is needful to Salvation, and that the Government by right ought to
stand a^ now it stands. But there are great grievances, dreadful disorders,
and horrible corruptions in the Discipline and Government of the Church, as now
it stands; and men should rather swear to endeavor their utmost to get them
removed in this approaching Parliament, then give consent to have them unalterd
one day longer: as Iesu-worship, Altar-worship, kneeling at Sacrament,
promiscuous receivers, subscription, Oaths ex Officio, Canonical obedience,
reading of Apocrypha Books, abuse of Excommunication, the exorbitant power of
Bishop interdicting whole Churches, perverting equity in all their Courts,
changing times and seasons for Marriage at their pleasure, hindering Preaching
and praying where they list, imposing new and unlawful things upon the
Ministry, illegally outing them from their livings, etc. The proceeding yet in
many things by the Popes Canon Law; the taking away the power of the keys from
the Pastors of particular Congregations, and setting up Chancellors over them
and their flocks, putting into Laymens hands (for a Chancellor is no other) the
power of Excommunication. Lay Elders are much cried out of, and condemned by us
in the Scottish and Foreign Churches, and yet we set and hold them up at home
with both hands. The Bishop delegates his power to the Chancellor, and so the
sentence of Excommunication is devolved upon a mere Layman, which dealing with
Presbyterians, we say is incompatible to a Layman: and what is this, but to
destroy with the hand what we bind with the tongue. Neither is that shift
avayleable to say, it is some grave Minister that must pronounce the sentence,
because he is but os Canceliarij, the mouth of the Chancellor, to pronounce
what he decrees: who can stop it if not pronounced call it out of the
Ministers hand, and must give the A^solution if pronounced, and so the whole
power lies still in the Chancellors hand. If these things therefore and diverse
other were altered, we should not abjure them, but think our selves bound by
right and Conscience to intertaine them.

Again, this Oath appears further to be unlawful. First, because it does
insuare our Consciences, and takes away the liberty of them, binding us not so
much as to consent unto any alteration, although it should be in the judgment
of all far better then what we have. Secondly, it does make us vassals and
bondslaves to the Prelary, we must be their sworn Subjects, and tie our selves
by Oath to uphold their tottering Kingdom. And if the Prelacie have its
pedigree from Rome, as some of themselves (...) me, what is this Oath but a
policy to setch in our shoulders so support Antichrist and his Government?
what is it but the plain mark of the Beast, which some make to be an Oath, and
others a submitting to his power, and acknowledging of him to be Lord, Me^d in
Comment. (...) Here is both an Oath and an absolute (...) unto the (...) and
acknowledging of them to be (...). By this Oath free (...) become (...), which
(...) contrary to the Petit^on of Right, 30. (...)

3. It is an (...) and perpetuating of humane and (...) for the whole
Hierarchy mentioned in the Oath, from Archbishops to the end of the etc. are
sufficiently known to be moore Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and subject to
such coruptions from time to time, as may necessitate an altert^ion. Are there
not such ^oule corruptions now amongst them, as er^ mightily to the Parliament
for alteration, and without redress will sink the whole Kingdom. What safety
or (...) then has any man to swear these Constitutions into an in^^^rable
condition.

4. It Is a condem^^^g of all other Reformed Churches: They have not our
Discipline, and yet we have given them the right hand of fellowship, that they
want nothing necessary to Salvation. And if we swear this Discipline to be
necessary to Salvat^^, we must condemn them as wanting something necessary
thereunte: It Is little less then to unchurch, and to pronounce them to be
without that Discipline which is Essential to the being of a true Church; and
they may charge us with falsifying the 20 th and (...), A^^^ch, which teach,
that things belonging to Government and Dis^ipline are alterable; and so much
is expressed in the Title of Ceremonies before the Book of Common Prayer.

5. Because by this Oath the Prelates are invested with a (...) which neither
God nor the Laws of the Kingdom ever gave them; as namely, upon refusal of
this wretched Oath, they will deprive any painful conscientious and faithful
Minister of all his Ecclesias^^call promotions whatsoever, and of the execution
of his Function, which is directly against Law, for if Pastors be Legally
possessed of their hvings, what injustice is it to make after- Canons and Oaths
to question and throw them out of their right.

6. This Synod had not our consents and suffrages for the Clerks of it. Those
were legally chosen had voice no longer in the Convocation house then the
Parliament endured. There being therefore no new el^ction of Clerks, nor any new
Writ to legitimate those, but only a new Commission to go on with what was
begun in Parliament but nul^^^^ by breach thereof, (...) being ^^^out that
Commission the space of a whole week, as (...) by the date thereof, May 12. ^
we cannot but j^dge both Oath and Canons to be illegal.

7. The Oath implies a plain contradiction, and that which is (...). It
requires me to Swear sincerely, without any secret reservation, and (...) an
etc. in it, which imports more then is expre^^, and necessi^^aces a mental
conception, and (...)

8. We are bound to take it heartily, and willingly, which no man that has any
consideration or conscience can do. For it is against truth, and obliges to
swear a falsehood, viz. that the Government of this Church as now it stands,
ought by right so to stand, which is not true of Chancellours, Commissaries,
Off^^^alls, etc. nor of Bishops proceeding in their Courts in their own names,
and under their own Seals. It s against judgment, including a contradiction,
as appears in the 7 th particular: It Is against righteousness, because both the
Parliament, the Prince and Pastors themselves are perjured by it, as has
formerly bin shown; and it is a swearing up a corrupt, if not an Antichristian
Government over the People. Besides this Oath is backed with severe punishment.
Refusal of it brings Deprivation, ab Officio and Beneficio. Hence many that
are poor and weak it is to be feared) will take the Oath, reluctante
conscientia, and to save their Livings, forswear themselves.

9. This Oath is full of ambiguities. The Doctrine of the Church is not
clearly known, the Homilies have been disclaimed. The Articles are challenged
by the Armi^^ans and others, to be for them. It Is doubtful to us whether a
great part of Scripture be not excluded as unnecessary, because much of the
Scripture is neither verbaily expressed, nor vertually included in the public
Declaration of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, and that
they are said to contain all things necessary to salvation: we are doubtful
of the Discipline, because much depends upon the interpretation of the
Ordinary, which is unknown: and yearly differing Articles are composed for
Visitations. And although a general standing Book of Articles be promised for
the whole Kingdom, yet three years liberty is reserved for alteration, and
who can say he knows what the Discipline is. We doubt whether the Oath does
not suppose some Popish Doctrine established. We know not in what sense those
words by right it ought to stand, are to be taken. This word jus, or right, is
a word equivocall. There is jus Divinum, and if we swear in this sense, then
we swear Deanes, Archdeac^^s, and the etc. to stand jure divino. There is jus
Ecclesiasticum, and if we swear in that sense, then the Prelates will not be
our Friends, because we swear divine right from them. There is jus positum,
and if we swear in this sense, then the Hierarchy must loose both divine and
Ecclesiastical right. It being thus, who can swear without equivocation?

Lastly, no man taking this Oath can well acquit himself of perjury, for if he
take it in the plain common sense and understanding of the words, yet there
must be some mental reservation in the words etc. and equivocation in the
minds of Hyerarchicall men touching those words by right: for though they
should venture to swear Prelates into a jus divinum, yet they dare not swear
Deanes and Archdeacons into it, and so must swear in a double sense, and
perjure themselves But all this may be helped by our own interpretations and
protestations. Perjurisunt quiid quod falsum esse sciunt, aut putant juramento
confirment. Est in sent ^. 3. did. 39
Ans. We may not take it in our own senses. Those authorized to administer the
Oath, by the Kings Commission are tied to keep the very words* of it; if they
should leave out the etc they have no power to administer it at all. And the
Oath* it self binds us to take it in the common sense of the words If we then
take the Oath: and protest against such and such senses, and make a sense of
our own, this is direct and wilful perjury said Civilians And the protestation
being made before a public notary, this shall be sufficient evidence in any
Count of the Kingdom to convict us of the perjury If then any of the Prelater
have taken this Oath in its proper sense, or a sense of their own, how have
they perjured themselves, propham'd their hands, and put in a bar against
their future conferring of holy Orders.

Qui^ Synodus nod^^^* patrum Chorus, integer; aeger
C^nven^^^ (...), Sess^^^^ramen,
Amen.
FINIS.

