The Lame^tacion of England.
Esaias lv. chapter. Seek the lord while he may be found / and call apo^ him
while he is nigh / let the ungodly man forsak his own wayse / and the
vnrightwyse his own ymaginacions / and torn again to the lord our god / so will
he be merciful to us / for he is ready to forgive.
Ioell the second chapter. Thus says the lord / turn you unto me with all your
hearts / with fasting / weping and mourning / rent your hearts and not your
garments / and turn you to the lord our god for he is gracius / merciful / long
suffering / and off great compassion / and ready to pardon wickydnes / etc.
There has been here tofore diverse godly and weldysposyd persons, that for the
preseruacyon and wealth off there own contres: have taken great pains to write
and put fourth diverse godly, and notable books for the redressyng often many
abuses vsyd in there common welthes. Among other serteine Englyshmen, perceiuyng
the state and common wealth often England to decay, being mouyd in conscience off a
good zeal and trwe heart, that they bear, to this there natural contre, have
taken pains, to set forth in prynt, diverse notable books, which have given
warning to avoid the great dangers like to follow in the common wealth off this
realm, if spedy remedy were not provided for.

First I will begyne with Johan fyshe, who perceyuyg the great a busys often the
clergy and sprytualtye, Johan ^ys^.
about xxx years past, made a little treatise, and named it, the supplicacyon
(...) beggars which God bepraysyd took some effect: when through the great
number off monks, ^upplication (...).
Chanons, Nuns, false flateryng friars, and obstinatlyers, with there deuelysh
disemblyng, and ypo^ryticall falshode were made manifest* and openly dysclosid,
that all men young and old, did perceive as clear as the day, there
abhominacions, dysemblyng falshod and wyckydnes: ffor the which according to
there deserts, were by king henry the viij utterly disclosed confused and came
to nawght, as it is manifest.

Affter that one other book was made and put forth, under the name off
Rodoryck Mors, and named a complaynt to the perliament house, (...) de tyke
(...).
declaryng the great number off Innormytis and abuses that were vsid in the
common wealth off this realm the which the more it is to be lamented, took little
effect. Besyds many and diverse other good books made as well in the time off K.
H. 8. as in the time off K. E. 6. which in like case took no effect.

More over now off late days, one more then a year past off a good zeal that
he has to this his contre off England, made and set forth a book namyng it a
supplycacyon to the queen's May. ^^ppli^ac^^^ (...) que
wherein he has manyfestly declared, the wicked deuyses off the shameless by
shoppes and clergy off England: how they for the vpholdyng off there deuelyshe
kingdom, have been allweyse seruers off the time, As was that wicked Steven
gardener B. off wynchester, ^
who manyfestly as the^ apperyth, declared the same by his book de (ve^a
obedientia) which book being then made according to gods word as he prouyth
plainly, that began to take rote in him. And afterward being given up off god,
he re^usyd the same and resystyd gods word, which book is wholly against the
supremacy off the B. of Rome, the reasons grun^lyd upon gods word, wherein he
also manyfestly declaryth the ma^yag between K. H. 8. and queen ca^^^yue to
bea^ together unlawful and ungodly, and thereby p^ou^th the queen to be a
bastard, as plainly apperyth^ Bonner B* off london.
And bonner bishop off london confirmy^h the same by his prologe made before
the same book de vera obedientia, which is notable to be merkyd and notyd of^
that most wicked and dyssemblyng tyrant, who is past all shame and honesty.
Also off Tunstall b. o^f du^ram, Tunstall B. on du^ram.
off his sermon that he preachyd before K.H. 8. on palm sunday 1539. and is
openly in print, proving by many good and probable reasons, Cardinal pole to be
an arra^t traytore to his co^^re, and worse then an infydell, and doctor smyth
that wethercoke, Cardinal Pole.
that ^urni^h with every wynd off doctrine, as apperith by his so often
recantyng. In the same supplicacion is made an exhortortacion to the lords and
gentyllmen off England wa^nyng them to beware off the c^af^e and falshode off
our dyssemblyng bysshoppes, Doctor Sinyth.
and clergy who like most arrant traitors, go about to betraye this noble realm
of England, in to the hands off the prince of spain only for the establyshment
off there wylkyd kingdom, Bysshopps and clergy traitors.
which if it come to pass, this noble and ^^e co^^re shall be brought in to most
^yle bondage, and slavery, the which I beseech allmychty god to defend yff it
be his holy will and pleasure amen.

Sens that time, a true hartyd Englyshman, perceyuyng the miserable thraldom,
seruytude and bondage, that the goodly contres off Naples, Miland etc be
brought in to ^a^lye, Naple^ Myland.
to say sens the K. off spain has come to the croune there off, has made a
treatise calling it a warnyng for England, wherein he has declared plainly and
at large, what taxes, tolls, and tributes the K. of spain and his spanyerds,
The warni^g for England.
has brought those goodly contres unto both of corn, wine, flesh, fyshe,
salt, and fruits etc. and what subsydes every man off occupacion must pay
daily, as by the same book at large more plainly apperyth.

And although many occasyons have been mynystred and daily more and more
inseuyth, whereby it is to be supposyd, the destruction off our contre to be
nere at hand (except Gods great mercy) yett is there ^o^, that has made the
lamentacyon thereof. wherefore perceyuyng such things com to pass, as be allredy
done, and diverse other practyses, wrough and a workyng* only to bring this
noble realm in to most vile bondage and slavery off the spanyerds. I. have
often be waylyd and lamented the state theroff: And because it is my dwtye for
the love that I. bear there unto I thought it good to set it forth, that other
good and virtues men perceyuyng the dystructyon theroff to be so nere at hand,
that they also lamentyng the state theroff might be the more mouyd to make there
ernest prayers to allme^hty god, that he for his dear sone Jesus Christ's sak,
Ernest prayers.
would spare and be favorable to ur pour contre off England now over rune with
horyble ydolatry. And that he would perdon and forgive us om sins. for the
which cause, he has sent such wicked rulers to raygne over us, Iaco. 5.
for as S. James says the prayer off the Just man avaylyth much. And I doubt
not, but god is merciful pacient and long suffering, and will have mercy upon
us, and upon his pour congregacyon there* orells where stat^ryd abroad, at such
time as he knouyth best to his honor, and will also take ffrom us our cruel
rulers, that have so sore persecutyd and made havoc of his said congregacyon,
the which I beseech him to do for the blude of his dear sone our lord Ie^us
Christ, that we may there once again openly confess his holy name, to the
utter confucyon off the kingdom off Antychryste amen.

But forasmych as non off the same godly books and warnings either com not to
the queen's hands, or else will nothing molyfye here heart, but that there is
fought malyciusly and off a set purpose the dystructyon off the noble men
gentyllmen and commons off England whereby may the more easyer be brought to
pass, there most wicked deuyses and purposes, that is, to give away and betray
this noble realm off England, in to the hands off the king off spain and his
spaynyerds. wherefore I have thought it good to declare unto my natyue contre,
serteyne off these manifest treasons, and practyses, but first I will declare
the prophecye off that blessed marter off god master hugh latymer, preaching
before the most virtues prince K.E. 6. in his palace at westmynster 1549. that
these plages should com upon us for our unthankfulness, and that god would send
such tyrants to rain over us, for our unrepentant hearts, which now is come to
pass in deed, and was thought at that time a thing impossyble, but that gods
word must be true which was spoken by the holy ghost through that blessed
martyr M. latymer, and his fellow marters and other preachers, as it is come to
pass at this day.

And because the prophecye which he then prophesied in his sermon before the
king, is now all to gether fullfyllyd as plainly apperyth, The cawse off the
making off this lamentacion.
And that sermon and prophecye mouyd me much to lament the state off our
contre, has also partly cawsyd me to make this lamentacyon upon this realm off
England. And becawse it shall not be thought, that I will add or deminysh any
part off the said prophecy, I* will here recyte perte of hit, word for word
as it is printid in the book off his sermon, he taking accasion to prech before
the king, of the dwty of kings rulers, and Maiestrates, as here after folowith.

It makyth no matter by what name the rulers be namid if so be they shall walk
ordinatly with god and direct there steps with god, for both patriarks,
Judges, The very words off M. Latimers sermon.
and kings, had and have there auctorite off god, and therefore godly, but this
ought to be considred, which god said. Non praeficere tibi potes hominem
alienum, that is thou must not set a strenger over the. It has pleasid god to
grant us a natural liege king, and lord off our own nation, an Englishman,
one off our own religion god has given him unto us, and is a most precius
treasure, A stranger to be king.
and yet many off us do desire a stranger to be king over us. Let us desire no
more to be bankers, but let us in devour our selves to walk ordinatly and
plainly after the word off god, let us follow daniell, le^t is not seek the
death of our most noble and rightful king, our own brother both by natiuite
and godly religion, let is pray for his godly estate that he may live long
among us.

well the kings grace has sisters, my lady Mary and my lady E^sabeth, which by
succession and course ar inheritors to the crown, who yff they should mary with
strangers, what should in ^ewe god knowith, but god grant they never come to
coursing nor succeding, therefore to avoid this plage, A strange King.
let us amend our lives, and put away all pride, which does droune men in these
dais, all co^etisues wherein the Magistrates and rich men off this realm ar over
whelmid, all lechery and all other excessive vices, provoking gods wrath, were
he not merciful, even to take from us, our natural king and liege lord and to
plag us uith a strange king for our unrepentant heart, wherefore yff you say ye
love the king, amend your lives and the^ ye shall be a mean, that god shall lend
him us, long to raygn over is, for vndoutidly s^n^s provoke ^^ich gods wrath
scripture says, Dabo tibi regem in furore meo. that is I will give the a king
in my wrath, Now we have a lawful king, and a godly king, neuerthelesses yet
many euels do reign, and a little after now I here say all things ar endid after
a godly manner, or else shortly shall be, make have make have, and let us lern to
convert to repent and amend our lives, if we do not I fere I fear least for
our sins, and vntha^kfullnes an hipocrite shall reign over us, Long time we
have been seruan^s and in bondage, serving the pope in Egypt, god has given us
a deliueret, a natural king, A natural King.
let us not seek no stranger of another nation, no hipocrite which shall bring
in a gain all papistry, ypocrisie, and ydolatry, no diabolical minister, which
shall maintain all deuelishe works and evil excersises, M. Latimers w^rdes
fullfillid.
but let us pray that god maintain, and contin^^ our most excelent king here
present trwe inheritour of this our realm both by natiuite and also ly the
special gift and ordinance of god etc.

(...) this prophecy of that blessid marter of god M. Latimer be not now com
to pass and fullfillid let all men Judge* which before was not regardid, ye it
was thought a thing impossible such alteracion and tyranny, so sone to have
folowid* as now plainly apperith, and yet this is but the beginning off sorows
and plages that shall follow, onles god of his great mercy (at the cry and
lamentacion of the pour oppressid, which live in misery and bondage of
conscience) fear these plages now begone, and manifestly appear before our
eyes, for our in gratitude and great unthankfulness.

Oh what a plage is it to see strangers rule in this noble realm violently,
where before time trwe hartid Englishmen have gouernid quietly? what a lamentable
thing is it? that although queen Mary being born in England, and had to here
father a noble and trwe hartid prince and English man? The (...) spanish mother.
yet she folowith nothing his steps in true zeal to this realm, becawse she
took the most part off here blude and stomach off her spanish mother, and
therefore from time to time ever regardid her spanish kindred, and permotid them,
by giving them l^censis, The spanierds carry away our (...).
whereby they do carry and convay away, out of this realm fre^y without paieng
any custom therefore, our goudly and best comodites, as woll Tin^ lead lether
etc. to the great decay and ympouerishment, off the pour commons off this realm,
by ^^a^son wheroff the said comodites, be now at doble pryces, that they were
before, and also pour men cannot be set a work as they have been.

Ye who seith not but that she sekith the destruction of those nobles and
gentillmen, that here noble father tenderly louid? the thing is manifest and
cannot be denied, who would ever have thought such unnaturalness, as to cawse
that worthy and vertuose Lady, Lady Jane, being inocent and giltles, Lady Jane*
put to death.
as the queen here self did think, being compellid to take the stat upon here
of xvij. years of age, and so nere off here kindrid, to be so cruelly murtherid?

Also to cawse that worthy and virtues man, Thomas Cramner* Archbishop off
canterbury.
and marter of god Thomas Cramner Archbishop of canterbury, to be so cruelly
murtherid who sauid here liff, what time as K.H. 8. here father would have
dispachid here, for her contempt and disobedience, when nether the old duke of
Nortfolke, nor oth^ off the temporal lords of the counsel could entreat here
said father, but that she shoud die, then went this meke archbisshop to be
king, and so prudently pewrsadid him, that he spa^^de here and sauid her lyff,
which when he had obtainid the duke off Northfolk and the other lords off the^
counsel gave him, such thanks for that dais work, saying to him that if ever
they lived and lay in there pouer they would requite it, so that it is to be
supppsid that yff the said duke off Northfolke and had liuid, he should not have
been so cruelly murtherid. But here is to be notid great ingratitude, and
vnthanfullnes, to requite him with death that sauid here liff.

K.H. 8. here noble father perceiving the wisdom, sobrenes honesty, meknes,
and good lerning off the said Thomas Cramner, promotid him not only to be
archbishope off Canterbury, but also metropolitan, and primate of all England,
and becawse he so prudently and soberly behauid him selff therein he made him
cheff off this preuy counsel, and for the fidelite that he found in him, at
the time off his death, he made him one of the cheff of his executors off his
testament and last will: when he put out Gerdenar. B. of winchest, and comittid
unto him as one off his executors the governance off his sone, that worthy
prince king Edward the vj, K. Edward.
under which noble prince, this realm off England was quietly gouernid and
rulid, with out any such cruelty and tirany as to vsid now adais.

Wherefore o England / England / Lament, lament, how great and greuouse are thin
offencis, and sins, that god is so sore displeasid with the, to suffer such
rulers to bridle the and so sore to plage and scourg the, A very Rod^ off god.
ye verily a very rood of god apointid, and therefore wounderfully and
meruelusly reseruid and kept, to plage England, for there unthankfulness, and
for not knowing the time off there visitacion* wherefore now England repent
repent, and bewail thy miserable sta^e, for if thou do it not tyght sone,
thou art no^ like shortly to be over thrown with strangers and tyra^ts* who
will rule and bridle the, as they have already thretenid the, thy goodly women
and faier daughters will they defile, thy pleasant houses and goodly places off
pleasure shall be given unto the^, and they shall in joy thy labors, which thou
and thy forefathers, with great pain travel, and troble have gatherid to
gether for the, the thing is now a working, and the fire ackindling, so that
yff god only off his great mercy help the not, thou art like to be distroid
very shortly, for they that guide the my people, Esaias. 3.
says the prophet Esaias, are extorcioners and ^o men have rule over you. O my
people thy leaders desame the, and distroy the way off this foot steps. It is
ye that have burnt up my vine yard, and the spoil of the pour is in your
houses, where fore do ye oppress my people, and smite the^^on the ^a^is says
the lord off hosts.

It is (...) in the 34. chap. off the book off the holy man Job. Job. 34.
that for the sins off the people god suffrith a tyrant to reign over them*
if England now have not tirans and women to rule an^ reign over them, let all
men Judge? does not all there d^^ngan^ procedings declare manifestly that if
has been laborid and gone about by all the wais and means that can be deuisid
or ymaginid to give away (I will not say to betray) this noble realm off
England, in to the hands off the spanierds.

The queen (...) off Spain.
First did not the queen in mediatly as soon as she came to the governance
and. dignite off this realm desire to mary with the prince off spain, and
as soon as the matter was espied, ^ere not, 20 off the perliament house sent to
here, to declare what: normites would follow to the realm if she married with any
stranger, and therefore desirid here to mary within the realm, whereby it is esye
to be perceiuid what she has had alwaise in here mind.

After that was it not pretentyd, as soon as she was married that she was with
child, and without all shame cawsid the same to be published an^ set abroad in
print and subscribid with the hand off 1^. off the preuy counsel that the hole
body off the realm, ^he prete^did (...) be with child
might think the same to be trwe, and immediately upon the same callid a
perliament, becawse the nobles and commons should be the more willing and ready
to condissend and to give the crone off this noble realm, to the prince off
spain, to thentent that he with his proud spainierd might bridle this
brithanishe nation, according as it is set out in print about the fisnamy or
pictur of the queen's in these words.

Illa ego, The queen's pose about her fisnamy.
cui superare suos Deus optimus hosts
Iustitiaque, dedit gentem frenare Britannam.
And when it was perceiuid that there practice would take no place, but that it
was espied in the pliament house, and that he could not have the crone to him,
were they not then markid and notid, who were against it and to some off them
were sent parents of 100. lib. a year some of 200. lib. a year, Patentes given,
and grauntid.
some more some less according as time and accacion seruid, to stope there
mouths withal, and look who shewid not them selves ready on inclining to take
a bribe to betray this there natural conne, was not one quarrel or another
pikide to him or them, whereby they were brought quorum nobis, and then to lay
either treason or heresy (as they call it) to there charges, whereby many were
brought in to preson as it is manifest, by reason wheroff who dare speak there
minds frelie in the said perliament houss, according to the ancient privileges
off this noble realm? and is not this also a plage which is come upon us for
our vn^hankfullnes according as our true prechers and prophets declarid to us
as is before said. And for the more furtherance off this there wickid purpose,
did they not with out all shame, set out in print, a genelogy or petigre in
the english tongue, to prove by the same genelogy that the prince off spain came
off the blood off king Edward the third. Be all these practices think you, for
any other purpose, but for to cause the common people, to have such a good
opinion off the prince of spa^ne, that they might be the more ready an^ willing,
to have him cro^nid king, off this realm. And thereby to disinheret, This
genelogy had been treason in the time of K.H. 8.
all the next rightful heirs off the same, and so to bring this noble realm
in to the bondage off strangers, contrary to the ancient la^^s, statu^^s, and
customs off this noble realm off England.

And no^ of late who is ignorant of so many noble men and gentilmen fech^d out
off all shires, and cauillacions and quarrels pikid to them, and so cast in to
prison (as they say) upon suspection of conspiracy against the queen, which
thing is but vain and ymagined as apperid lately by M. John frogmarton, who at
the time off his execution, Johan frogmarten.
confessid openly to the people that he never offendid in any treason against
the queen, and therapon took his death, and yet he was most cruelly hangid
drawn and quartrid: how be it I know some men will answer and say, that he
was co^dempnid by the law and the quest passid against him and found him gilty
etc but I would know off the again? I pray the what quest dare quite any man,
were he as ygnorant and clear as Susanna, yff the Judges conde^pne him, as the
wickid Judges condempnid here, becawse she would not condissent to there shamfull
lust and desire.

Do ye not know how 12. honest and substancial mercha^t men off london were
handlid not long sens, because they clerid and found sir Nicolas throgmarten
not gilty, according to there oath and conscience, but what was there reward,
were they not all most shamfully put in preson, where they lay miserably some
halff a year, The quest that quit sir Nicolas frogmarten inprisonid therefore.
some more some less, and afterward were fain to pay some off them 200. lib^
some 500. merks, some more some less to the queen, according to there abillite
and substance, or else they should have remaynyd still in preson, with out any
right, justice, or law.

Here by ye may perceive, what tyranny is vsid, and by this practice they have
so fearid honest men that should go apo^ any quest for the queen, that they
will say and do as the queen will have them, rather then to be so cruelly and
shamfully intreatid and handlid as those 12. honest merchant men were before,
who has herd of the like tiran^y vsid in England before this time, I do
remember in the time of K. H. 8. that the lord dacres of the north was
indightid of treason, The lord dacres.
and a quest of honest me^ did quite him according to equite and justice, and
yet I never herd that any off the same quest were either in prisonid or trublid
therefore.

Is it not also manifest how shamfully, those thwo knights, Sir peter Carow and
Sir Johan Cheke were betrayed, taken and carried away, ryding betven bru^sells
and Andwerp, in the county of brabant. And had not Sir peter Carow his pardon
sent him over the sea, so liberally, both for lifflands and goods that a larger
perdon has never been grauntid. And likewise Sir Johan Cheke had he not the
queen's licens, to depart the realm, and being both as it was supposid in there
princes fauour^ or at the least no man perceiuid the contrary, for they both
had been with the queen's ambassadors at brussells, Andwerp and barro, mich
friendly comunicacio^ and great chere was had between the^, after that they
riding to gether to brussells, to them bassadors, which were there present both
to gether, where they were friendly, and lovingly interteinid, and great chere
was made to the^ three dais to gether, and no manner thing laid to there charges,
and also lovingly and friendly took there leave of the said emblassadors, and
returnid towerd Andwerp again, were most shamfully, by the kings marshall of
that co^tre taken, and like thieves carried away, and so conuaied to the tower of
london. Is not this also a lamentable case, to here these two gentilme^, to be
betrayed so shamfully, Princis promyss not pe^^formed
who will trust such rulers with any manner promises, when they thus seek to
betray, the noble and gentillmen, of this realm. Is this the truth and crede^s
that should begeuen to princes words, when they thus shamfully pluke bake that
they have grauntid, and perform not that they have promisid.

More over who seith not plainly now that the prince of spain has optainid to
have the name of the king of England and also is permittid in our english coin
to ioin out english arms with the arms of spain* an^ his ^^^namy with the
queen's, the croune of England being made over both there heds in the midest, and
yet apo^ nether of the^ both, and the supscripcio^ about the same coins was
with the name of philipe and Mary as apperith* sens that time, is it not
manifest, The king vsyth the arms off england in his coin with ou^ the queen's
name o^ ^^s^my.
that he in his own private coin has vsurpid ferther, and ioinid his arms
with the arms of England, and made his pictur alone, with themperiall crone of
England upon his head, leaving out both the queen's picture, and also here name*
and so uses both the name and arms of England with out the queen's* having
this sup^cripcion about his coin Philip ^. ^nglie, francie, n^apolis princep.
hispaine, by this ye may perceive what he does intend and purpose, and that ^e
sought not in marriage the queen's person, but the welthy and rich land off
England.

Besides this, what practices be inuentid daily, to set England at va^iance
with france, it is not unknown, not only by giving out that englismen should
go about to betray callis to the frenchmen, whereby our new king might have
accasio^ to send in soldiers of his, an^ so take the town and sorts for him
selff, but also to cawse some of our Ioly ^^ckers, which be soldiers about
guines, or ha^mes, to pike quarrels with the frenchmen to set us and the^ to
gether by the ears, that by that means the queen might have accasio^,
Practice^ set us at v^^ance with france.
and that it might be thought she should be co^pellid, to send out both ships
and soldiers, and so not only consume the greatist (...) of the substance an^
treasure of the realm, with the artillary and navy of the same, but also will be
accasion off destruction off a great number off the noble men gentyllmen and
commons off this realm.

It is not long sens that we had wars with france, which was for the^prours
pleasur, but what folowid there of, it is not unknown did it not all most beggar
the hole realm, The fruits off wars.
besides the loss, and distructio^ of a great number of worthy gentilme^ and
como^s* Therefore I would desire the states of the realm, that they will be
circu^spect an^ well aduisid; how they attempt, to break with france, for the
pleasure of any other princes, least they be the occasion of the destruction
and beggary of the hole realm.

More over it is to be considred when king henri the 8. began wars with
france, how that before he had been at rest and quiet 30. years with out any
wars, what we have susteynid by the last wars nith france.
in the which time, he had gatherid diverse ways, great great substance and
treasure whereby it was supposid he to have had sufficient, to have maintained
his said wars with all: but for all that, was he not sam to gather off his
nobilite, clergy, and commons, diverse great subsides, beniuolencis, lones or
lending off money, besides also our fine coins off gold and silver, was turnid
in to copper and brass as it is manifest at this day* which was a great dacay
to our common wealth, as it cannot be denied. wherefore if the queen should now
begin wars with france, for her husbo^ds pleasure, The queen has no
provision a forehand.
and have not the like prouicion aforehand in comparison off her said noble
father (as it is to be supposid that she has not) by raison she has given
away so mich to the b. off Rome and his adherents, and beggerid her nobles and
como^s to set up her spitfull spritualty (so that the old proverb is now
fulfyllyd, S. Nicolas is on horse bake and S. George is on foot) where upon it
is to be thought that she has nothing the like provision, that her said noble
father had, when he began to have wars with france. And therefore I will leave
it to the counsel and states off the realm, to consider what will follow, The
mass is the occasion off the great dearth in England.
(...) we should at this present, have wars nith france for as I do
understand, by other, England is in as great misery and penuri at this day, as
hit has been in many years before, the dearth of come, and all manner of vital
be so exceeding dear, although at the first coming in off the queen to here
raygne, it was reportid, that that shamfully doll, (the blessid mass as they
call it) had brought with it, all things plenty, which being contrary* now
plainly apperith, to be the occasion off the great vengeance off god upon this
realm, for so shamfully receiving again, that wickid and abominable pop stome,
with all there wickid ceremonies, express^y against god and the death of his
sone Christ.

This have I writton, considring it to be my dwty in waring my native contre,
to avoid the great plages and dangers, that be now coming apo^ them, and
knowing it also to be the dwty of every christean and trwe hartid englishman,
and that man that perceiuith this his native contre like to come in to ruyn and
destruction, and does not indeuore him selff by all theme (...) he can devise,
for the deliverance there of, the same is not worthy to be countid a trwe hartid
englishman, Miles hogerd and his fel^ws.
but a traitoure to his contre, what shall then every trwe hartid englishma^,
Judge of Miles hogerd and his fellow helpers, who more like swinherds have made,
a shamfull, railing, folishe, and blasphemus book, against god and his pour
persecutid members, and afflictid, congregation now dispersid abroad in diverse
conties for his names sake, who by there flathering bocks, Themistocles saying.
extollith the King above the moon, aledging in there books the saying off
Themistoc^es, to the Athenians by these words why make eye these tumultes and
rumors, against rhem, off whom by manifold wais, ye have receiuid so many
comodites what shall all men Judge off this shamelese flaterers. I pray you
what commodites has England receiuid, of the king: Except it be, that they
bestowid an hundrid thousand ponds, for his charges, to bring him, and his navy
off spainierds in to england, which money, thenglishe merchants latly have paid
at Andwerp as it is manifest and cannot be denied. Besides that what
discomodites and (...) England is like to receive by him, I pray god thy may
bewarnid to take heed in time. And as touching the kings person, I know non to
find any fault with it, exceapt the queen her selff do, The spanierds report of
the queen.
for lake off his company so long, the which as it is reportid he little
regardith, for as his spanierds have blasid abroad in other contres saying what
shall the king do with such an old bich, also affirming that she may be his
mother, a younger is more meter for him, with modispitfull words spoken off
them, the which yff an englishma^ should report, should be taken for to odius.
And as for England with a great number off the states of other contres: could
have been very well content, The dowghter off portingal.
that he had procedid with his former marriage, with the dowghter off
portyngall, which had been more feter and quieter for him, both by the Judgment
of his own spanyerds, and also of many other. And as for the nobles and commons
off England, they could have been very well pleasiid, that the queen had also
married within the realm as with the lord Courteney earl off deuenshir borne of
a noble house, Lord courtney poisonid
or with some other noble man. And so had the said lord Courtney not been
compellid for the save guard off his liff, to have trauelid beiond the sees in
to strange co^tres, whereas it is supposid he was poisonid, for fear of^ putting
the prince off spain besid his protensid enterprise. The lady fransis daughter
off to the french queen


what shall men Judge also off the queen, that now suffrith the aspergement off
her blude, and suffrith the hieres apparent off the crone to many so basely and
vilre, to bring thereby the succession, out off estima^ion, that people may the
less care if the croune, go to a stranger, which is contrary to the laws and
statu^s of this realm, which would not have been suffrid in the time of King
Henry the 8. nor in any other ^ing or princes time, that had set by the honor
of the realm* who ^erth not the practisys that is vsid daily, and all for pour
England. The conclusions (...) peace with the french king, so (...) redounding
to there dishonours becawse they might the more quietly, work, and make there
practis for England, with* (...) set or interupcion off any other forain
princes.

And becawse they have failid off there purpose at two perl^aments and cannot
have there desire, The (...)
by the comen assent who (...) not there practice and in ^ent, to enter upon the
realm with pour and force, and so to ca^^e the prins off spayn to m^ke a
conqueste off this noble Realm (yff he cann) and thereby to desinheret all the
n^ble blude and commons off England, and to plant in there places the vile
spanyerds* c^ntrary to the rightful laws and customs off this realm. The queen
(...).
And did not the queen when she was crownid, take a (...) to mayntain and
defend the old and ancyent (...) customs on this realm, and how she kepith them
(...) judge.

Moreover what a greuounse plag is it, perceiving the great dearth and scante
off corn (...) ^ail etc to be in all england at this present which has not
been seen many years before, ^
whereby the common People be in great poverty and misery: that there is gathered
such great subsidies off them, besides, jones or sending off money, as is now,
only to keep them low, and in misery, that the prince off ^payne may the ^one^^
prain to come to his said pretensid enterprise.

At the queen's first coming to here rayng, she forgave the subsidye, that was
grauntid to King Edward the 6. whereby it is to be supposid she had no great
need off money, or else it was to make the people more willing to consent, that
she should mary with the prince off spain.

Is it not also manifest, that sens she came to her state and dignite, that she
has had no wars, whereby here treasure should be consumyd, but contrary wise
has gotten great possessions and substance off those noble men and
gentyllmen, that have suffrid most cruel death, besides great (...) that she
took an^ does take of many noble men and other s^ns she came to her raygne as
it is manifest. what the quen meanith by gathering off money.
But all her gathering is to help the King her husbond, and to enrich him and
to make him strong, that he may the more easily com in and conquer this noble
realm.

Also is it not manifest how many thousand pounds is daily paid, by Thenglish
merchants and staplers at Andwerp, by the queen's commandment, and daily more
and more is paid by them, and therefore Thenglish merchants, ar comaundid, to
make over but two shyppyngs a year, to the utter undoing off a great sort off
young merchant men who are not able to abide there merkets so long, wha the
english merchants must pay at andwerp for the queen.
and wherefore do they cawse this ordinance to be made* but only that at such
times, many clothes and wolles may be shyppyd over the sees to gether: off the
which clothes and wolles the said merchants must lend to the queen, a serteygne
some off money off every cloth, and. serpler off wole, that they so ship, that
it may amount to.xxx. or xl. thousand pounds at a time to thentent that it may
serve the king* to maynteyne him and his mynyons out off the realm, becawse he
has no great h^st Home to the queen, being now more then xv monythes from
Here, whereby it is manifest and plainly apperyth as clear as the sone, that in
marriage he sought not the queen's person but only the rich and welthy realm of
England.

And by cawse I know my name shall be abusyd, for writing thus plainly my mind,
for the dwtye and good will that I bear to my natyue contre, I do desire the
therefore gentle reader, what so ever thou be, The auctors request.
that thou wyle consider, how many worthy men off the Romans, did not pass to
venture there lives, and gave them selves to the death, for the delyuerance off
there contre, Mucius Seuola. Marcus Curcius.
as Caius Mucius Seuola, Marcus Curctus, and many other (as plainly apperith in
Titus Liuius, the Romans story) for the deliueuerance of there Cite, co^tres
and common wealth from the hands of strangers there henemyes, like as I do at this
time, and there fore I do desire them to Judge the best off me consydryng I do
but my dwtye, Miles hogerd and his felous at blind snailes and hyssing serpents.
which likewise is the part and dwry off every trwe hartid English man.

And as for hogerd and his felows who may be comparid to blind snailes, and
hissing serpents, creping out of there holes to fight against dead men* and also
with such whose answers cannot be suffrid to be read and indifferently to be
iudgid, and therefore these snailes may be bold to crepe upon there own du^ghills,
to lie, slander, and condemn, Christ's pour members at there own pleasure, for
if our answers might be suffrid open lie to be red and indifferently to be
iudgid (such answers should be made to there follshe and slanderus books wul
^aledgid auctors out off the grauesend barge, which be mete couers for such
cups) they suould be so paintid out in there colers, Hogerds auctor aledgyd
out off the grauesend barge.
that they should be ashamid here af^r, to Rail and lie as they have done,
onles they be past all shame, like as that inocent prelate doctor standish, who
long agone wrote a treatise against doctor barnes aste* he was burnid, which
offentmies affterward he lamented, and recantid the same: who now beginnith
again to wax bold like a snaile creping out of his shel seeing no man dare
openly resist him, beginnith again to write, and affirmith that he will now
abide (by his folishe fantasies) to the death, D. standish is a cokes come.
alake pour cokesscom, that turnith with every wind off doctrine, as a great
number off his felows have done, who being more wily, and crafty then he is,
although they make books ar ashamid to setto there names, for fear off after
clappes, for they dought how long this hothe wether off persecucjon, and
borning will continue, and therefore ar contentid, that such swinherds as Miles
hogerd and his felous be, shall bear the name, Miles hogerd.
who for vain glory, and hope to come to promocion, ar contentid like blind
busserds, to take it upon them.

Thomas Archbi^. off canterbury b. off london. b. off worcetr^ b. off glocetr^
b. S. Dauiths doctor tailor M. rogers, M. bradford M. sanders, M. filpot etc
who ever hard off so many worthy bisshops, and lernid men, to be so cruelly
martrid, as has been now off late dais, as namly Thomas Cramner archbissop off
Canterbury, M. Ridley bisshope off london M. Latimer sometime bishop worceter,
M. hoper bishop off gloceter M. pfarer bishop off S. Dauiths, doctor tailer
off hadle M. Rogers, M. bradford M. filpot, M. sanders, with many other virtues
and lernid men, befid M. grene, and M. Cawsten gent^llmen, and many other
gentillme^ in diverse shires and places off England, besides also many virtues
men and women, whose nomder I cannot sertenly rehearse, but amsure and serteine,
that there names ar writton in the book off liff, and becawse our Rulers would
have there tiran^ie made the more manifest to the word, did they not lately
burn 13. men and women in one fire, at stratford the bow besides london.

Yff for our sins and unthankfulness, god has not sent us strangers and
tirants to Rain over us, according to the prophecy off M. Latimer, then was
there never any. Yet ha have we one notable example of a wickid tirant, in the
third book off the kings. in the xvij.xviij. and xix. capters we read off that
cursid woman queen Iesabell, Reg. 17 18 19. chap.
who off a wickid zeal that she had to the serving off here false ydols cawsid
all gods holy prophets to be persecutid and stain, in so mich that the holy
Prophet Elias was fain to fly in to the wilderness, Queen Iesabell.
to save his lyff, where god sent arauen to feed him, where he cried and
co^plainid to god, saying lord they have distroied all thy holy prophets, and I
am only escapid, and yet they seek after my liff, but god answerid Elias and
said I have yet reseruid unto me vij. thousand, that have not bowid there Knees
unto ^all not worshippid his image etc. Even so I trust, and doubt not, for all
the greuouse persecucions, Elyas.
and tyrany that is daily vsid against gods saints god has reseruid many that
have not bowed there knees to there ydols, but that do continue in there prayers
still to god, for his pour afflictid church off England, now dispersid and
staterid abroad, at whose ^rye and lamentable complaint, god will aduenge him
selff off his and our adversaries, our wickid rulers, and will bring some off
them to as shamfull an end, as he did that cursid, and wickid woman queen
Iezeqell.

wherefore dear brethern, sease not to lament, and bewail our sins, and the
state and misery off our country, that is come upon us for our unthankfulness
and for not knowlegyng the time of our visytacyon and doubt the not, but god is
good merciful, pacient and long suffering, and will at his appointid time so
confou^d them with all there false spitful spritualty* that all the world shall
know, that he only is the lord in all the earth. wherefore I say once again
dear brethern, lament, lament, the state of our native, co^tre, and sease not
to cry with me unto god and to beseech him for his dear sone our save your
Jesus Christ's sake, that he will have mercy apo^ his po^n church off England,
and that he will not give us over in to the hands of strangers and tyrants, his
and our henemies, for our sins and unthankfulness. Psalm. 107.
for as the Prophet Dauith says in the 107. psalm it is he that for the sins
off the people, makith a frutfull land to be barine etc. a godly and
compfortable psalm for all such as be oppressyd with tyranny, wherein the
afflictid, and troblid conscience, shall be well satisfied. There unto accordyth
the saying off the holy man Job, Job. ^4.
that for the sins off the people, god sendith tirantes to reign over them.
seeing then that for our sin^es et vntha^k fullnes we have prouokid gods wrath
who has sent us these tira^es to rule over us, we have now non other wais nor
means then only to subsmitt our selves under the migkty hand off god and,
^^ges 10
to follow the example off the childern off Israel, who were gods elect and
chosen people what time as they had offendid god by worshipping ydols, he
ponisshid them by sending strangers and tirants to Rule and rain over them who
oppressid them (as our rulers do now us) wherefore they turnid to god, humhlid
them selves with prayer and fasting, and confessyd there sins and
unthankfulness: and the lord said to them, did not the hethen before oppress
you, and ye cried unto me, anb I deliuerid you out off there hands, and for all
that, ye forsook me again, and worshippid there gods, wherefore I will help you
no more, go and complain unto those gods which ye have seruid, and look yff
they will help you out off your misery. And they confessyd and said to the
lord, we have sinnid, do thou with us, what so ever pleasith the, deliver us
only at this time, and they put away there ydols and seruid the lord, and the
lord had pite upon there misery, and deliuerid them out off there henemies hands
etc. Oh let this godly example move us to cry unto the lord, with out
seasing, and confess like wise our sins and unthankfulness, and say to the
lord with the Prophet Esaias, A prayer for he chiurch of England. Esaias 37.
oh lord of hosts, thou art god alone off all the kingdoms off the arth, thou
only have creatid heaven and earth, incline thin cares and consider, open thyn
eyes, and see our miserys, and deliver us from the hands off our adversaries,
that all the kingdoms off the arth may know that thou only art the lord.
Jeremy. 5. oh lord call to remembrance what we have suffrid, ^eremy. 5.
consider and see our co^fucion, our in heritaunce is turnid to strangers, and
our houses to foreners. Esaias. 55. (oh let us seek the lord while he is to be
found, and let us call upon him while he is nigh, so will he be marcifull to
us) Thy holy Prophet Dauith says. Esaias. 55.
that like as a father pitieth his own childern, so thou lord have mercy and
pite upon them that fear the. wherefore oh lord be merciful to us, and remember
not our offencis, nor the offencis off our fore fathers, Psalm. 103.
nether take thou vengeance of our sinnis, spare us good lord, spare thy pour
afflictid churh off England whom thou have redemid with thy most precius blude,
and be not angry with us for ever, but deliver us this one tim from our cruel
enemies, which most cruelly oppres and persecute us with most cruel death,
becawse we will not worship the works of there own hands, which worship does
perteine to the only our lord god, therefore ar we spoilyd off our goods, and
persecutid from contre to contre. oh lord our god hear our prayers, which thou
do give us grace to make for thy pour afflictid church off England, oh do not
prolong becawse thou ^eist, how thy most holy and blessed name is daily
blasphemid, through false and wickid doctrine, where before thy holy word was
truly preachyd and taught, and thy church there did bear the professyon off thy
name, oh call to remembrance how merciful thou have been to thy people off
old time, when they were disobedient, and did for sake the, and worshippid the
works of there own hands (like as in England they now do) thou did not
utterly reject them, Judges. 3. Iueges. 6. Judges. 14. 3. Reg. 9.10. Macha.
2.3. Jeremy. 14.
but when they repentid, and confessyd there sins and turnid to the with all
there hearts, thou mercifully forgauest there sins, and sentyst them deliuerers,
as Aliud, ge dro^ Samson, ^ehw Machabeas and other, who deliuerid them from
strangers there henemies Jeremy. 14. we knowledge oh lord all our misdeds, and
the sins off our fore fathers, for we have offendid the, be not still
displeasid with us (oh lord) for thy names sake, forget not thy loving kindness,
and remenber the throu off thy glory, oh be merciful to us, be merciful to
us. psalm. 83. hold not thy tongue oh lord, keep no longer silens, refrain not
thy selff oh god, for lo thin henemyes make a hurl burle, they ymagin crafft
against thy people, and conspire against them, com say they let us rote them
out, from among the people. Oh my god make them like a whole, and as the stuble
before the wynd, persecute them with thy tempest, make there facis ashamid,
Psalm. 83.
oh lord that they may seek thy name. let the^ be confoundid and vexid ever
more and more, let them be put to shame and perish, that they may know, that
thou art god alone, and that thy name is the lord, and that thou only art the
most highest over all the earth. psalm. 35. Strive thou with them that strive
against the and fight thou with them that fight against the let them be as the
dust before the wind and thy angel oh lord scateryng them, let sodayn
destruction com upon them unawares, Psalm. 35.
And the ne^^ that they have laid preuely cach themselfs in, that they may fall
in there own mishefe, so will we give the thanks in the great congregacyon and
praise the among all people, oh lord here us, oh lord be merciful to us, Esaias.
40.
oh lord do not prolong the time, becawse thy pour church off England have
borne the professyon off thy name. Thou knowist oh lord, that all flesh is as
grass and all the glory off man as the flour off the feld, the grase witherith
and the flour ^adith away, but thy word indurith for ever. wherefore oh lord
call to remembrance thy great mercies and thy loving kindness, according to thy
promises, and do not consider, nor have respect unto the number off our daily
sins, and wickidnes, but according to thy great mercies we do beseech the to
forgive us. in thy dear sone our saueiour Christ's blude, and say unto us, thou
art our health, which would not the death off a sinner, but rather that he
convert and turn from his sins and wickidnes. Convert thou us unto the, so
shall we be convertid, ad turn thou us unto the, which are in extrem misery so
shall we be confortid, for as thy holy prophet Dauith says, yff thou shouldist
look narowly upon our sins and wickedness, lord who might abyd before the,
Psalm. 130.
but he says there is mercy with the, and therefore art thou worshippid. Again
he says lord enter not into Judgment with thy servants, for no man living
shall be found right wise before the. Seeing oh lord thou knowist all things, and
nothing ^s hid from the, Psalm. ^43.
thou knowist also that all flesh is grass, and no good thing can com from us,
as of our selves, being but flesh and blud, and all to gether vnproffytable
servants, stre^^^ now forth thy mighty hand and confound the deuisis of thin
and our henemies abate there pride aswage there mallis which still continue, and
persecu^e thy pour afflictid church off England, that all the word may know,
that thou art the living god and lord that rulist over the whole world, then
shall we mangnify and praise thy holy name, which liuist and raygnist one god
in the holy Trynite, to whom be given all honor glory and praise, for ever and
ever world with out end: Amen Amen, 30. December. 1556.

The Addicyon:
Here before in this treatise christen reader / which I fynishede and sent in
to my natyue contre more then a year past, I have declared what dystomodytes
folowid the last wars, that we had with france, to say, not only the loss of
a great number of noble and worthymen of our country, but also through the same,
our good coins of gold and sylluer, were turnyd into copper and brass, as it
is manifest: wherefore I desyryde the states of the realm, to have good
consyderacyons, and respects before they brake with france for any foreign
princes pleasure etc. the which request I doubt not but mani true englysch
hearts do now wyshe that they had folowid. Sens the which time, the queen and
counsel as is aforesaid (being a stourge and rood to plage England for our
unthankfulness) have of there own fantastical ymagynacyons, for the prince of
spaynes pleasure, not only with out the consent of any parliament broken and
begone wars with france: but also contrary, to thact off parliament made in
the first year of her rain, ^ead thact off (...)
when the conclusyons were made with themproure, for her cursyd marriage (may
England say) with the prince of spain* as in the said statude plainly
apperith: whereby asmych as in them is, they seek the dysquyetnes of the hole
realm, and to bring the commons of the same in to great mysery, which only is
the fruits off wars.

For sens the beginning of these last unfortunate wars, now begone whath has
England wone thereby? ye rather what have we not lost, although there were sent
out with the prince off spain a great number of worthy gentyllme^ and commons,
to there great costs and charges, to the wynnyng off S. Quintynes, hawn,
schatelet, and other pieces there about, the which the prince kepith for him
selff, to his own use, S. Quintin^
yet the most part of our me^, lest there bones there and the rest of the^ that
estapyd the danger of the wars, returnyd home again in great myssery penury
and begery. More over wha^ lossys have our english mercha^ts susteynid by
taking of the three rich ships, 3. Rich ships taken.
which the frenchmen took coming out of Flanders on barty^mew dai last past,
being worth 30. thousand pou^ds, besides many other ships taken by the
frenchmen sense that time, as they that have susteynid the losses thereby can
report.

And now will I come to speak off the loss of the honowr of England which is
the notable town of Callys, Callis hames and gwines lost through evil
government.
with the strong castells of hames and gwynes etc. which has be^ne in the
custodye of England more then. 200. years past, to be so shamfully betrayed and
lost, through the evil government off the queen and here counsel: whose
dylygent study and care should have been. to prouyd and forsee, specially, in
these dangerus times of wars, that not only Callys with ha^mes and gwynes, and
the pieces beyond the seas, to have been furnysshed with men and vytall
accordyngly, for to have withstand the mallys of the french men our henemyes
but also to provyde that the strong towns, castells, fortresses and blok
houses etc. lyeng about the realm, for the saff custody and defense of the
same, to be well furnysshed with men munycyon and vytalls, and also that the
ryall Navy of England had been mayntaynyd that the subjects off this realm,
might live in sanyte and quyetnes, with out danger of any foreign prince or
potentate.

This is the charge and dwty of all good and polytyk ruters and governors yff
the queen had meant this to do, The dwty of rulers
wherefore has she cawsyd to be rasyd, and defacyd those bulwarks at grave send
and tylbery, etc. and wherefore does she let fall in decay, those blokhouses
and bulwarks about deal beside dover, which her noble father, with his great
travail, Bulwarks blokhouses
costs and charges, byldyd and fortefyed, for the defense off the subjects
off the realm. But I pray you what can men otherwise Judge off the queen, here
in, but that she has done it becawse the prince off spain may the more
easyly, come in with his army and navy off ships, and so to make a conquest
off this noble realm off England as is aforesaid. But what y^f the queen and
her counsel have practysyd, how to bring Callis in to the hands of the prince
of spain, and that being perceuyd, and the french king theroff admonysshed,
cawsyd him to take his enterprise as he did.

Callis.
Or whether the queen and counsel, did wyttyngly or wyllyngly, suffer callys to
come in to the frenchmens handys (by neglecting to send aid thither in time,
the same being ^o often and many times desyrd by the lord deputy) becawse that
afferward it might come in to the hands off the prince off spain, either by
exchanging for other towns or else in some conclusyons the ^ouer to make
peace, that he having it, I mean Callys etc. mygth the souer bring his
prete^syd enterprise to pase with England.

wherefore o ye nobles and comens off England help that your bulwerks and
fornesses be made up again, with all speed and trusty men appoyntyd, Ordinance
Armore Treasure.
toward and keep them, keep the ordinance, Armore and treasure etc. with in the
realm, to defend the same when need shall require, that with gods help ye
maybe, able ^o defend your co^tre, from foreign princes who seek your
distructio^, and to bring the realm in to bondage, with bride lig you, as
before in this treatise is declarid at large

The burning of the great Harri, at the first coming off the queen to here
raygne, betokenyd some desolacyo^, and yet the queen would besto^ no cost, to
byld that goodly shype again but letti^ it with the rial Navy off England, fall
in to wast and decay* which her noble father, as a prudent and poly^yke price
mayntaynyd for the defense off the realm.

when was it ever hard off before this miserable time, when we had wars with
france, but that iij, or iiij, thousand men were sent over to keep Callys, with
the castells and frunteres therabout, that they might not only with stond the
mallys and enemyte of the frenchmen, but also to have made an inrod into france
at times, as by our chronicles plainly apperith wa^ done in our time, by the
noble prince K. H. 8.

But it is a he^^ case and much to be lame^tyd, that the queen studyeth lest
about such matters, which should turn to the wealth, comodyte and sauegard off
this realm. But contrary wise it is manifest, that all her care and study was
and is, how she may bring to pase, that the prince off spayn, may have the^
periall crown o^f thi^ noble realm of England to him and to (...) heirs, (...)
by cra^ty means or perfo^ce, and so to bring this noble and fre country off
England in to most miserable seruytude and bondage, Holland, Zeland, Brabant,
Flanders* Neape^s* Myland.
like as be his other contres off Holland, Seland, B^aba^t Flanders, Namure and
lytzenburg, etc. with his other goodly contres of Napels and Myland, etc. the
which I pray god England may take warnyng there off by time.

Here para venture some will rail upon me and revile me, because I am so bold
to charge the queen, and here counsel, as before in this treatise I have done,
and now do, and also for layeng to there charges, that through there default and
negligence, Callys with hames and gwynes, etc. become in to the frenchmens
hands, To the which I will answer and prove it to be trwe. First yff the queen
had as is before said sent over, iij. or iiij. thousand me^ to have lain upon
the borders or frunteres of Callys, and thereto had spent but only, v. hundrid
marks by the year, (I speak with the most) to honest men being strangers
dwelling in other contres (as here noble and polytyke father did) who might
have sertefyed and given knowledge to the queen and counsel from time to time
what the french king and other princes practysyd, and went about. Callys had
not been in the frenchmens hands as it now is.

For I am sure, that the french king has not seasyd contynwally to parctyse
how he might get callys, and those parties, and that within these sew^ years,
as the lord paget, and other off the counsel do very well know, Lord page^.
who were of king Edwards counsel, when the french king went about his
practyse in those days. And being known, there was a gentyllman and a doctor
sent into England to give the king and counsel warnyng theroff, after whose
coming inmedyatly, there was proclamacyons made that all captains and soldyers,
should repair in medyatly, to there towns Castells, fortresses, and holds,
and therapon preparacion was made inmedyatly, that Callis, Callys delivered
from the frenchmen.
with the castells and ^or^es were prouydyd, and finnysshed, whereby the french
king was dyssapoyntyd, and therefore forsook his pretensyd enterprise, and so
Callys was sauyd at that time from the frenchmen. And they that brought the
said message and gave warnyng to the counsel, had given them for there reward,
but one hundryd marks, which money was delivered to a friend off mine, by the
said lord paget, as he told me at that time, and yet I never hard, that that
gentyllman, that sent the said warnyng had any recompense at all for his
labor. But yff there had been given him at that ti^me for his reward (according
to his deserts) a stipent off an C. marks or an ^00. pounds by the year during
his lyff, Callis had not been in the french men's hands at this day. For I do
know that the same man had knowledge off this late p(...)se for Callis, long
before it was known abroad, and so might have given knowledge long before the
coming thither off the frechme^, and so Callis with (...)es and gines, might
have be^e sa^^d from the^.

But it is also much to be lamented that the queen has such a hate against
honest men, that profess the gospel off our ^aueyour Jesus christ, and be not
off her wickid relygyon, that she had rather, that the hole realm, should go
to wrake, then that any honest men should be maintained by here, for she will
not only give the^ any thing that might turn to the comodite and sauegard off
the realm. But contrary wise most sha^fully and wrongfully with holdith such
pencyo^s, as here noble father and brother gave to them by patent, during there
lives, for recompense of there good and faithful service and pains they took
to serve them in there days. If the queen had folowid here noble fathers
(...)d, and been ruled by his wise prudent and sage cou^selers, who had the
knowledge and experience how the affairs of the realm stood this realm, had
not come to such mysery and begery as it is at this day* but those wise and
worthy men, whom her father tenderly louid has she cawsyd to be cru^^^y
murtherid, as is aforsaid. And has set up counselors of her own, which (...)
no knowledge in the affairs off the realm, but those who will say ^s she
says, and affirm her wickid will and devises to be good and to be a (...).
Like to be co^parid, to Roboha^ the sone off king Solomon, when the chil^^^n
off Israel came to him saieg, thy fathers yoke was greuouse unto us* (...)
thou it lighter (he doi^g as the queen now does) folowid such counsele (...)
had been brougt up with him. And would not follow the counsel of the (...) and
wise men, that were off his father king Salamo^s cou^nsell, where fore, x. of
the xij. trybes off the chylderne off Israel fell from him, as the story
declarith at large, in the third book off the kings the xij. chapter. But the
text sa^^ it was the lords doing.

Oh what substance and treasure has the queen spent apo^ the prince of spain,
sense the begyn^ing off her marriage, and what vnreaso^able great subsydes and
lones has she gathered, whereby she has in pouerished the subjects of this
realm, for to aid him, where off the xxii. part would have kept Callis with
ham^es and gwines, etc. that they should not have been in the french men^ hands
at this day, but what carith she, so that she have here own cursyd will,
although the hole realm go to d^struccyon, and beggary. what think you would
her noble father. K. H. 8. have done to his said dowghter yff he had know, that
she would so wyckidly have ruled and abusid her state as she has done, first by
marieng with a stranger, (and bringing in the vsurpyd autorite off the B of
Rome) contrary to her said fathers mind, for her said noble father by his
testament and last will gave her themperiall crown of this realm, but only
upon co^dycio^ as plai^li app^rith by thacte, off perliame^t, made for the
sucsessyon off the crou^e ano, 35. H. ^. so that she would be rulid by the
counsel, as well in marriage, as in other affairs, as in the same her fathers
last will establysshyd by act of perliame^t plainly apperith. And whether she
have obied and folowyd, her said fathers last will, let all men Judge.

Finis.
Oh pray pray pray pray.
That god will take our wyckid rulers away*

Soli Deo honor and gloria. 1558.

