A declaration of certain principal Articles of Religion, set out by the
order of both Archbishops Metropolitans, and the rest of the Bishops, for the
unity of doctrine to be taught and holden of all Parsons, Vicars, and Curates,
as well in testification of their common consent in the said doctrine, to the
stopping of the mouths of them that go about to slander the ministers of the
Church for diversity of judgment: as necessary for the instruction of their
people, to be read by the said Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, at their
possession taking o^ first entry into their Cures: And also after that yearly
at two several times. That is to say, the Sundays next following Easter day
and Saint Michael tharchan^ell, or on some other Sunday within one month after
those feasts, immediately after the Gospel.
FOrasmuch as it appertains to all Christian men, but especially to the
ministers and the pastors of the Church, being teachers and instructers of
others, to be ready to give a reason of their faith when they shall be thereunto
required: I for my part now appointed your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, having
before mine eyes the fear of God, and the testimony of my conscience, do
acknowledge for my self, and require you to assent to the same. i First that
there is but one living and true God, of infinite power, wisdom, and
goodness, the maker and preserver of all things, and that in unity of this
Godhead, there be three persons of one substance, of equal power and
eternity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

ii I believe also whatsoever is contained in the holy Canonical Scriptures,
in the which Scriptures are contained all things necessary to salvation, by
the which also al errors and heresies may sufficiently be reproved and
convicted, and all doctrine and Articles necessary to salvation establyshed. I
do also most firmly believe and confess all the Articles contained in the
three Creedes: the Nicene Creed, Athanasius Creed, and our common Creed,
called the Apostles Creed: for these do briefly contain the principal
Articles of our faith, which are ar large set forth in the holy Scriptures.

iii I acknowledge also that Church to be the spouse of Christ, wherein the
word of God is truly taught, the Sacraments orderly ministered according to
Christ's institution, and the authority of the keys duly used. And that every
such particular Church has authority to institute, to change, and clean to
put away Ceremonies and other Ecclesiastical rites, as they be superfluous, or
be abused, and to constitute other, making more to seemelynesse, to order, or
edification.

iiii Moreover I confess that it is not lawful for any man to take upon him
any office or ministry, either Ecclesiastical or secular, but such only as
are lawfully thereunto called by their high authorities, according to the
ordinances of this Realm.

v Furthermore I do acknowledge the Queens Majesty's prerogative, and
superiority of government of all estates and in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, within this Realm, and other her dominions and
countries, to be agreeable to Gods word, and of right to appertain to her
highness, in such sort as is in ye late Act of Parliament expressed, and
since by her Majesty's Iniu^ctions declared and expounded.

vi Moreover, touching the Bishop of Rome, I do acknowledge and confess, that
by the Scriptures and word of God, he has no more authority then other
Bishops have in their provinces and diocesses: And therefore ye power which he
now challenges, that is, to be ye supreme head of the universal Church of
Christ, and so to be above all Emperors, Kings, and Princes, is an usurped
power, contrary to the Scriptures and word of God, and contrary to the example
of the primitive Church. And therefore is for most just causes taken away, and
abolyshed within this Realm.

vii Furthermore I do grant and confess, that the book of common prayer and
administration of the holy Sacraments, set forth by authority of parliament,
is agreeable to the Scriptures, and that it is Catholic, Apostolic, and most
for the aduauncing of Gods glory, and the edifying of Gods people, both for
that it is in a tongue that may be understood of the people, and also for the
doctrine and form of ministration contained in the same.

viii And although in the administration of Baptism, there is neither
exorcisme, oil, salt, spittle, or halowing of the water now used. And for
that they were of late years abused, and esteemed necessary, where they
perteine not to the substance and necessity of the Sacrament, they be
reasonably abolyshed: and yet the Sacrament full and perfectly ministered to all
intents and purposes agreeable to the institution of our Savior Christ.

ix Moreover I do not only acknowledge, that private masses were never used
amongst the fathers of the primitive Church, I mean public ministration and
receiving of the Sacrament by the priest alone, without a just number of
communicants, according to Christ's saying, Take ye, and eat ye, etc. but also
that the doctrine, which maintains the mass to be a propitiatory sacrifice
for the quick and the dead, and a mean to deliver souls out of purgatory,
is neither agreeable to Christ's ordinance, nor grounded upon doctrine
Apostolic, but contrariwise most ungodly and most injurious to the precious
redemption of our Savior Christ, and his only sufficient sacrifice offered
once for ever upon the altar of the cross.

x I am of that mind also, that the holy Communion or Sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ, for the due obedience to Christ's institution, and to
express the virtue of the same, ought to be ministered unto the people under
both kinds, and that it is avouched by certain fathers of the Church, to be a
plain sacrilege to rob them of the mystical cup, for whom Christ has shed
his most precious blood: Seeing he him self has said, Drink ye all of this.
Considering also that in the time of the ancient doctors of the Church, as
Ciprian, Jerome, Augustine, Gelasius and others, vi.C. years after Christ and
more, both the parts of the Sacrament were ministered to the people.

Last of all, as I do utterly disalowe the extolling of Images, Relickes, and
feigned miracles, and also all kinds of expressing God invisible, in the form
of an old man, or the holy Ghost, in form of a Dove, and all other vain
worshipping of God, devised by man's fantasy, besides or contrary to ye
Scriptures: (as wandering on pilgrimages, setting up of candles, praying upon
beads, and such like superstition,) which kind of works have no promise of
reward in scripture, but contrariwise threatenings and maledictions: So I do
exhort all men to the obedience of Gods law, and to the works of faith, as
charity, mercy, pity, alms, devout and fervent prayer with thaffection of
the heart, and notwith the mouth only, godly abstinence and fasting,
chastity, obedience to the rulers and superior powers, with such like works
and godlynes of life, commanded by God in his word: which as Saint Paul says,
has promises both of this life, and of the life to come, and are works only
acceptable in Gods sight.

These things above rehearsed, though they be appointed by common order, yet
do I without all compulsion, with freedom of mind and conscience, from the
bottom of my heart, and upon most sure persuasion, acknowledge to be true and
agreeable to Gods word. And therefore I exhort you al, of whom I have cure,
heartily and obediently to embrace and receive the same, that we al joining
together in unity of spirit, faith, and charity, may also at length be joined
together in ye kingdom of God, and that through the ^^^ts and death of our
Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all ^^^ry
and empire, now and for ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, printer to the Queens Majesty.


