PEACE WITH HER FOUR GARDERS.

VIZ.

Five Moral Meditations: OF Concord, Chastity, Constancy. Courtesy.
Gravity.

Eschew evil, and do good, seek Peace and ensue it.

LONDON, Printed for John Teage, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Ball. 1622.

SOme loathing Peace, wish War, because unknown,
To them Peace is like Manna, common grown:
I such do wish to travel out, and see
Their Countries Bliss, by others misery.
Peace types us out the Bliss of our Creation,
Wars show our fall from Glory to damnation:
All Warriors since, which seek immortal fame,
Must fight for PEACE, or merit Hell and shame.
Sweet PEACE to Subjects does all blessings bring,
Immortal honor to a mortal King;
The Uertues four, which do on Peace attend,
Her Body guard, as still does them defend:
For nothing sets a Kingdoms Peace so fast,
As Courtiers constant, courteous, grave and chaste.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN, LORD BISHOP of Lincoln, Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal, and one of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
THou great Peace-Keeper, whom the greatest King,
That our great God of Peace did ever bring
To rule these Western Isles, in happy Peace,
For Honors, Arts, and Piety's increase,
Thou, whom this mighty Monarch does entrust
With his Great Seal, as Prudent, Faithful, Just;
God to thy outward bliss, add inward Peace,
That Goodness with thy Greatness may increase.
May but thine active Spirit now descend
From high affairs, and high-straind thoughts unbend,
To walk in Muses gardens delicate;
Wisest Apollo thou shall imitate,
And Martial Pallas, whom the Poets feign
To leave Olympus Mount for Tempe-plaine:
Thus David leaves his Throne, to sit with Graces,
The Preacher after Travels, Hymen paces.
These Precedents imboldned have my Muse,
For Patron of the Graces, thee to choose,
Whom great Augustus with his Seal does grace;
Oh be a true Mecenas in thy place:
Seal up for ever Ianus Temple door,
And let Bellona's voice be heard no more:
I of some Graces only meditate,
But they are all in thee habituate;
Then my defects excuse; when we oppose
Darkness to Light; the day more glorious shows.
Your Lordships humble servant, Robert Aylet.

To the curious READER.
PRophaner Michols will be censuring
Even David, if he do but dance and sing
Before the Arc: Then how should holy Rimes
Escape the Jaws of these Censorious times?
MEDITATION I. Of Peace and Concord.
WHen first Worlds great Creator fashioned
This little Mansion for our Souls of Clay;
Man in his image he so ordered,
He had both Will and Power to obey:
Thus this sweet concord might have lasted ay,
If to his Power, had been joined his Will,
Which failing in Obedience to stay,
He brake the Peace, whereby he all did fill
With Fury, Wars and Strifes, which do continue still.
Thus, by man's wilful fault, Hostility
Between him and his Maker first began,
Such breach has Sin made with the Deity,
As reconcile, not all the creatures can:
Besides, they all are Foes become to man,
For that he against their Maker did rebel:
Poor Adam, guilty, naked, woe and wan,
The Noise of God to covert does compel:
A guilty Conscience is more terrible than hell.
Adam even then did feel a double pain,
One pain of Loss, another pain of Sense,
And now against him Battles all maintain,
Heaven, Hell, World, Creatures, Wife and Conscience,
Are out with him for Disobedience:
Till God, who first elected Man in Love,
For mercies sake, now by Obedience,
From him does pain of Loss, and Sense remove,
And brings to endless Peace, and rest, in heaven above.
Of wondrous value is this Pearl of Peace,
Which to redeem, the Lord of Life was sold,
Most sweet peace-offring; when for our release
Christ's precious blood was as a ransom told.
Not that we here should Peace and quarter hold
With Hell, World, Lust, true Peace's mortal foes:
Such Peace does us in dangerous wars infold:
Except we these most valiantly oppose,
For seeming Peace on earth, we do the heavenly lose.
Therefore the great Peacemaker did not come
To send us Peace on earth, but Swords and Strife;
Debate betwixt the Father and the Son,
Mother and Daughter, Husband and the Wife:
Perpetual warfare is a Christians life,
With Arms and Weapons, he must fortify
Against his foes, which will assail him rife:
Right end of Wars and all hostility,
Is gain of happy Peace, and sweet tranquillity.
Thou, that before, through wars and dread affray,
Have for us entered on true Peace and rest,
By thine own bloody wounds us opening way,
And pains, wherewith thy foes did thee infest;
Inspire sweet heavenly peace into my breast,
That thence, as from a Lymbick may distill
Sweet drops of peace, on hearts that are oppressed,
And with true love of heavenly peace so fill,
As feeling her sweet Good, they never faint for ill.
Peace may be called the minds serenity,
The concord of the affections and the will,
The Band of Love, the hearts simplicity,
The Souls chief good, the conscience free from ill;
Thus is she simply: but if so you will
Discern her nature plainer; we divide
Her by the friends, to whom she bears good will,
Thus we in Peace with God do first abide,
Next, with our selves, and, last with all the world beside.
And yet this peace with God, our selves, and men,
Is but one, and the same true heavenly peace:
That happy peace, we have with God, is when
We freed by Faith, are iustifide of Grace:
True inward peace then in our hearts has place,
When as our Consciences excuse within:
Then peace with men we rightly do embrace,
When to have peace with all men we begin:
Thus have we peace with Jews, and Turks, but hate their sin.
Eternal, inward, and external peace,
Eternal Peace is that with God alone,
From which our inward Life has and increase,
The third's the peace we have with every one;
No farther yet than it concerns our own:
For when we wronged or iniuride behold
Those, that with us in godly League are grown.
We break our League, if peace with them we hold,
For by such worldly peace our love to God grows cold.
God is the Author, Christ the King of Peace,
The Seeds of peace, are by the Spirit sown,
Which, watered by his Servants here, increase
Till they into abundant fruits are grown.
How beautiful the feet of them do shown,
That Peace's joyful tidings to us bring!
This Pearl of Peace, where ever it is known,
Does pass all understanding; Christ our King
Did honor Peace on earth with his sweet publishing.
Health, Quiet, Happiness, Prosperity,
All Concord, Liberty and good success,
Peace to us brings with minds-tranquillity,
And frees our Souls from dismal heaviness:
It is the door to inward happiness,
True inward Peace our hearts does mollify,
And make like Wax, that Joy on them may press
The privy Seal; whereby, assuredly,
We sealed are to live with God eternally.
The Gentiles that far off, and strangers were,
Peace by Christ's precious blood now makes nic:
For he is our peace whereby all one we are.
For so all fullness of Divinity
Inhabited in's Body really;
That on the Cross by his most precious blood,
He all in heaven and earth did pacify:
Abyss profound, not to be understood,
But where sweet inward Peace of Conscience makes it good.
For in the heart and Conscience is the Seat
Of all the Peace, that mortals can befall:
Alas! what boots it, though our peace seem great
Abroad, if that within we nourish shall
Hate Diffidence, Contentions, Envy, Gall,
Without this inward peace and holiness?
We may not hope to see the Lord at all,
Peacemakers only shall have happiness.
True peace on earth the earnest is of heavenly Bless.
Sweet voice of peace! than which, we nothing hear
In heaven or earth more glad and acceptable!
What more delightful can to us appear?
What here than to possess, more profitable?
As sprite of man to quicken is not able
The members, without peace and unity;
So never stand the Churches members stable,
Unless sweet inward peace them viuifie,
And cause them all to live in peace and amity.
Inseparable friends are Righteousness
And peace, they one another meet and kiss:
Except thou Justice love, thou do profess
In vain thy love to peace: Him that does miss
True love to Justice, peace will never bliss:
What more than Peace do all mankind admire?
But Righteousnesie to them a stranger is:
Sweet Fruits of Peace all earnestly require,
But to the works of Justice no man has desire.
With peace are always Mercy, Grace, and Love,
Faith, Meekness, Humbleness, Joy, Holiness,
Except these Graces her companions prove,
She Is but seeming-quiet Laziness,
Even stupifide with worldly happiness:
Like dreams and slumbers, in a morning fair,
Which feed our Fantasies with seeming bless,
But when we wake, lo, nothing but the air,
Our golden hopes are flowne, we left in more Despair.
This is a seeming peace: there is a feigned,
Which wolves do in sheeps clothing often propound:
Ah! many Souls by such false peace are trained,
To build their peace upon uncertain ground.
Such semblance make, as if there did abound
With them, Joy, Peace, Truth, and Sincerity;
But seek, and nothing less with them is found,
Vain outward glory, wealth, prosperity,
Is all their aim and end, not minds Tranquillity.
Cursed be their Union, cursed is their peace:
For by their concord, plots, and unity,
True Justice hindered is, in her increase,
For thus they foster all iniquity.
These make a show of peace, but come to try
Them by their actions, they are instruments
Of Wars, Rebellions, Treasons, Cruelties;
Like Simeon, Leui, cou'ring their intents,
With making Proselites, and sewing Churches rents.
Four mortal enemies there are to peace,
Base avarice, pale envy, wrath, and pride:
If from us we for ever banish these,
We may in happy peace for ay abide:
These two words, Mine and Thine, do more divide
The minds of brethren, neighbors, priests and flock,
Than all that you can reckon me beside:
These two the bands of Amity unlock,
And all the world together in a fury shocke.
Even as man's body, whose just temp'rature
Consists of humid, frigid, hot and dry;
So long as they in Concord do endure,
Does thrive and grow: but if ambitiously
They strive amongst themselves for sovereignty,
Their civil breach does cause Deaths execution.
So is it in City, Church, or Family,
Sweet Peace and Concord breed sound constitution:
But Envy, Discord, Pride, a fearful dissolution.
And as in Music diverse diffring Sounds,
By Concord make one pleasant Harmony,
But he that strains above the rest, confounds
His own, and all the others melody:
So it befalls each Society,
So long as they in Concord do remain,
They live in plenty, ease, prosperity:
But if they jar for Envy, Pride, or Gain,
They from their quiet state do tumble down amain.
As many weak sticks, in one faggot bound,
No strength of man e're able is to break,
Which if they be alone and single found,
Would seem but easy to a man that is weak;
The same we may of Peace and Concord speak,
Whilst they true Subjects hearts in one do bind,
No foreign Power on them their spite can wreak,
But if with iarres it them disioyn'd does find,
It breaks their ranks, them chasing like a fearful Hind.
Concord and Peace be like a brazen wall,
No Fort's so strong as virtuous minds combined:
But as a straight and crooked piece, by all
The workmans skill, cannot in one be joined:
So fores it with a good and wicked mind;
In wicked nature fraught with guile and spite,
True Peace and Concord thou shall never find:
For as good minds great pleasure take in right,
So base malicious hearts, in doing wrong, delight.
The hungry Fox, pursuing hard his prey,
By chance upon a sleeping Snake does tread;
For which, she wroth, deferres not long his pay,
But with sting taught him to take better heed:
Thus dang'rously both wounded are indeed,
And both to wounds do Phisicks help apply,
Which inwardly do ranckle more than bleed,
Yet both by Leeches skill and Surgery:
For bodies grief, not minds, do find a remedy.
Many years after, this malicious Snake,
Who still revenge does harbor in her breast,
Meeting the Fox, him fairly thus bespake:
Ah! how great sorrow does my heart molest,
That we should one another thus infest:
For since the time that first began our broyle,
No greater care within mine heart does rest,
But how our loves again to reconcile,
(Thus would malicious Snake the crafty Fox beguile.)
Now if you please, let us all injuries
Forget, and as we ought true Peace embrace:
For Peace and Concord all good things supplies
To mortals, of what-euer rank or place:
What thing more pleasing, sweet and good than Grace?
She all conserues, keeps all things safe and sound,
Makes great increase of Fruit in little space,
In pleasure, wealth and ease she does abound,
Yea all the good, that one can wish, in her is found.
She is the cherisher and nurse of Life,
She breeds, feeds, nourishes, gives education,
When all confounded are by wars and strife,
Which breeds Corruption: Peace brings Generation.
Nothing on earth is of like estimation.
Thus having said, she offers him to kiss,
And fair embrace, according to her fashion:
But Renold trusts her never the more for this,
Who most malicious, cruel, implacable is:
But thus replies, All Is true that thou have said:
But as true peace of all things is the best,
So sure of nothing more am I afraid
Than feigned peace: a poison nearly dressed,
Which thou concealst now boiling in thy breast;
And, with a seeming Kindness, cruelly
Would spill my Life, when as I feared it least:
No open sorce, spite, or hostility,
So dangerous is, as feigned peace and amity.
This public, private, health, wealth, dignity,
All overthrows, when most we seem secure:
No man will trust an open enemy,
And therefore against his malice stands more sure;
When he by fraud can him no harm procure:
But such fair painting words, and honest shows,
Ensnare the simple inexpert and pure,
And into misery and error throws,
Then he too late plaine-dealing from dissembling knows.
But now to thee, that peace do so commend:
I answer, That for reconciliation,
And thee embracing as a faithful friend,
I never had so fond determination:
God shield me from thy sly malicious nation?
Thy guilefull heart's as hollow as the sand;
Thou doubt'st of Truth, I of Equivocation:
Stand off: The Moral you may understand,
You have this Tale from me, but at the second hand.
Thus did the Snake our mother Eve beguile
By baits of honor, kindness, and ambition:
But from her stole this pearl of peace the while,
And plunged her, and her Seed in all perdition:
E're since by feigned shows, and false apparition,
This subtle Serpents viprous progeny,
Embrace us, Ioab* like, with all submission,
But to the heart-blood stab us privily.
I Will never trust a base malicious enemy.
Of a fat Iouiall Orator I read
A pleasant story; who when he ascends
Into a narrow Deske for Peace to plead,
The people all forth shouts and laughters sends:
Though's corpse were gross, his wit soon apprehends
The Occasion, and he thus them tells plain,
My wife at home in bigness me transcends,
Yet us at peace, one bed can well contain,
At odds, we in this City walls cannot remain.
But well my Muse of her Digression wites
From Peace to Concord; which the Schools define,
An union of diverse appetites
Of diverse men, who in affection join.
To Peace, this Definition they assign,
To be a concord in the appetite,
Which does the affections but of one combine
In one: I Peace and Concord here unite,
And of them, as but one true perfect peace do write.
All cruel wars and battles David fought,
Was but to stablish peace to Solomon;
That type of happy peace, who now (no doubt)
Rests in that Peace, which he on Earth begun:
Oh blessed, joyful, happy Union,
The Song of peace thou singest of the Bride,
And that great King of peace, her lovely One;
When sitting at the Banquet by his side,
Her with true peace as with a Banner he does hide.
His sweetest gardens are our beds of rest,
The fruits there growing, sweetest fruits of peace,
The tunes which birds there warble in their breast,
Be songs of Peace: There Spring does never cease,
But Zephyrus with Dewes blows full increase.
Sweet Peace! which makes the Turtles voice resound
Such Music, as the heauiest heart can ease,
For she her notes does to the heart propound,
But none conceive the sweetness, till they feel the sound.
If I through Scriptures gardens should you lead,
And show you all that glorious Nurcerie
Of fruits and flowers there, of Peace that breed:
I should you tire with sweet Variety.
It was the last bequest and Legacy,
Our King of peace did his Apostles leave:
Who made our peace when he on Cross did die.
For Peace, he bars and gates of hell does cleave,
And his Will in due time to endless peace receive,
See his Apostles, Martyrs, Fathers all,
How meek and lowly they on peace attend,
Refusing neither Cross, nor cup of Gall,
So as they might attain unto their end;
Sweet peace on earth they labor to defend,
When they have made their peace in heaven above:
Who feels this inward Peace, fears not to spend
Wealth, Strength, and Life, for to maintain the love
Of those, which with them members of one Body prove,
But what need I thee furnish from without,
If in thine heart this inward peace thou find?
This peace of Conscience will give (no doubt)
More Rest and Comfort to thy Soul and Mind,
Than all wealth, pleasure, glory here assigned
Unto the wicked, for their worldly rest.
Sweet peace of Conscience! who art not consigned
To any pleasure here, on earth possessed,
Eternal, heavenly peace possesses all thy breast.
Oh I had my Muse some losty rapted strain,
The glory of this heavenly peace to sing,
Which does the heaven, earth, sea, air, all maintain,
By gentle government and ordering:
Or were she able, on a high-strain'd string,
To sing the Honor of my Sovereign,
That grand Peacemaker, Britains peaceful King,
Who through the Christian world does Peace maintain:
God grant, for peace on earth, thou heavenly peace may gain.
But ah! how can my soul oppressed with Care,
And worldly tumults, of such Glory sing,
Since quiet peace her self remoueth far
From Discord, Strife, Contentions, Quarrelling?
Oh let me under shadow of thy wing,
In happy rest and Peace for ay abide!
So shall I never fear the malicing
Of Envy, Satan, Couetize, or Pride:
True inward peace was never vanquished, though tried.
Ah thus I wish for Peace, but worldly Care
And troubles more and more my mind oppress;
Afflictions here and Crosses should prepare,
And fit a man for peace and happiness,
But often they fill us more with worldliness;
Yet such the nature is of inward peace,
She fills the hearts of all, that her possess,
And ever as her vigor does increase,
Our worldly thoughts and cares do more and more decease;
O King of Peace! grant me this inward peace,
It Is that for which the Spirit always prays,
That peace which brings all Graces sweet increase,
And now thou art to heaven gone, with us stays.
This Peace, Hell, Death, nor Tyrants rage dismays,
It Is not such peace as world to us does give,
In Comforts she transeends Suns gentlest rays,
By her when we in Life of Grace have thrive,
With her we ever shall in life of Glory live.
This is the peace which sets our hearts as sure
As Sions Mount, which no force can remove,
This peace it is which ever shall endure,
If rooted in our hearts by Faith and Love:
This Peace which first descends from heaven above,
And does our troubled Consciences still,
Which makes the Members like the Head to prove,
This is the Peace of God, the which does fill
Both heaven and earth with Peace, and all men with good will.
Now never let my Soul enjoy true Peace,
If now she does not more my heart delight,
Than all the pleasures, glory, wealth and ease,
Which here men's minds to vanity inuit:
God of all Peace, which have me given a sight
Of this most rich inualewable treasure,
Grant, I on peace may set my whole delight,
True peace like love, which has no bounds nor measure,
In this I ly down safe, and take my rest and pleasure.
MEDITATION 2. Of Chastity.
THe heavenly Steeres-man, which was erst my guide
Unto the hau'n of peace and happy rest,
Where I could wish at anchor ay to ride,
Free from worlds storms, which mortals here molest;
Does now unto my whiter Muse suggest,
The praise of heavenly Chastity to sing,
Most needful grace for those, in peace, that rest:
For when she most tranquillity does bring,
Man most in danger is of Lusts enchanting sting.
For such is Hels malicious subtilty,
With all advantages still to assail
The part unarmed of man's mortality,
That he with greater danger may prevail:
And when we all his instruments do quail
Of Anger, Envy, Couetize, and Pride:
In humble quiet peace, he will not fail,
By slight, within our wills with brands to slide,
Where with he fires the gates, and all the Town beside.
Thus when as Ioab and the host were pressed
To lie in Tents, and Fields a warfaring,
And Ishai's son in Peace at home does rest,
Diuinest Hymns and Lays on Harp to sing;
Malicious Basiliske with lustful sting
Enflames his eyes, which set his heart on fire,
And from his heavenly peace to war does bring,
Such lustful wars, such raging hot desire,
As breed him dismal broiles and Gods revenging ire.
For man's whole life is a continual war
With Satan, World, his fleshes sin and Lust:
Satan the Captain, these his Soldiers are,
Against these always stand in arms we must:
But most of all, when we in peace do trust,
We want Dame Chastity's commanding Power,
Sweet holy Lady, faithful, pure and just,
In peace and rest our safe defense and tower,
Dames Laps enriching more than Danaes golden shower.
Thou; that from slime of earth man first did raise,
To bear thine own express similitude,
That he in purity might spend his days,
And all corruption, sin and lust exclude;
Who have his heart with Grace divine indude,
To be thy temple, and thy Spirits Cell,
From me all thoughts, words, acts unchaste seclude,
Whilst I the honor of this virtue tell,
For in a heart vnpure, chaste Spirit will not dwell.
I take her for that virtue of the mind,
Which does the Furiousness of Lust retain
In reasons bounds; And our affections bind
In Royal Links of Virtues golden Chain:
As Abstinence does appetite restrain
From food immoderate: So from desire
Unlawful, she does mind and flesh contain,
And bounds in limits Generations fire,
As meekness bounds the rage of Zeales revenging ire.
For even as Appetite, without restraint
Of Abstinence, delights in Gluttony,
And valiant Zeal is, without Meekness, taint
With cruel rage, and spites malignity:
Even so without this virtue Chastity,
The noblest vigor of sweet generation,
Abounds in Lust, and foul Adultery,
And spends the vitals without moderation,
But Chastity bounds all to lawful propagation.
In twofold currents runs her purer sourse,
Body's and minds; The mind remains chaste,
Though one by violence the Body force,
Again thy mind may be corrupt, unchaste,
Though thou no act in flesh committed have:
Thine eyes, hands, ears, words, looks, least lustful thought
She will contain, if in thine heart once plas't:
The unspotted Lamb, whose blood thee dearly bought,
Unchastly never spoke, looked, did, once heard or thought.
She has her first divine pure excellence
With her beginning, from our Souls creation:
That heavenly, holy, purest influence
God breathed into the Lump his hand did fashion.
And though at first by Natures deprauation,
She as all other virtues did us leave,
Yet we again by true mortification
Of earthly Members, her again receive,
And seek, as members chaste, to chastest head to cleave.
For as naught better can the mind contain,
Than reading, heavenly thoughts and meditation,
So nothing fleshly lusts does more restrain,
Than Fasting, Prayer, and mortification:
Sweet chastity's of heavenly propagation,
And as none gain gift of Virginity,
But by the Spirits chaste sanctification,
So none conserve their Sacred Chastity,
But by that Spirits working, Grace and Sanctity.
Wherefore as wantonness, Adultery,
Amongst the wicked works of flesh are named,
So Meekness, Continence, and Chastity
Are called the Spirits Fruits by none defamed:
Talk scurrilous to hear she is ashamed,
Her modest looks are free from Wantonness,
Uncleanness, Filthiness may not be named
Within their mouths, that Chastity profess,
Tongue, eye and ear, the affections of the heart express.
The Heathen did this Chastity of mind,
In all that came to worship God, require,
For they her seated in the Soul did find,
From whence comes every good or bad desire:
And as Souls substance pure immortal fire,
Does Bodies made of Elements transcend,
So does the Chastity of mind aspire,
Our Souls to Angels purity do tend,
When we in flesh with them in chastest thoughts contend.
The fleshes Chastity is to be free
From sinful touch, or act; that of the mind
Is Faith inviolate; not to agree
To any lustful thought: we seldom find
The body chaste, where mind is ill inclined.
In this she does Virginity transcend,
That she is the Preserver of mankind,
And from chaste nuptial bed does children send,
Without which all the world would perish soon and end.
These therefore always her Companions are,
Shamefastness, Continence, and Modesty,
The enemies that of her stand in fear,
Are Fornication, wanton Luxury;
For she ay chastens their iniquity:
The Seminary's of Delight and Pleasure,
Carowsing, Chambering, and Gluttony,
Which Worldlings here account their greatest treasure,
She hates, and lives in all by Natures little measure.
Fullness of meat, Sleep, play, Garrulity,
With ease of body, costly vain attire,
The fuel are of Lust and Luxury,
Which here dry up our humid, and conspire
To burn our souls and bodies in hell fire:
Other sins are without, but generation,
To procreate by mutual desire,
Except it be confined with moderation,
A sin is against our body's health, and souls salvation.
Lust may be lik'ned to some River maine,
Bounded by purest Channels of her own,
Wherein so long as she her streams contain,
Her waters pleasant, pure and sweet are known,
But if her swelling waves so proud be grown,
They pass their Bounds, and ouerflow the Plain,
Her floods late pure, now foul and muddy shown,
And boundless ouerflow the grass and grain;
So rages lawless Lust, let loose from Virtues rain.
For we are like unruly Horses all
Still neighing after neighbors wives: But she
Us, as with Bit and Bridle, does recall,
And makes our Lusts to reasons rules agree:
Thus two as in one Body joined be,
And are for mutual Bounds of sweet desire,
And bounded thus, the act is Chastilee,
Like to the useful Element of fire,
Which bounded all preserues; but loosed is all is destroyer.
This boundless Lust some liken to the Fire,
And Brimstone God did down on Sodom rain,
Virginity to mount, God does require
Lot to escape unto, who does obtain
Rather in little Zoar to remain:
So they, that from Lusts Sodome-scorching flame,
Can not Virginiti's high Mount attain,
May stay in Zoar, which they wedlock name
The Citti's safest, but the Mount of greater fame.
As glorious Sun, when he does first arise,
Is both of heaven and earth the wonderment,
Even so a woman, modest, chaste and wise,
Of House and Husband is the ornament:
An honest Wife's a gift from heaven sent.
As light on golden Candlestick shines bright,
So Beauty in a woman continent,
A Lamp to House and Husband all the night,
All day like glorious Beams of Titans heavenly Light.
And as that is the noblest victory,
Which Soldiers with most danger do obtain,
So she, that keeps her honored Chastity,
Against most temptations, does most glory gain:
It Is harder base affections to restrain
In ease and rest, than moderate aright
A Kingdom, which by open force we gain,
So many are our Lusts that in us fight,
So strong is Satan's force, so subtle is his slight.
No beauty, form, or golden Vestiment
Do so adorn the Body; as the Mind
Is graced by this Virtues Ornament:
Without sweet Light the Sun as soon we find,
As Shamefastness from Chastity disioyn'd:
Immodest looks are Darts against her thrown,
When man and woman's light aspects are joined,
The battel's fought, both sides are overthrown.
Ah cruel fight! where neither side defends her own.
As eyes from wanton looks, even so our ear
Against all immodest Charms, we must enclose;
For Shamefastnesses veil these off do tear,
And our affections prone to Lust unloose:
The Flame and Fire do not sooner close,
Than Impudence and foul unchastity,
Then Beauty, like Gold-ring in swinish Nose,
Does root in Dirt of Impudicity,
No Body's chaste where Mind's join in Adultery.
Who is not clothed in robe pure snowy white
Of Chastity, the Lamb will never know:
Then Dames, that in fair ornaments delight,
Desire to be, as you desire to show:
All richest Pearls, Gold, Jewels, here below,
Are nothing to this Gem of Chastity:
No fairer Flower, does in Loves garden grow,
Than Blush of Shamefastness, and Modesty,
No Jewel like the Belt of Truth and Sanctity.
Nor do I only here of you require
A Continence, for fear of Law or Fame,
But such a Chastity I do desire,
That neither may your Mind nor Conscience blame*
Oh let it be unto your Souls a shame,
A Bird should you in Chastity transcend,
The Turtle never changes mate or name,
For this the Story Judith does commend,
But this is no Command, but counsel for a friend.
Take here for pattern Rachels chastest son,
Who even a princess lustful soft embrace
For virtues Love, not fear of shame, did shun:
I here might grant Lucretia a place,
But that selfe-murther does her foul disgrace:
Penelope's a Map of Chaste desire,
Who far away all Idleness does chase,
Nor takes least heat from Suitors lustful fire,
But twice ten years expects her dearest Lords retire.
Susan's so chaste, her rumor dares not blame,
To this high pitch of honor they do rise,
That shun all idleness, and wanton game,
And more than gold their names and honor prize.
Sobriety them ay accompany's,
Both in their speaking, eating, and attire,
Their modest gate, sweet carriage, shamefast eyes,
Do prove their Beds be nests of chaste desire,
To quench more than inflame the brands of lustful fire.
Even fruitful Venus, true to husbands side,
May win from heavens high Juno
Queen the golden Ball:
And virgin Pallas may be well denide
The honor, which chaste Matrons does befall.
Glory of either Sex! Oh how then shall
This hand unchaste of that pure chastnesse write,
By which Christs-Bride surmounts the daughters all,
And does the Queens and Concubines delight,
Binding even mighty Kings with her most glorious sight?
Her turtle-voyce, Doves eyes, as Lilly-white
Excels the thorns, so She all Womankind:
Yet loves but one, whom she in bed by night,
Does seek for long, at last alone does find:
He her alone in arms embraces kind,
And she alone delights in his embrace:
Chaste Bridegroom, chastest Bride together joined,
Of Saints beget a holy heavenly race:
With this high Mystery, Christ does chaste Wedlock grace:
And brandeth with spiritual Fornication,
Those, who on earth their chastest Head forsake,
And stoop to Idols and abomination,
Here choice of Lovers to themselves to rake:
The Saints and Angels they for Bridegroom take,
When they before their Images do fall:
Thus she the Scarlet-whore herself does make,
And they her bastards which she bears all:
Such bastards, with true-heiers, never inherit shall.
As chaste, so we a ielous Bridegroom have,
And as his Love, like Death, is sure and strong,
So's Jealousy as cruel is as grave:
Who such a loving Husband dares to wrong,
His ielous Fury may expect ere long
But now I stray from sweetest Meditation,
I ought to end, as I began my song:
One word more of a Worthy of our nation,
A pattern worth thy learning, love, and imitation.
Thomas Archbishop of Yorks famous See;
When Doctors counsel, and his friends him praid,
For Cure, to use a female-remedy,
And for that turn, him brought a comely maid;
Most piously to them replide, and said,
That to preserve his flesh, which was to die,
His Souls immortal Chastity betrayed
Should never be: Such heavenly chastity
Shows plain, his Soul does live in heaven eternally.
But as the Lute, which yields a pleasant sound,
Does others, but it self, no whit delight;
So, if examples, only I propound
To others, and not practice what I write,
I never may approach the chastest Light,
To which our chastest Head before is gone:
For no unchaste one comes in his sight,
Except with Magdalen they sigh and groan,
And cleanse with floods of tears their filthiness each one.
Thus clensd our Soul is like Brides liuing-Well,
Whose waters are most pleasant, pure and sweet:
Our bodies eyes like fountains two, which quell
And quench all Lusts temptations which they meet:
But now adays we hold this Grace unmeet,
In noble valiant breast to intertaine,
Men only think her fit for Dames to greet,
And to their basest Lusts let loose the Rain:
But sure no Virtue dwells, where she does not remain.
The Flesh against the Spirit coueteth,
But if the Spirit manfully hold out,
It all Lusts base temptations vanquisheth;
Who have a purpose resolute and stout,
To temper their affections, may (no doubt)
Defend their honour' against Concupiscence;
And though they often opposd are by a rout
Of their own lusts, hels, and worlds violence,
Their chaste resolved mind maintains their innocence.
Then Fools are they, that when they have began
In spirit, in the flesh will make an end:
He that once tastes of Lust, more hardly can
Abstain, than he that never did intend:
Me, from her first Beginnings, Lord defend!
She Is like the Serpent that did Eve assail;
She pleasant fruits and pleasures does pretend,
Her mouth drops hony-sweet, but with her tail,
She stings even all to hell, with whom she does prevail.
But though I make a cou'nant with mine eyes,
Like Job, no lustful object to behold,
Yet often this Monster will mine heart surprise,
And unawares in sinful Thought infold:
This Serpents cunning sleights can not be told:
The best way to avoid them can be found,
Is her aloof to keep: if thou be bold
To chat with her, she unawares will wound.
I almost fear her filthiness now to propound.
Uncircumcised, railing Philistine!
Who all Gods host defies in single fight,
I dare not suffer thee to come within,
Such is thy force, such is thy cunning slight:
Thou art a Giant of exceeding might.
If you will hearken unto my persuasion,
Keep him aloof, and in the forehead smite.
Best way to shun Lusts furious invasion,
Is warily here to avoid the least occasion.
David escapes the Bears and Lions paws,
And overthrows the Philistine in field,
And yet this subtle Serpent him so draws,
His heart unto her Syrens-songs does yield:
Then she him conquers without sword or shield,
And leads him by the eyelids to her snare.
Heavens from such subtle vile allurements shield
All those, that have a Conscience and care,
Their hearts fit Temples for thy Spirit to prepare.
Purge us with Hyssope, and we shall be pure:
Wash us, we than the Snow shall be more white;
Our Souls and Bodies Temple shall be sure
A holy house, wherein thou may delight:
But I the virtue for the vice have quight,
I purposed Chastity here to commend,
But Lust so fiercely with my Muse does fight,
I scarce mine own am able to defend:
Therefore with Prayer I my Meditation end.
Oh thou, that made my Soul a little King*
And in this little-world, my-Body placed;
It subject making to the ordering
Of Reason, wherewith thou this King have graced;
Set first of all the Sovereigns Kingdom fast,
Whereby his Subjects he may rule aright,
That is, affections keep most pure and chaste,
But most in spiritual chastity delight,
To which add Constancy, of which I next do write.
MEDITATION 3. Of Constancy.
SO often as I the Splendor do behold
Of heavenly Graces, linkt in golden chain,
Which them so firmly does together hold,
That all they but as one seem to remain;
My Soul is so delighted with their train,
That she desires to dwell with them for ay;
But often employment, pleasures, cares and gain,
Mine eyes and heart so draw another way,
I fleshly motions more than spiritual obey.
And as these Graces joined, my soul delight,
So does each singled out by Meditation,
Sing I of Love, I love with all my might:
If Humbleness, she works humiliation:
So Faith, Repentance, Hope, Justification,
By Righteousness imputed: Mercy kind,
Joy, Patience, Fortitude, chaste Conversation,
Peace, Meekness, Prayer, Zeal, even all I find
Do always to my Song, both suit mine heart and mind.
But such are my Corruptions innate,
Hels malice, and the worlds enticements vain,
I can no longer hold that happy state,
Than I in Contemplation remain:
This is the cause my Muse is now so feign
To sing of Constancy, that heavenly Grace,
Which all the rest does ay with us retain
Most glorious Grace! the luster of whose face,
Both heavenly Love, and all her Peers for ever grace.
For, without Her, the rest are all but shows,
Like Corn by highways side, flourish awhile,
And seems more glorious, than that which grows
Upon best bottomed, dunged, tilled Soil:
But as that only does our eyes beguile
With flourishes, in calm and gentle spring,
But Summers heat, and frosts, it is verdure spoil:
Even so, these rootlesse Virtues flourishing,
Adverse or prosperous Fortune to confusion bring.
Thou, that art from Eternity the same,
Without least shadow of Variety:
Like to the Sun, heavens pure world-lightning flame,
Constant in beat, course, and serenitie:
Three, yet subsisting in one Deity,
Who, though thou seem to change with things below,
Art far in truth from Mutability:
Oh make mine heart in virtue constant grow,
That thence, as from a Fountain, this Discourse may flow.
We Constancy a Perseverance call
In some good purpose: for in every thing
We undertake, right must be first of all
Resolved of, next, our firm perseuering:
A vain, unsettled, idle wavering
Without just ground, by Proteus, Poets feign,
Who on himself as many forms will bring,
As he has idle notions in his brain,
Or base desires and Lusts which in his heart remain.
But in good purpose to stand fast and sound,
Not only man-like is, but most divine,
Like God, in whom no change was ever found:
For as the Sun, this worlds pure crystal eyne,
In heaven does always with like glory shine,
Though, by the varying Medium's here below,
It seem more glorious in the Summer time,
Than when Eolian blasts dark clouds do blow:
So Constance is the same, though alt'ring often in show.
This Constance is with Patience a twin,
Begot by Jupiter of Fortitude;
Mother and Babes as like, as near of kin;
Who has one, with all three must be indude:
These lift up to heroical habitude,
And come from Justice, and a prudent mind.
If Fury, Rage, Wrong, Rashness do intrude,
We them no virtues fair, but vices find,
With whom Minerua, nor the Graces ever joined.
Patience and Constancy in this agree,
Effeminate faint hearts ay to oppose,
And men relieve in all extremity,
Undaunted, resolute, who will not loose
That liberty, they have the Good to choose:
Thus seem they one: now mark their difference,
Patience all wrongs with courage undergoes:
For without Suffering's no Patience:
But Constance is in joy and pain a firm defense*
Without Compulsion, free for Virtues sake,
Patience constrained, often by necessity,
Most cheerful valiantly does undertake
To bear, what cannot well avoided be:
One good end Constancy propounds, which she
Only regards: but noble patience,
Before her will all evils conquered see,
Which her oppress in flesh or conscience:
Both have brave resolution, and sound confidence.
No fury of the headless Multitude,
No Tyrants rage a constant mind can shake;
Though all the world turn to a Chaos rude,
The ruins crush him may, but can not make
Him stagger, nor Jove's thunder make him quake.
The Sea may roar, the waves mount to the skies,
And threaten him to drown in deepest Lake:
But Fury, Rage, Waves, all he does despise,
And when hopes outward fail, his inward highest rise.
He constant perseueres unto the end,
Like some good traveler, who gives not in,
Till he attain the place he does intend:
And as the Soldier, that the town would win,
Fights stoutly, till he conquers all within:
Even so in Buildings, Arts, or Merchandise,
In any Work or Science we begin,
It is the end where all our glory lies;
He runs in vain, that faints before he wins the Prize.
Though all her means, and all her strength do sail,
Yet fears she not to hold out to the end,
She Is still the same, and nothing can prevail,
To alter any Good she does intend.
To whom the heavens true Constancy do send
Within their hearts to dwell, on all occasions
Effects most admirable thence transcend,
She fills the heart with such secure persuasions;
They it defend from all faint-hearted base invasions.
A constant man, the most disastrous fate,
With a most pleasing forehead entertaines:
Integrity so sweetens his estate,
As in a pleasant Calm he ay remains:
With her he always in his heart retains,
Hope, Prudence, Fortitude, Right, Temperance:
And when him Troubles, Losses, Grief or Pains
Assail, so stoutly patience does advance,
He lives most secure, not subject unto Chance.
Brave noble Constance! who art never sound,
Except dame Prudence thee accompany,
Thou on her counsels and advice do found
Thy settled resolutions all, whereby
Thou standst most firm for Truth and Honesty;
Nothing can thee, thus well resolved, withstand.
In vain and evil things no constancy,
But base perverseness, we do understand;
Just, honest, profitable's all she takes in hand.
For perseverance in a thing that is ill,
Is to this Virtue no less enemy,
Than they that by affections guide their will,
With vain inconstancy and leuitie:
Who, of a wanton imbecility,
Stagger and change at every idle motion;
Wind-shaken Reeds, whose instability,
Are like the brain-sicke, idle, vain devotion
Of Nouellists, drunk with hot humors giddy potion.
Prepost'rous fools! who when they should frequent
Assemblies, hide themselves at home alone;
From what they do approve, they soon dissent,
Hating what erst they loved, dispraise as soon,
What erst they liked well: Lo, such a one,
Appears like Cato's Ape, wondrous severe,
With rugged brow; but you may find him soon
Dissolved in Laughter, or even dead with fear:
Such, any public Office is unfit to bear.
No truth of Judgment or Sincerity,
In such a vain inconstant mind is found:
But Sloth, Fraud, Wantonness, Iniquity,
With all the basest Vices there abound:
This Leuity in youth does age confound
With doting madness; and a man declares
Wise only then in show, not inward sound:
But then a brave and constant mind appears,
When constant Resolution honors silver hairs.
Well said the old Cynicke, when him friends advise
To leave his study, and to take his rest:
I am, says he, now running for a prize,
And therefore in the end must run my best.
The shorter time of Life to us does rest,
More constantly we to our aim must rend.
Who runs, says Paul, the race, is never blessed
With due reward, that holds not to the end:
For Constance is the Grace does all the rest commend.
And as the man, that hard things undertakes,
Must always have respect unto the end,
Which all precedent bitterness sweet makes,
Be it for pleasure, glory, gain, or friend;
So he that for Gods glory does contend,
And makes it ay his constant end and aim,
As that is immortal, so it him does send
True immortality in heaven to gain,
Which comforts him for all his Labor, loss, and pain.
As Mountains huge stand fast on their foundation,
So constant minds on resolutions sound,
As they unmoved, so without alteration
Are good Conclusions built on Virtues ground:
A constant man stands on a rock profound,
Which neither storms, wind, waves, nor force can move:
Crosses, afflictions, can no more confound
Him, than wind, waves, and storms, the rock remove,
Whose strong foundation stands on faith, hope, truth and love.
Anselmus does a constant man compare
Unto a sixe-square dye, or hewed stone,
The six flat-sides, his six Conditions are,
Freedom, Prosperity, Subjection,
Aduerstey, Life-publique, and alone:
On which soever side he chance to fall,
He stands upright with resolution,
No changes can his constant mind appall,
But as he stands firm on one side, so on all,
As bodily eyes all need Light of Sun,
Whereby they may attain unto their end,
So on all good and virtuous works begun,
This holy Virtue Constance must attend:
And as except the Sun his Light does lend,
We open in the dark our eyes in vain,
So vainly we good holy works intend,
Except we constant to the end remain,
Like Pilot drowned in hau'n, when he has escaped the Maine.
Is It not absurd, that we should early rise,
Lose sleep, broile with Suns heat, and take great pain,
Only to win a fading worthless prize,
And give in, when we sure be to obtain
A Crown, which shall for ever make us reign?
Except the Soldier Constant be and bold,
His Captains favor he shall never gain,
Unless our spiritual fight we constant hold,
Gods comfortable face we never shall behold.
She is the Nurse of Merit, friend of Peace,
Way to Reward, sister of Patience,
True friendships Band, pure Sanctities increase:
Take away Constance, Bounties excellence
Does fade, and Duty wants her recompense;
High Fortitude does want her commendation.
She is alone the noble Grace, from whence
All other Graces have their Consummation:
To her is given, or rather she gives man salvation.
What more like unto God than Constancy?
Who ay like Sun in heaven remains the same,
Though to descend to man's capacity,
He often seem to change his mind and name.
The Scriptures then man's changing closely blame,
When they affirm, God grieves, or does repent:
It Is flesh that alters, God is still the same:
So clouds seem often to change the Firmament,
Which till the Day of Doom stands firm and permanent.
When as she has a constat of the right,
She therein perseueres unto the end:
Therefore of constat she is Constance hight;
And well this name her nature does commend.
Her understanding first does apprehend
Things to be good, before she does begin*
Then she most constantly does ay intend,
When she consid'rately has entered in:
Thus all the Saints on earth, a room in heaven must win.
And though all flesh, by our first Parents fall,
Are so unconstant, vain, and wavering,
They have in words, thoughts, actions, and all,
Of Eues fond fickleness a relishing:
Lo Enoch yet constant perseuering
To walk with God, till he him takes away:
And Noah, constant in the publishing
Of true Repentance, even until the day,
Floods come and drown all Flesh without the Arc that stay.
Abram most constant in belief we find:
No fear nor terror Jacob could dismay:
Joseph had rather iron linkes should bind
His lims, than from chaste Constancy to stray.
So long as hardened Memphians disobay,
Moses most constantly for plagues does call:
Lo Iosuahs courage lengthens out the day,
Till he Gods enemies destroys all;
No force, nor fury can his constant mind appall.
I number may the Stars of heaven as well,
As here the Mirrors all of Constance count,
Who champions brave against world, flesh, and hell,
In Fortitude and Patience surmount:
Many of them I formerly recount,
In Fortitudes and Patience Meditation,
They all arise from one fair heavenly fount,
That clensing Lauer of Regeneration,
Though glittring shows we find often with the heathen nation.
I Will name one Regulus
Carthage prisoner for all,
Who, upon promise to return again,
Was sent to Rome, the Senate there to call,
Them to persuade against their Cities gain:
But he most nobly will not yield to stain
His Countries glory, for his private good,
But constantly persuades them to maintain
Their honor, though he sealed it with his blood,
And constant still the same against all tortures stood.
His noble mind their cruelties derides,
His Executioners are wearied,
Yet constant he and cheerful all abides,
Grief, gain, for Countries good, he reckoned.
Yet has this Constancy been conquered
By thousand Martyrs, which most willingly
For Syons glory have been martyred;
Who when their flesh does broile, and bowels fry,
Sing joyful Hallelujahs to God on hie.
Yet are these, but as Candles to the Sun,
Compared with the constant Lord of all:
Begin we with his apprehension,
When his Disciples all from him do fall,
Behold him in the high Priests Iudgment-hall:
See Herod's men of war him foul deride:
Condemned by Pilate, scorned, abused of all:
The thief that raileth, hanging by his side,
Yet he most valiant, constant, patient, does abide.
But now the Sun ascended is above,
The Apostles will their Light no longer hide,
They constantly before the Rulers prove,
That they the Lord of Life had crucifide:
And when they are before those Rulers tried,
And charged to preach no more in Jesus name,
They most courageous, constantly replide,
Be judges, whether it were greater blame,
You now to disobay or God who us did frame.
Paul ready is not only to be bound,
But at Jerusalem for Christ to die,
He patient is in all afflictions found,
Constant in losses, joy, prosperity:
Read his imprisonments brave history,
You there shall more divine Idea's find,
Than Homer, Virgil, Spencer, can supply,
Though they in loftiest strains the form have lined
Of a most brave, heroicke, constant, noble mind.
These, as they saw their pattern set before,
Unto the Races end most constant run,
But yet their Fortitude's increased more,
By Confidence, that he which has begun
So good a work, it will not leave undone:
Let Devils try by crosses and tentation,
Hold constant to the end, the Crown is won.
Though for awhile we suffer tribulation,
A noble, constant mind stands without perturbation.
I do confess it is difficult and rare,
To know ones-selfe; but to be still the same,
Is chiefest work, of all the works that are:
He that so constantly his mind can frame,
Deserves the honor of a constant name:
He Is near to glorious virtues consummation;
His soul minds only heaven, from whence it came,
Secure and free from worlds vain molestation,
And waits heavens leisure only for his glad translation.
Not that I constant Idleness commend,
Or a retired Life monastical;
No, Constance always Labor does intend,
And is the same approved and seen of all:
Her words, looks, gesture, are heroical;
She makes the Body strong, confirms the mind.
Ah! woe to them, that from her favor fall,
And leave the right, the crooked way to find;
These grieve the Angels, which to guard them are assigned.
Grant in Prosperity a prudent heart,
And in Adversity a mind upright;
So shall no pleasures vain my Soul pervert,
Nor crosses or tentations me affright:
My self I with Gods blessings will delight,
So long as please his Bounty them to lend.
If I must suffer here for doing right,
I to the Just one will my cause commend,
Where I am sure to have a just and equal end.
The end, whereon all that is past depends,
If then we have a constant resolution,
A holy Life shall bring us happy ends,
Then comes our Fate, to iustest revolution:
We then of Adams loss have restitution,
Ah! all our Labor has but been in vain,
If Courage faint in point of Dissolution:
This is the hour we happiness attain,
Or else for ever in hels torments must remain.
Lord make me ever mindful of this Hour,
That constant always I may stand prepared,
Grant me with boldness to declare thy power,
And in the right of none to be afeard:
True happiness is Constancies reward,
A high reward, but he it sure shall gain,
That to the end holds out with due regard.
Things hardest, Perseverance will attain,
And Constancy will make them ay with us remain.
Then stand we firm, in what we have begun,
And labor constantly more to obtain,
Lo, thus we heaven upon the earth have won:
Thus we that true Security attain,
Which every wise and good man seeks to gain:
No Greatness, King, or Kesar is so high,
As those that over their affections reign:
Here Peace of Conscience brings Security,
Saints wished true content, and Angels Dignity.
Most blessed Port, that Pilgrims can attain!
Till they arrive at hau'n of Happiness,
Pure Joy of heart, which only they do gain,
Where heavens sweet Comforter does dwell in peace:
God of all Comfort, in my heart increase
This Constancy, that she may me defend
In private, public, loss, gain, pain, and ease,
And grant, as I the Graces do commend,
I may in all continue constant to the end.
Authoris Uotum.
MIght I a Life enjoy to my desire,
I would no wealth, or honor vain require,
Nor troops of Horsemen after me to ride,
Nor clouds of Servants trouping by my side:
In private fields, and gardens I would walk;
Now with my Muse, now with my Friends to talk:
(By Muse, I prayer mean; and Meditation,
By Friends, a holy loving Conversation)
At Peace with all, but Ill: My Conscience
Both good and quiet, free from foul offense:
So when the hour of my change shall come,
I with a willing heart will leave my room,
To whom it is ordained by Destiny:
Thus I desire to live, and thus to die.
MEDITATION 4. Of Courtesy, or Humanity.
THus have I brought the Muse from pleasing shade,
And gentle sweetest Heliconian Spring,
To Stoics School, to teach her in the trade
Of Constancy; and firm perseuering:
Some Critic will me blame for marshalling
Cato severe, with Virgins sweet delight,
But nothing more makes for their honoring,
Than with that noble Virtue to be dight,
Which makes them high accepted even in Princes sight.
And sure, O Kings, your wisdoms cannot find
More prudent Senators, your States to sway,
Than Muses friends, which have a constant mind,
And know as well to govern as obey:
Who by their Courtesy and Constance may
Order your Hals, and wield your State-affaires:
For noble Courtesy and Constance ay
Adorn Kings Iudgements-Seats, and stately Chaires,
And strangers intertaine, that to your Court repaires.
For in each flourishing and goodly State,
Upon the royal Person of the King,
The courteous Courtier has a place to wait,
As well as Senate for wise-gouerning:
These both must join in prudent managing
Of subject Provinces, and to entreat,
Of Leagues with Princes on them bordering;
But he for all employments is most meet,
Where Courtesy and Constance both together greet.
Wherefore in Court of Loves most royal Queen,
Where Graces all, in due administration,
Are in most comely order placed seen
For Kingdoms Peace, and Princes Delectation:
Behold this one thing worth thy Observation,
Brave Constance ay with Courtesy is joined,
For all men do observe, with admiration,
A courteous carriage, with a constant mind,
Adoring even as Gods the valiant gentle kind.
For sure except these both together meet,
Constance alone's so rigid and severe,
She for a pedagogue is far more meet,
Than Office in Loves gentle Court to bear:
And, if that single courtesy appear,
Without this resolute most constant Grace,
She is but apish complement, to bleare
Beholders eyes with Conges and a face,
When naught that in her looks, within her heart has place.
David the heavenly Muses darling dear,
An Emblem of Humanity I find,
In Camp he is undaunted, without fear,
In Court of constant, noble, courteous mind,
One Ionathans true love to him inclined,
The other smites even stout Goliab down,
His Muse the evil spirit of Saul does bind,
And raised him from the fould to high renown,
And set upon his royal head the golden Crown.
True noble Courtesy, most heavenly Grace,
Most high to be esteemed and reckoned
Of all; but most of those whom God does place,
Above their brethren to be honored:
For they that here us govern in his stead,
Ought, like their Lord, to gentleness incline,
Who, though his Throne shines round with lightning dread,
With courteous countenance on his does shine,
Oh gentle King me grant this Grace aright to line.
Gentleness, Courtesy, Humanity,
Diverse in name, in nature are the same,
Proceeding from the minds integrity,
And are as sparks of Loves celestial flame:
The outward shows which co^plements we name,
Are but as Symboles of her heart and mind,
If they be true, she is a noble Dame,
If feigned, she is the shame of womankind,
And seeks to lie with all, where she may favor find.
I know not whether I may better call
Her Sister, or the Child of Gravity,
But sure I find these Graces all in all,
Delighting in each others Company:
The glory of all fair Society,
Most reverend and amiable Peers,
In whom all sweetness shines with Majesty,
Where not least ostentation vain appears,
Chief ornaments of Youth, and grace of filuer hairs.
Both do proceed from one Dame, Sanctity,
And both employed are in reformation
Of manners; but in brief Humanity
A man, humane, like to his name does fashion:
And this to Poets fables gave occasion,
To tell how men were made of stocks and stones,
And Beasts turned men, by Orpheus his persuasion.
And for she thus brought men to live as one,
Amphions Harp is said Thebes walls to build alone.
Yea those, that in Humanity transcended,
And others brought unto ciuility,
Were deified when their lives were ended,
And ever honored of Posterity:
Ah! what more princely is than Courtesy?
Thus Kings to King of heaven most near do come,
When savage men unto Society
They bring, which else like furious Beasts would run,
And even more cruel to themselves than beasts become.
Thus Courtesy with adamantine band
Men ties in Friendship, free from Enuies rents,
For no offense can part their joined hand,
Where gentleness interprets friends intents;
Where Kindness ever Courtesies preuents,
And grateful, always strives to overcome,
As Foes by Arms, Friends by munificence
The barbarous and insolentest groom
Does gentle, kind, benign, by Courtesy become.
Man is the weakest creature God has made,
For where all else, by heavenly Providence,
Have bodies armed against Foes that them invade,
And rage of Times by Natures muniments,
Man only Virtue has for his defense,
This gentle virtue, sweet humanity,
With loving kind and tender heart, from whence
Flow Pity, Mercy, Love, Benignity,
Whereby we mutual helps to others here supply.
For these Companions are to gentleness,
Which make her here beloved unto all;
Sweet gracious looks, and speeches gracefulness,
Are to this courteous Lady natural,
To which she adding Majesty withal,
And comely Guize does steal men's hearts away,
And free, from stern morosity and gall,
In sweet Tranquillity and Peace does stay,
Immutable, without base perturbation, ay.
Far from the base morose and cynnicall,
That to all others manners are auerse,
Who are so crooked, cross and critical,
In their own dispositions so perverse,
No friend with them is able to converse,
Delighting to be conversant with none;
But sullen, truculent, so stern and fierce,
You easier may wring water from a stone.
Then mirth and gentle words; or looks from such an one.
Neighborhood, Countreys-Loue, Affinity,
Kindred and Friendship are cold barren names;
Such neither like nor love the Company
Of honest equals, nor of gentle Dames:
This Vice in every man even Nature blames,
But most in Officers of Court or State,
For Courteous gravity her Courtier frames;
Sweet, gentle, facile, pleasing, delicate,
Fair Almas bounteous Pears in all to imitate.
As he is worthy Death, who here denies
His brother Water from a living Spring,
Or him Suns comfortable Beams enuyes,
Or from his Candles-light, light-borrowing,
Or to direct aright the wandering;
So he is most discourteous, inhumane,
Who when he profit may to others bring,
Without least Damage to himself, or blame,
Yet to his brother churlishly denies the same.
Humanity's like fairest Iuly-flower
With silken leaves, which bud, does yet enclose,
Which fair dispreading by sweet Natures power
As she does wax broader and sweeter blows;
No flower in Loves fairest garden grows,
That more delights the smell, affects the eye,
But as from root bright hue and sweetness flows,
So from the heart springs fairest Courtesy,
Else as the Flower fades, so dies Humanity.
For as a gentle heart it self bewrayes,
By doing courteous deeds, with free delight,
Even so base dunghill mind it self displayes,
In malice, churlishness, revenge and spite:
Humanity is Friendships chiefest night,
Foes reconciler, Bounty's greatest Fame,
Than to accept more ready to requite,
Gifts are to her like Oil powered on the flame,
Which more and more her heart with friendly love inflame.
As blowing on hot coals them more enflames,
But water on them powered extinguisheth;
So bitter words enrage, but soft reclaimes:
One ire appeaseth, the other kindles:
And as more safe on Sea he trauelleth,
That passes on with soft and gentle blast,
Than whom full Sails like arrow carries:
So stands the mild, sweet gentle man more fast,
Than he whose furious mood bears all before in have.
As lukewarm water cooles an inflammation,
So courteous language, anger pacifies,
And as wild horse is tamed by mild traction,
So cruel foes are won by courtesies:
We easier our most savage enemies
Subdue by Gentleness, than cruelty,
Wild Hawks the Faulkner surer to him ties,
By handling gently, and familiarly,
Than if he never suffered them from fist to fly.
The Bough by gentleness is easily bent,
Which handled boistrously would break in sunder,
Thus fiercest Bull is with the yoke content,
And gentleness brings cruel Tygres under:
Philosophers affirm that dint of Thunder,
Does never hurt, where it does yielding find,
It melts the blade, and yet behold and wonder!
The scabberd's not consumed, it bones does grind,
And yet the yielding flesh is neither scorched nor pined.
Wisely, said he, that thought wise men below
Should not be moved with those which do offend,
But where they vices find increase and grow,
Should strive and do their best them to amend;
Like good Physicians, who when they attend
Their Patients, are not angry with their fit,
But to the cure best skill and cunning bend:
As all are sons of Eve, we sin commit,
But he is most like God, that here amendeth it.
Humanity may have a threefold sense,
Man's Nature, Virtue, and his education,
In humane Arts, and pure Intelligence;
From whence she seems to have denomination:
And therefore Liberal Arts by every Nation,
Are called the studies of humanity,
And breed in man a courteous conversation,
With gentle manners and ciuility,
Which only heavens bestow on Muses Nursery.
And hence it is, that rustique Boores and Clownes,
Who want the good of civil education,
So rude and rustique are in Country towns,
When those, that have with Muses conversation,
Or near to Princes Courts their habitation,
Become more civil, sociable, kind;
Hence it is that every rude and savage nation,
Where gentle Arts abide not, are inclined
To rustique force, and savage cruelty of mind.
No greater Grace the heavens to man afford,
Than gentle breeding up in heavenly lore,
By thews and holy knowledge to accord
Their wrathful furious Passions evermore:
Plato the Gods immortal does adore,
That they him reasonable made, no Beast;
A Man, no Woman: But it glads him more,
That he knew humane Arts, and heavenly best,
By which he thought himself in life and death most blessed.
The Emperor Traiane; when his friends him blame
As careless of imperial Majesty,
Because so mild, sweet, gentle he became
And affable to all his company;
Said he would so be in high Sou'raignty
To others: as if else he private were,
He wished to find the royal Dignity,
With whom all good men ought be free from fear,
But cruel, vile, malicious, never should come there.
Philip, who had by Liberality
Obliged, as he thought, to him a Nation,
Received naught but Scorn for Courtesy,
Wherefore his Courtiers, moved with indignation,
Persuade their King unto revenge and passion:
Soft, said the Prince, if these men do requite
Our benefits, in such a scornful fashion,
They us for injuries will more despite:
True pattern of a prudent, patient, gentle Knight.
Is Jury barren then of gentle deed?
Because I only of the Nations tell,
The lives of Abram, Isaac, Joseph read,
And see how they in Courtesy excel:
When as betwixt the Heardmen strife befell,
Abram leaves to his nephew Let the Plain,
His Courtesy the Angels greetes so well,
Their errand gently they to him explain,
Yea gracious God to him familiar talk did daigne.
Most gentle Jacob, courteous like thy Sire,
Though Laban churlishly thee handeled;
Let all thy patient gentleness admire,
When thou did see thy Dina ravished,
And for her Rape a Nation slaughtered:
Thy gentle Joseph into Egypt sold,
Who when he sees his brethren humbeled,
Could not his heart and eyes from weeping hold,
The Dreams thus proving true, which he before had told.
Though Shemei bark, David forbids to smite,
Oh let him curse, my son me seeks to kill:
The Lord with Blessings may his Curse require,
If in his favor I continue still,
I shall return, else be it as he will.
Mephibosheth must have his fathers land,
And at his Table eat of Bread his fill,
Chimham in old Barzellais room shall stand,
And nothing be denide him at King David's hand.
But Kings and People, all learn gentleness
Of our most courteous, gentle King of Kings,
Who, when he walked on earth in lowliness,
And was the Lord and Maker of all things,
Never used bitter words nor threatenings,
But was to meanest, courteous, gentle, mild;
The Lord rebuke thee, Michael only sings
When Satan's malice would have him beguiled
Of Moses body; but he never him reuil'd.
As of the head, so of the members learn
Mildness, Humanity, and Gentleness,
Speeches morose, and countenances stern
Never agree with worth and nobleness:
Nor to the vessels of true holiness:
And Dames that soft and tender are by kind,
Adorned with Natures goodliest gracefulness,
Be gentle, humble, soft and meek in mind,
So you with God and Man, shall grace and favor find.
No virtue so adornes a valiant man,
Nor virtuous Dame, whom valiant men do love,
As courtesy, which best direct them can
To bear themselves in all as does behoue:
Whether them God has plast to rule above,
Or wait below, it them befits to know
Their Duties, that none justly may reprove
Their rudeness, in not giving what they ow:
Who gives each man his due, does great discretion show.
Nothing more wins men's hearts than gentle words,
Nor their affections than sweet looks delight,
If Men, like Beasts, should make the strongest Lords,
And be enraged one at another sight,
Society of men would perish quight,
The rules of Policies and States would fail;
Men's lives should be in hazard of each wight,
That them by force or cunning would assail,
Yea savage Beasts against their weakness would prevail.
Rude manners those that have them do infest,
And grievous are to all they deal withal,
But gentleness in Angels, Man, and Beast,
Is much commended and beloved of all:
The Poets want the Gods in heaven to call
Most gentle, bountiful, and amiable;
But Fiends and Furies, cruel, tetricall,
To first they Temples build, and prayers fable,
Counting the other dreadful and abominable.
If Socrates a froward wife would bear,
As men ride horses wild; that they may know
To rule them better that well tamed were,
Much more should Christians sweetly bear the blow
Of proud and cruel worldlings here below:
And not to grieve at their prosperity,
Though here they seem in wealth and bliss to flow,
Alas such stand in places slippery,
And in their haughty pride shall perish suddenly.
Who that most wicked Sect do imitate,
That would all friendship and acquaintance shun,
That they might here enjoy more happy fate,
And partners of no others loss become:
One burden is enough for any one,
Oh! why should others losses them molest:
By this is all Humanity undone,
And man made more ungentle than a beast,
The Heathen therefore did such beastliness detest.
The first and special Duty, which we ow,
Is Love to God, which we call Piety;
Next, is the Mercy we to men do show,
And this indeed is true Humanity:
This is the sum of all Divinity;
And this to Piety does Practice join:
All love the Lord in words, but do deny
Their hearts and hands to Mercy to incline,
God grant they both in us together may combine.
Chief Band amongst men is Humanity,
Which who would break, deserves eternal palne,
From one man all derive their pedigree,
And therefore Kinsmen all in him remain:
From one God, we our souls do all obtain,
And so we brethren are, and nearer joined
In Soul than Body: And we hope in vain,
If all into one head be not conioyn'd,
And feel not all one Spirit working in our mind.
Inhumane cruel Beasts! which take delight
Without just cause Gods image to destroy,
Torment, kill, torture, cruelly despite,
When God would have all live in amity.
Oh measure others by thy misery!
No man without another aid can live,
He that denies help in adversity,
None at his need unto him help shall give,
As none shall be forgiu'n, that does not here forgive.
No man, that does obey Dame Natures hest,
Can hurt a man, much less him spoil or kill:
Learn of the gentle, meek, and harmless beast,
How he Society does covet still:
The Shepherds gentle Flocks the Plains do fill,
Wolves, Bears and Tygres love to Lord alone:
Where they their young ones with the fat may fill,
And forage all the Country for their own,
Lo Mercy there is strange, where Misery's unknown.
Such in their Complement are only kind;
And where they kindness may receive again,
Oh be mine heart to gentleness inclind!
Not for base recompense, reward, or gain,
But for his sake, who for my sin was slain:
But ouer-courteously I do abuse
My Readers patience, with ungentle strain,
Yet if he gentle be, he cannot choose,
But my most willing mind, though not my Verse excuse.
MEDITATION 5. Of Gravity.
MY Muse now fares like some Geometrician,
That having viewed on Globe terrestrial
The Earth, and like a good Mathematician,
Cast up the Measure of her craggy ball,
Now thinks that all does in his Compass fall,
But sailing forth by Compass, Card, and Stern,
With his own eyes it to discover all,
He many Isles and Regions does discern,
Which never by the Map he able was to learn.
So when I first in Virtues Maps had read,
Of all the Graces linked in golden Chain,
I thought I had them all discovered,
And able was their Natures to explain,
But more that I do labor and take pain,
To tell their Numbers, Nature, Qualities,
More numberless I find their glorious train,
And more admire their Grace and Dignities,
And more of them I write, the more my Muse descry's.
But none more fair I can amongst them find,
Than next I write of comely Gravity,
Which as I said, goes linked and combined
With gentle, noble, sweet Humanity,
Whom follow Constancy and Chastity
Attending always on this stately Peer,
Who for her venerable Majesty,
Is to the Queen of Love her self most dear,
And always tires her face, which court'sie washes clear.
Now help, O heavenly Queen! and (...) fair!
Her to adorn that beautify's you (...)
And lift my Muse to fly above the (...),
Oh never let my fit and fury fall,
Whilst I describe this Grace Maiesticall;
Which with her comely presence does adorn
The Temple, Judgment Seat, and Princes Hall,
With Academies, where the Muse was borne,
And ay defends the ancient from the yongers scorn.
She is an inward splendor of the mind,
Which makes the whole man gracious, commendable,
The outward manners which in her we find,
Her looks and gestures, fair and delectable,
Are but as Beams of that bright admirable
Transcendent Grace, which in her heart does shine,
To make words, looks, and actions venerable,
And Dignity and Comeliness to join,
With manners Sanctity, which make a man Divine.
For sure all reverend shows of Gravity,
Are but external good exposed to sight,
Except they have fast rooting inwardly,
And from the heart receive their Splendor bright,
As Majesty, is without Goodness light,
So's Gravity without true holiness,
It Is that which makes us grave, and to delight
In sober honesty, and comeliness,
And to be patterns of all Grace and godliness.
She is that holy Law and Rule of Life,
Of constancy and gracious manners borne,
Free from lascivious Love, or causeless strife,
And ever does most gloriously adorn
Him, before whom her glorious ensigne's borne,
She is not lowering hard, to equals proud,
To betters base, nor does inferiors scorn,
(...), wanton, loose, exulting, loud,
Her habit, look, attire, all modesty does shroud.
Her Ornaments are not Wealth, Strength, or Power,
Sumptuous apparel, decking Limbs, or face,
Sweet Chastity of Manners is her Dower,
Her outward parts, adorned with inward Grace:
These be the ornaments that most her grace,
Not made by any skillful hand, or Art;
Virtue the Queen of all things did enchace
These works of wondrous Glory in her heart,
Wherewith she now adornes and graceth every part.
By these she casting out all perturbation,
Perpetual tranquillity attaines,
And shines in Grace, which at her first Creation,
She from the Fountain of all Grace obtaines,
And thus she true immortal honor games,
Not that which leanes on popular vain blast;
But that whereby the Queen of Virtue reigns,
And stands upon her virtuous thoughts so fast,
She from the pitch of honor cannot be displas't.
Hence it is, that who can to this pitch attain,
Admits of naught unseemly to be done,
His mind no evil cogitations stain,
His actions chaste as mind from whence they come,
Many indiffirent things are fit for some,
Which some more grave and noble ill beseem;
It does no Judge or Magistrate become,
In servants habit public to be seen,
What Country Maid commends, may ill beseem a Queen.
Justly did Philip reprehend his Son,
When, to the Harp, he heard him sweetly sing,
This well, says he, soft Ladies does become,
But Drums and Trumpets best beseem a King;
It is for Clerks no commendable thing,
To Hunt, Hawke, and great Horse for service train,
Which highest Grace to Gentlemen does bring,
Poets may witty pleasant fictions feign,
Which in a grave Divine would be accounted vain.
Man in Gods Image to be like a Beast,
Neigh like a Horse, grunt, swill, like to a Swine,
Such things does Gravity as base detest,
Equality and Comeliness do shine,
In her voice, speeches, countenance divine;
In going, sitting, gestures, and devotions;
She words perplexed, contentions, does decline,
Plain, constant, resolute, are all her motions,
Proceeding from her hearts, pure, wise, and heavenly notions.
Her words fly not at random, all do flow
From Fountain of pure understanding heart:
Her gestures are not quick, nor yet too slow,
Sweetly severe, consid'rates in each part:
Her looke's not Cruel, nor composed by Art,
Grave and severe, yet gentle, liberal,
Sweet Mistress of the Graces! where thou art
They are most gracious and comely all,
Wherefore I them thy Scholars all aright may call,
Nay rather thy companions: Poets feign
Astrea called from heaven, with thee to dwell,
And to put all her Nymphs to thee; to train
Them up in Virtue as beseems well:
To men all graceful manners thou do tell,
Thou teach Kings to rule their Subjects right,
Fathers their Duties to their sons to spell,
Servants to Masters, Lady to her Knight,
No Policy or force without thee rules aright.
Happy are they! thou teach to eschew
All Leuity, vain fear, and ostentation,
Morose, rough manners, taunts, reproach undue,
Which shows a mind subject to perturbation,
Delighting in another molestation:
These are like Scorpions, whose malignity,
To all, comes from their natures inclination,
And from their Malice comes Morositie,
Auerse to all, but most to Truth and honesty.
As Vrchin, which has pricks upon his skin,
Amongst Thorns, and Briars always takes delight,
So in all business these enter in,
They use morose, uncivil, barbarous might;
They bring within them Malice, Gall and Spite.
How-euer be the thing wherein they deal,
Oh God forbid! such base malicious Sprite
Be ever Judge in Iudahs commonweal:
Such take large Toule, but never care to grind the meal.
Some days Euripus seven times ebbs and flows,
Some other days, nor flows nor ebbs at all,
The moving of this Riuer's like to those,
That have not Gravity habitual:
Unlike themselves, loose, sparing, prodigal,
Idle precipite, vain, for either part
Most earnest, vehement, patheticall,
These their own business and friends pervert,
For want of Gravity, and Constance in their heart.
But Gravity is like the Ocean maine,
Into whose Treasure all the Floods do flow,
Which he as constantly sends out again,
Yet hereby does, nor less, nor greater grow,
He neither swells, nor banks does ouerflow,
When greater sums his tributaries pay,
Nor is base sparing, when their pay is slow,
The winds may toss his waves but not dismay,
He smiles so soon to see his troubles blown away.
As Censor in the Senate House of Rome,
So is this Grace amongst the Graces all;
And as none might into the Senate come,
But those whom he did in his Conscript call:
So none may come into the Graces Hall,
But they must be conscrib'd by Gravity,
And those she will not have come there at all,
She passes by them for their Leuity,
Such confidence have all in her integrity.
But she most like is to the glorious Sun,
Whose cheerful countenance is still the same;
And like him constantly one course does run,
Of which, she never weary is or lame:
From him's all elementall heat and flame,
With her all lively spiritual does dwell:
He lightens all with his enlightening beam,
Sins, Clouds, and Ignorance she does expel:
Sol prince of Lights, she of all Graces bears the bell.
She Is like that Breath, which God is said to breathe
Into man's face for immortality,
His own sweet Image, which he did bequeath
To Adam, Righteousness, and Sanctity:
For where is inward holy Gravity,
All Graces spiritual are likewise found,
Where grave and modest outward Courtesy,
There outward comely Graces all are found,
Without the one we never find the other sound.
No firmer, or more ready muniment,
Against Envy, Malice, and each enemy,
That here mankind assail, and circumuent,
Than high, sublime, grave Manners majesty;
Who outward has and inward Gravity,
Concords with all without, has Peace within,
Of Virtues all consent, and Unity,
Gods image thus renewed, does here begin,
In humane flesh to vanquish Lust, and mortal Sin.
Old Ages honor, garland of gray-haires,
Most ample orders Grace, and dignity,
The highest seats of Justice, richest chaires
Of State, from her have all their majesty:
She swayes the Scepter of high Sou'raignty,
The fairest Cope which Arons sons do wear,
Sweet, reu'rend, amiable Gravity!
To thee I nothing find fit to compare,
All Simile's but shadows to thy substance are.
For in the grave and reu'rend do shine
All Goodness, Constancy, and Sapience,
The Manners which were in the golden time,
The Age when reigned Right and Innocence,
Before Debate, Strife, and Maleuolence
Were hatched, since fledge, now taught aloft to sore;
Inueterate in reprobated Sense,
Habituated so in Vices lore,
They scoff at grave examples, all that went before.
At first, I say, when in the golden Age,
Grave Saturn did Olympus Scepter sway,
Of high esteem were then the ancient Sage,
And mortals all did their behests obey;
But since Jove did by violence betray
His father, and aspired to his Crown,
Seuerer Gravity is driu'n away:
The Iouiall men are only of renown,
Grave Saturn on their Lusts too rigidly does frown.
As long as Eve maintains her Gravity,
So long in her Integrity she stood:
But when neglecting Grace and Majesty,
She of her vassal learnes the ill from good,
The Serpent, with his base malicious brood,
Soon brings her to an everlasting blame;
She evil did, and evil understood,
And seeks to hide her naked parts from shame,
Which perfect Natures Gravity did never blame.
Oh wondrous Grace of heavenly Gravity,
If in her likeness she should here appear!
But Adam lost her with Integrity,
Since, she could never be discerned clear:
But when our Head with us conuersed here,
Only some Beams he pleases to bestow
Upon his members to himself most dear,
Whereby they shine like little lamps below,
And, as he lends them light, they great or lesser show.
If you examples of this Grace desire,
You must the Fathers lives, and Stories read,
She a continued habit does require,
Nor is expressed in a single deed,
I easier to you could their slips areed,
As Noah grave yet ouertane with wine,
And Lot thus punished with incestuous deed.
I read, that once even Abram did decline,
And fainting, fell from this high Gravity divine.
Could I now Job here picture in a Verse,
I might her comeliest feature to you show,
Read his whole life: I only will rehearse
What he would have his unjust friends to know:
Did he unto the Seat of Judgment go;
The youngmen saw him, and themselves did hide,
The aged rise; the Princes tongues that flow
In Eloquence, their talking lay aside.
Speaks he? all mouths are shut, all ears are open wide.
I do not read, that grave Judge Samuel
Did ever from this heavenly Grace decline,
For all the time he judged Israel:
But sure his Eli
Tutor did so much incline
To gentleness, he swerued from her line.
Oh David! where was then thy Gravity,
When thou did make Vriah drunk with wine,
That so he might go with thy Lemman lie,
To cover thy base Sin of foul Adultery?
That innocent pure golden Gravity,
With which thou in a linen Ephod dight,
Laidst by thy sovereign kingly Majesty,
To dance before the Lord with all thy might:
Oh thus to be vncouerd in the sight
Of maids, and servants, well becomes a King,
Though profane wicked Michols us despite,
Yet when to God we our Devotions bring,
To be most vile and meek is no dishonouring.
Should I now pass by Judges, Prophets, Kings,
And from The Apostles times this Virtue trace,
To show how silly fishermen did things
More grave and venerable in their place,
Than all the Prelates that have highest grace,
My self and Reader I too much should spend:
Let Us labor in our hearts her to embrace,
For that indeed is Meditations end,
In vain he sees the right, that does the wrong way wend.
By two or three examples, I Will commend
This Grace, as she did with the Heathen won:
Cato, one from the Senate did suspend,
Because he kissed his wife before his son:
A Poet craving of a Judge alone,
To do him favor against Law, replide,
As Poet is not good, whose Virtues run
Not by the rules of Art: so Judge is wide,
That lays, for fear or favor, Laws and right aside.
A Spartane lewd, in serious consultation,
Giving his good advice, was followed
Of all the Senate in their Convocation;
And the Decree in his name entered:
A grave old man them better counseled,
That they their honor would not so defame,
To have Decrees in such names registered:
The Sentence might continue still the same,
Changed only from a lewd, unto a grave man's name
Themistocles is said, once with his friend,
After the Persians fatal overthrow,
To see that mighty slaughter, to descend
Unto the Sea, which wont to ebb and flow;
Which many Chains and Bracelets up did throw:
These when he saw thus lying on the shore,
He them, thus saying, to his friend does show,
Thou art no Captain, gather them therefore:
Showing, he Gravity, than Gold esteemed more.
Oh! shall a Captain of the heathen host,
For Gravity despise all gold and gain?
And Christians, thou whose Soul alone has cost
More than all wealth that does on earth remain,
Neglect this Grace a little pelf to gain?
Oh! what do such, but Esaus Birthright sell,
Or like the Prodigal, eat swill and grain:
If they at home with Gravity would dwell,
Manna should be their food, their drink sweet liuing-Well.
Alas! how many be that do profess
Themselves great friends to gracious Gravity,
And do in outward shows express no less?
But they at home are full of Luxury,
Base Wantonness, and all Immodesty;
Especially obscene in filthy Lust:
Thus Cupid binds Jove's awful Majesty;
Uenus have her petitions granted must,
When Juno's and Minerua's thrown are in the dust.
Ah! I could wish, but never hope to see
The golden-Age, when every one was plain,
And hearts and faces did in one agree;
Dissembling was not known all Saturnes reign.
The Matrons modest Virgins sought to gain
By patterns gra^^, in Virtue to begin
Their youth, the ancient up in labor train;
To moderate their Lust, and keep from sin:
That as they seemed without, so they might be within.
Three things the Persians did teach their youth,
To ride a horse, the Bow aright to draw,
The last thing was, in all to tell the Truth;
This made them of ill doing stand in aw,
They being bound to Truth, as to a law.
This last, true inward Gravity would frame,
Considering God secret sins will draw
To light on earth, to our disgrace and blame,
Or else hereafter to our greater pain and shame.
But I confess, we are so far from fear
Of wanton looseness in our priuacie,
That openly we without blushing bear
The ensigns of our Impudicitie.
So far from antique grauer Modesty,
In gestures, goings, looks, vailes, and attire:
They now are baits of Lust and Luxury,
And fuel to increase our shameless fire,
Which should be limited in Wedlocks chaste desire.
And not shows only, but our sweetest songs,
Are now the Baits of Lust and Wantonness;
In Ribaldry we exercise our toungs,
With unchaste tales we intertaine our guess;
Without these now no mirth or cheerfulness.
Alas! poor Gravity is quite undone,
Her honors blended by Lasciviousness;
The Signs will tell you, where good-Ale does won,
It Is filthiness to speak, what is filthy to be done.
Diuinest Spirits! Muses Darlings dear!
That in sublimest Numbers take delight,
Oh! let your Fountains stream as pure and clear,
As runs the Helicon whereof you write:
Dim not your pure, sublime, most glorious light,
With lustful thought, or wanton cogitation,
But spend the honor of your Furies might,
In holy, sweet, transcendent Contemplation,
And as your matter's grave, so be your conversation.
You by the Muses are inaugurate
Censors of Manners, inward Sanctity,
As of the outward is the Magistrate;
Oh both be patterns of true Gravity!
And you shall both shine like a Deity,
Amongst the mortals which are here below:
Your private honor, public majesty,
By Gravity more glorious shall show,
So as your outward truly does from inward flow.
Wives, Matrons, Widows, Virgins fair be grave,
Dame Chastity defend your Bodies may
From lawless Lust: This Virtue will you save
From lustful proffer without saying nay;
The boldest dares not Gravity assay;
She better than a thousand Argo's eyes,
All lustful looks and glances keeps away,
And silenceth enchanting Mercuries:
That Matron's truly chaste, whom no man ever tryes.
God of all Grace, I humbly beg this Grace
Of inward, and of outward Gravity,
Grave in my Muses, grave in public place,
Grave with my friends, grave in my Family,
Grave in Adversity, Prosperity,
In all religious Duties truly grave:
Be I in Bondage, or at Liberty,
In health, or sickness, Gravity I crave.
In all from crying Sins, this Grace my Soul shall save.
And though to sing of Gravity I cease,
Yet never will I cease her Contemplation.
As years, so must my Gravity increase.
The Author of all heavenly Cogitation,
Me teach her practice in my Conversation.
This Book began with Peace, I now will end
With Gravity both Book and Meditation:
God grant it Readers hearts may all amend,
As it has done the Authors, when the same he penned.
To the Author.
I Read thy Poems, and I them admire;
The more I read, the more I do desire:
They breathe such holy Passions in the mind;
Who reads them most, himself shall better find.
R. C.

FINIS.

