SUSANNA: OR, THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THE TWO VNIVST ELDERS.

DEVT. 16.20. That which is just and right shall thou follow, that thou may
live and enjoy the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

LONDON, Printed for John Teage, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Ball. 1622.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT, EARL of WARVVICKE, and to his most virtuous
and Noble Countess, the Lady Frances:
THou who art in thy Country justly hight,
Another Daniel for judging right:
And thou his Dame, a Susan of this age;
Let Both be graced with your Patronage.
The Argument, or Moral, of the whole History.
I Chaste Susanna, here interpret Right,
Or Justice; clear, as pure celestial Light;
Whom covetous false Elders, most unjust,
Seek to corrupt, to satisfy their Lust.
Divine Justice.
Astrea, of immortal Seed,
Abhominates such foul and wicked deed:
Wherefore they to the people her disgrace,
And set up wrong and bribing in her place.
The people, always prone to imitate
Their vice, not virtues, that do sway the state,
Join with the Judges al to beat down right,
And take in gifts and doing-wrong delight.
Till Jove, awaked with the piteous cry
Of those that groan under Iniquity,
The gods his Pears to Parliament does call,
And to Ol^^ pus court them summons all:
W^^re they decree a Daniel to send,
To judge the wo^st, that all the rest may me^d:
Thence does Astrea ^l^are, like Susan shine,
And judges measure by her equal Line.
THE FIRST BOOK OF SUSANNA.
Gods goodness in Iudahs captivity;
Ioachims worth: what Elders ought to be;
A good wife by Susanna is descride,
The greatest Bliss that can a man betide.
The Elders each to other do discover
Their Lusts, and plot their wishes to recover.
I Sing the honor of that noble Dame,
Who for true virtues sake despised shame;
And rather chose to die with infamy,
Then violate her sacred Chastity:
For she him made her confidence and stay,
That made her righteousness as clear as day.
Lucrece be mute; if chaste, why should thou die?
If not, why should we praise thy chastity?
I sing of Judges base, not more unjust
In judgment, than obscene in filthy lust;
I sing of Justice, Judgment, Equity,
And knowledge of discerning Verity.
Oh blessed Spirit, who did the spirit dispose
Of youth, the Elders malice to disclose,
Direct my Muse; Injustice to discou^r,
That hating vice, I may be virtues lover:
And teach me sing Susannas sacred story,
To all chaste ears delight, and to thy glory.
Whilst Canaans Land lay seauenty years vntilde,
2 Chr. 36.21
And Sabbaths all profaned had nigh fulfilld:
The Abramites that under bondage groan,
Sat weeping by the streams of Babylon:
Their Harpes upon the willow trees then hung,
On which they lately Sions songs had sung;
And though their voices had forgot to sing,
And fingers touch of sweetest warbling string;
Jehovah could not, for his Abrams sake,
Forget the promise he to him did make:
But gave them favor in the heathens sight,
And dwellings both for profit and delight:
And, lest they should these benefits despise,
They had, within themselves, the exercise
Of their own Laws; and Elders every year,
The people chose the government to bear,
Who might by uprightness, and skill in law,
Protect the Good, and keep the bad in awe.
Amongst the ^est, that in that region
Had large possessions; In Babylon
Ioachim had a house most rich and fair,
Most pleasant, fruitful, healthful eke for air:
But was renowm'd and famous, most of all,
For one fair, large and open goodly Hall,
Whither all Jewish suitours wont resort,
For Justice; there the Elders kept their Court.
Elders which ought, by Iethros counsel wise,
Exo. 18.21.
Be men of courage, hating couetise;
Fearing the Lord; in dealing just, upright;
And able to discern the wrong from right:
But these were Ancients in iniquity,
Malice, Injustice and Adultery.
Both like in Ignorance, and base condition:
Both raised by bribing, favor and ambition:
Not using Law hard causes to decide,
For they all matters by one balance tried;
Whose gift weighs heauiest, victory obtaines,
This mickle profit brings with little pains:
Deferring strifes final determination,
Not thereby to take better information,
But for to groape whose purse did heauiest way,
And unto him they always give the day.
These judged then the congregation
Of captive Jews that were in Babylon:
And for Ioachim was a noble man,
To him the people with the Elders came;
Where they till noone the causes over call,
As now our Judges in Westminster hall.
This noble man was not so honorable
For ancestry, or ought that is heritable,
As for his virtues, Justice, Piety,
Humbleness, Meekness and Integrity.
These did his mind and actions more adorn,
Than wealth, ambition, favor, arms with scorn:
These made him of the highest reputation,
And sought unto of all the Jewish nation;
Who though he Patron was and Advocate,
And wondrous knowledge had, to rule the State,
By his great skill in Laws judicial,
The Moral and the Ceremonial;
Yet seeing the corruptions of the Time,
And Folly into Seat of Justice clime:
And that the most unjust and ignorant,
By bribing, friends, or boldness, got the Grant
Of highest Offices; He free from charge,
Of public Office, chose to live at large:
But for because, man borne he understood,
Not for himself, but for his countries good,
He took more pains, than any Magistrate,
For wronged friends, and good of public state.
So that his was the House of Justice hight,
His mouth an Oracle of Law and Right;
The widows, poores, and orphans sure defendour,
The Innocents aid, and terror of the offendour.
He ware a Lawyers Gown to keep him warm,
But sold no Breath, to do a poor man harm.
He that describe all heavenly Graces can,
May tell the virtues of this noble man;
Which he not only learnd, by contemplation,
But acted to the good of all his nation.
A good wife described. Prou. 31.10.11. etc.
But above wealth and all this man possessed,
He with a faithful, honest wife was blessed,
In whom her husbands heart might safely trust,
In wealth or want contented, true and just,
Who did him good, not evil all her days,
Industrious with her mind and hands always:
Like merchants ship that food from far does bring,
Early and late her household ordering:
Her working hand still open for to feed,
The hungry, and to give to them that need:
And in the Summer for the Winter tide,
She clothing for her household does provide.
This made her husband so much set by, and
To sit amongst the Rulers of the Land:
Her mouth was shut, and covered her face,
In one sat modesty, in the other grace,
In one did angelique sweet beauty shine,
From the other wisdom flows, and grace divine.
To many daughters, Graces rare befall,
But chaste Susannna went beyond them all.
Amongst the fruits of her Industriousnesse,
Who never eat her Bread in idleness,
She plants an orchard fruitful, rich and fair,
Whither she with her Lord does often repair,
Themselves awhile from worldly cares to free,
And on their handy works Gods blessing see:
There might they please, smell, touch, eat, taste and sight,
With flowers, fruits, and musiques sweet delight;
For through the same a pure stream murmured,
To which the Birds sweet trebles warbeled,
The winds amongst the trees a Base did sound,
And flowers all enamelled the ground.
But lo the winds, birds, streams and all were mute,
At nimble touch of Susans trembling Lute,
Brook staid, Birds ceast, and Air calm became,
To hear the heavenly music of this Dame;
But most it does her husbands heart rejoice,
To hear her Lute outwarbled by her voice:
Which seemed a quire of Angels, which did praise
The King of heaven in David's holy lays.
So have I often heard, in forest fair,
When Spring begins with calm and gentle air,
Groaues citizens, which thither do resort,
Often sing by turns, often ^oyne in one consort;
Till Philomele to welcome Phoebes light,
Having their music heard with due delight:
Sends from her breast such lute-like warbeling,
The other Birds are all ashamed to sing;
And listening, in one strain most sweet and clear.
Do all their changes in one Dittic hear.
And so have I often seen the shepherd swains,
Wooing the shepheardesses on the plains,
Challenge their mates by single pipe and voice,
And join in consort with harmonious noise:
That all the shepherds dance to hear them sing,
And forests all with joy aloud do ring,
Till Phillis with one stroke of warb^ing Lute,
The shepherds pipes, and voices all makes mute;
Yea Collin Clout does break his pipe for shame,
To hear the heavenly ditties of his Dame.
Thus often she solaced for recreation,
But most alone, for holy meditation,
She in her orchyard walks every day,
To read the Scriptures meditate and pray,
Where by sublime pure heavenly contemplation,
With God and Angels she has conue^sation,
And by true Faith, and her spiritual eye,
As present does the day of Christ descry.
This Di'mond of invaluable prize,
^
Was soon discerned by Elders lustful eyes,
Lust that fierce Fire, which first in eyes conceiues,
And raging enters in, and never leaves,
Till all the body it has set on fire,
And ^eard the soul with wicked strange desire;
L^ke lightning, sent from Heaven for cursed sin,
Which first on tops of Towers does begin,
Then fires the roof, thence falls down to the hall,
And is not quenched ti^l it consumes all.
Sweet kindly heat, when youth kept in loves bounds
A wife not womankind for scope propounds;
But even a spark of hell, when it does rage
Amongst the Ancient, politic and Sage.
"G^^y heads incontinent when they were young,
"As they grow weak in limbs, in lust grow strong.
This fire so fierce does in the Elders burn,
It all their mirth to heaviness does turn,
Their cast down eyes dare not behold the sight
Of Heaven* nor think on God that judges right.
Deep was indeed Selfe-guilty conscience wound,
But they more violent Lusts fury found;
Each his own fire but not his fellows knew,
Not durst one it unto another show;
Ashamed their filthy lust to her to tell,
Yet both, to quench their flames, would burn in hell;
Both wickedly do pro^ect day and night,
That at the least they may enjoy her sight:
To have their will on her both were full feign,
But saw no means their longings to obtain.
As Satan, when he would us work despite,
Transformes him to an Angel of the Light,
Lest if we should behold his proper Shape,
Forearmd, forewarnd, we might his malice escape:
So these two Carles in Susans presence sat,
As if they all on Justice meditate,
And when they chanced with Ioachim to dine,
Their table-talke was of all things divine:
Of a sound conscience, and equity,
Wives Loyalty, and virgins chastity;
Thus hoping, by their queint Hypocrisy,
To make a way to foul Adultery.
One day from Judgment seat when both did rise,
And either turned home as was their guise,
Both straight returned, and together met,
With hope the sight of her alone to get:
Where either of the other does enquire,
The cause of their so sudden back retire.
Brother, said then, the Senior in degree,
What is the cause I thee so heavy see?
Does any Ahab hold from thee some ground,
That does upon thy house, or vi^eyard bound?
Which thou desir'st for profit or delight,
Tell me, and he shall know a judges might.
Or does there any Mardochee deny
To do obeisance to thy Seignury?
Have thou received wrong of any wight,
And would again with sweet revenge requite?
Or tell me, some fair Dame do thou not love?
Whose Chastity thou art afraid to prove:
What ever be thy grief, now tell it me,
And use my power, as I have used thee.
What do we both like Kings over Judah reign?
And shall ought cross our pleasure or our gain?
No no, we will break or make them all obey;
We rule not if our subjects us gainesay:
My Lord, replide the puny Judge again,
It Is not Revenge, Ambition, Pleasure, Gain,
That so afflict my body and my mind,
It Is Love of Fair: but shame there stopped his wind,
The word Susanna rain he would have said,
But was of man, though not of God afraid.
As two old thieves, that have companions bin
Often times in Murder, Theft and fowler Sin;
H^uing a Booty in one place espide,
But neither others mind thereto descride,
At diverse windows slipping in by night,
Into one Hall, which does both much aff^ight,
(One for the owner first the other taking,
And each a true man, for a Thief mistaking,)
Till by some secret marks each does espy
His fellow-theefe, there met unwillingly,
Wherewith both glad, hope easelier to obtain,
Their purpose, and be Sharers in the gain:
E^'n so these Elders; who by might and fraud,
Had often ioind in judgment to defraud
The fatherless, and widows of their right,
And to oppress the weaker by their might;
First feared one by the other to be spide,
But after they had both their lusts descride,
Joy in their hap, and easelier hope to get,
And share the Booty, for which there they met.
Thrice noble Mate, the elder Judge replide,
I see one fire in both our hearts does bide,
Which smothered, smoking inwardly will bu^ne,
But blown and stird, to purest flames will turn:
I, by thy meeting here, do surely guess,
It is one Dame does both our hearts possess:
For I have often beheld thee six thine eye,
Upon her beauty as she passed by,
And therewith heard thee ^nly sigh and groan,
As thou did wish to be with her alone.
But, since sweet Cupid smites both with one Dart,
Let us not herein one another thwart,
If discord our desires shall divide,
Our power and empire can not long abide:
Let name of Rival which breeds mortal hate,
In youth, in age, our loves conglutinate.
Her beauty that than Sun does clearer shine,
Has heat enough to warm mine heart and thine,
And both our longings fully satisfy,
Let Us share in loves, as in commodity.
As strongest castle which does fortify
It self to endure the Siege of enemy,
By force vnited's ^ooner overcome,
Than if they should assault it one by one:
So shall we find the Fortress of this Dame,
By both, than one, more easy to be t^ne:
Yea if through waiwardnesse it shall stand out,
By force or policy we will bring't about,
Either with peace our pleasures to enjoy,
Or ruin it and utterly destroy.
Dear Brother, I mine heart must tell thee plain,
My stomach can not brook, so foul a Swain
As Ioachim, whom the base Multitude
Honor as King, should thus unto be sude
Of all, to be their Patron, Advocate,
And sway our power in ruling o^ the State:
Alleging Law and Custom to maintain
Things, that so cross our pleasure and our gain;
That he, I say, should be the only wigh^,
That feels the Beams of this clear Suns sweet light;
That in his arms he should enjoy alone,
Susanna, a fit Bride for Solomon.
Let us bethink's of some convenient tide,
Our selves in some close shady place to hide,
And take her in he^ Orchard all alone,
For there she walks eu^ry afternoon:
The^e, when we see our opo^tunitie,
Keep thou the doo^e, I Will keep Her company,
And when I satisfide have my desire,
As I did mine, thou may assuage thy fire:
Thus wickedly one with another reason,
Deferring all to more convenient season.
The end of the first Book.
The second Book of Susanna.
Susans devotions, works and Husewifery,
Ioachims justice, hospitality.
Elders her washing tempt; but she denies:
They offer force, then out for aid she cries*
On her transfer they* fals^ly, all the blame,
Unto her own, and all her servants shame.
Now scarce his steedes had Phoebus watered,
And for long journey ready harnessed,
And fair Aurora usher of the day
Made haste; because Sol went his longest way,
When chaste Susanna from sweet side arose
Of Ioachim, and putting on her clothes,
She meditates on ^oabe of righteousness.
Wherewith the bridegroom his beloved does dress:
His merits made her own by imputation,
In spiritual birth, nor fleshly generation.
Long costly dressings did the Dame decline,
As nurse of pride and mis-expence of time,
Wherefore her nightgowe quick at out her cast,
With band and hat in seemly order placed,
She suddenly up all her maidens calls,
And kneeling with them to this prayer falls.
Oh King of rest! that do appoint the night
For rest; the day that man should in thy sight,
To all the duties of his calling tend,
Having thy glory ever for his end;
We first acknowledge our unworthiness,
Relying whole, on Lambs vnspottednesse,
Which from worlds first foundation was slain.
That he might free us from eternal pai^e.
We, for this wondrous grace, thee ever praise,
Thy care and providence for us always,
Grant we of this may ever meditate,
Our tongues thy praise and noble acts relate,
And make us truly do all thy commands,
So thou the works may prosper of our hands.
As nimble lark which with the morn does rise,
Mou^ts from her couch, first to salute the skies,
And all the way to Heaven and earth she rings,
Praise to the Lord of Lords and King of Kings:
But, having finished her due devotion,
Falls silent down with swift and nimble motion,
And diligent takes pains for daily food,
That may sustain and keep her self and brood:
Even so this Dame as soon as any light,
Affoorded her the least use of her sight,
Up from the bed does her fair body raise,
Her soul mounts up to heaven the Lord to praise.
But after her devotions finished,
And all her servants duly ordered,
Due portions to her maidens she divides
And for her household daily food provides,
Still caring for her husbands table most,
To furnished bounteously with smallest cost:
Here she directs her steward, and her cook,
One to provide, the other well to look,
That with her fair allowance they be able,
To furnish plenteously her husbands table.
This time she sovereign waters did distill,
(For she in Physic art had mickle skill;
Yet was her charity, than cunning, more,
Stooping to heal the meanest Lazars sore:
Her Lions heart, fine hand, and eagles eye
Made her admired of all for surgery.)
That done, she back returns to her maids,
Where either she to them the Scripture reads,
Or learnes them some choice precepts she collected,
Or hystories which most her soul affected,
With piety their minds to exercise
Whilst each her task with nimble ioints applies:
Their chiefest works were roabes; to keep from cold,
The orphans poor, and widows that were old;
Of cloth which she had spun of her own fleece;
Yet often to show her skill in curious piece,
She for her husband works a cap or band,
To make him be more honored in the land,
Where thou might see, with cunning needle told,
The subtle serpent simple Eve infold.
Here stands a tree, all covered with leaves,
whose fairest fruit most lookers on deceiues;
By this was shadowed that Forbidden tree,
That Adam ban'de and his posteritee.
Many fair trees she planted there around,
But none so goodly to the eye was found,
Like sin of pleasing show, but deadly taste;
Better, than eat such poison, ever fast.
But not far off, her cunning hand contriues
An Antidote which out this poison drives:
For here the child's depainted to the life,
That trembles under faithful Abrams knife,
Where lo! above his hand an Angel stays,
And does his faith and firm obedience praise:
Here in the bush a spotless lamb does lie,
Willing, to save young Isaacks life, to dye;
A figure of that lamb that offered
His life to save us all in Isaacks seed.
Often with her maids, about her round, she sings
David's sweet lays unto the King of Kings,
Who joining all with angelique sweet noise,
Do praise the Highest of all as with one voice,
Thus was her house of maidens arts the school,
And Academy to instruct their soul:
Her hands with use so cunning were become,
That though her eyes lookd off, her work was done,
The whilst with them her maidens she directs,
And her own business no whit neglects:
Often reads she them some holy Hymn of praise,
Yet never from their work her fingers stays.
Thus she her time in working spends till noone,
Whilst Ioachim which rose from bed as soon,
Does his whole family together call,
And ioynes in humble prayer with them all.
Then walks he forth to see his oxen plow,
Or mowers pearly locks of meadows mow,
Or widows weeding of his earing grain,
Or maidens milk from bags of kine to strain:
Here he appoints a jolly Swain to tend
His flock, and from the wolf and fly defend:
Often would he teach a courser for to pace
More easy, and to rain with pleasing grace.
But ever he returns home by eight,
Where many longing Clyents for him wait,
And him for pity and compassion praid,
To be the widows and the orphans aid.
Brethren, says he, with all my skill and might
I Will stand for you, if that your cause be right,
But surely know, I cannot move my tongue
To do you good, and do another wrong:
Law is a constant will, a balance true
That gives to every man what is his due,
And therefore must not under false pretense,
Be made a cloak for wrong or violence:
Or be for envy, to the great a snare,
Whilst faults for pity in the Poor we spare:
Right sets each thing in the proper place,
Without respect of persons, fear, or grace.
Then would he lend to all a patient ear,
Till each his cause in order does declare:
The right with all his might he would defend,
And what was wrong would counsel soon to end:
Nor for displeasure, fear of loss or might,
Would be deterred from pleading for the right.
Therefore was called the just man's Advocate*
Truth's Champion* and maintainer of the State.
For pair thus each their life in labor spends
One feeds and cloths them the other them defends:
The wisemans rule is unto both a guide,
Prepare abroad, then things at home provide:
A blessed pair, for Truth which always stood,
Their end Gods glory, and their neighbors good.
Now had the glorious Titans panting horse
Attaind the midway of their longest course,
And Sol to check vain glorious humane pride,
When as he highest sat was least descride;
When Chimes informed old stomachs it was noone,
So Judges rose, and all departed soon:
And Nature craving after toil repast,
Makes Ioachim unto his dinner have.
Here should my Muse in order, next propound,
How he in order all things ready found;
Susan him greeting, like the wise Kings Bride,
With many fair chaste Damsels by her side,
Who all with cheerful comely modest face,
Bow to the ground with courteous comely grace*
His servants round about the table stand,
Attending all their Lords eye, and command:
Who can describe the order of the King,
Whose wisdoms glorious fame so far did ring,
That it from Seba brought that prudent Dame,
Which found his glory far exceed his fame:
He to describe the order's only able,
This noble man observed at his table;
His servants, ministers, his drink and meat
Happy were they that at his table eat;
Blissed are they that waiting by do stand,
His gracious words and deeds to understand,
Their thirst and hunger being satisfide,
And God before and after glorifide,
After some sweet discourses, all arose,
And to their business themselves dispose,
(...) turns his books the law to find,
Which might resolve some doubts then in his mind.
With two maids Susan, as it was her guise,
To bathe her self into the orchard hyes;
And sending forth her maids for soape and oil
Her daintiest body does undress the while:
Oh, Susan stay, oh, stay not here alone,
The wiseman says, two better are than one;
The (...) close in wait for thee do ly,
So (...) that Susan can them not descry.
I (...) that fair Dame which Iesses son from high,
(...) her self in garden did espy,
(...) dazzled with her splendor bright,
Thinks he does see a new Sun rise at night:
So shines the beauty of Susannas face,
Her eyes like stars which frosty night do grace,
Her teeth like ivory piles stand row by row,
Over which her lips like scarlet ribbands show,
Her chin, her checkes, her forehead and her nose,
Like lillies mixed with red and damask rose.
Her Iu'ry neck, fair shoulders which excel,
Her paps that like two haruey apples swell:
The which for sport her babes were wont to cull,
When they from them have suckd their bellies ^ull.
Her snowy arms each graced with milk-white palm,
Like two even branches of the fairest Palm,
Whose ends were with small fingers ioynted neat,
And at their ends smooth stones of Berill set,
The rest who knows? them to omit I choose,
As not once thought of by my graver Muse.
But she into the water leaping light,
To cool her heat, inflameth their delight,
Where purest waters her fair limbs embrace,
As Iuory Sculpture in a cristall case.
Like chastest Cinthia when with dreaded dart,
She chaste the Tigre, Leopard and Heart,
Her body ouertoiled with the heat,
And fairest skin over shadowed with sweat,
In purest fountain in the shade does wash,
Whilst all her darlings round about her pash:
Till hunter, to his cost her beauty spies
Which heavenly did amaze his humane eyes:
The sight whereof so rauisheth his breast,
A reasonable man turns senseless beast,
With snaggy horns, cloue hoofes, and frighted looks,
That he who upward erst, now downward looks;
And all his Curs, that lately he so fed,
Him chasing as their game fast followed:
Whom pulling down, like Iesabel they tear,
Such beastly ends, all beastly Letchers fear;
Such beastly ends these Elders eke befall,
Whilst clouds of stones sing their cursed funeral.
As subtle Serpent close himself did hide
In Eden, till a fit time he espide,
When Adam to some other corner gone,
He there might take Eve naked all alone:
So these two Elders of the Serpents breed,
Who bear like enmity to all her seed,
This naked Dame alone, watch to assail,
And first with promises seek to prevail:
Madame, says one, the ardour which we prove
Burning our hearts with flames of fervent love,
Compel us life and honor to adventure,
And closely now into your garden enter:
If you will us in true affection meet,
Silver to you shall be like stones in street,
And we with gold will fill your fairest hands
Like Danaes lap, or Tagus golden sands:
Thy beauty like the Day stars shall be seen,
And thou shall reign in Judah like a Queen.
But if thou shall refuse with us to lie,
Behold, we then against thee testify,
We saw thee with a youth thy bed defile,
And thou had sent thy maids away the while.
Who can express Daphnes perplexity,
When gods for pity turned her to a tree,
As she does naked from Apollo fly,
And than her honor lose, would rather dye?
Or who can tell that pitiful sore-taking
Of Absolons fair sister, when she baking
Cakes for her brother Amnon for to eat, 2. Sam. 13.11.

Perceived her honor was his longd-for meat?
And cride, forbear, oh brother, to discover
Thy sisters nakedness; nay rather cover
My shame than force me: oh! let no man tell
Such wickedness was done in Israel;
And I even whither shall I go for shame?
And for a fool all Israel shall thee blame:
May tell how Helchi's daughter was ashamd;
But most the Elders for their lust she blamed,
That they which ought to judge adultery,
Should authors be of such iniquity;
That those her Lord and she so honored,
Should plot with shame now to defile his bed.
Her nakedness with clothes she feign would hide,
But they all covering to her denide:
Her covering was sorrow, grief and shame,
And floods of tears for to express the same.
As when fierce thunder threats to rend the skies,
Great floods by storms most violent arise,
That rivers all their channells ouerflow,
And drown the seed which husbandmen do sow,
So fill her tears the lauer to the brim,
That drowned in sorrow, she in tears may swim:
Her drops of sweat like pearls do trickle down,
And she is all benumbd as in a swoune:
Sol, erst that shined, ashamed, now in a cloud
Himself, from seeing this foul sin, does shroud:
Showers fall from heaven, as if the stars did mourn,
And all the birds their songs to murmurs turn:
The trees small drops like tears about do das^,
And all the under shrubs with weeping wash;
The shrubs, the herbs, and all make lamentation,
To see this Dame so near her desolation:
And even my Muse, as I this story write,
Laments and mournes to see her piteous plight.
At last ^ore grieved that humane eye beholds
Her naked body, she her mind unfolds.
My Lords for love of God, this sin forbear,
If not for love nor honor, yet for fear,
When you condemn another for this crime,
You judge your selves! It Is now a fitter time,
To fast and pray in our captivity,
Than thus to double our iniquity.
If I like Eve consent unto your mind,
I sure with her a like reward shall find*
And if I do your wickedness withstand,
Yet know I not how to escape your hand:
But I all mortal deaths will rather die,
Than in Gods sight commit adultery:
Who does with lust her laser lims enroule,
Defiles her body, and does damme her soul:
Have I not promised before God and you,
To be unto my husband just and true?
And must not all by laws judicial dye?
Without exception for adultery?
Oh Judges grave: but bridle yet your lust,
And once a woman's Secrecy entrust,
That never will bewray this offered shame,
For honor of our nation and your name.
But howsoever you my flesh torment,
My heart to wickedness shall not consent,
A guilty conscience is a soarer wound,
Than tortures all that Tyrants out have found.
Dame; said the Judge; art thou yet so unwise,
Thou know not Politicians did devise
Religion, only to repress the base,
And hold the Noble in the peoples grace?
Do fear God should us in this action see?
This Lawyers gown shall cover thee and me;
Under which often to Heaven has past unseen,
Far greater Trespasses then this, I ween*
Lust is a Sport, if closely carried,
And from all fleshly eyes close covered;
The Troth which to your husband you did plight,
Was but for ceremony in our Sight.
And as for our judicial Laws offense,
Judges have power therewith to dispense:
Your self and honor unto us entrust,
And you shall find us faithful, true, and just*
Great is the honor of an Elders name,
Then who shall dare or thee or us defame?
And for your conscience now so foolish tender,
Custom like ours, will strong and valiant render:
We Will not torment your flesh, but it delight,
Come, Madame, you must try an Elders might.
Then, like foul Bear, that greedy of his pray,
His filthy Paw on milke-white Lamb does lay,
So he by force would bring her to his Lust.
But she that in the Almighty put her trust,
Needs no Stilletto, now for to defend
Her honor, but loud cries to heaven does send;
"Surest defense that women have to cry,
"To save them from Lusts raging villainy.
You females-masculine, that do pretend,
You weapons wear your honors to defend,
If in the Court or City, villainy,
Should be attempted against your chastity:
See here this naked woman all alone,
Defends her honor having two to one.
Her modest Looks were late her sure defense,
Against base attempts, now cries against violence.
Oh model of a chaste and constant Dame,
The world all chaste ones, hence Susannas name.
Eve tempted was, and by temptation fell,
Fair Thamar forced was against her will,
Sarah was taken away, but never tried;
Shames Fear made Lucrece yield, whereof she did.
But Iuda's daughter naked all alone,
Here ouercomes her Tempters, two to one.
But one of them, ah! ^uddainely does run
To the fore-gate, which he has sone undone,
And coming back, both against the woman cry,
Stop, stop the adulterour, they both must dye.
The Servants much affrighted with the noise,
And knowing well the^ heard their Ladies voice,
Rushing in at the back-dore, found their Dame,
Accused by the Elders to their shame.
Vile woman! cride the one of them, fie, fie,
Is this thy modest holy Purity?
Thy Prayer, Fasting, Alms, and Meditation,
Sabboths, and New-moones, holy observation,
With which thou seekst thy wickedness to cover?
God now will thy Hypocrisy discover.
Thy piteous looks, and faind strict Conscience
Shall be no Subterfuge for foul offense;
Was this the cause thou forth thy maids did send?
More closely with a young man to offend;
We as true witnesses, do testify,
That thou art taken in Adultery,
Thy Minion we do hope to catch ere long,
Who brake from us because he was too strong:
For testimony, open see the door,
Through which he escaped, that was close spard before*
And see her naked, as with him she lay,
Lo here for heat her garments laid away.
The Servants all were grieved and much ashamed*
To hear their Dame thus by the Elders blamed,
For envious Fame durst never till that day,
Least Spot or Blemish on Susanna lay.
The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF SUSANNA.
True Lovers greeting, willinger to dye,
Than suspect mutual integrity;
An old man into talk of Susan falls,
And her describes from birth to nuptials:
She is brought forth; arraigned, condemned to dye,
God her delivers, soon as she does cry.
NOw clouds black curtains under Heaven were spread,
And Morn was all in Scarlet manteled,
(For chaste Aurora put on this array,
To show the horror of this bloody day:)
When Elders from their Beds of Down arise,
Who naught but mischief all the night devise;
And send their Serieants out to summon all
The people to assemble at the Hall.
Their Love was turned now to Indignation,
Their Lust to mischievous Imagination,
And Hostile-like since they may not enjoy
Her Fort by parley, seek it to destroy.
But here chaste Susan does my Muse inuit
To tell, how with her Lord she spent that night:
Who hearing in his study at his Book,
A wondrous noise, does from his window look;
But when he thence but little could discern,
For shade of trees, comes down the Truth to learn.
As when great Ebers Son, (to save his life,
Her, Genesis ^^
sister called, who was indeed his wife,
Which made the King of Gerar for her send
And for his own wife Sarah apprehend:)
Was vexed with Fear, Doubts, Love and Jealousy,
For loss of Honor, and the Chastity
Of mother of the faithful, who for clea^e,
Both mind, and body, never yet had peer:
But when the King conuai'd her home again,
And she affirmed her self without all stain:
Does unto Heaven both Heart and hands advance,
And praisd the Lord for her deliverance;
And though foul Fame, her for this shame reprove,
He her more sure and constantly does love.
Even so Ioachim was at first afraid,
His wife was used as the Elders said,
But waying well her Faith and Constancy,
Soon blames his foolish Fear and Jealousy:
And turns all his doubts and bitter passion
To tender Love, tears, pity and compassion:
And her embracing thus began: My Dear!
Forbear to weep; And let me from thee hear,
The depth of this profound iniquity,
That Both us plungeth in this misery.
The desert sooner shall be fruitful plain,
Mount Sinas top be drowned in Ocean maine:
And Iordans fruitful valleys turn to waste,
Than I suspect my loyal Wife unchaste.
As when fierce Storms do all the mountains wash,
And threat to drown the valleys with a dash,
If Titan please to cast a golden Gleame,
The coasts are clear, and all the Heaven serene;
So, at these gracious speeches of her Knight,
Susanna turns her cloudiness to Light;
Her eyes are dride, which fountains were of tears*
Sighs turned to speech; And thus her self she cleares,
O wretched I! yet wretched who can be,
That has so kind, a noble Lord, as thee?
Who doe'st me now in loving arms embrace,
When enemies do plot my most disgrace:
My Lord! should thou suspect my Loyalty,
My heart should burst for Grief, and I should die.
But Iordanes streams shall sooner backward slide,
And Force my Body from my Soul divide;
Celestial Fire unto Earths center tend,
And Center Titans fiery coach ascend,
Than I consent for fear of Death or Shame,
My conscience with eternal spots to blame.
Persuaded be that I have loyal stood,
I joyfully will seal it with my blood;
I fear no accusations unjust,
For I do know in whom I put my trust.
These wicked Lords for me in wait have laid,
But shame and Sorrow here her Speeches staid:
And suddenly another Cloud appears,
Which dims her Light, and drowneth all in tears:
So deep she sighs, ^o fast her tears do flow,
That Ioachim does weep with her for woe,
And both with Sighs and Groans their loves record*
But neither able is to speak a word.
As when two Cloud in Summers day arise,
In East and West, which do obscure the Skies,
The lesser Cloud which Zephirus does blow,
Comes swift, but Lo^^ the greater comes but slow,
Till they both meeting in the Welkin wide,
Raise raging ^louds, like to an Eastern tide,
Whose violence the ears of Oorne down beats;
And all the Plough-mans Labor ill intreates:
So do the tears of this grieved Couple fall,
That they in Sorrow drown Words, Eyes, and All.
And even my pen with Sorrow drowned is faint,
To leave them weeping, and you next acquaint,
With that which passed in the Judgment Hall,
For there the people do assemble all.
Amongst the rest, one called Jeremy,
(That was a child of the Captivity,
Who was old Helchi's ancient friend and pear,
And from their cradles most familiar were,
And often had the Elders office borne,
Till Pride and base Ambition with scorn,
Had thrown from Seat of Justice, Equity,
And foisted in her room base Briberie)
Being now summond to appear that day,
Inquired of Tobith then upon the way,
What cause was of this Summons general,
Who told him what to Susan had befall.
Susan, said he, what Helchi's daughter fair,
Which is her parents only child and heir,
Could she be brought her fathers house to blame,
And bring her husbands honor unto shame?
Together with her parents I was one
Led Captive by the King to Babylon:
There was no man more noble in the Land,
Than he, nor more for Countries Good did stand,
^ Kin. 25.57
We saw our Kings Sons slain before his face,
And then his eyes thrust out, for more disgrace;
Yet virtue graced to Helchi in this Land,
He in high grace soon with the King did stand,
And was the first dwelt here in his own house,
Most Valiant, Noble, Wise, Religious,
Most happy in one chaste and godly wife,
By whom he had this child, their joy and Life*
I tell thee Neighbor, I this Girl did know
Even from a child, as pure as any Snow,
Who from her mother suckd milk, as sincere,
As ever any nurse to child did bear:
For she so much this infant tendered,
As with her own Breasts she it suckeled,
"For with the milk, it is an old tradition,
"The child may suck a good or bad condition.
So soon as Parents could her tongue prepare
To speak, they neither Cost nor Labor spare,
To teach her all demeanor mannerly,
But above all, the dread of the most High:
In Scripture they her daily taught to read,
So that in time they sowed in her such seed,
As might produce in Harvest certain gain,
For all their tillage, labor, cost, and pain.
Scarce had the Sun twelve times through Virgo past,
When fair Susannas manners sweet, were cast,
By care of Parents, in so fair a mould,
That all with wonder did the maid behold:
In public Dancing she does not delight,
Faires, banquets, plays, or sittings up at night,
Nor yet in wandering Dinas conversation,
But keeps at home her fathers habitation:
Employing all her pains and careful thought,
To please and tend on them that up her brought.
Like, Storke who when her parents old have need,
Sustaines in Eld, who her in youth did feed;
Accounting it a wondrous happiness,
For gifts received to render thankfulness.
At vacant hours it was her chief delight,
To read the stories of Gods glorious might,
Where all the choicest precepts she could find,
She stored as heavenly Manna for her mind:
The Lives of choicest Dames of Jewish nation,
To her as patterns are for imitation,
Which often with needle, lest she should forget,
She in most curious Colors neately set.
Here in a table she does tell the story,
Of Egypts overthrow, and Judas glory,
Where Miriam leads her Daughters in a dance,
To sing Heavens Praises for Deliverance:
The Red Sea here his waters does divide,
Whilst Israel passes to the other side;
And here the waves begin to meet again,
To drown the proud Egyptians in the maine:
One breaks, but knows not how, his Charet wheel,
Another horse does of the staggers reele;
Here one yet without hope of Life, does swim,
Another si^^ing catches hold on him,
And never lets him go, till he him strain,
unto ^he late-^ry bottom of the Maine.
Here stands a Palm, whose height and breadth excel,
Where Debora sits judging Israel.
Close by whose side sat valiant Barac, who
Unto the war without Her, would not go.
Here weanes She Iephtes daughter in a Lome,
From Conquest welcomming her father home,
When lo, he rends his hair, and tears his beard,
That one would think the picture had been scard:
Who for the Vow he made to the most High,
Deuotes her to perpetual Chastity.
Then would She wish her Father such a cross,
So both thereby might have no greater loss:
Often sings she to her Lute diuinest Lays,
And often to make sweet Hymns her self assaies,
So that indeed to win her for his Bride,
Young Princes sought, but she them all divide.
Thus wooed of all, but yet Loves fiery dart,
Could never thaw the chaste y^e of her heart,
But like a Diamond, which nothing but
A Diamond is able for to cut,
So nothing could this peerless Lady move,
But pairelesse Ioachims most constant Love:
The iron easelier from beloved Side,
Of Loade-stone than their Loves you might divide:
"For as words cut in Diamonds, ay last,
"So Love on virtue grounded stands fast,
"When that which only does on Lust depend,
"Does like to Ammons with the Fury end.
This man was virtuous, of noble race,
Rich, beautiful in Body, and in Face;
To him her parents gladly gave consent,
And with her happy choice were well content.
Then see how Love thus lawfully begun
Betwixt this pair, a holy course does run;
A wise discreet man; chaste and modest wife,
Lived as their Bodies both had but one Life*
One will, one mouth to wish and to direct,
What one delights, the other does affect,
And he offends both, that displeases one,
Thus are they truly both one flesh and bone.
The old man farther would his Tale have told,
But now they at the Hall arrived, Behold!
The officers, and sergeants cry out, Room,
Make way, for here my Lords the Elders come.
As Judges (which the wicked Iesabel,
To get the field which Naboath would not sell) 1. King. 21, 8.

Corrupted by her Li^es proclaim a fast,
And guiltless Naboath with the chiefest placed;
Till that two wicked persons swear this thing,
We heard this man blaspheme God and the King.
Wherea^ the godly Jurors out do cry,
We find him guilty, guilty let him die;
So came th^se wicked Elders to the Hall,
Resolved to wreake their Spite and Malice all:
But that they might themselves upright pretend,
They cause the people for the Dame to send,
Who with her parents, children, and her kin,
Appeared as fair without, as clear within.
As when the course of some much honored peer,
Unto her tomb is brought upon a Beer,
Covered with velvet black down to the ground,
Her friends and kins-folkes all about her round,
Their late delights now all to Sorrow turn;
But most her parents and her children mourn,
For loss of their dear child, and careful mother,
Who never had, nor shall have such another:
That all the lookers on and standers by,
Bewail the last act of this Tragedy:
So was this Dame brought out in black array,
Unto the funeral of this sad day,
Her fair black stole low-reaching to the ground,
Under which heavenly Beauties all abound,
Followed by noble Dames of I^wish nation,
Who made for her exceeding Lamentation:
Y^a, so her parents and her children mourn,
It does all Judas hearts to pity turn;
Yet would the Elders Bowels not relent,
Th^^ugh even the rocks and stones seem to lament.
And sure none can the ashes in an vrne,
Bewail more than they all for her do mourn:
Herein the difference does only lie,
A Co^rse is dead, and Susan is to dye.
One's Soul is whole in heavenly habitation,
Hers there as yet only by contemplation.
The Elders burning in old lustful fire,
To satisfy their beastly Lusts desire,
Command the Serieants straight her face uncover,
And at the Bar the prisoner plain discover.
As when the Coffin which the Coarse contains,
With black all covered, on the Hearse remains,
The mourners seem their loud Laments to hold,
But when the Sexton does the Same unfold,
Preparing it for earths last habitation;
All send out loudest groans and Lamentation;
So all her friends this living Coarse bewail.
When from her tender eyes they pull the veil,
Her Face then under Sorrows clouds does shine,
As near as mortals may, like to divine;
Her hair like wires of burnisht gold appears,
Whereon like pearls do hang her cristall tears.
Malicious Curres! look off, your Sight is ill,
You, like the Basiliske, by eying kill:
For her but yesterday your Lives you venterd,
And into her Lords orchyard closely enterd,
But now I see the flame which you then burned,
Is all to Malice, Hate, and Fury turned.
In brief the Clerk does her Indictment read,
To which she truly does non-guiltie plead,
Yet so the Law is, that upon Denial,
Her Life must stand upon the peoples trial.
Poor wretch (says then the eldest Judge) confess,
And ask God pardon for thy wickedness:
The Evidence, alas! too plain will be,
The witnesses thee in the act did see.
"But who fears not to act Adultery,
"In Gods sight, fears not before men to lie.
Thou thought this thing in secret to have done,
But God shall make it clearer then the Sun.
Then on her guiltless head both lay their hands,
Whilst she like Iepthes virgine-daughter stands,
Looking to Heaven, expecting when priests knife,
Should for burnt-offering dispatch her life.
And thus they swear; A^ last days afternoon,
We two in shady arbor sat alone,
In at the foregate to the orchard came,
With maidens two attending her, this Dame,
Whom at the back-gate soon away she sends,
Whilst some Devotions private she pretends;
But in close shade we suddenly epsy,
A young man waiting with this Dame to lie;
And much ashamed of such most wicked fact,
Arise and take them in the very act.
The man escapes, because he was too strong,
For we alas are old, and he was young:
Out of the gate he breaks from us away,
But what he was this Dame will not bewray:
This truth before God and man we testify,
Now hear the Law against adultery.
The Clerk then reads: The man that is lying found,
With any woman-kinde in wedlock bound,
Deuteronomy. 22.22.
They both shall die, as both together lay,
So sin from Israel is done away.
Then as the chimes the clock do follow soon,
As it has told her longest tale at noone,
Not caring whether it go false or true,
So do the idle-giddy headed crew,
At hearing of the Judges witness, cry,
We find her guilty, guilty let her die.
Oh Heavens! chaste Susan die? Thou may complain,
That thou thine heart have cleansed then in vain,
In vain have washed thine hands in innocence,
And day and night endured chastisements:
But understanding well the fearful end
Of those that so maliciously intend,
How they consume and perish suddenly,
She only thus aloud to God does cry.
Searcher of Secrets: who from ever was,
And all things know before they come to pass,
Thou know they falsely these things testify,
Against me: therefore, Lo I guiltless die.
Thou know I never to such things consented,
As these men have maliciously invented.
As Bullet then which force of Powder sends,
Swiftly attaines the mark which it intends:
Even so these words sent from a wounded Sprite,
Fly to the Lord that judges all things right.
Who understanding well by this appeal,
Guiltless Susann's wrong, forthwith does seal,
Without delay, or fee, an Inhibition,
And to a young man grants a new commission.
For God (as was seen often in those days)
The Spirit of young Daniel does raise,
Who as she is led to execution, cries,
I free am from this bloody Sacrifice.
The people which all novelty desire,
Return of him his meaning to enquire,
Who in the Spirit of Truth now waxing bold,
Before them all their error does unfold.
O! Fools of Israel! who to discern
The Truth not able are, nor seek to learn:
You one of Isreal's daughters here to die,
Condemned have, but know no reason why.
Before what Judges did you her arraigne?
Who her accusers are? and who again,
Are witnesses? What, two false Elders shall,
Be Judge, accusers, witnesses, and all?
"He that his throne on Justice will erect,
"Men's causes, no^ their persons must respect.
If Elders now accusers will become,
(...) 19.^^.
They must before the Priests and Judges come:
And if they fail to prove their accusation,
They must be subject to like condemnation.
Return, return, make better inquisition,
Pu^ the accusers both out of Commission;
Ap^o^nt new Judges, who with diligence,
May tr^e the witnesses and her defense.
Return, return, in Judgment sit again,
For they against he^ falsely do complain.
(...) 41.38.
As when lost Son of Jacob did unfold,
The meaning of the Dream which Pharaoh told,
And (...) that he should Officers command,
To store up ^oode ^o (...) alive his land:
None then in Pharoe^ and his servants eyes,
Appe^red then this Hebrew child more wise;
For by his gracious words they plain descry,
(...) in him most abund^ntly:
And therefore next unto the King must stand,
And (...) by his word all Egypt land.
So when this youth does his great Prudence show,
(...) like dew of Heaven which from him flow,
(...) one mind conclude for certainetie,
(...) the Spirit rests of the most High:
And therefore as approouing of Gods choice,
(...) all elect him Elder with one voice:
(...) other from their offices suspend,
(...) their cause shall have a final end.
The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF SUSANNA.
The fickle state of seeming men of might:
Their peace of conscience that judge upright.
The people plain the Elders malice see,
In that their testimonies disagree.
Susan's absolu'd, and they condemned to die:
Of Men and Angels heavenly melody.
YOu Judges; that on earth Gods people wield,
As husbands trees and bushes in a field,
Crop which you list, and which you list let grow,
And are as Gods Vicegerents here below;
Lo here an emblem of your fickle fate,
And vain inconstancy of humane sta^e:
Who but this morning ruld both fa^re and near,
Ere noone, as prisoners, at the Bar appear;
And who even now were Judges over all,
Must by their Subjects judgment stand or fall.
Ambition base, light puff of worthless Pride,
How do thou here vain mortals thoughts deride?
Them throwing like hand-bals against the ground,
That they again the higher may rebound,
And when as thou have finished thy Sport,
Them leau'st all in the Dust in equal sort:
Oh happy Elders! could your conscience
Now plead, 1. Sa^. 12.3.
with Samuels, a just defense:
That willing does before King Saul appear,
And people all, himself of fraud to clear.
Whole Ox, whose Ass have I unjustly taken?
Whom have I wronged, says he, in Goods or Name?
Of whose hands have I taken less or more,
To blind mine eyes, and I will all restore?
Before God and's Anointed (say they) we
Acknowledge thee from all corruption free:
Thus all acquitted upright Samuel,
Who many years had judged all Israel,
But these two Elders had not ruled one year,
Ere they are both brought forth themselves to clear,
Before the Judge, and there to testify
Against themselves, their own iniquity.
Oh peerless pearl of good sound conscience!
When we are called to plead our own defense,
Especially before the Lord of might,
Before whom all our deeds must come to light,
When Angels shall aloud their trumpets blow,
And mortals all at once in flesh shall show,
For to receive their just and final Dome,
When all in person must to Judgment come.
How cheerful shall good Consciences abide?
Whilst wicked wish the rocks may fall and hide,
Them, from the vengeance of that iustest one,
Who retributes to all as they have done.
As wisest Solomon when he could find,
1. King. 2.^3.
No certain witness to resolve his mind,
When as two women did before him strive,
Whose was the dead, and whose the child alive*
Well knowing one of them the truth did know,
Devised how by themselves it plain to show:
So this young Judge in heavenly wisdom wise,
Does with the Lords and people thus advise:
Brethren, Lo here a question betwixt two,
Which none on earth, but they, do truly know.
The Dame deny's, what these accusers swear,
She Is one, they two; but both one party are,
And witnesses: therefore in laws conception,
They both are liable to just exception.
Wherefore I will, that one be put aside
Whilst the other is examined and tried:
"God that from heaven the truth of all does see,
"Will never let false witnesses agree.
When they are parted, first to Bar they call,
The elder Judge, there to be seen of all:
Who as base Shemei (of the cursing kind,
After he was by Solomon confind)
For passing 's bounds, 1. Kin, 2.4^.
then brought before the King,
His guilty conscience against him witnessing,
The wickedness he to King David did,
When from his graceless Absolon he fled)
Stood mute, amazed before the judgment seat,
And, out of hope, no pardon does entreat:
So stood the Carle amazed, shaking, mute,
Expecting God should vengeance retribute:
Yet being old and full of subtilty,
Does thus his own proceedings justify.
My heart is confident and bold within,
Since all I did was but to punish sin:
If in some circumstances, fail I shall,
To be accuser, witness, Judge and all,
My witnesse-bearing thus I justify,
There was no more but we, could testify,
And better we to bring this accusation,
Than leave unpunished such abomination*
As for condemning, let the people say,
Who were the only Judges here to day.
We never urged the rigor of the law,
We only testifide what we both saw:
Let not her tears or beauty thee so blind,
As she a patron for her sin may find:
Besides the proof, which we by oaths have shown;
It Is plain, we found her naked all alone.
Alone (...) Daniel, ^^nc^ed ^a^e that have
Lived wi^kedly, so long and ^o unchaste,
Th'ungracious deeds thou actedst in Gods sight,
Shall here before us all be brought to light.
False iu^gements thou have given, and sore oppressed
The innocent, the guilty have releast.
Yet (...) the Lord, The innocent and righteous,
(...) nor justify th'unrighteous:
We have well marked the wicked accusation,
Thou bringst against this daughter of our nation,
If, as thou swear'st, thou saw the adultery,
Tell now under what tree they then did lie.
A Mulbery tree, the Elder then replyde:
Well, then said Daniel, now thou have lyde
Against thy self; the Angel of the Lord,
Stands ready to divide thee with a sword,
Against thine own life thou have testifide;
Bring forth the other, put this wretch aside.
Simile.
As thee^e which fears, besides his guilty breast,
That Is fellow has before the theft confessed,
Trembles and quakes at his examination,
And seeks to escape by nice equivocation,
At last resolving still to hold his tale,
Does utter words that tend to's final bale:
Even so this second fears, his will not hold
Agreement with the tale his fellow told;
Or that his brother might the truth confess,
In hope of pardon for his wickedness:
But in the end, it is his determination,
No whit to alter his first accusation,
And therefore with a feigned innocence,
He boldly speaks thus in his own defense.
Brethren, since you to me this office gave,
I know I did so well my self behave,
As guiltless now I need not be afraid,
To beg unto mine innocence your aid.
That you from me my dignity have rent,
And brought me to the Bar, I am content:
My shoulde^s of a burden is well lighted,
For never I in Sovereignty delighted*
That which mine heart with grief does now aff^ct,
Is, that you me of Falsity suspect:
That you should think I durst swear to a Lie,
And not expect ^read lightning suddenly.
Young man, God send thee honor in thy place,
Thy greatness build not yet on our disgrace:
What us befalls may come to thee as soon,
We judged in the morning, thou at noone:
Therefore beware, oh man, thou iudgest right,
Thou know not who may judge thy self ere ^igh^
What profit is it to me in this to lie,
And to condemn my true friends wife to dye*
Good Ioachims, who were she chaste as fair,
They were a holy, noble, pearelesse pair.
But that whereof we now accuse this Dame,
I swear is true; who dares deny the same?
Then Daniel said, Oh thou of Canaans seed,
And not of Judas, Beauty has indeed
Deceived thee, and lust does even thy heart
And all the powers of thy soul pervert:
Thus you with Isreal's daughters dealt before,
And they for fear have played with you the whore;
But Judas daughter, Ioachims chaste b^ide,
Could never such foul wickedness abide.
But they that will have one condemned to dye,
Ought of the time and place to testify:
Then tell me truly, underneath what tree
Them companing together thou did see,
Under a Pomegranate, he then reply's,
Behold now all, how this vile villain lies,
Says then the Judge; the Angel with a sword,
Shall thee divide, of God and man abhord.
Had she in orchyard to your lust consented,
This crime against her had not been invented.
Well knew I this before by revelation,
But would make it plain by their examination,
Before! unto judgment did proceed.
The sentence.
Wherefore ^, In Gods name, this sentence read.
I Daniel, a judge by your commission,
Having with diligence made inquisition,
In cause pretended of Adultery,
Between this Dame, and these two Elders by,
And witnesses in diffrent tales so found,
That thereby one the other does confound,
First do absolve from guilt this chastest Dame,
Restoring her to her good name and fame.
Deu. 19.16
Next I pronounce, that who so up shall rise,
And against his brother falsely testifi's,
Ought justly to receive that punishment,
Which wickedly he to his brother meant;
Do to him as he would have done, I say,
So ill from Israel is done away.
And so shall other hear of it and fear,
And henceforth no false testimony bear,
Let not your eyes of them take least compassion,
Respect not greatness, person, age or nation:
A hand for hand, for tooth tooth, eye for eye,
A foot for foot, for murder let them dye.
Never did any people say Amen,
More gladly to the preachers prayer, when
He for the safety of our King does pray,
And their confusion, that would him betray,
Than all the multitude their shoutings raise,
To bliss his justice and their maker praise.
God that from fraud delivers the just,
And from the wicked, all that in him trust.
And as when Faux that arcenall full fraught Gunpowder treason.

With treason, mischief, and rebellious thought,
(Plotting the death and utter desolation,
Of King, Priests, Nobles, and of all our nation,
Because like Susan here we did deny, Reu.

To leave our Lord, and to accompany,
With Iezabel in foul abomination,
With whom earths Princes commit fornication,)
Condemned was by Judges iustest dome,
Lo all the people do together come,
With joyful hearts, unto his execution,
Where he receives iustest retribution:
Even so when Daniel for false-witnesse-bearing,
The Elders had convict in peoples hearing,
Upon them the whole multitude does run,
And did to them even as they would have done,
To chastest Dame; so sin was done away,
And her blood innocent was saved that day.
My history is done, but not my song,
For they that all this while have held their tongue,
Up now their voices unto heaven raise,
And for this Dames deliverance sing praise:
First old Helchias spirit does ^euiue,
As Jacobs hearing Joseph was aliu^,
And like to upright godly Simeon old
When he his Savior in his arms does hold,
Sings nunc Dimittis, Oh now let me dye:
In Susan*s found not least dishonesty.
And next his wife like Miriam does sing,
The noble praises of her heavenly King.
When as she saw her enemies confounded,
And all the Egyptians in the red sea drowned.
Oh Ioachim, who can the joy descry!
That thou conceiud'st for her delivery?
He only that has skill to touch the st^ing,
Of David's Harp, and Psalms like his to sing,
Can here describe the heavenly melody,
Was made on earth by this whole company.
Father and mother for their daughter sung,
The children which about their mother hung,
Like f^ir^st clusters of the f^uitfull vine,
S^ng all with angelique, sweet voice divine.
^oe all her kindred, and her servants sing,
And even Dame Echo seemed from heaven to ring;
But it was not Echo, but sweet Angels voice,
That for this Dames deliu'rance did rejoice.
And now my Muse, the Reader only stays,
To sing one ditty of this stories praise.
Ha^^e all chaste Ladies, all just Judges hear,
Both old and young unto my words give ear,
Let them like dew upon your hearts distill,
And silver drops which heavens on meadows spill.
Ioachim, Susan, Hel^hi with me sing
The glorious bounty of the righteous king:
And babes who scarce have learnd to tune your voice,
Yea: sucklings in his noble strength rejoice.
He, to whom erst you lifted up your eyes,
Now hears your groans, and listens to your cries,
And you delivers from Bears cruel paws,
The Lions throat, and Crocodiles foul jaws.
He in all ages past has saved the just,
And those that put in him their hope and trust;
But never plainer have we heard or read,
Than here, his providence discovered.
Susanna chaste to justice I compare,
The Elders two corrupted Judges are,
Who seek for pleasure, favor, gain, ambition,
Her to corrupt, but to their own perdition.
Judges corrupt, when you this story hear,
At Gods just vengeance tremble, quake and fear;
And judging others for the like offense,
Condemn your own soul, guilty conscience.
And think not when you find your selves unjust,
Such punishment is only due for lust.
Who for ambition, favor, fear or gain,
Do judge unjustly, merit equal pain.
You that project to prove by witnesses,
Things false, for gain, or for malciousnesse;
Lo here your Fate in this example see,
Your testimonies never shall agree.
Old letchers that in beastly lust delight,
See here your deeds of darkness brought to light;
Who does from heaven your secret sins behold,
Will one day to your shame, them all unfold.
Judges and people diligently try
The truth, before you one condemn to dye;
For some for malice, some will swear for gain,
Of envy and ambition some will strain.
When as you see th'accusers violent,
And offer oath to prove their own intent,
Though it may seem them little to concern,
Yet wa^ily, before you judge, discern.
Chaste Dames! who rather had endure the shame,
Th^n pr^u^^y your consciences to blame,
Wait on the Lord, and in his laws delight,
So he will bring all wickedness to light.
Whilst Susan-like your innocence shall shine,
And be commended to succeeding time.
Henceforth let all the Ladies that live chaste,
Be with the title of Susannas graced:
So far as Isaacks seed the Scepter swayes,
And Phoebus does divide the nights from days,
So far shall honored be chaste Susans name,
And all chaste Dames shall glory in the same.
And when as witnesses do disagree,
Judges shall praise her honored chastity:
And Daniels prudent diligence admire,
And by this pattern, out the truth enquire*
In this she suffers like that holy One,
Who though he never ill had thought or done*
Mark. 14.58, 59.
Yet was accusd for cursed Blaspheme,
But never could the witnesses agree.
Lo wicked Pilate like these Elders stands,
Was^ing before just judge, his guilty hands,
Yet nothing but hells lake shall wash from thence,
That guiltless blood, the blood of innocence.
In thee two wicked Judges I do see,
The devil and the world accusing me,
Whose malice surely had me overcome,
Had not the Prophet to my rescue come.
I see in Daniel, sitting on the throne,
A true resemblance of that holy One,
Who though he all things past as present knows,
By Spirit which the truth to Daniel shows,
Yet by discussing will make all things clear,
That men and Angels which his Dome do hear,
May second it with final approbation,
The Iusts reward, the wickeds condemnation.
Go on, brave Daniel, in doing right,
And thou shall favor find in Princes sight,
Genesis 41.40.
Cyrus succeedes in Persian Monarchy,
Who thee shall raise to high Authority,
And like wise Joseph place thee next his throne,
He Egypt, thou shall Persia rule alone.
IN all thy Poems thou do wondrous well,
But thy Susanna does them all excel.
R. C.

FINIS.

