Injunctions for the clerge. Exhibit Die mensis Anno dn^i. M. CCCCC. xxxviii.
In the name of God Amen.
By the authorite and commission of the most excellent Prince Henry by the
grace of god king of Engeland, and of France defensor of the faith, lord of
Ireland, and in earth supreme heed under christ of the church of England. I
Thomas lord Crumwell, lord priui sease, vicegerent unto the kings said
hyghnes, for all his jurisdiction ecclesiastical within this realm, do for
the auau^cement of the true honor of almighty god, increase of virtue, and
discharge of the kings majesty, give and exhybite unto you (...) these
Injunctions following to be kept / observed and fulfilled upon the pains
hereafter declared.

First that ye shall truly observe and keep (...) and singular the kings
hyghnes injunctions, given unto you heretofore in my name by his graces
auctorite, not only upon the pains therein expressyd, but also in your defaulte
now after this second monitio^ continued, upon further punishment to be
straytly extended toward you by the kings hyghnes arbitreme^t / or his
vicegerent before said.

Item that ye shall provide on thisside the feast of (...) next coming, one
book of the hole bible of the largyest volume in English and the same set up
in sum convenient place within the said church that ye have cure of, where as
your parishoners may most co^modiously resort to the same and read it. The
charge of which book shall be ratably borne between you the person and the
parishoners a fore said: that is to say, the one half by you, and the other half by
them.

Item that you shall discorage no man privily or apertly from the reading, or
herynge of the said bible / but shall expressly provoke, ^ere, and exhort
every person to read the same, as that which is the very lively word of god,
that every christen person is bound to enbrace, believe, and follow / if they
look to be saved / admonysshynge them nevertheless to avoid all contention
and altercation therein, but to use an honest sobriety in thinquisition of the
true sense of the same, and to refer thexplication of obscure places to men
of higher judgment in scripture.

Item that ye shall every sunday and holydaye through the year openly and
plainly recite to your parishoners twyse or thryse to gyther, or oftener if
need require, one particle or sentence of the Pater noster or creed in
English, to the intent they may learn the same by heart. And so from day to day
to give them one like lesson or sentence of the same, till they have learned the
hole Pater nofter and Creed in English by rote. And as they be taught every
sentence of the same by rote, ye shall expound and declare the understanding
of the same unto them, exhorting all parents and householders, to teach
their children and servants the same, as they are bound in conscience to do.
And that done ye shall declare unto them the.x. commandments one by one
every sunday and holiday till they be likewise perfect in ye same.

Item that ye shall in confessions every Lent examyn every person that comes
to confession to you, whither they can recite tharticles of our faith, and the
Pater noster in English, and here the^ say the same particularly, wherein if
they be not perfect ye shall declare to the same that every christen person
ought to know them before they should receive the blessed sacrament of
thaulter, and monyshe them to learn the same more perfitely by the next year
folowinge / or else, like as they ought not to presume to come to gods boorde
without perfect knowledge of the same, and if they do, it is to the great peril
of their souls: So ye shall declare unto them that ye look for other
Injunctions from the kings highness by that time to stay and repel all such
from gods boorde as shall be found ignorant in the premises / whereof ye do
thus admonyshe them, to the intent they should both eschew the peril of their
souls, and also the worldly rebuke that they might incur hereafter by the
same.

Item that ye shall make or cause to be made in the said church and every
other cure ye have, one sermon every quarter of a year at the least, wherein ye
shall purely, and syncerely declare the very gospel of christ, and in the same
exhort your herers to the works of charity, mercy and faith, specially
prescribed, and commanded in scripture, and not to repose there trust or
affiaunce in any other works devised by men's phanthasyes besides scripture, as
in wanderyng to pilgrimage, offering of money, candelles or tapers to Images or
relyques, or kyssing or lyckyng the same, saying over a nombre of beads, not
understood ne minded on, or in such like supersticion, for the doing whereof,
ye not only have no promise of reward in scripture, but contrary wise great
threats and maledictions of god, as things tendyng to ydolatrye and
superstition, which of all other offenses god almyghtye does most detest and
abhor, for that the same diminysheth most his honor and glory.

Item that such Images as ye know in any of your cures to be so abused with
pilgrimages or offeringes of any thing made thereunto, ye shall for auoydyng of
that most detestable offense of Idolatry, furthwyth take down and deley, and
shall suffer from hensforthe no candels, tapers or Images of war to be set
before any Image or picture, but only the light that comenlye gothe acrosse the
church, by the roode lofte, the light before the sacrament of thaulter, and the
light about the sepulcher, which for thadourning of the church and divine
service ye shall suffer to remayn still admonisshyng your parishoners, that
Images serve for no other purpose, but as to be books of unlearned men, that can
no letters, whereby they might be otherwise admonysshed of the lives and
conversation of the^ that the said Images do represent, which Images if they
abuse for any other intent than for such reme^braunces / they committee
Idolatrye in the same to the great danger of their souls. And therefore the
kings highness graciously tendering the weal of his subiectis souls has in
part already and more will hereafter travail for the abolisshinge of such
Images, as might be occasyon of so great an offense to god, and so great
danger to the souls of his loving subjects.

Ite^ that in all such benefices or cures as ye have, where upon ye be not your
self resident, ye shall appoint such curates in your stead / as both can by
there habilite, and will also promptely execute these Injunctions, and do there
duty otherwise that ye are bound to do in every behalf accordingly, and may
profit there cure, no less with good exemple of living, than with declaracion
of the word of god, or else their lack and defaulte shall be imputed unto you,
who shall straytly answer for the same, if they do otherwise.

Ite^ that ye shall admytte no man to preach within any of your benefices or
cures, but such as shall appear unto you to be sufficientlye licenced thereto by
the kings hyghnes or his grace authoryte, by tharchbisshop of Cantorb. or ye
bishop of this dioces And such as shall be so licenced ye shall gladly receive
to declare the word of god without any resistance or contradiction.

Ite^ if you have heretofore declared to your parishoners any thige to
thextollig or setting forth of pylgremages, relics, or Images or any such
superstition, ye shall now openly before the same recante and reprove the same,
showing them (as the truth is) that ye did the same upon no ground of
scripture, but as one being led and seduced by a common error and abuse
crepte into the church through the sufferau^ce and avarice of such as felt
profytte by the same.

Ite^ if you do or shall know any man within your parysh, or else where yr is a
letter of the word of god to be read in Englysh, or (...) preached, or of
thexecutio^ of these injunctions, or a fautor of the bishop of Romes pretensed
power, now by the laws of this realm (...).


