ARTICLES To be enquired of, within the Archdeaconry of Essexx, by the
Churchwardens and Swornemen in every Parish.

And presentment to be made thereof to the Archdeacon.

With partciular Answers unto every Article.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by EDW: ALLDE. 1615.

The tenor of the Oath ministered to the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YE shall swear, that all affections, favor, hatred, hope of reward, or
gain, or fear of displeasure or malice set aside, you shall upon due
consideration of the Atticles given you in charge present all and every such
person, of, or within your Parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or
made any default mentioned in any of these Articles, or which are vehemently
suspected, or otherwise defamed of any such offense, fault or default, wherein
you shall deal uprightly and according to equity: neither of malice
presenting any contrary to Truth, nor of corrupt affection sparing to present
any, and so conceal the Truth, having in this action God before your eyes,
with an earnest zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice: So help you
God and his faithful promises in Christ Jesus.

Articles to be enquired of within the Archdeaconarie of Essex, for this
present year of our Lord God. 1615.
Articles concerning the Church.
WHether have you in your several Churches and Chappells the Book of
Constitutions or Canons Ecclesiastical, ready to be read by your Minister,
according to his Majesty's pleasure, published by his highness authority under
the great Seal of England.

2 Whether is there in your Church or Chapel, one parchment register Book,
provided for Christnings, Marriages, and Burialls: and whether is the same
duly and exactly kept, according to the Constitutions in that case provided,
and a transcript thereof brought in yearly within one month after Easter,
into my Lord Bishops principal Registers office: and whether does your
Minister upon every Sunday read the names of all such as have been married,
christened, or buried the week before?

3 Whether have you provided the Book of Common Prayer lately commanded by
his Majesty's authority only to be used, and the Book of Homilies, and two
Psalters: and whether have you in your Church or Chapel a Font of stone, set
up in the ancient usual place: a convenient and decent Communion table
standing upon a frame, with a Carpet of silk, or some other decent stuff: and
a fair Linen cloth to lay thereon at the Communion time: and whether is the
same then placed in such convenient sort within the Chancell or Church, as that
the Minister may be best heard in his Prayer and administration, and that the
greater number may communicate: and whether are the ten Commandments set up
on the East end of your Church or Chapel, where the people may best see and
read them, and other sentences of holy Scriptures written on the walls
likewise for the same purpose?

4 Whether have you a convenient seat for the Minister to read service in,
together with a comely Pulpit set up in a convenient place, with a decent cloth
or Cushion for the same: a comely large Surples, a fair Communion Cup of
Silver, and a cover agreeable for the same, with all other things and ornaments
necessary for the celebration of divine Service, and administration of the
Sacraments, and a strong chest for the alms of the poor, with three locks
and keys, and another chest for the keeping of the ornaments of the Church,
and Register Book.

5 How many Bells are there at this present, hanging in the Belfree of your
parish Church, and how many have there been heretofore: whether any of your
said Bells have been taken down and sold, or made away: and what other Church
goods are now wanting in your Church.

6 Whether are your Church or Chappells with the Chancells thereof, and your
Parsonage or Vicarage house, and all other housing thereto belonging, in good
reparations, and decently and comely kept, as well within as without: the seats
well maintained, your Churchyards well fenced, and kept without abuse,
according to the 85. Canon: if not, then through whose default, and what
defects are? All these things in these Articles to be prepared, according to
the Canons under the title appertaining to Churches.

Articles concerning the Clergy.
Whether has your Minister read the Constitutions set forth by his Majesty,
once every year, upon some Sundays or Holidayes, in the afternoon, before
divine service: according as by the Canons he i^ bound?

2 Whether does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King James,
and for the Queens Majesty, Prince Charles, Frederick Count Palatine of the
Rheine, with the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, giving unto his highness such style
and title of Supreme Governor of all causes, and over a^l persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as temporal, as by law are due unto him exhorting their
Parishioners to yealde him obedience according to the same and also in their
said Sermons, do pray for all Archbishops, Bishops, a^^ other Ecclesiastical
persons, according to the 55. Canon.

3 Whether is the prescript form of divine service used by your Minister upon
Sundays, Holidays, Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, according to t^^ book of
Common prayer. And whether does your Minister duly observe all t^^ orders,
rites, and ceremonies prescribed in the said book of Common Praye^ as well in
reading public prayers, the Letany, as also in administering t^^ Sacraments in
such manner and form, wearing the Surples, as by the boo^ of Common Prayer by
law now established is enjoined.

4 Whether does your Minister administer the holy Communion often, and at such
times as that every Parishioner may receive the sam^ at the least thrice every
year, whereof one at Easter, as by the book of Common Prayer is appointed.
And whether does your Minister receive the same himself on every day that he
administreth it to others, kneeling at the same, and administreth it to none
but to such as do kneel at the receiving thereof, and use the words of the
Institution according to the Book, at every time that the bread and wine is
received, in such manner and form as by the prouiso of the 21. Canon is
directed, or wherein is he ^aulty, and whether is warning given by him before
hand for the Commuion, as the 22. Canon requires.

5 Whether has your Minister admitted any notorious offenders, or
Schismatickes to the Communion: contrary to the 26. and 27. Constitutions,
without satisfaction by due course of law before enjoined them; or rejected any
from the Communion, who were not by public presentment, or other open
scandal, infamous, and detected of some notorious crime by common fame
published in the Parish.

6 Whether the Minister, together with the Church wardens and Quest-men, do
take diligent heed and care, that not only all and every of your own
Parishioners do receive thrice in every year, as aforesaid: but also that no
strangers of any other Parish do forsake their own Minister and Parish, to
receive with you, contrary to the 28. Canon.

7 Whether does your Minister use to sign the Children with the sign of the
Cross when they are baptized, according to the book of Common Prayer, and the
30. Canon: and whether he has deferred, or wilfully refused to baptize any
infant in his Parish being in danger, having been duly informed of the
weakness thereof, and whether the child has died by his default without
baptism, contrary to the 68. and 69. Canons.

8 Whether is your Minister continually resident with you upon his benefice: or
for how long time has he been absent, and where is he resident for the most
part, and what other benefice has he.

9 Whether does your Minister. being a Preacher, preach usually according to
the constitutions, either in his own cure with you once every sunday or else
in some other Church or Chapel near adjoining, where no Preacher is,
according to the 45. Canon, or how has he been negligent in that behalf.

10 Whether is your Minister a Preacher allowed: if yea, then by whom: if no,
whether does he procure Sermons to be preached among you once in every month
at the least, by such as are lawfully licensed, according to the 46. Canon, or
does contribute toward a licensed Preacher, if his living will bear it.

11 Whether has your Minister another benefice: and whether does he supply his
absence by a Curate, that is sufficiently licensed to preach in that cure of
his, whereon he himself is not resident: or otherwise in case he do not find
a preaching Minister there, by reason of the smalnesse thereof, whether does he
preach at both his benefices usually himself, according to the 47. Canon?

12 Whether is your Preacher or Curate licensed to preach or serve the Cure, by
the Bishop of this Dioces, or by any other, and by whom: whether does your
Minister or Curate serve more cures then one, contrary to the 48. Canon. If
yea, then what other cure does he also serve?

13 If your Minister be not licensed to preach as aforesaid, whether does he
read Homilies, or rather take upon him to expound the Scriptures either in his
own cure or elsewhere, contrary to the 49. Canon: If yea, then you are to
present him, and specify the place where he so has preached.

14 Whether has any person been admitted to preach within your Church or
Chapel, but such as you have well known to be sufficiently licensed (...)
whom have you so admitted? you shall present their names, and how often have
any such been admitted to preach, and by whose procurement: and whether have
you caused every strange Preacher, licensed or not licensed, to subscribe his
name, together with the day when he preached, according to the 50. and 51.
Canons: and if he were licensed, then by whom he was licensed* And whether have
they or any other preached in your Church not being soberly and decently
apparrelled according to the 47. Canon.

15 Whether does your Lecturer and Preacher read divine Service, and
administer the Sacraments in his own person twice every year, observing all
the Ceremonies in the book of Common Prayer established according to the 56.
Canon.

16 Whether does your Minister wear the Surples whilst he is saying the
public prayers, and administering the Sacraments: And if he be any Graduate,
whether then does he also wear upon his Surples, during the times aforesaid,
such a hood, as by the orders of his University is agreeable to his degree,
according to the 58. Canon.

17 Whether does your Minister every Sunday and Holyday, before Evening Prayer,
for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth, and ignorant
persons of his Parish, in the ten Commandments the Articles of belief, and
the Lords Prayer, as also in the Catechism last set forth in the book of
Common prayer, whereby the children of the Parish may be prepared for
confirmation, according to the 90. Canon.

18 Whether has your Minister without license from the Archbishop, the Bishop
of the Diocese, or his Chancellor, or without License under the seal of office
of the Archdeacon or his Official, solemnized marriage betwixt any parties, the
Banes not being three several Sundays or Holly-dayes first ^ublished in time
of divine service, in the several Churches or Chapels of ^^eir several
abode, according to the book of common Prayer, And the 62. Canon: and that
also betwixt the hours of eight and twelve in the fore^^one, contrary to the
102. Canon. And whether has your minister in the ^^mes prohibited married, any
without such License, notwithstanding the ^^^es have been asked, as you do
know, believe, or have heard say.

19 Whether has your Minister, since the last Canons published, so^^^^ized any
marryage betwixt any persons, being under the age of 21. ^^ares, although the
Banes be thrice asked, before such time as the parents ^^ue made known unto
him their consent thereunto, contrary to the 99. and ^00. Canons and whether
has he married any of another Diocese, and ^ho are they, and by what
authority, and when.

20 Whether does your Minister upon Sundays at morning prayer, ^^clare unto
the Parishioners what holy days and fasting days are ap^ointed to be kept the
week following, according to the 64. Canon, where^^ they may be put in mind
to prepare themselves accordingly, and to re^aire to the Church to public
prayer, as by law they are bound.

21 Whether does your Minister in the Rogation days, use the peram^ulation of
the circuit of the parish appointed by law, and in the same per^mbulation, move
the people to give thanks to God for his benefits using such Psalms, Prayers,
Homilies, as are to that end set forth.

22 Whether does any man (being neither Minister nor Deacon) read
Common Prayer openly in your Church or Chapel, or administer the Sacrament of
Baptism, or solemnize Matrimony, or take upon him to practice any other
ministerial duty in the Church, that is prescribed to be executed
particularly by such, as are either Ministers, or Deacons, and what is his name
that so does.

23 Whether does your Minister every six months denounce in his parish, all
such of his parish, as do persevere in the sentence of excommunication, not
seeking to be absolved: and whether has he admitted any person excommunicate,
into the Church, without a Certificate of his absolution from the Ordinary or
other competent Judge, under his seal, according to the Canons.

24 Whether does your Minister being a Preacher, endeavor and labor diligently
with mildenes and temperance to confer with, and thereby to reclaim the
Popish Recusants in his parish from their errors, if there be any such there
being: and whether is he painful in visitation of the sick, according to the
book of Common Prayer, and the Canons in that case provided.

25 Whether is your Parson, Vicar, Lecturer, or Curate too much frequent or
over conversant with, or a favorer of Recusants, whereby he may be suspected
not to be sincere in Religion.

26 Whether has your Minister, or any other, taking upon him the place of a
Minister, preached, baptized children (unless in case of necessity)
solemnized marriage, churched any woman, or ministered the holy Communion in any
private house or houses: if yea, then where, whom, and how often has he so
offended in any of the premises.

27 Whether has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private
fasts or prophesies, not approved and established by law or public
authority: or has he attempted upon any pretense either of possession, by
fasting and prayer to cast out devils, contrary unto the 72. Canon.

28 Whether has your Minister, or any other person or persons within your
Parish used to meet in any private house or other place, and to hold private
conuenticles, contrary to the 73. Canon: if yea, then you shall present them
all and every one of them.

29 Whether does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his
apparel, as by the 74. constitution is enjoined him, as well at home as wh^^
he goes abroad.

30 Whether do you know in your Parish, any that having heretofore taken upon
him or them, the order of Priesthood or of a Deacon, has sin^^ relinquished
the same, and betaken himself to the course of his life, a Law man, neglecting
his vocation: if yea, then you shall present his name an^ the place of his
abode.

31 Whether is your Minister noted or defamed to have obtained h^^ Benefice by
Symony, or reputed to be an incontinent person, or does keep an^ man or woman
in his house, that are suspected either to be of evil religion, o^ bad life,
himself to be a common drunkard, or to be a common hunter of T^uernes,
Alehouses, or other suspected places, a common gamester or player at dice, or
other unlawful games, a common swearer, or notorious person^ or faulty in any
other crime punishable by Ecclesiastical censures, whereby he is offensive and
scandalous to his function or ministry.

32 Whether does your Minister use the form of thanksgiving to women after
their childbirth, and whether has he admitted any thereunto that was begotten
with child in adultery or fornication, without license of his Ordinary, and
whether have any married wives refused to come to Church* according to the
book of Common Prayer, to give God thanks after childebirth: if any be faulty
herein, you shall present their names.

33 Whether does your Minister baptize any children in any Basin, or other
vessels, then in the ordinary Font being placed in the Church, according to
the 81. Canon or does use to put any basin into it.

34 Whether in the time of divine Service, and of ever part thereof, all due
reverence is used: no man then covering his head, all manner of persons
kneeling when Prayers are read, and standing up at the saying of the Belief,
according to the order prescribed.

Articles concerning Schoolemasters.
Whether the Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters within your Parish, openly or
privately, in any Noble or Gentleman's house, or in any other place, be of good
and sincere Religion, life and conversation, and be diligent in the teaching
and bringing up of youth: and whether they have been examined, allowed and
licensed for Schoolmasters, by the Ordinary in that behalf: and how many
several School masters have you, and what be their names.

2 Whether your Schoolmasters, or Schoolmasters do themselves receive the
holy Communion as often as they ought to do: and whether do all their
Scholars, which be of age sufficient, and of capacity, by instruction, to
receive the Lords Supper, come to the Communion either in your Church, or where
their Parents dwell, once every year, and be diligent to hear Common Prayer.

3 Whether the Schoolmasters, or School masters, either private or public,
do teach their Scholars the Catechism authorized by public authority, at
the least once every week, and do instruct and examine them in the same, or
do teach any other Catechism, and what Catechism it is that they do teach.

4 Whether your School master, or Schoolmasters, or any of them be known or
suspected to read unto their Scholars privately, any unlawful Books, or
privately to instruct them in their young years, either in Popery,
supersition, disobedience, or contempt to his Majesty, and his Laws
Ecclesiastical by public authority allowed.

5 What recusant Papists are there in your Parish, and whether do they, or any
of them keep any Schoolmasters in their house, which comes not to Church to
hear Divine Service, and receive the Communion: what is his name, and how long
has he taught.

6 Whether the Schoolmasters, or Schoolmasters within your Parish, do teach
his or their Scholars any other Grammar, then that which is ^alled the Kings
Grammar, set forth by the authority of King Henry the eight, teaching the
prescript form thereof, whereby the Scholars may perfectly understand their
Grammar rules and constructions.

Articles concerning Parishioners, Ecclesiastical Officers and others of the
Laytie.
1 Whether is there any within your Parish, that has, or does impugn the
Kings Majesty's supremacy and authority in causes Ecclesiastical, or do any
way, or in any part impeach the same, being restored to the Crown by the laws
of this Realm established on that behalf.

2 Whether is there any in your parish that denies the Church of England by
law established under the Kings most excellent Majesty to be a true and
Apostolical Church, teaching and maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles.

3 Whether is there any in your Parish, that does impugn any of the Articles
of Religion agreed upon in An. 1562. and established in the Church of England.

4 Whether is there any in your Parish that do impugn or speak against the
rites and ceremonies established in the Church of England, or the lawful use
of them: you shall present their names.

5 Whether are there any in your Parish that do impugn the government of the
Church of England, under the Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear office in the same,
affirming that he same is Antichristian, or repugnant to the word of God.

6 Whether is there any in your parish that impugn the form of consecration
and ordayning of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, affirming that the
same is repugnant to the word of God, or that they, who are so ordered in the
same form, are not lawfully made.

7 Whether is there any in your parish that does hold or frequent any
conuenticles, or private meetings, and there do confer or agree upon any
private orders, other then such as are by the Canons set forth by public
authority, to be by them or any others in Church government observed.

8 Whether any persons have luched or tipled in Tauerns or Alehouses on
Sundaies, or other Holy Days, or used his, or their manual craft, trade, or
mystery, or any bodylie labor, or keept their shops open upon the said
days, or any of them, especially in the time of divine service?

9 Whether are there any in your parish that do, or have profaned (sin^e his
Majesty's last general pardon) the Lords day, called Sunday, or other
Holy Day, contrary to the orders of the Church of England, prescribed in that
behalf?

10 Whether has any person in your parish quarrelled, stricken, or used any
violence unto, or with your Minister, or any other in the Church or Church
yard, or used himself disorderly in the Church, by filthy and profane talk,
or any other rude and immodest behavior?

11 Whether is that due reverence and humble submission, used within your
Church or Chapel in the time of divine Service, as by the eighteenth
Constitution is prescribed? and whether each one in the Church or Chapel, do
apply and order himself there in the time of divine Service, as by the latter
part of the same Constitutions is most commendably enjoined?

12 Whether the Churchwardens and Quest-men do every Sunday and Holy Day
diligently search who absenteth himself, or her self from Church? and whether
do they suffer any to abide in the Church porch, or Churchyard, in the time
of Common prayer or Sermon?

13 Whether the Churchwardens do provide against every Communion, with the
advice of the Minister, a sufficient quantite of fine white bread, and of good
and wholesome wine, for the number of the Communicants that shall receive, and
that to be brought in a clean and sweet standing Pot of Pewter, or other pure
Mottall?

14 Whether have any in your parish been God fathers or Godmothers to their
own children? Or whether your Minister, or any Godfathers of Godmothers have
used, or do use any other form, answer, or speech in Baptism, then is in
the Book of Common prayer appointed? Or whether any which have not
Communicated, be admitted to be Godfathers, or God mothers, contrary to the
29. Canon?

15 Whether is there any in your parish that do refuse to have their children
baptized, or themselves to recciue the Communion at the hands of your Minister,
because he is no Preacher? you shall present their names. And if your Minister,
sithence the publishing of the said Book of Canons, have received any such
persons (being not of his own Cure) to the Communion, or baptized any of their
children, you shall likewise present him.

16 Whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses, cause their
Children, Servants and Apprentises, to come to the Catechism upon the Sundays
and Holy Days before evening prayer, to hear and to be instructed and taught
therein? and those that do not their duties herein, you shall present their
names.

17 Whether have you, or your Predecessors Churchwardens there suffered, since
the last pardon, any Plays, Feasts, Banquets, Churchales, Drinkings, or any
other profane vsages to be kept in your Church. Chapels, or Church, yard, or
Bells to be rung superstitiously upon Holy Days, or Eues, abrogated by the
Book of Common Prayer, contrary to the 68. Canon?

18 How many Inhabitants within your Parish, Men, or Women, above the age of
sixteen years, do refuse to frequent divine service, established by public
authority of this Realm, or to receive the holy Communion, or are negligent
therein? what be their names, and of what degree, state, or trade of life are
they? you are to present them all of each sort.

19 Whether do any of the Inhabitants within your said Parish entertain
within their house any soiourners, lodgers, or any common resorters and guests,
who refuse to frequent divine Service, or receive the holy Communion, as
aforesaid? what be their names, and of what quality or condition are they?

20 Whether any of the said Popish Recusants be of insolent behavior, not
without public offense, or do boldly busy themselves, in seducing, or
withdrawing others, either abroad or in their own families, by instructing
their children in Popish religion, or by refusing to entertain any, especially
in place of greatest service or trust, but such as concur with them in opinion
of Religion: and what be their names that so do?

21 How long the said Popish Recusants have obstinately abstained either from
divine Service, or from the Communion, as is before said, whether of any long
time, or only since his Majesty's reign, and how long?

22 What persons aforesaid within your Parish, either for the offense
aforesaid, or for any other contumacie or crime, do remain excommunicated?
what be their names? and for what cause? and how long have they so stood
excommunicated?

23 Whether were you the Church wardens and Quest-men chosen by the consent of
the Minister and Parishioners, in Easter week, according unto the 89. and 90.
Canon. And whether have the Churchwardens before you given up a just account
for their time, and delivered to you their successors, whatsoever money or
other thing of right belonging to the Church, which was in their hands:
according to the 89. Canon.

24 Whether do all persons above the age of sixeteene yoores, usually cesort
to hear divine Service upon Sundaies and Holy Days approved? and whether
has each one of your Parishioners (being above the age of sixteen years, as
aforesaid) received the holy Communion thrice this last year, chiefly once at
Easter, in your Parish Church kneeling? If no, then you shall present their
name which have not so done.

25 Whether have you a fit Parish Clarke, aged twenty years at the least, of
honest conversation, and sufficient for reading and writing? and whether he be
paid his wages without fraud, according to the most ancient custom of your
Parish? if not, then by whom is he so defrauded and denied? and whether he be
chosen by the Parson or Vicar, or by whom, according to the 91. Canon?

26 Whether have any in your Parish been married within the prohibited degrees
for bidden by the law, and expressed in a ^ertain^ Table published by authority
in Anno. 1563. If yea, then you shall present their names? and whether have you
the said Table publicly set up in your Church, and fastened to some convenient
place?

27 Whether does any heretofore divorced, or married and not divorced, keep
company at bed and board as man and wife, with any other man or woman, then
with the person that he or she was married unto? and what be their names? If
the parties now so living together, say that they be married, when and where
were they married? and how long have they so continued together?

28 Whether have you in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame and
report, any which have committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest, or any
Bawdes, harborers, or receivers of such persons, or publicly suspected
thereof, which have not been publicly punished to your knowledge? if yea,
then with whom? And whether are there any which are by common fame and report
reputed and taken to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy Name, common
and usual swearers, filthy speakers, raylers, sowers of discord among their
Neighbors, or speakers against Ministers marriages: Usurers* contrary to the
Statute made in the seven and thirtieth year of King Henry the eight,
Symonicall persons, fighters, brawlers, or quarrellers in Church or
Churchyard? you shall not fail to present their names.

29 Whether have any in your Parish received or harbored any woman gotten with
child out of wedlock, and suffered them again to depart without penance
first inflicted upon them by their Ordinary? you shall truly present as well
the party harboring as harbored, and who is suspected to have committed
incontinencie with her.

30 Whether any person or persons suspected or detected heretofore of
incontinencie, and therefore departing out of your Parish for a season, is now
returned again? or in what place else is he or she now abiding to your
knowledge, or as you have heard? you shall not fail to present the whole truth
in that behalf.

31 Whether there be any person or persons Ecclesiastical or Temporal within
your Parish, or elsewhere within the Dioces, that have retained and kept in
their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or deliver to
others any English or Latin Books, or Libels, set forth or printed, either
on this side or beyond the Seas, by Papists or Sectaries against the Kings
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, or tending to Popery, Puritanisme, or any
other Sect, Error, or Heresy, against true Religion, and Catholic doctrine,
now publicly protessed in this Church, or the government or discipline of the
Church of England, now within this Realm received and established by common
authority, that you know or have heard of, what their names and sir names are?

32 Whether there be any in your Parish who are known or suspected to
conceal, or keep hidden in their houses any Mass Books, Portesses,
Breuiaries, or other Books of Popery or superstition: or any Challices, Copes,
Vestments, Athes, or other ornaments of superstition, uncancelled, or
undefaced, which is to be coniectured that they do keep for a day, as they
call it.

33 Whether any of your Parishioners, having a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to any other
place to hear other Preachers.

34 Whether there be any Inne-keepers, Alewiues, Victuallers, or Tiplers, that
suffer or do admit any person, or persons in their houses, to eat, drink, or
play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowls, or such like games, in the time of Common
prayer or Sermon, on Sundaies or Holy Days: Or any Butchers, or other, that
commonly use to sell meat or other things in the time of Common prayer,
Preaching, or reading of Homilies* and whether in any Fayres, or common
Markets, falling upon Sundaies* there be showing of any wares before morning
prayer be done? And whether any* Markets or selling of wares be used, or
suffered in any Churchyards on the Subbath day by common pack men and Pedlers
going about, or any Butchers?

35 Whether has your Minister, or any of the parish, without the consent or
priuitie of the Ordinary, caused any to do penance, or to be punished either
openly or otherwise, by any Vestrie meetings, or taken money for any crime
punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws only, and what be the names of the
parties that have been so punished, and in what manner?

36 Whether there be any in your parish who will come to hear the Sermon, but
will not come to the public prayer, appointed by the Book of common prayer,
making a schism or division (as it were) between the use of public prayer
and preaching? and whether there be any who being present at public prayer,
do not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees, at such times as by the
Book of common prayer they are appointed: to wit, when they make a general
confession of their sins: when all prayers and Collects are read: in the time
of the Letanie: when the ten Commandments are read: and at the receiving of
the holy Communion, etc. And what be their names that have af any time showed
themselves undutiful and vnreuerent in that behalf?

37 Whether there be any married women, or others within your parish, which
after childe-birth refuse, contemn, or neglect, to come to the Church to give
God thanks for their safe delivery, and to have the prayers publicly
appointed in that behalf by the Book of common prayer?

38 Whether any within your parish do resort into Barnes, Fields, Woods,
private houses, to any extraordinary exposition of Scriptures, or conferences
together, or that be drawers or perswaders of others to any such schismatic
conuenticle.

39 Whether any do keep their children unbaptized longer then is convenient,
unless that it be for the sickness of the child, or other urgent occasion?
And whether any do carry their child or children from the parish they are
borne in, to other parishes to be baptized, and so refuse their own parish,
and to what other parish? or do bring strange Ministers into their own houses
to baptize their children privately, according to their own fantasies?

40 Item, (Setting down the full sum of the Communicants within your Parish)
you shall present every one who has been defective at this feast of Easter
last past, in receiving the holy Communion upon neglect, contempt, or any other
pretense and excuse.

41 Whether do you know of any other matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance
worthy the presentment, in your judgment, heretofore in these Articles not
expressed, and which is fit to be reformed in Ecclesiastical censure? If you
do, you shall likewise present the same by virtue of your oaths.

42 Whether has your Minister kept any Excommunication in hie custody
vnpublished against any of his Parishioners, above the space of xx. days next
after the receipt thereof, without some lawful certificat of the absolution of
any such excommunicate person, or of some lawful warrant for the stay of the
same Excommunication.

43 Whether has your Minister admitted any excommunicate person to the holy
Communion before he has received a certificat of the absolution of the same
party: And whether have you permitted any excommunicate person either of your
own parish or of any other parish, to hear divine Service in your parish
Church, since the time you took upon you the office of Church wardens within
your said parish? If yea, set down the names of the same parties.

44 Whether has your Minister absolved any excommunicate person or persons of
your parish, or of any other parish within the Archdeaconry of Essex, within
the space of a year last past, without a special warrant in writing under the
hands of the Judge and Register of this Court, or of one of them? If yea, what
are the names of such person or persons which he ha^h so absolved.

45 Whether has your Minister, your selves, or your predecessors
Churchwardens of your parish for the year last past, presented any person or
persons of your said parish to the Chancellor of the reverend Father in God,
the Lord Bishop of London (saving in the Visitation of the said Lord Bishop,)
And whether has your Minister, your selves, or your predecessors
Churchwardens of your said parish, for the year last past, presented any
person or persons to the Commissarie of the said reverend Father in God? If
yea, what are the names of such person or persons which you or they have so
presented, and for what cause did you or they present any such person or
persons.

Articles to be inquired of, by the Minister, Churchwardens, and Sworne-man of
every Parish within the Archdeaconrie of Essex, according to the special
direction of certain letters heretofore sent to the Lord Bishop of London,
from the right Honorable the Lords of the Privy Counsel.
IN primis, Whether there be any in your Parish, either Parishioners,
Soiourners, or such as be late come out of other Countries into your Parish,
which do refuse to come to divine Service to the Parish Church, or elsewhere:
and what be their names, and sir-names, and how long they have refused so to
do.

2 Item, How many of their wives and children above the age of six* seen
years, servants and other soiourners, abiding in their houses, do likewise
refuse so to do: and what be their names and sir-names, and how long they have
refused so to do?

3 Item, Whether there be any in your Parish, which be suspected to have been
reconciled to the Popish Religion, or to have been absolved, or any that
procured or councelled any thereunto: and what be their names and sir-names.

4 Item, Whether there be any in your Parish which be suspected to be Massing
Priests, Reconcilers, Jesuits, Seminaries, or other persons, which have
received any orders or authority from the Romish Church, to use the like: and
what be their names and sir-names.

5 Item, Whether there be any Schoolmasters within your Parish, which do not
bring up their youth in the Religion now professed, or be not themselves
diligent in repayring to divine Service, or bringing their Scholars to it?


