Articles to be enquired of, in visitacions to be had, within the Diocese of
Cantorbury: in the second year of the reign of our most drad sovereign
Lord Edward the.VI. by the grace of God, King of England, France, and
Irelande, defender of the faith and in earth of the Church of England and
also of Irelande, the supreme hedde.
FIrst, whether Persons, Vicars, and Curates, and every of them have purely
and sincerely, without color or dissimulacio^, four times in the year at the
least, preached against the usurped power, pretensed authority and
iurisdiccion of the bishop of Rome.



Item, whether any person has by writing, Cyphryng, preaching, or teaching,
deed or act obstinatly holden, and stand with to extol, setfurthe, maintein
or defend the authority, iurisdiccio^, or power of the bishop of Rome, or of
his sea heretofore claimed and usurped, or by any pretense, obstinatly or
maliciously, inverted any thing for the extollyng of the same, or any part
thereof.

Item, whether in their common prayers, they use not the Collettes made for the
King, and make not special mencio^ of his majesty's name in the same.

Item, whether they do not every sunday and holy day, with the collectes of the
English procession, say the prayer set furthe by the Kings majesty for
peace between England and Scotland

Item, whether they have not removed, taken away, and utterly extincted and
destroyed, in their Churches, Chapelles, and houses, all Images, all shrines,
couerynges of shrines, all Tables, candelstickes, trindels, or rolls of wax,
pictures, Paintynges, and all other monumentes of fained miracles, Pilgrimages,
Idolatry and Supersticio^, so that there remain no memory of the same, in
walls, glasewindowes, or else where.

Item, whether they have exhorted moved and stirred their parishoners, to do
the like in every of their houses.

Item, whether they have declared to their parishoners, the articles concerning
the abrogacio^ of certain superfluous holy days, and done their endeavor to
persuade the said parishoners to keep and observe the same articles inuiolably
and whether any of those abrogate days, has been kept as holy days, and by
whose occasion they were so kept.

Item, whether they have diligently, duly, and reverently, ministered the
Sacraments in their Cures.

Item, whether they have preached, or caused to be preached, purely and
sincerely the word of god, in every of their Cures, every quarter of the
year, once at the least, exhorting their parishoners, to the works commanded
by scriptures, and not to works devised by men's pha^tasies besides
scripture, as wearyng or praiyng upon beads, or such like.

Item whether they suffer any torches, candelles, Tapers, or any other lights
to be in your Churches, but only two lights upon the high Aultare.

Item, whether they have not every holy day when they have no sermon,
immediately after the Gospel, openly, plainly, and distinctly, recited to their
parishoners in the pulpit, the Paternoster the creed, and the.x.
Commandments in English.

Item, whether every Lent, they examine such persons as comes to Confession
to the^, whether they can recite the Pater noster the Articles of our faith,
and the.x. Commandments in English.

Item, whether they have charged fathers and mothers, masters and governors of
youth to bring them up in some verteous study or occupacion.

Item, whether such beneficed men, as be lawfully absent from their
benefices, do leave their Cure to a rude and unlearned person, and not to an
honest well learned and expert Curate which can and will teach you holsom
doctrine.

Item, whether in every Cure ^, they have provided one book of the whole Bible
of the largest volume in English, and the Paraphrasis of Erasmus also in
English upon the Gospelles, and set up the same in some convenient place in the
Church, where their parishoners may most commodiously resort to the same.

Item, whether they have discoraged any person, from readyng of any part of
the Bible, either in Latin or in English, but rather comforted and exhorted
every person to read the same, as the very lively word of God, and the
special food of man's soul

Item, whether Persons, Vicars, Curates, and other priests, be common
haunters and resorters to Tauernes, or Alehouses, geuyng themselves to
drinkyng, riotyng, or plaiyng at unlawful games, and do not occupy them
selfs in the reading or hearing, of some part of holy scripture, or in some
other Godly exercise.

Item, whether they have admitted any man to preach in their cures, not being
lawfully licensed thereunto, or have refused or denied such to preach, as
have been licensed accordyngly.

Item, whether they which have heretofore declared to their parishoners, any
thing to the extolling or setting forth of pilgrimages relics or Images, or
lightyng of ca^dells, kissing, knelyng, deckyng of the same Images, or any such
supersticion, have not openly recanted and reproved the same.

Item, whether they have one book or register safely kept, wherein they write
the day of every Weddyng, Christenyng, and Buriyng,

Item, whether they have exhorted the people to obedience, to the kings
majesty and his ministers, and Charity and love, one to a another.

Ite^, whether they have admonished their parishoners, that they ought not to
presume, to receive the Sacrament, of the body and blood of Christ, before
they can perfectly the pater noster the Articles of the faith, and the ten
commandments in English.

Item, whether they have declared, and to their wits and power have persuaded
the people, that the manner and kind of fasting in Lent, and other days in ye
year, is but a mere positive law, and that therefore al persons, having just
cause of sickness, or other necessity, or being licensed by the kings
majesty, may moderatly eat all kind of meats, without grudge or scruple of
conscience.

Item, whether they be resident upon their benefices, and keep hospitality or
no, and if they be abse^t, or keep no hospitality, whether they do make due
distribucions among the poor parishoners or not.

Ite^, whether Persons, Vicars, Clerks, and other beneficed men, having
yearly to dispende an hundred pound, do not find competently one scholar in
the University, of Cambridge or Oxforde or some Grammar schole, and for as
many hundred pounds, as every of them may dispende, so many schools likewise
to be found by them, and what be their names, that they so find

Item, whether Proprietaries, Persons, Vicars, and Clerks, having Churches,
Chapelles or Mansions, do keep their Chauncelles. Rectories, Vicareges, and
all other houses apparteignyng to them, in due reperacions.

Item whether they have counseled, or moved their parishoners, rather to pray
in a tongue not known, the^ in English, or to put their trust in any
prescribed nombre of prayers, as in saying over a number of beads or other
like.

Item, whether they have red the kings majesty's Injunctions, every quarter of
the year, the first holy day of the same quarter.

Item, whether the Persons, Vicars Curates and other priests, being under the
degree of a bacheler of divinity, have of their own the new Testament, both
in Latin and in English and the paraphrase of Erasmus upon the same.

Item, whether within every Church, he that ministereth have red or cause to
be red, the Epistle or Gospel in English, and not in Latin, either in the
Pulpit or some other mete place, so as the people may here the same.

Item, whether every Sondaie and holy day at Matyns, they have read or cause
to be read, plainly and distinctly in the said place, one Chapter of the new
Testament in Engishe, immediately after the Lessons, and at Euensong after
Magnificat, one Chapter of the old testament.

Ite^, whether they have not at Matins omitted three lessons, when, ix. should
have been read in the Church, and at Eue^song the Respondes with all the
Memories.

Item, whether they have declared to their parishioners, that saint Marks
day, and the euens of the abrogate holy days should not be fasted.

Item, whether they have the Procession book in English, and have said or
song the said Letany in any other place, but upon their knees in the midst of
their Church, and whether they use any other procession, or omit the said
Letany at any time, or say it or sing it in such sort as the people connot
understand the same.

Ite^, whether they have put out of their church books, this word Papa and
the name and service of Thomas Bequet, and prayers having rubrices, conteinyng
pardones or indulgences, and al other supersticious lege^des and prayers.

Item, whether they bid not the beads according to the order, appointed by the
Kings Majesty.

Item, whether they have opened and declared unto you, the true use of
Ceremonies, (that is to say) that they be no workers nor works of salvation,
but only outward signs and tokens, to put us in remembrance of things of
higher perfeccion.

Item, whether they have taught and declared to their parishoners, that they
may with a safe and quiet confidence in the time of Harvest, labor upon the
holy and festival days, and if supersticiously they abstein from working upon
those days, that then they do grievously offend and displease God.

Item, whether they have admitted any persons to the Communion, being openly
known to be out of charity with their neighbors.

Item, whether the Deanes, Archedeacons, Masters of Hospitalles, and
Prebe^daries have peached by theimselfes personally, twice every year at the
least.

Item, whether they have provided, and have a strong Cheste for the poor
men's Box, and set and fastened the same, nere to the high altar.

Item, whether they have diligently called upon, exhorted and moved their
parishoners, and specially when they make their Testamentes, to give to the
said poor men's Box, and to bestow that upon the poor Chest, which they
were wont to bestow upon Pardonnes, Pilgremages, Trentalles, Masses
satisfactorie, deckyng of Images, offering of Candelles, geuyng to Friars, and
upon other like blind deuocions.

Item, whether they have denied to Visit the sick, or Bury the dedde, being
brought to the Church.

Item, whether they have bought their benefices, or come to them by fraud or
deceit.

Item, whether they have every Sondaie, when the people be most gathered, red
one of the Homelies, in order as they stand in the book, set furthe by the
kings majesty.

Item, whether they do not omit prime and hours, when they have any sermon or
Homely.

Item, whether they have said or song any Mass, in any Oratory, Chapel, or
any man's house, not being hallowed.

Item, whether they have given open monicio^ to their Parishoners, that they
should not wear beads, nor pray upon them.

Item, whether they have moved their Parishoners, liyng upon their death
beds, or at any other time, to bestow any part of their substance, upon
Trentalles, Masses Satisfactory or any such blind deuocions.

Item, whether they take any Trentalles, or other Masses Satisfactory to say or
sing, for the quick or the dedde.

Item, whether they have given open monicio^ to their parishoners, to detect
and present to their Ordenarie, all adulterers and fornicators, and such men
as have two wives living, and such women as have two husbands living, within
their parishes.

Item, whether they have not monished their Parishoners openly, that they
should not sell, give, nor otherwise alienate, any of their Church goods.

Item, whether they or any of them, do keep mo benefices, and other
Ecclesiastical promocions, then they ought to do, not having sufficient
license, and dispensacio^s thereunto, and how many they be, and their names.

Item, whether they minister the Communion, any otherwise then only after such
form and manner, as is set furthe by the Kings Majesty, in the book of the
Communion,

Item, whether they hallowed and delivered to the people, any Ca^delles upon
Candelmas day any ashes upon Ash Wednesdai, or any Palms upon Palm Sondaie
last past.

Item, whether they had upon Good Fridaie last past, the Sepulchers with their
lights, having the Sacrament therein.

Item, whether they upon Easter even last past, hallowed the Font, Fire, or
Paschall, or had any Paschall set up or burning in their Churches,

Item, whether your Persons and Vicars, have admitted any curates to serve
their Cures which were not first examined and allowed, either by my lord of
Cantorbury, Master Archedeacon, or their officers.

Item, whether you know any person within your parish, or else where, that
is a letter of the word of God, to be red in English, or syncerely preached,
or of the execucio^ of the kings Majesty's Iniunccio^s, or other his Majesty's
procedynges, in matters of religion.

Item, whether every parish have provided a chest with two locks and keys,
for the book of Weddyng, Christenyng, and buriyng.

Item, whether in the time of the Letany, or any other common prayer, in the
time of the sermon or Homely, and when the priest reads the scripture to the
parishoners, any person have departed out of the church, without a just and
necessary cause.

Item, whether any belles have be knolled or rong at the time of the premises.

Item, whether any person has abused the Ceremonies, as in castyng holy Water
upon his bed, or bearyng about him, holy Bread, saint Ihons Gospel, ringyng
of holy Belles, or keeping of private holy days, as Tailors, Bakers, Brewers,
Smithes, Shoomakers, and such other.

Item, whether the money coming and risyng of any cattle, or other moveable
stocks of the Church, and money given or bequethed, to the findyng of
Torches, lights, tapers, or lamps, (not paid out of any lands) have not
been employed to the poor men's Chest.

Item, who has the said stocks, and money in their hands, and what be their
names.

Item, whether any indiscreet persons do uncharitably contempne, and abuse
priests and ministers of the church.

Item, whether they that understand not the Latin, do pray upon any primer,
but the English Primer, set furthe by the kings Majesty's authority, and
whether they that understand Latin, do use any other then the Latin Primer,
set furthe by like authority.

Item, whether there be any other Grammar taught in any schole within this
Diocese, then that which is set forth by the kings majesty.

Item, whether any person keep their church holy day, and the dedicacio^
day, any otherwise or at any other time, then is appointed by the kings
majesty.

Item, whether the service in the Church, be done at due and convenient
hours.

Item, whether any have used to common, iangle, and talk in the Church, in
the time of the common prayer, Readyng of the Homely, Preaching, Readyng or
declaryng of the scripture.

Item, whether any have wilfully maintained and defended, any Heresies, Errors,
or false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ, and holy scripture.

Item, whether any be common dronkerdes, swearers, or blasphemers of the name
of God.

Item, whether any have committed adultery, fornicacion or incest, or be common
baudes, and receivers of such evil persons, or vehemently suspected of any
of the premises.

Item, whether any be braulers, slaunderers, chiders, skolders, and sowers of
discord, between one person and another.

Item, whether you know any that use charms, Sorcerie, Enchauntmentes,
Witchecraft, Sothesaiyng, or any like craft invented by the Devil.

Item, whether the Churches, Pulpittes, and other necessaries apparteignyng to
the same, be sufficiently repared.

Item, whether you know any, that in contempt of their own parish Church,
do resort to any other Church.

Ite^, whether any Inholders, or Alehousekepers, do use commonly to sell meat
and drink, in the time of the common Prayer, Preaching, Readyng of the
Homelies, or scripture.

Item, whether you know any to be married, within the degrees prohibited by
the Laws of God, or that be separated or divorced, without a just cause,
allowed by the law of God, and whether any such have married again.

Item, whether you know any, to have made privy contractes of Matrimony, not
calling two or mo thereunto.

Item, whether they have married solemnly, the bannes not first lawfully asked.

Item, whether you know any Executors, or Administrators of dedde men's
goods, which do not duly bestow such of the said goods, as were given and
bequethed, or appointed to be distributed among the poor people, repairing of
high ways, fyndyng of poor scholars, or mariyng of poor maids, or such
other like charitable deeds.

Item, whether any do co^tempne married priests, and for that they be married,
will not receive the communion, or other Sacraments at their hands.

Item, whether you know any that keep in their houses undefaced, any abused or
feined Images,

(...) IMPRINTED IN LONDON the last day of August, M.D, xlviii: in the second
year of the reign of our most drad and sovereign lord King Edward the,
VI: By Richard Grafton Printer to his highness: 1548.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


