







by thordinary, and whither the said priest has in the time of the late scisme
here in the realm preached heresy or evil doctrine, and not recanted the same,
or does not now preach and set forth the true doctrine of the catholic
church, and also pray for the three estates of the catholic church, and
especially for the King and Queen's Majesty's, and also whither prayinge for
the third estate, they do name Purgatory or no.







of any person or persons within your Parish that wyllynglye or obstinatelye
does neglecte or refuse to make their confession to the Priest, and to receive
absolution and penance at his hand for his offenses, or obstinatelye or
wyllynglye do refuse to receive the Sacrament of the Aultare, or extreme
Unction, in extreme danger of syckenesse, or to hear Mass, or to come to his
Paryshe Church, or refuse to go on Procession, or to take Holywater, or
otherwise do mysuse them selves in breaking the Rytes and Ceremonies of the
Catholyque Church, specially in fasting on the Ember days and other days
by the Church specially appointed, or in prayinge, or other such like.



especially to read the english service, used in the time of king Edward the
sixte, or the book of Communion, or any book prohibited or forbidden to be
read or taught, or to set forth any noughtye opinion or doctrine.







Pater noster, Aue Maria, and the Creed.

causing their scholars to fast, to pray, to come to the church, and to do
their duties there, specially in hearing Mass and other divine service, and
whither they teach them to help the Priest to Mass, and to say their Pater
noster, the Aue Maria, and the Creed with De profundis for all Christen souls,
and whither the schools, especially being commen be faithfully and diligently
kept or no.













or lands of the said places, or any of them, or spoiled any of the same, or
have converted the tithes, profits, commodities, revenues, and possessions of
any of the same to his own private and profane use.





























has two wives living, or of any woman that has two husbands living, no
lawful divorce being made between them.











the authority or jurisdiction of the Popes holiness, or the sea of Rome, or do
let the process of any Archbyshoppe or Bishop, or of any of their deputies.







as would thither resort to eat and drink, and whither it be not used at
the said tables to have Diner and Supper upon the Friday and Embryng days, and
all other days, as well within the Lent time as without, or whither there be at
the said tables any flesh eaten at times prohibited.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Robart Caly, within the precinct of Christ's Hospital.
The.vi. day of April. M.D.LVIII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


