ARTICLES ECCLESIASTICAL TO be enquired of by the Churchwardens and Sworne-men
within the (...)

In the Visitation of the (...)

And in the (...) year of the Reign of our most dread Sovereign Lord King
JAMES.

LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL. 1621.

The Oath.
YOu shall swear by the Name of Almighty God, well and truly to execute the
Office of Churchwardens and Sidemen, etc. That you shall diligently consider,
and enquire of all and every the Articles following, and make a true answer to
every of the same severally, and distinctly in writing, presenting every person
of your Parish, who has, or shall, in your Parish, or elsewhere: and every
person of any other Parish, who has, or shall in your Parish commit any
offense or fault, mentioned in any of the said Articles, or which are
publicly, and credibly defamed for any such offense, or fault: wherein you
shall not unduly present any person or persons of evil will, malice, or any
corrupt affection, nor shall for love, favor, dread, or any other indirect
affection, spare to present any that be offenders in any of those cases, but
shall do uprightly, as men having the fear of God before your eyes, and
desirous to maintain virtue, and suppress vice. So help you God by Christ
Jesus.

Note, you are by your said Oath to present truly what you either know of your
own knowledge, or what is publicly or credibly famed and spoken touching any
matter or thing contained in any Article following.
FIrst, whether any person whatsoever of your Parish does maintain or defend
any Heresies, false opinions, or Popish errors, contrary to the word of God,
and the Articles of Religion established in this Realm?

2 Whether any person be an impugner or deprauer either in word or writing the
of form of Ecclesiastical government of the Church of England, or of the
Book of Common prayer, or the Rites and Ceremonies prescribed therein, or of
the Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Oath of Supremacy or
Allegiance?

3 Whether any Parson does read public Service in any Church or Chapel,
not being lawfully ordered Deacon at the least, and licensed by the Lord
Bishop or his Chauncellor.

4 Whether any Parson, Vicar, or Curate presume to preach in their Cures, or
elsewhere, not being licenced by the Bishop or Ordinary?

5 Whether is your Parson or Vicar known, or probably and publicly famed or
reported to have obtained his Benefice by Simony, or to let out his Living to
farm, or any part thereof to any person in consideration of any such
Simoniacall compact.

6 Whether have you had a Sermon preached every Sabbath day this last year in
your Church: if not, yet how many have you had? and upon those Sundaies that
you had not a Sermon, have you had an Homely read?

7 Whether has any stranger been suffered to preach in your Church or
Chapel, without having first showed his license to preach unto the Minister
and Churchwardens according to the 50. Canon.

8 Whether does your Minister upon every Sunday and Holy day in the afternoon
before evening prayer call for, and instruct all the youth and ignorant persons
of your Parish, of both Sexes, in the Catechism, and grounds of Christian
Religion for half an hour or more?

9 Whether be there any Parents, Masters, or governors, who send not their
children, or servants to be chatechized on every Sabbath day, and Holy day, or
any children or servants that refuse to be instructed or examined?

10 Whether does your Minister neglect or forsake his calling, and betake
himself to worldly affairs, mercenary, or manuell Trades, haunt markets, or
intermeddle with, or solicit matters of Law for other men?

11 Whether does your Minister haunt or frequent Alehouses, or Tauernes, or is
he probably or publicly famed or any notorious crime, or any evil example of
life, to the offense and scandal of his vocation?

12 Whether does your Minister use or wear any kind of apparel which is
unseeming his calling, for color or fashion of the same, or otherwise then
according to the 74. Canon?

13 Whether does your Minister at all times wear the Surplesse in the time of
Divine Service and administration of the Sacraments? And if he be a Graduate,
whether does he also upon his Surplesse wear a hood incident to his degree?

14 Whether do you know, or have credibly and publicly heard of any within
your Parish that are procurers of Schisms, or maintainers of Schismatikes, or
which are resorters to conuenticles, or congregations of the Kings Subjects,
other then such as by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm are allowed?

15 Whether does your Minister use any other form of Common prayer, then is
prescribed in the Book of Common prayer, and whether does he use such
directions, rites, and ceremonies in Service, and the administration of the
Sacraments, as by the said book are required, and none other?

16 Whether does your minister admit to the Communion any notorious adulterer
fornicator, or incestuous person, or other great offender which has not first
done his penance, or any stranger of another Parish, contrary to the 28. Canon?

17 Whether have any been married within your Parish that have not upon the day
of their marriage received the holy Communion? or any been married in times
prohibited, or without banes solemnly asked three several Sundays, otherwise
then by license of the Ordinary, as you know, or credibly and publicly have
heard?

18 Whether has your Minister used the form of thanksgiving prescribed for
women after childbirth, for any woman unlawfully begotten with child,
otherwise then in the habit of a penitent sinner, or before sufficient caution
be taken for her not departing the Parish until she has done penance for her
offense?

19 Whether does your Parson, Preacher, Lecturer, and Vicar in his own person,
at the leastwise in every year upon two Sundays publicly, both in the
forenoone and afternoon in your Church or Chapel, read Divine Service, and
administer both the Sacraments in such manner and form as is prescribed by the
Book of Common prayer according to the 56. Canon?

20 Whether does your Minister daily visit the sick, and exhort them truly
to believe in Christ, and repent thereof their sins, and comfort and pray for
them, as is prescribed in the Book of Common prayer?

21 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Farmor of the Tithes, suffer either the
Parsonage or Vicarage-house or other buildings thereto belonging, or the
Chancell to fall to ruin or decay, and does not presently repair them?

22 Whether has any person taken away or uncovered any Church, Chapel or
Chancell, or any part of them, or any Church porch, or Vestrie, or has pulled
down the belles, or made any other spoil or waste upon his Benefice, either
in timber, or woods?

23 Whether is your Church every way sufficiently, and well repaired, and no
defect in glazing, tiling, sieling, pauing, or in any thing else belonging to
the same: and whether the Church be beautified, and adorned with Scripture
sentences?

24 Whether is your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Wall, Rail, Pale or
other fence, and is your Churchyard profaned, or swine suffered to root there?

25 Whether have you in your Parish Church or Chapel the new book of Common
prayer, two Psalters, the Bible in English of the largest volume, lately set
forth by his Majesty's authority, the two volumes of Homilies, Master Jewels
works, Erasmus Paraphrase, the table of the ten Commandments, and the Table
of the degrees of Affinity and Consanguinitie, wholly and untorn, a
convenient Pulpit, a fit seat for your Minister, a decent Communion Table upon
a frame, a linen cloth to cover it, with some other cover of silk, or such
like, a Communion cup of silver, and cover of the same, a clean sweet
standing Pet, or stoop of pewter, or other purer metal, to put in the wine
for the use of the Communion, a sufficient fou^ well covered, decent Surplesse
of fine holland, with large sleeves, a sure coffer with three locks for the
Register Book, a strong chest with three locks there to for the almesboxe,
and have your Minister and Churchwardens several keys to those Coffers
according to the 70. Canon?

26 Whether does your Minister and Churchwardens every Sunday after Evening
prayer take the Register book, and then Register the names of all those who
were Christened, married or buried the week before, and is the same a fair
book of parchment, and safely kept under locks and keys?

27 Whether does any Parson serve two Cures, or any Curate serve his Cure not
in due time? and what slipend has your Curate by the year?

28 Whether has your Minister published and executes all such processes,
excommunications, and penances as have been directed unto him from the Lord
Bishop or his Chancellor, in such sort as was prescribed and without delay?
and whether has he duly made Certificates thereof, and of all penances
according as they have been performed and no otherwise, as you know, or
credibly and publicly have heard?

29 Whether has your Parson or Vicar more Benefices then one, how many, and in
what places be they? what be the names, and values of them, and whether is he
absent from among you above 80. days in all in any one year? and if he has
two Benefices, has he a preaching Curate on that Benefice whereon he does not
reside? and whether does he let any lease of any of his Benefices, or any part
thereof? and to whom? and for how long?

30 Whether is your Clarke aged twenty years at least, and approved by the
Ordinary, and has he taken an Oath, and is he able to read distinctly, as by
law is required, and is he diligent in keeping the Church, Chauncell, Communion
table, Font, Books, ornaments of the Church, and all such things as belong to
his charge safe, decent and clean?

31 Whether is there any Schoolmaster teaching either openly or privately in
your Parish, or any person who practices Physic, or Surgerie? and what be
their names?

32 Whether have any Lords of Misrule, Dauncers, Players, or any other
disguised persons been suffered to enter the Church, Chapel, or Churchyard
with their sports? and if they have, what be the names of such disordered
persons?

33 Whether be there in your Parish any unlawful exercises used upon any
Sabbath, or Festival days? whether do any use dancing or such like sports
on the Sabbath day before the end of all divine Service appointed for that day?
whether be there any common drinking in your Church? who were present at such
drinking, or sports, and whether any do sit in the Tavern, Alehouse, or
Street upon Sundays or Holy Days in the time of morning or evening prayer?

34 Whether be there any in your Parish that use any handie craft, or work, or
keep open shop upon any Sabbath or Festival day, or that within time of
Harvest do upon Holy Days labor about their Harvest, or then use any
carriages by Wayne, or otherwise, unless necessity shall require, or the law
permit it?

35 Whether there be in your Parish any disturbers of the divine service of
God, or which do use any talking, walking, or any vnreuerent behavior in
Church or Churchyard in time of divine service?

36 Whether does your Minister give warning aforehand to his Parishioners for
the receiving of the Communion, and are there any in your Parish of convenient
age, viz. above sixteen years, that do not receive the Communion thrice in
every year at the least? or any that receive the Communion otherwise then most
reverently kneeling on their knees?

37 Whether any of your Parish do receive Seminary Priests or other Seducers
into their houses, and whether there be any Strangers that socourne in your
Parish, especially about Easter, and do absent themselves from Church?

38 Whether have your Churchwardens been diligent themselves in frequenting
divine service, and doing their office? and duly given account at the years
end of the goods, and rents of the Church, or not distributed the public
alms indifferently?

39 Whether when any man or woman is passing out of this life, the Bell be
tolled to give warning to the people to pray for the sick person? if not, in
whose default.

40 Whether any person of your Parish has remained excommunicate by the space
of forty days? and whether any excommunicate person has intruded himself or
been admitted unto divine service, the Sacrament or like public assemblies?
and who are keepers of company with any excommunicate person, or do harbor
any excommunicate person in their houses, or set them to work contrary to the
law?

41 Whether any excommunicate Recusant, or other obstinate excommunicants have
been buried in your Church, or Churchyard? by whom were they so buried? and
who were present?

42 Whether any of your Parish be known, or credibly and publicly famed to
be attempters of the chastity of any woman, or incestuous persons, or
adulterers, or fornicatours before or after marriage? Bawdes or receptors of
incontinent persons into their houses, or which convey them away before they
have done penance for the same? and whether any that heretofore have for those
crimes departed your Parish unpunished, are now returned again?

43 Whether there be any blasphemers of the name of God, or swearers, or any
common drunkards, slaunderers or defamers of their neighbors in your Parish?
and what are their names?

44 Whether any person in your Parish be known or reputed to use any
Witchcraft, Sorcerie, Charms, or any that do take upon them to tell
destinies, or to guide men to things lost, or any that resorteth unto such for
help and counsel?

45 Whether have there been any children borne in your Parish, which have not
been brought to be baptized in your Parish Church? (and whether any children
of your Parish have been baptized by a Seminary Priest? what is the name of
that Priest? and whether any of the children of Recusants or Soiourners with
Recusants have had their baptism deferred longer then the next Sabbath day, or
which remain as yet unbaptized? and whose are those children?)

46 Whether has any Father answered as Godfather to his own child, and
whether have any been admitted to be Godfather or Godmother to any child in
your Parish, who before that time have not received the holy Communion?

47 Whether any persons of your Parish divorced lawfully, do notwithstanding
accompany together? and whether any persons lawfully married, have forsaken
their wives or husbands, or live not together, or any which have married any
person contracted to others, or which had not the consent of their parents? and
whether any were married in any private house, or within the degrees
prohibited, or not between the hours of eight and twelve of the clock in the
forenoone?

48 Whether do you know any person formerly presented, which has not been
conuented and censured by the ordinary for the same? or any enjoined to do
penance, who either has not done it, or done it not penitently, but
scornfully, and not in form, habit, and time prescribed, or any that have
laughed or scorned at those, who have done their penance? and what be their
names?

49 Whether any Hospital or Almes-house be either pulled down or grown to
decay? whether the number of poor and impotent persons appointed by the
founders are maintained there? and if not, in whose default? whether any lands
or legacies given to such or other godly uses, are not employed accordingly?
and whether any rights, or duties belonging to your Church be detained by any
person?

50 Whether do you know any person within your Parish, who directly or
indirectly takes usury or interest for money lent, contrary to the laws of
God and this Realm? who are they? and what is the manner of their usury?

51 Whether any person of your Parish has suppressed the last will and
testament of any person deceased, or administered the goods of any person
intestate before administration committed unto him? whether do you know any
forgers or changers of such will? or any Executor which has not fulfilled the
Testators will in payment of Legacies to good and godly uses?

52 Whether have your Churchwardens sold or alienated any of the Church
books, ornaments, or goods? if yea, then to whom? and upon what cause? and in
whose possession are they? and whether has any Churchwarden or Sworneman at
any time concealed any disorder, crime, or fame of any crime, and not presented
the same to be reformed?

53 Whether for the retayning of the circuit, and limits of your Parish do
your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, Churchwardens, and certain of the substantial
men of your Parish in the days of perambulation, commonly called the Rogation
week, walk and compass the accustomed bounds of your Parish? and whether in
the said perambulation does the Minister use any other right or ceremony, then
to say or sing to the praise of God some Psalm of David of thanksgiving, as
the hundred and third, or hundred and fourth Psalms, with the Lettanie and
prayers following, or reading some part of holy Scripture or homely, and
without carrying of Banners or handbels, or such like Popish observations?

54 Whether are there any persons in your Parish which do not diligently
resort to your Parish Church, or Chapel accustomed, every Sunday and Holiday
according to the statute? what are their names, who do not so resort? when
have they so been absent? and whether does your Minister admonish the
Churchwardens openly in the Church after the second Lesson at morning and
evening prayer, to look to their charge in that behalf?

55 What Recusant Papists are there in your Parishes? present their names,
qualities, and conditions, how long have they abstained from divine Service or
from the Communion: or do any of them keep any ornaments of superstition
undefaced.

56 Whether any in your Parish (who heretofore being Popish Recusants, have
reformed themselves) do still remain and abide in the same conformity, and is
there a book provided in your Parish, to register the names of all such
Recusants, who so conform and submit themselves according to the Statute of
35. Eliz.

57 Whether have you a terrier of all the gleabelands, meadows, gardens,
orchards, houses, stocks, implements, tenements, and portions of tithes
(whether within your Parish or without) belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicaridge, taken by the view of honest men in your Parish: and whether the same
terrier be laid up in the Bishops Registrie? and in whose hands are any of
them now: and if you have no terrier already made in parchment, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his absence
with your Minister, are to make diligent inquiry and presentment of the
premises, and to make, subscribe, and sign a terrier as aforesaid.

58 Whether does your Minister upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes, not being
Holidays, read in your Church or Chapel publicly the Letany, and other
prayers appointed in the book of Common prayer for those days: and whether
does he read the Commination against sinners, in such order and form as it is
there also prescribed.

59 Whether does your Minister upon some Sundays or Holidayes in the after
noone before divine service, read over once every year all the Canons
Ecclesiastical, published by his Majesty's authority Anno 1603. publicly in
your Church or Chapel where he serves, dividing the same in such sort, as
that the one half may be read one day, and the other another day.

60 Whether does your Minister refuse or delay to christen any child brought
to be christened upon Sundays and Holidays, according to the book of Common
prayer: or being informed of his weakness, or danger of death, does refuse to
go to the place where the said Infant remains to baptize it.

61 Whether has there been since the last Visitation or before, which is not
presented, any contention, brawling, or fighting in your Church, or Churchyard,
betwixt any of the Parishioners touching the placing or displacing of any in
any seat or Pew in the Church, or touching any other cause? and whether has
there been any Pew builded, or alteration made since the foresaid time in any
your Churches, without the express leave of the Ordinary of the Diocese, and
by whom has the same been done?

62 Whether are there any Inne-keepers, Alewiues, or Victualers in your Parish,
that suffer any person to eat, drink, or play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowls,
or such like games in their houses in the time of Common prayer, or Sermon on
Sundays or Holidays: whether any Butchers or others do sell meat or other
things in the time of Common prayer, preaching, or reading of Homilies.

63 Whether has any person cut down any tree or trees growing in your
Churchyard, to the hurt or prejudice of the Church: and to what use was it
converted as you know, or credibly and publicly have heard.

64 Whether has your Minister or any other Minister baptized any child in
your Parish, without using the sign of the Cross at the baptism thereof: or
solemnized marriage without using the Ring therein according to the book of
Common prayer.

65 Whether is all due reverence used in time of divine service, and of every
part thereof, according to the 18. Canon, and whether there be any in your
Parish that use any vnreuerent speeches or iestures against Ministers, and in
contempt of their calling and function.

66 Whether any Apparitor or other person has compounded or smothered for
reward or favor, any cause or matter of office belonging to the
Ecclesiastical Court: if yea, then do you declare the same, and what money or
reward he had for the same.

67 And generally whether do you know of any of the Laws Ecclesiastical
violated or broken, or any Ecclesiastical matters worthy of redress: and if
you do, then you are to present the same, and in all your presentiments as
near as possible you may, you are to note the year, time, and place of every
offense committed.

FINIS.

