ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF, IN THE ORDINARY Visitation of the most Reverend
Father in God, GEORGE by Gods Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, and Metropolitan: in, and for the Cities and Diocese
of COVENTRY and LICHFIELD, the Sea there being void.

Holden in the year of our Lord God, 1632. and in the two and twenty year of
his Graces Translation.

Imprinted at London for Robert Milbourne 1632.

The Tenor of the Oath, to be ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, That you and every of you, shall duly consider, and
diligently enquire of all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and
that all affection, favor, hatred, hope, of reward and gain, or fear of
displeasure, or malice set aside, you shall present all and every such person,
of, or within your Parish, as has committed any offense, or made any default
mentioned in these, or any of these Articles* or which are vehemently suspected
or defamed of any such offense or default: wherein you shall deal uprightly
and full; neither presenting, nor sparing to present any, contrary to truth:
having in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain
truth, and to suppress vice. So help you God, and the holy Contents of this
book.

I. Concerning the Ministers.
INprimis, Whether does your Minister distinctly and reuerendly say divine
Service upon Sundays and Holy Days, and other days appointed to be observed
by the Book of Common Prayer: Wednesdayes and Frydayes, and the Eues of every
Sunday and Holyday, at fit and usual times? And does your Minister duly
observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the said Book of Common
Prayer, as well in reading pulibke Prayers and the Letany, as also in
administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, Uisiting the sick,
Burying the dead, Churching of women, and all other like Rites and offices of
the Church, in such manner and form, as in the Book of Common prayer is
enjoined? And does he read the book of the last Canons once yearly, and
wear a Surplice according to the said Canons?

2 Item whether does your Minister bid Holidays and Fasting days, as by the
Book of Common Prayer is appointed? And does he give warning beforehand to
the parishoners, for the receiving of the holy Communion as the 22. canon
requires? And whether does he administer the holy Communion so often, and at
such times, as that every parishioner may receive the same at the least thrice
in every year: whereof once at Easter as by the Book of Common Prayer is
appointed? And does your Minister receive the same himself on every day that
he administreth it to others, and use the words of Institution according to
the Book, at every time that the Bread and Wine is renewed, accordingly as by
the Prouiso of the 21 Canon is directed? And does hae deliver the Bread and
Wine to every Co^municant severally? Whether has he admitted to the holy
Communion any offender or Schismaticke, contrary to the 26. and 27.
constitutions, or received any to the Communion being not of his own Cure or
put any from the Communion, not being publicly infamous for some notorious
crime? Does he use the sign of the Cross in Baptism, or Baptize in any
Basin, or other Uessell and not in the usual Font: or admit any Father to be
Godfather to his own child, or such who have not received the holy Communion,
or Baptize any children that were not borne in the parish, or wilfully refuse
to Baptize any Infant in his Parish being in danger, having been informed of
the weakness of the said child: and whether has the child dyed through his
default without Baptism?

3 Item, whether has your Minister married any without a Ring or without Banes
published three several Sundays or Holidays in time of divine Service, in the
several Churches or Chapels of their several abode, according to the book of
Common Prayer, or in times prohibited albeit the Banes were thrice published,
without a License or dispensation from the Archbishop, the Bishop of the
Diocese, or his Chancellor, first obtained in that behalf? or not betwixt the
hours of eight and twelve in the forenoone, or married in any private house:
or if the parties be under the age of 21. years, before their parents or
governors have signified their consent unto him?

4 Item, whether does he refuse to bury any, which ought to be interred in
Christian burial, or defer the same longer then he should, or bury any in
Christian burial, which by the Constitutions of the Church of England ought not
to be so interred?

5 Item, whether the body of any excommunicate person dying within your parish
has bin buried by any of your parishioners disorderly (your Minister justly
refusing to bury it) within your Church or Churchyard, or have the body or
bodies of any such excommunicate person or persons bin carried out of your
Parish to be buried in another Parish, without consent of your Minister, or
Ordinary first had and obtained; and what are their several names and sirnames?

6 Item, whether is your Minister a Preacher allowed? If so, then by whom? If
not, whether does he procure some who are lawfully licensed, to preach amongst
you monthly at the least?

7 Item, whether does your Minister (being licensed) preach usually according
to the Canons, either in his own Cure, or in some other Church or Chapel,
near adjoining, where no Preacher is and how often has he bin negligent in
that behalf? and does he preach standing and with his hat off? Or whether does
he or his Curate upon every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read an Homily,
or some part thereof, according as he ought to do: or in case he be not
licensed to Preach does he take upon him to preach or expound the Scriptures in
his own Cure, or elsewhere? If so then you are to present the same, the time
and place, when, and where he did it.

8 Item, whether does your Minister in his Sermons, Lectures and other
exercises, use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King Charles and for our gracious
Queen Mary, and all the Royal Progeny, with addition of such Style and Titles
as are due to his Highness, and exhort the people to obedience to his Majesty,
and all Magistrates in authority under him: not omitting particular mention of
the Bishop of the Diocese, according to his Majesty's late direction in that
behalf?

9 Item, whether is your Minister continually resident upon his Benifice, and
how long time has he bin absent, and in case he be licensed to be absent
whether does he cause his Cure to be sufficiently supplied, according to the
Canons: or in case he has another Benefice, whether does he supply his
absence by a Curate sufficiently licensed to preach in that Cure, where he
himself is not resident? Or otherwise, in case the smallness of the living
cannot find a preaching Minister, does he preach at both his Benefices
usually?

10 Item, whether does your Minister or Curate serve any more Cures then one:
If so, then what other Cure does he serve, and how far are they distant?

11 Item, whether does your Minister every Sunday and Holyday, before Evening
Prayer, for half an hour, or more, examine and instruct the Youth and
ignorant persons of his Parish, in the Ten Commandments, Articles of the
Belief and in the Lords prayer and the Sacraments according as it is
prescribed in the Catechism, and set forth in the Book of Common Prayer; and
also strictly enjoined by our late Sovereign King James of blessed memory, in
his directions to the Bishops of each Diocese?

12 Item, whether does your Minister in the Rogation days go in perambulation
of the circuit of the parish saying and using the prayers and thanksgiving to
God, appointed by law, according to his duty, thanking God for his blessings,
if there be plenty on the earth: Or otherwise* to pray for his grace and
favor, if there be a fear of scarcity?

13 Item, whether has your Minister admitted any woman, begotten with child in
adultery or fornication, to be churched without license of the Ordinary?

14 Item, whether has your Minister, or any other Preacher, Baptized children,
churched any woman or ministered the holy Communion in any private house,
otherwise then by Law is allowed?

15 Item, whether does your Minister, being a Preacher, endeavor and labor
diligently to reclaim the Popish Recusants in his parish from their errors (if
there be any such abiding in your Parish) Or whether is your Parson Uicar, or
Curate, ouerconuersant with or a favorer of Recusants, whereby he is suspected
not to be sincere in Religion?

16 Item, whether has your Minister taken upon him, to appoint any Public or
private Fasts, Prophecies or exercises, not approved by Law, or public
authority, or has used to meet in any private house or place, with any person
or persons, there to consult how to impeach or deprave the book of Common
prayer, or the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England? If so, then you
shall present them all.

67 Item, whether has your Minister stayed the publication of any
excommunications, or suspensions? or does he every half year denounce in his
parish Church all such of his parish, as are excommunicated, and persevere
therein without seeking to be absolved, or does he wittingly and willingly keep
company with such as are excommunicate: And has he admitted into your Church
any person excommunicate, without a Certificate of his absolution from the
Ordinary, or other competent Judge?

18 Item, whether does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the
poor, and from time to time call upon his Parishioners to give somewhat as
they can spare, to godly and charitable uses, especially when they make their
Testaments?

19 Item, whether does your Minister, or any having taken the holy Orders,
being now silenced or suspended, or any other person of your knowledge, or as
you have heard, hold any conuenticles, or preach in any place, or use any other
form of Divine Service then is appointed in the Book of Common Prayer? If so,
then you are to present their names, and with whom.

20 Item, whether is your Curate licensed to serve, by the Bishop of this
Diocese or by any other, and by whom?

21 Item, whether does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his
apparel, as by the 47. Canon is enjoined: and is he of sober behavior and one
that does not use such bodily labor, as is not seemly for his function and
calling?

22 Item, whether is your Minister noted or defamed to have obtained his
Benefice or his Orders by Simony, or any other way defamed, to be a Symoniacall
person, or any way noted to be a Schismaticke, or Schismatically affected, or
reputed to be an incontinent person, or to table or lodge any such in his
house: or is he a frequenter of Tauernes, Innes, Alehouses, or any place
suspected for ill rule: or is he a common Drunkard a common Gamester or a
player at Dice, a Swearer, or one that applies not his Study, or is otherwise
offensive and scandalous to his function or Ministry?

23 Item, whether are there any Lectures, or exercises used within your parish
Church? If so, then whether do the said Lecturer or Lecturers, refuse to
conform themselves to the Laws and Ordinances of the Church of England, and
especially to the late instructions for Lectures published by his Sacred
Majesty King Charles, and directed to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace, and accordingly by his Grace, sent to every Diocese of his Graces
Province. Anno Dom. 1629. And so by the Lord Bishop of this Diocese, commanded
to be published through this Diocese, by his Lordships Arch-deacous, at their
several visitations after Easter, Anno Dom. 1630. And does your Lecturer or
Lecturers, and every of them observe that Article, and instruction of his
Majesty, wherein it is provided precisely, that every Lecturer shall before
his Lecture, or Sermon, read Divine Service in his Surplice, and Hood
according to his Degree: If you know of any default or neglect hereof, in not
observing this instruction of his Majesty's, or other the Laws Ecclesiastical
of this Kingdom, you are to present it, otherwise you are likely to answer
for this your contempt.

24 Item, whether do any Knight, or Gentlemen within your Parish maintain or
keep any Chaplain, contrary to the Laws of the Land, not being thereunto
Licensed by the Bishop of this Diocese?

25 Item, whether does your Preacher or Lecturer read Divine Service, and
Minister the Sacraments twice a year at least in his own person, according to
the Canons?

II. Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches possessions.
26 WHether have you in your several Churches and Chapels, the whole Bible of
the largest volume, and the book of Common Prayer, as also the book of Homilies
set forth by his Majesty's authority, all fairly and substantially bound: a
Font of stone, set up in the ancient usual place: a convenient and decent
Communion Table, with a Carpet of silk* or some other decent Stuff,
continually laid upon the Table at the time of Divine Service, and a fair
linen cloth upon the same, at the time of the receiving of the holy Communion?
And whether is the same Table placed in such convenient sort within the Chancel
or Church, as that the Minister may be best heard in his prayer and
administration, and that the greatest number may communicate? And whether is it
so used out of time of divine Service, as is not agreeable to the holy use of
it: and as by sitting on it throwing hats on it writing on it or is it abused
to other profane uses? And are the Ten Commandments set upon the East end of
your Church or Chapel, where the people may best see and read them and other
Sentences of holy Scripture, written on the walls likewise for that purpose?

27 Item, whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient seat
for your Minister to read Service in, together with a comely Pulpit, set upon a
convenient place, with a decent cloth or Cushion for the same, a comely large
Surplice, a fair Communion Cup, with a cover, of Silver, and a Flagon of
Silver Tin, or Peuter, to put the Wine in whereby it may be set upon the
Communion Table, at the time of the blessing thereof, with all other things and
Ornaments necessary for the celebration of divine Service and administration of
the Sacraments? And whether have you a strong chest for alms of the Poor with
three locks and keys, and another Chest for the keeping the Books, and
Ornaments of the Church* and the Register Book? And whether have you a
Register Book in Parchment, for Christenings, Weddings, and Burialls, and
whether the same be kept in all points, according to the Canons in that behalf
provided? And whether have you in your said Church or Chancell a Table set, of
the degrees, wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry?

28 Item, whether are your Church and Chappells, with the Chancels thereof and
your Parsonage, or Uicarage house, your Parish almes-house and Church-house, in
good reparations, and are they employed to godly, and their right holy uses? Is
your Church, Chancell and Chapel, decently and comely kept, as well within as
without and the seats well maintained, according to the 85 Canon in that
behalf provided? Whether your Churchyard be well fenced and kept without
abuse: and if not, in whose default the same is, and what the defect or fault
is? And whether any person have encroched upon the ground of the Churchyard, or
whether any person or persons have used any thing or place consecrated to holy
use profanely or wickedly?

29 Item, whether have you the Terrier of all the Gleabe Lands, Meddowes
Gardens, Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements and portions of
Tithes (whether within your Parish or without) belonging unto your Parsonage or
Uicarage, taken by the view of honest men in your said Parish? And whether the
said Terrier be laid up in the Bishops Registry, and in whose hands any of
them are now? And if you have no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or Uicar, or in his
absence, with your Minister, are to make diligent inquiry and presentment of
the premises, and make, subscribe, and sign the said Terrier as aforesaid.

III. Schoolmasters.
30 WHether does any in your Parish take upon him to teach School, without
license of the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the Religion now established?
And does he bring his Scholars to the Church to hear Divine Service and
Sermons? And does he instruct his Scholars in the grounds of Religion now
established in this Church of England? and is he careful and diligent to
benefit his Scholars in learning?

IIII. Parish-Clerkes, and Sextons.
31 WHether have you a fit Parish-Clerke, aged twenty years at least, of
honest conversation, able to read and write? Whether are his and the Sextons
wages paid without fraud, according to the ancient custom of your parish: if
not, then by whom are they so defrauded or denied? By whom are they chosen? and
whether the said Clerk be approved by the Ordinary: and has he taken an Oath
as in such cases is fit and required: and is he diligent in his Office, and
serviceable to the Minister, and does he take upon him to meddle with any thing
above his Office; as Churching of women, burying the dead, and such like?

32 Item, whether does your Clerk or Sexton keep the Church clean, the
doors locked? Is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church through his default?
does he suffer any unreasonable ringing, or any propane exercise in your
Church: or does he (when any is passing out of this life) neglect to tole a
Bell, having notice thereof?

V. Physicians, Surgeons, and Mid-vviues.
34 HOw many Physicians, Chirurgions, or Mid-wiues have you in your Parish? How
long have they used their several Sciences or Offices, and by what authority?
And how have they demeaned themselves therein, and of what skill are they
accounted to be in their profession?

VI. Touching the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
34 WHether you the Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen from time to time do
and have done their diligences, in not suffering any idle person to abide
either in the Churchyard, or Church Porch in Service or Sermon time, but
causing them either to come into the Church to hear divine Service, or to
depart, and not disturb such as he hearers there? And whether have they, and
do you diligently see the Parishioners duly resort to the Church every Sunday
and Holy, day, and there to remain during divine Service and Sermon? And
whether you or your predecessors Churchwardens there, suffer any Plays,
Feasts, Drinkings, or any other profane vsages, to be kept in your Church,
Chapel or Church yards, or have suffered to your and their uttermost power and
endeavor, any person or persons, to be tippling or drinking in any Inn or
Uictualling house in your Parish, during the time of divine Service or Sermon,
on Sundays or Holidays?

35 Item, whether, and how often have you admitted any to preach within your
Church or Chapel which was not sufficiently Licensed? And whether you
together with your Minister, have not taken diligent heed and care, that every
of your Parishioners being of sixeteene years of age or upwards, have received
thrice every year, as aforesaid: and also that no stranger have usually come
to your Church, from their own Parish Church?

36 Item, whether have there bin provided against every Communion, a sufficient
quantity of fine white bread, and of good and wholesome wine for the
communicants that shall receive? And whether that wine be brought in a clean
and sweet standing pot of pewter, or of other purer metal?

37 Item, whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the
parishioners? And have the late Churchwardens given up a just account for
their time, and delivered to their Successors the money, and other things
belonging to the Church, which was in their hands? And are the Alms of the
Church faithfully distributed to the use of the poor?

VII. Concerning the Parishoners.
38 Whether is there any of your Parishioners, being sixteen years of age,
or upwards, or others lodging or commonly resorting to any house within your
parish, that do wilfully absent them selves from your Parish Church upon
Sundays or Holidays, at Morning and Evening Prayers: or who come late to
Church, and depart from Church before Service be done upon the said days? Or
who do not reverently behave themselves during the time of Divine Service
devoutly kneeling when the general confession of sins, the Letany, the ten
Commandments, and all prayers and Collects are read and using all due and
lowly reverence, when the blessed Name of the Lord Jesus Christ is mentioned,
and standing up when the Articles of the Belief are read, or who do cover
their heads in the Church during the time of Divine Service, unless it be in
case of necessity, in which case they may wear a Night cap or Coyse? Or who
do give themselves to babbling* talking, or walking, and are not attentive to
the word preached, or read: or reading, or praying, during the time aforesaid?
Whether any of your Parish being of sixteen years of age and upwards, do not
receive the holy Communion in your Church thrice every year: whereof once at
Easter and whether they do not devoutly kneel at the receiving thereof?

39 Item, whether any of your Parishioners, being admonished, thereof, do not
send their children, servants, and apprentises to the Minister, to be
catechized upon such Sundays and Holidayes as are appointed? or whether any of
them do refuse to come: or if they come, refuse to learn the Catechism set
forth in the book of Common Prayer?

40 Item how many of the said Catechismes have bin dispersed in your Parish or
Chapel, according to the number of such children and servants as can read
and are to learn the same, according to the late Iniunction of your Ordinary,
and who they be that have refused to obey that order so enjoined? and what are
their several names?

41 Item, whether any of your Parish do entertain within their house any
soiournier, common guests, or other persons, who refuse to frequent divine
Service, or receive the holy Communion, as aforesaid? Present their names,
their qualities or conditions.

42 Item, what recusa^t Papists are there in your parish? or have dwelt or made
usual abode there within the space of two or three years last past, and
whether they still dwell or remain there, or where do they dwell, or make
their abode? Present their names, qualities, or conditions. And whether keep
they any Schoolmasters in their house, which comes not to Church to hear
Divine Service and receive the Communion? What is his name, and how long has
he taught there, or else where?

43 Item, whether do any of the said Popish Recusants labor to seduce and
withdraw others from the Religion now established? or instruct their Families
or children in Popish Religion? or refuse to entertain any, especially in
place of greatest service or trust, but such as concur with them in their
Papistry?

44 Item, whether the tuition of the children of any of your Parishioners,
dying within your Parish, be committed to any Popish Recusants convict,
contrary to the Stat. 3 I^^. Cap. 5. and if so, to present and certify the
names both of such children, and of the Tutors, or Guardians, to whose tuition
and education they are committed.

45 Item, how long have the said Popish Recusants abstained from Divine Service
or from the Communion as aforesaid?

46 Item, whether is there any in your parish that retain undefaced, or sell,
utter or disperse any Popish Books or Writings or other Books, Libels, or
writings of any Seetaries, touching the Religion, State, or Government
Ecclesiastical of this Kingdom of England, or keep any Ornaments of
superstition uncancelled or undefaced?

48 Item, whether have you any in your parish, which hertofore being Popish
Recusants, or Sectaries, have since reformed themselves, and come to Church to
hear Divine Service, and receive the Sacraments? If yea* then who they are:
and how long since have they so reformed themselves? And whether they still
remain and abide in that conformity?

49 Item, whether is there any in your parish, that refuse to have their
children baptized, or themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your
Minister, taking exception against him, and what causes or exceptious do they
allege? Or have any married wives refused to come to Church according to the
book of Common prayer to give God thanks after their Childbirth, for their
safe deliverance? And whether do any of, or in your Parish, refuse to have
their children Baptized in your parish Church, according to the form
prescribed in the book of common prayer?

50 Item, whether any in your parish having a Preacher to your Parson Uicar, or
Curate do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to other places to
hear other Preachers: or whether any of your parish do Communicate or Baptize
their children in any other parish?

51 Item, what persons within your parish, for any offense, contumacy or crime
of Ecclesiastical conusance, do stand Excommunicate? Present their names, and
for what cause they are Excommunicated, and how long they have so stood, and
what person and persons do wittingly and usually keep them company.

52 Item, whether do any, not being in Orders, execute any Priestly or
Ministerial office in your Church, Chapel or Churchyard, and what be their
names?

53 Item, whether is there any in your parish, that having hertofore taken upon
him the Order of Priesthood, or Deacon, has since relinquished the same and
lives a Layman neglecting his vocation?

54 Item, whether has any person or persens in your parish quarrelled or
stricken or used any violence to your Minister, or has stricken or quarreld
with any other person within your Church or Churchyard, or demeaned himself
disorderly in the Church, by filthy or profane talk, or any other lewd or
immodest behauior? Or have disturbed the Minister in time of divine Service or
Sermon, or have libelled or spoken slanderous words against your Minister to
the scandal of his vocation* or defamed any of his neighbors touching any
crime of Ecclesiastical conusance?

55 Item, whether have any of, or in your parish, without consent of the
Ordinary, or other lawful authority, caused any to do penance, or to be
censured or punished for any matter of Ecclesiastical conusance, by any
Uestry-meetings, or otherwise by their own authority? or have taken any money
or co^mutatio^ for the same present their names that have don it? and who have
been so punished: in what manner* and upon what cause.

56. Item whether any person in your parish do exercise any trade or labor*
buy or sell, or keep open shops or warehouses upon any Sunday or Holiday by
themselves, their servants or apprentices, or have otherwise profaned the said
days, contrary to the orders of the Church of England? And whether there be
any Inn keepers, Ale-house-keepers, Uictualers, or other persons that permit
any persons in their houses to eat, drink, or play during the time of Divine
Service, or Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoone or afternoon,
upon these days?

57 Item, whether has the fifth day of November bin kept holy, and thanksgiving
made to God* for his Majesty's and this States happy deliverance, according to
the Ordinance in that behalf? And whether have you in your Parish Church or
Chapel the books in this behalf set forth and commanded by public
authority.

58 Item, whether does any of your parish hold or frequent any conue^ticles or
private congregations, or make or maintain any constitutions, agreed upon in
any such assemblies? Or are there any that do write, or publicly or privately
speak against the book of Common prayer, or any thing therein contained, or
against any of the Articles of Religion, agreed upon in Anno 1562. or against
the Kings Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, or against the Oath of
Supremacy, or of Allegiance, as pretending the same to be unlawful, and not
warrantable by the Word of God? Or against any of the Rites or Ceremonies of
the Church of England now established? Or against the government of the Church
of England, under the Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops Bishops,
Deanes Archdeacons and other Officers of the same: affirming, that the same is
repugnant to the Word of God, and that the said Ecclesiastical Officers are not
lawfully ordained? Or whether be there any Authors, maintainers, or favorers
of Heresy or Schism, or that be suspected to be Anabaptists, Libertines
Brownists of the Family of Love, or of any other Heresy or Schism: present
their names.

59 Item whether have any in your Parish married within the degrees by law
prohibited; or any couple in your Parish being lawfully married, live apart one
from the other, without due separation of the Law: or any that have bin
divorced, which keep company with any other at Bed or at Board, and when and
where they married?

58 Item, whether do any persons administer the goods of the dead without
lawful authority, or suppress the last will of the dead? Or are there in
your Parish any wills not yet proved, or goods of the dead dying intestate left
vnadministred? By authority in that behalf you shall not fail to present the
Executors, and all others faulty therein: and also how many persons being
possessed of any goods and chattels, have dyed within your Parish since the
year 1617.

59 Item, whether does any withold the stock of the Church, or any goods or
other things, given to good and charitable uses?

60 Item, whether are your Hospitalls and Almes-houses and other such houses
and Corporations, founded to good and charitable uses: and the lands,
possessions, and goods of the same, ordered and disposed of as they should be?
And do the Masters, Governors, Fellows, and others of the said Houses and
Corporations, behave and demean themselves, according to the godly Ordinances,
and Statutes of their several Foundations?

61 Item, whether have you any in your parish to your knowledge, or by common
fame and report, which have committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest, or any
which have impude^tly bragged or boasted that he or she have lived
incontinently with any person or persons whatsoever: or any that has attempted
the chastity of any woman, or solicited any woman to have the carnal knowledge
of her body, or which are commonly reputed to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers
of Gods holy Name, common Swearers, common Slanderers of their Neighbors, and
sowers of discord, filthy and laciuious talkers, Usurers, Symonaicall persons,
Bawds, or harbourers of women with child which be unmarried, or conueying or
suffering them to go away before they have made satisfaction to the
congregation, or any that having heretofore been presented, or suspected of any
the aforesaid crimes, have for that cause departed your parish, and are now
returned again? Or any which have used any enchantments, sorceries,
incantations or witchcrafts, which are not made felony by the statutes of this
Realm, or any which have committed any perjury in any Ecclesiastical Court,
in an Ecclesiastical cause, or which have committed any forgery, punishable by
the Ecclesiastical laws, and the procurers and abettors of the said offenses?
You shall truly present the names of all and singular the said offenders, and
with whom they have committed the said offenses, in case they have not bin
publicly punished to your knowledge for the same crimes.

62 Item, whether was the public prayers and fast lately enjoined by authority
for the pacifying of Gods wrath, and for asswaging the late fearful Plague,
been duly and solemnly performed both by your Minister and Parishioners on
the days and times appointed, as also, The day of thanksgiving for Gods mercy
in asswaging that fearful sickness, being Religiously observed, according to
those public forms set forth by authority, and whether have you the said
Books so published, as by the same authority you were commanded.

VIII. Concerning Ecclesiastical Magistrates and Officers.
63 WHether do you know or have heard of any payment, composition, or
agreement, to, or with any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, or Officer, for
winking at, or sparing to punish any person for any offense of Ecclesiastical
conusance, or for suppressing, or concealing of any Recusant, or any other
offendour in the cases afore-sayd? What sum of money, or other consideration
has bin received or promised, by, or to any of them in that respect, by whom
and with whom?

64 Item, whether has any person within your parish, paid, or promised any sum
of money or other reward, for communication of penance for any crime of
Ecclesiastical conusance? If so, then with whom, when, and for what and how
has the same been employed?

65 Item whether are your Ecclesiastical Judges and their Substitutes Masters
of Arts or Bachelours of the Law at the least, learned and practiced in the
Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws: Men of good life and fame, zealously affected
in Religion, and just upright in executing their offices? Have they heard any
matter of Office privately in their chambers, without their sworn Registers,
or their Deputies presence?

66 Item, whether do you know, or have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical
Judge, Offcer, or Minister has received or taken any extraordinary fees, or
other rewards or promises, by any ways or means directly, or indirectly, of
any person or persons whatsoever, either for the granting of the administration
of the goods and chattells of those that have died intestate, to one before
another, or for allotting of larger portions of the goods and chattells of
those that have dyed intestate to one more then to another: or for allowing
large and unreasonable accounts, made by Executors or administrators: or for
giving them Quietus est, or discharges, without Inuentory or account, to
defraud Creditors, and Legataries, or those who are to have portions? And what
sums of money do you know, or have you heard that any Ecclesiastical Judge or
Officer has taken out of the state of any dying intestate, upon pretense (...)


