:: ARTICLES to be enquired of, in the Kings Majesty's Visitacion.
FIrst, whether that the Bishop, Archedeacons, and other, having iurisdiccion
Ecclesiastical, have caused only to be song or said the English Procession
in their Cathedral church, and other churches of their Diocese.

Item, whether your Bishop, Chauncelor, Commissarie, Archedeacon, or Official
be propence and light in excommunicating of men, for a little Lucre.

Item, whether they or any of them, for one man's trespace, have taken away
from the people, and the whole parishioners, their divine service, as for
violatyng and suspendyng the church yeardes and such like.

Item, whether they do take excessive somes of money for consecrating again
either of the church yeardes, or of any other ornaments for the use of alters,
or of belles, where is no need of consecracion, but is supersticiouse and
lucratiue.

Item, whether that they or any of them take any great exactions, for
institucions, induccio^s assignations of pencions, or for any other matter
Ecclesiastical.

Item, whether they do lightly call any Persons before them, ex officio, and
put the^ to their purgacion, without urgent suspicion or infamy proved.

Item, whether the Bishop have not preached without dissimulacion, against the
usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, and setfurth the kings Majesty's
Jurisdiction to be the only supreme power in all his realms and dominions.

Whether the Bishop have personally preachede in any of your churches, or any
where with in this diocese, and how often in the year.

Item, whether he and his officers have diligently executed for their part, our
late Kings Injunctions and his letters missiues, for a due order in the
religion of Christ, and caused the said Injunctions and letters, to be
diligently put in execution thorough his Diocese.

Item, whether he has learned and discrete officers under him, that do without
any respect of persons punyshe such crimes, as apperteyneth to Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.

Item, whether he or any of his officers, do take any money or other gift, to
hyde and cloak adultery, or any other notorious vice, that ought by them to be
punished.

Item, if any commutacion of penance have been made to a pecuniary some, to
what purpose the same has been converted, and what good deeds has been done
with the same, and specify the same deeds.

Item whether the bishop has such chaplains about him, as been hable to
preach the word of God, and do the same purely and syncerely, and how often in
the year, how many they be, and what be their names.

ITem whether Persons, Vicars and Curates, and every of them, have justly and
truly without dissimulacio^, preached against the usurped power, and pretensed
authority and iurisoiccio^ of the bishop of Rome.

Item whether they have preached and declared, that the Kings Majesty's power,
authority, and preeminence, is within this Realm and the dominions of
the same, the most supreme and highest under God.

Item, whether any person has by writing, Cyphryng, Printyng, preaching, or
teaching, deed, or act, obstinatly holden and stand with, to extol, set
furthe, maintein or defend, the authority, iurisdiccion or power of the
bishopp of Rome, or of his Sea, heretofore claimed and usurped: or by any
pretense, obstinatly or maliciously inverted any thing for the extollyng of the
same, or any part thereof.

Item, whether they have declared to their Parishioners the articles concerning
the abrogacion of certain superfluous holy days, and dooen their endeavor, to
persuade their said Parishioners to keep and observe the same articles
inuiolably, and whether any of those abrogated days has since thesaied
abrogacion, been kept as holy days, contrary to thesaid articles, and by whose
occasion they were so kept.

Whether there do remain not taken down in your Churches, Chapelles, or else
where, any misused Images, with Pilgrimages, clothes, stones, shoes,
offerynges, kissynges, Candelstickes, trindilles of wax, and such other like,
and whether there do remain not delaied and destroyed, any Shrines, coueryng
of Shrines, or any other monument of Idolatry, Supersticio^ and Hypocrysy.

Whether they have not diligently taught upon the Sondaies and holy days,
their Parishioners, and specially the youth, their Pater noster, the Articles
of our faith, and the Ten commaundemetes in English, and whether they have
expounded and declared the understanding of the same.

Whether they have diligently, duly and reverently, ministered the sacraments
in their cures.

Whether such beneficed men, as be lawfully absent from their benefices, do
leave their cure to a rude and unlearned person, and not to an honest, well
learned and expert Curate.

Whether they have provided and laid in some convenient place of the church
where they have cure, a bible of the largest volume in English.

Whether Persons, Vicars, Curates, Chau^tery Priests, and other stipendaries
be common haunters and resorters to Tauernes and alehouses, giving themselfes
to excessive drinkyng riotyng, and plaiyng at vulawfull games, and apply not
themselfes chiefly to the study of scripture, teaching of youth, or some other
honest and Godly exercise.

Whether they be resident upon their benefices, and keep hospitality or no:
and if they be abse^t or keep no hospitality, whether they do make due
distribucion emonges the poor Parishioners or no.

Whether they having yearly to dispe^d in spiritual promocio^s an C. l. do not
find co^petenly one scolar in any university, or at some gra^met scole, and
for asmany C. l. as every of them may dispend, so many scolars likewise be
found by them, and what be their names that they so find.

Whether they keep their Chauncelles, Rectories, Vicarages, and all other
houses apperteynyng to them, in due reparacions.

Whether they have every lent, required their Parishioners in their confession,
to recite their Pater noster, tharticles of our faith, and the ten
commandments in English.

Whether they have cou^sailed or moved their Parishioners, rather to pray in a
toungue not known then in English, or to put their trust in any prescribed
number of prayers, as in saying over a number of beads or other like.

Whether they have preached, or caused to be preached purely and syncerely the
word of God and the faith of christ in every of their cures, every quarter of
the year once at the least: Exhortyng their Parishioners to the works
commanded by scripture, and not to works divised by man's fantasies.

Whether in their sermons, their have exhorted the fathers and Mothers,
Masters, and governors of youth, to bring them up in some verteous study or
occupacion.

Whether they have exhorted the people to obedience to the kings Majesty and
his officers and to charity and love, one to another.

Whether they have moved the people to read and hear the scripture in
English, and have not discoraged them from readyng and hearing of the same
such as be not prohibited so to do.

Whether they have declare to their parishioners, that they ought to know and
understand the Pater noster, the articles of our faith, and ten commandments
in English, before they should receive the blessed Sacrament of the altar.

Whether they have taught the people the true use of Images, which is only to
put them in remembrance of the Godly and verteous life's of them that they do
represent: and have taught that if thesaied people use the Images for any other
purpose, they commit Idolatry, to the great danger of their souls.

Whether they have declared, and to their wits and power have persuaded the
people, that the manner and kind of fasting in Lent and other days in the
year, is but a mere positive law, and that therefore all persons having just
cause of sickness, or necessity, or being licenced by the kings Majesty, may
temperately eat all kinds of meat without grudge or scruple of conscience.

Whether your Parsonnes, Vicars, and Curates have showed and declared unto you,
the true use of ceremonies, that is to say: That they be no workers, nor
works of salvation, but only outward signs and tookens to put us in
remembrance of things, of higher perfection.

Whether they have admitted any man to preach in their cures, not being
lawfully licenced thereunto, or have refused or repelled such to preach, as
have been so licenced.

Whether they, which have spoken and declared any thing, for the settingfurth
of pilgrimages; feigned relics, images, or any such supersticion, have not
openly recanted the same.

Whether they have one book or registre sauefely kept, wherein they write the
day of every wedding, christening, and buriyng.

Whether the kings Iniunccions were quarterly red or not.

Whether they have declared to their paryshyoners; that saint Marks day,
and the euens of the abrogated holy days, should not be fasted.

Whether the knollynge at the Aues be used.

Whether they have the procession book in English, and in their processions use
none other Letany, but that, which is setfurthe in the same book. And whether
they omit the same English Letany at any time in their processions:and whether
they have had the same Letany as often as they were commanded.

Whether they have put out of their church books, this word Papa, and the
name and seriuce of Thomas Becket, and prayers having rubricies, containing
Pardons or indulgences and all other superlticious lege^des and prayers.

Whether they bid the beads according to the order prescribed by our late
sovereign lord king Henry the. VIII.

Whether they or any of them, have been admitted to their benefices by Simony,
or by any other unlawful means.

Whether in their masses they use not the collectes made for the King, and make
not special mention of his Majesty's name in the same.

Whether they or any of them, do keep mo benefices, and other Ecclesiastical
promocions then they ought to do, not having sufficient licenses and
dispensacio^s thereunto, and how many they keep, and their names.,:,

WHether you know any person, that is a letter of the word of God, to be
read in English: So that it be mekely, humbly, and reverently done, and
without disturbaunce of the people, and by them that have authority there to.

Whether you know any person spiritual or temporal, which does let the
word of God, to be preached, or that the Kings Injunctions should not be
duly executed.

Whether any person has obstinately and maliciously, without a just and
reasonable cause, broken the laudable ceremonies of the Church, commanded to
be observed, or supersticiously abused the same: as in casting of holy Water
upon their beds and other places, and bearyng about them holy bread, or
making crosses of woodde upon Palm Sundaye, or blessyng with the holy Candell,
thinkyng thereby to put away sins, drive away deuilles, dreams, and
fantasies, or putting trust or confidence of salvation in the same
ceremonies, whereas they be ordained only to put us in remembrance of the
benefits, which we have received by Christ.

Whether any person spiritual or temporal, keep the Church holy day, and the
dedication day, at any other time, then is appointed by the ordinance made in
that behalf by the Kings Majesty.

Whether Matens, Mass, and Euensong, be kept at due hours in the Church.

Whether any be braulers, slaunderers, chiders, scolders, and sowers of
discord, between one person and another.

Whether any be common swearers, or blasphemers of the name of God.

Whether any use, lewd, unchaste, dishonest, and filthy communicacion, songs or
ballettes.

Whether any do use to common, Iangle or talk in the Church, at the time of
the divine service, Preaching, Readyng, or declaryng the word of God.

Whether any do obstinatly keep and defend any erroneous opinion, contrary to
the word of God, and faith of Christ.

Whether any commit adultery, fornicacion, or incest, or be common baudes, and
receiuors of such naughty persons.

Whether you know any that use Charms. Sorrery, Enchauntmentes, Witchecraft,
sothesaiyng, or any other like craft invented by the devil.

Whether you know any to be married within the degrees prohibited by the law
of God, or that be separated and divorced without a just cause, approved by
the law of God, and whether any such have married again.

Whether the Church, Pulpit, and other necessary things apperteinyng to
the same, he sufficiently repaired.

Whether you know any to have made privy contractes of Matrimony, not calling
two or more thereunto.

Whether any have married solempnely without bannes askyng.

Whether you know any that have taken upon them, the execucion of any man's
testament, or be admitted to the administracio^ of the goods of the dedde,
which do not duly distribute the same goods, according to the trust committed
unto them, and specially such goods, as were given and bequethed, or
appointed to be distributed among the poor people, repairing of high ways,
finding of poor scholars, or marriage of poor maids.

To what uses and intentes, all such gifts and bequestes, of cattail, money,
and other things, as in times past were made, for the findyng of tapers,
candelles, or lamps, in the Church, be now employed, and whether they be
embecilled and withholden, and by whom.

Whether there be any persons, commonly enfamed of adultrie, fornicacion,
common swearyng, blasphemyng the name of God, dronckennesse. Simony, or other
notorious crime, whom the bishop, Archedeacon, or other his ordinary, for favor
or fear, have not corrected accordyngly, although they have been sundery times
presented, and detected in visitacion, or otherwise lawfully accused.

Whether there be any other primars, used by them that do not understand
Latin, then the Englysh Pryme, rsethfurth by the kings Majesty: And whither
they that understand Latin, do use any other then the latin primar settfurth by
like authority.

Whether there be any other Gra^mer taught in any schole, within the realm,
then that which is setfurth by the kings Majesty.

Whether they know any alienacion of lands, tenementes, iewelles or goods,
perteyning to the Church.

For chauntry Priests.
WHether they be residente on their Chauntries.

Whether they be aydinge and assistynge the person or Vicar of the Church,
that they be of in the ministracion of ye Sacraments, and divine service
accordingly.

Whether they keep and perform all such dooles and distribucions to the
pore, and other deeds of Charity, as they are bound by their foundacions to
do.

Whether they be of evil name, fame, or dishonest conversation, fighters,
swerers, dronckardes, or incontinent lyuers.

Item, what benefices and how many they have, besides their Chauntryes, and by
what title they do keep the same.

Richardus Grafton Regis Impressor excudebat.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimeudum solum.


