THE LIFE OR THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF S. THOMAS ARCHBISHOPE OF
CANTERBVRY.

COLLONIAE.

M.DC.XXXIX.

TO THE MOST REVERENT FATHER IN GOD RICHARD SMYTH BISHOPE OF CHALCEDONE etc.
MOST Reverent and my most honored good Lord,

I have always apprehended the life and Martyrdom of that most excellent
Prelate, and undaunted Champion, S. Thomas Archbishope of Canterbury, a most
perfect Pattern of a good Pastor, yea and of a good subject too, as one wisely
discerning Gods part from Caesar's, and giving to either their own, without
which there can be no Christian justice. Take his own golden, and last words
for it, written to King Henry his sovereign; Prepared I am, not only to die,
but also to suffer a thousand deaths, and all torments whatsoever for Christ's
sake: Yet whether I die or live, Cod. Vat. l. 5. Epist. 54.
I am and shall ever be yours; and what ever becomes of us and ours, God ever
bless you and your issue. So that I have judged no time misspent, in culling
the pieces out of the most authentical and best Authors, which have concurred
to the making up of this little bulk, or Epistolarie process of his life and
death; which I hope will appear most contentfull and satisfactorie to all, and
fittest to frame a right judgment in any: as not being crooked and fitted to
self ends by artificall amplifications, but furnished by known fact, and
made good by so many and so ir^eprochable witnesses, as it cannot indeed be
suspected to be in any part disguised or forced by corruption or malice, but to
deliver a naked truth.

Now amongst all those, whom I duly reverence and honor in earth, I could find
none, to whose patronage this poor work of mine, might lay a more just
claim then to your Lordship: like as, in my judgment, your Lordshipe can
pretend no Patron in Heaven, to whom you may have a more confident recourse,
or with whom you might have more sympathy, being considered such as he lived
in this earthly habitation, for Religiousnesse, zeal, contrie, cause,
constancy. None which comes more home to your use in respect of your long
delay in banishment, and the opposition you have found, even amongst some of
your children, and those domesticalls of faith. In a word, in reading it you
will not fail before your death, to read a great part of your own renowned
life. May it, I beseech almighty God, be long, contentfull, prosperous in
earth: and followed out with an eternally blessed one in heaven. These are, and
ever shall be, the zealous wishes of all good men; and in particular of

Your Lords. most humble and devoted servant. A. B.

THE PREFACE TO THE Epistolarie and Ecclesiastical History of saint Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury.
INTENDING to present unto your view out of that reverent an renowned author
Cardinal Baronius the great controversy beetweene the Church and kingdom of
England, wherein the chief actors in this our disturbed nation, were, that
mighty King Henry the second, and our Metropolitan saint Thomas Archbishop
of Canterbury, and in foreign countries that most holy and wise Pope Alexander
the 3. and Jews the pious king of France, with many Catholic Princes, and
among the Scismatickes the potent Emperor Frederick with his idol Octauian,
seeking by all means to intrude themselves, and put their sickles into this
harvest, where the Devil the father of their execrable scysme, like a deep
politician taking advantage of their hellish discord had in this unfortunate
Island sowed the cockle of dissension, I thought best in regard this canker so
spread it self through the Christian world, and this history was collected
out of the Epistles written by the chiefest rulers in that age, to lay open
briefly the state of the western Church, and kingdoms united therein,
whereby your minds receiving light may better discover things otherwise
obscured. First therefore to delineate the time, I must somewhat touch the
reign of Pope Adrian, Alexanders predecessor, who being the only man of our
English nation that ever steered saint Peeters ship, and was not only for his
singular virtues, wisdom and learning preferred to the Apostolic Sea, but
also himself the Apostle who converted the Norwegyans to the Christian faith,
I think it no unnecessary digression to treat of his origin, progress, and
most high preferment.

At Abbotts Langley in the County of Hertford, near kings Langley, Nicolas
Breakespeare afterward Pope Adria^, borne in England.
where Edmund of Langley received his first breath, from whom all the kings of
England and Scotland have these many years descended, was borne Nicolas
Breakespeare, who afterward exalted to the government of the Church of Rome,
and called Adrian the fourth, ruled in matters of faith and Religion, the whole
Christian world. His father was Robert Breakespeare a younger brother of the
family of Breakespeare, whose place concurring with the name is seated near
Vxbridge in Middelsex now in the possession of Ashby. His father (says John
Stowe) after the death of his wife, and before the departure (as I conceive) of
his son out of the realm, professed a Religious life in the Monastery of
saint Abbans; wherein Stowe ignorantly, not maliciously ran into an error, for
Pope Adrians mother (as shall be afterward showed) ouerliued him. It
appears in a Counsel celebrated in Normandy by Pope Alexanders Legates with
the Archbishop of Roane and Bishops of the same Province anno Dom. 1172. how
before that time men might enter into religion leaving their wives in the
world, for there was made a Canon afterward prohibiting it. And so might
Robert Breakespeare in this precedent age (as it is affirmed) be a Monk in
saint Abbans, and his wife (as it is certain) ledd a retired life under the
Archbishop in Canterbury. The name of Breakespeare being truly English, and
about the time of the Conquest, inuincibly proves they were of the Saxon not
of the Norman race. Breakespeare it self was in the reign of king James the
inheritable mansion of a knight, and how great in forepassed days, God
knows. But (as saint Thomas says in his Epistle to Gylbert Bishop of
London) what has a priest, a religious man to do with these worldly
flourishes? I will descend to his humiliation, which was his ascent, first to
honor, then to heaven. All that follows is collected out of Card. Baronius.
Leaving as Abraham his country and kindred, he traveled in his youth to
pourchase learning, and coming to Arnulate professed religion in the Monastery
of saint Rufus, where he was called first to be Prior, then Abbot of the
house, whereupon it fortuned that for serious occasions of the Church commended
to his charge he went to the Apostolic Sea, and having fully finished all his
business, and now intending to return, Pope Eugenius of blessed memory retained
him there, and by consent of his brethren, Pope Eugenius Adrian Bishop of
Alba.
did consecrate him Bishop of Alba. A while after, seeing his virtues and
wisdom, he designed him Legate a Latere of the Apostolic Sea into Norwaye
to preach the faith in that Province, Adrian Apostle of Norwaye.
and purchase to allmighty God their misdebelieuing souls, where he like a
worthy and discreet steward and disciple of Christ, diligently instructed
that rude and Barbarous nation in the Christian law and Ecclesiastical
ordinances. Pope Anastacius.
After by the divine providence upon the death of Eugenius and preferment of
Anastacius to the Papal throne, he returned to his mother the holy Church of
Rome, leaving beehind him peace to the kingdom, laws to the barbarous,
tranquillity to the Churches, order and discipline to the Clergy, and a people
acceptable to God and fruitful in good works. Within a short time after dyed
Anastacius, and the Bishops and Cardinals assembling together in saint Peeters
Church by the dispensation of the divine counsel, speedily chose him Pope,
Pope Ad^ia^
and with great acclamation of the Clergy and layetie, as a man elected by
Allmighty God (allthough he labored with all his power to avoid it) they
inthronized him in the papal chair, calling him Adrian the fourth 3. Non.
December. An. Dom. 1156. He was a man of singular benignity, The praise of Pope
Adrian.
meek and patient, learned in the Greek and Latin tongues, eloquent in
speech, a perfect Orator, very skillfull in Church music, a famous preacher,
seldom angry, willing to pardon, bountiful in beestowing, a great Almesma^,
and for demeanor and beehauiour renowned. This much out of the Vaticane
library. Now to show that he esteemed his honor a burden, his dignity a
misery, and that he would never have undergone the weighty charge of this
supreme authority, but only to satisfy the will of almighty God, I do here
recite his own words spoken to that worthy John of Salusbury in Polichrati
lib. 8. cap. 23. He confessed he found in that high estate so great
tribulations, as in comparison of them all his former bitter aduersitys, seemed
sweet and pleasing; He said, the seat of the Roman Pope was a thorny
throne, beegirt with most sharp spurs, of that huge weight, as it was able
to press, to bend, yea break in pieces the strongest shoulders, and but that
(said he) I will not struggle against the divine providence, I would I had
never gone out of my native soil of England, or else ever lurked in my poor
Cell of saint Rufus, rather then to be plunged in these extreme difficultyes:
yea he professed that in all his ascentes from his solitary cloister to the
supreme heygth of the Papacy he found noe contentment or pleasure; yea (quoth
he) god has stretched out my whole life beetweene the anuile and the hammer;
but now (if it pleases his divine goodness) let him supporte with his allmighty
hand the burden that he has imposed on my infirmity, or otherwise it is
intolerable. Thus he teaches from the highest throne of this world to fly
honors; thus he preaches from the greatest eminency to all Potentates not to
repose themselves in glory, riches, and pleasures, which are but the shadows
of their seats, but deeply to consider the charge, that by reason of their
authority they undergo, which is to employ their uttermost forces to honor
Almighty god in the ryghtuous government of the people subjected to their
powers, for otherwise Potentes potenter punientur. Nether would I ever have
dilated my self so far in praise of Pope Adrian, but that some of our
Chronickles ignorantly, others wilfully omit his commendation. They confess
he converted Norwaye, and gave the dominion of Ireland to the kings of
England; but as the first was only for enlargeing the kingdom of Christ; so
was the last, as you may see in his Epistle to Henry the second. Now craving
pardon for my digression in the praise of this man, the glory of our nation,
who prefered god before his country and all, I will return to the matter.

Frederick king of the Romans in his first entrance into his royalty, began
impiously to increase his dominion, Frederick king of the Rom^nes a perpetual
enemy of the Church.
with the suppression of the Church; and by how much his power was the greater
(for he commanded all Germany, and mightily prevailed in Italy) so much the
more was he enabled to mischeife. This wasting flame, which so much endangered
the whole Christian world, showed it self as a little spark in the reign of
Pope Eugenius, gathered strength by the conniuancy of his successor Anastacius,
began to waste the power of our noble Adrian, and lastly fired Alexander the
third out of Italy, and devoured for the time all his jurisdiction in Germany,
and had not Christ maintained his Church against the gates of Hell, France,
England, Spain, with all the rest had been ruinated. The original of the
discord beetweene the Church and the Emperor.
The original was the first year of his reign, in the Church of Magdeburghe
the Metropolitan of Saxony, where upon the death of the Archbishop, a
dissension aryseing about choosing his successor, they appealed to Frederick
then residing in Saxony, who not able to compose the controversy, persuaded
the Deane and Chapter of Magdebourghe to accept of Guicman Bishop of Cicens, a
noble young gentleman to govern their Church, pretending that when such
questions arose, the king with advice of his counsel ought to dispose therein,
nether was any Bishop in that case to be consecrated, till he had received
his authority from the kingly scepter. But all this was a false pretense, for
it lay not in the kings or Emperors power, causelessly to translate Bishops
from seat to seat, without assent of the Apostolic Sea, which holy Pope
Eugenius righty considering, with singular constancy withstood the kings
unlawful attempt, sharply reproving the Bishops of Germany, that labored
for him, because they rather sought to flatter their prince in concurring with
his sin, then to please God; and this did he not only with his learned and
pious Epistle, but also vehemently persued the same by his Legates. But
Eugenius prevented by death, left all to his successor Anastacius, a man of a
gentle and yielding disposition: For notwithstanding his Legate was
disgracefully abused by Frederick, and ended his life in his return home, he
nevertheless ratifyd the kings election, and granted Guicman his Pall;
whereupon Frederick declining from his religious zeal increased year by
year in obstinacy against the Church. And Anastacius not long after departing
the world our countreyman being instantly elected by the name of Adrian the
fourth, Pope Adria^ assaulted by the King of Cecil. The king of Cecill
excommunicated. Pope Adria^ terrifyed by Frederick king of the Romans.
found the kings insolency much strengthened against him by his predecessors
facility of nature. In the beeginning of his Popedom he was troubled with the
invasions of William king of Cecil, wherefore against his temporal sword, he
drew his spiritual sword and excommunicated him. Frederick also king of the
Romans with his sudden approach toward the City terrifyed him; whereupon
he sent Legates to treat with Frederick, and Frederick likewise two
Ambassadors, being Archbishoppes, to the Pope; Octauian enemy to the Pope and
Cardinals.
which Legates and Ambassadors meeting together, went jointly to Frederick at
Viturbi: where first Octauian, afterward that firebrand of Christendom, began
to show his turbulent spirit. This man nobly borne in Rome, and descended from
the Earls of Tuscan, Priest, Cardinal of the title of Saint Cecill, like
another Judas ever endeavoring what he could against the Pope, the Church,
and College of Cardinals, being dismissed from his Holiness, in regard he
sought to raise a sedition by the Scysmatickes, intruded himself without
commission to confound the peace, which was now to be concluded by the
meditation of the Legates and Archbishoppes, beetweene the Pope and Frederick;
but being sharply reproved by his brethren the Legates, he was for this time
with shame, repressed: and so suppressed the poison which since he vomited.
This being, thus ouerblasted, the king in a great and most solemme assembly of
his nobility and knights, caused his fealty to be sworn by his deputy to the
Pope. The Empeperours oathe of fealty to the Pope and Church.
Which was to preserve the Pope and Cardinals with their state, and not to
do any injury, or suffer any injury to be done to them or theires; and if
any should offer to wrong them, he would withstand it to his uttermost power,
and if wrongs were so committed; he would by all means redress them:
Whereupon the Pope being satisfyd, resolved to inuest him with the Imperial
crown, and a day and place was for their meeting appointed. But the king
neglecting to hold the Popes styrrup (a custom formerly used by the Emperors
in honor of the Apostles saint Peeter and saint Paul (as was presently made
manifest by authentical record, The cause and custom of the Emperors
houlding the Popes styrrup.
and otherwise) the Cardinals with drew themselves to places of safety, and
the Pope being left in the power of Frederick, and his army, would not for all
this peril admit the king to the kiss of peace, until he proformed this his
duty to him and the Church; which the king in the end, seeing the ancient
practice thereof, with humility condescended unto. This Master Camden in his
survey of England notes of Pope Adrian, which he being expert in historys
could not choose but know to have bin done by diverse Emperors and kings to
sundry Popes. But to the purpose: the king proceeding to his imperial
coronation, was like to have bin prevented by the Roman Arnoldistes (a
scysmaticall faction then swaying in the Commonwealth) had not Pope Adrian
with his counsel and power made way to him for his coronation in Rome,
Frederick croumed Emperor by Pope Adria^.
where he received, with all ceremonies from the Pope, the Crown and
Imperial ornaments: Which finished, the seditious Romans with a sharp fight
assaulted the Germans, in which conflict many being killed, the Germans in
the end obtained the victory with the slaughter, and captivity of their
adversaries, wherein the Pope showed himself to his Citticens a pious father,
for he never left sollicitinge the Emperor until he had procured their
release. So passing from the Emperor, who hy this perfect or politic amity
concluded with the Pope, found thereupon good success in the wars which he
undertook in his return toward Germany: let us see what beefell to William
king of Cecyll after he was excommunicated. The king incensed heerewith,
commanded the Princes of his army to lay a straight siege to Beneuent, the
Popes familiar court of residence, Beneuent beesieged by the king of Cecill.
to repel which injury, the Pope excited the mightyest Earl in his kindome,
Robert de Bassauyll his cousen-german, with many others of the nobility to make
war upon him, moreover he called in diverse others exiled, The great
co^bination in war of Emperors and others against the king of Cecyll.
and spoiled of their goods by the king and his father, as Robert of Surent a
Prince of Campany and Earl de Rupe canina, with others renowned for parentage
and power, to return into their Country and recover their lost posessions,
promising them the assistance of the Roman Sea: lastly he solicited the
Emperors both of Rome and Constantinople to invade the kingdom of Cecyll:
whereupon the Emperor of Constantinople as strong in men as money took Hadrant
a sea-towne Apulia, the Cittyzens yielding unto him. Earl Robert also with his
followers, what for the love of him, and hatred of the king, violently won
Tarunt and Barum two renowed Metropolitan Seas, with all the sea coasts to
the very bounds of his kindome: The famous and worthy peers the Prince of
Capua and Count Andrew challenged all Campany commonly named the land of labor,
even to Salern, Naples and saint Germans; so as the whole region was in a
mighty combustion. Frederick Emperor of Rome encamping his army about the
coasts of Ancon, endured so great a mortality among his soldiers, as loseing
his most puissant lords, scarce the tenth man remained alive, whereupon being
notable to retain his powers that were wilfully bent to return into their
country, though unwilling, was ready to depart. The king of Cecyl ready to
submit himself to the Pope*
Now the king of Cecyl thus beegirt with assaults, retyring himself with dew
repentance and all humility to obedience, sent the Elect of Catana with the
choysest of his noble attendantes as far as Salerne toward the Pope,
submissiuely beeseeching absolution from this excommunication, and promising to
do homage and swear Fealty to his Holiness, and withal to restore all the
Churches of his kingdom with ample liberty, and give therefore three Castles
called Palud, Montfuscal, and Muron, with their appurtenantes for ever to the
Roman Church, offering to subdewe the rebellious Romans to the Popes
subjection, and if he could recover the grace and favor of the Pope and Church
of Rome, would beestow on them so much money as the Emperor of Constantinople
promised: The Pope therefore assured that all these should be proformed, was
most willing to embrace these conditions, being so honorable and profitable
to the Church: but the Cardinals that were of the Roman Emperors faction,
being too singular in their own conceits, withstood and rejected all this,
and did afterward often the like to the Church of Romes exceeding dommage.

For hereupon the next year a world of miseryes ensued, in regard the king of
Cecyl gathering a most powerful army in Cecill and Calabria, Anno 2. Hadr. Pa.
The king of Cecyl overthrowing his enemies besieges the Pope.
with great iourneys marched into Apulia, where, Prince Robert beetaking him
self to flight, he ouerthrewe about Brundusium at the first onset the Grecian
Host, casting their Captayns captives into chains, and enriching himself
with their treasures, and bringing the whole country into subjection, he went
forward and beesieged in Beneuent the Pope, with the Cardinals, where they and
all the City being overwhelmed in calamityes Adrian was constrained for
redeeming himself, The Pope constrained to crave peace upon unjust conditions.
the Clergy and inhabitants, to receive from the victorious king a peace upon
most unjust terms: neither could the Pope, environed with these streyghts,
include his associates with in the precincts of these conditions, but thus left
to themselves, were forced to seek foreign countries for refuge, where the
Prince of Capua more miserable then the rest, falling into the hands of the
kings freinde was violently deprived of his eyes, and thrown into perpetual
imprisonnement.

Gods revenge upon the king of Cecyl for oppressing the Church.
But this attempt of the king of Cecyl against the Church, was by gods
unsearchable judgment severely punished, for in the second generation was his
Norman race of kings rooted out, and the Crown tra^sferred to the Sweuians
his ancient capital enemies: Moreover during his own life, there never ceased
rebellious tyrans to rise against him, whom allthough he conquered, yet like
Hydras heads they still increased, until inthralling him in hands, they
crowned Roger his son in his throne, and afterward, reskued by the people
out of captivity, he killed his own child to recover his kindogme, soyling
his purple robe with his sons blood: lastly Mayius his Amirant, the chief
contryuer of this mischeife, ended his days, with a most cruel death.

But this peace so established with the King of Cecyll very much displeased
the Emperor Frederick, because the Pope making of this miserable calamity
some commodity, The Emperor displeased at the peace with Cecyl.
had got hereby the king to strengthen him against the Emperor, if he should
attempt any thing against him or the Church; for otherwise the Emperor had bin
ever of power to have commanded the Clergy. Hereupon grew the dissension
among the Cardinals, some favoring the Emperor, others this union with Cecil,
The Cardidinalles divided.
which discord after Adrians death bred the terrible scysme that rent
Christendom in sunder.

The Emperor a trangressor of the Ecclesiastical Cannons thought to awe the
Pope, that he should not correct but condescend to his affairs. An. 3. Had. 4.
For to omit the dismission of his wife, and the marriage of an other, because
it is a matter controuerted, in regard they were within degrees of
consanguinity: Edward Bishop of London imprisoned by the Emperiales was a cause
of dissension between the Pope and Emperor.
I will come to Edward Bishop of London, who, passing in his return from the
Sea Apostolic through the Emperors dominitions, was assaulted with naked
swords, robbed of all his goods, and violently detayned a prisoner: whereupon
the Pope wrote to the Emperor, requiring the Bishops release, and condign
punishment for the offenders. But the Emperor neglected all, whereby the
malefactors being encouraged, withheld the Bishop still in captivity. The Pope
not enduring so great a wrong and indignity, addressed two Legates, the one
Rowland Priest Cardinal of the title of saint Mark, Chancellor of the Roman
Church, afterward Alexander the third (whose very person in this case yielded
matter to the ensuing dissension) the other Bernard Priest, Cardinal of the
title of saint Clement; sending by them letters, wherein, having expostulated
this heinous and sacriligious offense, with the impunity thereof as yet
tolerated, he descended to the benefittes latety conferred by the Church on
the Emperor, namely that he received the fullnes of his dignity and honor,
together with the ensign of his Imperial Crown from the Popes hands, nor
yet did it repent him if he had conferred greater benefitts on him,
considering what singular augmentations and commodityes might by him be
rendered to the Church again. These words the princes of the Empire took to
the heart, as if the Emperor should receive from the Pope the Empire of Rome
and kingdom of Italy, remembering withal certain verses and a picture in Rome
made to that purpose, which being offensive to the Germans, Pope Adrian had
before commanded to be abolished, The Emperor and Emperialles vehemently
incensed against the Pope and Cardinals.
least so vain a trifle should otherwise breed matter of discord among
Princes: But all these now concurring in one, and being tumultuously argued
among the prime nobility, adding still fire to the fuel, one of the Legates is
said to have answered; And from whom has he his Empire, if not from my Lord
the Pope? At which words one of them, and as it was reported Otto Count
Palantine of Baioaria, outrageous in anger, was drawing his sword, threatening
to kill him, had not the Emperor interposing his authority, appeased the
broyle, commanding the Legates to be safe conducted to their lodging, and the
next morning early to depart, and go on straight to Rome, neither declyning
on the right nor left hand to the Palaces of Bisoppes, or Monasterys of
Abbottes. The Emperor also prosecuted his indignation conceived against the
Pope and Legates for this cause, by sending letters, signifying these words,
and his displeasure vehemently distasting the same every where, to his Prelates
and Princes; so whetting their minds to execute with him the malice, which
upon the next occasion offered, he violently pursued, venting the very bowelles
of his mother the holy Church, yea the Clergy from the Church, by Octauians
scysme. Thus he diuulged the wrong offered him by the Pope and Legates,
concealing the reason of the Legation, being for the delivery of a virtuous
English Bishop restrained in his dominions impiously and unjustly in prison.
He sent out also his Imperial Edict that no Clearke or Religious man should
trauail to Rome, faynedly pretending it was to exempt them from charges, and
that the religious should not leave their Monastical discipline, and so laid
watch and ward to debar them. The Legates on the other side returning home,
appealed to the Pope for redress of the iniuryes they sustained; whereupon the
court of Cardinals was divided, for some favoring the Emperor imputed the
fault to the Legates careless folly, others aggreed with the Pope, who wrote
hereupon to the Bishops of Germany, persuading them to recall the Emperor
from his sinful proceedinges, and cause Reynold his Chancellor and the Count
Palantine, who had openly abused the Legates, and vomited blasphemies against
the Church of God to make therefore public satisfaction, intimating also by
them to the Emperor, that if he would rebel against the Church, it was all
in vain, since she was founded on so firm a rock, as neither he nor hell
it self could ever overthrow her. The Bishops blinded with affection and
fear to their Emperor, confessed, that although saint Peeters ship could not
be drowned, yet they themselves were nevertheless shaken with this tempest,
and reporting the Emperors Apology of his regal power, beesought the Pope to
mollify and sweeten those words of his letter which the Emperor and Germans
could not digest, and so certifying the absence of Count Palantine in wars,
by reason whereof he could not clear himself, and that Reynold the
Chancellor was in the opinion of all, innocent, they ended their temporising
letter. Whereupon Adriam to please them sought to pacify the Emperor.

Pope Adrian laboring to appease the Emperor, An. 4. Had. 4. The Pope
indeuoreth to pacify the Emperor.
sent Henry priest Cardinal of saint Nereus and Achylleus, and Hyacinth
Deacon Cardinal of saint Mary in the Grecian school, men practiced in the
world and affairs of the Court, with letters to the Emperor tending to that
purpose, who to show their greater humility, went out of their way to meet
Reynold the Chancellor, and Otto Count Palantine, the Emperors Ambassadors,
declaring to them the cause of their Legation, being for a peaceable treaty to
the honor of the Empire, they departed. Their journey through the streyghtes of
the montaynes being publicly known, and also how the Emperor was offended
with the Pope, styrred up diverse (who were desirous to enrich themselves with
the spoils of others, and hoped under the coulor of this enmytie to patronise
their rapine, as a thing serviceable to the State) to make a prey of the
Legates; The Legagates robbed and imprisoned by the Emperialistes.
among whom the Count Frederick and Henry, men in those parts violent and
powerful, not only robbed and imprisoned the Legates, but also Albert Bishop
of Trent coming along with them for their safe conduct. The Legates lay in
bands till leaving a pledge they were discharged, and the divine providence
did set free the Archbishop: But the noble Duke of Baioaria and Saxony for his
reverence to the Roman Church, and the honor of the Empire reuenges this
vilany, enforcing the Countes to deliver the pledge, and with constraint of
deserved calamityes to yield and give satisfaction. The Legates coming with
these difficultyes unto the Emperor at Augusta, presented with humility the
Popes letters, wherein he interpreted the meaning of his words, which were,
that he conferred the Emperial crown upon him as a benefitte, alleageing that
conferring, was imposing, and a benefit a good Act derived of bonum, so as in
crowneing him, it was to be reputed a good act done unto him; Thus the Pope
by writing, and the Legates by word of mouth, complying as far as they could
to please him, A peace beetweene the Pope and Emperor.
the Emperor seemed content, and the seeds of peace were sowed, which falling
on stones, brought out no fruit.

For Pope Adrian beesides the intolerable and sacrili^ious iniuryes offered to
his Legates, An. 5. Had. 4.
was urged with ^ncrochments and insultations of the purueyors for the
^mperours stables, and oppressions by the Lieuetenants of ^he Imperial
Castles, and lastly because the Bishops and Abbottes as well as the Layety
had acknowledged ^is Royaltyes. Wherefore Adrian condemning his ingratitude
sharply reprehended him. New controversies raised beetweene the Pope and
Emperor.
Frederick in the mean time, upon the vacancy of the Bishoppricke of Rauenna,
having designed Guido son of Count Blandera^^us to enjoy the place, and
sending two Bishops one after an other to the Pope for confirmation thereof,
received repulse, because the noble young man being Subdeacon of the Roman
Church, and a hopeful member thereof, Adrian would not dimisse him thence. The
Emperor disappointed of his expectation, and thereupon incensed, sought first
by disgracing the Pope to revenge himself; wherefore he caused his Notary in
styling the Pope, to use the singular number, and prefer the Imperial name
before his; which Adrian not only blamed in him as insolency, but also put him
in mind that contrary to his fealty sworn to the Roman Church, he required
homage and fealty of Bishops, being princes of the same Church, counselling
him to desist from these unlawful usurpations, least otherwise God should
deprive him of his lawefull dominions. Frederick obiecteth, that Pope
Siluester received from Constantine the Emperor his temporali^^es: whereunto is
answered, how this present generation (...) Emperors cannot derive their
authority as descending (...) them from their Ancestors, but from the election
of prec^dent Popes, and coronation received from them. Heere^pon ensued deep
suspicions on all sides, with vncer^^^ne rumors, as if the Pope did secretly
incite the Mila^^yes and other Cittyes, to shake of the Imperial yoke: (...)
Henry Cardinal of the title of saint Nereus and Archylleus, the late Legate,
and Eberard Bishop of Rabenberg, a man of great virtue learning and wisdom,
and the Emperors entyrest counselor, indeauoured (as by their mutual letters
appears) to appease these turbulent winds which raised the wars of
dissension. Afterward there were meetinges, before the Emperor, of Legates
and Princes for composing a peace, which was never likely to proceed, the
demaundes on either side being so repugnant, and the Emperor breathing out
his coffeehouse for the league contryued with the king of Cecyll.

Pope Adria^ dies.
But God ended these treatyes with the death of Adrian the fourth. And now after
these light skyrmishes instantly ensued the terrible battle of Scysme that
shook the whole state of Christendom. Yet before I enter into so tragical
a discourse, I crave pardon to spend a few word about the death and praise of
our Adrian, who falling sick of a Squinsey at Anagni.
Anagni in the Kalendes of September departed this life. Wherein I cannot choose
but wonder at Master Camden, who preferring a tale of a fryuolous scysmaticall
author before a known truth, writes that he dyed being choked with a
fly; a falsehood discovering it self; for his author says that after he had
excommunicated the Emperor, drinking at a fountain a fly entered his mouth,
and cleaued so to his throat, as noe art could remove it till he yielded up
the ghost. But none can ever prove that Adrian excommunicated the Emperor,
wherefore we may see that one fable draws on another. The commendable acts
of Pope Adria^
Now passing from this to his renowned acts. It is recorded for ever to the
world, and noe doubt registered among his blessed works in heaven, that he
greatly augmented the buildinges and repaired the ruins of the Roman Sea, and
with his own expenses enlarged the possessions, and increased the patrimony of
saint Peeter. More-ouer that he destroyed a den of thieves, erecting upon
his own cost in the same places castle to defend the country from their
invasions. And ^r which this realm should ever extol him, he confir^ed to
our kings the dominion of Ireland: And all this ^ee did in a short reign of
four years eight months and four and twenty days. Lasty above all, he
left to his successors one admirable example, which is, that he never
beestowed any thing upon his family or freindes, but made god and his Church
the heir of all; in so much as his mother suruyuing him, was mayntayned by the
charity of the Church of Canterbury, as John of Salisbury reports out of an
Epistle written by Pope Alexander to saint Thomas.

After Pope Adrian was buried in the Church of saint Peeter, An. 1. Alex;
Alexander the third chose^ Pope.
Alexander the third was chosen his lawful successor. He was by birth of Seen
in Tuscany, his father Ranusius, his name Rowland, who being first a Cannon in
the Church of Pisa, and a Clearke of great account, was much esteemed by all,
and called to the Church of Rome by blessed Eugenius, who knowing him worthy
of high preferment, advanced him first to be Deane of saint Cosmus and
Damianus, His ascent.
then priest Cardinal of the title of saint Mark, and lastly Chancellor of
the Apostolic Sea. He was an Orator of singular eloquence, in sacred and
humane learning well instructed; His commendation
and sufficiently approved in the explanation of both, as also excercised in
scholastical doctrine: Moreover he was wise, gracious, patient, merciful,
meek, sober, chaste, charitable in almesgiuing, and ever ready to execute all
works pleasing to allmighty god. On the day before the Nones of September,
^he bishops and Cardinals being assembled together in ^^inct Peeters Church,
and having three days deliberated about the election, did all, excepting only
Octauian of the title of saint Cecill, John of the title of saint Martine, and
Guido of the title of saint Calistus, being three preistes Cardinals, with
mutual consent jointly chose Rowland the Chancellor Pope, by the name of
Alexander the third, whereunto concurrd the approbation of the Clergy and
people of Rome. Which not withstanding John and Guido two of the Cardinals
aforenamed following Octouians faction, wilfully and wickedly named him
afterward Pope. The bishops of Ostia and other Seas, together with the
preistes and Deacons Cardinals, did by the hands of the same Deacons according
to the ancient custom of the Church, inuest with the papal robe and ornament,
Alexander, although he refused, excused, and by all means sought to avoid it.

Octauian violently invaded the Popedom
Whereupon Octauian whose ambition had long aimed at the Apostolic throne,
seeing himself defeated of his aspiring expectation, brake out into that
audacious fury, as with his own hands he violently pulled the papal ornament
(as if it were obtained by stealth) from Alexanders neck, and with tumultuous
outrage attempted to carry it away: But one of the Senators there present, upon
the sight of so heinous an act, incensed with a virtuous zeal, assayling
this notorious offender, and took the papal cloak from him: Whereupon
Octauian touched inwardly with exceeding grief, cast his eyes on his
Chapelaine, who came readily prepared for the purpose, frantickly calling and
beckning to him, to give him instantly the like papal cloak that he brought
with him; which being presently done, catching the Cloak, he bowed down
his head, and from the hands of his Chaplayne, and such an other ordinary
Clearke (ashamefull thing to speak) impudently assumed the papal cloak. But
this so rashly handled fell out so ridiculously, as he turned the fore part
beehind, God making him thus a derysion to the beehoulders, and seeking to mend
all, he made it worse, for quite beesides himself in haste, missing his
Caputium
hoode he reuersed his cloak; a trayteuous show of a discordered action, and
a manifest token of his reprobation. In this rebellious proceeding were the
gates of the Church thrown open, which were before locked up by the Senators,
and an armed troop whom he had with money mustred together, with naked
swords came rustling in, running speedily to assiste this scysmaticke. So in
place of bishops and Cardinals, he was environed with routes of soldiers.
The Clergy beehoulding this excecrable act, the like whereof was never seen,
fearing they should be enforced by the adverse power to adore this exalted
Idol, retired themselves with their elected Pope into a safe munition of the
same Church, Pope Alexander and the Cardinales restrained of their liberty by
Octauian.
where Octauian with assent of some of the senators, who^ he had corrupted
with bribes, kept them streyghtly with a diligent and armed watch and ward
for nine days, so beesieged and restrained, as they could not by any means
possible come forth.

But the people of Rome exceedingly crying out against this intolerable abuse,
and extending their uttermost forces against those senators, who were authors
of this mischeife, the Clergy with their elected Pope were delivered out of
this thraldom; yet malice so prevailed, as they were instantly by the same
senators, being won thereunto by rewards, cast into another more straight
and close imprisonment beyond Tyber, where being almost three days in hold,
the whole City rose to redress so great an enormity, and such an apparent
treason, yea women and children detesting Octauian, exclaymed against him,
calling him an accursed man, an Heretic, rejecting him, reuyling him, and
thirsting after Alexander, in so much as to his very face they contemned and
condemned him. Thus was all in a horrible combustion. The Clergy mourned, the
Judges lamented, old men wasted in grief, and all men were astonished with
amazement. Wherefore the City no longer enduring such an outrageous rebellion,
came with Hector Frangipane and others of the nobility to the place where the
Pope and Cardinals were in straight custody, Alexander and the Cardinales
restored to liberty.
compelling those disorderly senators to cast open the prison gates, and
suffer Alexander and his followers to depart in free liberty. Thus where they
by the meritts of saints Peeter and saint Paul delivered from their
persecutor, and passing through the City with acclamations and ringing of
belles, the whole army of horse and foot, with the kinghtes of Rome
accompanyng them, they came by Gods assistance on saint Mathews Eve to
Nympha; where the bishops and Cardinals, Preistes, Deacons, Abotts and
Pryors, with the Judges, Aduocats and other officers, together with the
nobility, and a number of the Romans being present, Alexander consecrated and
crowned Pope.
Pope Alexander amidst the quires of exultation, with invocation of the holy
Ghost, was consecrated high bishop by the hands of the bishop of Ostia (to whom
that office only appertains) and according to the solemnity of the Church
invested in the kingdom with his triple crown.

Octauian on the other side residing at saint Peeters, the two Cardinals John
and Guido blind with their hellish error, would not reclayme themselves from
their damnable presumption, but with headlong rebellion honored their erected
Idol, and leaving the Churches unity, fell at his feet; and he the shadow of
Antichrist, so exalted above himself, Octauians scisme.
usurped the Chair, as if he had bin lawful Pope; which many with weeping
eyes and exceeding sorrow beehoulding, remembered what Pope Anastacius as it
were profecying, foretold him in these words: Accursed and excommunicated
son, thou shall never have this papal ornament, which thou so much thirstest
and impudently seek, but to thine own ruin, and the confusion of many. And
when he had labored for four weeks space, and wearyed himself, his
military bands, and great kindred to assemble bishops for his forged
instalement; in the end the Bishop of Melphitana fugitive, the Bishop of
Ferentyne Pope Alexanders adversary, and the Bishop of Tusculan who of a
follower of Alexander, bee^ame now his fai^hles enemy, in show consecrated,
but ^n deed execrated Octauian. Neither had Octauian (as ^imselfe afterward
openly professed) attempted a sin ^oe heinous as this against the Church of
God, had he not ^in thereunto animated by the favor and power of the
Emperiour; Octauian animated by the Emperor to this scisme.
for there was sufficient proof that he was ^estrayned by an oathe of fealty
not to attempt the Popedom.

In this turbulency of the state, Pope Alexander first of ^ll found Palatine
Otto and Guido Blanderan, the Emperors Ambassadors to Pope Adrian, though they
knew their Masters affection to Octauian, and his distaste of the Roman
Pope, yet faynedly dissembling with him. These ^hinges thus passing, Alexander
nevertheless with the Counsel of the Cardinales sent his Nuntios with letters
to the Emperor being then in Lumbardy at the siege of Crema, Pope Alexander
seeks the Emperors favor.
seeking with all patience and humility to reclayme him, who swollen with pride
contemned to read the letters, and had not Duke Welphus and the Duke of Saxony
dissuaded him, he had in his madness hanged the Nun^ios; The Emperors
conceived cruelty against the Pope and Cardinales.
and although at the instance of the Dukes he admitted them in the end, and
did read the letters, yet he afforded them no favorable answer. The
relation of this s^ysme thus arysing upon Adrians death, because it so much
disturbeth Christendom, I translated as I found it (...) the Annals of
Cardinal Baronius, alleged out of the ^^oke of the vatican: what follows I
will abridge.

Alexander hereupon excommunicated Octauian, and all such as should assist him
in his counterfeit consecration, Octauian and his accomplices excommunicated.
h^uing given them first eight days warning for reformation of their error.
He wrote moreover his letters to the ^^shop, Clergy and university of
Bononi, being men (...) special account for virtue and learning, and as it is
to be thought to sundry other Churches, to declare the truth of his election,
and Octauians reprobation, all which puctually agrees with the former
relation. Octauian on the other side being instaled in his usurped place,
Octauian by letters fortifyes his usurpation.
not vntike the devil who endeavors to be adored as God, assuming to
himself the name of Victor, and facing his letters with apparent lies, wrote
especially to the Emperor and his inward favorites as upon whose power (his
calling being not from God but man) he principally relied, and also to
others, signifying his election or rather invasion; where under a formal show
of sanctity, he flattereth the mighty to compass his ambitious ends. So
likewise his Cardinals increased now, as it seemed, with the number of two
more, in all fire as the spirits that fell with Lucifer, following Octauian,
sent every where their circuler letters, which, to show they sauoured not God
but flesh, were especially grounded upon the league concluded in the time of
Adrian with the king of Cecill (of which before) and hereupon division arysing
among the Cardinales was the cause of Alexanders election, maintayning by
falshoodes what they wrongfully got: Octauians faction in their own letters
confute themselves.
wherein although they untruly multiply Octauians Cardinales from two to nine,
yet they are enforced to confess that fowerteene concurred in the choice of
Alexander, and so being inferior not only in virtue, but also in number they
establish with their own words the truth of Alexanders title which they so
wickedly opposed: Count Otto with arms inuadeth the Popes dominion. The
Cardinals appeal to the Emperor, against Otto.
For now Otto, Count Palantine, first of all for the advancement of Octauian
and the Popes overthrow, entered violently into Campanie and the Patrimony of
saint Peeter, seeking to subdue it: whereupon the whole college of Cardinals
(excepting these scysmatickes) sued for redress to the Emperor, the chief
fountain of this mischeife. But noe injustice is so great as that which is
shadowed with a color of justice, which the Emperor practiced; for under a
pretense of piety to determine this great controversy and conclude an union,
The Emperor summoneth Alexander and Octauia^ to a counsel.
he summond Pope Alexander and Octauian to a counsel, alleging thereof the
examples of Justinian Theodosius and Charles serving nothing to his purpose;
for these Emperors were freindes not foes to the Church, as Frederick had now,
proved himself: they likewise summoned these Counsels upon the Popes
persuasion, or the Pope at the least assenting thereunto, but Alexander neither
persuaded nor assented; lastly matters were there controuerted, not concluded,
as Alexanders election was. Thus Frederick with the Counsel of the impious
would have advanced Octauian to serve not God, but his own turn. Hereupon he
sent his Ambassadors the Bishopes of Prage and Verdun with letters to the Pope,
styling him only Rowland the Chancellor, imperiously commanding him and the
Cardinales to appear at a Counsel held at Pauy upon the Octaues of the
Epiphanie to receive his sentence from the Clergy there assembled. The
Emperor summoneth all adjacent kingdoms to appear at his counsel to be held
at Pauy.
He likewise wrote to all the Bishops not only of the Empire, but also of
France, England, Spain and Hungary enioyning them all to be then and there
present to decyde this controversy; the final sentence whereof in his first
letters he reserved to himself, but after, being by some of more
understanding better instructed, he left that to the Clergy. In the mean
time thinking to make void the privilege granted by God unto his Church, and
to dispose of the Papacy at his own pleasure, not as an advocate and defendor,
but as the supreme judge of the Church, his Ambassadors tracing the stepes of
their Masters pride, came to the Pope at Anagnia, The Emperors Ambassadors use
no reverence to the Pope.
where in the presence of the Cardinals and a great assembly of the Clergy
and Layetie, they sat down giving him no reverence at all, and there in his
palace delivered their embassage, showing their Lords commission authorized
with his golden seal, commanding the Pope and Cardinals on the Churches
beehalfe to appear at Pauy before his presence. The Emperor styleth Octauian
Pope, and Alexander Rowland the Cha^cellor.
Whereupon the Pope and Cardinals discovered on either side apparent dangers,
here threatening persecution of a mighty Emperor, there the ruin of the
Churches liberty; again he named in his letters Octauian Pope, and Alexander
but Rowland the Chancellor: nevertheless in the end, the zeal and grace of
God dispersing their fears, they resolved all in defense of the Churches
liberty and unity, and for their obedience to the Pope (if occasion were) to
sacrifice their lives. The Pope and Cardinals resolve to dye in defense of
the Church.
The Emperors Ambassadors instantly urging them for an answer, the Pope said;
That above all Princes they would honor the Emperor as the Churches Advocate,
so long as they dishonored not God, but when they could not please the one,
without offense of the other, then they would absolutely prefer God. He
maruayled much he denyd him the reverent respect due to his place, and
summoned a counsel without his authority, and above all that he would cite
him to appear before that Conuentickle. The privilege of the Church granted
by Christ and continued from saint Peeter to that present age, has ever bin,
that in Causes Ecclesiastical the supreme judgment was ever in the Church,
and the Church it self never judged by any: since therefore he who ought to
defend the Church, did now offend it, and in contemning the Church disparaged
his mother, he could not but admire it. For appearing at his Court, the
Canonical tradition forbad him. And since meaner prelates in matters
spiritual do govern their princes, it were intolerable in him to suffer the
authority of his place, which was purchased with the blood of Christ, through
his pusilanimity or ignorance to be subjected to the temporal power.
Wherefore as his Predecessors had endured death for the Churches liberty, so
was he ready to spend his blood in her cause. The Ambassadors offended with
his answer contumeliously departed, coming to Signia adored the the Idol
Octauian; The Emperors Ambassadors and Otto adore Octauian.
and so did Count Otto the Palatine whom the Emperor had sent with his
Germans toward the City; which exceedingly puffed up the pride of this
Archhereticke, not considering that scysme, though at the first it flourysheth,
yet after a while it vanishes. Thus Frederick by his Ambassadors accepted of
Octauian, wherefore Alexander had reason to except against Frederick as no
indifferent Judge. The Emperor for advancement of this Antipope sought to
draw other kings into his faction, The Emperor sought to draw the King of
England into his faction.
and first vehememtly attempted King Henry of England, but in vain, for
Arnulphus Bishop of Lexouy, a very learned man, and of great estimation with
the king, had so informed him, as he prevented Frederick, and although there
was a firm league of freindship beetweene them, yet would king Henry never be
induced to yield to this scysme, but only suppressed, The King of England
faithful to Alexander.
till matters were more ripened, his proclamation for publishing Pope
Alexander, suffering all his subjects in the mean time to maintain his
right. Alexander also upon the advice of the Bishop of Lexouy sent his Legates
a latere to the realms of Spain and France, The Bishop of Lexouy most
industruous in asisting Alexander.
and likewise to the Emperor of Constantinople and king of Hungary, to make
known his lawful election, and the wrong he sustained by this presumptuous
Scysmaticke. Whereupon Lewys the most Christian king of France (a country never
defiled with scysme) together with Henry king of England received Pope
Alexander as their father and pastor of their souls; All Chrystendome beesides
Frederick and the Emperialles accept of Alexander.
moreover the kings of Spain, Cecyll and Jerusalem and the Emperor of
Constantinople, with the Patriarchs, Bishops, Princes, Clergy and Layetie
did all acknowledge him the Catholic successor of Peeter: Only Frederick with
his accomplices and these few scysmaticall Cardinals, the unlearned children
of Belial, obstinate still in their error, remaining nevertheless the cruel
persecutors of him and the Church. Neither was this unpunished in Frederick,
Frederick unfortunate after his fall from the Church.
for even from the very beeginning of this scysme, his successes altered, and
of a victorious Emperor he beecame now often vanquished, God endeavoring by
this discipline to correct him. The Popes Legates who went to the kings of
France and England were encountered with some difficultyes, because the
Politicians of both kindomes being affected to their adversaries, when they
could not herein alter their kings resolutions, labored to defer the
acceptance of Pope Alexander, The king of England draws England, France,
Spain, Ireland and Norwaye to the Popes obedience.
till matters were more fully determynd; but the Legates with their virtue,
wisdom, and exemplar lives overcame these assaults, and the king of France
referring all to the king of England, the king of England drew England, France,
Spain, Ireland and Norwaye to Alxanders obedience. And in the kindome of
Jerusalem allbeit is whas some wat cu^trouerted, because Octauian had there in
former times won some affection, yet preferring the love of God before natures
disposition they yielded to the truth, and embraced the lawful Pope.

In the year of our lord 1160. was held the Conuentickle at Pauy, The
Conuenticle of Pauy.
but adiourned from the Octaues of the Epyphany to the Purification of our
Blessed Lady. William of Newberry our Countreyman writes: That this
controversy (considering the multitude that chose Alexander, and the small
number that elected Octauian) might easily have bin ended, had not Frederick
hated Alexander upon his old grudge to Rowland; Fredericks inueterate hatred to
Alexander.
for Rowland the Chancellor was one of them who did mediate the peace to
deliver Pope Adrian, the Cardinals, and the City of Beneuent out of the
hands of William king of Cecill, a matter to Frederick most distastefull, and
was also one of the Legates sent to Frederick about the sacrilegious abuse
offered in Germany to Edward Bishop of London, when Count Palatine in the
Emperors presence had like to have murdered one of the Legates; these things
lay undigested in Frederickes stomach, which made him not endure Rowland, now
Alexander the third. This caused him to assemble his Italians and Germans at
Pauy; in show to determine the controversy, but indeed to crown Octauian his
Victor with the victory, according to Newberrys opinion who lived in that age.
There flocked together the Bishops of both Nations, with an infinite number
of inferior Prelates upon the Emperors command, who with the Generalles of
his armies struck a terror into their minds; Frederick terrifyeth with power
here in silence were suppressed all proofs and allegatious for Alexander
(who discreetely absented himself) and what in truth was wanting on Octauians
side, was artificially helped. Frederick allureth with hypoc^iticall sanctity.
Frederick to cast a myste before the eyes of the assembly, beegan with fasting
and prayer, and then with a solemn protestation that he having no authority
to intermedle with spiritual matters, left all to the judgment of the Clergy
there present, departed the place, having given them before examples how to
proceed in electing Octauian by his Ambassadors and Count Otto. After
deliberation of seven days (for this Pageant was set out with solemnity) they
consented (as before was conspired) to the approbation of Octauian there
present, The Scysmatickes approve Octauian and condemn Alexander.
and condemnation of Rowland, who being cyted refused to appear before them,
for by these names are they recyted by the author who favored or feared the
Emperor. Allthough the devil in this sinful counsel tranformed himself
into an Angel of light, sometimes with a pretense of exceeding piety,
otherwhyles with whole boastes of Bishops, preystes and Religious, yet
whosoever considers that Alexander was elected by fowerteene Cardinals, and
Octauian by three only; Three principal approbations of the Roman papacy.
that Alexander was chosen by all the Bishops Cardinals, Tusculan only
excepted; That Alexander was consecrated by the Bishop of Ostia, and not
Octiuian, and Alexander established upon these three principal foundations of
the Roman papacy, and not Octauian, must needs beesides diverse other reasons,
be inuincibly persuaded by these, that Alexander was truly preferred by God
and his Church, and Octauia^ only bolstered out by the Emperor and the world.
For no Pope can he chosen without the Bishop of Ostia.

I should have wondered, that so many Bishops and Prelates gathered together
in this unlawful conuenticle could so be overwhelmed in this Aegiptian
darkness, as they could not see this apparent light, had I not known the like
afterward in our own country. But thus it is, when Bishopes feeding
themselves, and not their flocks, run away at the sight of the Wolf, and
beetray Gods cause with their slavish fear or flattery.

The reasons alleged for this their wicked sentence against their supreme
spirtuall head were supported with the horrible perjury of many eminent
Clearkes, a thing most detestable in so holy a function: and a great argument
against him, was that he refused to be judged by these his subjects, a
matter contrary to Religion and all rules of government. Hereupon these rebels
against the Church excommunicated the Pope out of the Church, and imitated in
all points the actions of a true counsel, but still grating upon the old
quarrel of the league with Cecill against the Empire so was the world ever
predomina^t. Some also pretended the cause of their connyue^ce or consent to
this co^uenticle was for an vnio^ beetweene the Church and the Empire, which
proved on the contrary side the original of a tedious dissension beetweene
them; and some wiser then the rest subscribed to the Conuenticle to satisfy the
present necessityes of the Empire, with reservation of their sentence to the
Churches more serious and further determination. The Emperor hereupon not
only adored the beast, attributing to his Idol all honor beelonging to the
papacy, as kissing his feet, The Emperor adoreth Octauian.

The Emperor persecuteth all Prelates who resist this scysme.

Scysmaticks usurp Ecclesiastical dignitys. Alexander threateneth the Emperor
with excommunication. The Archbishop of Mountes who first subscribed against
Alexander, miserably murdered by his Citizens.

Co^rade succeeding the scysmatick in the Archbishopric of Mounts left all to
follow Alexander.

The Cistercians persecuted for Alexander.


houlding his styrrop, and leading his horse; but also proclaimed throughout
the Empire, that all the Prelates should accept and reverence him as Pope,
threatening banishment for ever to such as refused it. And presently ensued the
time to try the gold in the fire of persecution: Now was the corn and chafe
parted: For they who preferred their souls before their worldly substance,
left their countries, their Churches, and all their Ecclesiastical dignityes,
which Octauians scysmaticall followers by intrusion invaded: So miserable was
the face of this deformed Church. Neither was Alexander heerewith discomforted,
but the more the persecution prevailed, the more courageously he opposed
himself against the Emperor, for he prepared to denounce judgment against
him from his Apostolic throne, he summoned him to appear, and refusing to
obey, threatened him with the swoard of Excommunication.

Arnold Archbishop of Mountes being the first who absolutely subscribed
against Pope Alexander (for the Patriache reserved his opinion to the Churches
judgment) was the first who sustained due punishment therefore, being on the
Nativity of saint John the Baptist next following, most cruelly murdered by his
own Cittize^s, thrown naked out as a prey for Wolves and dogs, and his body
after diverse abuses offered it, in the end stinking and scarce to be known,
by stealth and with great difficulty buried. His next lawful successor was
Conrade the Emperors kinsman, who leaving the Emperors scysmaticall faction,
followed Pope Alexander, and for his just cause endured persecution, as also
whole Conuentes of the Cistercians, who were banished for defense of Alexander.
But among others was Peeter Archbishop of Tarantasia, most to be admyred, who,
not withstanding he labored above all others, in mayntaining Alexander
against Octauian, was honored by the Emperor for his singular virtues. Thus
he and some others in this ruin of Bishops were tried faithful in the
Churches cause; The Archbishop of Tara^tasia most constant to Alexander, yet
honored by Frederick for his sanctity.
Octauia^ on the other side (as it is said) so basely beehauing himself as
he submitted the Papal insignes to the Emperors will, and received back from
Frederick his inuesture by the ryng: Octauia^ receaueth his inuestur from
Frederick. The king of England constant to Alexander co^te^neth Octauianes
Nuntios. The Archbishop of Seno^ faithful to Alexander, and a great friend of
saint Thomas. The Cardinal of Pauy fainting in Alexanders cause proved so to
S. Thomas.

An. 1162. S. Edward King of England and Co^fessor canonized Whereupon miracles
were wrought.

Miracles wrought by the Archbishop of Tara^tasia, proving the lawful election
of Alexander. The Archbishop of Tarantasia confirms the Catholics in
obedience to the Pope in Italy, Burgundy, Loraygne.

S Anthel^^ Bishop of Billice^s set^eth the Carthusians and Cistercians in
subjection to Alexander, winning thereby the western Church. Frederick rages.

Spain, Gaul, and Brytaygne acknowledge Alexander.

Alexander not able to continue in Rome, being oppressed by Octauian.

Alexander enforced to fly into France.


This appears in Alexanders Epistle to the Bishop of Lexouy, wherein he
seems very much to rely upon the king of Englandes constancy, extolling him
with extraordinary praises. For king Henry so much contemned Octauian, as he
made a scorn of his Nuntios and letters. Lastly there were two things
contrary to themselves yet concurring in this year, which having relation to
the history of S. Thomas, are not to be passed over in silence; The one, that
the Archbishop of Senon being now most faithful to Pope Alexander, proved
afterward as faithful to saint Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury; the other,
that William of Pauy Priest Cardinal of saint Peeter ad vinculum faynting
with silence at the Conuenticle of Pauy in the cause of Alexander, was
afterward as faulty in the cause of saint Thomas.

King Henry the second of England acknowledging Alexander the lawful Pope,
sent this year Ambassadors to him for canonizing saint Edward King of
England and Confessor, being 95. years after his death, whereupon miracles
being wrought, God did with the power of these two Kings, the one in Heaven,
the other in earth, confirm Alexanders undoubted title, and our remote Island,
one of the uttermost bounds of the world confessed, whom some of his
Countrymen, yea Citizens, wickedly contradicted. Now also Peeter the renowned
and holy Archbishop of Tarantasia being sent for by the Pope to strengthen the
faithful in their true obedience to the Church, Herbert the scysmaticall
intruder of the Bishopric of Chrysopolis, seeking to disturb him in his
journey, was miraculously, stricken, and dyed desperately. An other tyrant
likewise, as he attempted to make a prey of the good man, his horse running
amayne, in the very act, being spoiled, ouerthrewe him, which caused him, to
beecome a penitent, and obtain pardon both of God and the holy Bishop. Many
other miracles were moreover showed in him, which together with his admirable
virtues, labor and preaching, not only enforced that feirce Lion Frederick to
love him, but also confounded the erroneous, and established the Catholics
being imnumerable multitudes in Italy, Burgundy and Loraygne. In the same
sort saint Anthelme Bishop of Billicens assisted with one Geffery a learned
wise and virtuous man, so persuaded the Priors of the Carthusians and
Cistercians (who amazed knew not which way to take) that as now being settled
by them in the right, they with their orders, especially the Carthusians,
through out the whole western Church, were the chief publishers and defendors
of Pope Alexanders cause. Neither thus ended the worthy endeavors of saint
Anthelm and Gessery, but they diswaded many other Prelates and their subjects
from following the wicked scysme of Octauia^, and made the^ utterly detest it.
Whereupon Frederick desirous still to dispose of the Papacy, although he
neither had power to bless nor curse, condemned saint Anthelm, a firm pillar
of the Catholic Church, susteyning the strong frame of obedience through
Spain, Gaul, and Britaygne.

Alexander nevertheless returning to Rome sound Octauians faction so
strengthened with the power of his noble kindred, and such as the Emperor had
with his uttermost endeavors labored on his side, as he could have there no
place of continuance; wherefore he departed thence into Campany, and all the
Patrimony of saint Peeter and the adjacent territoryes about the City being
almost wholly possessed by the Almaynes and scysmatickes, he determined by the advice of his faithful Counselors to go by sea with his brethren the
Cardinals into France. Leaving therefore the Bishop of Prenestyne his vicar
and substitute in the City, and disposing other things necessary for the
Church, he with the Cardinals went to Tarana to take shipping, where he
found four Galleys excellently ordered, being sent by the King of Cecill to
serve him: Alexander suffers shipwreck without loss of life or goods of
any.
Which he and the Cardinals had no sooner boarded, but that a horrible
tempest aysing with the violence of the winds, waves and rocks, shattered
the^ all to pieces: yet here the successor of S. Peeter obtained at above S.
Paul at Malta, for God granted to the Apostle the lives of all the saylors
and passingers; but to the Apostolic Alexander not only the lives, but also
the goods of all that were in the Galleys. Neither was Alexander unthankful
to the King of Cecill for this extraordinary favor, The Archbishop of
Tarantasia sent Legate into France to make a peace beetweene France and
England. Peace concluded.
for when he was afterward solicited with great sums of money to have
deposed him, as a man not able to weylde the state of a kingdom, and to have
placed Amirate Maio as an other Pypin of France in his throne; the Pope not
only refused it, but remained also to death his constant friend, so the King,
though otherwise ill, was herein worthy and provident. The Pope
notwithstanding this, resolving to go into France, heard the country was
wonderfully imbroyled by reason of wars lately arysing beetweene the kings
of France and England, and therefore sent Peeter Archbishop of Tarantasia to
reunite them again in league. Which he happily accomplished, and thereupon
ensued that both the kings in their several dominions summoned their
Bishops, Abbottes and Barons: the king of England at Nouum Mercatum.
New Market in Normandy, and the king of France at Bewuoys where they treated
and concluded about the receiving of Alexander and rejecting Octauian: and
because the Emperor never ceased to solicit them to join with him in the
acceptance of Octauian, some what to satisfy him, and make a prefect conclusion
of the controversy, they called in one a Counsel of both kingdoms, where the
scysmaticall Cardinals Guido and John on the beehalfe of Octauian, and Henry
of Pisa, Alexanders title manifested in a counsel of the Clergy of France and
England.
John of Naples, and William of Pauy Cardinals for Pope Alexander appeared.
Here Guido in the presence of these kings and Prelates, and that great
multitude both of the Clergy and Layetie, extended for Octauian the uttermost
of his wit and eloquence, to whom William of Pauy a singular Orator, opening
his mouth that was shutt at Pauy, replied, and so retorted his own arguments
upon him, as he overcame him with his own weapons; in the conclusion of which
conflicte the victory was so apparent on Alexanders side, as both kings with
their subjects acknowledged him ever after their spiritual governor, and
thereupon was excommunication pronounced against the Scysmatickes. Thus all
beesides the Empire yielded to Pope Alexander, who safely reposeing himself in
the principality of the king of Cecill, expected a conueniente time to pass
over into France, having thus prepared his way by Peeter Archbishop of
Tarantasia, a man of that singular humility, charity, and contempt of the
world, as had he not bin dissuaded upon urgent reasons, he would have sold
his horses, and beestowing the money on the poor, traveled on foot. But,
happily hindered, The Archbishop of Tarantasias humility and charity.
he was instantly upon the Popes occasions enforced to use them in his journey
to France; when staying by the way at the Monastery of Pluriack for want of
health, he nevertheless restored the sick miraculously to their health; and
that by the confluence of people flocking to him the provision of the Religious
should not be wasted, The Archbishop of Tarantasias miracles confirming the
Popes election.
he with the same power multiplied their corn and bread; where also a knight
whose son was deprived of sight, hoping to recover by the meritts of the
Saint, what his child for his own demeritts had lost, carrying him toward the
Abbey, and meeting by the way with a Catholic, who had bread hallowed by the
Archbishop, applied some of the crummes thereof to his sons eyes, whereupon
he did presently see, and the father who thought to press the Saint with his
suit, did now render God and him humble thanks for this benefit. The Governor
of Corboyle in France having a daughter of five years old, who was borne lame,
offered the child at the Saints feet, by whose prayer and imposition of his
hand, she presently obtained integrity of her limbs. From thence he passed
through Paris with wonderful expectation of the kings and princes, and
exceeding concourse of multitudes of people, every where honoring him, and
pressing about him not only for these rare cures so often showed, but also to
see the Popes Legate, the messinger of peace, the enemy of war, whose bloody
discord was even now ready to confound both kindomes, every one for reverence
of his sanctity, and for remedy of their maladyes, striving to get but some
little piece of his garment. At the Blaud Mountain the confine of France and
Normandy Henry King of England hasted to meet him, and no sooner saw him,
but Alighting
leaping from his horse he ran to him, and embracing his feet, instantly got
his upper garment, yea although he refused, although he resisted, although
he and others dissuaded, yet the king persisted, and one of the Legates
followers saying, and what should an old torn cloak do in akinges royal
wardrobe? The king answered, you would never use these words, did you but know
the great cures that have bin wrought by his girdle which now some years since
was given me. About this place rested the Legate, treating with the prime men
of the kingdoms, concerning a conclusion of peace, where a poor woman whose
daughter was dumb from her nativity, more respecting her childs cure, then the
glory of the kings and state of their kingdoms, could not be restrained, but
that she broke in through the greatest of them, leading with her the child;
neither did this humble Legate for all this noble assembly refuse her, but
praying, and putting his thumb dipped in his own spittle into the childs
mouth, and then signing her tongue and lips with the Cross, bad her speak
after him, which presently she did, and afterward continued the use of her
speech. And instantly a young man brought his feeble and lame mother, who signed
with the Legates benediction, recovered. The Legate an other time conferring
with the king of France, the young prince of England and the Earl of Flanders,
about this weyghty business, a woeman pressed toward him with her son being
twelve years of age, and seven years blind, whom when the Courtyers and
attenders would have kept back, the Legate commanded her, weeping as she was,
to be brought with her child unto him, and the Legate asking the child what
he desired, my lord (said he) that I may see; the Legate put a piece of money
into the childs hand, and weeting his fingers in his own spittle, signed the
crown of the childs head, and his eyes, with the Cross, and prayed; the
princes wondered what the Legate meante, thinking he had iested, but the child
instantly recovered sight, saw the money in his hand, and all things else;
the Princes and all admyred, and the devout king of France being certainly
assured of the miracle, falling on his knees, kissed the childs head and eyes.
At the Monastery of Mortimer the legate on Ash Wednesday giving hallowd ashes
to the king of England and others, a knight, who by reason of a wound received
in his temples from a Crossebowe, had lost now long since the sight of one of
his eyes, importunately beesought the Legate to restore him his eye, the Legate
excusing himself, and entreating the knight not to press him above his power,
the knight still instantly urged him, till in the end the Legate touched,
blessed, and dismissed him, whereupon he received the sight of his lost eye.
The knight published this to his lord the king and others, whereupon God was
more praised and honored, and his servant more reverenced. In all which
miracles wrought by this Archbishop the Popes Legate, Almighty God did show his
approbation of Alexanders election. The Emperor and Octauian nevertheless
desperate in their malice, Octauians Conuenticles. An Dom. 1162 Alexanders
voyage into France from the coaste of Mount Circe to Genua.
continued their scysmaticall Conuenticles beegun at Pauy, next at Crema, and
then at Laud.

Alexander being not able to execute the function of his supreme authority in
Italy, because all that ever had recourse to him there, were robbed and
imprisoned by Octauians soldiers, resolved upon France, and within the Octaues
of our Lords Nativity taking shipp with his Cardinals about Mount Circe, on
the feast of saint Agnes (God prospering his voyage) came to Genua, where
contrary to the Emperors command, he was royally entertained by the Clergy
and Layetie. From Genua to an Island of Liguria.
Launching from Genua on Passion sunday, he prosperously arrived on Palm
sunday in an Island of Liguria, where he celebrated Easter. The Island being
not long able to contain him, and beesides a mighty number of Prelates
expecting him on the main land, From the Island to Mount Pessula.
he came toward a populous village of Mount Pessula, where such a press of
people went forth to meet him, as clad in his Pontificialty, he was hardly
able to take his horse, so great a concurse there was to kiss his feet, The
Popes entertainment in France.
and happy was he thought that could but touch the hemme of his garment. The
lord of the town for a mile, leading his horse, with Barons and a comely
train of soldiers waiting on him, he entered the village with solemn
Procession: where among the Christian nobility that humbled themselves at his
feet, came a Prince of the Saracenes pompeously attended, and falling on his
knees before him with great reverence bowing low and k^ssing his feet, A
Saracens great reverence and solemn embassage to the Pope.
delivered him from his lord a king of the Mahometans an embassage in his
barbarous language, but expounded by an interpreter; whom the Pope courteously
answered, and honorably entertained, placing him at his feet among others of
the nobility. So the infidells reverenced him whom the scismaticall Emperor
persecuted. On sunday following the Pope, Octauian again excommunicated. A
great famine in Aquitaine*
declaring openly in the Church before a great multitude of all sorts, his
lawful election, and the perfidious attemptes of the s^ysmatickes, solemnly
excommunicated Octauian and his accomplices. An outrageous famine at that time
increasing and consuming Aquitaine with the adjacent co^treyes, threatened all
France; wherefore the Pope sent two of his Cardinals to the king of France,
signifying his arryual within his Dominions, and requesting to know in what
part of his kingdom he would appoint him and his to remain: whom the king
for the honor of saint Peeter reverently used, returning them back with all
contentment to Pope Alexander, whom he called his Lord, father, and Pastor of
his soul. And according to the kings and his counselles designment, Alexander
about the month of June traveled toward Aluerne, The Pope resided at
Claremo^t.
and on the Eeuen of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady came to Claremont.

The Emperor now seeing the whole Christian world (except himself) follow
Pope Alexander, was confounded but not converted; for standing on his own
power he knew the limitts of his Empire to be extraordinarily enlarged, and
almost all Italy subject to his Dominion; moreover he feared, if Pope
Alexander prevailed, he should loose his Imperial courts; straitghtned
therefore in this sort, being a man of a great wit and deep policy, he
beegan to devise how he might with a general assent of the Church have both
Alexander and his Idol Octauian deposed, and a third elected: And because,
like will to like, he made choice of Henry Count of Trey, in whom he reposed
especial trust, The Emperor entrappeth the King of France.
to be herein his strength and assistance. The Count therefore instructed by
the Emperor returned home, and coming as a subtle temptor to his lord the
king of France, a man of a Doves simplicity, craftily suggested to him on the
Emperors beehalfe a singular good way to make a perfect union in the Roman
Church, which was, that the Emperor for the pure love of God desired that they
two, being the greatest Princes of this part of the world, should at Auinion,
a town confining on both their dominions, assemble together the Clergy and
Layety both of the Empire and France, and the Emperor to bring with him
Octauian and his accomplices, and the King, Alexander with his Cardinals, and
there the election of them both being diligently examined by the Clergy of
Italy, Germany and France, to determine then what was best and most profitable
to the Christian Common wealth. The king out of his pious disposition too
confident, and considering the great mischeifes which arose upon this discord,
condescended to the Count, promising his safe conduct to the Emperor for
effecting this matter. Whereupon the Count returning to the Emperor in
Lumbardy, confirmed this on the kings beehalfe with his oathe. Hence spread an
evil rumor through Italy to the grief of all good Catholics, fearing least
hereby the Churches liberty should be endangered. Against the day the
Emperor with his Princes and puissant army came to the appointed place, and
Octauian with his scysmaticall co^federates followed. The king with his Clergy
and nobility hastened also thither, meeting in the way at Saluian with Pope
Alexander, where honoring one an other, they consulted two days about this
appointed assembly, but being a thing not only unworthy, but also contrary to
the Churches Canons, that the Papacy being the highest seat, should be
subject to any earthly judgment, it was agreede by all, that only some of the
principal Cardinals should be sent to manifest to the world the lawefull
election of Pope Alexander, and Octauians title to be but a fryuolous
imposture. Whereupon five Cardinals acco^panyd the king to the parlee, the
Pope with the rest retyring themselves to the Monastery of Dole in Aquitayne.
The king with his reverent and honorable train came by Diion to Mount Saon
which deuideth France from Germany, expecting there what the Emperor would
propound. Wherefore the Arch heretic Octauian, seeing the Reverent Cardinals
of the Church of Rome, and the Clergy of France constantly appearing against
him, being afraid of his trial, complained to the Emperor, that his adversary
Alexander disdayned to appear, and himself whose cause was in the Emperors
presence confirmed at the Counsel of Pauy, must yet come to a new examination.
Whereupon the Emperor incensed with anger, sent the king word that be had
broken his covenant, and falsifyd his oath, beccause he brought not Alexander
to the place. The king therefore aduising with his counsel, answered, that
allthough he could lawfully excuse the Popes absence, yet because he would
not derogate from his regality or renown, nor be taynted with any deceyte,
be it either just or unjust, he would presently without any dissimulation
send for the Pope and his brethren thither. And so instantly posted away
messingers to call the Pope and Cardinals thither with speed, or otherwise to
signify that he must yield himself a captive into the Emperors hands,
according as it was couenanted between them. Whereupon the Pope and Cardinals
seeing the king thus entangled in the Emperors snares, were marvelously
troubled, considering how they were on all sides be set with dangers, for if
they went thither to undergo the judgment of men, The Pope and Cardinals
together with the King of France in danger to be surprised by the Emperor.
they saw the Churches liberty hazarded by violence; if they went not, but
suffered the king to be enthralled by the Emperor, they could expect nothing
for themselves but imprisonment and loss of all. For the Emperor was not only
dreadful with his own mighty army, but had also the kings of Denmark and
Behemia with his princes and powers there united with him, intending, as it
seemed, to accomplish in that parlee the malice which he had long hached
against the Pope and king. But god who never forsakes his, suffered not the
Pope and king to beecome a prey to the Emperor, for he styrred up the spirit
of the glorious king of England with a powerful army of resolute soldiers to
march speedily and courageously against the Emperor, The King of Engla^ds
courageous attempt to deliver the Pope and King of France out of the Emperors
hands.
sending also such a terrible famine among the Emperiales, as Frederick could
no longer endure there to effect his intended mischeife. Wherefore, to make a
fair pretense for his departure, he sent by Reynold his Chancellor and others
his favorites to the king of France, commanding him, that in regard their lord
Frederick was Emperor of the Romans, and the special Advocate of the Roman
Church, and therefore no Prelates could judge the cause of the Election of the
Pope of Rome, but such as were within the Roman Empire, the king with his
Bishops and Clergy should repair to him as a friend and associate to attend
his sentence herein. Whereunto the king smiling answered, that he wondered a
wise man would send so foolish a message; asking if he were ignorant that
Christ committed his flock to saint Peeter and his successors, or whether he
could ever prove that the king of France and his Prelates were any where
excepted, as being not sheep of that flock. The Pope and king of France by
Gods assistance rescued from the Emperors malice.

The king of England visits the Pope, and humbly kisseth his feet.


And so contemning the Emperor and this embassage he departed, arming
himself and his nobility, and fortifying his frontyre towns against the
Emperor, returned by Gods assistance with glory to his court, and the five
Cardinals in like sort to the Pope, showing to his holiness their blessed
delivery. The Emperor on the other side confounded with shame dispersed his
army even perishing with famine, and with great sorrow went into Germany.
About this time the king of England visited Pope Alexander, in the Monastery of
Bobien, and prostrating himself with all humility, kissed his feet: and when
the Pope offered him a seat meet for his Majesty, he refused it, and with
his Barons sat at his feet: He was received by the Pope with the kiss of
peace, and the king bestowing royal and bounteous gifts on him and the
Cardinals, with great joy departed, The Pope traveling from thence to towers
celebrated there the feast of Christmas. This year also lewis king of France
and Henry king of England meeting Pope Alexander at Tociacke (which is situated
on the river of Loyre) both kings attending on foot did lead the Popes
horse, he ryding thereon: That kings of France and England together lead
jointly the Popes horse. The Pope unites the kings of France and and England
in perfect amity.
the king of France houlding the right, and the king of England the left cheek
of his bridle, and so conducting him to a Pauylion prepared for him, where he
by gods assistance united them in a perfect leage of amity. So these two
kings divided long in bloody wars, agreed both in one to honor in this sort
jointly together Christ's vicar. A thing though often used by Emperors and
kings to Popes, yet never before excecuted by two kings at once. So God did
honor him whom the Emperor sought to depresse, and rewarded the kings for
their humble service with a Benediction of Peace.

Now here is to be showed how Waldemar king of Denmark son of king Canutus
the Martyr being deluded by the Emperor and Octauian, Waldemar king of
De^marke deluded by the Emperor beecame his homager, yet delivered by God from
his scysme.
was drawn within the Lions paws, and so enforced to be his homager, yet
mercifully delivered by Christ from the contamination of this scysme. The king
being solicited by the Scysmatickes, and not understanding the matter, sent
Rafe his secretary, a man of more words then wisdom, to the Emperor, where
overcome with the courtesies and rewards of Frederick and Octauian, and allured
also with large promises made to the king his Master of a Province in Italy and
the government of Sclauia, and being moreover informed how pyous an act it
was, and how well beeseeming the zeal and great discretion of so worthy a
king to come and yield his assistance for uniting the Catholics thus
disioynted; neither yet Octauians humility submitting himself to the counsel,
nor Alexanders refusal to obey their judgments, being forgotten, was thus
persuaded, and sent back to relate all this to his king, who more bold heerin
then discreet, and not so much upon a Religious yeale as a curiosity to see
the fashons of other countries, entertained these suggestions. At that time
Octauians Legate was in Denmark, Absolon Bishop of Rochildens a wise and
virtuous Prelate.
but rather scorned then accepted. After whose dimission the king went to
Absalon Bishop of Roschildens his foster brother and faithful friend, a man of
rare virtues, gravity and wisdom, to whom laying all open, he declared his
intended journey, desiring the Bishop to accompany him. The Bishop discovering
Frederickes deceytes, condemned them, assuring he could not without violating
his religion, entertayne the Emperors freindship, being more passionately
then justly transported with this scysme, and for his own part, that he was
altogether unprovided for such a journey. The king offering to furnish him with
all things necessary, the Bishop answered, he would not hazard his soul
among the professed enemies of Gods Church. The king replying, he therefore
desired to have him along, because if his conscience should be any ways
endangered, the Bishop might rescue and deliver him; the Bishop overcome with
his importunity, happily yielded: whereupon the king with a royal train set
forward: neither with any dangers or dissuasio^s of his faithful counselors
could he be-recalled, but nevertheless preceeded on with great justice and
religion, which purchassed him in all Countries where he passed, both love
and reverence: for though his company increasing amounted in show to an army,
yet would he not suffer them to offer the least wrong to any; The singular
justice of the king of Denmark.
yea his severe equity was such, both at home and abroad, as when afterward
upon want of provision for his horses; complaining to the Emperor, he desired
he might have the same for money, and the Emperor willed that his servants
as others who followed those wars should get it by spoil of the Country:
he cried out he was no theife, nor would purchase by robbery, and although in
eases of necessity this was tolerated, yet would he not allow that in other
nations, which he condemned in his own, or suffer his subjects with foreign
offenses to corrupt their domestical laws. Whereupon the Germane Princes
admyring, protested, that happy was the Realm where such a king governed. But
to return to the purpose: After a tedious journey approaching the Imperial
Camp, he found contrary to his expectation a cold entertaynment. For Absolon
the good Bishop accompanyd with Rafe that ill Ambassador, delivered before the
Emperor the cause of his lords coming. But Frederike condemning first the
kings neglecte and delay, said, that he who held his kingdom by service to
the Imperial Majesty, forgot himself much in omitting thus long his
attendance. Absolon answering, The Emperor should have signifyd so much to
the king before he undertook his journey, and not to inuit him with such
fair and large promises. The Emperor wondering, answered, who fed the king
with such hopes and promises? Absolon produced Rafe, saying, this is he, who
with your high promises abused the goodness of our credulous king. But Rafe
abashed at the Emperors denial, gave the Bishop leave to unfold the whole
matter. The Emperor still gaynsaying all, Absolon desired his king might have
then a safe conduct back into his Country: But Frederick yielding to
nothing, affirmed, that as he meddled not with his coming, so he would not
assist him in his goeing. Heerupon the king repenting his rashness, said,
allthough the swoard hung over his head, nevertheless he would rather dye then
inthrall his country to bondage. And for a remedy to this mischeife, lying
with the Emperor on the confines of France, determined by Absolons counsel,
to fly thither by stealth for refuge. But the Emperor altering his mind
sought to win him by gifts, whom he could not bend by terror, and giving the
government of Sclauia allured the king to do him Homage, yet so as it should
neither prejudice his posterity nor kingdom, alleadgeing for example the
glorious king of England, who in like case for his principallityes in France,
did Homage to the king of France. And now to descend to Octauians absurd
conuenticle, where the Archbishop of Clen declaymed of the injury offered the
Roman Emperor by other kings who would intermedle with choosing the Pope of
Rome, where the Emperor on the contrary side never interposed himself about
the elections of any Bishops in Cittyes subject to their dominions. And the
Emperor saying also that he doubted not but the kings there present,
assembled by him for that purpose, would concur with the Bishops in
ratifying Octauians authority. When Octauian hereupon proceeded in his
counterfeit solemnity to accurse Pope Alexander, The king of Denmark by the advice of Bishop Absolon flyinge Octauian, follows Alexander.
the king of Denmark admonished by Absolon, departed the place, and refusing
to be present at that sacriligious excommunication, showed thereby his
approbation of Alexander, and reprobation of Octauian. And Bishop Absolon
following after, when Octauian requested him to stay, said, there was no reason
but as he came with the king, so he should depart with him, and so they
both left Octauian. Thus the Emperor contrary to the Canons of the Church,
summoned kings to establishe the Papacy.

Here now dawneth the day of saint Thomas of Canterburyes history, which
being most tempestuous, closed nevertheless in a most glorious Evening; for
thus writes Cardinal Baronius. This self same year a great counsel was
assembled at London in England, of all the Bishops meeting together about the
election of the Archbishop of Canterbury, being the chief Metropolitan of the
Realm, after the death of Archbishop Theobalde who departed this life on
Easter Tewesday, Saint Thomas chosen Archbishop of Canterbury.
when he had administered that place twenty years; the king himself was also
there present, where by the general assent of all, Thomas his Majesty's
Chancellor was chosen to that dignity: which being written at large among the
actions of his life cronicled by Edward a man of that age, you see here
breifely collected and printed: The Authors and Epistles from whence Cardinal
Baronius collecteth the history of saint Thomas.
But other matters are likewise recorded by four Authors, being all Disciples
of saint Thomas, the first, Hubert his Clearke, the next William of Canterbury,
the third John of Salusbury, the last, Allane Abbot of Deache, all which being
digested in three books remaining in the Vaticane library, together with
selected Epistles written by diverse Authors, and all tending to this purpose,
among which many were sent by saint Thomas and Pope Alexander, and being by
the labor of John of Salusbury divided into five books excelling all
treasures, shall help to beautify this my history. Saint Thomas laboreth to
fly the Archbishopprick, telling King Henry that in this place he shall
offend him in defending the Churches liberty.
The tome it self remains in the Vaticane library. Hubert testifyeth that
saint Thomas sought by all means to avoid this Archiepiscopull dignity, for
these are his words: Thomas labored with the king, that he should forbear
to advance him to the Archbishoppricke of Canterbury, professing if he were
so chosen, he should prove his adversary and enemy in defending the Churches
liberty. Whereunto Salusbury adds thus; having long resisted, upon the
instant urging of Henry of Pisapreist Cardinal of saints Nereu and Achilleus
being there Legate, he assented, whereupon they presently sent Messingers to
Pope Alexander resyding then at Mount Pessulan for obtaining his pall, S.
Thomas consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury.
which for reverence of so great a man was out of hand granted, and so at
the Popes hands they received it.

But in laying open the excessive tribulations and extremityes falling out in
the process of his Bishoppricke, which exceedingly afflicted not only Thomas
himself with the Church of Canterbury and all England, but also Pope Alexander
with the Roman Church, and the whole Catholic world, we are so overwhelmed
with abundance of Authors, as we can hardly without great labor ploung out of
them. For not only Edward and those four Authors writing to this purpose; with
others who registered the occurents of the time, yield plentifully most copious
matter to furnish Chronicles; but also 455. Epistles sent upon that occasion by
diverse to sundry persons, and especially by Pope Alexander and saint Thomas
himself, out of which we frame this Epistolary history which excels
others, present us with such an ouerswelling sea of discourse, as our style
being even drowned, the very plenty makes us poor,

An. Dom. 1163.
Pope Alexander intending to celebrate a Counsel at Towers, hastened about the
beginning of Lent to speak with the king of France at Paris, where the
virtuous king with his lords and knights met him two leagues before his
entrance of the City, and as the king saw the Pope, he alyghting, ran to his
styrrup and humbly kissed his feet, whom the Pope received also with a kiss,
and so both ryding forward together with the Cardinals, were with a most
solemn procession of the Clergy, and great exultation brought to the
Cathedral Church. Alexander celebrateth the Counsel of Towers.
Here remained his holiness till Easter was passed. Afterward he trauailled
to Charters, and thence to Towers, where on the 14. Kalends of June, being
within the Octaues of Penticoste, in the Church of saint Martine he celebrated
his Counsel with 17. S. Thomas coming to the Counsel of Towers was
honorably received by the Pope.
Cardinals, a hundred and four and twenty Bishops, besides a maruilous
number of the Clergy and Layetie; among whom was saint Thomas who was the last
year instauled in the Archbishopprick of Canterbury, whom the Pope so
honorably received, as he sent all the Cardinals, except two that ever
attend him, to meet this Metropolitan before his entrance into the City, and
gave him as fully as he requested, confirmation of all his Churches
privileges. Here Arnulphus Bishop of Lexouy, by the Popes appointment made
the Oration, being most pious, learned and eloque^t, wherein he touched the
Emperors authority given only to his Ancestors by the Roman Church and thence
diriued to him, Co^rade the the elected Archbishop of Mounts leaving his Cosen
the Emperor, came to the Pope at the Counsel of Towers. Co^rade advanced by
the Pope Alexanders undoubted tittle to the Papacy manifested. Octauia^
accursed.
and prays them charitably to relieve the Pope and Cardinals being now
banished out of all. To this Counsel came Conrade the Elect of Mountes,
leaving his Cosen the Emperor and all his temporal honors to follow Pope
Alexander, by whom he was made afterward Cardinal Bishop of Sabine, and
Archbishop of Mounts, wherewith the Emperor being offended intruded Christian
his Chancellor into his place. In this Counsel Alexanders undoubted title to
Papacy being most evidently declared, Octauian with all his Accomplices was
again accursed. There are also diverse Canons of the same Counsel extant. Pope
Alexander being offered by the kings to make choice of some City within
their dominions to inhabit in, went in October to Senon being a Metropolitan
City, where he executed freely his supreme function, and authority. Here
William of Newborough wandreth in two errors, the one, that saint Thomas at the
Counsel of Towers moved in conscience, Alexander residing at Senon in France
governs the Catholic Church. William of Newberies erro^s.
because he received at the kings hands a laycall inuesture, being neither
Canonically nor sincerely done, resigned therefore his Bishoppricke secretly
into the Popes hands, which his Holiness restored to him again with lawful
approbation, curing the scruple of his afflicted conscience, which, as in the
process of this work will appear, was afterward. The other, that the only
cause of controversy beetweene the king and the Archbishop was, that saint
Thomas would, not suffer him to punish a notarious offending Clearke, which (as
shall be manifested) was not the only, but one among other most just occasions
that moved saint Thomas to reprove the king, whereupon grew this bitter
dissension. Yet Newborough would have thus excused the king. But let us now
follow the Archbishop returning home to his own Church from the counsel of
Towers, that we may search out the original of this great controversy, which
for seven years troubling the Roman Church, found none effect for uniting
this rented discord beetweene the king and him. The Translation of S. Edward
King of England and Confessor.
After the Archbishops return, until the translation of saint Edward the
king, which was solemnized on the third of the Ides of October, there remained
quiet peace and contentment beetweene the king and him: but what afterward
ensued, these Authors being eyewitnesses of the proceedinges do testify.

CONSIDERATIONS UPON the Preface.
LEt us now here behold the Christian world as at this time it presented it
self. Where first we see the Pope and Cardinals banished out of Rome, Italy
and all, the mighty Emperor of Rome posessing all their dominions
Ecclesiastical and temporal, and mayntaineing Octauian that usurping
Scysmatick in the Papal throne. The Emperor of Constantinople not intermedling
with the Western Church, and also lately overthrown by the Cecilia^s. The
king of Jerusalem though acknowledging Alexander his lawful Pastor, yet
reigning a far of, and hardly able to defend the frontyers of Christendom
against the Saracens. The good king of Denmark though lately showing himself
an approved Catholic, yet Frederickes Homager, and divorced by all Germany
from assisting Pope Alexander. Bohemia drowned in Germany; and Hungary a remote
kingdom, and though subject to the Roman Sea, yet not able to succor her.
The king of Cecill, though Alexanders faithful friend, yet so encumbered with
domestical rebellions, as he could not raise an army to restore him. The
kingdoms of Spain, though they wished him well, yet so overcome with the
Mahomet a Moors as their states were miserable. So he was only left by God
to the pious and worthy king of France, the powerful king of England, and in
mine opinion, the greatest king of the Norman race that ever swayd over this
land: for (as Gilbert B. of London writing in the names of all the English
Bishops to saint Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, says) his dominions reached
from the Perinean Mountains to the Northern seas; and if Edward the III.
Henry the V. and Edward the IV. having England, Ireland, Callis, and rather a
tumultuous title, then any peaceable countries or profitable revenues in
France, were able to triumph over France, then how much was Henry the II. who
beesides England and Ireland, had the Dutchyes of Normandy and and Aquitaine,
with the Earldom of Anioue his native soil and other honores in quiet
possession, to omit Britain that had a great dependence on him, able to
ouermatch the puissance of France. To pass from this to his great reverence
and affection to Pope Alexander, I know no king that ever showed more: and last
to ascend to his actions, the effects of these, Henry the II. drew England,
France, Spain, Ireland and Norwaye to obey Pope Alexander: and when the
Emperor would have surprysed at Mount Saon, the king of France, and thereby
entralled the Pope and Cardinals, and spoiled them of all, this renowned K.
with his courageous army rescued them. Now what a terrible attempt was it of
the enemy of Mankind to withdraw (if he could) from the Pope such a king,
from the Church such a child? But though the billows of these seas were
wonderful, yet God was more maruaylous in guiding saint Peeters ship through
them. Considering all these, every indifferent man may in reading this
Epistolary history judge how great reason the Pope had, as far as in conscience
he possibly could, to forbear this king so well deserving of the Apostolic
Sea. And also when, enforced through justice thereunto, he would have executed
against him the censures of the Church, what a true heroical virtuous act it
was to prefer the love and duty he bore to Almighty God, before the favor of
so great, and such a deserving friend. And what above all others is most to
be marked in the process of this matter, although all the Bishops of this
realm fearfully and fowly wandered astray, yea although saint Thomas of
Canterbury himself like an other saint Peeter falling, recovered again, and
rose to a glorious Martyrdom: yet Pope Alexander, whom it cheifely concerned,
never erred either infayth or infacte; God so directed with his holy Ghost the
governor of his Church. Lastly to conclude with this famous king, whose fair
arysing sun was so ouerclowded with his turbulent passions, as they,
molested the whole Church, and gave occasion (though, unwitting to him) of the
Martyrdom of the glorious Saint; he returned nevertheless in the end so
clearly again to himself, as he gave that great satisfaction, and endured,
yea imposed upon himself so sharp a penance as was able to make his very
enemies relent, and a stony heart with tears to pity him: Neither do I
think but the prayers and merits of S. Thomas, that converting his bloody
executioners to co^trite penite^tes through Christ's passion saved their
souls, did in like sort, yea more effectually help to raise to the same
eternal blessedness this king, after he departed this world in the Octaues of
S. Peeter and S. Paul An. 1189. being first penitent, confessing his sins,
and receiving the most B. Sacrament. This being delivered by Card. Bar. out of
Roger I have precisely set down, because it is Cronicled that the king dyed
out of charity, being I think as false, as that Pope Adrian (according to the
Scysmatickes fable) was choked with a fly, or K. John poisoned by a Monk.

THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SAINT THOMAS ARCHBISSOPPE OF CANTERBVRY.
THE old enemy makes continual war against the Church, but the son of
God who has redeemed it with his own blood, will also by the blood of his
own members bring the same to true and perfect liberty: among which the
glorious company of the Apostles and purple coulored army of holy martyrs has
the pre-eminence by whose doctrine the lively stones in the building of the
body of Christ, are confirmed, by whose blood (as it were with mortar and
symonde) they are joined together, and united, that the Church of God goeing
forward and multiplying in piety, the number of the faithful might be made
fit for the building of an holy Temple, in our Lord.

And allbeit all Martirs in general have a supereminent prerogative of
eternal glory, The glory of martyrdom.
yet their title is more glorious, and their Crown more bright, that have
deserved double honor by instructing of others, making themselves an example to
their flock; and laying down their lives for their sheep in the time of
trial: for like as one star exceeds an other in brightness, so in the
resurrection the Saints shall shine like stars, every one in his proper
order, and they that have instructed many to live well, shall be as the
bringhtnes of the Firmament for ever and ever: among which rank saint Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury may worthily be placed, Saint Thomas of Canterbury.
who as he has bin for Christ a Companion of their tribulation and patience,
so is he now in Christ, a fellow heir of their joy and consolation: whose
meritts that they may the better appear to the world, I have here set down
the sum of his life and conversation, breifely and succinctly, referring
those that desire to read his acts more largely discoursed to larger volumes
of him and by him, where he shall be satisfied to the glory of Gods grace,
which breaths where it will; with how great expedition he dispatched many
great affairs, it appears by his Epistles, and by the writings of other
credible Authors also, which being read with due attention, may stir up us
and succeeding ages to virtue and piety.

He was borne in London of noe mean parentage.
Blessed Thomas was by birth a Londoner, a noble issue descended from no mean
parents: from his tender years he was endowed with manifold graces: of
stature, he was tall; of personage, comely; of wit, quick; in discourse
subtle and pleasant, and in beauty of mind he was no less amiable. In his
young years such was the sharpnes of his wit, that he could unfold strange
and intricate questions, and therewithal he had so happy a memory, that what
soever he read or heard, he could easily make use of it when occasion was
offered, which many greater Clerks could not attain unto: all men did admire
the alacrity of his spirit, especially in a man employed in so many
businesses: but thus did grace attend and nourish him that was reserved for so
emine^t a place in the Church of God. In his Sermons and ordinary discourses
(as he used often times to say) necessary matter was ministered unto him: his
mother also (as he used to say) taught him from his cradle to serve God, His
mothers Lesson.
and devoutly to call upon the Blessed Virgin mother of God, as the directer of
hi^ ^yes, and patroness of his life* and next unto Christ, to put his chief
confidence in her. His charity and compassion.
He had compassion on those that begged from door to door, and releiued them
effectually, so as he might say with Job, mercy has grown up with me from
the beginning, and pity came with me out of my mother's womb.

Leaving the schools of liberal sciences, he beecame a Courtier, He became a
Courtier.
in which profession he gave so great hope of his forwardnes, that both in
the serious affairs of the Court, and in their disportes and recreation, he
excelled far all his companions of his rank: and albeit he did apply
himself to the vain delights of youth, as the frailty of that age did lead
him, yet was there ever in him a religious zeal, and a magnificent mind: He
was very religious.
albeeit he was beyond measure desirous of popularity, and (as we read of
saint Brice of Tours) although he was proud and vain, and many times amourous
in his words, yet was he nevertheles an admirable pattern to be followed in
the chastity of his body. He was chaste of body.


When he perceived that many things were attempted in the Court, to the
dishonor of the Cle^gie, and that his living there was repugnant to his
intended purpose, by the instinct and conduction of grace, rather then by the
motion and advice of his freindes, He was preferred to the service of Theobald
Archbishop of Can.
he preferred himself to the service of Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury of
happy memory, where through his industry in short time, he was received
into the number of his most familiar freindes, which were very few: how many
great travails he sustained there for the Church of God: how often he did
visit the sepulchers of the Blessed Apostles, He was employed in meighty
affairs.
for the dispatch of necessary affairs: with what prosperous success he
spedd in his negotiations, it is not easy to be related, especially by a pen
that affects breuity: purposing only compendiouslie to set down the cause
and manner of his Martyrdom, He studied the Civil and Canon law.
for the better preparing of him that was preordained of God to be so great a
prelate; for the decyding of weighty causes and instructing of the people, he
gave himself to the study of the Civil and Cannon law, and for the increasing
of his experience in the Ecclesiastical function, the said Archbishop made
him Archdeacon of the Church of Canterbury wherein he was trained up. He was
made Archdeacon of Cant.


Afterward when Henry Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine the son of Galfride
Earl of Angiou, and Mawlde the Empress succeeded king Stephen in the crown of
England, the said Archbishop obtained of the king the Chancellorship of
England for his Archdeacon, He was made Lord Chauncellor of Eng.
for he suspected the kings youth, and feared the malice of certain young
heads, by whom he seemed to be directed, least that by their counsel he
should be incited to take upon him the government of the realm by the law of
conquest: for it seemed unto him that he had conquered the Realm whereas in
truth, it was not so: and therefore the Archbishop procured such a Lord
Chancellor by whose means and industry, the new king might be stayed from
attempting any thing against the Church; his malice tempered; and the insolency
of his officers repressed who under color of authority and instice, had
conspired to make a prey, of the Church, and commonweal e.

At his first entrance into that office, he sustained so great and manifold
difficultyes of weighty affairs, was environed with so many labors, oppressed
with so many afflictions, set upon with so many wiles, and exposed to so many
snares of the court, (or to speak more properly) of the courtiers, that he
used often times with tears to protest unto the Arch-Bisbop, and others his
freindes, he was every day weary of his life: and moreover that next unto his
eternal salvation; he desired nothing more, the^ (without note of infamy) to
deliver himself from the alurements of the Court, for albeeit the world
seemed to applaude and flatter him with all her enticements, yet was he never
unmindful of his place, and the Church committed unto him, whereby he was
constrained continually to contend, and strive; His allegiance to the king and
love to the common weal.
for the honor and safety of the king, and secondly, for the good of the
Church, and common wealth, both against the king himself, and his enemies
also, and by diverse sleightes to defeat diverse wiles by them intended against
him: but his greatest grief was that he was without intermissio^ to fight
against the beasts of the Court, and continually to be wrestling with a
certain Protheus (as the Proverb 15.) so as if the grace of God, and his own
industry had not preserved him, he was like every hour have bin thrown down
head long into ruin and destruction.

In the time of his Chancellorship he found so great favor with the king,
that after the decease of the Archbishop of Canterbury, he succeeded in that
Sea, to govern the Church of England; for the king, having had manifold trial
of him, He was made L. Archi-Bishop of Canterb.
deemed his fidelity, and magnanimity to be fit for so high a dignity, and
also that thee would have a care of his profit, and govern all things in the
Church, and Common wealth to his good liking, and moreover he did fore see, if
it should please God to cut him of by untimely death, that he would be a
faithful Tutor for the education of his children, for surely, he was a man of
wonderful great experience in the world, and one that would wisely conjecture
of the event of things to comme: A faithful Tutor to the kings issue.
having by long experience, learned the charge and honor both belonging to his
place: he knew also the kings conditions and the pride of his officers, and
how powerful the malice of his Parasites was, whervppon he coniectured
evidently, that by the acceptance of that dignity, he should lose the favor of
God or else of the king: for it was impossible for him to please God, and to
observe the kings humor, neither could he please the king, and prefer the
law of God before his, He refused that promotion.
and therefore for a season he would not accept of the promotion, which the
king and other of his freindes persuaded him unto. But the providence of God
prevailed, so as by the instant and urgent persuasion of that honorable
Cardinal Priest Pisanus, Legate of the Sea Apostolic, he did satisfy the
kings desire, and the persuasion of his freindes, choosing rather to hazard the
kings displeasure, then to give way unto the desolation of the Church, and
resolving either to protect it from so imminent danger of servitude; or else
(after the example of Christ) to lay down his life for his sheep, for the lay
power, beereauing the Church, of her ancient privileges, took upon it to
determine all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as temporal, and as the people,
so was the Clergy troaden under foot also, wherefore he whom God had
preordained to be so great a Prelate and Martyr, notwithstanding that some of
his enemies did labor against the ordinance of God, was elected with the
general consent of all men.

After his consecration forth with, His discipline
(putting of the old man) he put on haire-cloth to Crucify the flesh with the
concupiscence thereof; and remembering that he had taken upon him the office of
a Pastor and Doctor, he performed the ministry of a Preacher. All the time
which he could spare from his affairs of greatest importance, His pronesse to
prayer.
he beestowed it for the most part in prayer and reading: when he was
solitary he did maruilousely abound in tears, and in his celebration at the
Altar his behavior was such, as if he had beheld our lords Passion in the
flesh before his eyes. He did minister the Sacraments with so great reverence
that the very handling of them, was able to inform the faith and manners of
them that beheld him. He kept back his hand from bribery and gifts, and cast
away from him the filth of covetousness: in counsel he was prouide^t, He was
a provident Counselor.
in hearing of causes a diligent and indifferent judge, in questions subtle, in
answers ready, in judgment just, without respect of persons, and a strict
executor of the law in all points. Under outward decency of apparel he was
inwardly apparelled with the armor of a Christian soldier, which (that the
merit thereof might not be diminished through vaineglory,) he was very
careful to hide from the world, and that, according to the saying of the wise
man, his outward semblance might be agreeable to the world, His charitable
releife of the poor.
whenas inwardly all things were contrary. In his place he sat not down to
meat, until the poor were sent in before him, and that they might the better
be releiued with that which was left, he would have his table the more
plentiful: Such as begged from door to door went not away empty handed from
his gate: He caused his servants to visit the houses of sick and feeble
persons, and he did visit them himself effectually with his benevolence,
sustaining many of them daily with meat drink and cloth; He doubled the
largiss of his Predecessor.
for whereas his predecessor Theobald of happy memory did double the expenses
of his Predecessor beestowed in alms, he likewise of a certain religious
emulation, thought good to redouble the like expenses of his Predecessor also:
for the performance of which charitable work, he did consecrate the tenth
part of all his revenues to that purpose. He daily washed the feet of 13.
poor people.
He used daily, in a certain secret Cell, upon his knees to wash the feet of
thirteen poor folk, in remembrance of Christ, giving to every one of them
after they had well dyned, fourepe^ce which if any time he could not attend in
his own person (which seldom happened) he caused it diligently, to be
supplied by a substitute. He entertained religious persons with so great a
respect, as if he had received a dinine presence, He was very liberal.
or an Angel in their persons. In hospitality, and other works of liberality,
he was so plentiful, that his riches seemed the common treasury of all me^:
and albeeit his house was garnished with rich and precious furniture, His
contempt of worldly riches He was temperate in his diet.
yet did he contemn riches and worldly treasure as dung, for Christ; using
transitory things to serve his necessity, and not to satisfy his
concupiscences and pleasure. In his diet he was temperate observing therewith a
mediocrity, that by too much austerity he might not be taxed of superstition,
or by ingurgitation esteemed a Glutton. He detested hypocrisy.
He detested no less the note of hypocrisy then he did the imputation of
dishonesty, esteeming it the best kind of fasting to observe the measure of
sobriety, in which attire being poor in spirit, under a merri countenance
covering a contrite heart, in a delicate table preferring penury, rising often
from the bourde rather empty then full bellied, and more often refreshed then
satisfied, in keeping himself ever within the compass of sobriety. He
conformed himself to the manners of those he accompanied withal, after the
example of the Apostles, who by wholesome dispensation, became all unto all to
the intent to gain all. He delivered the poor from the hand of the mighty,
as one that was truly, given by God, to be a father to the poor, He was a
father to poor people.
and a conforter of those that mourn. He reproved liberally, the sin of the
nobility, knowing that where the spirit of God is, there is also liberty; yet
that he might not seem to cast holy things to dogs, or pearls before
swine, he would first prudently, considere the nature of those he did
admonish or reprehend, and being conducted by the spiritual unction, his
communications and sermons did seem wonderfully learned to all sorts of
hearers, He was both learned and eloquent.
both in the weight of matter and eloquent delivery. After meals and his
necessary sleep, until his business called him away, he passed the time in
reading of the scripture, or else in honest communication, lest the enemy
should take occasion there at to deride his Sabbath. All the time which he
could without the great detriment of his body, he did bestow in prayer,
tears, and holy meditation, keeping chastity in his body, cleanesse in his
heart, modesty in his words, and justice in his works, that he might move
those by his example which, he was to teach by his doctrine. He did without
ceasing impugn scysme and heresy, He greatly impugned scysme and heresies.
and would never be induced to keep company with excommunicated persons: for
whosoever was an ennemy to sound doctrine, he did esteem him as his enemy in
Christ, and being fervent in the zeal of justice, he endeavored that every
man should enjoy his own, without respect of persons or receiving of bribes.

S. Thomas retourneth into England from the Counsel at Towers.
And though at his return from the counsel of Towers into England (being the
second year after his consecration) he was received of the king, as a father
of his son, with favorable countenance, a good respect and esteem, yet
soon after discontentments beegan to arise, whilst Saint Thomas, without any
offense offered to the king, exercised the office of an Evangelical pastor, in
undergoing which charge, whilst he endeavored to recover the Graunges of the
Church usurped by the layety, and wrongfully alienated from his predecessors,
he incurred the displeasures of many and mighty me^. Yea when he touched the
kings exchecker to the quick, by little and little the king himself was moved
to indignation against him. For in England had the same unconscionable custom
prevailed, that the exchecker couetously challenged to it self the revenues
arysing from the vacancyes of Churches. Wherefore S. Thomas required that for
two seas of Bishopprickes, being now long vacant, there might be speedily
Bishops ordained. The ground of the discord beetweene the king and S. Thomas.
It did also somewhat trouble the kings mind, when S. Thomas being created
Archbishop, gave absolutely over the office of Chauncellorship, according to
that of the Apostle: no man fighting under the banner of God, intangleth
himself in temporal businesses. 2. Timoth. 2
For the king desired to retain him still in his service. And for a greater
addition of dislike, Thomas moreover forbad the unlawful exaction of a
Tribute: Heerewithall at the same time concurred, that he delivered not over
to the secular Court, a Priest condemned of murder, but being degraded,
committed him to a Monastery. The like happened concerning one Phillip a Cannon,
and yet a grievous offender, whom the Archbishop enforced not to suffer
punishment in such sort as the king would have it, but only chasticed him with
Ecclesiastical censures.

The king by reason heerof beecommeth wrathful, The causes of the kings
indignation.
because there was, according to the direction of the holy Cannons, a milder
proceeding with those of the Clergy who offended, where upon they might grow
more insolent in wickedness: He beegan to demanund instantly of Thomas the
Archbishop, that Clearkes committing such crimes might after the Canonical
punishment inflicted on them, be delivered over to the secular Tribunal. But
this motion of the king was gainsayed by S. Thomas and many other Bishopps
associate with him, all of them humbly beeseeching his Majesty to abstain
from these attemptes, but he was rather more enflamed with anger. Whereupon
Robert writes in these words: but the king somewhat moved heerewith, yet much
more incensed because he saw the Archbishop and Bishops with mutual assent
(as he supposed) bent against him, asked of them presently being thus
constantly united, whether they would observe the customs beelonging to his
crown, adding that these being in the reign of his grandfather formerly
observed by Archbishops and Bishops, by private and privileged persons,
ought not by tracte of time, with a severe sentence, to be condemned.
Whereupon the Archbishop having first consulted with his brethren, answered:
He and his brethren would observe them, saving the prerogative of their
order, and the same every Bishop being asked one by one, did turn by turn
severally answer: only Hilarie Bishop of Chichester hearing the king more
enraged for these words so uttered alike by them all, without advise of the
Archbishopps, altered some, saying, he would absolutely observe in good faith
the customs of the kingdom; and for a seeming good intent truly (as I think)
he said it, that he might yet so appease the kings mind. But the king was
nothing at all calmed; yea he waxed more wroth: and turning himself to the
Archbishop and Bishops upon the hearing of this uniform and one answer of them
all, said: A battle was ranged against him, and that poison lurked in this
captious word, Saving the prerogative of their order. Wherefor he required
that absolutely without addition, they would promise to observe the customs of
the kingdom. The Archbishop answered: they had sworn to him fidelity, that is
to say, life, limme, and earthly honor, saving the prerogatine of their order,
and that in this earthly honor the customs of the kingdom were comprehended;
and he would not bind himself to the observation of them in any other sort
then they had formerly sworn. Now when a great part of the day was in this
fashion passed, The Kings intemperate anger.
the king being all the while vexed, without any farewell to the Bishops,
suddenly departed the Court in great wrath and indignation.

The King was accustomed in the disturbance of his mind, through the passion
of anger to be unreasonably and outragiously altered and transported; as by an
example or two I shall here lay open before you, whereby in the very
entrance of this controversy now raised, you may understand how difficulte and
dangerous it was to contend with him in any case were it never so just. For in
the 44. epistle written to S. Thomas concerning the King, thus we read: The
King on a certain day, when he was at Cane, and a business which he had with
the King of Scotts, dealte seriously against Richard de Humet, who seemed to
defend the cause of the King of Scotts, brake out into disgraceful words,
and openly called him Traitor, and hereupon enflamed with his wonted fury,
threw his cap from his head, vngirte his belte, hurled away his cloak and
garmentts, where with he was apparelled, cast of with his own hands a
couerlet of silk from his bed, and sitting as it were in a dunghill of
straw, beegan to chewe the strawes. And these tokens not so much of wrath as
of madness he then uttered. Of whom in the nept epistle is written thus: A boy
who delivered a letter to his Majesty: incurred a great danger, the king
endeavoring with his fingers to pluck out his eyes, so far as it came to the
effusion of blood. And moreover Peeter of Bloyes in his epistle to Roger the
Deane, concerning the kings conditions, says thus: Be carfull in this, Peeter
of Bloys Epistola 75.
that you come not to our lord the king to treat of your business, until you
make your way by me, or some other, who is acquainted with his customs; for
he is a lamb so long as his mind is pleased, but a lion, or more cruel then
a lion, when he is vehemently angreed. It is not a light matter to procure his
indignation, in whose power is honor and confusion, inheritance and
banishment, life and death. And in his epistle to the Archbishop of Panorma
he has these words in describing the kings countenance: His eyes are round,
while his mind is appeased, mild as a Dove and simple; but in wrath and the
garboyle of his heart, they are as it were sparkeling with fire, and lightning
with fury, and after: whom he has once hated, he scarce ever receives into
grace and favor gain. Thus far Bloys.

Hereby (reader) I say you may conceive, with how great a danger these Bishop
were now to withstand him. What followed hereuppon Robert proceeds to recyte.

When they departed from the King, Thomas the Archbishop severely reprehended
the before mentioned Bishop, because without his and the other Bishopps
consentes, he presumed to alter from the answer generally made by them all.
The next day the King demanding it, were delivered into his hands the
Charters and honors, which the Archbishop held from the time of his
Chauncellorship, and neither saluting nor being saluted by the Bishops, yea
without their priuity, he secretly and before day removed from London; which
was vndoubledly an apparent proof of his excessive wrath and displeasure. What
followed hereupon shall be declared the next year wherein it happened.

The king dissolved the union of the Bishops.
Matters standing in this sort, the king through the wicked counsel of the
malicious, beegan to endeavor how this united body, I mean the joint
agreement of minds between the Archbishop and Bishops, whereby they were
made absolutely invincible might be rent a sunder, and so dissolved, be
easily vanquished by him. Whereupon it came to pass, that to pleasure the
king, the inferior members rebelled against their head, and if at any time
the Archbishop would attempt with Canonical authority to repress them, they
would presently appeal to the Apostolical Sea. And verily the Saint being in
regard hereof entangled in extreme streyghtes of his mind, certifyed the
same to Pope Alexander, sending together with his letter a messanger. The Pope
compassionating his estate, returned to him this consolatorie answer,
beeginning in the book with this inscription: Alexander Pope to Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury: Lib. 1. Epist. 17.
in the first onsett of his tribulation was this epistle written, the self
same year in the end of the month of October.

Pope Alexander to S. Thomas.
We have with attentive diligence heard the letter sent to us by your
brotherhood, together with that which your Messanger delivered by word of
mouth, and withal considered the greiuous streights and bitter sorrows,
wherewith your mind is continually afflicted; upon the hearing and
understanding whereof, our spirit is moved and exceedingly troubled, whose
comfort is to be gladly dilighted in your prosperous success; and
contrarewise in your aduersityes to partake by all means with you in
aggreiuances, as with our dearest brother; wherefore as a constant and wise
man, calling often to mind, how it is said, that the Apostles went reioyceing
from the sight of the Counsel, because they were made worthy to suffer
reproach for the name of Jesus. Acts of the Apost. cap. 9.
Undergo with patience the burden of these extremities, and let not your
spirit be encumbred more then is convenient, but recover to your self worthy
consolation, that we together with you may be jointly recomforted in him,
who has reserved you in this instant of necessity for stre^thning the
fertresse of the Catholic and Christian truth; and whose good pleasure it is
to wash away, and chastise with sundry afflictions the spots and blemmishes
of the offense, by you unlawfully committed; that they may not be seen to be
reserved for punishment, in the last severe examination. What remains let it
not be troublesome, nor (as we understand in your letter sent by your
Clearke) any whit dreadful unto you in that they appeal against you to the
Apostolical Sea; because as a thing grateful and acceptable to us, our
pleasure is, that if they, who bring the appeal against you, perchance
appear before us; you your self (if you think good) setting aside all
doubts and delays, shall prosecute the appeal. Neither yet can ever any man
under pretense of the Roman Church affright with fear or doubt your constancy,
because we, by the grace of God, will be careful with all diligence to
conserve (as fare as with justice and reason we can) the rightes and dignities
of the Church committed to the charge of your self, as the party whom indeed
we have found a constant and courageous defender of the same.

Moreover we, inioyning co^mau^d your brotherhood, that you retire your self
unto your Church of Conterbury, and retayning with you some few, and those most
necessary atte^da^tes, you do as little as may be trauaill through the
country. And lastly we commend this especially to your providence, that you
never suffer your self to be enforced under any pretense of fear, or
adversity (which may possibly beefall you) to renounce the rightes and
dignities beelonging to your Church. Dated at Senon the 7. of the Kalendes of
November. These were the words of Pope Alexander in the beeginning of this
persecution, so prepareing his soldier, to the encounter of the next ensueing
battle.

Upon the receipt of which letters, Thomas returned these again to Pope
Alexander, by Henry his familiar friend, being for that purpose sent to the
Court of his Holiness.

The letter of S Yhomas to Pope Alexander lib. 1. epist. 78.
The letters of comfort, which your Fatherhood vouchsafed to send us may truly
imparte an ample remedy to a mind inta^gled in ordinary troubles: or at least
if our incu^bred thoughts, were only bent against one mischeife, we might
conceive thereby some hope of relaxation. But in regard that malice increases
daily in power, iniuryes are likewise multiplied, not to us, but to Christ, yea
because to Christ, therefore rather to us, and storms like waves, succeding
one after an other, we see nothing but shipwreck tbreatening instantly to
devour us; nor any advise left, but that with our uttermost ability awakeing
Christ, Matthew. 5.
as it were sleeping in the ship, we cry out: Lord save us, we perish. And
heerin truly iniquity has got a more fit occasion to vent her malice, because
he sees the state of the Roman Church as now more weakened; whereby appears
that whatsoever it be, good or ill, sweet or sower, which flows down on
the head, the same descending by the beard, leaves not the lowest hemme of the
garment untouched. Jesus Christ is despoyled of that, which by his blood he
purchased. The secular power has laid hands on his very patrimony: So as
neither the decrees of the holy fathers, nor the constitutions of the Cannons
(whose very name among us is grown odious) are as now of force to patronise
the Clergy, who in times past have bin by special privilege ex^mpted from
this secular jurisdiction: and because it is long and tedious to rechearse or
prosecute in writting the iniuryes we endure; we send to your Fatherhood
Master Henry a man both to your Holiness, and us, faithful and familiar, to
whose relation we have commended all things in such sort to be declared
particularly, unto you as he has s ene and heard them, and if it pleases
you, credit him as much as you would our s lfe. Know you nevertheless, that if
it might be, we would far rather visit you in person, then by an other: we
speak confidently to you as to our father and lord: and what we say we
humbly beeseech may be concealed in all silence. Nothing remains safe to us,
since almost all things are disclosed to the King which are spoken in our
private chamber, or whispered in our ear. Woe be to us, who are r^s^rued to
these times, in whose days these mischeifes are beefallen; who in our former
estate have enjoyed s^e great a liberty, which now is recompensed with a hard
and most vile slavery. We would at the least have fledd, that we might not
see the patrimony of the crucified given over to spoil; but whither we know
not, unless unto him who is our refuge, and virtue. Concerning the Welshmen
and Owen, who calls himself a prince, we beeseech your Lordship to be
provident, because our lord the King is heerewith wonderfully disturbed, and
moved to indignation. And so dear father and lord, we wish you all felicity.
To the same purpose; and by the same Messinger, Lib. 1. ep^st. 19. 20. 21. 82.
did he writ to Humbald Cardinal and Bishop of Ostia: he sent also letters
to Bernard Bishop and Cardinal of Portua: and likewise to Albert Priest and
Cardinal: with an other to Hyacinthe Deacon Cardinal; all which are reserved
entire in the same book.

Alexander afterward, somewhat foreseeing these combats to come, prepares
himself for resistance, admonishing as well the Archbishop, as all other
Bishops of England, not to yield a whit to the king, against the
Ecclesiastical liberty, and not to observe, whatsoever they had promised their
prince, in derogation of that immunity: which was signified in writing to
Thomas, and all the Bishops of England with these words.

Lib. 1 epist. 91.
We would have ye know, that ye have undertaken the burden of your
pastoral authority, to the end ye should govern the Churches, committed unto
your charge, to the honor of God, and the profit and salvation of your flocks
in such sort as the Francises of the same Churches should not by your
defaultes in any wise be impaired, but conserved still in their estates, by
your studyes and endeauours: whereupon we will and command your brotherhoode,
by our Apostolical letters, and enjoin you in the virtue of obedience, that
if the renowned King of England, shall at any time require of ye any thing,
contrary to the Ecclesiastical liberty, ye presume not in any case herein to
satisfy his mind: nor yet beecome, in any sort, bound unto him, especially
against the Church of Rome: neither yet be ye so bold, as to bring in the
f^rme of any new devised promise, or oath, but only to observe that, which
Bishops have bin accustomed to swear unto their Kings. And if ye know that
in any thing of this nature, ye have tied your selves unto your King, observe
not by any means this your promise, but be rather careful to recall it, and
endeavor to be reconciled to God his Church, for the lapse of this unlawful
promise. Thus wrote Alexand^r, the most vigilant keeper of the sacred Cannons,
admitting nothing that was usurped against them in favor of the king,
allthough otherwise he were very much beehoulding to the same prince, for late
received benefittes. The rest follows the next year.

Here follows the year 1164. and the 12. indiction A year to the Catholic
Church, in regard of many adversities she sustained therein, replenished with
greifes, and troubles. And first concerning the state of English affairs; more
dangerous floods were daily there raised, tending not only to overthrow the
Primate of Canterbury, together with the whole Church of England; but also to
drown (if it had bin possible) the holy Catholic Church it seife, together
with her high Bishop Alexander. For Henry king of England prosecuting S.
Thomas with an obstinate mind, turned all his endeauours against the same Pope
Alexander, to remove him from his sea. But how all these deadly attemptes were
managed, receive here the relation.

After this turbulent encounter between the Bishops and the king, and the
departure caused by the kings enraged fury; for eschewing the imminent
mischeifes whose forces daily increased, and avoiding far greater ruins,
which threatened the overthrow of the Catholic Church, S. Thomas is beesieged
with the often and sundry persuasions of many Bishops and Abbotts, that he
should not in regard of one only word, unseasonably and unreasonably cast
himself together with the whole Church, into so open and apparent danger; one
Abbot among the rest affirming this to be the opinion of Pope Alexander
himself.

Thomas at lenght persuaded these by reasons (says Hubertin Quadrilogus)
charity enforceing him thereunto, came to the King at oxford, and promised he
would alter the word, which the King took so offensiuely. Whereupon the King,
his anger being now somewhat assuaged showed the Archbishop a more pleasing
countenance, though inferior to his wonted fashion: the King moreover said he
would have according to this form, an instrument or obligation made for the
observation of the royal customs, in the public sight and hearing of the
bishops and nobility of the kingdom. But when Thomas was advertised of the
gathering together of a general assembly foreseing the ensuing mischeifes, he
beegan to recall his consent; yet again he is assaulted by the entreaty of
many, whereby he is enforced for that instant to yield, Galat 2.
by the example of Peeter, conforming himself to the Jews, with the Jews at
Antioch, and of Paul often exercising the same. A congregation of Bishops is
appointed to be called at Claringtone, concerning the time of which
convocation, thus much is rehearsed in the first book of Epistles, The
detestable ^onue^^ckle at Claringtonne.
after the eleventh epistle: In the year of our lords Incarnation 1164. the
fifte year of Pope Alexander, and the tenth of the m st famous king of
England, Henry the second; concerning the day, this is added in the end: These
things w^ere handled, the fourth day before the Purification of S. Mary the
perpetual Virgin, to wit, the 30. day of January. For those who were present
at this assembly, they are recounted to be, all the Bishops of Eng^and
together with the Earls, Barons, Magistrates, and nobility. For the matte^s
then in action, receive them thus from the words of William in Quadrilogus.

The king ^^erefore (as i^ s^emed) fervently thirsting after an ^g^eement
beetweene ^he kingdom and the preist^ood, but less prouide^t for the state of
himself and his Archbishop, 1 Parliament
summoned at Claring^onne a Parliament of the whole nation. Whither, when the
Bishopes and peers were come, the King importunately required, that things
promised to him might be performed. But the Archbishop, allthough he promised
to consent to the King, being nevertheless suspicions of the promise, which
the King exacted, and because Kings very often exceeding all measure extend
their power to things unlawful, rather made choice to hazard the kings
indignation, then to offend the law of God, and to break the brazen serpent in
pieces, rather then wickedness should bud out among the people of God. Now
although he feared banishment and imprisonnement, yet preferring God before
these, he absolutely withstood it. The King threateneth, he refuses: the King
raueth, the other in secret, craves Gods assistance. In the mean while, the
Bishops of Salisbury and Norwich, fearing a new punishment, for an old
grudge, and dreading much, by reason of this distempered time, with weeping
words beesought the Archbishop, to have compassion on his Clergy, to relent
from the willfullnes of his mind, least himself should incur imprisonment,
his Clergy banishment, themselves the judgment of an opprobrious death. And
withal two Earls, the mightiest of the kingdom, assayling him, said, that
unless he would conform himself to the kings pleasure, they themselves by
his Majesty's commandment, should be constreyned to that violence, which would
brand the King and themselves which an eternal infamy.

This man therefore of invincible constancy, The frailty of S. Thomas.
and grownded in the work of Christ, moved neither with the sunshine of
flattery nor the storms of terrors, is notwithstanding in the end, pulled away
from the bosom of truth, and the breast of his mother, unto whose liberty he
had so lovingly cleaued: and lest being a conqueror in these listes, he
should be puffed up with pride of mind; fainting then, when he sbould
cheifely have fought, is left for an hour to fall, that, after a faulting
fall, he might rise again; that falling he might acknowledge humane
frailty, and r seeing, understand the divine mercy toward him. In like sotte
because no man should have confidence in his own strength, Peeter the prince
of the Apostles, and holy David fell; and so S. Thomas is left destirute to
his temptation for a time, that afterward being mindful of his frailty, he
might arise with more courage to the combat. Wherefore being the third time
admonished by Richard (a man of great account and Prior, as then, of the Temple
of Jerusalem) to have a care of himself, and compassion on the Clergy, he
endured no longer their submissiue petitions, their often kneeleinges: for they
seemed to cry out, as if even now they saw the very swoardes threatening over
his head, and lamented the intended murder as a present death. Whereupon moved
rather with commiseration on the Clergy, then on himself he consented by
persuasion of their counsel, to submitt himself to the Kings pleasure. And
therefore, before all the rest, the Archbishop bound himself first in that
prescribeb form, that is to say, he would observe the custom of the Crown,
in good faith: suppressing those words: saving the prerogative of his order.
Adding also this caution, with an oath: that he promised to perform this in
the word of truth: so heapeing sin upon sin. And all the Bishops severally, in
semblable manner, swear the same.

And incontinently, an obligation being drawn in this form, The Recognition,
and ^ngrossement ^f the Royal ^ustomes.
by certain Peers of the realm (who as their offices required, were learned
in such proceedings (there was made a Recognisance of the royal customs, that
as publicly, so they might expressly be recited. But when many were now
rehearsed, and more yet as it seemed to be set down, the Archbishop
interrupting, said that he neither was one of the auncientes of the kingdom,
whereby he could know the old customs of the Crown, neither had he
continued long in his Archbishoppricke, and therefore said, he was in these
matters ignorant. Moreover because the day was so far spent, it was convenient
a business of so great importance, should be referred unto the next morning.
His motion was liked and thereupon they retired themselves to their lodginges,

Returning on the morrow, to prosecute the business beegunne, the customs of
the Crown, which were left the day before vnrecited, were recounted,
expressed, and reduced into a writing, made after the manner of an obligation,
and styled with the name of the kings customs. Notwithstanding many of them
(as it is said) were not the kings, but the vomit of emulation, and poison of
envy, for hatred of the Archbishop, and to bring the Church into bondage; yea
the king himself being absolutely ignorant of them, because some men intended
by this sinful suttlety to sow the cock of dissension between him and the
Archbishop. Neither yet the king who was yet but a young man, nor the
Archbishop, who was lately elected, could know the customs of the kingdom,
but by their relation. And if any one is desirous to see, what these kingly
customs were, he shall find them set forth in the end of the history.
Whereupon a little after he says; and we here will declare them. Then he
thus proceeds in his intended discourse.

The customs being therefore written and drawn into the form of an
obligation, the king requires of the Archbishop and Bishops, that for the more
surety and confirmation of them, they would set to their seals. But the
Archbishop, allthough exceedingly moved with grief, nevertheless dissembleth
it, being as then unwilling to discontent the the king, nether absolutely
denying said: it was awhile to be delayed, and albeeit they were ready to do
it, Eccles. 32.
he affirmed notwithstanding in reguard of the weightines of the business, it
was convenient to be deferd a time. Since according to the wise man: without
counsel no matter of importance is to be performed. And afterward, some
deliberation being had: he and the Bishops might more decently be required
to accomplish it. Notwithstanding be took with him one part of the deed
containing the before said customs, to the end he might carry with him his
cause; the other part of this obligation, the Arrchbishop of York received;
the third, the king himself retained, to be enrolled among his royal
Charters. And so that day they were dismissed,

Here first of all you may disprove that which Roger writes in the Chronikles
of England, to wit, that S. Thomas promised those unlawful things to the
king, by Pope Alexanders persuasion; for if he did it, not only by the
consent, but also by the persuasion of the Pope, why did he penance, before
the said Pope for the same, as a most heinous sin, if the Pope himself
should be the author of his offense? but let us hear what remains.

Beesides the history of Quadrilogus mentioned by us, there is added in the end
thereof, a more exact narration of all things, which happened after the
dissolution of the same detestable conuentickle, held at Claringtonne, until
the departure of Pope Alexander out of France: from whence we have inserted
the history here to be recited, beeginning with the pennan^^ of S. Thomas, in
these words: And he departing from ^he Court of the king, his followers by
chance beegan to ^urter among themselves, some affirming (according to ^he
custom) that in regard of this distressed time, matters ^ught to be thus
carried: others disdaining, that for the ^leasure of a man, the authority of
the Ecclesiastical liber^y should perish. Among whom one, instantly pressing
more earnestly, said. The public power disturbeth all, ^niquitie rages
against Christ himself, the Sinagog of Sa^han profaneth Gods sanctuary,
princes have sat and assembled in one against Christ our Lord: no man is safe
who ^oueth equity: in the judgment of the world they are accounted wise, and
are at this time worshipped, who flatter Princes in following their pleasures:
yea this tempest has shaken the very ^illars of the Church: while the Pastor
is fled: the scattered sheep are subject to the wolf: to conclude, what place
remains now secure for innocence? who shall fight in defense of this
Bullwarke or who shall triumph in this battle, the general being overcome?
And thus he expostulated the matter, who carried the Cross before my lord of
Canterbury, the rest being silent for sorrow: and with great liberty he
added, assumeing in this sort a parable: what virtue (says he) has the man
reserved to himself, who has lost his constancy and renown? whom mean you
by this, my son? quoth the lord of Canterbury. Even your self, (answered
be) it concerns you: because this day you have for ever lost both conscience
and fame, having left beehind you to ^osteritie, an example odious before God,
and contrary to ^onesty, while your hands consecrated to almighty God, were
stretched out to observe those accursed customs, and ^our self conniued with
the Ministers of sinful Satan for ^he confusion of the Ecclesiastical
liberty. This was assu^edly the Cock, at whose croweing Peeter awake^ed, did
weep bitterly. For the Author proceeds. my lord of Canterbury therefore
wayled and lamented, S Thomas recouereth his laps, and imposes penance on
himself.
and with sighs and groans said: I repent me, yea greiuously and trembling
with the horror of mine offense, I comdemne my self as unworthy to serve
hereafter a^ a Priest at hi^ altar, whose Church I have so basely sold. I
will rest silent therefore sitting down to sorrow, until Almighty God
shall visit me from above, that I may deserve from our lord himself, or from
my lord the Pope, to receive absolution. And presently thereupon he sent a
messinger to the Sea Apostolic.

Pope Alexander had learned all this before by the relation of others, Libr. 1
epist. 20.
and moved with exceeding compassion, did write these letters to S. Thomas,
whereby he recomforted him now drowned thus in sorrow, and absolved him from
the oath. The letters are these.

Pope Alexander absolueth S Thomas from this sin.
Your Brotherhood understands how we have, heard and by the report of some
bin certifyed, that in consideration of a certain offense, you have determined
to forbear the celebration of Mass, and abstain from the consecration of the
body and blood of our lord Which truly of what importance it is, especially in
a man of your eminency, and how great a scandal may ensue thereupon, I would
have you with careful consideration to ponder, and weigh the same with your
watchful discretion. For you ought with prudence diligently to conceive, that
there is very great difference, where sins are wilfully committed with
deliberation: and where on the other side they are done out of ignorance, or
necessity: For it is apparent that we ought to proceed in one sort with these
which are acted by a man's own free will: and in an other manner with those
which (as it is said) are of ignorance, or the compulsion of necessity: and one
way the first, an other way the last are by men of judgment and wisdom to be
handled and measured, as by the testimonies of holy Scriptures we are taught.
Your intention gives the name to your work: for as in an other place we
read: Sin is so far voluntary, as if it be not voluntary, it is no
sin: and our allmighty Lord, respects not the action of the worker, but
rather considers the intention, and discerns the will. If therefore you
call to mind, that you have committed anything, whereof your own conscience
ought to accuse you, whatsoever it is, we advise you to confess it in the
Sacrament of Penance, to a Priest of discretion and prudence, which being
performed, our merciful Lord, who looks much more to the heart then to the
fact, will through the commiseration of his accustomed pity, forgive it you:
and we, being confident of the meritts of S. Peeter, and S. Paul his
Apostles, do absolve you from what is committed, and release your brotherhood
thereof by the Apostolic authority: counselling, and commanding, that
hereafter you abstain no more in this respect, from the celebration of Mass.
Dated at Senon the Kalends of April Thus wrote Alexander. But John of
Salisbury in his epistle to Peeter the writer (I think of Bloys) which being
omitted, in the often recited book of epistles, is afterward placed in the
end of the volume, affirms, the sin of S. Thomas, not be excused, but
rather declared, to be purged by penance: for he says. I cannot excuse his
promise at Claringtonne, whereunto he was drawn by the counsel of the
Bishopps: because such a promise was not to be made: but confession washed
away the offense, having received so^emne pennances from the Popes holiness, who
in the presence of many, by the Apostolical authority condemned those perverse
customs. So writes John. Now the former recited history proceeds thus.

The King in the mean time, perceived that my Lord of Canterbury would fly of
from this promise, especially in that he openly refused to seal the charter
of these customs, according to the agreement: Whereupon his Majesty being
very bitterly incensed, beegan to vex him with more greiuous and exquisite
molestations, in such wise, as it was apparent to all understanding men, the
blood and life, of the Archbishop was thirsted after. Among other matters the
king so wrought, The King incensed against Saine Thomas sends an embassage
to the Pape.
as he sent messangers to Pope Alexander, and required two things at his
hands; first that he would grant the legantine authority (which was usually
committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury) unto the Archbishop of York: then
that the Pope would confirm the artickles of the customs, published in the
Parliament of Claringtonne. Upon receipt of which message, Alexander being on
all sides beesieged with exceeding extremities, seeing this war now turned on
the Apostolical Sea, labored with his best and most ready endeauours, to
calm and appease the king, and so to yield to him insome what, which
nevertheless should with no prejudice derogate from the Chuch of Canterbury:
and thereupon did write in this sort to the Archbishop.

Lib. 1 epist 4 The Popes epistle to S. Thomas concerning the Kings dedemandes.
Although in regard of the wis^dome of your mind, and sincerity of your faith,
we would ever love your pers^^ with a more plentiful sweetness of ch^ritie,
and a more enflamed desire, and with a fare more fervent affection, seek the
honor and exaltation of you as our most dear brother, it is notwithstanding
beehoofefull to us, and you (who are a great pillar of the Church) warely to
weigh the qualityes of the times and with a provident moderation and
dispensation, to mitigate the wrath of the incensed king. You (on whom God has
beestowed a large talent of w^sedome and grace) do truly see in your
discretion, in what sort our most dear son in Christ, Henry the renowned
king of England, maintains an outrageous course in the government of his
kingdom, and desires to have the same unlawful proceedinges strenthned wit^
the authority of the Church of Rome: whereby they may obtain the greater
confirmation and favor. Whereupon, when in times past, he more instantly
required of us, and our brethren, by our reverent brother the Bishop of
Lions, and our beeloued son the Archdeacon of Poyters, that he might have
the power Legantine of all England, granted to the Arrchbishop of York: and
beesought also that we would command as well you, as all the Bishops
universally to keep and conserve the ancient customs, and dignities of his
kingdom: because we did not yield to his desire, according to his own will,
instantly upon return of his ambassadors, scarce hearing the answer received
from us, he sent our beeloued sons Geffry his Archdeacon, and Master John,
unto our presence: and by them most earnestly required at our hands, not only
the former, but also other far more unreasonable demands, and to the end we
should yield an easyer way to his desire, he procured letters unto us from
your brotherhood: and also the foresaid Bishop of York: For as he prayed us
before, that the ancient customs, and dignitys might, by our command, be
conserved: so now again of late, he most earnestly requested, that in like
sort, as your self, and others had promised to observe them, they might in
the same manner be assured to him, and his posterity, Hew far the Pope
granted or denied the Kings requests.
by the Sea Apostolic. But we rejected his petition. Notwithstanding, least
we should incite him to overmuch bitterness, and more passionate trouble of
mind, against us and you: least also it might be suspected, that this was any
way hindered in regard of your self: moreover fearing he might break out into
a more furious rage, against you, and being therefore desirous to be more
provident for you, and our selves, with consideration of the dangerous times,
we yealded so far to the king, as to grante the Legantine letters, to the
aforesaid Archbishop. And for that subjects are truly bound to submitt
themselves to their Princes desires, and obey their will; we advise counsel,
and by all means exhort your wisdom, that as a provident and discreet man,
measuring the necessity of the time, and with faithful consideration
foreseeing, what aduersityes may happen by reason thereof, to you and your
Church, you would endeavor to yield to your King in all things, saving ever
the honor of your Ecclesiastical dignity, and instant labor to recover to
your self his grace and favor; least in doing otherwise, you disquiet him,
to the hurt of you and our selves, and they, who are transported with an other
spirit, might thereby purchasse power to insult over you and us. And w^e truly,
as opportunity shall serve, will diligently and carefully treat with your King,
for your honor and augmentation, and will employ all necessary travel, for
conservation of the laws and dignityes of your Church, and with all
conueniency be watchful, and provident therein. Dated at Senon, the third of
the Nones of March.

Reader, you beehould Pope Alexander beesett with extremityes, either to loose
the kings good will, or grante his requests, and yield to him who labors
to extorte a petition against the Churches liberty: these two so intangleing
him, the one of the kings demaundes he satisfied, giving the Legantine
authority to the Bishop of York the other he absolutely denied, being the
confirmation of the recited customs; yea to the end this Legantine power,
conferred on the Bishop of York, might no way prejudice S. Thomas, he thought
good so to restrain the same in his later letters, that he should understand
this Legation of his for England, to be confined with condition, that
notwithstanding he should have no authority granted him over the Archbishop
or Dioces of the Church of Canterbury. Lib. 1. epist. 5 Lib. 1. epist. 3^. and
40.
Pope Alexanders letters importing this restraint are extant, which for breuity
we omit, thinking it sufficient, if we leave them here, noted with their
numbres, in the margent. It is alsoo apparent in the same letters of Pope
Alexander, that he so gave the legation for England to the Bishop of York,
as nevertheless he would not suffer the Bishopps to be exempted from the
obedience they owed unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom in very true
right they were subject; which rather enkindled the Kings greater
indignation, who desired the Apostolical Legantine authority for the
Archbishop of York, of purpose to depose the Archbishop of Canterbury.

For Alexander hereupon inclined more to the cause of Saint Thomas, The Pope
endeauoreth to succor S. Thomas.
and was so far of from granting to pleasure the King against him, as he
most carefully watched to supporte his prosperity, with the libertys of his
Church, commanding also the principal Monasteries of France, to pray for him
unto allmighty God, which is witnessed by a messinger sent from S. Thomas to
his Holiness, in the conclusion of whose letter, are these words worthy of
memory. Last of all we petitioning his Holiness, that he would command you to
make your repair to him, and direct his letters to you, for that purpose, he
seemed with grief and great affliction of mind to answer; saying, God forbid;
let us rather dye, then beehould him so departing his country, and leaving
his Church in that sort so desolate. And a little after. By the mediation of
my lord the Pope, there is continual prayer made for you, and the Church
committed, by God, to your charge, at Clareualle and Pontiniacke Monasteries of
the Cistercians.

Pope Alexander in the mean time cherished Thomas comforted him with his
letters, and revived his mind when it was depressed with extreme grief. Many
of his letters remain, worthy of so noble a Bishop, among which receive you
these, being in contents the shortest.

Lib. 1. epist. 43. How he ought to proceed with the King.
Because the days are evil, and many things are to be suffered, in regard
of the quality of the time, we entreat, advise, counsel, and perswad your
discretion, that in all actions, as well of your own, as those appertaining to
the Church, you beehaue your self warely, prouidently and circumspectly, and
that you do nothing hastily or rashly, but all things deliberately and
gravely: whereby you may recover the favor and goodwill of the renowned King
of England, as much as possibly you may, without derogation to the liberty of
the Church, and the honor of your office, and authority: And that by all
means you endeavor and labor to endure the violence of the same King, until
the next Easter, in such sort, as you devise not, to put any thing in
execution against him or his land, until that perfixed time: for then our lord
will grant a better and milder season, whereby as well you, as we, may more
safely and securely proceed in our affairs. Thus Alexander to Thomas; of whom
(as we have said) it is extant, that he did write other letters, to the same
effect unto him. But in that the Pope did so certainly promise; that times
would be calmer at the next ensueing Easter: it is apparent he did with a
Prophetical spirit, foreknowe the death of the Antipope, which at that time
happened; as we shall hereafter declare.

But Alexander, who so counseled S. Thomas to forbear the outrageous king,
did not himself forbear to admonish, by his letters, the same king in season,
and out of season, instantly reproving, rebukeing, and beeseeching him, as
(Reader) you may understand by this letter, written about the same time.

ALEXANDER THE SERVANT OF THE servants of God, Lib 1. Epist. 42.
to Henry illustrous King of England, health and Apostolical benediction.
ALlthough the devotion of a dutyfull child, as well toward us, as your holy
mother the Church, The Pop^ admonish^t^ the King by writing.
seems of late to wear somewhat cold in you: nevertheless, we have not at
any time omitted our fatherly affection toward you, and the kingdom commended
to your government, wherefore your excellency diligently weighing, that the
stripes of a friend, are better then the kisses of an enemy, may more carefully
consider and attentively understand, that as Clearkes are in life and habit
distinguished from secular persons; so the iuditial proceedinges with
Clearkes, are approved to be absolutely different from the judgments of the
Layetie; and therefore if you desorder these, otherwise then it beecommeth, and
(usurping under your power, those things which beelong to Jesus Christ) do at
your own pleasure, ordain new laws, for the oppr^ssion of Churches, and
Christ's poor flock, and bring in also those customs, which (as you termed
them) beelonged to your Progenitors: your self, without all question, Proverb.
13
will before the last terrible Tribunal (which you can no way avoid) be in
like sort adjudged, and the same measure, whereby you have measured others,
be returned upon you. But least our admonitions may seem tedious and rigorous
to the ears of your excellency, remember how it is written, that the father
chastises the son whom he loves, knoweing assuredly, that with how much
more ferrent charity we love you in our lord, and by how much more often and
carefully we call to mind the monuments of your most sincere devotion many
ways, and most royally heretofore showed to us and the Church of God; so much
the more earnestly wishing, with the devoted affections of our heart, your
spiritual, and eternal salvation, we signify these unto your understanding.
For if the last judgment be any ways terrible to you, or the crown of rewards
in the eternal rest, delightful, it is not only beeseeming, but also
necessary for your Majesty to reverence truth (which is God himself) and
also Justice, to give every man his right, to leave to the managing of
Ecclesiastical persons, all matters Ecclesiastical, especially criminal, which
spring from the breach of faith or perjury; to yield to men of the Church, the
decisio^ of causes concerning goods and posessions of Churches, and not to
confound the kingdom with the preisthood: for if you would bestow on the
relief of the poor, or other works of Charity, all the substance, which by
such compulsions you wrest and wring from the treasures of the Church, unto
your own use, you should do no more acceptable an act, in the sight of God,
then if you should, rob one Altar to garnish an other, or crucify Peeter to
save Paul from death; for you ought to recount, and for an exemple of such
proceeding, to set before your eyes: how king Saul, because after the
overthrow of Amelech, Lib 1. Reg. cap 14.
he would, contrary to the precept of God, reserve the prey, when as for his
own excuse, he pretended to retain the same for sacrifice, was as a
reprobate, rejected by our Lord, and he yet living, another chosen unto his
honor, and kingly dignity. So whom the sins of the people made a governor,
his own off^nces deprived of the kingdoms government. And it is convenient for
your souls health to call to mind how also King Ozias, 2. Par. cap. 26.
whilst he would offer incense, and usurp to himself the office of a priest,
was by the just judgment of God struck with a leprosy.

If truly you attribute your happy successes to your own forces, and power,
and not to Almighty God: and do not withdraw your mind, and attemptes from
oppressing Ecclesiastical persons, and Churches: he doubtless wh^ placed you
in government over others, and ordained you a great prince in this world, for
ruling, and not for the wrongful depression of his faithful people, will with
a greiuous usury, demand of you again the talentes committed to your charge,
and as it is written of Roboam the son of Solomon, (who for his fathers
offense, 3. Reg 14.
was cast out from his kingdom) will transferrre, and pour out upon the
heirs, the vengeance of the fathers sin. Harken not therefore to every ones
wicked suggestions, nor open your ears to those, who murmur ever mischeifes
into your head: but diligently attend those things which are expedient for
salvation, and endeavor to rule, and commodiously to govern your kingdom,
according as our lord has appointed you, to the honor of God, and the peace
and tranquillity of his Chrch, for which only end you have received into your
hand the reins of the realm. That he, by whom kings reign, and whose
service is a kingdom, may preserve to you and your heirs a temporal kingdom,
and after the expiration thereof, an eternal one without end.

Thus Alexander to King Henry: which is also set forth by Roger in his
Chronicle.

But what Thomas in this passage of time, before he fledd into France, with
patience endured, is to be declared out of the aforementioned Authors: for
thus is it related.

The king in the mean while understood, that my Lord of Canterbury, would
fly off from that promise, especially in that he openly gaynesayd, to seal
the deed of those conditions, in sort as before was appointed. Whereupon the
Prince, enraged more with fury, beegan to afflicte my lord of Canterbury with
more grievous and exquisite vexations; so far forth as it was apparent to
understanding men, that his blood and life was thirsted after. Wherefore
Thomas, fearing that, determined to fly the Realm, and coming to his Manor
called Aluter, while all the rest were a sleep, accompanyd only with two, with
drew himself secretly; and getting a ship, committed himself to the seas;
but long outwearyd with a contrary wind, returning back, he hardly recovered
early in the morning the land again with hazard of his life. In the end his
departure being known; his familiars and servants were thereupon severally
dispersed. Yet one of them boulder then the rest coming to Canterbury, S
Thomas ^tt^mp^ing (...) pass aw^^ by seas (...) contrary ^indes ^^^^en back
again.
retired himself the next night, into the Bishops own chamber, and supper
being ended, began carefully, with sorrow to lament the misfortunes and
afflictions of his lord; and having thus spent the beeginning of the night
desirous to take his rest, Go (quoth he to his Boy) and shutt the uttermost
door of the hall, to the end we may sleep more securely; this servant
therefore coming thither with a candle lighted, the door being open, saw my
lord of Canterbury sit alone in a corner, terrifyd with which specctacle, he
ran away, imagining he beheld a vision, and telling his Master thereof, this
Clearke, whom he served, would in no case believe it, until himself made
trial of the truth, and coming found all in sort a foresaid. My lord of
Canterbury calling together some of his brethren of Canterbury Church, declared
to them what had beefallen him, and how as yet it was not Gods pleasure he
should depart, and being refreshed with a light supper, rested. The next
morning came the kings officers to confiscate the whole estate of the
Archbishop as a fugitive; but hearing and seeing he was present, confounded
they held their peace.

The king therefore, with a more heavy hand, increased the afflictions of my
lord of Canterbury; causing him to be peremptorily cyted,, for answering his
Majesty at a certain day, concerning matters, The Parliament at North-Hampton.
to be objected against him. The time being come, they who were summoned,
assembled, and a Parliament being held at North-Hamptonne, my lord is called
to answer his cause. The Archbishop together with the rest of the Bishops,
being sat and sequestered in a room a part, the doors, by the Kings
commandment, being shutt, so as there could be no passage forth; it was on
his Majesty's beehalfe alleged against him, that in the time of his
Chancellorship, having many vacancyes of Bishopprickes, and Abbeys, with great
rentes, for very many years, in his hands, he never gave up his account for
the same, which now the king required of him. Heereunto said the Archbishop:
we will consult with our counsel, and answer by advice.

While, therefore, The opinions of the Bishops.
they remained all in deep silence, Gilbert Bishop of London, Deane of the
Church of Canterbury, and in that respect, cheifest of his Council in
authority, next under the Archbishop, my lord of Canterbury requiring him to
speak, said: if (father) you consider, from whence the king has exalted you,
what he has beestowed on you, and weygh also the malice of these times, how
miserable a reign you have prepared for the Catholic Church, and us, by
withstandinge the king herein; you ought not only to yield him the
Archbishoppricke of Canterbury, but also the same, were it ten times better.
And if perchance he could but seein you that humility, he would restore you
whatsoever you have lost. We sufficiently perceive (quoth my lord of
Canterbury) what you have advisedly answered.

Then Henry Bishop of Winchester said. This manner of Counsel, being
absolutely pernicious to the Catholic Church, byndeth and confounds us all:
because if our Archbishop and Primate of England should leave us such an
example, as that every Bishop should yield and forsake at the beck and
threatening of his Prince, his authority and care over the souls committed to
his charge, what will be then afterward the state of the Churches, but only
this, that nothing will be ordered according to law, but all will be
confounded as the king lists, and such as the Priest, such will be the
people.

Next Hilary Bishop of Chichester, a man glorious in words, adding his
opinion, said: if this instant time, and the troubles of the Catholic Church,
did not require at our hands an other course, we ought doubtless, to assent
to your sentence: But when the authority of the Cannons staggereth, we ought
very much to withdraw the rigor of severity, that sweet dispensatio^ may
profit there, where sharp correction may otherwise destroy; wherefore I think
we ought to yield to the kings pleasure, yet only but for a time; least
otherwise we run on rashly to decree that, whereupon may follow a more
grievous retractation not without confusion.

Afterward the Bishop of Lincoln, a man truly simple, and of less
discretion, said: it is apparent they seek the life and blood of this man, and
of necessity one of these must follow, that he must suffer either in his
Archbishoppricke, or in his life; now what fruit he can reap of his
Archbishoppricke, if he loses his life therefore, I see not.

But Bartholomewe Bishop of Excester spoake thus: it is plain that these days
are evil; wherefore if we may under the shadow of dissimulation, avoid the
force of this tempest without hurt or loss, it were especially to be
procured: neither can we easily attain thereunto, unless there be a great
relaxation of severity; the instance of this time requires it, cheefely since
this persecution is not general, but particular. It is better therefore, one
head should in part be subject to danger, then the whole Church of England
exposed to an inevitable peril.

Roger the Bishop of Worcester, being also asked his opinion, so tempered his
answer, as in his very negative, he made apparent what his mind was. In this
(quoth he) I will give no advice, because, if I shall say, that we ought to
leave the care of souls received by us from God, at the threatening and
pleasure of a king, my mouth should declare against my conscience, to the
condemnation of my soul: if on the other side I censure, that the king in this
case ought to be resisted, Lo here his followers will hear me by whose
relation, his Majesty will be thereof certifyed, and I shall presently be
cast out of the Sinagoge, and hereafter ranked with his public and condemned
enemies: wherefore I neither say this, nor counsel that.

These things thus handled: The first act of this conuentikl^.
they sat awhile in silence, neither was there a man who spoake a word more;
and devising a way to have a free passage out of the room (for they were
locked in) I would (quoth my lord of Canterbury) speak with two Earls, who
are with the king, aad named them both: And they being called, opening the
door, entered hastily in, and being greedy to hear somewhat, that might
satisfy the kings desire, my lord of Canterbury used these words in their
presence. We have consulted about those matters, for which my lord the king
assembled us here, and in regard we have not with us now, those persons, who
more clearly understand this cause, we therefore crave respite until to
morrow, determining to answer then as our lord shall inspire us. The Bishops
of London and Rochester were sent to deliver this message to the king; but
London, like a crafty fox, corrupted the business, commended to his charge;
telling the king; that my lord of Canterbury beesought only at his Majesty's
hands a truce of time, for making ready the wrytinges, as one prepared at the
determined day to yield account in answer of his accusations, and this he
said to the end my lord of Canterbury, might be thereby the more engaged to
fulfill the kings request. The Earls therefore were directed to the
Archbishop, for granting him, on the kings behalf, this respite of time, if
he would ratifying confirm, what the Bishops on his part had certifyd his
Majesty. Whereunto Canterbury replied: he gave the Bishops no such
commission, neither would allow what they had signified to the king, but would
the next day (God willing) appear, and as it was inspired unto him from above,
so answer. Gilbert of London was therefore with shame confounded, seeing
himself fallen into the snare, which he laid to inta^gle his father. The
counsel being thus dissolved for the present they severally departed, S.
Thomas left by his knights entertaineth the poor.
the troops of knights and others, who attended the Archbishop to the place,
terrifyed for dread of the king, left him, which Saint Thomas seeing,
commanded some to seek about the hedges and villages, and inuit the poor
lame and impotent to come unto him, saying he might with such an army more
easily obtain the victory, then by those, who in time of temptation fledd
shamefully away; with these poor guestes was his house and feast furnished,
and the day spent with contented delight in our lord, without any open mention
afterward made, of the forepassed trouble. The next day early in the morning
was my lord taken with the Hiake passion, a disease that followed him, and as
then held him in such sort, as he could not lift himself, out of his bed:
whereupon making the longer delay (which the malicious supposed to proceed of
an unwillingness, to appear in the kings Court) some were sent to command him
more sharply and pere^ptorily to go on with his answer. Who replying said:
if this sickness will suffer me, I will (god willing) to morrow appear. That
day passed away, and the office of the insui^g night being finished with great
devotion, arysing early to solemnize Mass, and having (according to the
custom) vested him, calling to God for his assistance, through the merittes of
the blessed S. Stephen, he commanded the entrance of the Mass to beegin with:
Etenim sederunt Principes, and aduersum me loquebantur: The preparation of S.
Thomas.
and Princes have sat also, and against me have they spoken. And so with
extraordinary devotion ended the whole office, with all thereunto appertaining;
the kings servants, who were present, in silence advisedly marked all, who
suspected that this signified somewhat. Mass being done, he laid aside his
Pall, and Miter, having on his other sacred ornaments, and over all a Cope. It
is said in Quadrilogus, that S. Thomas celebrated as then the Mass of S.
Stephen, the first Martyr, by the advice of a certain holy and religious
Monk, and not in regard it was any feast of Saint Stephen: and that,
otherwise then his wonted order was, he performed the same in his Pall: and
carried also with him secretly the Blessed Sacrament, after the ancient
customs, but openly bore only his Cross, the Saint thus preparing himself
to Martyrdom, because that day he supposed he should dye. But the a fore
recyted history proceeds thus.

Entering the kings chamber, where his Majesty expected him, taking at the
very door the Cross, he boar it in his own hand, the Bishops following,
and interpreting this his Act, otherwise then beeseemed them. Yet Robert
Bishop of Hereford, offering himself, said: Father stay: and in place of your
Chaplain I will carry the Cross before your presence, for so is it
convenient. With more justice (answered Canterbury) the carriage hereof
beelongeth to me, under whose protection I remain more securely: and that
Banner appearing, there is no doubt under what Prince I fight. London replied:
if the king sees you entering in arms, he will draw his swoard, being of
greater force, then yours, and strike at your head, and then you shall try,
what these your arms will avail you. All this (quoth Canterbury) we commend
to God. Yea (answered London) you have bin hitherto a fool, and this folly (I
see) you will never leave. So went they forward. But the king hearing the
Bishop, came in thus armed forgetting, or leaving of his swoard (mentioned by
London) withdrewe himself speedily into his privy chamber, Canterbury taking
his place on the one side, a part, with some very few his followers: the
Bishops sat on the contrary side, in place; and mind united against him. At
the last are the Bishops called into the kings counsel, Canterbury being
left to the slaughter. The time is protracted, while they sifte out the matter,
for condemning the innocent. Canterbury with a confide^t look put on
Constancy. Roger Archbishop of York coming forth, said to his Clearkes
present (being Master Robert surnamed Cross, and Osbern a Rondell) let us
depart hence, we ought not to beehould, what will here be instantly executed
on Canterbury. Master Robert replied: I will not forsake the place, until I
see what God has determined herein; if he will fight for God, and his
justice, to the very death, he cannot more nobly and more worthily finish his
days. The Archbishop of York departing thus, Barthelmewe Bishop of Excester,
coming out from the kings Chamber, and falling at my lord of Canterburys
feet, said: my dear father take pity on your self, and have mercy on us,
this day we perish all, in respect of hatred conceived against you; for the
king has published an Edict, that whosoever shall hereafter hold with
Canterbury, shall be adjudged an open enemy and condemned to dye. It was also
reported that Ioselin Bishop of Salisbury, and William Bishop of Norwiche,
because they yet resisted the kings will, should be presently drawn to
execution, and have their limbs maimed; wherefore they liKewise cried out to
Canterbury for their preservation.

The Archbishop therefore fixing his eyes on Excester, said: fly hence,
because you relish not, what appertains to God: then issued out from the
counsel all the Bishops together, in a troubled disorder to Canterbury, where
one among the rest, I mean the Bishop of Chichester, breaking forth in these
ruffling words, said: Sometimes you were our Archbishop, and we bound to
obey you: but because you have sworn to our lord the king your fidelity, which
is with your power to conserve his life, limbs, and earthly dignity, keeping
withal the customs required by him: and nevertheless do now, endeavor to
destroy them which tend to his worldly royalty and honor we therefore
pronounce you guilty of perjury, and as a perjured Archbishop, we are no
longer oblyged to obey you: in reguard whereof committing and submitting us and
ours to our lord the Popes protection, we appeal from you unto his presence,
there to answer these objections. We hear you (quoth my lord of Canterbury)
the Bishops withdrawing themselves, sat apart on the contrary side,
remaining long in great silence. In the end came out from the king, Earls and
Barons, with a mighty route, approaching to my Lord of Canterbury, among whom,
the chiefest, Robert of Leicester said: The king commands you to appear, and
yield account, concerning matters objected against you, as yesterday you
undertook to do, otherwise hear your judgment. Judgment (quoth my Lord of
Canterbury) nay, S. Thomas pleads his cause.
son and Earl, hear you first. You are not ignorant (my son) how
seruiseable and how faithful, according to the state of this world, I have bin
to my Lord the king; in respect whereof, it pleased him to prefer me, to the
Arch-Bishopprick of the Church of Canterbury (God knows) against my will, for
mine own weakness, was not unknown to my self, and rather for his pleasure,
then the love of God, I consented thereunto, which is this day apparent enough,
since God withdraws, as well himself, as the king, from me. But in the the
time of my promotion, while the Election was made; Prince Henry his son (on
whom this charge was imposed) being there present, it was demanded, in what
manner they would give me to the Church of Canterbury? Whereunto was answered:
Free and discharged from all bands of the Court. If therefore free and
discharged: concerning these, from which I am discharged, neither am I bound,
nor yet will I hereafter answer. This case is otherwise (said the Earl) then
the Bishop of London informed the king. Canterbury added: Withal mark this
(son Earl) how much the soul excels the body, so much are you bound to
obey God, and me, before an earthly king; neither yet law nor reason allows,
that children should judge or condemn their father: where upon I disclay me
from the judgment of the king, of you, and others, being only to be judged,
next under God, by our lord the Pope, unto whose presence, here before ye all
I appeal, committing the Church of Canterbury, mine order, and dignity, with
all thereunto appertayning to God, and his protection. In like sort, do I
cite ye (my brethren and fellow Bishops) because ye obey rather man, then
God; to the Audience and judgment of my lord the Pope; and so defended with
the authority, of the Catholic Church, and the Apostolical Sea, I depart
hence.

As he went away, the courtyers and malicious followed him, crying out against
him with reproaches and iniuryes, and deprauing called him traitor. Coming to
the uttermost gate, he found it shutt, nor could he pass, no Porter being
there to be seen; and while the matter was handled in fear and hazard, as
God would have it, a bunch of keys hung by the wall, which one of my Lord of
Canterbury's followers, catching, tried one after an other, until in the end
he opened the gate. Thus going forth, a great number who were sick of the
Kings evil, together with the poor, and impotent, met him, rejoicing and
saying: Blessed be our lord who has delivered, and rescued his servant, from
the face and fury of his enemies. For it was credibly supposed, he had bin now
dead. S. Thomas tryampheth and feasteth the poor.
A great company, therefore, of needy and diseased persons, goeing before and
after him, together with the Clergy and Layety, he was with joy and gladness
brought to his Inn. And he seeing the triumph of the people, said to his
followers: Lo, what a glorious procession conducteth us, from the face of our
persesecutors! Suffer the poor of Christ, and partakers of our tribulation, to
enter with us, that we may feast all together, in our Lord; and so the whole
house and court were filled with these his guestes. It is moreover written in
Quadrilogus; that then by chance was read at the table, out of the Tripartite
history, the persecution of Liberius, when he resisted Constantine an
Heretical Emperor, by whom he was cast into banishment. And out of the Gospel
accustomed to be read, was also rehearsed, that of the Evangelist: If they
shall persecute ye in one City, fly into an other. Which being heard by
saint Thomas, Matthew. 5.
and taking it as spoken to himself, he put it presently in execution,
passing the seas, by Gods assistance, into Flanders, where he remained a
while, at the Monastery of saint Bertine; what beefell him in his journey,
with many things thereunto beelonging, are set forth at large in that history:
For saint Thomas, who appealed to the Popes Holiness, ought, with all
conueniency, to hasten to his Court for purgation of himself. But his
adversaries proclaimed his journey to be his flight, and what slanders did
they forbear, to vomit against him as a fugitive?

Of this subject treats John of Salisbury, in the a fore recyted Epistle, to
Peeter the writer; where he has composed a most eloquent Apology, in defense
of the flight of saint Thomas, which I omit for breuity: And allthough he
has, for his excuse, very many exemples of Christ, his Apostles, Prophets and
Saints; yet one thing alone suffices, that he was, by the Popes letters,
commanded to prosecute the appeal put in, and also to be with his Holiness in
France, before his departure thence; which was not to leave, but to labor to
place in safety his Church, so dangerously hazarded. Hereupon says the same
John. This was not (assuredly) to expose his Church to peril, Codi. Vatican.
ep. 3. post lib. 3.
but to endeavor for her delivery. Unless perchance you will imagine he
leaves the shipp, who enters the Cock-boate to draw her into the haven. This
and much more in the beehalfe of saint Thomas, writes his defendant John of
Salisbury. But hear what the King of England did, Cod Vatis. lib 1 epistola 23.
upon the report of his departure. Henry thus deluded, hearing by some, that
saint Thomas was escaped by flight, published his Edictes in this sort against
him, and the Clearkes his followers. Henry King of England to the several
Bishops ordained in England. Ye are not Ignorant in what evil sort Thomas,
Archbisoppe of Canterbury, has proceeded against me, and my kindome, and in
what bad manner, he is departed: And therefore I command ye, none of his
Clearkes, who after that his flight accompanyd him, not any other Clearkes, who
derogated from the honor of me, and the honor of my kingdom, receive any
renttes beelonging to them, in your Bishoppickes, otherwise then by my
permission; nor have any assistance, or advice from ye. He set out also an
other proclamation, for sequestring the revenues of the Archbishoppricke of
Canterbury into the kings hands. Likewise he published other decrees,
signified to S. Thomas, from his friend by writing in these words.

Please i^ you to understand, Ibid epist. 15 ibid. ep 14. Laws on asted after
the flight of S. Thamas.
that this is the tenor of the commissions sent by King Henry, into England: to
wit: That every haven, be most carefully guarded, least any letters of
interdiction be any way brought into the land: and if any Reguler person
brings them in let his feet be cut of: if he be a Clearke, let him lose
his eyes and privy members: if a lay man, let him be hanged: If a Leper, let
him be burned: and if any Bishop, for dread of this interdictio^, will travel
out of the realm, let him carry nothing with him beesides his staff. It is
also his will, that all scholars, be compelled to return into their
country, or else to be deprived of their Benefices; and they that stay, shall
remain without ever hope of return: likewise for those Priests who refuse to
sing, let them lose their privy parts. And let all who rebel, be deprived of
their Benefices. Thomas in the mean while having suffered this banishment,
sent these letters to Pope Alexander, which Roger in his Chronickes of England,
recyteth the year following, yet truly appertayning to this present, S Thomas
concerning hi^ appeal to the Pope.
written with these words.

I fly for refuge (most holy father) unto your audience, that you who with so
great a hazard of your self, have rescued the Churches liberty; may now
consider the only, or chiefest cause, of the persecution of my self, who have
followed your example. For I grieved to see the state of the Church by little
and little to perish, and her laws infringed, by the Avarice of Princes; and
thought this danger of sickness was to be prevented: and by how much I knew my
self more bound to that lord of mine, unto whom, next under God, I am most
engaged, so much the more securely, I supposed his unjust attemptes were to
be resisted; until they prevailed, who clowded from me the clear beams of
his favor. Afterward (as it is accustomed with Princes) they raised against
me slanders, and false accusations, whereby they might prosecute me; and I
rather chose banishment, then to yield to injustice: and to multiplye these
mischeifes, I was as a lay man, called before the King, to mak^ satisfaction;
and where I hoped, in my resistance, for most assistance, there was I
especially deceived: for I found my lords, and fellow brethren the Bishops
prepared, at the pleasure of the Courtiers, to punish me. Thus almost
strangled with the invasions of so many, I have fled for succor, to the
audience of your Holiness, who neglects not those, who are plunged in
extremityes, and under whom I stand ready to make good, that I am nether to be
judged there, nor by them: for what is this else (father) then to diminish, and
withdraw from you, the authority of your laws? yea what else, then to submit
spiritual Power, to temporal jurisdiction? this once suffered, would open an
example to many, and therefore I judged, Christ favors Caesar, not a tia
tirant.
it was with more constancy to be withstood; because the headlong way to do
hurt, is to see but a weak resistance. But they will say: Those things are
to be given to Caesar which are Caesar's: yet allthough in many matters the
king is to be obeyed, he is nevertheless not to be obeyed in those, by
which he cease to be a king: for such appertain not to Caesar, but to a
Tyrant: wherein the Bishops, if not for my sake, yet for their own, should
have resisted him. For if the last judgment is reserved for him, who has power
to judge both body, and soul: shall the highest Tribunal among men, be
attributed to him, who judges according to his own sense? if these Bishops
mayntaine the part of justice, why did they assault me? why do they reprove
me, for appealing unto him, to avoid whose determination of controuersyes, is
either unlawful or not expedient? wherefore they have unjustly accused me, or
distrusted of your justice: for otherwise, it were a double confusion to me,
to be convicted before your Holiness. And have I deserved persecution at their
hands, for whose cause, I defended the bullwarke, against so great a
battery, and had won the victory, if only they would have assisted? but in all
case is the head, being left destitute by the members for how would it be, if
the eyes, should use the tongue against the head? if they had well foreseen
it, they deuis^d but mischief, to their own confusion; and our principal
adversaries abused their assistance, to bring them into slavery.

Because they have accomplished all this, How many ways the Bishops of
England offended against S. Thomas.
upon so great a malice, that to undo me, they would withal overthrow
themselves: they have herein neglected spiritual treasures for temporal
trifles: and failed in the end of both. Again what an offense was it, that
when I cried out against this injustice, and appealed to your audience, they
durst, in judgment comdemne me their father? what if they conspire, with the
Prince our adversary, against the whole Catholic Church? and truly (most holy
father) you might have bin suspicious thereof. Yet will they say they were
bound to their king, as their temporal lord: but, to him in their bodies, to
me in their souls; and to whom could they be more obliged, then to
themselves? Is it not better to lose corporal, then spiritual riches? But they
will again reply: the king was not, in this perilous time, to be provoked. O
how subtly do they argue for their own slavery? yea they provoke him, who,
by their excesses, give wings to his will and pleasure. For they might have
bin quiet, had they not to quietly assented. And when is constancy more
required, then in the midst of our persecutors? Are not Christ's frindes tried
with persecutions? If continually they yield, when shall they overcome? Of
necessity sometimes they must resist. Condescend therefore (most holy father)
to succor me in my flight and persecution, and remember that once I was in
your age an eminent man, but now, for your sake wearyed out with iniuryes. Put
your power in execution: restrain them, at whose instance the cause of this
persecution, came slilie creeping in. Neither let the fault of any of these,
be laid on my lord the King, who is rather a practiser, then inuentor of this
wicked device. Hitherto Roger: but Pope Alexander heareing hereof, declared
first that S. Thomas was no way bound by his condemnation in this
Conuenticle; writing thus.

Cod Vatican lib. 1. epist. 49.
Pope Alexander to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.
That the inferior cannot judge his superior, and him especially, to whom in
the right of Prelacy, he is known to be subordinate; and held bound in the
chains of obedience, as well divine as humane laws do show: and this
especially in the decrees of the holy fathers, is more manifestly declared.
Wherefore with careful consideration weyghing this, we to whom it beelongeth
to reform errors, and amend that, which for want of correction may leave a
pernicious example to posterity: and moreover because the Church ought not, by
reason of the offense of any particular person, to sustain any loss or
discommoditie, do adiudge the sentence to be absolutely void, and declare by
the Apostolical authority, the same to be of no force, which by the Bishops
and Barons of England (in reguard you appeared not upon the Kings first
summons) was presumptiously pronounced against you, whereby the said Bishops
and Barons deprived you of all your moveable goods, as well against the form
of law, as contrary to the Ecclesiastical custom: and that especially, since
you had noe moueables, but only of the Churches goods. Also we determine the
said sentence, to be hereafter of no power, nor any ability to prejudice, or
indammage you, your successors, or the Church committed to your gouerme^t.


Thus wrote Pope Alexander, who likewise by other letters commanded
restitution to be made of all things taken away from the Archbisgop or any
others, Ibid. epist 32.
upon any occasion concerning him.

But that the state of the Church of England, may appear more plainly, I would
have you understand, how these letters, which by the kings Ambassadors where
returned back to his Holiness again, were first imparted to the Archbishop of
York, unto whom, at the kings request was decreed the Legantine authority,
for England; but in reguard Pope Alexander had in his later letters (as we
see) confined him, that he should not by reason of his jurisdiction, challenge
any power to himself either over the person of Saint Thomas, or the
Archbishoppricke of Canterbury: the king as frustrate of his intention, (who
was only bent by prerogative of this Legate, to depose S. Thomas) commanded the
letters of legation, now unprofitable for his purpose, to be remaunded back
to the Pope, by his Ambassadors designed thereunto. Concerning this, there are
other letters extant declaring so much in these words.

To his most beeloued lord, his assured sends greeting, and ever wishes him
well to fare.
THrough the mercy of Almighty God (who never forsakes those, Lib. 1. epist 6.
who repose their trust in him) it so fell out, as the same day wherein my
lord the Pope was certifyd of Octauians death, the Imbassadors of the kings L,
and H, to wit Jews and Henry, came to the Court: the English truly pretending
on their kings beehalfe a show of exceeding humility, both in open words and
letters consonant to their speech, seemed so far to move my lord the Pope, and
some of his Cardinals that (as by report of those who favored you I
understood) they hardly could abstain from tears wherefore after many
allegations, in what sort,, and with what affection the kings Majesty
received Pope Alexander, and how great reverence he ever showed to him, the
which he would continue during his life, these flourishes finished, they
returned unto his Holiness many letters, concerning the legantine power, which
your Archdeacon obtained dishonestly for England, during the time I remained
with you: but the condition, wheruppon he procured the same letters, my lord
the King by the mouth of his Ambassadors absolutely renounced, as never made or
desired by him. The Popes Holiness so willingly and gladly received the same
letters back again, as if a thing most wished were now offered him in such
manner as some there present marvelled very much.


You perceive (reader) in all things hitherto handled before Bope Alexander in
the case of S. Thomas, how he favored ever his side: Lib. 1. epist. 24.
and was from the first in the passage of this business, inclined to asist him:
in regard whereof, let John of Salisbury reprou himself, who in the beeginninge
of these tumultes writing to S. Thomas, beeco^meth so bad a prophet of Pope
Alexa^ders proceedinges, saying: many things make against you, few for you,
for mighty persons will come who are bountiful in the largess of money,
which Rome never despised: and will be supported, not only with their own,
but also my Lord the kings authority, whom the court ought in no case to
displease, etc. You may see therefore how untruly, and rashly he censured of
Pope Alexanders, constancy supposing he might be conquered with gould who was
stronger then steel.

Another imbassage also ensued, The imbassage of the Bishoppe^ of England
^hainst Saint Thomas.
addressed from the keng to Pope Alexander, by the Archbishops and Bishops of
England, who were all admitted to public audience; wherein the Co^sistory,
first of the^ all the Bishop of London, houlding the first place, did first
beegin thus to speak. Unto you (Father) appertains the care, and watchful
eye over the Catholic Church; that both the discreet, may by your wisdom,
be fostred up to the example of manners; and the unadvised, by the Apostolical
authority, suppressed and chasticed, to reduce them to wisdom. But in the
depth of your discretion, the man cannot be conceived to be wise, who
presuming in the strength of his own wit, endeauoreth to disturb the band of
union among his brethen, the tranquillity of the Church, and the devotion of
the king, A dissension has lately sprung in England, beetweene the kingdom
and the Preisthood, upon an occasion but light, and of little importance, which
might have bin easily extinguished, had a moderate medicine bin thereunto
applied: but my lord of Canterbury, being herein singular in his own conceyte,
and not guided by our counsel insisted severely, beeyond reason never
considering this ill affected time, or what manner of mischeife may ensue, upon
such a headlong entreprise, and so weaued intangling snares, for the
dest^uction of himself, and his brethren: and had but our assent favored his
designs, the matter it self had now fallen out more foully, But in respect he
could not (as he ought not) compel us, to condescend to his intended purpose;
he attempted to retorte the blame of his rash presumption, on my lord the
king, on us, yea on the whole nation: wherefore to give a coulor to the
infaming of our mutual brotherhood, no man enforcing him, no man threatening
him, he fled the land, Proue^b. 27.
according to that saying: the wicked has fled and no man persecuted him.
Here my Lord the Pope interuping him, said. Forbear (Brother:) and London
answered: I will (my Lord) forbear him. Whereunto his Holiness replied. I bid
you not forbear him, but forb^are to wrong your self. At the sound of this
Apostolical trumpet, Londons senses were so amaysed by Allmighty God, as he
could not after pronounce one word.

Wherefore Hilarie Bishop of Chichester, floweing in eloqu^nce, more confident
of his Rhetoric then of the truth and honesty of his cause (as appeared by
the sequel) pursued the matter, saying: My lord and father, it beehoueth your
Holiness, speedily to reduce to the orderly state of peace and concord,
wha^soeuer is disorderly landled to the destruction of the universal body:
least^ such immoderate presumption may produce with the overthrow of many, the
scysme also of the whole Catholic Church* ^hi^h my lo^d of Canterbury full
little consid^^e^h, while leaving all grauer advice, he builds only on his
own brain, that thereby he may raise more turbulent storms and anxietyes to
himself and his, the king and kingdom, the people and Clergy: and truly in
a man of his eminent authority, this was not seemly, neither was it opportune;
neither can it hereafter at any time be ever opportune. So gaiely, Hylary of
Chichester played the Grammarian with his opportune, adding moreover: neither
yet was it opportune to his Cleagie (were they well advised) to yield in such a
case assent unto him. Heareing therefore this gallant Grammarian so leap from
port to port, by often iterating opportune, they could no longer abstain
from laughter, among whom one breaking out, said: Now Sir at length you are ill
arrived in the port. At which word our Lord so abashed the Prelate, as
presently he beecame silent and dumb. The Archbishope of York seeing them
both so foiled before him, endeauored to abate the fury of his mind, and in
few words only taxed the improuidence of the Archbishop; and they in like
sort, who discoursed afterward, whom for breuity I here ouerpasse; yet
joining all finally in this, they beesought that his Holiness would make a
Legate a latere: and send him into England to understand the business beetweene
the king and the Archbishop, whom they would needs have returned back into
the same land, there to receive his judgment: which allthough they insta^tly
entreated, yea and partly threatened that otherwise the king would break out
into scysme; the Pope nevertheless would not yield to deliver up into their
hands innocent Thomas, but that they should expect his Sommons into that
Court, there to have his cause before his Holiness determined; whereunto they
refused to agree, and with disdain departed, without receiving his
Apostolical benediction. There is among other epistles to be seen the Libell
farced with poison, which these Prelates offered up to Pope Alexander against
S. Thomas.

S. Thomas came afterward unto his Holiness, who (as says Alane in
Quadrilogus) was entertained coldly by the Cardinals, but admitted freely to
my Lord the Popes presence, who received him with a most kind, and fatherly
affection, casting a tender compassion on his manifould afflictions, and his
long pilgrimage, so dangerous, troublesome, and tedious; and while these
matters were thus to and fro discoursed, he was at the length commanded to
lay, the next day, open, before his brethren, the causes of his banishment.
wherefore on the morrow, while it was questioned among his associates, which
of them should first unfold the cause, every one pretending excuses, the bulk
of this business fell on the Archbishop himself. Instructed therefore by God,
allthough of himself absolutely unprovided, while placed next under my lord
the Pope, he would for reverence have risen; being commanded to sit dow
again, and so to plead his cause, he thus beegan: Although not abounding in
wisdom, yet are we not so indiscreet, as for a trifle, to leave the king
of England, S. Thomas pleadetae his cause in the Consistory.
his Court, and commodityes, for if we would, in all respects, submet our
selves unto his pleasure, there is not he within his dominions or kingdom,
who would refuse to be obedient to our will; and during the time that under
this condition we served his turns, what was there that answered not our
wished desires? But after we entered another course of proceedinge, thorough
the dew remembrance of the profession and obedience, which for the service of
God we have undertaken, his former affection he bore us, beegan assuredly to
wax cold. And yet truly, if we would fly back from our intended purpose; we
need not the intercession of any for recovery of his favor: but because the
Church of Canterbury, has bin accustomed in times past to be the Sun of the
west, and her brightes in this our age, is very much clowded; we had rather in
thee name of God, suffer any torments, yea thousand several deaths, if so
many were offerred us, then ever with dissimulation to endure the afflictions,
which at this instant she sustayneth. And that we may not seem with
curiosity, or a pretense of vain glory, to have beegun this our entreprise, it
is convenient that with an eye-witnessing testimony, the effect be made
apparent.

And producing the writings contayneing the customs, the cause of this
contention, with tears he said; Lo here, what laws the King of England
ordained, The rroyal customs of the kingdom of England examined in the
Consistory.
against the liberty of the Catholic Church! Be judges your selves, if it be
lawful to dissemble in matters of this moment, without the loss of a man's
soul. Which once heard, they were all moved to the very effusion of tears;
neither yet could they contain themselves, who before were to their power
vehement on the contrary part; all with one voice praising our Lord, for
reserving yet one person to himself, who durst in this tempest of persecution,
stand in defense of his holy Church: and they who seemed before to be, in this
controversy divided, now consented in this one opinion, that in the person of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the universal Church was at this time to be
succored. But my lord the Pope having read and often perused, and with great
diligence and attention heard and considered severally these customs; being
exceedingly moved, instantly burst out into anger against the Archbishop
reproving him with sharp reprehension; for that yielding an assent to these,
unworthy the name of customs, but truly tyrannical usurpations, he (as he
there confessed) together with the other Bishops, had renounced their preistly
dignity: and cast the Church into bondage, pronouncing: they rather ought to
have undergone all dangers, then ever to give the least way to such an utter
overthrow of God Almightyes law, and moreover said: assuredly in this rabell
so abominable which has bin here both read, and heard) there is nothing at
all to be allowed as good, somethinges only may be endured for the Church in
a sort to tolerate: but the greater part, as reprobate, by the ancient and
authentical counsels have bin ever condemned, being directly contrary to the
holy constitutions. And thus did the Lord and Pope in the open presence of them
all reprove, and sentence these to be hereafter ever by the Church condemned.
These they are, and thus set forth (as we find them recorded in the aforesaid
book of the Vatican) together with the addition of condemnation or
tolleration, according to the censure of Pope Alexander. But I fear least the
intermingling of words and terms only proper to the English, should by reason
of their obscurity, seem to the reader dark, and difficult to understand:
which are thus recyted.

The customs of England propounded at Claringtonne.
1. Concerning the aduowson and presentation of Churches: if any controversy
thereupon arises, beetweene laymen, or beetweene Clearkes and laymen, or
beetweene Clearkes and Clearkes, let the cause be pleaded and determined in
the Court of our lord the king.

This did the Church of Rome under Pope Alexand. the III. condemn. With. this
note, are they delivered in the end of every artickle being taken out of the
said book of the Vaticane, and inserted in the conclusion of the Quadripartite
history, alias Quadrilogus the Cronickles of S. Thomas.

Cronickles of S. Thomas.

2. Churches of our lord the Kings fee, cannot be given for ever without
assent and consent of his Majesty. This he tolerated.

3. Clearkes cited, and accused upon any cause being summoned to the kings
Court shall appear before the said Court, there to answer in such sort, as
to the royal Court shall seem convenient for them to answer: so as the kings
Bench, shall send into the Court of the holy Church, to see upon what ground
the cause shall be there handled; and if the Clearke be convicted, or do
confess; the Church ought not any longer to defend him. This he condemned.

4. It is not lawful for Archbishoppes, Bishopes, and Persons of the kingdom
to depart the realm without our lord the kings license: and if they will
depart, they shall at the kings pleasure give security, neither in their
goinge, staying, or coming, to compass any evil, or damage toward our lord
the king, or his kingdom. This he condemned. Ad Remanens which is think to
the I law.


5. The excommunicate ought not to give assurance for remaining, or answering
the law, neither be sworn, but only give pledge, and security to stand to
the Churches judgment, and so obtain absolution. This he condemned.

6. Laymen ought not to be accused in the presence of the Bishop, but by
testimony of certain, and lawful witnesses, so as the Archdeacon may not lose
his right nor any thing which should thereby acerewe unto him; and if the
accused be such as no man will, or dare accuse them, the Shyreefe being
required by the Bishop, shall swear 12. lawufll men of the neighborhood, or
village before the Bishop to lay open the whole truth, according to their
conscience. This he tolerated.

7. No man who houldeth of the king in cheyfe, nor any of his Majesty's
househould servants, shall be excommunicated, nor their lands made subject
to interdiction, unless our lord the king (if he be within the land) or his
Lord-cheife justice (if his Majesty be out of the Realm) be first made
privy thereof, that he may therein determine of the delinquent according to
right, whereby such matters, as appertain to the kings Court, may be there
judged; and what beelongeth to the Ecclesiastical court returned thither,
there to be ended. This be condemned.

8. As touching appeals, if they arise, men ought to proceed from the
Acrhdeacon to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and if the
Archbishop fail to execute justice, they ought for their last refuge to fly
to our lord the king, that by his commandment, the controversy may be
determined in the Archbishops Court: so as they shall not attempt any farther,
without the kings assent. This he condemned.

9. If there arise any controversy, beetweene Clearke and a layman, or
contrariwise about any tenement which the Clearke claymeth to be held in free
Alms, the lay man in lay fee, it shall be determined before the lord chief
justice according to his discretion in the kings Bench by the verdict of 12.
lawful men, whether the tenement appertains to free Alms, or to the lay
fee, and if it be found to be free Alms, then shall it be pleaded in the
Ecclesiastical court: and if of a lay fee then (unless both parties auow the
same to be held of one self same Bishop or Baron) the plea shall be ended
in the kings Bench: but if both of them make their auowry of land held of one
self same Bishop or Baron then shall the plea remain in the court of the said
Bishop or Baron. Always provided, that he (who was first seyzed) loose not
his seyson by reason of this recognition. This he condemned.

10. Any man of city, castle, Borough, or the kings Demeasne manor, being
cited by the Archdeacon or Bishop for any offense wherein he is bound to
answer him, and will not give satisfaction upon his citation, it shall be
lawful for him to subject the offender to interdiction, but not to
excommunication, before the kings chief officer of the place be first
acquainted therewith, that he may adiudge the offender to make satisfaction;
wherein if the kings officer be defaulty, he shall fall into his Majesty's
mercy; and then the Bishop may after punish the accused with Ecclesiastical
censures. This he condemned.

11. Archbishoppes, Bishops, and all Persons of the kingdom, who hold of
the king in chief, and have possessions in his dominion, as a Barony, shall
in reguard thereof answer to the kings justices and officers, and follow and
perform all royal customs and rightes, and ought to sit with the other
Barons, in the kings court until the judgment come to loss of member or
life. This he tolerated,

12. When an Archbishoppricke, Bishoppricke, Abbacy, or Priory of the kings
Dominion shall fall void or ought to be in his Majesty's hands, he shall
receive all their rentes and revenues, as those of his own royal dedemeanes,
and when time comes, to provide princi^all persons of the Church; and the
election ought to be made in his own chapel by his royal assent and the
counsel of such Persons appertayning to his Majesty as he shall call to
perfect the same, and the Prelate elected shall there do his homage and fealty
to our Lord the King, as his Liege Lord of life, member and earthly honor,
saving his order, before such time as he be consecrated. This he condemned.

13. If any noble-ma^ of the kingdom, shall powerfully ouerbeare any
Archbishop, Bishop or Archdeacon in matter of justice, so as he cannot obtain
the right beelonging to him or his, the king ought to make him have his own
according to justice: And if any one will ouerbeare our Lord the king in
clayming his right, the Archbishops, Bishops and Archdeacons ought to procure
his Majesty's justice, that his adversary may satisfy our Lord the king. This
he tolerated.

14. When any shall forfeit their chattells unto the king, no Church nor
Church-yeard ought to detain them, contrary to his Majesty's justice; because
be they found in Churches, or otherwise, all is one, they are his Majesty's.
This he tolerated.

15. Pleadinges in matter of debt, which are grounded upon oath, as well as
others which are without oathe, shall be handled in the king's court. This he
condemned. I think because perjury was punished in the spiritual court.

16. The sons of Villanes, ought not to take holy orders, without assent of
their Lords, of whose lands they are known to be natives. This he
tolerated.

How the Pope proceeded with S. Thomas
Which being read, and considered, Pope Alexander (as before) being very much
troubled, turning himself to the Archbishop used these words: Allthough,
brother, the offense of you and your associate Bishops be great, and
enormious; yet ought we to proceed more mildly with you, who albeeit (as you
confess) have fallen, yet presently after, with rising again, endeauored to
repair your ruin, and by reason thereof endured many grievous, and terrible
wrongs; and presently upon your fall (remaining as yet in England) did seek,
and deserve from us, as proceeding from our clemency, the benefit of
Absolution; whereupon (as it is convenient) we pardon your offense, to the end
you, in this your adversity, may so much the more fully and effectually feel
the consolation, and grace of our clemency, above other Ecclesiastical
Persons; by how much the more you have lost worldly commoditys, and sustained
greater afflictions, for the liberty of the Church, your faith, and devotion
toward us. And thus the Apostolic Prelate first rebukeing with a fatherly
severity, and then recomforting, with the sweetenes of a motherly consolation,
dismissed for that time the Archbishop. So is the matter there discribed. But
an other speech, far differing from this here recyted, and supposed to be
made by saint Thomas to Pope Alexander, is rehearsed in the fore mentioned
volume of Epistles. Lib. 1. Epist. 30.
Then our Author preceedeth.

The morrow after, the Archbishop being present with my Lord the Pope, and the
Cardinals, sittting in a withdrawing chamber, used these words: My fathers
and lords, S. Thomas resigneth his Archbishopprick before the Pope.
it is unlawful for a man to speak untruly any where, much more before God,
and in your presence: wherefore with tears I confess, that my miserable
offense, was the original of these agreeuances, to the Church of England. I
ascended into the fould of Christ, but not by the true door, as a person not
called by Cannonicall election but intruded by the terror of public authority;
and although I undertook this burden against my mind, nevertheless the will
of man, and not of God induced me thereunto. What wonder then, if things
succeeded contrary to my expectation? But if I had upon the kings
threateninges (as my associate Bishops instantly persuaded me) renounced at
the Princes pleasure, and desire, the prerogative of the Episcopal power so
granted me, I had left to the Catholic Church a pernicious example. I
differred it therefore, until I came before your presence; but now
acknowledging mine entrance not to be Cannonicall, and fearing therefore my
departure will fall out to be far worser, perceauing also my ability too
weak for vndergoeing so great a charge, least I prove to be preferred over
my flock for their ruin, over whom I am placed (howsoever) for a Pastor, into
your hands (o holy father) into your hands, I say, I resign the
Archbishoppricke of Canterbury. And pulling withal his ring from his finger,
he humbly beesought a fit Bishop might be provided, worthy of that Church,
in reguard that he having the name of a Pastor, proformed not the office of a
Pastor. And finishing his speech, he enforced my Lord the Pope and all present,
to like sorrow; yea what man hearing this, can abstain from lamentation.

The Archbishop afterward departing aside, together with his followers, who
were scandalized at his words, because in reguard hereof, they began to
despair; My lord the Pope did hereupon enter into conference with the
Cardinals, the matter being on both sides, through sundry opinions, diversely
discussed. Some thought, occasion being thus offered, the Kings indignation
might be more easily appeased, while the Church of Canterbury, by the election
of an other Bishop, might be reconcyled to his favor, and saint Thomas
otherwise provided with more competent means. These were the Pharisees (so
the Author terms the adversaries of S. Thomas) Others, whose eyes were
opened, judged otherwise, saying: That if he, who, for defense of the Churches
liberty, exposed to imminent hazard, and danger, not only his riches, and
glory, with dignity and authority, but also his very life, should at the kings
pleasure be deprived of his right, as he should be made a pattern to others
in like case for resisting of Princes, if the title of his just cause were
mayntayned entire; so on the other side, were he suffered to fall, all other
Bishopes would fall after him, and none in time to come dare to resist the
power of wilful Princes, whereby the state of the Church would stagger, and
the Popes authority perish; and therefore, say they, it is expedient that this
man (although unwilling) should be restored to his sea, and he, who fights
for us, by all means succored. This sentence was approved by all, the
Pharisees only excepted.

The Pope restores to S. Thomas his resigned Archbishoppricke.
Saint Thomas with his followers being called in, my Lord the Pope thus
delivered his sentence. Now at length (Brother) appears to us, the zeal you
have had, and do as yet still continue for the house of our Lord; with how
sincere a conscience, you have opposed your self, as a bullwarke against her
adversaries; how pure a confession you have made, of your entry into your
function, making a voluntary resignation, whereby the fault of the offense
may, and ought to be purged. Now may you securely receive an w from our
hands, the charge of your Pontifi^all authority, we adiudging you to be
entirely restored, and out of all doubt, worthily, whom we know to be a man
approved, with manifold kinds of temptations, a person provident and
discreet, beeloued of God and man, faithful in all things to us, and the
sacred Church of Rome: And as you have bin made a partaker, and undivided
associate, in our persecution, so, by Gods grace, can we never in any thing
be wanting to you, as long as the breath of life shall last in this our body.
But having hitherto flowed in delights, that you may hereafter learn to be,
as you ought, the comforter of the poor, neither yet can you be taught that
lesson, but by the instruction of poverty it self, the mother of Religion, we
have here thought good to commend and commit you over to the poor of Christ
(I mean this Abbot of Pontiniack for he was there of purpose present) not I
say to receive sumptuous but simple education, as best beefitting a banished
man and Christ's Champion: Among whom it behooves you with a few, and those
necessary attendantes (the rest of your followers being distributed among your
freindes) to converse for a time, until the day of consolation shall beegin to
dawne, and the season of peace shall from above descend upon us. In the mean
while be of a constant courrage, and manfully resist such as disturb
tranquillity. Thus far Alexander; and so the assembly was dismissed. Saint
Thomas departing went away with the Abbot of Pontiniack, where willing to live
among the Monks in a Monastical habit, he desired the same might be
sanctified with Pope Alexander's blessing, and clothed therein he perseuered
a Monk, among the Monks, absolutely observing all the rules of Monastical
perfection. But what the king did, when he heard hereof, you shall not only
see (reader) but marvel thereat.

To the open injury of Pope Alexander, then resydent at Senon in France, he
published new artickles, worser, then the first, which he commanded to be
observed in his Provinces beeyond the seas, being Aquitayne, and other places
under his subjection; and among other letters, he directed one concerning the
same, to the Bishop of Poyteeres, who, as he wittnesseth in his Epistle to
saint Thomas received it after the feast of the Apostles. Lib 1. Epist. 1.
Idem postea Epist. 16.
And what these Edictes were is here to be laid down, out of the said book
of the Vatican, where we read in this wise. These are the Constitutions which
King Henry ordained in Normandy, and gave in command to his Justices.

1. If any man be found carrying our Lord the Popes letters, or the Archbishop
of Canterburies mandate, containing Interdiction of Christianity, into England:
let him be apprehended, and justice, without delay, executed on him, as a
traitor to the king.

2 Moreover let no clearke, nor Monk, nor conuertite, nor any of any
conversion be suffered to pass over the seas, or return into England;
unless he have letters of justice, for his passage, and the letters of our
Lord the king, for his return; if any man be found to do otherwise; let him
be apprehended and imprisoned.

3. Let no man appeal to the Pope or Archbishop.

4. That no plea be held by the commandment of the Pope, or Archbishop, or
any Mandate of theires received in England of any man: if any one be found
doing otherwise; let him be apprehended and imprisoned.

5. It was also generally forbidden, that no man should carry any Mandate of
Clearke or Layman, to our Lord the Pope, or Archbishop; if such should be
found, let him be apprehended and imprisoned.

6. If Bishops, Clearkes, Abbottes, or Laymen will defend any sentence of
interdiction: let them, and all their whole kindred without delay, be banished
the land, in such wise, as they carry none of their chattells with them.

7. That the chattells of all such, as favor the Pope or Archbishop, and all
the possessions of them, and all such as appertain to them, of what degree,
order, sex, or condition soever they are, be seized and confiscate, into the
sovereign hand of our Lord the king.

8. That all Clearkes, who have rentes in England, be admonished through-out
all countries, that within three months, they return into England, to their
rentes (if they love their rentes) and if they return not at the appointed
time; let their rentes be seized into the kings hands.

9. That saint Peeter's pennys be not paid any more to the Apostolic Sea, but
carefully gathered and reserved in the king's treasury, and disbursed at his
commandment.

10. That the Bishops of London and Norwich, be at the mercy of our Lord the
king, and summoned, by the Shyriffes, and Bayliffes, to appear before the
kings Justices, to satisfy the king, and his Justices, for that contrary to
the statutes of Claringtonne, they interdicted, by the Popes commendement, the
lands of Earl Hugh, and diuulged the excommunication (which our Lord the Pope
pronounced against him) in their parishes, without the kings Justices.
Hitherto are the kings constitutions which were sent into Normandy.

Nor yet king Henry contented here withal, for the hatred he bore to saint
Thomas, caused the whole estate of the Saint, and his followers to be
confiscate, and all his kindred and familiar freindes, to be transported out
of England, and sparing neither sex, nor age, made an exceeding show of
extreme cruelty. All this is declared at large in Quadrilogus, a book compiled
of saint Thomas. And all this was written to him, by one affected to the king,
yet detesting this tyranny, unworthy so great a Prince. And because saint
Thomas himself was not able to relieve the miserable necessityes of so many
distressed persons; he devised to send the^ into Cecill to be there
mayntained, where they were received by Margarete, Queen of that Island, a
right pious woeman. Moreover the Archbishop of Siracusa, beecame their good
benefactor, both which, by letters saint Thomas gratefully thanked. But this
so great a cruelty, being not able to satisfy the kings enraged mind, Lib.
1. Epist. 27. and 28.
he wrought beesides by decree, to deprive saint Thomas of Spiritual
benefittes, commanding that noe man, under his Episcopal jurisdiction, should
presume to pray for him. This William witnesses in Quadrilogus.

Now concerning saint Peeters pennyes, Concerning the forbidding of paying S.
Peeters pennys.
which were appointed by Pope Alexander, to be gathered by two Priors of the
Cistercians, who gave it over, and durst not gaynesay the kings commandment
to the contrary, Peeter of Bloys, one tf his Majesty's court, plucking up a
courageous spirit, contested with his Sovereign, and enforced him to leave
the payement thereof free to his Holiness, and this himself witnesses in his
inuectiue against the deprauer of his actions, with these words: I speak not
this for vain glory, but for refutation of thine impudency (for thou art
transformed unto the browe of an harlot, by the testimony, and affirmation of
very many peers of England.) King Henry of worthy memory, did once (concerning
the collection of the pennys of saint Peeter) not enduring then to be won by
entreaty, or recalled by reason, inueygh exceedingly, against two Priors of
thine order: no man durst oppose himself on the contrary part; I only
attempted to make a breach, and way for them, and in time of wrath beecame
their reconciliation: At mine instances (God assisting) his royal hand full
often poured out bountiful and magnificent alms, and to this day the Church
of Saints recounteth his charitable benignity. Thus fare Peeter, who although
he were the king's faithful seruante, yet seeking rather the honor of God
then men, omitted not, as much as in him lay, to defend under hand the cause of
saint Thomas.

AN. DOM. 1165.
Now follows the year of our Lord 1165. with the xv. Indiction, according,
to times computation; An Embassage to the Pope from mawde the Empress.
in the beeginning whereof, an Ambassag was sent from Mawde the Empress,
mother of Henry king of England, to Pope Alexander, wherein she beesought his
Holiness, to join in league the kings of France, and England, which if he
could accomplish, a peace was likely to ensue, beetweene the king of England
and saint Thomas. When John of Salisbury (who was resident in Alexanders
court) had notice hereof, he certifyd saint Thomas thereof, by letter,
beeginning thus. When as lately I solicited my Lord the Pope, encouraging him,
and carefully insinuating a way (which meethought I understood) for reducing to
him and you the tranquillity of peace; he answered, that he conceived a hope
of peace, from words of the Empress, who upon a vow sent then the Abbot of
saint Martyrs thither, promising the king of England could easily be
persuaded, to what soever my Lord desired, if his Holiness would (as has bin
long wished) confederate the two kings: wherein, because my Lord the Pope is
forward, the king of France (as surely it semeeth) will easily inclyne, upon
the Popes conference, with the kings; and that his Holiness had already
invited the king of France, to keep the feast of the Purification with him.
Thus far concerning the conceived hope of Peace; and added moreover, That he
spoake with the king of France, whom he found very fearful, least upon such
occasion, he should be withdrawn from the communion of the Church of Rome,
and leaving Pope Alexander, cleave to the scysmaticall faction.

These things thus signified, Salisbury beeseecheth saint Thomas, to employ
himself rather in prayer, then the study of learning, from whose letters
receive these notes, which in Quadrilogus are recyted, out of Herebert
concerning saint Thomas; while he remained as yet in the Monastery of
Pontiniacke, he was so much affected to the reading of holy scriptures, as
daily after the Ca^nonicall hours, the sacred books were scarce ever out of
his hands; whereupon, by reason of his love to the Scriptures, and labor
employed therein, he did in short time so profit, as most often in the nice
and obscurest sentences, he excelled his instructors themselves; moreover, he
bestowed his life in studying the Ecclesiastical Cannons; which endeauours of
his, in these dangerous times, were no whit pleasing to John of Salisbury, whom
saint Thomas held in no small estimation, as well in reguard of his singular
honesty, as also his learning, who confident of his credit with this saint,
admonishes him in the same letters, of these things worthy remembrance,
saying. My counsel, my desire, my instant entreaty is, that you wholly convert
your mind unto our Lord, Cod Vat. lib. 1. Ep. 31.
and the suffrages of prayers, because (as it is written in the Proverbs) the
name of our Lord is the strongest tower, whereunto if any man fly, Proverb. 18.
he shall be delivered out of all extremities. Put of in the mean time, as
much as you may, all other businesses, The ptofitable admonition of a friend to
S. Thomas.
because allthough they seem maruilous necessary, yet what I persuade you is
more highly to be preferred, in regard it is far more necessary; The laws
and Cannons of the Church do profit, but beelieue me this other work, is
now of more importance; those ornaments are not suitable to this season, for
they are not so much the procurers of devotion, as of curiosity. Do you not
remember, how in the distress of the people (as it is written) the Priests and
Ministers poured out their tears beetweene the porch and the Altar, Joel. 2^
Psalm. 76. ibidem.
saying: Spare o Lord, spare thy people. I was exercised (said the Prophet) and
I sweeped my spirit, in the day of tribulation, seeking our Lord with my
hands. Which teach us that spiritual exercise, with cleansing and
examination of the conscience, turns away the scourge, and obtains the
mercy of God. Who rises with compunction from perusing the laws and Cannons?
Nay I say more; these exercises in schools, do sometimes puff up knowledge
to swell in pride, but seldom or never inflame us with devotion. I had rather
you would meditate on the Psalms, and spend your life in saint Gregorie's
Moralles, then beecome a Philosopher after the Scholastical fashyon; it is
far better to confer with aspirituall father, for amendment of manners, by
whose example you may be incensed, then to sifte and discuss points of
controversies, appertayning to secular literature: our Lord knows with what
intent, with what devotion I suggest these things. Accept them as you please;
but if you perform this, God will ever assist you, that you shall never have
cause to fear, what soever man deuiseth against you; our Lord sees, that in
these instant streightes of afflictions, we are not to hope, (as I think) in
any mortal creature etc. Thus John advised saint Thomas very conveniently,

In the mean time, S. Thomas, oppressed with extreme afflictions; although
absent, yet with letters does prosecute his business, writing as well to the
king of England, as also to the Bishops, who ought to exhort and admonish
their Prince. To the king he directed these letters, which Roger in his
Cronicle delivers in these words.

To his Dread Sovereign Lord, Henry by the grace of God, the famous king of
England, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and Eearle of Anioue: Thomas by the
same grace the humble servant of the Chuch of Canterbury, The letter of S.
Tomas to the king of England.
sends greeting and all wishes of well-doinge.
To speak of God, is the part of a free, and well quieted mind, which
causes me so to speak to my Lord: And I would we might treat peaceably. I
humbly beeseech you (my Lord) to endure with patience some little admonition,
concurring with the grace of God, which was never void for the salvation of
your soul, and delivery of mine. I am on all sides beeset with extremityes,
for tribulation and perplexities have found me, in the midst of two most
weyghty and fearful matters, plunged, I say, beetwene these two important
things, dreaded silence, and Admonition. Let me cease to speak, death is
then threatened me, nor can I avoid the hand of our Lord, saying: If thou
shall not show the offender his fault, and he thereby dies in his sin,
Ezech. 3.
I will require his blood at thy bands. On the other side, let me admonish; I
see not how to eschew (which God forbid) my Sovereigns indignation; fearing
moreover least that should beefall, which the wise man foretold, saying: when
he who pleases not, comes or sends to make intercession or motion, it is
to be feared, least the incensed be thereuppon faer more enraged. What shall
I therefore do? speak? Or hold my peace? since on every side danger menaceth
me. But because it is safer, to fall into the indignation of man, then into
the hands of our living Lord, being confident in the mercy of the highest, in
whose hands are the hearts of Kings, Daniel. 13.
inclining them to what side be^ lifts (and I wish to the better) I will
speak to my Lord, since I have once beegun; for many times, benefitts are
prepared even for the unwilling, especially when we advise them rather for
their saftie then pleasure. His admonition concerning the estate of the Church.
In your realm is held captive the daughter Sion, the spouse of the mighty
king is oppressed by many, being afflicted by those, who have long time hated
her: and of whom she rather should be honored then aggreeued, especially of
your self: weyghing therefore seriously in your own conscience, the singular
benefitts which God has beestowed on you in the first entrance of your reign,
in the midst thereof, and even almost to this very day, loose now her bands,
and suffer her to rule together with her spouse, that God may bountifully
bless you, your kingdom instantly recover his former power, obloquie be
washed away from your generation, and singular peace flourish in your days.
Give credit to me (most beeloued Lord most renowned Prince) for our Lord with
patience repayeth, with longanimity expects, but with terror reuengeth.
Listen to me and do well, otherwise ought you to dread (which God forbid)
least the Amighty beegirt with his swoard on his thigh, and come in a strange
hand, with a huge army to deliver his spouse (not without grievous punishment)
from her oppression, and servitude of tribulation; but if you will harken unto
me (because our Lord has at this instant most urgent occasion, to make
trial of your obsequious service, as of his courageous soldier) God will
pour out his benefittes on you, adding glory, to the posterity of your sons
and daughters, in long enduring ages. Otherwise I fear (which God forbid) that
the swoard shall never depart from your family, until he comes, who shall
fully revenge the injury offered him, and his, being God Almighty himself;
like to the plague which left not the house of Solomon, from whom (although God
made choice of him, and gave him that abundance of wisdom and peace, as it
was said of all, This is the son of wisdom, and peace: yet because he
flew back from the ways of our Lord, and walked in iniquity upon iniquity)
God rent his kingdom, and gave it to his servant especially in reguard he
sought not instantly, after his sin, to appease the wrath of our Lord, like
David his father, who presently upon his offense humbled himself to God,
corrected his fault, beesought mercy, and obtained pardon. I would to Almighty
God, that you likewise through the grace of our Lord, would imitate his
example. And thus much for the present I write, the rest I leave to the
relation of this bearer, a man Religious, and of great estimation, and, as I
suppose, your faithful servant, unto whom I humbly beeseech you (if it
pleases your Majesty) that you will confidently give credit, although I
rather desire, with your royal favor, to speak with your self in presence.
God grant my Lord and king now and ever well to fare.


Thus much to the king, sending also by the same messinger, these letters
worthy your attention to the Bishop of Hereforde, Thomas by the grace of God,
the humble seruante of the Church of Canterbury, to his reverent brother
Robert, The letter of saint Thomas to Robert Bishop of Hereford.
by the same grace, Bishope of Hereforde sends greeting, and wishes him in
all things well to do.
If my letter, had stirred up in your Brotherhood, a careful diligence, I had
not found you slougthfull in your affection, or not effectually watchful for
discharging the duty of your undertaken office. I have made choice to be an
abject, to be accursed for all, to be the obloquio of men, and the out cast
of the people, to the end, I may not see the calamityes of the Saints, and
rather then to dissemble the iniurys of our nation; expecting if perchance, any
one among ye, being zealous of the law of God, and thirsting the liberty of
the Church, would come after, and join with me, that we might not yield
horns of power to offenders: and beehould, you, who (as I beeleiued) was
beestowed on me by God, that together with me, might build, pull down, and
plant, beegin to me with converting your spur of zeal, to ruin, and your
comfort to despair, preaching humiliation, nay deiection, and denouncing
goodness, when on all sides there is nothing left, but trouble to the
destruction of the Church of God, and of his clergy; yea even at such time,
when as you ought cheifely to confirm with consta^cy the wavering mind, and
endure with me the combat, for defense of the patrimony of the crucified, for
repressing, and subduing the enemies of the Church, to sound into mine ears,
to breath into my head, that I should entreat more instantly, reprove more
sharply, rebuke more severely, and if prechance they listen not to me, then
truly to cry out to me Arise. Why do you sleep Pluck out the swoard of
saint Peeter, revenge the blood of the servants of Christ, which is poured
forth with the iniurys of the Church, that in you and us are daily sustained.
Is it clean slipped out of your memory, with how great injuries I was
afflicted, with what reproaches abused, when in my person Christ was again,
before the Tribunal of a Prince, adiuged? I call not again to mind, the wrong
offered to mine own person, allthough the same was also in truth to the
Church: Mark you more diligently, consider deeply in your heart, what was
done before my departure out of the land; what in my departure, and what after
my departure, yea what is done every day in the realm against the Church of
God and his clergy? with what conscience can these things be dissembled by
you, who was expected to be a Redeemer of Israel? a champion, to deliver the
Church out of bondage? And now because you have bin so long silent, I pour
out my plaintes against you. O my eldest son! I fear an other will step in
your place, to beereaue you of your inheritance, yea win from you (which God
forbid) the blessing of an heir. But allthough hitherto you have rested
silent, recover now your courage again my dearest son! Cry out, and cease
not: Lift up your voice on high against them, darte fear into their hearts,
strike into them contrition, force out of them satisfaction, least otherwise,
the wrath of God fall down upon them, and the whole nation, or (which God
forbid) on the mightyst Potentates of the kindome; for the just revenge of God,
hangs even now over their heads This I write not to confound you, but to
forewarne you, to be watchful; that, supported with the authority of almighty
God and of us, you may be hereafter able, and willing with more strength and
power to parforme the dutys of your charge. In breife, this only thing I would
have you now to know, that through the mercy of God, they shall never wrest
from me the Churches confusion. All this not with standing, I give you
thanks, in reguard you would at this time visit, and refresh me with your
consolation.

What say I more? more one thing there is, which without grievous sorrow of
mind, I cannot ouerpasse. I lament truly my dearest beeloued Lord the king;
for fear and trembling have fallen upon me, Psalm. 54.
and darkness covered me round about, in reguard I see tribulation and
extremityes hang over my Lord and Prince, neither yet is it strange, for he
has shaken the Church of God, and disturbed the same, showing hard measure to
the Clergy of the land, and giving them for drink the wine of sorrow;
wherefore our Lord says to him; where are now thy wise Counselors, who have
given thee foolish advise, who said, Isai. 1^
thou art the son of the prudent, the son of anci^^^ kings, whose customs
are to be observed in England, and whose laws whosoever shall refuse to obey,
he is not Cesar's friend, but enemy to the Crown, guilty of judgment; yet
nevertheless (which is of worth) he is afreind to the Cross of Christ:
because woe be to them, who enact laws of iniquity, and writing have
indighted injustice, whereby they may oppress the poor in judgment, and
commit violence on the cause of the humble of the people; that Churches and
widows may be their prey, and they themselves waste the gooddes of the
Clergy, and others: what will they do in the day of visitation, and calamity
approaching a far of? to whom will they fly for refuge? and where will they
relinquish their gloryes, to the end they be not depressed with judgment, and
falling dye with the murdered? where are now his wise ones, let them come
forth, declare to him and show, what our Lord of Hosts has thought of
England, his grave counselors are beecome fools, and his Princes have
withered away, they have deceived England the Angle and Corner of the world,
our lord has intermingled among them the spirit of giddynes, they have made
England err in their works, as the drunken man erreth, with vomiting, and
trembling, and it shall not be Englands work either to make head or tail,
because they have devoured Jacob, and made his place desolate, Psalm. 78.
and said; let us possess for our inheritance the sanctuary of God, with
vphraiding Priests, and their Princes; saying: whither will ye fly out of
our hands? And in whom is reposed your confidence? why have ye resisted, and
withstood our precepts? O how vain are th^se conceptes, and how extreme vile
are these works in the sight of our Lord? He sees truly that all these
things are idle: for he will deride him, who deuiseth thus and him who does
thus; foreseeing that his day is even at hand, yea entering at the very door,
and he will say: Lo here the men, Psalm. 51.
who have not settled their succor in God, but have planted their hope in the
abundance of their riches, and prevailed in their vanity, and yet to no purpose
are these their works: Our Lord leaves not his Church and Clergy without a
defendor, nor without a most terrible revenge, for she is founded upon a strong
rock, yea the rock is Christ himself, who has built her with his own
proper blood. Assuredly unless they reform these sins, they will not pass
unrevenged, because they have trampled under their feet the holy of holys,
the house of God, by afflicting his preistes with iniurys, and reproachful
words: for his Preistes are they to whom our Lord himself speaks thus:
Psalm. 21. Luc. 10.
I have said ye are Gods, and all, the sons of the highest. And in another
place: who hears ye, hears me, and who contemns ye, contemns me;
and who touches ye, touches the aple of mine eye. Let them return to their
hearts, and cast these mischeefes away from them; let them do penance, in the
depth of humility: otherwise it is to be feared least our Lord (which God
forbid) will come, bring upon the^, and their land grievous tribulation, and
the most heavy revenge of retribution; Behold our Lord will come, and will not
delay, but he will save us, yea he never forsakes such as trust in him: for
the Prophet says: Hope in our Lord, and do righteousness, and thou shall be
fed in his riches: And in another place: Psalm. 26. Psalm. 36.
Expect our Lord, and deal manfully, and let thy heart be comforted, and
endure our Lord, and quickly shall thou be delivered from the hunter's not,
and the bitter word. And that I may finish all the rest with a worthy
conclusion; In regard, our Lord declares unto us, what and how great
aduersityes we must suffer, for his name, and defense of his Church; it is
requisite, yea most necessary, that both you and the wh^le Church committed to
your charge, pray instantly for (...) that what by our own merrits, we are
not able to atcheyue, we may obtain to accomplish by your intercession, and
the suffrages of the holy men, who live in your Dioces, and thereby come to
purchase eternal grace.

Farewell, and be, of good comfort; yea farewell the whole Church of England,
and be comforted in our Lord, that we may all together farewell.



Thus wrote saint Thomas out of France (where he then lived) into England. But
what in the mean time did the king of England?

The requests of the ^ing of England Ambassadors to the Pope.
Before Alexander departing out of France, undertook his journey toward Rome
(which happened in Easter this present year) the King of Englands Ambassadors
came to Pope Alexander; But what their Embassage was, you shall now hear out
of Alan in Quadril. In the mean time were messangers sent of all sides, yea
from my lo: the Pope himself, to establish peace. In the end it was on all
hands agreed, that my Lo: the Pope, and the King should at an appointed time
and place, meet together; to the end, by their intercourse of speech, the way
for peace might be more easily devised. The King assenteth to be there
present, so as the Archbishop would not as then appear in place, because he
would not in the sight of saint Thomas behold the face of my Lord the Pope.
The Archbishop on the other part, forewarned his Holiness, not in any case to
entertain this parlee with the King, but in presence of himself, who was best
acquainted with his fasho^s: for he said, the piety of the Apostolic Sea may
soon be deceived by the subtle varyety of the kings words, if there were not
a skillfull interpreter, ready at hand, who were able to sifte the depth, and
intent of his mind, out of the dark clouds of his speech. Thus did saint
Thomas write to the Pope. Whereupon, says Alan, my lord the Pope modestly
answering the king, affirmed, how it was never in any age heard, that the
Church of Rome at the command of any Prince whatsoever, forbad any person her
presence, especially being banished for the cause of justice; But that it was
a priuiledg and authority granted from above to the Apostolic Sea, to succor
the exiled and oppressed, yea from the fury of their sovereigns, and the
violent rage of their malicious enemies. The Ambassadors therefore repining,
departed, to deliver this message to their king, and my lord the Pope
determining to return to Rome, undertook his journey. Thus Alan, whom saint
Thomas followed as far as Bituricum, where taking leave and receiving his
blessing, he departed back to Pontiniake, never after seeing Pope Alexander
in this world.

AN. DOM. 1166.
The year 1166. ensues and the 14. indiction. When Frederick the Emperor
seeing the prosperity of the Catholic Pope Alexander, daily more and more to
increase, and that his holiness was now peaceable settled in Rome, being enraged
with anger and envy, commanded a Conuentickle in Witemberge (otherwise called
Herbolis) at the feast of Penticost, where he meant with his Bishops and
Princes to assemble for co^firming the power of this Antipope Guido. Wherefore
the king of England being by the Emperor invited to this scysme, because
experience taught him that Pope Alexander inclined to the part of saint
Thomas, taking advantage of this fit opportunity for his excuse, sent an
embassage unto the City to Pope Alexander, determining if he refused to yield
to his demands, then to fall off from him to Guido; for the better
accomplishment whereof, he wrote these letters to the Archbishop of Colen (the
chief ringleader of the scysmatickes) for procurring a safe conduct for his
Ambassadors.

I have long since desired to find out some just occasion for leaving the part
of Pope Alexander and his unfaithful Cardinals, who presume to maintain
that Traitor Thomas, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, against me: whereupon
by the advice of all my Barons, and consent of the Clergy, intending now to
send to Rome men of great account in my kingdom, namely the Archbishop of
York, the Bishop of London, the Archdeacon of Poyters, John of Oxenford, and
Richard de Lucy, who openly and manifestly on the beehalfe of my self and my
whole kingdom, with all other lands under my dominion, shall propound and
denounce to Pope Alexander and his Cardinals, that they shall no longer defend
my Traitor, but so absolutely discharge and free me of him, as I, with the
counsel of my Clergy, may establish an other in the Church of Canterbury;
and shall moreover require that they revoke and make void whatsoever Thomas
has done, and likewise demand that the Pope in their, presence cause it to be
sworn publicly, that he and his successors shall conserve for ever (as far
as to them appertains) to me, and all my successors, the royal customs of
Henry my grandfather inviolable and untouched, and if by chance they will
gainsay any one of my demandes, that then neither I, nor my Barons, nor yet my
Clergy will ever hereafter yield him any obedience; yea we will openly
withstand him and his, and whosoever under my gouerme^t shall be found
hereafter to follow his part, shall be banished out of my kingdom.

I entreat you as my dearest friend, all excuses set aparte to send me
speedily brother Ernold or brother Randulph of the hospital of saint John,
whon may on the beehalfe of the Emperor and your self give safe conduct to
the before said Ambassadors as well in their goeing as return through the
Emperor's dominion.

This was the kings letter. An Embassage was also sent to Pope Alexander,
which London and Oxford only executed. But so far was Pope Alexander from
being any way moved, either by the terrors of the kings thundering letters,
or other threats uttered by the Ambassadors in the kings name, as having
rebuked their rashness, he returned to the king himself again an answer
fraughte with sharp reprehension, wherewith being terrifyd he desisted from
his wicked intention, and gave therefore great thanks to his Holiness, promising
hereafter to obey ever readily in all things; whereof the Bishops of England
in their epistle sent the next year to Pope Alexander, are apparent witnesses;
which afterward in place convenient we determine to declare. Mean while
(says our Author) Colen requires the Emperors advise, in what sort he
should answer the king of England; whereunto the Emperor replyeth, that he
ought to satisfy the kings desire; in reguard with how much the more solemnity
this matter is accomplished, so much the greater shall be the Popes
confussion, if he condescendeth to the kings request; and it may be that
secretly by some one of the Temple or Hospital or any other (whom they could
not prevent) the king by corruption of money may otherwise obtain the same.
Wherefore brother Randolph of the Hospital was addressed to the king of
England, who safely conducted the Ambassadors whom the king intended to send to
the court of his Holiness through the Emperors dominion.

Thus much there. But so it beefell that the same Ambassadors came first into
Germany, where they were present at the Conuentickle of Witemberge; but what
matters were there handled the letters patents of Frederick the Emperor, dated
at that place, declare where among other things is thus written of this
Embassage.

Moreover the honorable Ambassadors of our renowned friend the king of England
directed from him to us, Cod. Vat. Epist 70.
did on the beehalfe of the same king in the presence of the whole court, upon
the relics of Saints, make their public oath to us, that the king himself
together with all his kingdom should continue faithful to our side, and
joining with us should ever defend the Lord Pascall (whose part we take) and
never hereafter intermedle in mayntaining Rowland the Schysmaticke. Beccause
also we (who have ever hitherto bin ready to abide the examination of the
vprighteousnes of our cause, which the adversaries of the Church of God and us,
be it either out of their pride, or the distrust of their cause have avoided)
are now by reason of their manifest obstinacy, compelled to unaccustomed oaths:
Let therefore, hereafter every man and estate carefully eschew the Communion
of Scyfmatickes; for their fury allthough it has seemed hitherto in some sort
pardonable, it will hereafter be altogether intolerable etc. Moreover in an
other letter written by one affected to Pope Alexander is said. That Frederick
the Emperor gloryeth in the assistance of the king of England, whose
Ambassadors were sworn to the part of the Antipope etc. In an other place
likewise.

Frederick Couloreth his business with false prophesies, that Pope Alexander
should be taken captive; whereunto not only the vulgar sort, but the king of
England, expecting the event, has almost given credit etc. And out of
Salisbury: The king of England is confident in the Emperor, and the captivity
of my Lord the Pope, which the Prophetts of Belial have told him.

But whereas the kings Ambassadors did swear in his Majesty's name to follow
the Scysmaticall faction, the Archbishop of Roane excuses the same, as no way
done by the kings commandment, which appears in his letters directed to
Henry Priest and Cardinal of the title of the Saints Mereus and Achilleus,
written thus.

Concerning the king of England, we certainly secure you, that neither by
himself, nor by his Ambassadors he ever gave oath or promise to leave the
Church and cleave to the Schysmaticke; yea we are assured that in those
covenants of Marriage (whatsoever they were) allthough for three days the
Almaynes indeauoured to pervert him, he would never accord to any thing, but
with preservation of his fidelity to our Lord the Pope, the Church, and the
king of France; and as well our lady the Empress, as our selves, have by our
letters enjoined him to clear himself with all expedition, from this
aspersion. For our parts, being at Roan, allthough the kings Ambassadors
were then also there, we only heard of them, but saw them not, etc.

But for these Ambassadors who faulted so foully, we find that saint Thomas
excommunicated them, as his letters to his suffraganes in the year following
do signify, which here after in their turn we will declare.

These things being thus laid open concerning this passage with Frederick
the Emperor against Pope Alexander, it remains that we likewise know what
were the actions of this year, concerning saint Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury. When Pope Alexander was certifyed of the king of Englandes
Ambassadors in the conuenticle of Witemberge, The Pope reproves the King of
England.
whereby they bound themselves with their king to the Scymaticall Antipope
Pascall, it pleased him to admonish the king thereof by letters from the sacred
College of Cardinals; the letters themselves are not extant^ but only the
letters of Apology written by the king in his defense to the holy College of
Cardinals in these words. Cod. Vat. lib. ^. Ep. 41.


King Henrys Apology written to the Cardinals.
As touching that which our Lord the Pope has signified unto us, to wit, the
alienation of our mind and intention, from our love and devotion to the Roman
Church, we do first answer, that your wisdom is fully informed, with how
sinceere an affection we have ever loved as well the Roman Church, as also
the person of our Lord the Pope, what great attemptes we have undertaken for
him, and what affronts we have sustained for his sake: for (to pass over
other things in silence) when the question and controversy arose for
receiving him, we did not only accept of him our selves, but also draw, yea
enforce diverse others (allthough unwilling) to do the like; nor yet did we
ever estrange our mind from the fullnes of our affection: But he (as we
manifestly know) who has in former times bin most troublesome to us (as the
events of his actions many way declare) even now especially with word, work,
and writing (which cheefely incenseth the minds of Princes) perseuereth to
defame our person, terming us as well in letters as speech the Persecutor and
oppressor of the Church. Now let our Lord the Pope consider, how fatherly this
man's proceedinges are toward us, who first signifying unto us that Princes
ought to have especial caution and care to preserve their fame unspotted,
neglects here this fatherly affection toward us, and with word and work
disgraceth our fames renown.

We do therefore make it known to your whole reverent College, that
whatsoever honor, eminency and power our kingdom possesses, and all other
things subject unto our government, these, and every one of these, we
acknowledge and profess to be given and bestowed on us by our Lord and
Creator, and to him we render most humble thanks, although not such us me
ought, being thereunto altogether unable, but such as our power can afford,
and would to God our Lord the Pope would beeseech allmighty God in our
beehalfe, that we might offer up, and understand how to yield to our God and
Creator all dutiful devotion and reverence, and that we may, with that entire
and inward portion of our souls, which we owe him, fear and love him only:
for truly although we cannot love and adore him so much as in duty we are
bound unto, nevertheless have we an affection and desire to serve him in
every thing, to please him in all things, and wholly to obey him. We intend
truly and desire willingly to persevere in the integrity of the grace and love
of our Lord the Pope, if his Holiness will in like sort mayntaine unto us and
our kingdom the same honor and preservation of glory and dignity which holy
and reverent Popes of Rome have showed to noble and potent Princes our
Predecessors.

But concerning appeals which he supposes we prohibit, affirming also that
we restrain the subjects of our kingdom from visiting the Court of Rome;
we would not have this concealed from your wisdoms, that we have never at
any time hindered either visitations or appeals, but only require they should
be in such manner, such course, and such fashion ordered, as they have bin
formerly performed according to the customs and dignity of our kingdom in the
time of our progenitors, who were illustrous Princes, and according to the
ordinations and constitutions of the grauest and wisest persons as well of the
Clergy as Laytie of our dominions.

In that he reproves us for entering into leage with the excommunicate, we
suppose not we have herein either offended God or proceeded against reason;
for as we received from our Lord the Popes own mouth, his Holiness never held
the Lord Frederick the Emperor of Ro^^ excommunicate, neither yet have we
heard by relation of any, that he was afterward excommunicated. Neither
although we granted our daughter in marriage to the Emperors son, do we
beelieue we have committed any offense therein: Because (that we may receive
example from the like) as the same was in our knowledge lawful to the most
excellent and mighty king Henry our grandfather, who intermaryed his daughter
with Henry of late memory Emperor of Rome, so we by the same reason deduced
from our ancestors, being advised also by our grave Counselors did condescend
to a contract beetweene the Emperors son and our daughter.

Whereas moreover he admonishes us by his letter to recall the Archbishop of
Canterbury (whom he says we have expulsed our kingdom) unto the dignity
from whence he fell, and restore him again unto his Sea: we apparently know
how evident it is unto the eyes of ye all, that we neither banished, nor yet
enforced him to depart our dominions, but he rather by the instigation of his
own light and perverse disposition, then upon any mature deliberation
indueeing him thereunto, beetooke himself to flight with an intent and purpose
to raise envy against us, and (which the world witnesses we never deserved at
his hands) maliciously to deprave and derogate from us and our renown: But if
the said Archbishop as of his own accord he departed the land, so of his
own free will would return again, and bear him self to us in such sort as
he ought to behave himself to his Lord and king, we then would likewise so
deal with him as according to the counsel of our Clergy and Layetie, as well
of our kingdom as our Provinces beeyond the seas, should be thought
convenient; but we think it unfitting to call him back, whom we never
enforced to fly our dominions. Wherefore if it ^^all appear to us that we
have any way offended or exceeded our bounds, we will with the advice of our
Clergy and Barons according to the customs, dignityes and excellency of our
kingdom willingly satisfy as we are bound. But if any one will attempt to
trouble or diminish the laws, customs, and dignityes of our crown, we will
esteem him the public adversary and open enemy of our name, honor and
kingdom, and we (so long as we live) will never endure the least detriment
to the dignityes and customs of our regality, which the renowned men our
Predecessors have held and inioyed in the reigns of the holy Popes of Rome.

Lastly in that he commanded ye to insinuate unto us that we should not
afflict the Churches or Ecclesiastical persons of our kindome or Provinces,
nor yet suffer them to be afflicted; God and our Conscience do witness that to
this very day we never did nor Permitted it to be done.

Hitherto the kings Apology to the Cardinals.

But as the image of a foul deformed and horrible Monster being ouercast with
coulors may be transformed into the show of a most fair and chaste Virgin,
and not with standing there lurketh underneath what to the eyes would be
dreadful to beehould, yet outwardly it appears delectable: So shall ye
plainly see his detestable crimes, with a deceytfull style transformed into
virtues. But what estimation is to be had of him, that which has already bin
said, and what hereafter shall be written, will apparently declare. There are
also other letters extant which passed this year in the cause of controversy
beetwene the king of England and saint Thomas, being writings truly of great
moment, and principaly that which Pope Alexander sent to the Bishop of London,
and is recyted by Roger in these words.

Alexander Bishop servant of the servants of God to his reverent brother
Gilbert Bishop of London sends greeting with an Apostolical Benediction.
In that you have beestowed singular care and diligence about the business we
enjoined your brotherhood, and for that your have faithfully solicited and
effectually admonished our most dear son in Christ Henry the renowned king
of England concerning the increase and exaltation of the Church and us; we
receive the same as a thing most grateful and acceptable, and thereupon
rendering you abundance of thanks, we do for that cause highly commend and
praise in our Lord your watchful and endeavoring wisdom. And because we
love with a more entire charity this your king as a famous Prince, and our
dearest son, therefore we have thought good often, yea very often to
sollicyte and excite him by all means to devotion toward the Church, as well
by your reverent brethren the Archbishop of Roane and Bishop of Hereforde, and
also by our most dear daughter in Christ his mother, sometimes the illustrous
Empres of Rome: And now rejoice and are greatly comforted in our Lord for the
godly zeal of the same king signified to us by your letters.

But because we would have him as entirely affected to the Church of God and
to us, as in the beeginning her was accustomed to be; we entreat, admonish,
yea command your brotherhood that you will again and again both by your self
and others carefully and diligently stir up, exhort, and by all means
persuade him, to procure after his wonted manner with his best endeavors the
honor and exaltation of the same Church, and foster, mayntaine and defend with
all courage the cause thereof, that he would love and reverence Churches and
Ecclesiastical persons, and conserve their rightes and franchises.

Likewise that he would restore to his grace and favor our reverent brother
the Archbishop of Canterbury; and for our part if he yield to saint Peeter
and us, the respect and honor which heretofore he has done, we will love
him with a most tender affection, and labor by all means (as beeseemeth us)
to magnify and advance him, and preserve the kingdom committed to his charge:
for we had rather vanquish him with patience and mildnes, then any way agreeue
him, so long us we can possibly forbear him.

Dated at Gradus Mercurii XI. Kalend. September.

Thus wrote Alexander to the Bishop of London, who in this manner answered him.

To his father and Lord the most high Bishop Alexander, Brother Gilbert servant
of the Church of London sends his dutiful service of sincere charity and
humble obedience.
Having received (most dear father in Christ) your commandment with dew
reverence, we instantly heard that your son our most beeloued sovereign
Lord, was leading his army in the confines of France, and taking with us our
venerable Brother Robert Bishop of Hereford, according to your direction, with
all attentive diligence we treated with him, and laying before his eyes
whatsoever you signified to us by letter, partly entreating, and (as far as
beecame subjects to the Majesty of their king) also reproving, we constantly
and instantly persuaded him that he would be certifyed in all these points,
and if he had swarued from the path of reason, he would return to the way of
truth and justice, being called back by your admonition delivered him by our
mouth, and being piously advertised by his father, (...) absolutely desist from
wicked actions, love God wit^ a pure heart, respect his Mother the holy Church
of R^^e with his wonted reverence, and never forbid those wh^ were willing to
visit her, nor hinder appeals made unto her, and reducing charitably from
exile our father the Lord of Canterbury, he would remain constant and
immovable in the obedience of saint Peeter and your Holiness, and wholly bent
to the works of devotion, would not any way afflict Churches or
Ecclesiastical persons of his kingdom or dominions; nor suffer them to be in
any sort injured by himself or others, but with love defend them under his
royal protection; that he by whom kings do reign, may in this world
prosper his temporal Dominion, and beestowe on him in heaven an eternal
kingdom. Otherwise if he obeyed not your godly and wholesome admonitions, your
Holiness who had hitherto with patience endured, could no longer contain your
self within the compass thereof: Heereunto we added, that he was justly to
fear, least if he corrected not his offenses, he should shortly incur the
wrath of Allmighty God through which his kingdom would not long continewe, nor
his be suffered to live in prosperity, but that he who exalts the humble
would throw down with great ruin them (now exalted) from the heygth of their
dominion.

But he accepting most thankfully your fatherly correrection, with a
maruaylous temperate mind and exceeding modesty, did in order answer to every
particular: Affirming first he never alienated his mind any way from you, nor
ever had the least conceyte to that purpose; but as long as you showed your
fatherly favor to him, he would affect you as his father, and reverence and
tenderly love the Church of Rome as his mother, and humbly obey and submitt
himself to your sacred be heastes; reserving ever without impeachment the
dignity of himself and his kingdom; and if now for a while past he has not
respected you with due reverence, he alleges for the reason thereof, that
whereas in your necessityes he did withal his heart, with all his mind and
his most ample power assist your Holiness, you did not on the other side give
him correspondence answerable to his deserts, when as afterward, he had by
his Ambassadors recourse unto you in his necessityes, but with bushing
complayneth that almost in every petition he receaueth repulse at your
hands, and yet being notwithstanding all this confident of your fatherly
grace, which at his pleasure will hear his son, hoping and expecting also
from you a countenance more calm, he remains with an immovable constancy
in the fidelity (as they call it) of saint Peeter and your self; whereupon it
follows, that he will not any way hinder such as are willing to visit your
Holiness, neither (as he assures us) has he hitherto bin their impediment.

Concerning Appeals, according to the ancient custom of his kingdom, he
challenges to himself an honor and burden, that in cyuill causes none of the
Clergy of the realm do exceed the bounds of the land, unless first by
experience they try whether by his royal authority and commandment, they may
at home obtain their right, which if they cannot there procure, then may they
freely at their pleasures appeal to your holiness without any restraint of his
Majesty, wherein if there be the least prejudice to your laws or honor, he
promises, by Gods assistance out of hand to reform the same by the Counsel
of the whole Church of his kingdom.

For the Emperor, allthough he knows him to be a Scismaticke,
nevertheless that he is excommunicated by your Holiness, to this instant he
is ignorant, but if he understands him to be so once denounced, and then
makes any unlawful league with him or others, he v^dertaketh to reform the
same also by the judgment and Council of the Church of his kingdom.

Moreover he assures us that he never banished out of his kingdom our
father the Lord Canterbury; wherefore as he departed of his own accord, so
shall he be freely permitted with all peace to return to his Church,
whenever it shall please him; always provided that in satisfaction to his
Majesty he will absolutely conserve those dignityes, against which he now
complayneth, notwithstanding he was formerly sworn to them.

Lastly if any Church or Ecclesiastical person shall make proof that they
have sustained any wrong by him or any of his, he will be ever ready
according to the judgment of the whole Church to give satisfaction. These are
the answers we have received from our Lord the king, and we wish we could
haue' got at his hands any thing more ample to have satisfied your pleasure;
but such as they are, we thought good to inform your Holiness of them, to the
end that out of his answers, your discretion may gather, what will be the
conclusion of this business: For our Lord the king seems much to justify his
cause, whilst he promises in all things here recited to submit himself to
the counsel and judgment of the Church of his kingdom, and no way at all to
hinder (as before has bin said) the return of our father the Lord of
Canterbury: whereupon, we think good, humbly to beeseech your Holiness, that
setting the saying before your eyes: The bruised reed he shall not break:
Isai. 42.
and smoakinge flax he shall not quench: you would be pleased for a time to
confine within the bounds of modesty that zeal which is worthily inkindled by
the fire of the holy ghost, to revenge all iniuryes offered to the Church of
God, least by pronouncing the sentence of Interdiction, or that last judgment
of excommunication, you suffer thereby the miserable ruin of innumerable
Churches, and divert without recovery as well the king himself, as infinite
numers of men his followers (which God forbid) from your obedience. For it is
better a lymme, be it maimed, should yet remain with the head, then being
cut off, be cast away from the body; parts wounded may recover to be sound
again, but being once separated absolutely from the man, cannot return to
their former integrity; division breeds desperation, whilst the labor of the
skillfull surgeon cures, often, a greiuous heart. If therefore it may please
you, it is better you should at this instant employ your travel for healing
this soar (if any he) then by cutting of the noblest part of the Church of
God to heap far greater troubles, yea more then can be expressed on the state
of Christendom being now in such a combustion. For what if your speech cannot
as yet fully take, or be taken, shall we therefore despair of the grace of
God, because in an acceptable time it may both take, and be taken? what? Isai
53.
is the hand of our Lord shortened that it cannot save? Or is his ear hardened
that it cannot hear? For that swifte running speech does mightily (when it
pleases) clean change all thingcs, and grants to the prayers of the holy
eue^ matters beeyo^d expectation: The royal blood knows then best to be
overcome, when it has overcome, nor blusheth to yield, when it has
vanquished; in meekenes he is to be mollifyed by admonishmentes, and conquered
with patience. What if there ensues a loss of some temporalityes, either
through patience already used, or as yet hereafter to be practiced? Ought
we not to sound a retreat to severity, whom otherwise a great slaughter
hangs over the peoples heads? are not many things thrown out of the ship
into the seas, when clouds and waves confounded with storms do menace death?

We speak fondly, but out of an unfeigned charity Admit this be the end of
the matter, that our Lord of Canterbury together with his losses does also
endure a continual exile, and England (which God forbid) obeys no longer
your command; it is nevertheless better for a while to forbear with patience,
then with so great a zeal to vnsheath the swoard of severity. For what,
albeeit persecution is not able to separate many of us from your obedience,
some nevertheless will not be manting to bow their knees to Baal, and
without respect of religion or justice to receive the Pall of Canterbury from
the hand of an Idol, nor yet will there fail some who possessing our seats
and usurping our chaires, will with all the devotion of their minds obey him.
Many there are who do now foretaste this, wishing that scandalls would once
arise, and plain ways be perverted to crooked paths. Wherefore (father) we
do not lament or be wayle our own misfortunes; but unless you prevent these
mischeifes we do, forseeing, dread a foul subversion to threaten and hang
over the Church of God, neither sooner would we wish a day of this loathed
life to perish, then that wherein we were borne to see such manner of
spectacles. Allmighty God (dear father in Christ) preserve you long in health
and prosperity.


And thus wrote the Bishop of London to Pope Alexander.

But Pope Alexander who sought by the Bishop of Londons means the kings
recovery, desired much more by his own pastor saint Thomas to perfect the
same, who never failed of his office, and as at all times he admonished him by
his letters, so now more amply in writing he thought good to persuade his
king in manner following.

To his beeloued Lord Henry by the grace of God King of England, Duke of
Normandy and Aquitayne and Earl of Anioue, Lib. 1. Epist. 65.
Thomas by the same grace the humble servant of the Church of Canterbury
sometimes temporally his, but now much more, wishes him in our Lord all true
repentance with amendment.
Expecting we have expected that our Lord would look upon you, The Epistell
of saint Thomas to King Henry.
and that being converted you would do penance departing from your perverse
ways, and that you would cut off from you the wicked by whose suggestestion
and counsel (as it is tought) you are now fallen down almost into the depth;
But God forbid it should be into that depth whereof it is said. Proverb. 18.
The sinner when he comes into the depth will contemn. And allthough we
have hitherto forborne in vain, considering in silence and with all affection
expectin; if any messinger would come, and reporting say, your son, king, and
Lord being now long inueagled with deceiptes, and drawn on to the Churches
destruction, by the inspiration of the heavenly clemency in the abundance of
exceeding humility hasteneth himself for the Churches delivery, with making
all satisfaction and amends: Allthough there is yet no such thing, we not
withstanding will never cease with humble and daily devotion to beeseech
Allmighty God that what we have long and earnestly wished both of you, and for
you, we may with a speedy and fruitful effect obtain. And beehould
thereupon it comes to pass that the care of the Church of Canterbury, over
who^ our Lord has at this present placed our preistood though unworthy, while
you do there rule the temporal estate, does not so nearly touch us in
regard of our continued discommodious exile, as otherwise move us to direct to
your Majesty letters of admonition, exhortation and correction, that we be
not to great a dissembler of your offenses (if any there be) which in very
deed are, being the ground of our no small grief, those, yea cheefely those
(we say) which, concern the Church of God and his Clergy, being diverse ways
committed by you without regard of person or dignity, and that we appear not
theerin too negligent to the hazard of your souls salvation. For he is
doubtless guilty of the fact, who forbeareth to amend, what he ought to
correct: It is written: Not only they who do, but those who consent are
adiuged partakers of the crime; And truly they consent, who when they may and
ought, resist not, or at the least reprove not the offender: for the error
being not resisted is allowed, and truth being not defended is oppressed;
neither auoydeth he suspicion of secret association, who forbeareth to
withstand a manifest offense.

For as (most excellent Prince) a small City, cannot lessen the prerogative of
a potent kingdom, so ought not your royal power to disturb or alter the
bounds of the Churches religious government: It is ever consonant to the rules
of justice, that judgment be ministered to the preistes of God by a preistly
council. The jurisdiction of the Preisthood distinguished from the
jurisdiction of the kingdom.
For Bishopps whatsoever they are, although as men they run astray, yet if they
fall not from their faith, neither can nor ought they to be censured by the
secular power. It is the part of a good and godly Prince to repair ruinous
and decayed Churches, to build them anew, to honor the preistes of God, and
supporte them with all reverence, like Constantine that virtuous Emperor of
most famous memory, who said (when a cause of the Clergy was brought before
him) ye ought not to he judged by any secular authority, who are only
reserved to the judgment of Allmighty God. And we read that the holy Apostles
and their successors (whose power is warranted by the word of God himself) do
command: That no persecutions nor disturbances be raised, nor yet that any
should envy them who labor in the field of our Lord, nor that the stewardes of
the eternal king should be banished from their Seas.

For who makes question but that Preistes are the Masters and fathers of
kings and all faithful beeleiuers; and is it not then a point of miserable
madness, for the son to endeavor to bring his father into subjection, or the
scholar his Master, and with unjust laws to reduce him under his rule, who
(as he ought to beelieue) has power to loose and bind him; not only in earth,
but in heaven also: If you are a good and Catholic king, and so will remain
(as we beelieue and hope you will) let us say under your Majesty's correction,
you are a child and not a Bishop of the Church, and ought to learn of
Preistes, and not to teach them; and in matters Ecclesiastical to follow them
not to guide them. You have the privileges of your power which you have
obtained from God for administering your temporal laws, to the end that being
not ungrateful to him for his benefitts, you should usurp nothing contrary to
the disposition of his heavenly order, but that with a more sober mind you
should use those things, which now rather perchance through the counsel of the
malicious, then the inclination of your own mind you abuse against his
ordinance: yield therefore speedely with all humility and all manner of
satisfaction, least otherwise the hand of God being bent against you, shoot
his arrowe at you, as at a mark: for the Allmighty has bent his bow to
strike you openly with his arrowe, if you repent not.

Be not ashamed (whatsoever the malignant suggest in your mind, and the
Traitors, not only to you, but also to God himself do whispering murmer in
your ears) to humble your self under the mighty hand of God, for it is he
who exalting the humble, throws down the proud, who in revenge for iniuryes
offered to him and his, beereaueth Princes of their lives, because he is
terrible, and who can resist him? You ought never to forget in what state God
did first find you, then how he promoted, honored, exalted you, how he
blessed you with royal issue, confirmed the throne of your kingdom, and (in
despite of all your enemies) enriched you with ample possessions, in so much
as to this very hour all men with admiration pronounce. This is he whom our
Lord has chosen; And what shall you yield, or what can you render for all
these bountyes beestowed by him on you? Will you at their instinct and
instance, who persecute about you the Church and Ecclesiastical persons, and
have ever to their power afflicted them, repay evil for good, with
oppressions, tribulations, iniuryes, vexations to Churches, and their Clergy?
Are not these the persons of whom our Lord says: Who hears you hears me,
who contemns you despises me, who touches you, touches the aple of mine
eye? If truly leaving all you possess, you take up your cross and follow our
Lord Jesus Christ, hardly shall you, yea never shall you be found faithful
and grateful enough to recompense these his benefit^s received. Search out the
Scriptures of such as know them and you shall find, that Saul although chosen
by our Lord, 1. Reg. 15. 2. Paral. 20.
yet nevertheless because he wandered from his ways, was punished with the
overthrow of himself and his family. Ozias also king of Judah, whose fame was
spread both far and wide, and was so highly renowned for the many victoryes
beestowed on him by our Lord, had to the downfall of his own destruction his
heart so puffed up in regard that God did at all times assist and strengthen
him, that contemming the reverence due to our Lord, he would needs usurp to
himself a matter no whit appertayning to his office, but only to the
preisthoode, which was to offer incense on the altar of our Lord; and therefore
was strooken by our Lord with a leprosy, and by the hands of the preistes cast
out from the temple of our Lord, and so remained till his dying day a foul
Leper, in respect whereof he was banished the house of Allmighty God. In like
sort many other kings who mightily abounded in riches, because they walked
above themselves in the maruelles of this world, presuming to rebel against
our Lord, perished, and in the last gasp found none of their riches, left in
their hands. Moroeuer king Azarias wrongfully intruding himself likewise into
the preistly office, Reg 15.
was punished with a leprosy. 2. Reg 6.
Lastly Oza (though not a king) but for touching the Arc of our Lord, and
vphoulding it, being in danger to fall, by reason of the Oxens stumbling, yet
because this appertayned not to his charge, but to the offices of the temple,
being wounded by Gods indignation, fell headlong dead hard by the Arcke of our
Lord A king (according to the common proverb) chastised by the misfortune of
an other, looks more narrowly to himself.

For you are near an evil turn
When as your neighbors house does burn.
Allmighty God (most dear sovereign) would, that things appertayning to the
disposition of the Church, should beelong to preistes and not to secular
powers, who if they be Christians, his divine pleasure is they should be
subjects unto the preistes of his Church: Challenge not therefore to your
self an others office, or right, neither raise contention against him, by whom
all things are ordained, for fear least ye seem to fight against the
benefitts of him, from whom you receive your authority. It is not the will of
Allmighty God that the Clergy of the Christian religion should be either
ordered or censured by public laws or secular Princes, but by Bishpps and
priests: Christian kings ought to submitt the excecution of their designs to
Ecclesiastical Pastors, and not prefer their customs, before them. For it
is written that none ought to pronounce judgment against preistes, but the
Church, nor does it beelong to temporal laws to give sentence over such.
Christian Princes were wont to obey the Canons of the Church, and not to
ouerpoyse with their power Ecclesiastical Constitutions: to humble their
crowned heads unto their Bishops, not to determyne over their Bishops; for
two states there are, in which does principally consist this worlds government,
the Bishops sacred authority, and the kingly power, wherein the worthynes of
preisthood is of far greater weight, because they must in the day of judgment
render an account of kings themselves. Ye ought truly to know, that ye are
bound to depend on their judgments, and not to have them reduced to your
wills. For many Bishops have excommunicated some kings, others Emperors, and
if you would know any particulers concerning the persons of these Princes:
Innocentius excommunicated the Emperor Arcadius because he consented to have
saint John Chrysostom banished out of his Sea. Saint Ambrose for one fault,
which in the eyes of other preistes appeared not so heinous, excommunicated and
cast out of the Church the Emperor Theodosius the great, who having made
condign satisfaction obtained absolution. And many others such like are to
this purpose. 2. Reg. 12.
David also having committed adultery and murder, Nathan the Prophet was sent
to him by God to reprove and correct him; admonished he was, and soon
amended, for the king, laying aside his royal Diadem, and casting away his
Imperial Majesty, was not ashamed to humble himself before the face of the
Prophet, to confess his sin and crave pardon for his offense; what shall I
say more? conducted by penance, he beesought mercy, and obtained forgiveness:
Be it so with you (o dearest beeloued son, most renowned king, most honored
Lord) according to the example of most excellent David, that most godly king,
of whom our Lord said: 1 Reg. 13.
I have found a man according to mine own heart. Be you in like sorce with a
contrite and humble heart converted to our Lord God, and do severe penance for
your sund^y excesses: for you have fallen down headlong and erred in many
things which as yet I conceal, expecting, if so be it our Lord will inspire
you, so as you may say with the Prophet: Have mercy on me (o God) according to
thy great mercy, Psalm 24.50 Psalm. 33.
because I have much offended thee, and committed sin in thy sight; for God is
at hand to them who are righteous of heart, and will save the humble in spirit.

Thus for this time (my Lord) I write unto you, suppressing the rest in
silence; until I see whether my speech may fasten on you, and bring forth of
you fruits worthy of penance, that I may hear by the report of others, and
congratulate with them who shall tell me; your son and king was dead but is
revived; was lost, but is found again. If so be that you will not hear me
who was accustomed to pray for you with abundance of tears and exceeding
sighs before the Majesty of the body of Christ; I will assuredly in the same
place cry out against you and say: Arise (o Lord) adiudge thy cause, call to
mind the scorns and iniuryes which are all day long offered by the king of
England and his to thee and thine, forget not the reproaches of thy Church which
thou have founded with thy blood; revenge (o Lord) the blood of thy servants
afflictions which are beeyond number, infinite; the pride of these who hate and
persecute thee and thine, ascends so high, as we cannot longer endure them.
My Lord and king, whatsoever your followers have committed, will all be
required at your hands; for he apparently has done the injury who has given
occasion of doing the injury: Assuredly unless you restrain your hands from
disturbing the people, the son of the Allmighty himself will upon the
sighs of the settered, upon the sighs of those who cry out to him, come in
the rod of his fury, because the time is now at hand, to judge against you
justice in equity, and in the severity of his spirit: for he knows how to
take away the spirit of Princes, and is terrible among the kings of the earth:
we speak not thus unto you to confound your face, or provoke you to farther
indignation, and anger, as perchance the malicious, (who swarm about you, and
lie in wait day and night for our destruction, indeauoring to alienate your
mind from us) will with their wicked and unjust suggestions whispering, murmur
against us: Give them (o God) according to their works, and according to the
naughtines of their inventions; but that we may make you more cautions and
wary in the provision and care of your soul, and cause you to avoid the
danger, that is even now instantly at hand, and because it is our especial
charge to be watchful over your soul, in regard the care and government
thereof is committed to us, as the king whereof we must render an account in
the dreadful day of judgment. Incline theereunto a willing ear, and use our
service as it shall please you, so long us we offend not Allmighty God, nor
deal with wicked dissimulation to the ouerthowe of your soul and ours; for
what will it boot you to gain the whole world with the danger of your
salvation? Consider with your self what is beecome of the Emperors, what of
the kings and other Princes, what of the Archbishopps and Bishops our
ancient predecessors? They labored in their days, und others have succeeded
in their trauailles: what more? So vanishes the world and his glory. Remember
therefore your last, and you shall not sin eternally, and moreover if you
have offended you will then do penance. God send you dearly beeloued grace
well to fare, if in true humility and speedy penance you will be converted to
our Lord God Allmighty.

So fare you well again and ever.
Thus saint Thomas.

He directed also other letters to the Bishops concerning the Hierarchicall
order and unity of the Catholic Church, which beegin in this sort.

THOMAS BY THE GRACE OF GOD, the humble servant of the Church of Canterbury, to
all his reverend brethren the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury sends
greeting.
IF we have a care to live as we ought. Codi. Vat. lib. 1. Epist. 97. The
Epistel. of S. Thomas to the Bishops of of England.
(And within a few words after.) Now concerning the visible unity of the
Catholic Church under one head; In the beeginning of the Primitive Church (as
the blessed Apostle teaches) Christ ascending into heaven, that he might
fulfill all, made truly some Apostles, some Prophetts, others Evangelists,
others Pastors and Masters, for the instruction of Saints, for the work of
ministry, for the buylding of the body of Christ; neither yet were all offices
to be committed to one, but every member was to be endowed with his proper
offices; and yet neuertheless in that sort, as the head, in whom as in a
castle or certain Capitol all the senses of virtues are assembled together,
may provide for all and every particular; and all on the other side may obey
the head according to their several conditions. The Doctor of the Gentills,
who gloryeth that he learned not the Gospel either of man, or by man, Call. 1.
but was instructed by Christ, went up to Jerusalem and conferred with the
Prince of the Churches concerning matters of faith least he should run or had
run in vain. And as it appears by many examples, Genesis 2.
all fluddes of the Gospel return to the sea, from whence they had their
original, to the end they may flow again, for the fountain of Paradise is
one, but divided into many rivers, that thereby it may on all sides water the
earth. Who doubts the Church of Rome to be the head of all Churches, and
fountain of Catholic doctrine? Who is ignorant that the keys of the
kingdom of heaven were delivered to Peeter? Does not the frame of the whole
Church arise on the faith and Doctrine of Peeter, until we do all meet
before Christ in a perfect man, in the unity of faith, and acknowledgment of
the son of God? (And afterward.) But whosoever he be that waters or
planteth, God gives increase to none, but him, who has planted on the faith
of Peeter, and humbles himself unto his doctrine. To him truly are referred
the judgments of the people which are of greatest importance, to be examined
by the Pope of Rome, and the Magistrates subordinate to him in the Courts of
the Church, that they who are assistantes in partaking the care, may exercise
the power committed to their charge; so as the priest when he cannot
determine a matter incident to the flock of his parish, may refer the same
to his Bishop, who submits things surmounting his reach also to the
Archbishop or Metropolitan, from whom whatsoever is of greatest importance, is
reserved unto the high Bishop of Rome. This order has Peeter taught us, and
the same has the Catholic Church observed unto this day, neither by Gods
grace shall is ever be overthrown whatsoever iniquity attempteth against it.

Neuertheless in the kingdom of England (which I cannot without exceeding
grief recall to mind, nor without tears declare) they presume wonderfully
against Peeter. The authority of the Apostolic Sea (as much as lies in
perverse Potentates) is extenuated and endangered, while they who of necessity
are compelled for performing their penance or procuring the commodity of their
souls, or otherwise in the duty of visitation to travel over to our Lord the
Pope, are hindered in their journey, spoiled, hardly handled, and forbidden to
pass the seas either by those who seek out occasions to committ mischeefes,
or by others who are compelled to take oaths for restrayning Clearkes and
Penitents in this said journey. And therefore in regard they lay violent hands
on the Clergy, they incur by their own act the condemnation of accursing;
which is the reason that we using the authority of the Church of Rome, do
command your brotherhood, charging ye by the Apostolic power in the virtue
of obedience, and upon the peril and hazard of your order that ye denounce
them publicly excommunicate, and cause them so to be declared through out
your Dioceses, who lay violent hands on the Clergy: and that ye command your
neighboring Bishops by the authority of our Lord the Pope and also of us to
perform the same likewise in their Bishopprickes.

Moreover in the same manner, and under the same pain we command ye to
denounce to such as hinder Appellantes or Penitents from travailing to our Lord
the Pope or us, that they incur the sentence of accursing, as well as they
who do it in proper person, as also the kings officers who constrayne others
to this heinous offense. And for such as being enforced thereunto, have taken
unlawful oaths to hinder these aforesaid passengers, we absolve them from
their oaths, whereby they may hereafter desist from so great a sin, and
being penitent for their offense, learn rather to obey God then man. If any
one in seeking to right his Church, and conserve the integrity of his faith to
the Apostolic Sea, dreadeth ensuing discommodityes, let him remember how the
Church with far more safety and profitt purchases virtue, then temporal
treasures, and that Christ who reigns over the Church of Rome restrayneth the
powers of his adversaries, and he who shall punish the mighty mightily, will
chastise likewise all disobedience, not only bringing the poor to iugdment,
but also humbling the glorious of this world to the ministry of the Church,
against which the very gates of hell shall not prevail.

Be ashamed (most dearly beeloued) to put in practice unjust judgments, in
such sort as the peers of the kingdom insulting upbraid ye saying: If a
poor man commits a light offense, he is presently excommunicated by ye
and your officers, but if a rich person transgresses, he is not so much as
with a word chastised; whereby scandalls may on every side be retorted on such
judges. And can great powers against the poor so rage? Look therefore to
your selves and your Churches, least if ye dissemble the iniuryes of the
Roman Church, ye may be justly thought to conspire with the impious against
her, and to have forestalled the ways of those who walked, that ye might
raise your commodityes upon the Churches loss. Remember rather how our fathers
atchiued salvation; by what means, and how great tribulations the Church has
increased, and bin dilated, what huge storms the ship of Peeter has escaped,
having Christ for her Pilot.

Thus did saint Thomas write to his Clergy.

ANNO DOM. 1167.
Now beeginneth the year of our redemption 1167. with the xv. Indiction; when
Pope Alexander understanding as well by the letters of the king of England, as
also from others being Bishops the Suffraganes of saint Thomas, that was
persecuted by them, and his most worthy proceedinges condemned as hideous
offenses, to the end he might raise him above his aduersarys, and humble them
to his obedience, he ordained a king most worthy of praise, which was to make
the holy Archbishop with most ample authority Legate of the Apostolic Sea.
The Popes letters are yet extant indighted for that purpose in these words.

Alexander seruante of the servants of God to this beeloued brother Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury sends greeting and his Apostolical blessing.
The most holy Church of Rome has bin ever accustomed to embrace with greater
charity, Saint Thomas made Legate a latere over all England, excepting only the
Proumea of York.
and prefer in glory and honor, persons of eminent worth, and them especially
whom she knoweeh to be most renowned for honesty, wisdom, lerning, and
excellency of virtues: Considering therefore the constancy of your devotion and
faith, wherein you have persisted as an immovable pillar for the Church of God,
and weighing withal the singular prudence, of your integrity, lerning, and
discretion, wherein you are known to surpass others, we thought it worthy to
love and honor with a certain peculiar privilege and more excellent
prerogative your person so adorned with the insignes of such high virtues, and
with our usual hounty to provide, and with a more tender care to procure your
good and commodity. This is the cause that with our loving favor we grant and
beestowe on you the Legantine authority over all England (excepting only the
Archbishoppricke of York) to the end that within your jurisdiction in our
place and authority, you correct what you find worthy amendment, and that to
the honor of God, and of the holy Church of Rome, and for the salvation of
souls you do constitute, buyld, and plant, whatsoever is to be settled and
planted: wherefore we admonish, yea we command your brotherhood that you
dispose all things, extirpate vices and plant virtues in our Lords vynyeard
with that prudence and discretion, which Allmighty God has beestowed on you.

Dated at Auigni on the seventh of the Ides of October.

Heereunto were also added other letters of Pope Alexanders, being written for
the same purpose to the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury: And others
likewise for gathering of saint Peeters Pence which the king had before (as
we see) forbidden; all which were caryd into England and received by the
Bishop of London, who certifyed the king of all, writing in this sort unto
him. Lib. 1. Epist. 116. Lib. 1. Epist. 131.


To Henry King of England, Gylbert Bishop of London.
The Bishop of Londons letter to king Henry concerning the Popes Mandates.
So bige a weight of commandementes does (my Lord) at this time oppress us, so
great an authority beeseegeth us, as compelled by extreme necessity, we are
enforced to beeseech counsel and with all assistance from your Majesty: for
what the Apostollicall authority commands, cannot with Appeal be suspended,
neither can there be any remedy against his Mandate, since we must needs
fulfill his precept, or incur the offense of disobedience, For being on
saint Pules day in London at the Altar, we received from the hands of a
certain Messinger, altogether unknown to us, our Lord the Popes letters,
whereby was granted, and by authority confirmed unto the Lord of Canterbury
the Legantyne power over all England, excepting only the Archbishoppricke of
York: Moroeuer all we the Bishops of the kingdom were by the same authority
enjoined with all humility to obey him as the Legate of the Apostolical Sea;
and at his calling without any contradiction to assemble our selves together,
to yield him an account of all things appertayning to our office, and
absolutely undertake to observe, whatsoever he shall decree; and lastly, that
we shall enforce all who by your commandment have received the revenues and
goods of the Clearkes beelonging to the Archbishop, in their absence to make
full restitution and satisfaction to the owners within two months, otherwise
to be denounced accursed without any appeal at all to the contrary. S.
Peeters pennyes.
We are beesides required to gather of our brethren the Bishops saint
Peeters pence, and to deliver the same sealed up to such Messingers as shall
be designed for that purpose. And withal commanded to send or deliver the
letters of the said Legantyne authority together with the letters of the
Archbishop to sundry Bishops according to their several directions, and not
to omit this, under pain of infringing the integrity of our state and order.

Prostrate therefore in heart we humbly beeseeche at the feet of your
Majesty that you will not, in regard of the weighty affairs beelonging to the
charge of your kingdom neglect to consider of us, but to provide out of your
princely piety so for us, as we be not to our eternal infamy thrown from
all to nothing, which you may conveniently do, if you condescend by your leave
to obey the Apostolic commandementes, and restoring saint Peeters pence, and
through your mercy, the Clearkes to their own. You command all the Bishops,
that if they can find any thing in the Archbishoppes letters to make against
the customs of the kingdom, they presently with all confidence appeal unto
the Popes holiness or his Legates which are directed unto us; so shall you do,
a work of mercy, preserve us from the guilt of disobedience, and by the common
appeal of all, defend our cause from receiving any detriment. Our Lord
instruct you to do his will, and redeem us out of the streightes wherein we
are at this instant plunged. Farewell most beeloued Lord in Christ. And thus
London painting the wall without temperature, whilst with the remedy of
appeal, and not absolute obedience, he counseled the king to redress this
matter-


But Thomas now strengthened with the most ample power of the Apostolical
Legation, setting aside delay, S. Thomas executes his Lega^tyne authority.
falled down what was to be cult and corrected, plucked up the bastard
plants, which had now beeyond all right and reason taken deep roots, and
being made a fan in the hand of our Lord, undertook with his great labor
to separate the chafe from the corn, finding in all things not only the king
himself, but also the Bishops his most bitter adversaries, whom neither by
benefitts nor admonitions he could ever bring to better pass, but endured
them still as the most vile deprauers of his actions to the king. Yet that he
may not appear negligent in his office, he awaked the slougthfull, restrained
the wanderers, and those whom he found in regard of their abominable crimes
altogether unworthy he cut them of from the communion of the Catholic
Church, as rotten members from a sound body: All which is signified by the
letters he wrote this present year out of France into England to the Bishops
subject to his charge, which being recorded among other his Epistells, are to
be read in this sort.

Codi Vat. lib. 1. Epist. 9^.
Thomas by the grace of God the humble seruante of the Church of Canterbury, to
his reverent brethren the Bishop of London and other Bishops of the whole
Province of Canterbury wishes so to pass through temporal felicity, as they
loose not eternal.
My most beeloued Bretthren, why rise ye not with me against the malicious?
S. Thomas by his Epistel corrects the Bishops of his Province.
Why stand ye not with me against the works of iniquity? Are ye ignorant
that our Lord will disperse the bones of them who please men? They shall be
confounded, because our Lord has despised them. Your discretion sufficiently
understands, that an error not resisted, is approved: and truth not defended,
is oppressed: And by the testimony of saint Gregory, Psalm. 52.
he seems to consent to the erroneous, who essayeth not to reform what is
to be amended. Hereby is apparent, that we have too long, and too much
forborne the king of England, nor yet has the Church of God reaped any
commodity by this our enduring. It seems dangerous and intolerable for us to
leave any longer unpunished (hitherto we have done) so great excesses of him
and his officers against the Church of God and Ecclesiastical persons,
especially since we have very often endeauored by messangers, letters, and all
manner of means (as be came us) to recall him from his perverse purpose.
Because therefore he will hardly afforde us the hearing, and much less
attentively listen unto us, we have with invocation of the grace of the holy
ghost publicly condemned and declared as void that deed of writing together
with the authority of that indenture wherein are contained, not customs, but
rather those wicked devices, by which the Church of England is disturbed and
confounded, and have also excommunicated all the obseruers, exactors,
counselors, assistantes, and defenders of the same; and do absolve by the
authority of God and us, all ye Bishops from that promise, whereby ye were
bound, contrary to the constitution of the Church for the observation of them.

For who can make doubt, but that the Preistes of Christ should be esteemed
the fathers and Masters of kings, Princes, and all faithful beeleeuers. Is
it not a miserable madness if the son should endeavor to bring the father, or
the scholar the Master under his subjection, and with unlawful bands to
subdue unto his will the party by whom his faith tells him that not only in
earth but also in heaven he may be tied and loosed? wherefore that ye may
not fall into the lapse of this sentence, we have adjudged void the authority
of this obligation, and the schedule it self with all the enormityes contained
therein, and have especially declared it of no force in these things ensuing.

1. That no man shall appeal to the Apostolic Sea, upon any cause, without
the kings license.

2. That it shall not be lawful for an Archbishop or Bishop to depart out of
the kingdom, and come at the calling of our Lord the Pope without our Lord the
kings license.

3. That it shall not be lawful for a Bishop to excommunicate any one
houlding of the king in cheyfe without the kings license, or to interdict his
land, or the lands of his Officers.

4. That it shall not be lawfaull for a Bishop to punish any one for perjury,
or profaning his faith.

5. That Clearkes shall be bound to be tried before secular Tribunalles.

6. That the Layety, or king, or any others shall handle causes beelo^ging to
the Church, or Tithes, or others of like nature.

We denounce also as excommunicate, and have excommunicated by name John de
Oxeforde, who has fallen into a damnable heresy, by making oathe to the
Scysmaticks, whereby the scysme almost extinguished in Almayne, revived
again, also by communicating with that infamous Scysmatick Reynold. Archbishop
of Col^n, and lastly because against the commandment of our Lord the Pope and
us, he usurped to himself the Deanery of the Church of Salisbury, which act
as contrary to law, and a pernicious example to the Church of God, we have
condemned and declared as void, commanding the Bishop of Salisbury, and his
Chapter in the virtue of obedience, and peril of their order, that upon sight
of our letters they never hereafter for that reason repute him Deane.

We have likewise denounced excommunite and have excommunicated Richard de
Iuecester for his fall into the same damned heresy for communicating with
Reynold the Scysmaticke of Colen, and for devising and practicing all
mischeefes by combining with the Scysmatickes and those Allmaynes to the
overthrow of God and his Church, and especially the Church of Rome, and by
contracting couenantes beetweene our Lord the King and them.

We have in like sort excommunicated Richard de Lucy and Ioceline de Baliol,
who have bin the authors and framers of those wicked devises, and Raynulph de
Broc who possessed, and with houldeth the goods of the Church of Canterbury
which are by right the alms of the poor, and has apprehended our followers
as well of the Clergy as Layety, and detayneth them prisoners.

We excommunicate moreover Hugh de Clare and Thomas Fitz-Bernard who have also
seized on the goods and possessions of the Church of Canterbury without our
conniuence, and as yet with hold the same. we have lastly inuolued in this
sentence of excommunication all such as shall hereafter lay violent hands
without our will and consent on the possessions and goods of the Church of
Canterbury. Afterward he inserteth the decrees of the Bishops of Rome,
wherein such as these are said to be condemned for excommunicate, and whereby
the sentence pronounced by him is approved. All which being rehearsed he
adds thus. And we inioyne you (Brother and Bishop of London) in the virtue
of obedience, that presently you manifest and show these our letters to all our
reverent brethren and associate Bishops of our Province. Farewell in Christ,
and instantly pray for us.


Thus wrote he to London and other Bishops of his Province. Saint Thomas did
also certify the Archbishop of Rome, of this excommunication so denounced.
Beesides he sent a letter to Pope Alexander of the same subject, beeseeching
him to confirm the sentence which he had published against them: Also to
Hyacinth and Henry of Pysa Cardinals. And other letters are extant which were
directed to the Bishop of London, and the like to the Chapter there. And to the
same effect did he write to Robert Bishop of Hereforde concerning this
excommunication, which Roger recyteth in the Annalls of England the year
following: But the letters to Pope Alexander for excommunicating the king of
England are thus indighted.

To his most dearly beeloued Father Alexander by the grace of God high Bishop,
Thomas the humble servant of the Church of Canterbury sends his dew and
devout obedience.
Long and ouerlong have I endured (most beloved father) expecting the
reformation of the king of England, nor reaped any fruit at all of my
patience; but rather exceedingly increased the loss and utter overthrow of
the authority and liberty of the Church of God, while I have thus unadvisedly
forborne. often have I admonished him by religious and convenient messingers,
and many times invited him to make due satisfaction; I have also made known to
him by letters (the coppyes whereof I have sent to your holiness) the divine and
seueere justice and revenge of God unless he amended his life: But he
nevertheless waxed still worser and worser, treading more under foot and
depressing the church of God and continuing his persecution against my self
and those exiled with me in such sort as he attempteth by threats and
terrors to beereaue of their benefittes and co^modityes the servants of the
Allmighty, who for Gods sake and yours provide us sustentation: For he did
write to the Abbot of the Cistercians, that as he tendered the Abbeyes of his
order which were within his dominions, he should banish us from all benefitt
and society of his said order. What need I more words? The hard and cruel
dealinges of the king and his officers have increased to that heygth by our
endurance, as by report of religious men, who, if it pleases your holiness,
shall affirm the same by oathe, shall be in order delivered unto you. And I
wonder if your holiness will give credit to so strange a thing so constantly
declared. Considering therefore in great streightes and grefe of mind, and
weyghing the danger as well of the king, as of your holiness, I publicky
condemned those pernicious not customs, but subtell deceyptes and wicked
devises, by which the Church of England is disturbed and confounded together
with the instrument it self and the authority of the obligation, the ground of
their confirmation: And did generally excommunicate as well the obseruers as
the Exactors, together with the Patrons, favorers, counsellore, and abettors of
the same of what estate soever they were, either of the Clergy or Layety. And
absolved our Bishops from that oathe, whereby they were violently bound to the
observation of them. And these are the things which in that writing or
obligation I have especially condemned.

1. That they shall not appeal to the Apostolic Sea, without the kings
license.

2. That it shall not be lawful for Bishops to question any man of perjury or
violating his faith.

3. That it shall not be lawefull for a Bishop to excommunicate any man
houlding of the king in chief, or to inderdict his land, or the lands of his
officers without the kings license.

4. That Clearkes or Religious men be drawn to the secular Judgments.

5. That the Layety, the king, or any others handle causes concerning the
Church or tithes.

6. That it shall not be lawful for an Archbishop or Bishop to depart the
la^d and come at the calling of our Lord the Pope without the kings license.

With others of this fashion. The names of the excommunicated.
And namely I have excommunicated John de Oxeforde. who communicated with that
excommunicated Scysmaticke Reynold of Colen, and contrary to the commandment of
your holiness, and us, usurped the Dearny of the Church of Salisbury, and made
oath in the Emperors court for renewing the Scysme. We have also denounced for
excommunicate Richard de Iuecester, because he fell into the same condemned
heresy by communicating with that infamous Scismatick of Colen, deuysing and
contriuing all mischeises with the Scismatick and those Allmaynes to the
destruction of the Church of God, especially of the Roman Church, by means of
couenantes contracted beetweene the king of England and them. We have
pronounced likewise the same sentence on Richard de Lucy and Iocelin de Baliol,
who were favorers of the kings tyrany, and framers of those heretical
offenses, with Raynulph de Broc, Hugh de saint Clare and Thomas Fitz-Bernard,
who usurped without our license and consent the possessions and goods of the
Church of Canterbury; and lastly we have excommunicated all who contrary to
our will and assent lay hands on the possessions and goods of the Church of
Canterbury. Concerning the king himself, we have not as yet personally
excommunicated him, expecting awhile his amendment, whom nevertheless we will
not forbear to excommunicate unless he speedely reform himself, and receive
discipline for these his disorders. To the end therefore (most blessed father)
the authority of the Apostolic Sea, and liberty of the Church of God, which
in our parts are almost wholly perished, may howsoever be again able to be
restored, it is necessary, and by all means expedient, that what we have
do^^, may by you be absolutely ratifyed, and with your letters confirmed. And
so we wish your Holiness long to prosper and flourish.


The reason why saint Thomas did not excommunicate the king, which he was
prepared now to do, and was of the king so much feared, is thus declared by
John of Salisbury in his Epistle to the Bishop of Exceter. Having lately
assembled to a counsel at Chynon, his peers and familiars, who are known to
have the sleyght and practice for contriuing mischeefes, and are wise to devise
and effect wickedness, he carefuly inquired many ways with forerunning
threats and protestations, what were best to be advised to prejudice the
Church, grievously complaining not without groans, and many sighs, yea very
tears (as the standers by reported) of the Archbishop of Canterbury, saying
that Canterbury would deprive him both of body and soul; in the end he
affirmed, they were all traitors who would not with their uttermost endeavors
and diligence seek to deliver him from the molestation of this one man.
Heereupo^ my Lord of Roane was somewhat moved in regard of these words,
reproving him, but mildy according to his fashion, in the spirit of lenity;
whereas the cause of Allmighty God required rather the spirit of severity and
the authority of a Bishop to be applied to his wound, who languisheth both in
reason and in faith; for the grief was the greater, by the pressure of the
fear conceived out of the letters written by Canterbury to him and his mother
(the coppies whereof are sent you) for he feared, and not without cause, least
by the authority and commandment of the Popes holiness, the sentence of
Interdiction should be instantly pronounced against his land, and the like of
Accursing against his person: Caught therefore in these streyghtes, the Bishop
of Lexouin said there remained one remedy, which was to stay this sentence (now
ready to strike him) with the bar of Appeal.

So I know not how (but that truth the more it is resisted the more it
excels: and justice the more resisted the more preuayleth) While the king
endeauored by his ancient customs to overthrow Appeals added greater
strength unto them, being himself for his own safeguard constrained to fly
to the refuge of Appeals.

And therefore from this Parliament, as from the face of God and their king,
were dispatched in all haste the Bishop of Lexouine and likewise Sagien to the
often named Lord of Canterbury to the end that by the interposition of an
Appeal they might suspend the sentence until the Octaues of Easter. The
Archbishop of Roane undertook this journey also with them, not as an Appealant
(as he professed) but as mediator for peace, a thing he much desired. But our
Archbishop being even now in hand to deliver this sentence, traveled to the
city of Swesson, to the end he might there commend the care of this
controversy by prayers to our Blessed lady (whose memory is there renowned) to
saint Drausius, The Pilgrimage of S. Thomas to Swisson.
unto whom men in their fightes have refuge, and to saint Gregory the Apostle
of the Church of England who lies in the same town intombed; saint Drausius
is a most glorious Confessor, who (as they of France and Loraigne beelieue)
makes the Champions that watch and pray all night at his relics invincible,
so as both out of Burgundy and Italy men in such necessityes have recourse
unto him: For Robert de Mount-forte being to encounter with Henry of Essex,
used there the same devotion; wherefore by this chance, through the work of
Allmighty God, was made frustrate the di^^nt exployte of these king-pleasing
Bishops, because coming to Pontiniake they found not the Archbishop whom
they should appeal, but deluded of their purpose, they returned with
complaynte that they beestowed their money and travel, and profited nothing.

The Archbishop having watched three days and nights before the relics of
these Saints, the morrow after the Ascension hastened his journey toward
Vizelliac to the end that there he might on Whitsonday proceed to the
sentence of Accursing against the king and his adherents. But by the providence
of God it happened being in the Church at Regitane the friday before the same
feast, it was reported to him as a thing most certain, that the king of
England was taken with a desperate sickness, so as he could not come to a
Parlee with the king of France, being a matter he greatly desired and dearly
purchased, but was enforced to send Richard de Poyters, and Richard de Humec to
make his excuse, who proferd by oath to auerre this the cause of his absence:
by reason therefore of this, being delivered to the Archbishop by a Messinger
from the king of France, he deferred the denouncing of this sentence against
the king. Thus far John of Salusbury concerning the delay of this sentence
against the king. Then he proceeds to speak of the excommunication of them,
whom we read to be specifyed by name in the letters to the Bishop of
London, and of the accursed customs there condemned by him, and how with other
letters yet again he sent his last and peremptory admonition unto the king.

But for the king (says Salisbury) whom he had before as well by letters as
Messingers, with respect of his regality, according to the customs of (...)
Church, invited to satisfaction; he summoned (...) now with a public citation
to the fruits of p^^nance, threatening he would shortly pronounce against him
the sentence of excommunication, unless he reformed his abuses, and made
satisfaction for these so great and wicked attempts against the Church; which
nevertheless he would not do, but by constraynte against his will: neither was
any of his servants inclyning to be the Messinger of his sentence as yet
suspended saint Thomas in his Epistle to Pope Alexander writes thus.

We have not yet pronounced our sentence on the kings person, Cod. Vat. lib 1.
Epist. 138.
but it may be we will do it, unless he conuerteth his errors, and upon
these our admonitions embraces discipline. Thus much saint Thomas.

Cod. Vat. lib. 1. Epist. 116.
But how the king, dreading this, interposed an Appeal, is declrared in a
letter written by John of Salisbury to the Bishop of Excester where he
beeginneth from the Appeal of the Bishops in this sort. How as touching the
public estate, this was afterward diuulged, by the affirmation of many; how
all the Bishops of England assembled by the kings commandment, The Bishops
interpose an Appeal.
to the end the sentence promulged by my Lord the Pope might not take place,
they appealed against their Archbishop, who for their safety and the liberty of
the Church, was neither ashamed nor afraid to expose his possessions and
fortunes to the spoil of the wicked. There came to him not long since two of
the Clergy (as one then present at Pontiniake made certain relation to me)
publishing these things and appealing, the first in the beehalfe of the Lord
Bishop of Salisbury, the other of his Deane, absolutely denying he made ever
such oath to the Emperor or in sort communicated with Reynold ^he Scysmaticke
of Colen; on of them alon confessing (...) was M. John of Oxefordes clearke,
and familiarly conuersed with him at the table, said he had a message from the
king to the Archbishop, appealing in the name and beehalfe of his Majesty and
by his commandment (as he affirmed) from the Archbishop to Pope Alexanders
audience, and added, The King appealeth.
that by him the king appealed, assigning for the appeal the day wherein is
sung Ego sum Pastor bonus. To whom the Archbishop replied thus: Since you are
altogether unknown to us, neither yet have any Mandate or letters from the
king, and are a person excommunicate by reason of your communicating with your
Master John of Oxeford, who is apparently excommunicated by my Lord the Popes
letters, you are disenabled to undertake the office of an Appealant, and
therefore by Gods grace we will execute and accomplish the commandment of the
Sea Apostolic. And a little after. But all France wondered at the dealinges of
these Bishops, saying: They must needs assemble to provide a remedy for
their king, whom they knew (like the Emperor whose offense was his Scysme) to
fall daily deeper into the ruin of sin, in regard of the Church and Clergy,
whose overthrow he wrought. Thus Salisbury.

But the Bishops of England, The Bishop, of England beecome adversaries to S.
Thomas.
Suffraganes to saint Thomas being netled with the letters of their
Archbishop, who gouernd as Legate a latere, flying back, never devised (as
they ought) to obey his commandementes, to receive profitable admonitions, to
provide for the goods of the Catholic commonwealth by redeeming it from
miserable bondage, but rebelling, contend against him for the king, with
wrytinges, words, and actions: and so far were they of from defending the
Church against the king (which was their office, and whereunto the holy saint
by his letters exhorted them) so far were they (I sa^^ from reprehending and
threatening him, by setting forth what arrows were even now in the bow ready
to strike (I mean the Ecclesiastical censures issuing out with Apostolical
power from the Church of Rome) that they raised rather a terrible war against
this holy Saint who defended the Ecclesiastical liberty, assayling him with
the weapons of contentious words, to the open scandal of all Catholic
Bishops that ever heard it, especially their neighboring Bishops of France,
among whom this glorious Confessor Thomas lived as yet securely. And first they
assaulted him with letters so terrible, as to them the saying of David might
rightly suit: Psalm. 13.
The poison of Aspes lurked under their lips, whose mouth was full of cursing
and bitterness, their feet were swifte for the effusion of blood: while in the
mean time they would dissembling seem to be pious, to be peace makers,
desirous of Charity, careful for brotherly concord, imitating such indeed of
whom the Psalm aptly says; Psalm. 54.
Their speeches are made, softer then oil, and the same are darts. All this
shall you better understand by reading their own Epistles written this present
year. The Ringleader of these disordered Bishops was London, for he penned
their letters, although written in all their names.

These letters are extant, being either recyted by Roger in his Chronickles of
England, or else gathered out of the book of the Vaticane, where they are set
down at large. And first of all receive these which next ensue after the
former recyted Epistles in this manner.

To the reverent Father and Lord Thomas by the grace of God Archbishop of
Canterbury, The Epistle of the Bishopp of England to S. Thomas.
the Suffragan Bishops of the same Church and Parsons through their Dioceses
in several places ordained do send their dutiful subjection and obedience.
We hope (father) that the troubles which were raised by the new and
unexpected attempt of your departure hence to those foreign countries, would
by the grace of God through your humility and wisdom be changed into the
fair calm of the former tranquillity. It was truly comfortable to us that
after your departure a public fame was every where reported; how you living
in those parts beeyond the seas, did noe whit aspire in high conceiptes, nor
imagine any enterprises against our Lord the king and his kingdom, but
modestly endured the undertaken burden of your voluntary poverty, that you were
wholly bent to reading and prayer, redeeming with fasting, watching and tears,
the lost time of your forepassed days, and so busyed in sperituall exercises,
did through the blessed increasing of your virtues monte to the state of
perfection; we rejoiced that by such your endeavors you took the way to
recover the benefittes of a peaceable reconciliation; hereby was conceived a
hope that you could reduce from above into his Majesty's heart such favor, that
he would out of kingly mercy relent in his wrath toward us, and never recall
to mind again the iniuryes offered in and by reason of your departure, your
freindes and well wishers regayned some access unto his Majesty while these
things were thus diuulged of you, in so much as he graciously admitted all
such as were suitors for restoring you into his former favor. But now by the
relation of some we understand which we cannot but with grief remember, that
you published against him a severe threatening of comminatory, wherein you let
pass all salutation, wherein you practice no^ counsel or petition for
pretending grace, wherein you neither devise nor write any thing that sauoreth
favorably, but with all extremity do rigorously menace Interdiction or
excommunication to be instantly pronounced against him, which were it as
sharply executed as it is bitterly spoken, we should not then hope our
disturbed estate would be reduced to concord, but should fear it would be
inflamed with an irreuocable and eternal hatred. Let your holy wisdom ponder
the end of these actions, carefully indeauoring that what is discreetely
beegun, may likewise come to a happy conclusion.

Be therefore (if it pleases you) prudently advised whether you run, and
whether you can by these endeavors obtain your desired end; for our parts we
are fallen down by these your attemptes, from a marvelous height of hoppe,
and we who conceived once some likelihood of obtaining tranquillity, are now
with a kind of heavy despair cast down from all hopfull conceyptes, and
whilst as it were with drawn sword you join battle, you have not left for
your self any place for petition. Whereupon (o father) we charitably imparte
to your advise, that you heap not labors upon labors, and injuries on
iniuryes, but setting threatinges aside, you would rather embrace patience and
humilyty; Commend your cause to the divine clemency, and your self to the
grace and mercy of your Sovereign, and in so doing you shall heap and cast
together coals of fire upon the heads of many; let charity in this sort be
inkindled, and wherein menaces cannot prevail, by Gods holy inspiration and the
perswasiue counsel of good men, piety alone may happily conquer. It is better
to be highly commended for voluntary poverty, then be openly taxed by all men
of ingratitude for a received benefitt. It is deeply rooted in the mynds of
all how gracious our Lord the king has bin unto you, unto how great dignity
he has raised you from poor degree, and received you into the bosom of his
favor with a mind so free, as the ample bounds of his dominion reaching from
the Northern Ocean to the Pirenean Mountains were by him so absolutely
subject unto your power, as through all those principalityes they were only
accounted happy, who could find but favor in your sight, and that no worldly
mutability might overthrow your prosperity, he would lay your foundation most
assuredly in possession appertayning to God, and notwithstanding his mother
dissuaded, the realm cried out against it, and the Church of God (as far as
she could) sighed and groaned thereat, he endeauored by all means possible
to raise you alofte unto the dignity of your present preferment, hoping he
should hereafter reign blessedly, and enjoy your assistance and counsel with
exceeding security. If therefore where he expected security to defend him, he
shall find a sword to offend him, what a rumor will be spread of you in the
mouths of all men? what a reward, what a remembrance will this be of a
requital never heard of before? Forbear therefore (if so it likes you) to
wrong your fame, forbear to iniure your renown: and endeavor to overcome with
humility your king, with charity your son. Whereunto if our admonitions
cannot move you, the love and fidelity you bear to his Holiness and the sacred
Roman Church ought to inclyne you: For you ought easily to be persuaded not to
attempt any thing, whereby to increase the labors of your Mother, who has bin
now long in troubles; that her grief, which already lame^teth the
disobedience of many her undutiful children, be not increased by the loss of
those who remain as yet obedient. For what if so by these your bitter
prouocations and endeavors (which God forbid) our king, whom through the
Allmightys bounty, people and kingdoms do attend, should revolt from our Lord
the Pope, and refuse perchance hereafter to follow his Holiness. Who denies
him assistance against your self? wherein, with what petitions, what gifts,
with how many and how great promises has he bin solicited? whereas he has
remained hitherto firmly grounded on the rock, and as a Conqueror in the
heyght of his magnanimity contemned all the world could offer, one only fear
rests as yet, least he; whom neither proffered riches, nor all that in
human glory is accounted precious, could ever once move, should in the end by
the only indignation of his mind be overthrown: which if by your default it
should so fall out, you could never after with any reason forbear to waste
your self wholly in the Threanes of Jeremy, or deny your eyes a fountain of
tears.

Recall therefore (if so it pleases your excellency) this counsel, which if
it proceeds, will by all means be truly pernicious to our Lord the Pope,
the sacred Roman Church, and (if it likes you to understand it) also to your
self. But they about you, who mount highest in their own conceiptes, will not
suffer you parchance to proceed on this way; they exhort you to make trial
what you are able to do against our Lord the king, and to practice the power
of your eminent authority against all that lies within the compass of his
Dominion. A power truly terrible to an offender, and dreadful to him who
refuses to satisfy; but for our Lord the king, we will not say he never
offended, but that he, was, and is ever ready to yield satisfaction to the
Popes Holiness, we confidently affirm and pronounce. Our king ordained by God
provides in all respects for the peace of his subjects, and to the end he
may conserve the same to the Churches and people committed to his charge, he
wills and exacteth that the dignityes which were due, and given to the kings
his Predecessors should likewise be continued to him, wherein if beetweene you
two here has arysen any contention, being heerupon conuented and cyted with a
fatherly favor from his Holiness by our reverent brethren the Bishops if London
and Hereforde, he opened not his mouth against heaven, but concerning all
things wherein the Church or any Ecclesiastical person shall find himself
grieved he humbly and meekely answered, he would not usurp on the right of
others, but submitt himself to the judgment of the Church of his own
kingdom, which truly he is ready in deeds to perform, and accompteth it a
sweet obedience to be admonished to reform himself, if he has any way
offended Gods Majesty. Neither only has he a mind p^epared to satisfy, but
also if the law requires to make herein ample amends; But with what law, with
what right, with what Cannon can you afflict the person who is willing to make
full amends and satisfaction, not drawing himself in the least point from the
judgment of the Church in such things as appertain to the Church, and
yielding his neck to Christ's yoke? Or with what Evangelical Axe (which God
forbid) can you cut him of? It is assuredly laudable not to be carried on with
passion, but to be discreetely gouernd with judgment; whereupon we do all
join in one general petition unto you, that you would not headlong run onto
kill and destroy but with a fatherly love indeauor to provide, that the ship
committed to your charge may enjoy life, peace and security.

We are all undoubtedly troubled with the pr^ceeding, which we have heard of
late to be (as some imagine) preposterously, carried against our brother the
Lord Bishop of Salisbury his Deane, upon whom you have inflicted the pain of
suspension or excommunication, before the offense was any way called in
controversy, giving therein (as it seems) rather reins to your wrath, then
following the path of justice. A new order of judgment and hitherto in the
laws and Canons (as we hope) unknown, first to condemn and then to examine
the offense. Which that you may never attempt to exercise and execute against
our Lord the king and his kingdom, nor yet against us and the Churches and
parishes under our charge, to the derogation and detriment of the Popes Holiness
and the sacred Roman Church, and to no little augmentation of your own
confusion; we do here oppose against you our remedy of Appeal, and we who
have heretofore long since in the open face of the Church and in proper person
Appealed to the Popes Holiness against the fear of these vexations, have now
again by writing Appealed to the same Sea, and assign for the term of our
Appeal the day of our Lords Ascension; humbly beeseeching with all the
devotion we can devise, that taking more sound advise you would spare both
your and our travel and expenses, and in that sort to repose your cause, as
it may find a speedy redress.

And so (father) we wish you well to fare in our Lord.

Hitherto the Bishop of London, together with his Associates of the same
Province, unto whom saint Thomas thus replied.

Thomas the humble seruante of the Church of Canterbury to Gilbert Bihoppe of
London, ^od Vat lib. Epist. 108.
as once, now again, wishes him so to pass through temporal prosperity, as
he loses not eternal felicity.
The answer of S. Thomas (...) Gilbert Bishop of ^ondon and ^^e other ^^^hop.
It is a wonder, yea an exceeding maruayle, that a man of wisdom, learned in
the holy Scriptures and at the least in habit bearing a show of religion,
should so manifestly, I spare to say irreverently, without all fear of God,
be adversary to the truth, an oppugner of justice, and confounding all right
with wrong indeauor the overthrow of the state of the Church, which the
Allmighty himself has builded. For it is truth that says, The gates of hell
shall not prevail against her. He is not therefore a man of a sober mind who
intends her ruin, but like one who binding a mighty montayne about with a
rope, attempteh to overthrow it. And have we passionately run into anger and
hatred, that provoked to wrath we are incyted to darte such words as these at
our brother, Associate and fellow Bishop? God forbid. But thus much have we
collected out of your letters, which we received by the hands of your
Archdeacon, Neither truly, can we gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles. That it may plainly appear whether this be so or not, let us lay
them open, and bring to light their contents. The end compared with the
beeging resembles a Scorpion: this makes his entry with flattery, that
stinging us terribly, attempteth to shut us up in silence: For what is it else,
first to acknowledge your bounden subjection to us, and promise obedience
annexed to subjection then for avoiding your obedience, to fly off to an
Appeal. What are there with me is and is not? says the Apostle: Neither
ought the same to be with the Apostles scholar. The Disciples necessarily
received from our Lord power to tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and Ezechiel
at this day dwells with Scorpions. Ezechiel 2.
And consider in what sense you say? We fly to the remedy of an appeal. You
call your self the follower of Christ, and yet in these words you are found
otherwise; for Christ has recommended to us obedience, as the efficacious, yea
the most effectual remedy of all our mischeifes, and that not only by word,
but also by most evident example, being made obedient to his father even to
the very death; and with what face can you then call that a remedy, which is
the impediment of obedience, and is not to be termed a remedy, but more truly
a detriment? And upon what confidence do you presume heerin to have probable
hope to procure any patronage or protection to shield you from your obedience,
before him, who for the chasticing of all disobedience, has received as well
his office, as a commandment? It is ill to hope in him, and withal grievously
to offend him. The first and second repulse which you have already suffered
may well hinder you from such presumption, for first your self in person, and
then your letters composed for persuasion, have by experience proved, how
firmly he stood, how truly he was the vicar of Peeter, whom you could never
move by prayers, gifts, admonitions, or promises: But now the third time be
is to be attempted, that by the example of his Master, he may after a third
temptation triumph with victory.

Joan. 21.
And that nothing may be left unattempted to increase our vexation; you have
fixed the Term of your Appeal almost a whole year hence, neither take you
any compassion of our banishement, or of the labor of the holy Church the
spouse of Christ, which with his blood he purchassed, and to omit these (yet
truly not to be omitted) neither have you a careful eye over our Lord the
king (whom you pretend to favor) who as long as he proceeds in this sort
against us, and the Church of Christ, cannot without peril of his soul,
either march to war, or live at home in peace. Let us pass to the rest.

You recyte some troubles which arose in and by our departure; let the authors
and counselors of this perturbation, fear least themselves fall into
perturbation. You set us forth with great praises in regard of the beeginning
of our peregrination; and doubtelesse it is not the part of a wise man to
neglect his fame; but who is discreet ought in censuring himself to beeleiue
none sooner then himself. We are accused of iniuryes offered our Lord the
king, but because you name not any, we know not whereunto we are bound to
answer and being superficiously accused, we do but superficiously excuse our
selves; nevertheless mean while receive this from us: we are guilty of
nothing, neither yet are we therefore justified. You maruayle at the
threatening, or co^minatory sent out by us against him: what father who sees
his son run astray can be silent? who does not chastise with the rod, to
prevent the slaughter of the swoard? The parent despayreth of the son whom
with threatening or discipline he corrects not; God forbid we should think
with you, that our Sovereign being impatient to endure correction, should
fall down to the extirpation of Apostasy; for the plantation of the heavenly
father will not easily be pluked up by the roots. The shipp is tossed with a
most terrible tempest, we are her Pilot, and you persuade us to sleep.

You heap together and set before our eyes the benefittes beestowed on us by
our Lord the king, Gilbert Becket Portgraue of the City of London in the
reign of K. Stephen was father to S. Thomas Godfrey de Maund^uil was Portgraue
of London in the time of the Conqueror and Willam Rufus.

Hugh Bouch and Aubrey de Vere in the reign of Henry the first. Next Gilbert
Becket as before Peter Fits walter Portgraue in the time of King Henry the 2
And the successiuly John Fits nigel. Ernulphus Buchel, and Wiliian
Fits-Isabell, all which John Stowe witnesses.

Heerby you may see what worthy me^ were then Portgraues of London, and so
consequently of what account Gilbert Becket the father of saint Thomas was.
Portgraue was then the highest Governor of the City.


and recounte how were raised by him from a low degree, to the heygth of
Fortune we we may truly answer heereunto a little, and yet neuerthlesse not
from how low a degree as you think. If you consider but the time wherein we
were preferred to his service, the Archdeanonry of Canterbury, the Prouosty of
Beuerly, the many Churches, together with some Prebandaryes, and other
possessions, being of no small value, which we inioyed from our Ancestors,
disprove that we were as then so mean as you say in the worlds reputation.
But if you aim at the stem of our stock, and our parentage: They were
assuredly of the City of London, living without taynte of credit, in the
midst of their fellow Cittyzens, neither rancked in the lowest degree: But
that, the miste of these wordly conceyptes being once vanished, we may with
the light of truth be more rightly discerned, which is more glorious either to
be borne of mean, yea the poorest parents, or of great and glorious persons,
since the Apostle says; We^ cloathe the basest parts of our body with more
abundant honor. 1. Cor. 12. What avail our high desentes? (quoth the Gentil
Poet.) What has a Christian, a Bishop, a Scholar, a Religious man to say
herein? If you labor by ripping up the memory of our poverty, to brand us
with confusion: how great an offense it is then to confound your father,
consider in the commandment of our Lord which you have received for honoring
your parents. Exodus 20.

Concerning the favor of the king so highly commended to us through the
remembrance of his bestowed benefitts, you needed not to have labored so much
therein, for we call the Allmighty to wittnes, that we hold nothing under the
sun so dear as his favor and prosperity, saving ever to God and his holy
Church their freedoms and immunityes, for otherwise he can never reign either
happily or securely: But let it pass, since so it is, benefittes toward us
far more and more ample then all these your words have yet expressed; ought
we for all these, yea were they twice so many to beetray the liberty of Gods
Church? How far less should we then do it for the preservation of a blast of
fame, which often varyeth from the truth? If toward others we have proceeded
with more leuity, yet in this we will neither spare you nor others, nor yet an
Angel if he descends from heaven, but straight as we hear him moving or
mentioning this, he shall have this answer from us: Auant, back Satan, thou
do not relish what appertains to God. Far be from us this frantic
folly, deliver us (Lord) from this extreme madness, to be persuaded ever through
any treacherous falshoode to make a mart of the body of Christ, wherein we may
be compared to Judas the Traitor, and our Sovereign to the Jews who chafered
for Christ.

As touching this our high preferment, whereunto (as you write) we were raised,
although the mother of our Lord the king dissuaded it, the realm cried out
against it, the Church of God as far as she durst sighed thereat. As for the
realm we heard not her exclamations against us, but rather her acclamations
of joy: Touching the disswasions of our kings mother, if any such were, they
never passed to the public notice of the world: it may be some
Ecclesiastical persons aspiring (as is accustomed) to this promotion of ours,
sighed when they perceived themselves to be frustrated of this conceived hope,
who perhaps at this day in revenge of this their defeatement, are procurers and
counselors of this present dissension: But woe be to him through whom scandal
aryseth. Yet against these impedimentes with which you formerly tax us, or
against others (if any there were) the divine dispensation (as now you may
plainly see) has prevailed. We are tried before him, who is justice it
self, and found to prefer none before him, who out of his singular mercy
has settled us in this degree. That also which you seem to propose for the
justification of the kings Majesty, we have not thought meet to be lightly
ouerslipped, or without mature examination; and we would to God he had never
frayed from justice, and that our complaint against him might have appeared
less iustifyable.

You say he is and was ever ready to give satisfaction, this you confidently
affirm, this you proclayme. Forbear, here a little, and answer our demandes:
In what sense understand you (as you call it) this preparation to satisfaction?
See you these of whom God terms himself the father and Judge, we mean
Orphans, wid^wes, children, Innocents, yea such as are absolutely ignorant of
this our controversy now in question, cast into banishment, and are you silent?
Clearkes rooted out of their country, and cry you not against it? Others
spoiled of their goods, and contumeliously abused, and do you not reprove it?
Our servants thrown into prisons and bound in fetters, and do you not open
your mouth against it? Your Mother the Church of Canterburyes possessions with
havoc wasted, and do you not resist it? Your father hardly escaping the
swoardes even now threatening to murder him, and are you not sensible of
sorrow? And what is far worser, are you not ashamed to join with our
persecutors against us, God, and his Church, and that not in secret? Is this
satisfaction, not to correct offenses committed, and daily to heap more
grievous mischeifes on mischeifes? But perhaps you understand this on the will
of the wicked, Deutro. 32.
according to the sentence, I will imbrewe mine arrows with blood. But you
will replye: what lay you father to my charge? I will answer all in a word, I
am a afraid of my coat. True (son) too truly you answer: and therefore you
want a swoard.

Whereas you write, he is ready to stand to the judgment of his own
kingdom, as if this were a worthy satisfaction: who is there in earth or in
heaven it self that can presume to judge of the divine dispensation? Let human
matters be adjudged, but for such as are divine, let them remain and be left
absolutely untouched: How much better were it (brother) how much more
profitable to him, how much more secure for you, if you would by all means
endeavor to incyte, to persuade him to fulfill the will of God toward the
conservation of the peace of his Church, not to covet after these things,
which are not committed to this government: to honor the preistes of God, nor
yet to consider what they are, but whose servants they are. You lay to our
charge, that we have abused our selves in a preiudicate proceeding against the
Bishop of Salisbury, and John of Oxeforde not a Deane (as you term him) but
an usurper of a Deanery, wherein you ought to remember, that some manifest
certaintyes did forerun this judgment; and withal you say you are moved; what
else? A man is afraid when his neighbors house is on fire, and would to God you
were well moved, from that, wnherin you have unlawfully stood. Let therefore
our Lord the king know and understand by your relation, that he who reigns
in the Empire of men and also of Angels, has ordained two powers under him,
Princes, and Preistes; one earthly, an other spiritual, one ministering, an
other more excellent, one to which he has granted authority, the other to
which he would have reverence yielded, he then who derogateth from the right
of the one or the other, resists Gods ordination. Let not then our Sovereign
Lord disdain to attribute to them, unto whom the highest of all vouchsafes to
attribute, calling them often gods in the holy Scriptures, For he speaks
thus: I have said ye are gods etc. And again: I have appointed thee the God
of Pharao. Psalm. 81. Exodus 9. Ibid. 22.
And, Thou shall not detract from the Gods: (that is to say) the Preistes.
And speaking by Moses of him who was to swear, he says: Bring him to the
Gods: Ibidem.
(that is) to the Preistes. Neither let our king presume to attempt to judge
his judges: For the keys of the kingdom of heaven are committed not to powers
of this earth, but to Preistes: And therefore it is written: The lips of the
Priest shall have the custody of knowledge, and from his mouth they shall
require the law, 1. Cor. ^.
because he is the Angel of our Lord. And also Paul says: Shall we not
judge Angels, how much more men?

We would have you also suggest into the mind of our Sovereign Lord, that
thing worthy of memory and imitation, which we read in the Ecclesiastical
history of Constantine the Emperor, to whom when there were offered up in
writing accusations against Bishops, he received the Schedule of the
accusations, and calling the accused together, he burned it in their sight,
saying, Ye are Gods ordained by the true God; go and determine your causes
among your selves, in regard it is unworthy that we men should judge the
Gods. O mighty Emperor! O discreet Governor on the earth, not fraudulently
usurping on the authority of others, and deserving in heaven an eternal
kingdom. Let therefore our Lord the king indeauor to imitate so great, so
discrete, so happy an Emperor, whose memory is with praises renowned on the
earth, and likewise accounted eternal and glorious in heaven. Otherwise let
him fear what our Lord has threatened in Deutronomy, Deuteronomy, 17.
saying: What man soever shall so deal in his pride, that he will not hear
the priest, he shall dye before the judge. For to this purpose is he called,
and to this end the tranquillity of his temporal kingdom, and that
magnificency (whereof you put us in mind) are given him from heaven. Otherwise
the king is not saved by his great power, although kingdoms are subject unto
him, and nations do reverently obey him. And thus far concerning these. Now
whosoever have joined with you in the writing of these before recyted letters,
let them know that the same answer we make you, the same we make to them.
What remains (brethren) we admonish, entreat, and beeseech ye, that no
scysmes may ever separate us, but that we be in our Lord one heart, and one
soul, and that we harken to him who says: In the beehalfe of Justice contend
for thy life, and fight for Justice even to the very death, and God will
conquer for thee thine enemies. Eccles. 4.
Let us not forget that severe judge, before whose Tirbunal Throne when we
shall appear, Truth only shall adiudge us, all fear and trust of any earthly
power being then clean vanished.

So in our Lord we bid your brotherhood farewell.

These were this year written, the rest shall in the years following appear
in their places.

But the Bishops of England directed letters to Pope Alexander, inueighing
against this before recyted Epistle written to them by saint Thomas, not that
they might any way succor the distressed estate of the Church, as need
required, but only appeal to his Holiness against their Archbishop: For these
are their words.

To their father and Lord the high Bishop Alexander, The Epistle of the Bishops
of England to the Pope.
the Bishops of the Province of their several Dioceses dispersed in sundry
parishes, as to their Lord and father remember their bounden service of charity
and obedience.
We suppose (father) your excellency is not unmindful, how you conuented in
your letters long since directed, by the mediation of our reverent brethren the
Bishops of London and Hereforde, your devout son, and our most dear and
renowned Lord, the king of England, and how with your fatherly compassion you
admonished him for the amendment of some matters, which appeared to the eyes of
your holiness as deserving reformation in his kingdom, who receiving your
commandment with due reverence (as it is manifest) swelled not in anger, The
Bishops commend their king.
nor with pride of mind contemned to obey you, but yielding thanks for your
fatherly chastisement, humbled himself presently to the Churches examination,
saying that in every thing, which according to the form of your Mandat, was
dilligently expressed to him, he would submit himself to the judgment of the
Church of his kingdom; and what soever they should determine to be amended,
he would reform by their advise, with a commendable denotion and in a Prince
worthy great praise; from this purpose he flies not, neither recalleth his
mind from his promise; but he who may sit in thrones, who may consider and
judge, now moved with the reverence of divine fear, not as a king, but as an
obedient son, is ready to yield to judgment, obey the lawful pronounced
sentence, and (as a Prince bounded with laws) show himself in all things a
dutiful child, wherefore it is unnecessary to enforce with interdictions or
threats, or the spurs of accursinges the man to satisfaction, who subiecteth
himself already to the censures of the divine laws. For his actions
withdraw not themselves from the light, nor by any means desire to be
shrouded in darkness: for this king in faith most Christian, in the bands of
wedlock most honest, the conseruer of peace and justice, and one who enlarges
the bounds of the same far and near incomparably, indeauoureth with all his
power, and thirsts with a fervent desire, that scandalls and sins together
with their foul followers may be taken away, and rooted out of his kingdom,
and that peace and justice may ever take place, and all things prosper and
flourish under him in sweet security and quiet tranquillity.

The Bishops excuse their king.
Who finding sometimes the peace of his kingdom not a little molested with the
outrageous excesses of some insolent Clearkes, with due reverence to the
Clergy referred their offenses to the Bishops judges of the Church, that one
sword might assist an other, and the power spiritual ground and establish in
the Clergy the peace which he ruled and fostred in his people. Wherein the
zeal of thee party came more to light, the Bishops persisting in this settled
judgment, that murder or any other like crime should only be punished in the
Clergy by degradation; the king on the other side being of opinion that this
punishment did not condignly answer the offense, neither was it a sufficient
provision for mayntenance of peace, if a Reader or Acolythy killing some famous
man renowned for Religion or dignity, should escape free with the loss only of
this Order. The Clergy therefore vphoulding the Order established from heaven,
and our Lord the king persecuting only the offense (as he hops) with a just
hatred, and intending to plant his peace more deeply, a certain holy
contention arose among us, which (we trust) the plain intention of both
parties will excuse with your Holiness.

Hereupon not with any ambition of larger dominion, not with any concept of
oppressing the Churches liberty but with an affection of confirming peace, our
Lord the king passed so far, as he would produce to light the customs of
his kingdom, and dignityes anciently observed, and quietly and reverently
yielded by persons Ecclesiastical to former kings in the kingdom of England,
and to the end no longer thread of contention might hereafter be spunne, he
would have the same to be openly known. Wherefore the most ancient Bishops
and greatest peers of the realm, being first adjured by their faith, and the
hope which they had in Allmighty God, and then making search into the state of
forepassed times, the dignityes of the crown being sought, were laid open, and
by the testimonies of men of the greatest account in the kingdom were
published: Lo here the cruelty of our Lord the king against the Church of
God, which fame has so spread over the whole world! Lo here his persecution!
These are his works so diuulged for wicked both here and every where.

Yet nevertheless in all these proceedings, if there be any thing contained
either dangerous to his soul, or ignominious to the Church, he has long
since with a most sacred devotion promised, and does still most constantly
continewe in the same mind, especially being admonished and moved with your
authority, for the reverence of Christ, and the honor of the holy Church whom
he professes to be his mother, and for the redemption of his soul, to
reform the same accordingly as he shall be advised by the Counsel of the
Church of his own kingdom. And truly (father) our solicitation had long since
(as we hope) obtained the desired end of this wished peace, had not our Father
the Lord of Canterbury's bitter prouocations stirred up anew this discord now
laid asleep, and almost absolutely extinguished. For he, from whose patience
we hitherto expected peace, from whose modesty the recovery of the kings
favor, assailed him afresh, and without respect of his Majesty (at such time
as lately he led his army against the Peace breakers) with severe and terrible
letters, no whit savoring of fatherly devotion or Pastoral patience, but most
bitterly threatening him with the sentence of Excommunication, and his realm
with the pain of interdiction: Where as on the other side, he rather ought
with admonitio^s to have mollifyed him, and with meritts and meeknes overcome
him, whose humility if it be so requited, what will be then determined
against the stuborne and contumatious: if the ready devotion of obedience be
esteemed so slightly, in what manner shall wilful obstinacy be revenged?
Yea to these so grievous threats, are yet added matters far more grievous, for
he inuolued in his Excommunication some of his Majesty's Liege men, most
inward with our Lord the king, the principal of his privy counsel, who
managed the mysteryes of the kings estate, and the affairs of his kingdom,
and denounced them publicly excommunicate, being never cyted, nor defended,
neither (as they call it) guilty of any crime, nor convicted, nor confessing
any thing.

Yea he stepped farther, in so much as he suspended our reverent brother the
Bishop of Salisbury, being absent, undefended, neither confessed, nor conuicte,
from his Preistly and Episcopal Office, before ever the cause of his
suspension was approved by the advice of those of the same Province, or any
others. If therefore this course of proceedinges in judgments so preposterous
(I spare to say) inordinate, be followed concerning the king and kingdom,
what will be the end (considering the time is evil, and yields great
occasion of exceeding malice) but that the band of grace and favor, whereby
the kingdom and preisthood have bin hitherto united, will be rent a sunder,
and we with the flock committed to our charge, be dispersed into exile, or
(which God forbid) falling of from the faith, we owe to you, into the miseryes
of Scysme, be cast down headlong into the bottomless pit of iniquity and
disobedience: for this is the ready way to the ruin of all relligion, and the
subversion, and overthrow as well of the Clergy as Layety.

In regard whereof, least in so miserable a time of your Apostolical reign,
the Church be overthrown; least our Lord the king with the people subject to
him fall away (which God forbid) from your obedience; least what someuer our
Lord of Canterbury by the counsel of private men deuiseth, be in his wrath
executed on us, we have as well by word as writing appealed to your excellency
against him, The Bishops appeal to the Pope against their Archbishop.
and his Mandates importing any detriment to our Lord the king and his
kingdom, us, and the Churches committed to our care, and have designed for the
day of our Appeal, the day of our Lords Ascension; choosing rather to humble
our selves before your Holiness in all things which shall be pleasing unto
you, then to be daily, according to the lofty motions of his mind (while our
merittes deserve nothing less) tediously afflicted. We beeseech our Allmighty
Lord (most beeloued father in Christ) long to preserve your health to his
Churches prosperity.

Thus far the Bishops.

Pope Alexander nevertheless perseuering in his opinion, when he perceived
the Appeal of the Bishops to be void, by reason the Appellants appeared
not at the designed day, confirmed the sentence which saint Thomas pronounced
against them; which is wittnessed by Salusbury in his letter to saint Thomas,
saying: As it is signified to me from the City, so I remember I certifyed
you by writing, that my Lord the Pope has now confirmed your sentence, yea he
has challenged it as an injury offered himself. There are also extant Pope
Alexanders own letters, written to Saint Thomas to the same purpose, after he
perceived the Bishops did not prosecute their Appeal. His words are these.
We have had intelligence as well by your letters, as also the certain
relation of many, that you pronounced the sentence of Interdiction against
Ioceline Bishop of Salusbury, in regard he was disobedient to you, and he,
notwithstanding he appealed hereupon to our audience, and assigned for the
time of his appeal the Sunday wherein is sung, Ego sum Pastor bonus, next
ensuing, neither himself, at that instant appeared, neither sent any one unto
us, to answer for him; wherefore we refusing absolutely to maintain him in
his disobedience and rebellion against you, will by Gods grace ratify and
confirm the sentence, which upon this occasion you have given against him, and
have thought good to leave the whole business concerning him to be determined
by your discretion, resolving without farther obstacle of Appealation, to
establish whatsomeuer you shall therein Cannonically do.

And the Pope likewise wrote to all the Bishops in england in these words.

Epistola 1.9. The Pope in these letters restrayneth the Bishops of England.
Allthough by the obligation of our office we are bound to have a care and be
watchful for vphoulding the right of all sorts in perfect integrity, yet
notwithstanding in mayntenance of their justice, who are chosen by our Lord to
undergo a part of the charge committed to us, we ought in how much they are
more eminent above others in their authority, so much the more to reflect
upon them, to provide with greater diligence for them, and have an
especialleye over them Guyded therefore with this reason, we charge and
command ye, and in the virtue of obedience by our Apostolical letters inioyne
your brotherhood, that ye presume not in any case, neither yet any way attempt
upon occasion of the Appeal, which ye have made unto us against our reverent
Brother the Archbishop of Canterbury, to intermedle in any thing known to
appertain to the rightes, dignityes, and libertyes of the Church of
Canterbury, without his assent and priuity. And if any of ye shall under any
coluor whatsomeuer dare to break this our commandment, we will by the grace
of God endeavor to punish him so seuearely, as he shall learn by the pain
inflicted on him, how dangerous it is to violate the Apostolical Mandates.
Dated at Lateran 5. Kalend. Februarij.

But the king fearing as yet to be excommunicated, or to have his Realm
subject to interdiction by Saint Thomas, after he had interposed (as we see)
such as it was, this Appeal, he directed to Pope Alexander, an Embassage not
so much to prosecute the Appeal, as to obtain of his Holiness an other
legantine authority, to the end he might thereby weaken and infringe the
sinews of the power given to Saint Thomas: and for the undergoing of the
business, he desired of the Pope, that a certain Legate might be sent him,
which was William Cardinal of Papia of the Tytell of Saint Peter ad vincula,
whom he might have as his entire friend: To manage also this matter the king
made choice of his Chaplain, who (as we lately said) was excommunicated by
Saint Thomas because he made oath to the Archbishop of Colen for maintayning
the Scysmaticall Pope (we mean) John of Oxeforde, with whom were others also
joined Associates in authority; but in what sort they proceeded with Pope
Alexander herein, we shall hereafter in place convenient declare.

Codic. Vat. lib 1. Epist. 139.
The king after this Appeal made (as says Salisbury) sent then a Messanger
into England (for he^ remained at this time in Normandy) with letters for
guarding the sea coasts, dealing also with the Abbott of the Cistercians
against Saint Thomas, for expelling him out of the Monastery of Pontiniake; who
since he continewed there two years (as the Authors in his life declare) must
needs be said this year to have bin banished thence: for the recyted letters
testify that till this year he remained there: William likewise in
Quadrilogus rehearses how he aboade two whole years in that place; and so
we see he entered first into that Abbey in the year of our Lord 1164. But how
foul a scandal it was in the eyes of all good men, to see so great a guest
so banished, the said writer shows at large, and adds, that Jews the
king of France receiving tydinges thereof by letters from Saint Thomas,
exclamyng publicly said: O Religion! o Religion! where art thou? Lo the men,
whom we esteemed as dead to the world, fear yet the ruins of the same world,
and for the frail temporal trash (which they profess to contemn for our Lord)
fly off from the work, which God himself has commanded, casting out of their
house this man exiled for Gods cause. Moreover he tells us how Saint Thomas
was then entertained by the king of France, assigning him Senon to dwell in.
And at that time (as the same Author reports) it fell out, that God revealed
to Saint Thomas in a vision his Martyrdom.

Saint Thomas afterward not to let ship any thing appertayning to his
office, whereas he had before with censures terrifyed and troubled the king,
now again he indeauored to quiet and pacify his mind with more pleasing
letters indyted in this sort.

To his most beeloued Lord Henry by the grace of God King of England, Duke of
Normandy and Earl of Anioue, Thomas by the same grace the humble servant of
the Church of Canterbury wishes health and all times perseverance in goodness,
with worthy resistance of all malicious suggestions.
Our speech to you shall be short, Cod. Vat. lib. 1. epist. 66.
least in abundance of words we become over tedious: would to God we were
more acceptable to you, as to our most beeloued Lord, he knows this who is
the searcher of hearts, whatsoever is otherwise and falsely muttered and
murmured against us by your enemies, yea rightly and truly rather yours then
ours. We exhort you therefore again on the beehalfe of Allmighty God, and
adjure you in the virtue in the Holy Ghost, and require you for the remission
of your sins, that you make restitution sinceerly, of your grace with assured
peace and good security to to us and ours, and the like to the Church of
Canterbury in such fullnes and liberty, as our Predecessors and we also since
our entrance into our Archbishoppricke have more amply and freely enjoyed the
same, with all the possessions, Churches, and prebendaryes appertayning
thereunto, which have remained void since the first breaking out of the
discord beetweene you and us, and ours: and that we may use and possess the
same under your dominion, as our predecessors have in better and more worthy
sort heretofore done, and we also since our preferment to this same Sea:
whereby the Church may justly rejoice in our return, which has for many
causes to the danger of both our souls (as we beeleiue) so long wanted our
presence and ought truly to lament the discommodity incurred by our absence.
Perform this (gracious Lord) with a joyful and pacifyed mind, that God may
grant and restore to you the peace which your heart desires, with the
salvation of your soul, and the souls of the people committed by our Lord to
your charge, and we truly on the other side are, and will be ever ready to
do you all service with more feruor and devotion then ever heretofore, so long
as we neither offend God, nor violate our order thereby.

Concerning the goods taken away from the Church of Canterbury from us, and
ours, we constantly affirm to you before God and the whole world, yea were
his divine Majesty here present, that by no means nor reason can the sin
be forgiven, unless what is unjustly taken away be again restored, if he who
took it, or caused it to be taken away, has wherewith to restore? Whereupon
Saint Augustine says: If the thing taken away, when it may be restored be
not restored, Penance is not done, but dissembled. And in an other place: I
have said this most confidently, that he who makes intercession for a man to
this purpose, that he may not restore things unjustly taken away: and he who
compels not, as far as honestly he may, the party that in this case
flies to him to make restitution, is partaker of his deceipte and offense; for
with far greater mercy do we forbear to help such men, then assist them.
Be assured therefore of this, make no doubt at all thereof, and if any man
preaches contrary to this, yea be it an Angel from heaven, let him be
accursed, and so shall he, as long as he perseuereth in this opinion. See
therefore (renowned Lord) that in this case you walk warely, least the
detayning of a thing evil gotten, which is but dust and worms, drive you
headlong (which God forbid) into impenitency, and make you subject to that
danger, from which you can never be cleansed by fasting and prayer.

In discretion moreover you ought to understand, that allthough all Bishops
are not Saints, yet possess they the places of Saints, and allbeeit they
shine not with such meritt of life, yet ought they to imitate those who have
shyned before them as far as Gods mercy will give them grace. Because
therefore holy men have fought for the law of their God unto death, and have
not feared the words and threats of their persecutors (for he is absolutely
more to be dreaded who is able to cast soul and body into hell fire) we
likewise are of necessity bound (as far as God will inspire us) to keep,
foster, and defend his laws, neither is this to be imputed to us, as pride or
malice, but is imposed on us as incident to our office. For so says our Lord:
Keep my laws: And again in thee Gospel: He that breaks one of these
least commandments, shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. We
beelieue (noble Lord) you are sufficiently endowed with wisdom, and therefore
we humbly beeseech you as our dearest Lord, and that in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that you will vouchsafe to hear us, yea with mercy, and to hear
us thoroughly, as God may hear, and fully hear you at the day of judgment, and
receive you among his elected, when assuredly neither strengh, nor power, nor
empire, nor riches, nor secular laws, nor customs can help any man, nor any
thing else but the mercy of Allmighty God with the fruytes of forerunning
works: which would to God it might ever remain fixed in your mind, and
thence never to depart: Let our Lord and king willingly admit and hear the
counselors who advise him herein, that God may prosper him, and lengthen the
life of him and his heirs with the blessings of peace for many years; neither
let them pass in this world unpunished, who with their falsehood and exquisite
deceiptes have endeauored to undo and disturb the worthy and virtuous
designs of our Lord and king, which from the beeginning of his reign he
conceived and continued (as we think) with a just sincere devotion for the
honoring of Churches and Ecclesiastical persons. God send our Lord ever to
flourish, and that his Church and we may thereby live more blessedly: God send
him long life. And thus Saint Thomas, not as a judge threatening with severe
censures, but as a father exhorteh and admonishes his son, whom he desires
to deliver from the sentence of condemnation: allthough in vain, his wicked
counselors withstanding it.


Cod. Vat. lib. 1. Epist. 140.
And like to this complainte of the kings counselors made by Saint Thomas (as
you have heard) does John of Salisbury inueigh also against them, writing to
Nicholas de Monte of Roan, who was to Saint Thomas a most entire friend, which
short epistle, because it contains much matter appertayning to this time,
we thought convenient to be here inserted, being thus.

Our Lord disperseth those nations, that would have wars; and they who
estrange themselves from the peace of God, shall undoubtedly perish. What one
of the Persecutors of Gods Church has bin read to have eschewed the revenging
right hand of our Lord, who punishes the mighty mightily? In regard whereof
(which without grief I cannot speak) our Lord the king of England, whom with
his heirs, God (if it be his blessed will) preserve, is much to be feared
least their kingdom be rent asunder, and the power weakened, which they have
abused against the Church: If revenge be deferred for the correction and
probation of his children, whom the merciful father chasticeth first, that he
may afterward crown; it is not therefore taken away, but that after the
patience of the holy it beecommeth more bitter and terrible against the wicked.
Why then (I pray you) does not this most wise man, endowed by God with so
great virtues, so large a dominion, and almost all singular guiftes, return
unto his heart. And why cannot the co^queror of so many and mighty cittyes,
co^quer his own intemperance? Why does he persecuting the Church, the only
beeloued spouse of Christ, inkindle him to wrath who takes away the spirit of
princes, and with his own propper power trampleth on the necks of the potent?
Undoubtedly if he were aduysed, he would turn the fury of his indignation
against them, who with their guiles and abuses, have thrust him headlong into
this not counsel but downefull; and would at the least imitate the king of
Babylon, that he might not be found more cruel then he, who cast them into
the Lions den, by whose counsel he threw Daniel a prisoner thither, that
the guilty counselors might suffer the pains, they devised against the
guiltles. Then adds he examples of Bishops restored by kings to their
proper Seas; writing thus: [The Archbishop of Saint James who lived long in
banishment, is now restored by his king, The king of the Danes calling home his
Archbishop, governs by his advice, subdueth his enemies, and honoreth him as
his father: The Archbishop of Lions has received again his Sea, and reduced
his province to the Catholic unity: The cittyes of Italy abandoning Frederick
the Scysmaticke, have entertained their Catholic Bishops: God is my witness,
unless our Lord and king recalleth again his Archbishop, I dread to utter the
fear I conceive of him; but if he will send for him, and render peace to the
Church of God, I do assuredly hope, that in him and his the glory of his
former successes will through the Churches prayers flourish again; what say I
more? There rests, yet for him one apparent advice, which is, that he
banisheth his wicked counselors, the Churches aduersarys, and endeauoreth to
appease Allmighty God, whom he has offended, against whose divine pleasure
he can neither reign nor rule. God has yet endured him with unspeakable
patience, but unless he beeware, as the woeman in labor, he will shortly
speak against his immoderate proceedinges] And thus far John for this year,
but after this ensued a wonderful mutation of matters.

For in the mean time the king of England, misledde with most wicked connsell,
that he might avoid the sentence of Excommunication, thus threatening him,
searches out new remedys, inuenting other sutle and more potent devices, which
was to address an other embassage, and send an other Sinon to Rome to deceive
Alexander with untrue oaths, and corrupt (as he could) the Cardinals with
money. To set this sin abroach, is chosen the worst of men, perjured,
excommunicated, John of Oxeforde, the usurper of a Deanery, (as before is
mentioned) who furnished with lies, and false promises, and also with gould,
might overthrow the whole judgment, and recall Pope Alexander from pronouncing
his sentences of excommunication and interdiction, beeguyling him with
pretended promises of peace, and absolute restitution of all the Churches
privileges invaded by the king. Pope Alexander gave credit to this Ambassadors
oathe, suspended his judgment already beegun, and determined the legation
desired for effecting this business. But allthough he designed according to the
kings request William of Papia, Priest Cardinal of the title of Saint Peeter
ad Vincula, whom he esteemed most convenient, to move the king his affected
friend, for composing a peace between him and Saint Thomas: nevertheless
because this Cardinal, in regard of the kings favor, might grow into some
suspicion with the contrary part; he joins with him for an associate a man
of singular integrity, very much renowned in the Church of Rome, and passing
well known through the whole Christian world for his virtuous life, Otto (I
mean) Deacon Cardinal of saint Nicholas in carcere Tulliano, who, if occasion
were, might with his worthynes restrain the other, and confine him within the
stricte bounds of justice. But allthough Pope Alexander proceeded thus warely
in sending his Legates, notwithstanding this (which might seem so passing
commendable) by reason of the false reports forerunning the Legates, appeared
to the credulous, as a matter not beeseeminge such a singular Pope: in so much
as all, as well by words as wrytinges exclaymed against him, yea his very
freindes, and those most forward for the Catholic cause; but how unjustly,
will be easily perceived by this Popes letters which shall hereafter be
recyted; yet how, before this was thoroughly understood, the tongues of men,
yea of the wise, were let loose against him, you shall see by what next
ensues, and thereby learn how every one, yea though most holy, is set up as
a mark, and as well his friends as foes will sometimes shoot at him the
arrows of detraction. For hear what the Champion of the Ecclehasticall
liberty, and defender of the laws of the Roman Church spoake though sincerely
yet bitterly Thomas (I say) the Archbishop of Canterbury, when John of Oxeforde
in his return from the City into England, every where boasted, that he had
obtained of Pope Alexander, as well for the king as himself whatsomeuer he
desired, intermingling many falshoodes with truths concerning the authority
conferred in the king, which beeinge blazed abroad and beelieued, Saint
Thomas, as one oppressed with exceeding sorrow, did thus write to John a man
of his own Province.

Thomas by the grace of God the humble seruante of the Church of Canterbury to
John of Canterbury sends greetinge.
Cod. Vat. lib. 1. epist. 164.
How we are made a reproach to our neighbors, and a scorn and scoff, not
only to them who are round about but also almost to all the people of both
kingdoms as well France as England, and it may be to those likewise of the
empire; and what fame (I say not infamy and scandal) rangeth up and down
thorough the ears and mouths of all men, against our lord the Pope, being to
us a greater cause of grief (God he knows) then that of our own person,
with a slander to the whole Court raised by those who rage, and insulte, and
cast irreuocable darts of disgrace against them, you may, some what see out of
this that follows, and secretly intimate the same to our Lord the Pope, and
our freindes, if as yet perchance we have any.


He adds thereunto what by faithful report he lately heard out of
England, saying.

[Beehould John of Oxeforde and other the kings Ambassadors returned lately
from the court, extolling themselves above all whatsoever is called or honored
as God, vaunting they had obtained of the court all they desired, that is to
say, concerning the band of excommunication, how the king was exempted from the
authority of all Bishops, excepting only that of the Pope; and his Majesty
should have the Legate he requested, (I mean) William of Pauy our inueterate
enemy, with ample power over all the kings dominions to buyld and plant, and
especially to pull out, and pluck up by the roots without ever any remedy of
Appeal, but above all to decyde the controversy now gtowne beetweene the king
and us, with all matters whatsoever incident thereunto, without any exception
of prejudice (as it is said) which may herafter happen. And with this pomp and
pride returned John of Oxeforde into England, and landing in a certain haven,
there he found our Brother the Bishop of Hereforde, expecting (yet secretly) a
prosperious wind to pass over, daring not openly to attempt it, being
forbidden by the kings officers on his Majesty's beehalfe by virtue of his
letters; and finding him, Oxeforde first commanded him in the kings name, and
then in the Popes, that he should not cross the seas: the Bishop asking (as
his messinger, coming afterward to excuse his lord, delivered to us) whether
he had the Popes letters to warrant this; he answered, yea; and that our Lord
the Pope did thereby forbid both him and all other Bishops of England to
appear at our call, or any way to obey us, until the coming of the Legate a
latere, whom the king had obtained from the Pope, and who should also determine
the cause of the Appeal lately made, and the main controversy beetweene the
king and us, and all things beelonging thereunto, with full power, and without
any further bar of Appeal.

The Bishop urging to see the letters, he replied, they were not ready at
hand, but that he had sent them with his caryages to winchester 12. miles
distant from the haven of South-Hampton: the Bishop taking advice of his
freindes, sent with John of Oxeforde to Winchester Master Edward his Clearke
(as we think) an honest faithful man, who saw the letters, and so did
likewise the Bishop of London, being then also at the point of passing the
seas; and London perusing the letters with reioyceing burst out into these
words: now Thomas from hence forth shall be no more my Archbishop: And John
moreover added: that he was a privileged person, nor could hereafter be
excommunicated, nor conuented by us, but only in the presence of our lord the
Pope, and likewise had free power to beestowe the Deanery of the Church of
Salisbury, on whom he listed, and for our dignity, that it was in every point
diminished until the Legates coming: All this did the Bishop certify us by
his Chaplayne being a Cannon Regular, and a Religious man, whom he sent to
excuse his forbearance of coming to us at our cyting; for we cyted him once
and again, and lastly the third time, with a peremptory Mandate to appear
before us, beetweene that, and the feast of the Purification, as a man of
great authority, the kings familiar, and one who should mediate a peace
beetweene his Majesty and us, if possibly it might be compased. All this the
Cannon is ready to testify by oath, that thus he received the same from the
mouth of the Bishop to be delivered on his beehalfe to us. Which if it be
true, then doubtless our lord the Pope has choked and strangled, not our
person only, but also himself, with all the Clergy of both the kingdoms, yea
verily both Churches as well of France as England; for animated with this most
foul example, what will not other Princes of the world dare attempt against
Ecclesiastical persons? To whom shall they have refuge? How can they he
confident of the Church of Rome, that has so forsaken and left destitute us,
who maintain her cause with fighting therefore to the very death? What will
beefall, if (these unspeakable and detestable privileges standing good,
together with the oppressions as well by the king, as others under any pretext)
it should so happen (which God forbid) that the Pope should dye, or the City
run into confusion, of troubles? All these would then descend on their
heirs, nor would ever hereafter be wrested out of their hands. And what is
far worse, other Princes stirred up with this example would extorte the like
privileges, to bring the Church, whether she will or no into subjection: So
shall the Churches whole liberty utterly decay, together with the jurisdiction
and power of Bishops, no man remaining who is able to control and restaine
the outrages of Tyrants, whose whole intention is at this day bent to make
havoc of the Church and Clergy, nor will they have brought them, like others
into bondage. What will be the end we know not, but this we know, that our
grief exceeds measure, be these things true or false, which are thus
propounded: For we are neither obeyed nor respected in any thing, as we were
wont, by Bishops or Abbotts, or others of the Clergy of England, being now
assured of our deposition. But let our Lord the Pope be persuaded, that we
will never on any condition pass over into the kings Dominion, to have there
our cause decyded, nor will we ever abide the judgment of our enemies, and
especially of Papyan, who thirsts nothing but our blood, thereby to obtain
our seat, which in truth (as we hear) is already promised him, upon
condition the king may be delivered of us.

We have also an other exceeding greiuance. The nobles as well temporal
peers as Bishops, with other Prelates of the kingdom of France, as it were
despairing now of us, shake of and send us back again the Associates of our
exile, whom they have heatherto mercifully relieved, and what will these but
perish hereafter with cold and famyne, as others their fellows have formerly
done. Intimate all these things diligently to our Lord the Pope, that he may
provide us some remedy against these mischeifes according to our request, if as
yet any zeal of God remains in him, as we hope it does, and we pray God
our hope confounds not. Farewell, and with all speed return us back this
messanger again, who may as well in these as other matters certify us, who
rest streyghtned in great extremitys, if things are so as we hear them
reported.]

And thus Saint Thomas wrote to his agent being lieger for him in the City.
But here ended not the complaints poured out against Pope Alexander: For now
remains to be recyted an other epistle of Lumbard Subdeaco^ of the Sea
Apostolic, who lived at this present in France, and wrote thence to the Pope,
for it is first thus intytuled. To Pope Alexander, Lumbard Subdeacon of the
Roman Church. And afterward beeginneth thus.

To the reverent father and Lord Alexander by the grace of God High Bishop,
Lumbarde his faithful Clearke remembers his service of obedience.
Cod Vat. lib. 1 epist. 165.
Whereas I am seruante to your Holiness, and in Christ the work of your hands,
I neither can nor ought to dissemble the slanders openly spread to the reproach
of your renown, and derogation of your name, and such mischeifes as are
subtly devised to the detriment of the whi^^ Church. For John of Oxeforde
insolently vaunteth, he is returned from Rome with the honor of a Deanery, and
the fullnes of your favor, adding arrogantly withal, that he is fortifyed
with your privilege against my Lord of Canterbury, and every Bishop; and
being as it were little inferior to the Court of Cardinals, that he is
subject to you only, and your Apostolic power: glorying moreover in his pride,
he affirms, he has procured that for the king, which never kingdom could
yet obtain, which is, the confirmation of a Marriage by your authority,
beetweene the king of Englandes son, and the Earl of Britains daughter,
being Cosyns in the third degree: And lastly, that Legates (such as he
desired) were to be sent to hear and determine whatsoever it should please
the king to devise against my lord of Canterbury; without any remedy of
Appeal. All this (most holyfather) upon John's return from Rome was diuulged:
which by how much they were the more unusual, how much the more rare to be
compased; so much they more amazed the hears minds: whereupon the king of
France, the devout child of your Holiness, and of the Church, was so
passionatly moved, as he said, he would presently address a message to
forbid your Legates to enter his Realm, and more he did, which I willed this
Bearer by word of mouth to deliver. He resolved moreover to assemble his
Archbishoppes and Bishops, before whom he would lay open and declare, how
the Church of Rome rayseth alofte the malicious enemies as well of him as her
self, endeavoring to depresse his power; saying: and does he not seek my
dishonor who subtelly compasses to work the death of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, an innocent man, banished for justice, and the Churches liberty, by
yielding him wickedly up into the hands of his persecuting enemies, whom not
in respect of any favor received by him, having rather bin wronged by him,
while he served the king, who now seeks his overthrow, but moved with
reverence of the most just cause he mayntaineth with admiration of his
virtue, and the love of my Lord the Pope (who instantly entreated me for him)
I constantly resolved to entertayne honorably and decently (as long as he
remained in exile) and to noursih him (as it were) in my bosom, as I have
already beegunne: denouncing to all, and openly protesting, it was no less
greiuous to him, that your Holiness sent Legates for managing this cause, then
if you had designed them for depriving him of his Crown. Neither were they
wantinge who ministered fuel to his enflamed mind.

Weertupon was occasion given of malice and mischeiuous attemptes against us,
and the Church of God, to them, who from the beeginning had minds and means
to hurt us, whose wicked purpose your clemency has nothing changed, although
your authority repressed their assaults. All this I received from a Clearke
who is faithful and devoted to your Holiness, who being then present, did
afterward pruily deliver the same to me. This one thing (most holy father) I
assuredly know (which I write not without tears) that the glory of your name
is somewhat eclipsed because the detraction of your fame is, as it were, meat
and drink to backbyters and slanderers, who like men intoxicated and drunk
with wine, tear in pieces your renown, and devour it with the jaws of
misreportes, and these are not the favorers of my Lord of Canterbury, but also
his professed foes, and that especially since the time of his victory and yours
(as many beeleiued) was now at hand; for the day of the Appeal being past,
the king was in that fear to see himself excommunicated, and his whole
dominion interdicted, as he said openly; He neither persuaded, nor compelled
his Bishops to appeal, and therefore would not intermedle in the matter; the
Bishops themselves were so mightily troubled, and feared so much to be
interdicted, as some of them sent messingers to my lord of Canterbury, others
were ready to appear at his summons.

When John of Oxeforde, as your Legate assembling the Bishops commanded them
by authority from you (as it is reported in France) that they should not come
to the Lord of Canterbury upon his citation. Whereupon Master Robert Bishop of
Hereforde being at the seas side ready to pass over, was recalled again, as
in way of excuse was delivered from him to the Lord of Canterbury by his
Messingers being religious men and well known, (I being then present:) and
therefore so great a trouble has invaded the minds of many, upon the fear
they conceive of the kings subtell devises to the ruin of the Church of
England and all Churches within his Dominion, together with the overthrow of
the Ecclesiastical liberty, and the longer and stronger persecution of the
Archbishop. For whereas it is said by many and that very often, that the king
has set up the rest of his hope on your misfortune and death, (which
Allmighty God out of his most merciful clemency long defer) affirming
constantly (as it is reported by many) that he will never admit your
successor, until he has confirmed all the dignityes and customs of his
kingdom. It is therefore supposed, that craftily and fraudulently he
requesteth the Legates for accomplishing his own ends and desires, as well
against the lord of Canterbury, as all other Bishops of his land: or if that
fail, yet at the least that he may put of the excommunication against his
person, and the interdiction of his dominions: and thus winning time, he may
so avoid the authority of the Bishop of Canterbury, as if in your Popedom
he be not bound, he need not fear the power of your successor, since (as
many say) he has resolved not easily to receive him. Wherefore (most wise
father) such as thirst after the spirit of God, and peace of the Church, desire
with all the affection of their minds, that our Lord will stir up in you the
spirit of Daniel, to search out the sleyghts of Bell, Daniel. 14.
and to kill the Dragon: For which they beseech God with their devout and
continual prayers. God prosper your Holiness with many years.


Thus far Lumbard, whom one reports to have bin the renowned divine, who
flourished in Paris, and being properly called Peter Lumbard, lived in these
days. You have heard the complayntes of the king of France and others,
expressed in Lumbardes letter: Hear now the exulting and insulting of the king
of England derived from this unfortunate fountain being no little cause of
lamentation to all well disposed minds: For there is extant to this purpose an
epistle of John of Salisbury written to John Bishop of Poytiers, wherein after
other things, he says thus of the king of England.

[Moreouer the king himself toulde the Bishop of Worcester that he and all
other Bishops, were now exempt from the Lord of Canterburys power, and
commanded him not to fear any threats, for he had now my Lord the Pope and
all the Cardinals in his purse; and so far he vaunteth, as he says openly,
he has now at last obtained the privilege of his Grand father, because in
his own land he was a king, a Legate, a Patriarcke, and Emperor, and what he
list, Cod v^t. lib. 1. epist. 1^8.
and so would he be; wherein as it is probable, he aimed at the Church of
Rome; For what could Octauianus or the Archhereticke of Crema have don more for
him? How could their Cardinals have pleasured him more then the forenamed
Cardinals sent from Pope Alexander, who whetted the tongues of England, and
made them spitt fire and poison to terrify the Pope and subject him to their
will? This will be regestred in the Chronickles of the Roman Church, and
doubtless (God permitting it) there will not want Historiographers to record,
that at the petition and threats of the king of England, whose intolerable
excesses he had so long endured, the Champion of liberty, the preacher of
justice, now living with an infinite number of Innocents for the cause of
Allmighty God as yet four years in banishment, without any respect of reason
or law as a man guilty, was deprived by the Pope of his office, not upon any
offense of his, but only to please a Tyrant. And yet nevertheless under his
letters patents remaining with us, was granted him to exercise in his ample
right the power of his office, wherein is expressed, that he neither gave nor
restrained the mandate for the kings excommunication. O good God what a nouelty
have we here? Isaia 58.
The holy Ghost bids in his law: Cry out, cease not: and lo an other
spirit, of what fashion I know not issuing out from the City into the world,
says to the Preachers: cease, cry not. 2. Tim. 4.
The Apostle instructing a Bishop commanding bids: Accomplish thy ministry:
And lo the Apostolical man wills saying, desist from the ministry of thine
office. Yet percha^ce he supposes he can with patience mollify his mind:
but has he not a sufficient trial to the contrary in the Bishop of
Canterbury, who having bin almost four years deprived of his Sea, has felt
the remisnes of the Sea Apostolic, and the Tyranny of the king, being all
this while exposed to winds? Let therefore (I pray you) my Lord the Pope be
ashamed of such a conscience, and have a care of his fame, honor, and
preservation of the Church, and intimate this unto him with more diligence, and
persuade my Lords the Cardinals to remember the judgment of Allmighty God, to
which Tribunal the poor of Christ do with their prayers daily fly against
all the Adversaries of the Churches liberty.] Thus says Salisbury, who
somewhat too boldly carpeth the estimation of so^ noble a Pope, whom in his
epistles he often commends, excuses, defends.

But to the end (reader) you may understand that it is dangerous to speak
evil, and rashly to judge of the high Bishop, hear (I pray you) the true
defense of Pope Alexander, without which it is unworthy I should inserte all
this in the Chronickles of the Church of Rome. For I shall not discharge the
part I undertake for bringing to light the truth of the history, if I shall
not vntwyning set it free out of the intangling errors and false assertions,
with which he and his acts are wronged, while things laid unjustly to his
charge are accepted as certain, without a dilligent axamination of the truth,
which I will make appear out of the epistles of diverse persons, whereby these
reports blazed abroad by John of Oxeforde will be rejected as untrue. Mark
therefore reader.

You have seen for the space almost of four years, being fully three
years and a half, the Controversy of the Ecclesiastical liberty beetweene
the king and Saint Thomas, and together with him the Church of Rome, being
tossed in delay, daily declyning to the worse, the king or Bishops never
con descending to submitt themselves to the judgment of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, from whom (as you have heard) the king together with the Bishops
appealed to the Roman Sea, and by their deputyes prosecuted the same Appeal,
desiring by them that a Legate a Latere might be sent into England. In which
petition of theyrs, it is first a falsehood, that (as it is affirmed) the king
requested only a Legate for England, which was the Cardinal of Papia: For
hear the same Salisbury: Our king (says he) requires that William of Papia,
and another Cardinal be sent as Legates, etc. And the Pope fearing, least one
of them, being the kings frind, there might come any damage thereby to the
contrary part, his Holiness chose such an one to be his associate, as by his
eminent virtue might withstand him, if he would attempt any thing against
right and equity, whom also he knew to favor the Bishop of Poytiers, treating
of both the Legates, in his letter to saint Thomas writes: to this William of
Papia (says he) as it is reported, my Lord Oddo the Deacon Cardinal de
Carcere Tulliano is associate, and I wish it so, for a favorable and well
disposed star may by conjunction, if it cannot extinguish the malice of an
evil affected star, yet at the least temper and extenuate the same.

Moreover that his Holiness designed the same legates not to decyde the
controversy (as it was publicly reported) according to John of Salisburyes
saying, but to compose a peace, the letters of the same Pope Alexander, yet
extant, do plainly witness. But to the end saint Thomas might rest secure of
any fear from the said William the Legate, Alexander above all other things
made him promise not to attempt any matter against the Archbishop of
Canterbury: I will relate the very words of Pope Alexander in his epistle to
Saint Thomas: and truly (says he) you may remain absolutely confident in the
Cardinals. neither ought you any way to doubt of the mentioned William,
because we have streyghtly and precisely enjoined him, to employ his whole
power to work your peace, and he made us so faithful a promise thereof,
that we have no doubt of the contrary. And more, that he might very much
prevail in procuring the peace, the matter being thoroughly considered, by
reason of his entire familiarity with the king, the same Salisbury conceived in
his mind, and expressed in writing to the Legate in these words: but in the
mean time, I hope, this your familiarity with the king, which to many is so
suspicious, will be profitable to the Church, necessary to you, gaynfull to
him, and to us glorious.

Beesides this Alexander endeavoring to make a peace beetweene the Archbishop
and the king, commanded not (as the kings, messinger lying foully said) that
this should be accomplished with detriment to the Churches liberty, but
contrariwise would have above all things a special provision for the
Ecclesiastical laws; so as in this point saint Thomas had no cause of
doubt, that the liberty of the Church should herein sustain any damage at
all, as in the same letters the said Bishop delivered. Again that there was
nothing granted by Alexander to the Bishops excommunicated by saint Thomas
(as Oxeford falsely affirmed) but that at the hour of death they might be
absolved, with a caution confirmed by oath, as the letters which his Holiness
wrote by the same Legates to the Bishops of England do manifest. Neither yet
was that true which with excessive boasting Oxeforde did lying spread abroad
among all men, Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist. 3.
how the king was exempted from the Archbishoppes authority, but that his power
over the king was only suspended while the Legates treated as the peace, in
like case and space as there is beetweene adverse armies an abstinence of war
during a parlee. And if peace took no place, that Saint Thomas might then use
his authority against the king, Alexander in his letters sent to S. Thomas thus
plainly declares: [But if perchance (which God forbid) the king shall
determine with a hardened heart to persist in his obstinacy, nor yet will, as
now, yield any thing to the will of Allmighty God; our admonition, and his own
honor in his reconciliation to you and yours, with the peace of the Church: If
afterward you think convenient to execute the severity of a due revenge upon
the kingdom, and the persons of the same subject to your jurisdiction, be it
either in regard of your Primacy, or Legantyne power, you shall revenge the
iniuryes offered to your self and your Church (as you shall think fitting)
with reservation of gravity, and maturity of judgment becoming your
Pontifical dignity.]

And to the point, that Pope Alexander dealte bountifully with John of
Oxeforde, the kings messinger, at his coming to Rome, beestowing on him the
Deanery of Salisbury, which being extorted from his Bishop, he surrendered up
into te hands of his Holiness, and that done, the wretched and altogether
vnwortthie man, received the same from the Pope again, For the Popes excuse
herein, John of Poytiers writes thus in his letters to saint Thomas: [Iohn of
Oxeforde won the more grace in the Popes sight, in regard he suggested to his
Holiness, that a peace might be concluded beetweene you and the king, if there
were but one to deal faithfully in the business; and promised to do his own
uttermost endeavor for the performance thereof.] And adds, he was absolved
from his excommunication by the Pope, in respect he abiured the kings
customs, the very ground of all this terrible discord. Thus therefore by
reason of the fair promises and a false pretense of contriuing a peace, Pope
Alexander was deceived by him, who is found a notorious liar in this, that upon
his return he publicly reported, how by privilege of his Holiness, he w^^
exempted from the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury. For, that the
Archbishoppes authority was only suspended, during the continuance of the
L^gantine power, and no way abrogated, what before is said does plainly show.
And Pope Alexander writing the next year to the Legates against this John of
Oxeforde, who had dispercing sowed such falshoodes in the minds of all,
commanded him to be punished with a most severe judgment. And these letters
shall also in their proper place be recyted.

All this have we said to wash away the foul slanders which John of Oxeforde
bruted in England against Pope Alexander, and which John of Salisbury too
credulous relished so ill for a time: for although (as you have seen) he
spoake hardly against Pope Alexander, yet afterward again he commends,
and in part excuses him, in regard what he did, was upon constraint of
necessity. For writing to saint Thomas he says: Neither have I any great
confidence of the Court of Rome, whose manners and necessitys are well known
to us: Pope Alexander indeed is a holy and just man, but his extremityes are
so many, and so great is the covetousness and wicked dealing of the Romans,
as sometimes he stretches to the vtermost of his power, and procures by
dispensation that which is said to be profitable to the common wealth,
allthough unprofitable to Religion. And again neither be ye discomforded, if
ye see in the Roman Court somewhat worthy of reprehension, remembering in the
Gospel, how the faithful are commanded not to imitate the works of them, who
fit in the chair of Moses, but to follow their doctrine. But he corrected
absolutely this and all the rest of his last letters written upon this
occasion, after better discovery of the business, handling the whole matter from
the very first coming of this most vilde man John of Oxeforde, and writing to
Miles Bishop of Moryn in this sort: If any man will dilligently consider the
preceedinges at Rome, he shall apparently see, how the Pope, albeeit
circumuented, yet nevertheless most faithfully handled the cause of the Church
and us. For the often recyted John of Oxeford being in the end upon his oath
according to the custom absolved, swoare again publicly, that he did
nothing in the aforesaid Conuentickle of Scysmaticks, against the faith of the
Church, and the honor and commodity, of my Lord the Pope; And I would to God
he had not bin perjured. Afterward he delivered letters of commendation and
Petition from the king, wherein was written, that credit should be given to him
in all things, as to the king himself: Then boulstred out with so great an
authority, he submits the cause in controversy between the king and the
Archbishop for the wicked customs, to the arbitriment of his Holiness, that at
his pleasure they should be either confirmed or cancelled, and binding this
also with another oath, he prevailed so far, as the Pope yielded to send
his Legates to this purpose.] Thus says Salisbury. whereby you may see, that a
man promising so much, and that not idely, but fortifyed with the letters of a
king, and mayntayned with oaths, ought not to pass unrewarded from the Pope;
which reward his Holiness beestowed, as the same Author witnesses in the
Epistle next ensuing; for he sent him back into England endowed with a Ring,
and preferred to the benefice of a Deanery; whereupon he grew to falsify with
more confidence, and had far better occasions to coulor his deceyptes, And I
would to God I could excuse as well as the Pope, some of the Cardinals, who
were corrupted with gold; but God forbid I should purge with excuse that which
deserves exceeding reprehension; yea I have ever said, these dead flies
loosing the odor of their oyntmentes, are to be prosecuted with most bitter
inuectinnes.]

The king of England endeauoreth to corrupt the Cardinals with bribes.
The king of England sent therefore by the Ambassadors to Rome certain pounds
of gould, to be distributed among the Cardinals: Many entertained fowly these
gifts; others to their great commendation absolutely refused them, because
they beelieued these rewards of kings turned to the reproach of the
Apostolic Sea: which assuredly so happened, for by reason hereof were
raised most grievous scandalls, and the face of the holy Church, the spouse of
Christ was much darkened; for mark (I pray you) hereupon the just complaynte
of saint Thomas uttered in his epistle to the Archbishop of Mountes. [I speak
(says he) with grief a thing much to be lamented, Ibidem epist. 21.
the City of great renown, which has conquered almost the whole world, is
surprysed, being ouerthrown with the covetousness of earthly favor, and she
who could never perish with the swoard, yields thorough the infection of an
accidental poison. O grief! in her fall is every where found the loss of the
Churches liberty for the grace of a temporal commodity. A breach is made to
her ruin by the subtell sleyghtes of riches, she practices dishonestly as a
harlot, who lies openly in the street to the lust of many, every mighty man
commits fornication with her.] These and other the like with great bitterness
of his mind did Saint Thomas even now at the point of his glorious
Martyrdom, pour out into the ears of his faithful frind, upon occasion of
this gould, so sent by the king of England, to corrupt the Court of Rome.
Hear you also the complayntes of the Bishop of Poytiers writing there of to
Lumbard^ in this sort. Ibidem epist. 32.
The king moreover vaunted; that he had such frindes in the Court, as could
quashe all the attemptes of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and were so diligent
in following all his business, as the Arbishop could not deliver a petion, nor
obtain the least favor, but he had present intelligence thereof by his
frindes; yea we know their names whose assistance he uses, and have lately
dealt in court, that the cause of God and the power of Christ might be soulde
at a vylde rate, neither truly was there a multitude in the commutation of
them; and was it possible there should be such ounces of gold as could
enforce them to fall, who should have bine the very pillars of the Church? And
the king is so puffed up with this triumph, as they cannot conceal in his
Palace, but must needs blab what Cardinals they were who would not taste of
that pestiferous and infamous gold, and on the other side who they were who
disposed of the money, in what sort it should be distributed, to some more,
to some less, according as every of them did more or less deserve in this
work of the subversion of justice.] Thus writes he of the matter.

Concerning those who scorned their gold, The Cardinals who abhorred those
bribes. Ibidem epist. 54.
among others were Humbald and Hyacinth most renowned Cardinals of the sacred
Roman Church, the frindes of saint Thomas of whom an epistle is extant written
by the Saint wherein is most honorable mention made of their contempt of gold,
because to their eternal commendation, they not only forbear to touch the kind
of Englands, gold, but also bountefully and charitably beestowed their own
on the English being poor banished men suffering for the Churches cause. For
Saint Thomas says: [others comfort us with words, but your bounty releeueth
us with your substance and your works, you have lamented our misfortune and
the Churches calamity, and esteemed here as your own, the miserys of the
poor banished for Christ; the most just Judge ^ender you in that day the
rewards of your brotherly Charity, and the (...) of your true compassion,
which promiseeth to the merciful abundance of mercy: you have not wandered
after gold, with the bayte whereof, to our exceeding hu^^^e, and the confusion
of the Apostolic Sea, some have bin caught; by whose procurement the king of
England having received the Apostolical letters, which he caused to be read
in the streets of either kingdom, vaunted that he had tryumphed over the
Church of Rome, nor without cause, for he has obtained his desire: and now at
his own pleasure he makes havoc in the Church of God without controulment
of any, hoping my lord the Pope (which God forbid) or my self should,
according to his own wish, in the mean time dye.] And afterward having
rehearsed his lamentable distresses, he writes thus again of the gold
bestowed at Rome: [our Lord knows who are his, and the Church now partly
knows who are not hers: For the king of England boasts openly, who are his,
neither is it concealed to how many, and to whom his gould was given, but his
bounteous gifts were the spoils of us, the spoils of the poor of the
crucified, the spoils of Christ himself, yea so great was the least portion
of their spoils, And therefore thus, because the king hereupon
sacriligiously usurps the most ample revenues of the Archbishopricke of
Canterbury; we cannot (I say) nor ought to excuse these offenses so foul and
detestable, for who are in this sort enthralled with the royal gold, are
become thereby leaden, and in estimation deformed; being for their leuity
flexible, they are in the burden of their conscience heavy, to God hateful,
exposed to the derision of men, and to be troaden under foot as salt wanting
taste, which is afterward of no value. Destroy them (o Go^) before they infect
the holy Church, which is without spott or wrickle. Confound them (o God)
before they beetray the Church into the hands of the Layety: let these errors
of their Predecessors, be a greater example and warning to their Successors.

ANNO DOMINI 1168.
The year 1168. Legates sent to the King of England.
together with the first Indiction now follows; in the beeginning of which
year, and the Kalends of January, the Legates a latere designed to go from
the City to the king of England, undertook their journey; the exact time of
this their voyage is signified in the letters written by John Bishop of
Poytiers to Saint Thomas in these words: Cod. Vrt. lib 1. epist. 163.
these two Legates, I mean William of Papia Priest Cardinal of the tytell of
Saint Peter ad vincula, and Oddo Deacon Cardinal of Saint Nicholas in carcere
Tulliano, passed on their way in the Kalends of January making haste to our
parts: but although they departed jointly together out of the City, yet went
they not one, but several ways, divided in their travailing unto France,
determining to meet together at the City of mount Pessulan.

But before we proceed farther in the history, let us see what letters Pope
Alexander delivered to the Legates, that you may perceive to what purpose he
sent them: the letters of the Legacy are yet extant, of which some were
directed to S. Thomas, others to the king of England, which here we are to
recyte out of the same written book, add first these letters to S. Thomas in
these words. Eib. 2. epist. 1. The Popes letters to S. Thomas.


[That we have not often with our letters visited your own person, the reason
(as you may understand) was in regard we have bin often careful to make
known to you by messingers and word of mouth such things, as we thought not
convenient to commit to writing: But now we would have your discretion to be
certifyed, that we with all our hearty affection desiring your peace, have sent
our beeloued sons William of the Titell of Saint Peeter ad vincula Priest
with Oddo of Saint Nicholas in carcere Tulliano Deacon, Cardinals, unto our
most dear son in Christ the famous king of England, to exercise the office
of Legates, in his Dominions on this side the seas; which is done especially to
make a final conclusion and agreement beetweene you and the king, and by the
grace of God to bring all to a charitable end. Wherefore in regard we esteem
your peace to be all one with that of the Church, neither do for any cause
more desire the same, then in that we suppose the universal Church shall
receive greater vtility thereby, we do by these our Apostolical letters
entreat, admonish, counsel and command your brotherhood carefully to
consider, how dangerously the state of this present time stands, and how
much the Church committed to your charge wants your presence and council,
and therefore to endeavor a peace, and inclyne your mind and will to lay a
sure foundation of concord beetweene you and the a foresaid king, as far as
may stand with the reputation of you and your Church.

And although all things do not herein succeed according to your hearts
desire, yet wincke at them for a season, intending by gods grace in process
of time to reduce to the former state such matters as are to be amended.
Neither yet in regard of the word, which according to your petition we
signified to our most dear son in Christ the renowned king of Fraece, do
you in any case fall of or estrange your mind or will from peace, and the
benefit of concord, so long as in the couena^tes thereof you may preserve (as
we have said) the honor of your self and Church untouched; because you may
hereafter by little and little with discretion root out many misdemeanors,
which if you should at this instant attempt, would be matters of great
moment. And concerning these two Cardinals, you may be confident in them;
nether ought you any way to mistrust the aforesaid William, because we have
streyghtly and severely commanded him to bend his whole power to the compassing
of your peace, and this has he so faithfully promised, as we can never
misdoubt the contrary. Moreover we entreat and admonish your brotherhood,
that you would carefully deal on our beehalfe with our beeloued son that
noble Earl of Flanders, and instantly persuade him, that considering the
necessity of us and the Church, he would endeavor with his liberality somewhat
to succor us; for we do not think he can do a more acceptable service to
Allmighty God, then to labor at this present to comfort us with the worthy
supply of his bounty for the defense of the Churches liberty.] Thus wrote Pope
Alexander unto Saint Thomas; and to king Henry of England by the same Legates
in this sort.

[Yeelding gladly to the requests of your Majesty and desiring as far, as
with God and his justice; we can to satisfy your will in all things, and
show due respect to you and your honor, we have thought good to send unto
your excellency, as Legates into your dominions on this side the seas, our
beeloued sons William of the tytell of Saint Peter ad vincula Priest, with
Oddo of Saint Nicholas in carcere Tulliano Deacon, Cardinals, men of learning
discretion virtue, being of great authority in the Church of God, and well
affected to you and your kingdom, and whom, among the rest of our brethren we
esteem as very dear and acceptable to us, giving them absolute power to
understand those causes which in former letters we have declared to you, with
all other matters likewise which shall seem convenient for them to know; whom
we have in all things authorized as vice gerents so far in our steed, as ever
the Church of Rome was accustomed heretofore to constitute them or any other
Legates of the Apostolic Sea. Wherefore we do by our Apostolical letters
request, admonish, and in our lord exhort your Highness that you will honorably
and benignly receive, and (as it beeseemeth your royal dignity) courteously
entertayne them, in such sort as is meet for men of that eminency, and
Legates of the Apostolical Sea; So as the holy Church of Rome may in your
beehauiour to her sons acknowledge your ancient devotion to her, and your
Majesty together with the lands committed to your government, through the
goodness of God, reap thereby increase of all things: and for those matters
which they shall propose to your excellency on our behalf, we do wish you
so diligently to admit, and promptly to obey them: as our lord and his
Church, may be therein worthily honored, and you with the realms subject to
your regiment, may also thereby gain abundance of benefits, with rewards from
God, and praise and glory before men. Show not the copy of this letter to
any but only Master Gunter, because I have passed thereupon as stricte a promise
to Master Walter, as he desired.] Thus wrote the Pope to the king, sending
likewise an other letter of the same effect to the Bishops of England, which
beeginneth: [it is reported to our ears, etc. Dated the last year in the
Kalends of December. By all which is evidently apparent, that Pope Alexander
persuaded a peace, in such sort, as no detriment might thereupon accrewe to the
Church.

Pope Alexander did write withal by the same Legates to the king of France, to
whom among other things he opens the desire of his mind for honoring Saint
Thomas with all worthy respects, and decreeing to this holy man the Legantyne
authority over the whole Church of France, if the Bishops of that kingdom
were so pleased. The letters of his Holiness were thus indighted.

Among other renowned tokens of your magnificence and devotion, we esteem as
chiefest, that you have with so many and so great honors entertained our
reverent brother Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, a man most religious,
discreet and virtuous, and to us, and the universal Church in every respect
most dear and acceptable: and that out of your bou^ty you have vouchsafed
ple^tifully to beestowe so large and royal benefittes out of your humanity on
him, for which we render your Majesty the greatest and worthyest thanks we
may, and for your clemency therein commend you with most exceeding praises in
our lord. And this as it is most grateful to God, to whom in his person you
have consecrated the same, so we accept it as dearly as if you had done it
to our selves; and because with all our affections we desire the peace of the
same Archbishop, we have thought convenient to send our beeloued sons
William of the tytell of saint Peter ad vincula, and Oddo of Saint Nicholas in
carcere Tulliano Cardinals, to our most dear son in Christ Henry famous
king of England, to reform by the help of God all matters beetweene the said
king, and Archbishop, indifferently for the honor of them both, and for the
conclusion of perfect concord and peace, and that they may in the same kings
lands on this side of the seas hear and understand all araysing
controuersyes, and there enjoy the Legantine authority of the Apostolic Sea.

Wherefore by our Apostolical letters we beeseech, admonish, and in our lord
exhort your Majesty that for the reverence of the Church of God, and the
honor of Saint Peeter and us, you would effectually do your part as well with
the said king as Archbishop, and carefully labor in such sort as to the honor
of God and his Church, and likewise to the benefit and commodity of them both,
they may frindly and peaceably agree together and bend their minds and wills
wholly thereunto, so it be done without impeachme^nt of the Archbishops and
the Churches reputation. And if by endeavor and labor of the same Cardinals
with your travel, they may return to peace and agreement, the Church, which
next under God is supported with your special assistance, shall receive
thereby no small increase, and you in the blessed retribution of the just
obtain of Allmighty God for this a special reward. But if otherwise (which
God forbid) they cannot accord, so it may stand with your royal likeing and
good pleasure, it would be to us in every respect a singular pleasure, and
very grateful and acceptable, if it may be without great scandal of the
persons of your kingdom, that we might endowe the said Arbishop with a
particular honor above others, and make him our Legate vicegerent in those
your parts, and therefore do most earnestly entreat your Highness, if he
cannot a cheyue a peace with reservation of the honor of himself and the
Church, being the thing we most desire, then that you will with all speed
signify unto us your mind herein, and in the mean while conceive this as an
exceeding secret.] Thus wrote the Pope to the king of France. The Legates
therefore as soon as they touched France, presently saluted saint Thomas with
their letters, and William did in this sort write unto him.

[Allthough thorough the variable alteration of times, for doubt least the
Church of Rome, Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist. 9.
being distempered with a Scysme, should sustain the greater damages, we
seem in the conceits of some to decline from you to the adverse part; he
knows notwithstanding, who is the searcher of hearts how we conserve still
in our breasts a tender affection unto you. For truly, as to our remembrance,
we have signified often to your wisdom, we have with all the care we could
labored to eschew the suspicion of the king of England, to the end we might
in process of time be a more effectual mean for composing a peace beetween
him and you, and with all retain still the devotion and zeal of so great a
prince to the Apostolic Sea. And being now designed together with our
reverent brother Oddo a Cardinal Deacon to pass into his Signioryes, for
determination of the matters in controversy beetweene you and him, in such
sort as we shall see most expedient for the Church of God, we exhort
earnestly and persuade your discretion, that setting a side, as much as in you
lies, those things which are accustomed to beeget the causes of greater
dissension, you would with dilligent care be atte^tiue to that which can best
procure a concord. For we will bend our minds, as much as by Gods grace we
may, to deal without any respect of persons for this peace and your profit,
leaving nothing undone, as the proof God willing shall make plain, which we
can possibly effect, for the honor of God and his Church.] Thus wrote William
the Cardinal and Legate to saint Thomas: who answered as follows.

To his reverent Lord and friend worthy of love William by the grace of God
Priest Cardinal of the tytell of Saint Peter advincula and Legate of the
Apostolic Sea, Thomas by the same grace the humble seruante of the Church of
Canterbury wishes health and courage against the insolency of Princes.
Ibidem epist. The hater letters of Thomas to William the Legate.
We yield thanks to your charity for vouchsafing now at the last to visit
with your excellencyes letters our poor afflicted person, which is measured of
many by the state of our present fortune, not by what is paste: yet God may
hereafter out of his mercy, when it pleases him, and to him shall seem
convenient, restore us again to better. In that you say, whereas many suppose
you are not so thoroughly affected to us the reason hereof is the Churches
great vtility, least otherwise being held in suspicion by the king, he
should be thereby less devoted to the sacred Roman Church, and not so much
incline to composition of a peace with us: God the searcher of hearts best
knows, and the event of things will declare. If at this instant you come
into his dominions (as your letters signify) for decyding the controuersyes
beetweene us and him in such sort as to the Church you shall see most
profitable, it is a thing possible; But we are of opinion, that we certainly
know to what intent you are come, and how we ought to receive you: whereupon
we desire in our lord most instantly to exhort your wisdom, foe to be have
your self in this business, as thereby God may he honored, the Church relieved,
and we restored to glory amyd the people, and in our nation. If any favor or
peace fall to us by your labor and industry, we shall therefore thank God and
your diligent care. And we wish you would weygh with a tender affection and
compassion, how great agreiuances we and the Church of England have
sustained, and do as yet endure, and how much the universal Church is
impeached in our sufferance. On this business we cast the eyes of all, and all
expect the conclusion thereof, the insolency of Princes will either exalte
their horns, or as they worthily deserve, be suppressed. And I wish they may
rather by this your coming sustain loss, then recover strength. God send you
now and ever well to fare, that we and the Church may thereby fare the better.

Thus saint Thomas.

But in regard William the Legate not only in his letters to saint Thomas and
others, but also in words did openly vaunte, that he came as a Judge of this
controuersye, and did usually with greater pride and insolency unadvisedly
boaste in this sort: saint Thomas sending a messinger to Rome, Saint Thomas
complayneth to the Pope against William the Legate. Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist.
22.
did presently complain thereof to Pope Alexander by his letters; wherein after
he had first set before his eyes, how far forth God had assisted him in
conquering the pride of the Emperor, who was dreadful to the whole world;
having experienced thereby, that the help of Allmighty God was on his side,
for the defense of the Church against any Tyrants whatsomeuer, he had now (as
he said) learned not to fear. Then he descends to William of Papia. [I
would moreover have your Holiness understand, that what we dreaded is beefallen
us, and what we foretold is now apparent, concerning the pride and
presumption of the lord William of Papia, as you may well perceive by these
letters he sent us instantly upon his coming, from whom we expected
(according to the tenor of your mandate to my Lord the king of France, and us)
rather comfort for the recovery of peace, then confusion for decyding of
controuersyes beetweene the king of England and us. For he is not the person,
unto whose authority in this case we ought to be subject, especially since he
was rather procured to come upon the kings instant entreaty to you, then any
way compelled or sent by you. We suppose truly it is not agreeable to law, we
should be enthralled to the judgment or examination of him, who seeks to
make his commodity of our blood: let him not therefore go about to purchasse to
himself, by the prize of our life, the name and glory of iniquity.] Thus he
wrote, because (as it appears out of other letters) it was held for
certain, that the king of England had promised William the Archbishoppricke of
Canterbury, if he could deprive Thomas of the same. He proceeds. [Wee do
therefore earnestly beeseech you (father) if as yet you have care of us, to
abrogate his authority at least so far as it concerns us and our causes in
controversy.

But let us see what Oddo the Deacon Cardinal the other Legate a Latere did
write to Saint Thomas who signified somewhat, though not much, by letters of
great note, concerning his journey, leaving matters of more secrecy to the
relation of the messinger he sent, The letter he wrote was thus.

To the worthyly beloved father, and his most dear brother, Thomas by the
grace of God Archbishop of Canterbury, Oddo by the same grace Deacon Cardinal
of the sacred Roman Church and Legate of the Apostolic Sea sends greeting.
The letter of Oddo the Legate to S. Thomas. Ibidem epist. 4.

We certifye your dearly beeloued self, that after our journey undertaken,
upon our Lord the Popes commandment, passing through hazardable places of
exceeding great danger, we arrived in the end by the conduction of Allmighty
God in Venice; our enemies the Scysmatikes lying, on every side, in ambushments
ready to intercept us, whose snares by the favor of God are broaken in pieces,
and we delivered. And traveling from Venice not covertly, but openly, with
great joy and comfort of our fryndes, through Marchia, Verona, and our native
country Brixia (where we made some long abroad) by Bergom ad Millane near
Nouaria; then by Vercelles not far from Taurin, we attained to Saint
Michaelles de clusa, and thorough Province to Saint Gyles with safety
untouched, following thence our ready way to Mount Pessulan, where the lord
William our frynde, whom our Lord the Pope assigned to be our associate,
coasting thorough other countries, in such sort, as we suppose you have
heard, gave us the meeting. And now proceeding on farther, we send you this
bearer our Chaplayne, whom we would have you credit as our selves being
confident in whatsomeuer he shall on our beehalfe relate unto you: and
whatsomeuer you will signify back again to us, trust him therein, as you would
trust your self.


Thus wrote Oddo the Legate to saint Thomas. Who before he received the same,
or any way understood of the Lord Oddos being in France, saluted him with this
respective letter.

[Hearing the approach of your excellency, Ibidem epist 18.
Christ's banished flock, our fellows in exile, conceived a meruellous joy,
and as if an Angel were sent from heaven for the comfort of the Church, and
ransoming of the Clergy, the whole congregation of Saints with thanksgiving
tryumphed: And although your associate be held in suspicion by many, saying
he accepts of persons and rewards, and is an inward faueror of our Lord the
king, willing in all things to patronize his cause, and for us together with
the Church of God to kill and choke, yea make us all his spoil; The opinion
nevertheless of your name, or, to speak more truly, of your virtues, shyneth
so bright as you are esteemed to have with Moses the Angel of our Lord,
which is the holy Ghost the forerunner in the law, who protecteth you ever,
and suffers you not to have new Gods, whereby you should prefer either
rewards, person, or cause, before Allmighty God, etc. Psalm. 18.
] But for his opinion of William, the other Legate, he utters it afterward
in these words. Many insult over us, especially our adversaries, yea the
Churches adversaries, saying truly, the Cardinal of Saint Peter's chains is
sent against us, that Peter may by his means be chayned again.

Now the reason why the Legates did not instantly upon their coming into
France, execute the office of their Legantyne authority for concluding a peace
beetweene the king and Saint Thomas, was the rising of a war beetweene the
kings of England and France, that hindered their designs, of which troublesome
discord John of Salisbury writes to John Bishop of Poytiers in this sort.
Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist. 31.
[The confusions of the two kingdoms with mighty earthquakes of immine^t
dangers, have long enforced me to withhould my pen, and expect more convenient
times for writing unto you. For the tumultes of war raging all the whole
summer out off the intercourse of Posts and a rebellion in kindled in the
City of Rhemes, so disturbed the Province, as a man could hardly pass in and
out of the City, etc.] He treats farther of the Civil war of Rhemes,
which never left till it came to the kings themselves, upon report whereof
Pope Alexander: wrote thus to his Legates.

Alexander Bishop servant of the servants of God to his beeloued sons
William of Saint Peter ad vincula Priest; and Oddo of Saint Nicholas in carcere
Tulliano Deacon Cardinals, and Legates of the Apostolic Sea sends
greeting and Apostolical benediction.
What exceedinge great damages and discommodityes may beefall to the
universal Church of God, Ibidem epist. 34.
and especially to the Roman, and the Church of the East, by reason of the
discord and dissension, which by the procurement of the enemy of mankind is
raised beetweene our dearest sons in Christ the renowned kings of France and
England, it be seems us in wisdom to consider, and so much the more
dilligently to bend our forces to extinguish the^ the more we dread (which God
forbid) the greater dangers ensuing thereon, and therefore by our Apostolical
letters we admonish charge and command both your discretions, that ye
endeavor by all means possible of your own, and also by other Religious and
grave men of either kingdom for restoring peace and concord beetweene them,
and that herein ye beestowe all your labors and powers, and that ye have in
any case singular care not to determine any thing upon the request and for the
favor of any one of them, whereby the other may be scandalized or disturbed.
Moreover we straightly forbid ye that neither ye nor any of ye presume to
enter the kingdom of England, or manage the affairs of that dominion, and
especially not to compass, or any thing to ordain concerning the consecration
of the Bishops, unless our venerable brother Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury
be absolutely reconcyled to the before said king of England; which we hope and
wholly trust may be brought to pass by your industry and ^^^el, if God
c^^curreth with all; For as we perceive by the letters of many judicious men,
there has not bin a greater firebrand to inkindle insurrections and tumultes
to the disturbance of the king of France with all his country, then the
rumors which John Deane of Salisbury upon his return from us is said to have
dispersed in those parts.]

Dated at Beneuent the eleauenth of the Kalends of September. Thus truly the
peace which was once or twice confirmed, was now clean dissolved again.

But let us here set down the conuenantes and conditions which were formerly
contryued for conclusion of a peace beetweene the two kings, for these are
signified in an epistle of John of Salisbury sent to the Archdeacon of
Excester, wherein is mentioned how in the assembly at Soisson they proceeded in
this sort concerning the Articles of peace now ratyfied anewe. The king of
England ought to return again unto the homage of the king of France, and
taking a corporal and public oathe to profess before all men, that for the
Duchy of Normandy he would serve him as his Lord in such wise as the Dukes
his Predecessors were accustomed to serve the kings of France. That he was
bound to resign the Countyes of Anioue and Cenomane, together with the fealty
of the peers depending on these Signiories to Henry his son, who thereupon
was to do homage and fealty to the king of France against all men, neither to
owe any more to his father or brothers therefore, but what the consideration of
nature or meritt required. The king of France on the other side did grant to
Richard, son to the king of England the Duchy of Aquitayne on like
conditions, giving him his daughter in marriage without any dowry, who was
nevertheless at her fathers pleasure to accept any free gift toward her
marriage These were the conditions of peace establshed at Easter: but upon new
occasions broke out a rupture of war again; whereupon it was necessary the
couenantes after our Lords Ascension should once more be revived, saving the
king of France would not be obliged to beestowe his daughter on Richard the
king of Englands son. Thus is it there related at large. And yet although
Pope Alexander (as has bin said) admonished by letters his Legates who were
sent into France, that setting other business a part, they should only bend
their forces to reunite the kings so rent in wars; nevertheless one of the
Legates William of Papia not performing (as it was beeseeming) the office of a
Mediator, far from indifferency, which declineth in affection to neither part,
beecame presently an absolute partaker with his frind Henry, king of England,
William the Legate takes part^ with the king of England. Cod. Vat. lib. 2.
epist. 32. The discourse of the encounter of the two kings.
whereupon the king of France was somewhat moved against him. There remains a
perfect declaration of all this in writing, containing other things worth the
knowledge, and is set down in the letter of John of Salisbury sent to Master
Lumbard in these words. [When the kings were come to the place appointed for
conference. Ewdo earl of Britane and Rowland of Dynamen broke into many and
grievous co^playntes to the king of France against the king of England, but
Edwo especially beewayled that his daughter, who being yet a virgen, was
delivered into his hands for a pledge of peace, was afterward gotten with
child by him, being therein a Traitor, adulterer and intestious. For the king
and Ewdoes wife were borne of two sisters. But the Earl of Angolysme and
March with the Vice-count of Doway, Robert de Sylly, Geffrey de Licimacke,
Henry de Rancore, and the Abbot of Caroffy pleaded for restitution of losses
they incurred by the king of England and his subjects after the truce was
taken. For the Abbot affirmed his Monastery appertayned to the Dominion of the
king of France, since the time of Charles the great who was their founder.]
And a little after. [The king of France having there understood, that the
Cardinal sat in the king of Englandes counsel, incensed said: he had not
deserved of the Church of Rome that the Cardinal (as hitherto he had ever
done) should favor his enemies, and that at this instant he would not
receive any thing for the love he bore to the Earl or Cardinal, but only for
his own right, etc.] And after many matters he adds: that the parlee of the
kings being ended, the king of England with great ostentation vaunting showed
the Popes letters, whereby he had enjoined Saint Thomas not to publish any
excommunication or interdiction against the king or any of his English, so
long as the Legates remained there, suspending him thus from his authority, and
boasted that he had with triumph in a sort obtained of the Church of Rome
whatsomeuer he desired of the Pope. The procurer of these letters was one of
the Legates William of Papia. John of Salisbury opens and delivers the
whole matter in his epistle to the Archdeacon of Excester, where we thus read.

It is apparent the letters, whereby the king gloryeth that he has restrained
my Lord of Canterburys power, until he reconcyleth himself unto his royal
favor, were purchased by this device. The often mentioned Papia knew how my
Lord of Canterbury had obtained authority from the Apostolic Sea to publish
against the king the sentence of excommunication, and against his kingdom the
like of Interdiction, unless the king within a time limited by the letters made
full restitution to the Church of all things taken away with ample
satisfaction: wherefore he wrote to my lord the Pope beeseeching him with a
lamentable petition, to proceed with the king in a milder fashion; otherwise
the king to the shame and eternal disgrace of the Church of Rome (according as
he has resolved if he were more rigorously handled) would cast as well
himself as his Associate Oddo into chains and prisons, where they should
pass a life abridged with miseryes, yea a time more terrible then death it
self, persuading thefore his Holiness that the king intended thus to tyrannize,
he obtained for contenting him, and continuing the free liberty of himself
and his associate, whereby they might the easyer travel in these affairs,
this Apostolical letter, which has so much afflicted the minds of you and
all other true Catholics.] So writes Salisbury of this letter so fraudulenty
procured from his Holiness by William of Papia one of the Legates.

By reason hereof the king of France grew wonderfully discontented with Pope
Alexander, which the elected Bishop of Charters perceauing, certifyed his
Holiness thereof, writing thus of the king of France. [Among all the kingdoms
of this world in my opinion there is not one which has continually showed a
faith more sinceare, a charity more fervent, a devotion more plentiful to the
Sea Apostolic then that of France; There is not one among the kings and
princes, who obeys your Mandates with more humility, honoreth the Church and
Ecclesiastical persons with more devotion, and defends them with greater
endeavors then our most Christian king: There is not a Church which has bin
more serviceable to the Church of Rome in all her distresses, then that of
France. This Church of France and the king himself beecame suitors to your
Holiness on the beehalfe of my Lord of Canterbury, who has for the Churches
liberty, and defending the dignity of your Majesty continued a banished man in
exile now four whole years. There pleads against him before your Holiness a
Tyrant, a persecutor of the Church and to the kingdom of France open enemy,
whose iniquity is notorious to all men, And yet notwithstanding, which I am
ashamed to speak, and greiue to see, malice has hitherto prevailed in vanity.
For why when as he lately came to a parlee with the most Christian king, where
by the mediation of the Earl of Flanders, who invited my Lord of Canterbury
thither, The king of England vaunteth of the suspe^sion of S Thomas from
proceeding against him.
there was earnest endeavoring to renew a peace to the Church, he caused to
be read in the hearing of his Bishops and Peers the Apostolical letters,
wherein was decreede that the aforesaid Canterbury should not publish any
sentence against him or his land, nor yet any way molest any person under his
Dominion, until he were reconcyled to the king. Upon the hearing whereof the
most Christian king was confounded, and the whole realm together with all the
children of the Church conceived exceeding grief, to see a just man, a
reverent Bishop suspended without cause, and that there proceeded from the
Apostolic Sea a writing that would prove so pernicious a President. Cod Vat.
lib 2. epist. ^0.
] Thus wrote William the Elect of Charters, whose singular commendation, John
of Salisbury in his letter to John Bishope of Poytiers sets forth in these
words. [A man assuredly of great hope, of high fame, of eminent authority.]
And a little after. [There is not in the Clergy of France (I sperke it from my
heart) who excelled him for wisdom and eloquence.] Moreover the king of
France sent letters importing as much to his Holiness. And saint Thomas himself
has his letters yet extant which he wrote to Manfred the Cardinal, to
Bernard Bishop of Portua, and to Humbald and Hyacinth Cardinals, Ibid^m
epist. 52.
all tending to that purpose. But this concerning the suspencion was granted
by the Pope, before he understood the aforesaid deceiptes of John of
Oxeforde, Ibidem epist. 54. Ibid epist. 55
which being once discovered, he was incensed with such a zeal against this
treachery, that he suspended presently the Legates from approaching to the
king, and with his letters comforted Saint Thomas, all which is witnessed in
the letters of John of Salisbury to Syluester, where first he writes of the
most magnificent intertaynement of saint Thomas by the king of France in these
words: [The most Christian king of France received my Lord of Canterbury at
Senon with royal magnificence in the Church of S. Columb, Ibid epist. 90
and in all respects does so honor and reverence him, as beeseemeth the
Christ or anointed of our Lord to be entertained by a most Christian man: yea
in the eyes of that most faithful Prince (as himself confesses) the days
seem few and the expenses small in comparison of the great love which he
beestoweth in the service of the Priest of Christ and of this Apostolical man;
and therefore this faith which with humility he practices, I beeseech God
with worthy retribution to reward, whose bounty it is that living in the
midst of his enemies without blood or war he prospers in all things, and
(which most highly he esteems) is beloved and greatly respected by his
subjects, 2 Reg. 6.
as Obededon the Gethean upon receiving the Arcke of God found the fruits of a
divine benediction in the fertility of his hand-maydes and flocks, together
with the multiplying of his whole possession: 2. Paral. 34. and 35. ibidem. 20
and as Olela for receiving the same Arcke being cast out of the Temple of our
Lord by Achaz obtained in the silence of the Bishops and Preistes the grace
of Prophesy: This most Christian king receiving into his realm the Church of
Rome in the person of Pope Alexander, had by his wife a son, and (by Gods
grace) heir of his faith and kingdom, a thing which above all others he most
earnestly desired, and now for his charity to the afflicted Church of England
he confidently expects an other reward, which God of his goodness give him.
My lord the Pope has of late as well by message as letters recomforted the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and I would to God the world understood with what
sleyghtes and devices the notorious swearer procured that, whereof the
Adversaries of the Church do so gloriously vaunte.] And a littel after. These
things are yet upon the necessity of obedience concealed from the world, but
our hope is that all will be shortly published, because (as we certainly
hear) the coming of the Legates: which has by them binne so gladly
expected, is now suspended, or rather frustrated, upon the discovery of
Oxeforde the swearers falsehood. Thus Salisbury.] Yet indeed the coming of the
Legates to the king of England, being for a time suspended, was not suffered
to proceed until almost the later end of Autumn.

But Pope Alexander receiving so many complaints by the letters of sundry
persons, for suspending Saint Thomas, somewhat moved thereat, writing to the
Legates signified, how he nothing at all abrogated the authority of Saint
Thomas, but rather suspended the power of the Legates themselves from
intermedling any way as judges in decyding these controuersyes, For the letters
he sent to the Legates a latere: Dated 9. Maij are these.

After your departure came heavy tydinges to our cares, how our beeloued son
John Deane of Salisbury publicly declared, that in regard we exempted
Bishops and other Ecclesiastical and te^porall persons of the kingdom of
England, from the Jurisdiction and authority of our reverent brother Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, we did all this to satisfy the will and pleasure of
the king of England, and to depose and condemn the Archbishop, and that we
sent ye purposely to that end. It is also insinuated to us, that John Cunim of
Oxeforde showed to Guydo the Antipope of Crema all the letters he procured of
us, whereupon the Archbishop being confounded with shame and grief, our most
dearly beeloued son in Christ Jews the renowned king of France together with
his Princes through these reports are very much troubled and extremely moved,
for allthough it was suggested to us by many and made in a sort to seem
credible that the aforesaid John did only, and so faithfully labor for the
honor and advancement of the Archbishop with his Church, and for the liberty
of the same, pretending that at his return home he would with his labor and
industry procure the delivery of Ecclesiastical persons from restraint of
imprisonment, which they endured upon the kings Commitment: and last allbeeit
the forementioned John signified to us by his letter how the king in the
presence of many did publicly say, He would conserve untouched to the Clergy
of England the self same libertyes which they had in the reign of his
Grandfather king Henry: yet nevertheless in regard the fame hereof is so
far spread, as it causes our good name in those parts to be consumed with
infamy; we admonish and command your wisdoms, that ye have instantly a
special care to recomforte the said Archbishop with your letters, and
clearing his mind from all sorrow and suspicion, ye endeavor by all means to
reconcyle him to the king and work a perfect peace among them, and that
hereein ye spend all the care and diligence ye possibly can, provided
always that ye preserve pure and untouched the ancient laws and libertyes
belonging to him and his Church, neither do ye any thing else of importance
within the kings principalityes; enter not in any case into his kingdom,
although himself does never so much entreat ye, unless the Archbishop be
first accorded unfeignedly with him, because it will contract to ye and us a
wonderful infamy, whereby the voice of the people will rent in pieces your
honor with slanderous detractions; but for John Cumyn if ye find the
allegations to be justified against him, censure him with severity, that he
be made an example hereafter to terrify others. We also will, that in all
your actions and affairs ye beehaue your selves advisedly, gravely and
prouidently, to the end no cause of reproach be any way found against ye, but
that the devotion of both kingdoms by your travel and conversation be
continually increased as well to us as the Church, whereby ye may gain to your
selves an eternal praise and glory.] Dated at Lateran in the Nones of May.

These letters being received and diuulged in France did breed a singular joy
in all devout minds as the epistles of diverse do testify. Moreover it so
fell out as the Popes Legates upon occasions did often mention in excusing
themselves to the king of England, that their authority was by his Holiness
diminished. Yea although the letters of Alexander were not extant, it is
nevertheless most assured that the Legates have professed the same in the
presence of the kings both of England and France, as it appears out of the
epistle hereafter to be recyted.

But the Legate of Papia, allbee it is his authority was very much lessened by
the Apostolical letters, did notwithstanding leave nothing undone to obtain
for the king of England his hearts desire, with the overthrow of the cause of
Saint Thomas, who in the mean time was encouraged with the Popes letters
writing in this sort.

[Although the calamity of aduersityes and labors seems more terribly to
threaten and prevail against you, set nevertheless before your eyes the
sundry examples of the holy fathers, who like your self suffering for the
zeal of justice many distresses and afflictions, deserved thereby to win with
great felicity an everlasting crown in the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore we
desire and admonish your wisdom that having in your sight the saying, Blessed
are they who suffer persecution for justice: you will not let your mind be
broaken with crosses, nor fall from her settled estate with any tribulations,
but strengthen the same with the virtue of fortitude and constancy. Where you
know assuredly the justice and liberty of the Church to have received
detriment, do not there in any case endeavor to renew a peace with the king of
England to the suppression and abridgment of the Churches dignity: but on the
other side, so far as it may stand with the honor of your degree and liberty of
the Church, humble your self and labor by all means to recover his grace and
favor, neither conceive of him a needelesse fear, nor require more security
then is convenient, because (as we beelieue) after he has once reconcyled
himself unto you, he neither will himself offend, nor suffer any other to
offend you: and for us (as we have often signified to you both by message and
writing) we will ever love you as our dearest with a sinceare charity, and
procure the conservation of your honor with the increase of your liberty and
dignity, so far as God will permit us.] This was Alexanders Epistell worthy so
renowned a Pope. But to the matter, let us now see what ensued here upon.
After long indirect ways and perplexityes, the Legates who were sent from the
City, did hardly at the length, in the Kalends of January and end of Autumn
come together to the king of England for managing the business wherein they were
employed. But how matters passed beetweene them and the king, their own
report to Pope Alexander, in the name of the Legates of the Apostolic Sea,
declares, Ibidem epist. 28.
which being written by one of them William of Papia, with a mind extremely
bent against the Archbishop, lays all the blame on Saint Thomas, in so much
as we ought not to make any reckoning thereof, unless he be withal admitted
to audience, who being innocent, was accused as culpable. Yet hear his
relation, or rather a most bitter accusation of Saint Thomas.

To our most blessed father and lord Alexander by the grace of God the most
high Bishop, William and Oddo by the same grace Cardinals, wishing prosperity
remember the humble and devout service of their subjection.
The report of William the Legate to the Pope, with an inuectiue against
Saint Thomas.
Coming to the dominions of the most renowned king of England, we found the
controversy beetweene him and Canterbury aggrauated in far worser sort
(beelieue us) then willingly we could have wished: for the king with the
greatest part of his followers affirmed how the Archbishop with great
vehemence incensed the most worthy king of France against him, and in like
sort induced his cosyn the Earl of Flanders, who before did bear him no
malice, to fall out with him, and raise the most powerful war he could
against him, and this he knew of certaynty as a thing apparent by evident
demonstrations. For whereas the Earl departed from the king with show of
freindship, the Arbishop coming in his province to the very seat of the
war, incyted, as much as in him lay, as well the king of France, as the
aforesaid Earl to arms: when therefore we first entered into parlee with the
king at Cane, we delivered into his hands (as best beeseemed us) the letters
from your Holiness, which when he had diligently and considerately read,
finding in the perusal of them, that they somewhat differed and disagreed from
others which he had received from your Holiness formerly concerning the same
matter, beegan to be styrred with greater indignation, and that the more,
because, as he said, he was assured how the Archbishop, after our departure
from your Holiness, received letters whereby he was absolutely exempted from
our judgment, and was no way bound to answer before us.

He affirmed moreover that the informations delivered to your Holiness,
concerning the ancient customs of England, were rather boulstred out with
falshoodes, then supported by truth, which the Bishops there present did
witness. The king offered also, that if any customs since his time were
devised contrary to the Ecelesiasticall laws, he would submitt them to the
judgment of your Holiness to be confirmed or cancelled. The Legates appoint a
time for parlee with Saint Thomas.
Calling therefore unto us the Archbishoppes, Bishops, and Abbotes of the
kings Dominions, to the end the king should not absolutely deprive us of all
hope of peace, but rather suffer himself to be drawn might have a conference
with the Arbishop, as well concerning the peace as the judgment. Sending
therefore letters unto him by our own Chaplaynes, we appointed a certain and
safe place, where we might have conference with him in the feast of Sa^^^
Martin: He nevertheless pretending excuses putt of th^^ Parlee until the
Octaues of this Saint, which truly molested the king more then we could
imagine; but when we saw the Archbishop (although we offered hi^ safe
conductes) would nevertheless give us no meetinges in any part of the kings
dominions which confyned on France, we being willing to yield to him, to the
end there might be nothing wanting in us, which might redounde to his profit,
came to a place in the realm of France which himself appointed.

The parles beetween the Legates and S. Thomas.
Where being at the parlee, we first beega^ most earnestly to persuade and
instantly exhort him, that he would beehaue himself to the king, who had bin
his singular Benefactor, with such humility, as might minister unto us
sufficient matter whereupon to ground our petition of peace: at which motion
retyring himself aside with his freindes, after consultation with them he
answered, that he had sufficiently humbled himself to the king without
impeachement of the honor of God, the liberty of the Church, the reputation of
his own person, the possessions of the Churches, and lastly the justice due to
him and his; these things so numbered up, we seriously persuading him (as it
was necessary) to descend to particulars, when he would allege nothing either
certain or particular we consequently demanded of him, if in the matters
specifyed in your letters, he would submitt himself to our judgment in sort
as the king and the Bishops had already undertaken to do; to which our
demand be presently replied, he had received no Mandat from your holiness to
that purpose; but if he, with all his, might first be fully restored, he
would then proceed herein according as by the Apostolic Sea he should be
commanded.

So returning from the parlee, since his words neither ^ended to judgment nor
agreement, nor yet he would by any mean enter into the matter: we manifested
unto the ^ing some things known to us concealing nevertheless (...) as it was
convenient) other passages, and tempering what we heared with discretion.
Having therefore ended ^ur speech, the king and peers there present beegan to
maintain, that his Majesty was now set at liberty, since ^he Archbishop
disclaymed from judgment: whereupon after the king had showed signs of great
disturbance, the Bishops and Abbotts of the kingdom of England together with
many others of the Clergy demanded earnestly whether we could enforce by
virtue of any special mandate, or by our Legantyne power, the Archbishop to
stand to judgment, and when they understood our facultyes were heerin
insufficient least the Archbishop being (...) not subject to judgment should
(as before he had done) work molestation to some of the kingdom, in regard
that therein our presence could profit them nothing, and was not able to defend
them against the Archbishop, with a general consultation and consent they
appealed to the audience of your Holiness, assigning the term of their appeal
the feast of Saint Martin, which shall fall the next winter following, flying
in the mean time for defense of them and theires to the Apostolical
protection, and including all the subjects of the realm with the whole
kingdom within the Edict of this appellation. Lastly we knowing this matter
evidently to tend to the Churches exceeding detriment, did by your and our
authority absolutely forbid the Archbishop (first in regard he was
restrained by your letters, then because they appealed solemly against him)
that he should not hereafter attempt any thing to the aggreeuance of the
kingdom, people, or Churches of the realm. It is therefore the part of your
Apostolical providence carefully to foresee that this business turn not to the
grievous damage of the Church, as they who respect the Churches especial
commodity fear and doubt.]


This was the relation of the Apostolical Legates to Pope Alexander. But here
we are to se^ down likewise the epistle of Saint Thomas concerning these
matters to his Holiness, which was thus.

Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist. 50.
[The greatness of our miseryes and bitterness of our greifes confounded the
minds of us and our fellows in exile, and afflicted with a heavy scandal the
most Christian king the peers of France compassionating the Church, which as
it seemed in the coming of John of Oxeforde was given over into the hands of
them who sought the depriuatio^ of her life, in so much as with exasperated
hearts they complained that faith and truth were taken of from the earth. But
(for the which the father of mercys reward your pity, most holy judge, most
living Parent, and of the Church of God faithful Guardian) according to the
multitude of dolors in our hearts, your consolations have rejoiced our souls.
For now are we revived in hope, and the most Christian king with his kingdom
yielding infinite thanks to your Apostleshippe (which God most highly bless
and conserve for many years) retorte all this their indignation upon them who
gloryed they had with their oaths tryumphed over your Majesty. For the king
having received your l^^ters of excuse written by your excellency, instantly
praised and magnifyed the grace of your wisdom, justice, sanctity and
blessedness, and with great joy laid open to the detractors the malice and
deceyptes of them who had with false rumors so fowly scandalized the Church of
France, beating this someytmes into the ears of them (if perchance they were
present) who were unwilling to harken thereunto, in regard they sided with the
contrary part. But his joy was more increased after his conference with your
Legates, by whom being received of him with reverence (as he confessed) he
understood they came not to prejudice the liberty of the Church or us, but to
compose a peace beetweene the king of England and us, and (if it were possible)
beetweene him and the Church of God. And I pray God they may prosper in this
way, with his grace, v herin they shall find us most ready Assystantes for
retayning the honor of God, and the Churches liberty.

And being invited by them to a parlee in the confines of the kingdoms the
tenth day following, we having then (we speak on our conscience) but three
horses in our stable, obtained a forbearance fer seven days more, to assemble
together our exiled company being poor wretches miserably dispersed here and
there, yet necessary as well for comfort in this intended journey, as to help
us with their counsel in the caryage of this business: who albeeit they were
hardly able to be called together in a time so short, and penury so pressing
on all sides, nevertheless we gave our Lord the Legates meeting on the Octaues
of Saint Martin. The most Christian king by his servants appointed for that
purpose (for which God in the mercy of his word reward him) liberally and
bountefully entertayning us with our fellows the whole company of Christ's
exiled who flocked together from every place. And as it was signified to us by
some, our persecutors did all they might to breed vexation in our iourneys and
chargeable disbursements, to the end they might make us burdensome and odious
by the great weight and tedious prolonging of our expenses, to the king of
France, who among others the poor of Christ, releiueth us with his alms: for
they think to reap a great benefitt of their malice, if they could disturb
us of this habitation, which God has provided for us, and deprive us of the
Princes charity, (...) as they beereaued us of our assistance among the
Cistercians. There came only with my Lords the Legates, the Archbishop of
Roan, the other Bishops and Abbots of our province (whom it pleased the king
to call) being left at Roan.

They laid therefore open first before our eyes the cruelty of the king, the
malice of the times, the necessityes and calamityes of the Churches, which in
all parts of the world almost (France only excepted) was assailed and
oppressed with aduersityes scarce tolerable, and many other words they used
of the mighty power of our prince, his love and reverence to the Church of
Rome: his favor, grace, and benefitts bestowed on us, aggravating withal
excellency, the accusations of iniurys done by us and ours, wherewith he
complained that he was wonderfully wronged, affirming we procured both the
king of France and Earl of Flanders to make wars against him; then they
persuaded us to endeavor with great humility and ample show of devotion and
moderation to appease his indignation, if so extreme a fierce nature may by
any means be reclaymed, and so rough and unbridled a disposition broken: yea
they asked counsel of us (who in times past weere accustomed to know him more
inwardly) how they might soften the hardness of his heart, for he showed
himself more distastefull to them, after he perceived how they could not
according to the promises made by John of Oxeforde, contrary to God and all
laws, pronounce against us at his pleasure the sentence of condemnation; but
what he said in the hearing of his Bishops, shall by Gods assistance be
delivered you more commodiously by word of mouth then by writing. And for us
we yield thanks to your Holiness that you are so carefully of the Churches
peace and ours, which ours if the Churches peace and yours.

We avoided the suspicions by which the king labored to tax us, with true and
probable reasons, and the king of France himself the next day followinge did
as far as concerned him in the presence of the Cardinals clear our
innocence with his oathe, being (as the searcher and judge of hearts knows)
guiltles of this fault; neither are we so dull and slow to beeleiue the law
prophetts and Gospel, that in a point of this great importance, laying aside
our spiritual weapons and the sheildes of Apostolic discipline, we should
suppose arms of the flesh to be used especially by preistes; for we know we
are not to trust, in princes, and accursed is he who makes flesh his arm;
Ierem. 17^
and to the end they might not falsely devise any such thing against us, we
long abstayned from having conference with the king, until at the last upon
his commandment we came, that we might present to him the letters of our
excuse, and obtain a free passage and safe conducte for my lord Oddo the
Legate who sent to us for that purpose his Chaplayne Papia, for he had
procured the like from the king of England: the king of France also as then
unripped unto us an old injury (as he said) offered him by them at such time
as he accepted you as his father and lord, and lastly he took worst of all
the vainglorious boasting of John of Oxeforde with those of his faction. After
his having graciously admitted our excuse and granting the pass we desired,
we returned to the place of our poor aboade expecting with patience relief
from our Lord.

And because our Lords the Legates required at our hands all humility and
show of modesty, whereby so magnificent a prince might be appeased and
pleased; we answered we would according to their counsel render unto him as
to our Lord and king most willingly and deuoutely all humility, service and
reverence, saving ever to God and the Apostolic Sea their honor, to the
Churches her liberty, to us respect of our person, and to Churches their
possessions, and if any thing seemed according to their opinion to be heerin
added, lessened, or altered, we beesought them to certify us, in regard it
was our desire to obey the^ so far as stood with our condition and profession,
they replying they would not consult hereof, nor came to us then to give advice
but ask counsel of us, essaying us they demanded (that we may use my lord
Williams words) in regard we were not better then our forefathers we would
in their presence promise our king to observe all the customs which his
ancestors held in the time of our Predecessors, and so all controuersyes on
both sides being laid asleep (if they could bring this about which would not
be done as they thought without difficulty) for us to receive our
Archbishoppricke again, and to recover his grace and favor. Whereunto we
said that none of our predecessors were ever by any king constrained to make
this protestation, neither we (God willing) would ever profess to observe the
customs which utterly destroy the liberty of Gods Church, pluck up by the
roots the privilege of the Apostolic Sea, and are open and absolute
oppugners of the law of God, from the which of your mercy you absolved us at
Senon in the presence of themselves and many others, whenas you used withal
these words worthy of your Apostolical mouth, which by Gods grace shall never
depart out of our mind, that we ought rather yield out necks to the swoard
of the executioner, then consent to such wicked customs, and for a filthy and
base commodity of our temporal estates, and greedy purchase of a frail life,
to neglect our pastoral office. There were read in their presence those
reprobate customs, some of which we had already condemned, yea which the
whole Catholic Church had in many Counsels before our age together with the
obseruers of them accursed; we asked them if it were then any way lawful for
a priest without peril of his order and danger of his soul to observe them,
yea or to wincke at them; we said moreover we had formerly sworn our fealty
unto the king, with reservation of the honor of our order, and that we would
ever willingly observe the same so far forth as we do not frustrate our faith
due to Allmighty God: whereupon one (whom as your Holiness knows we have held
and ever ought to have in suspicion) urged us thus; that better it was
absolutely to yield, then the Church to be in this sort disturbed; and to
this effect were multiplied many perswasiue speeches, which will better be
delivered by word of mouth then otherwise: to whom we replied, that in this
cause we would never yield, in regard it would prove a pernicious example,
and turn to the ruin of the Ecclesiastical liberty, yea perhaps to the
damage of the Christian faith, for who hereafter would then ever dare to open
his mouth? what is he who (when the Pastors shall thus run away) will rise
against them to oppose himself as a wall for the house of Israel? we said
moreover neither your Holiness nor any Apostolical men instructed ever the
Church of God with such examples. Did not (upon the flight of the Pastors as it
is famousely reported in Historyes) all Egypt return to Idolatry, where at the
first Religion so exceedingly flourished? Then running to an other matter, they
demanded if we would abide the judgment of the Legates in the controversy
beetweene the king and us, and that if heerin we refused judgment we seemed to
justify the kings side, and in the eyes of many to diminish the credit of our
cause: where on the other part (if it stands with your pleasure) we are not
bound to admit our adversary for a judge: neither can we be confident of any
herein but only in your presence, for by reason of the banishment of us and
ours, the king so frighteth and terrifyeth all men with the vexation and
losses of others, as none, knowing it, dares once affoarde us a good word.
Considering deeply all this, we tempered our answer so as we neither
refused nor accepted this judgment and dangerous trial: For we said,
whenever we, who were thus beerefte of Archbishoppricke, government, and all
our goods, were restored again to what we lofte, we would then gladly, and
when we ought submitt our selves to your determination, or the judgment of him
or them, whom by your mandate you should appoint, nor could we nor would we
fly from justice; in the mean time we could not with any reason be
constrained to a contentious course of law, neither were our poor means able
to supporte it, neither could the liberality of the most renowned king, without
molestation, extend it self so far as to mayntaine us with the poor of
Christ our banished breathren upon his expense under the roofes of strangers,
especially since he abounds not at this instant with money; for where he
has plenty of victuals, there can he more tollerably defray our charges.

Then descended they to the third question, demanding if we would admit the
process of the Bishops who appealed against us before those judges: But we
answered, we received no mandate of yours concerning this business, nor yet
that our poverty was able to undergo the expenses of such a controversy: forth
at was the drifte of our Aduerssaryes (as we understood by them who could not
be ignorant heerin) to give a taynte to our person upon any occasion in the
presence of the Legates, thereby to work us any wrong. For they coniectured
that none of the province durst assist: us against the king, in regard whereof
they might the sooner procure our ruin: and the king called out only those to
this conference, who being our Adversaries from the first raising of this
storm, were known to be the inuentors of so great a mischeife, which were
the Archbishop of York with the Bishops of London and Chichester, the Bishop
of Worcester being also sent for with them, that under the veil of his
worthiness the malice of the rest might be shadowed. But as your wisdom may
remember these who now so applaude the kings pleasure, and above the rest (as
it is openly known) thirst our blood, are they who sometimes so much extolled
in their letters full fraught with our praises, the procuring of our Pall, and
the form of our election together with our person; but now contradicting both
truth, and themselves, through an impudency of lying and flattering, they
beecome contemptible, whilst at the pleasure of the Prince, like the slave in
the Comedy, now they say, now they gaynesay: these are they (o father) who give
horns to the sinner, and if he be not made enough, incense him more, laying
soft cushons under his elbowe, and lulling a sleep on daynty pillowes the
head that languisheth with sins.

Since therefore they who ought with their counsel, assistance and authority to
be the pillars of the Church, do now with their flattery and expenses animate
and arm the persecutors of the divine law and of our selves against her and
us, it is not safe nor possible for us to subject our selves to judgment, but
only in the presence of your Holiness, and to be examined by your self: For
although the Church may conceive a great hope of the sinceare proceeding of one
of the Legates, and we are confident in him, especially in matters
appertayning to God, nevertheless there is not any man but your self to whom
we dare co^mitt this cause of our Lords; and for the other, God make him the
man who may save his soul and beeseeme the place of a priest Cardinal of the
Roman Church; yet let that never come to pass which (pleases it you to
remember) we forewarned and fear will yet happen, if it should fortune, the
wisdom, eloquence and authority of my Lord William should concur with the
power and wilful disposition of the king of England, we doubt (we say)
they will demand of us by their counsel and consent those things which
either be grievous for you to hear and impossible to be effected, or
otherwise displeasing to God and odious to the world.

And because the charge of all Churches rests on your shoulders, turn (if it
please you) your eyes on the west, mark and see in what sort the Church, is
there handled, let it be told by the lord Oddo, whom we beeleiue the spirit
of God guydeth, let him declare what he behouldeth, what he knows
concerning the Church and Province of Towers, what he heard reported in
England, what he has by experience found in Normandy, and we beeleiue you
will say with tears, there is no grief like to the grief of this. For to let
pass the Churches of Canterbury and Towers which he houldeth in his hands,
as you have heard, and we wish you would hear it more fully, he has now of
long time retained to himself seven vacant Bishopprickes in the provinces
beelonging to us and Roan, nor suffers any pastors to be ordained in them,
the Ecclesiastical state of the kingdom is given his followers to be
trampled under their feet and made their prey: If we look not to this (most
holy father) how shall we answer Christ in the day of judgment? who will
resist Antichrist at his coming, if we suffer thus the vices and offenses of
his forerunners? with such enduring as this, Potentates grow proud, the
kings of Nations turn to be Tyrants, and imagine the Church ought to have
no right, no privilege, but depending only on their pleasure: but blessed is
he who houldeth and dasheth the little ones on the rock. For if Judas being
commanded by the law rooteth not out the Cannonytes, they will grow up to be
perpetually his Adversary and his stinge. Be therefore (father) of good
comfort, and be a courageous commander, we have more on our side then they
have on theirs; God has broken in pieces Frederick the hammer of the impious,
being ready also shortly to strike others unless they amend and have peace with
the Church of God.

And to conclude, we only expect the sentence of your mouth, or of his who
has bin accustomed to beereaue Princes of their spiritts, and deliver the
poor from the potent. You shall receive more by word of mouth which we
thought inconvenient to committ to writing. Let your excellency be thus
persuaded, that if we would from the beeginning have given way to these wicked
customs, we needed not now intercession of any Cardinal, nor yet of any man
living. In vain (God willing) do they lay before our eyes the examples of
the Cicilians or Hungarians: which at the day of Judgment cannot excuse us, if
we prefer the barbarism of Tyrants before Apostolical constitutions, and
beeleiue the usurping pride of wordly powers to be rather a rule to direct
our life, then the Eternal Testament confirmed with the blood and death of the
son of God. To frame therefore a lamentable end to our former discourse, let
your Holiness now consider, if this ought to be the fruit of our labor,
travail and exile, thus to be judged, naked, miserable, deprived of our whole
estate, and these extremityes in our trial, only because we attempted for
the liberty of the Church, to withstand a most fierce oppressor of the same?
Yea we, who daily expect comfort from this desolation, joy for this misery
with a just revenge from God and you against the Churches Adversaries for their
injury done to Christ. Could it not sufficiently satisfy them, who sought our
life, that they have murdered some of us? nor yet could they content themselves
with our poverty and calamity, being scarce able to live by releife from the
alms of strangers, but that we must moreover with this Legantyne authority
(which would it had never bin) be in vain protracted and delayed from years
to years, from grief to grief, from misery to confusion? Yea our right and
justice to be turned to the ruin of us and our wretched Associates? Good God,
what will be the end of this dolor? Arise (o Lord) adiudge thy cause, revenge
the blood of thy servants thus impiously killed, together with those who
through intolerable afflictions do even now fainte, since there is none but
our Lord the Pope, and some few left with him who will deliver us out of the
hands of our enemies. God grante your Holiness for many years well to live and
prosper, that we with our unfortunate fellows may live and recover.] This was
the report of Saint Thomas unto the Pope. In the mean while the Legates
Cardinals signified to Saint Thomas, how the king of England had obtained from
his Holiness, which as we see by all means possible he bruited abroad, that
the authority of Saint Thomas concerning the affairs of the English Church was
wholly interdicted. There is extant a restraynte in this manner, which was sent
by them to Saint Thomas written in these words.

To our reverent and most beeloued brother the Archbishop of Canterbury,
William and Oddo Cardinals send greeting.
The king was certifyed of your answer as well concerning the agreement, as
also the cause, Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist. 29.
if so it pleased him to proceed against you: and whereas he was before hy
reason of your other actions (as he said) incensed enough and too to much,
he beecame now enraged with a greater and more vehement indignation, accusing
peremptorily the erection of your mind against him, and our Lord the Popes
nrglect of his affairs. Moreover the Bishops and Abbottes of the kingdom of
England hearing you would have noe dealing with them, nor yet stand to our
judgment, read openly in our presence our Lord the Popes letters, wherein (as
he says) he commands you to forbear interdicting the land: They demanded
also of us, if they might by us or either of us thorough this our Legantine
authority be defended against these your molestations of them in England:
whereunto when we answered, we had no power at all concerning any matters in
the realm of England, they appealed there instantly both for themselves and
the whole kingdom unto our lord the Pope, sheilding themselves and the realm
under the protection of his Holiness and us, assigning for their day the feast
of Saint Martin: wherefore we command your dearly beeloued self, and enjoin
you on the beehalfe of the Pope and our selves, that answering the foresaid
Appeal and respecting the restraint which our Lord the Pope, as he affirms,
has layn upon you, you attempt no interdiction or excommunication against the
realm of England, before you have appeared in the Apostolic presence, and
understood the pleasure of his Holiness and the Church, of Rome herein. The
Bishops likewise and Abbottes themselves have sent their especial messangers
to denounce to you this their Appeal made in our presence, together with the
determined day.


This was the Mandate of the Legates. But when this news of the inhibition or
restraint of the authority of Saint Thomas was not only by letters signified
unto him, but also (as before, you have heard) reported every where to the
scandal of all good men, who favored the Churches liberty, S. Thomas being
heerewith exceedingly afflicted, did write lamentable letters replenished with
complaints hereof, as well to Pope Alexander himself, as also to all the
Cardinals of the Roman Church wherein he discovered the bitter sorrow of his
mind, all which especially we can readylie declare, being extant in the end
of the same often recyted book of Epistles, and were by error of the writer
omitted in the second book after the 45. epistle, as the corrector of that
error has admonished us. The epistle of Saint Thomas to Pope Alexander is in
this wise.

To his most beeloued lord and holy father Alexander by the grace of God high
Bishop, Thomas the humble servant of the Church of Canterbury a wretched and
miserable banished man together with his exiled Associates wishes prosperity
and all felicity.
Saint Thowryteth to the Pope expressing his sorrow.
We send to your holiness the bearers hereof being two persons faithful to us,
and fellows of our miserable exile, such at this instant as we could get,
and them whom we have assigned to deliver in your presence, the certain and
pitiful relation of matters concerning us now lately acted, and withal the
necessity of our calamityes being assuredly above measure, that we may
thereupon receive (if it please you) with speed, redress by your means from
this oppression of the Church and us, (which help, though most due, is yet too
long delayed) and obtain withal through, the hand of your mercy, releife in
our greiuous distresses, least being otherwise cruelly and abouer sure
depressed, we fainte in this tribulation, a greater then which we have not
since the first beginning of our long continued afflictions endured: For we are
deferred, the time is now tedious (as your excellency understands) we are put
of and prolonged no less cruelly then unjustly from years to years in misery
and dolor, that if perchance by that way in length of protracted time our life
may perish through tribulation, and we thus worn out altogether be
extinguished and fall to dust as absolutely spent in the extremitys of our
disasters, while death in the mean time (which God forbid) may deprive you of
authority, whose power through the mercy of God shall, before it expireth
redeem us and ours out of this lake of misery, and break the snares of the
malicious contrary to the desire of the wicked. Be^d down therefore (o Lord)
thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and see if there has bin an iniquity
equal to this; be dilligent, attentive, and mark if there be a dolor like
this of us and ours, who are given up for a prey and spoil, unless thy mercy
(o God) do presently through the hand of the Apostolic authority succor us,
we are made a scorn and derision to those who are about us, being confounded
by the authority of your Legates, who would to God they had not dealte thus
disorderedly and presumptuously with us and the affairs of the Church, for if
they have thus used us in the green wood, what will they do in the dry? we
mean in the continuance of this Legantyne authority, which would it had never
bin. They have suspended us (as much as in them lies) from all power which we
have enjoyed over the Churches and persons of England, although never by Gods
grace nor by your goodness done at the instance of any Prince or other, or by
Gods mercy will be done; as your excellency vouchsafed most certainly to
promise us. And why (renowned Lord) have you granted this Legantyne authority
to such a man (let it be spoken with your pateence) in whose first entrance to
this business your Lordship ought to have bin circumspect what the fruit of
this Legation would he, and more considerate what the end would prove,
especially in him whose endeavors were wholly bent from the first, and so are
still, to the ruin of the Ecclesiastical dignity and also of yours, if so he
may be gracious thereby to the king.

My Lord, my Lord, on you are cast our eyes least otherwise we perish, help
us (my Lord) and deal with us according to your promises, which we would they
had not in vain rejoiced our hearts; for we have endured upon the
commandment of your excellency, we have endured peace (we say) and it
comes not; we have expected, by the handy work of your Legates, good, and
behold our affliction is more increased, and our troubles more terrible. Take
pity on us therefore (my Lord) take pity, since there is none under God who
fights for us, but only your self, with your faithful Assistantes. Have
mercy on us (we say) that God may have mercy on you in that severe judgment,
when you must yield account of your Baylywicke, for we have refuge to none
under God but your self, since even they, to purchase she favor of men, oppose
against us, who in regard of piety and justice, and for the reverence of the
sacred Church of Rome, ought especially to maintain and defend us. For your
estates being now consumed, and endless vexations assaulting us, we have not
hereafter any means left how to prosecute this troublesome suit and
co^trouersy raised by them, nor the least part thereof. Let then your
excellency instantly (if it please you) help us and the Church with making an
end of this malicious mischeife, that there be hereafter no longer delay,
because the time now importuneth it, for hardly are we able to breath, our
extremities are so great, make haste therefore, that we may receive some
benefit of your favor before we dye: God send long prosperity and life to your
holy and bounteous goodness which we esteem most dearly, and is next under
the love of our Lord for us most necessary, that by your magnificence we may
beegin to revive, who now beegin to dye.

Please it your wisdom to be also informed that three days before these
mischeifes befell us, we sent messingers with letters to signify to your
Holiness in what manner we departed from your Legates. For the most Christian
king of France, his Queen, the Princes and Bishops of the kingdom with
others of lesser note, who loved you, did by theer letters congratulate you,
glorifying Allmighty God, and thanking his divine Majesty and you, because it
was manifest upon the coming of the Legates, as they themselves by word of
mouth made known to my Lord the king, that all the rumors were false and most
untrue which John the swearer of Oxeforde, and others the kings messingers had
vaunted concerning the aggreiuances, and overthrow we should receive by the
Legates, which raised an unspeakable scandal throughout the whole kingdom of
France, and among all who heard this report, they only excepted, who were
adversaries to the Church and us, But this harp was turned to lamentation,
this mirth to morneing, and the last error made worser then the first: We
humbly therefore beeseech, that it would please your Holiness to apply a present
remedy to a sickness yet beeginning, and to let men openly know according to
the truth, how all this presumption was without your priuity and contrary to
your commandment. And so again God send your Holiness well to do now and
eternally.


Thus much wrote Saint Thomas to Pope Alexander. Which the Saint not satisfied
with this seconded with the ensuing complaints to the sacred College of
Cardinals.

To his reverent Lords and Fathers the Bishops, Codex Vatican in the
Appendix of the epistles, epist. 1.
Preistes and Deacons by the grace of God Cardinals of the sacred Church of
Rome, Thomas by the same grace the humble servant of the Church of Canterbury a
wreched and miserable banished man sends gteering with remembrance of his
most respective dutiful service. Saint Thomas complayneth to the College of
Cardinals.

It is not easy for a wreched man to make a grateful discourse, and for the
miserable to keep a measure is speech; forgive therefore (we beeseech ye) the
wreched, and pardon the miserable. We beelieue (most holy fathers) how ye are
by the ordinance of Allmighty God placed in that your hygth of dignity to this
purpose especially that ye should chase away injustice, cut of all
presumption, graciously succor the afflicted of the Clergy, and never suffer
them to be ouerborne with reproaches and calamitys, but aid and assist the
oppressed and aggreiued, suppress their false accusers, and severely punish
such as work their ruin: For in not chastising the perverse nor resisting the
Persecutors of the Church, we do nothing but favor them: He seems secretly
to consent who opposes not himself against a manifest offense; whereupon we
conclude, it cannot be but that ye are hereafter bound with all your forces
and endeavors to assist this cause of ours, And (a little after) is not our
cause also yours? yea absolutely yours. Will ye not yet seem to know that
the king of England has usurped, and every day usurps even still the
possessions of the Church, how he overthrows the Churches liberty, lays
hands on Gods anointed, tyrannizing every where and without any respect over
the Clergy, castinge some into prison, dismembring others, plucking out the
eyes of these, enforcing those to undergo the combat of single fight, and
likewise causing Clearkes to endure the trial of fire and water, making
Bishops to disobey their metropolitan, and inferior Clearkes their Bishops,
not to acknowledge themselves excommunicate, who are nevertheless truly
accursed, and in a word (which is far worse) that he clean abrogateth the
whole liberty of the Church, not unlike that infamous Scysmaticke the oppressor
of your selves (Frederick we mean) who laboreth utterly to rent out the very
bowels of the Church; if this be suffered to pass unpunished in our king,
what will not his heirs presume? what shall your successors endure? Consider
how mischeifes daily increase, and the occasions and inventions of mischeifes
increase withal.

Good God, and shall he do all this without controulement? This was not the
way of Christ, nor yet of his Apostles, whose imitators ye ought to be, etc.


By reason therefore of these letters sent as well to Pope Alexander as the
Cardinals, of the sacred Roman Church being then at Rome, and likewise by the
authority of a man of that worth, and above all by the truth it self, his
Holiness with the College of Cardinals was moved to call home with all speed
these Legates, who were accused by so many complayntes of this saintly man, and
his messinger and agent (who resyded at Rome) especially also procuring the
same, whom S. Thomas (as it appears) admonished to follow the matter
effectually with his Holiness, writing among other things unto him the
[Wherefore in all respects it is expedient, Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist. 104.
yea most necessary that you employ all yours endeavors, and with your
uttermost power work our Lord the Pope to call back the often recyted
Cardinals, and cause them to be compelled upon a pain to ensue, if they
should refuse presently to depart out of all the kings dominions.] So wrote
saint Thomas for recalling the Legates, who (as we have said) was ever
favorably heard of his Holiness: for the Pope by his letters recalled them
presently back to the City, abrogating all their authority, who before they
departed thought good to see the king of England, whereof, and concerning the
passage beetweene them, Ibidem epist. 6.
a relation then written discourses in this sort.

[The next Thursday after the Octaues of Saint Martin the Cardinals came to
the Monastery called Bec, The rep^rte of the last conference beetweene the
Legates and the King^.
on the morrow to Ligieux, the next day to Saint Peter's upon Dyue, and thence
the wednesday before the first Sunday in Aduent to Argenton, on which day the
king gave them meeting two leagues before they entered the town, entertayning
them with a pleasant countenance, and accompanyd both the Cardinals to their
lodging, the second day ensuing after Mass being called early enough in the
morning they came and entered the kings chamber to consult with the
Archbishoppes, Bishops and Abbots there assembled, and continuing in counsel
the space of two hours, they passed on farther the king accompaning them to the
outward door of the Chapel, and as they went, the king in the hearing of them
and all others said, that he wished his eyes might never more beehould any
Cardinal, and dimissed the^ so hastily, as their lodging being near at hand,
yet could they not expecte the coming of their horses, but were enforced to
ride on such as they could by chance find without the Chapel. Thus departed
the Cardinals with noe more at the uttermost then four attendantes. The
Archbishoppes, Bishops and Abbotts remained with the king and entered the
Chamber to sit in counsel, where having continued until evening, they went
thence to the Cardinals with discontented countenances, and staying awhile
with them, returned to their lodginges. On the morrow, after they had remained
with the king six houers, they went to the Cardinals, and thence back to the
king, with returning again to the Cardinals, and so continued, carrying
secret messages to and fro. At their meeting being on Saint Andrews Eve, the
king rising early went on hunting, and (as it was certainly supposed) did it of
purpose to absent himself: the Bishops came beetymes to the kings Chapel,
and thence to the counsel chamber, where after deliberation of matters they
departed to the Church near the Cardinals lodginge, where the Cardinals
being sat, they were called in to hear what they would propose; the
Archbishoppes of Roane and York taking their places, after them the Bishops of
Worcester, Salisbury, Bayon, London, Chichester, and Angolisme with many
Abbottes, and a company of the Layety. London rose up whose idle and ill
digested oration was a manifest argument of his distempered mind; and
beeginning ye have seen, etc. And rehearsing the Appeal made by the
Bishops of England, and declared formerly by the relation of the Legates,
having concluded he said since now they had appealed they desired of the
Cardinalle Letters of appellation sent from one judge to another.
Apostles, which (as it is supposed) was given them as proper to their appeal.
So the Cardinals departed from the king on the Tewesday after the Sunday
wherein is sung Ad te leuaui: but in taking leave, the king with great humility
beesought the Cardinals to be intercessors to his Holiness, that he would
absolutely deliver him from us; and with those words before the Cardinals and
all the company he wept, and my Lord William was seen with his tears to
accompany him; But my lord Oddo could hardly forbear laughing. Now for the
substance of the business thus it is: My Lord William of Papia sends a
certain Chaplayne of his, kinsman (as it thought) to Master Lumbard, in P^ste
to my Lord the Pope, and with him the king sends likewise two messingers, the
one appertayning to the Bishop of London, called Master Henry Pixim, the other
Reynold son to the Bishop of Salisbury. Moreover on Satturday before the
second Sunday of Aduent there went from the Cardinals being then at Sureux
Master Iocelin of Chichester and the Chantor of Salisbury toward you to
denounce that there was an appeal made against you by the persons of England.
[And somewhat after] my Lord Oddo the Cardinal certifyeth my Lord the Pope in
secret, that he would never be author or any way guilty of your deposition,
although the king seemed to desire nothing else but your head in the dish.]
This was the relation sent by a frind of Saint Thomas unto him. And yet there
is an other report made by John of Salisbury in his letter to John Bishop of
Poytiers, where it is set down thus of the kings imaged mind in their last
departure. [The Cardinals found the king in such an excessive fury, as he
complained openly that he was beetrayed by my Lord the Pope, Cod Vat. lib. 2.
epist. 20.
and threatened to forsake him unless he would cause justice to be executed on
the Archbishop of Canterbury.] And afterward concerning what followed when
they had appealed he declares it in these words.

The Bishops sent also two messingers being of the messingers beelonging to
the Legates, one called Walter the Chauntor of Salisbury, the other Iocelyn the
Chancellor of Chichester to declare the Appeal made in this sort, and to
renew the same before the Archbishop. But the Archbishop admitted not the
Messingers from the Bishops to speak in his presence, because among others,
they came also in the name of the Bishop of London, whom the Archbishope held
for excommunicate, and therefore signified to the Cardinals, that they who were
employed in this message, had communicated with those whom he had
excommunicated: although to delude the Apostolic Mandate they seemed to the
ignorant absolved, for our lord the Pope yielded at the last only to this, that
in danger of death they might be absolved, taking first an oath to submitt
themselves to the Popes Mandate, if they recovered, whereupon they fayning
themselves to be in hazard of their lives, because sometimes by their lords
commandment they were to cross the seas, or other whiles to travail into
Wales, obtained absolution from a Welsh Bishop Llanesua, a man inexpert
almost in both laws, and who as one wise in making his bargain, had received
at the kings hands the Abbey of Abeedon for a Bishoppricke, and to the end no
question might be had of the Popes Mandate, the Archbishop sent to the
Legates the Apostolical letters, whereby they were straightly commanded to
reduce all such as were so absolved into their former sentence of
excommunication, unless they fully restored unto the Archbishop and his
Associates their possessions, with all other things by them unjustly taken
away, and that no obstacle of any Appeal should ever hinder this Apostolical
Mandate.] And afterward. [Hee therefore instantly beesought the Legates, that
according to my Lord the Pope^ Mandate they would urge these persons
excomm^^^cated by him to make satisfaction, or to return the^ back to their
censure of accursing, etc. saying withal, that Legates were invited to this
business, who were weak on this beehalfe, to the end they might be bowed with
every blaste.] But concerning them who stole out an absolution in regard they
were to pass the seas, Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist. 98.
the epistell of John of Salisbury is extant written to Pope Alexander wherein
he does manifest that they could in no case be accounted for absolved.

After William the Legate understood Saint Thomas had not admitted the
Bishops messingers in respect they were not duly absolved from the
excommunication they had incurred, he himself as well in his own as his
associate Legates name sent these letters to the Bishops of Norwich and
Chichester, both of England, who had the matter by him committed to them for
absoluing the excommunicate.

Ibidem.
[Wee do by these our letters command your wisdoms that upon sight hereof
ye absolve such persons as are said to remain in your hands entangled in
the chains of excommunication by the Archbishop of Canterbury, taking first of
them a promise to stand to our awarde; and that this occasion being set
aside, either of ye, to whom these our letters shall first come, do endeavor
to prosecute and accomplish whatsomeuer shall seem moderate in your judgment,
and after they have received your Mandate, then signify that upon their oath
they are absolved.] These were the letters written in the name of the Legates.
Salisbury mentions these letters in his epistle to the Archdeacon of Excester
in this sort: Ibidem epist. 101.
[For he shall receive shortly (if he has them not yet) letters from the
Legates commanding him to absolve those who stand excommunicate by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, notwithstanding the Legates themselves have therein no
power to command, but are by the Apostolical letters forbidden to come within
England, or any way to intermedle with the affairs of the kingdom, unless a
most perfect peace be first concluded.] And after: [And let them be told
that they shall have no beenefit of absolution for obtaining salvation, unless
penance, confession, and satisfaction do forerun it, etc. This and other
things did Salisbury write, out of whose other letters to Alexander receive
here again the complaints of such as were banished for the Ecclesiastical
liberty in these words. Cod Vat. lib. 2. epist. 100.
[Our souls (o father) are drowned in bitterness, in so much as I fear
exceedingly in your sight, least the surpassing force of sorrow should
beereaue our words of modesty and patience, in regard the wonderful depth of
our miserys knows not how to confine our complayntes: For some of our
fellows dying for the defense of justice, expect from God and the Church
revenge of their innocent blood, others are afflicted with sundry tortures, we
are all banished, The complaints of the banished Englishmen to the Pope.
and have long lingered in exile: but there is one only remedy left to the
faithful in their tribulation, incessantly to solicit the divine Majesty
with their prayers, and to reveal to him the secretts of their inward minds,
that they may so move their father to mercy, and obtain comfort in their
calamityes. As often as the children of Israel used this, so often we read
they were delivered out of their necessityes and extremityes, they had recourse
to the Tabernacle of truce, where the holy of holyes was reserved, that is to
say, the commandementes of God which far excel all iustifications, in their
greatest difficultys they did fly to Moses, and Aaron the holy of our Lord;
and to whom shall the wretched of Canterbury run to be Mediators beetweene
God (...) them, but to the Roman Church where flourishes the conservation of
the divine law, and primacy of all Preisthoode; for next under God (if he
resolves to save us) we shall be presently delivered; if you lift up your
hands Amelech shall be destroyed, and he who has made you a God over
Pharao, will overthrow all the Churches Adversaries before your face.] Thus
far he complaining afterward of the excommunicated who were unduly
absolved, as we have before declared. But Pope Alexander understanding this,
wrote thus to the Cardinals Legates against those who were absolved without
forerunning satisfaction.

[Wee are let to understand that some of those, whom our reverent brother
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury has excommunicated, Ibide^ Epist. 99. The
Popes letter concerning the absolution of the excommunicated.
do still presume to withhould the goods and possessions of his Church and
Clergy, and make their commodity of them; wherefore because it is unworthy
that while they retain these goods and possessions, they should be released
of their accursed bands, we do by these our Apostolic letters command your
discretion that if (as we have heard) they are absolved by any, ye do
straightly on our beehalfe enjoin them upon their oaths instantly to yield
up the possessions and goods so wrongfully usurped unto the persons and
Churches to whom of right they beelong, and that hereafter they attempt not
upon any occasion what someuer to keep them or intermedle with them; and if
they will not obey your commandment, that then, all delay and appeal set a
side, ye recall and cast them back into their former sentence of
excommunication until they have made full satisfaction; yea although they have
bin absolved by your selves, yet nevertheless accomplish ye this our
commandment.]

Thus wrote Alexander but the next year following as appears by what has
been said, for before that time was not the Pope certifyed theereof. Which
letters from his holiness when the Legates had received by the messanger of
saint Thomas, writing back to the Saint they excused themselves, with
saying, that while they remained with the king they could not put these matters
in execution against them on whom the king had beestowed the goods, and how
this was also the Popes intention, that during the time they remained Legates
there with him, they should endure thereupon at his hands any thing unworthy
of the Apostolic Sea. But let us follow the Legates in their return
homeward, whereof John of Salisbu^y says this in his Epistell to the Archdeacon
of Excester. [The Cardinals return, Cod. Vat lib 2. Epist. 105.
called back not without confusion, repentance and complayntes, that to
pleasure the king they depressed to much the cause of the Church, for one of
them, which was Papia, obeyed his will in all things, the other also dealing
more remissely then beeseemed a man of so great expectation and hope.] Thus
Salisbury, who again after many other things declares how far Oddo the
Legate peruailed with the king, in these words. [I was like to have let pass
what is not to be passed over, which is, how my Lord Oddo a few days before
he departed from the king dealt more seriously with him to conclude a peace
with the Archbishop, whereunto he answered, that for the love he bore to the
Pope and Cardinals he would permit the Archbishop to return in peace to his
Sea, and to dispose of his Church and all things thereunto beelonging. And
because there has bin long contention about the customs, he said, he and
his children would be contented only with those which his Ancestors had, and
(...) should be made apparent) they so enjoyed by the oaths of a hundred men
of the realm of England, a hundred of Normandy, a hundred of Anione, and his
other principalityes: and if this condition of peace displeased the Archbishop,
he affirmed he was prepared to stand to the arbitrament as well of the
Bishops of England, as those beyond the seas, of Roane, Bayon, and Cenoman,
and if this were not enough, he would submit himself to the judgment of my
Lord the Pope with this reservation, that he would not impeach his childrens
right: for during his own life he was contented my Lord the Pope should
abrogate what he listed.

Then demanded the Cardinal how he would deal with the Archbishop and his
associates concerning restitution which was due and required of him, whereunto
he answered, swearing with many exquisite oaths, that he had beestowed all
the commodity whatsomeuer he reaped thereof upon Churches and the poor. But
let the Jew Appella beeleiue this, for I will never: The Cardinal replied,
unless he changed his course, and dealt more mildly with the Church of God, as
well Almighty God as his Church would sooner then he expected, require all
these more severely at his hands, and so taking his leave he departed.

Afterward came William of Papia to him almost in the same manner, but the
seed of his words fell on the sands. Then making their return by the most
Christian king of France, they recovered his favor upon conditions which this
bearer shall report unto you. Hitherto Salisbury, who concerning matters which
afterward ensued signified moreover in other letters thus. [Now do I endure
the first year of my exile, and whereas I wanted heretofore nothing now
behold I find abundance of comfort, because the liberty of the Church
seems even now at hand, and now has partly set her foot in the Island; for
the king has renounced (as Messingers from the Cardinals protest) certain
most wicked customs which nevertheless he was before accustomed to challenge,
detesting with an oathe both them and their first authors, agreeing withal
that hereafter it shall be lawful to appeal to the Apostolic Sea, that
Clearks shall not be drawn before the secular Tribunalles, with the like,
which I wish he would so approve by deed, as he affirmed in word.] Thus
writes he concerning these affairs. And this was lastly the conclusion of
this Legantine Embassage; other matters ensue in the end of this present year.

Salisbury in an other Epistell having discoursed of the state of the Church
being then imbroyled by Frederick the Emperor, and Paschall the Antipope,
Cod. Vad. lib. 2. Epist. 62.
descends to the troubles of saint Thomas, Pope Alexander being then at
Beneuent, where (says he) the Ambassadors of the king of England and the
Arbishoppes agents met together, in the presence of his Holiness, and both
parties were graciously and honorably entertained; and for those appertayning
to the king, as the justice of their cause was less, so was their pomp with
ostentation of their riches much greater. But when they were not able with
their flatterys and fair promises to win my Lord the Pope, then turned they
to threats, fayning that their king would rather embrace the errors of
Norandinus (the chief ringleader of the Mahometanes) and be a fellow of that
profane Sect, then endure Thomas any longer to enjoy the Archbishoppricke of
Canterbury. But the man of God could neither be shaken with fear, nor seduced
with flattery, and laying be^ (...) two ways the one of life, the other of
death, (...) they might easily (as they had beegune) cont^^^^^ the grace and
patience of God, make choice of the way of perdition, but he by our Lords
assistance would not forsake the way of righteousness. Their hope therefore in
short time beegan to quayle, and seeing they could not in this course prevail
against justice, they sent into Cicilie the kings Ambassadors and letters
(for they came armed with these) to the end that by the assistance of the king
and queen of Cicilie they might obtain somewhat of my Lord the Pope against
the Church: But the most Christian king of France seeing this flattery of the
malicious commended to the elect of Panorma the cause of the Church and of my
Lord of Canterbury, as his own. Mean while came the messingers of the Legates
(whom the king of England had procured) disagreeing each from other; for
whatsomeuer one said in the Court, the other denied; and of these likewise is
it yet uncertain what they shall relate back to their Lords. Supplication
was therefore made on the beehalfe of the king and the Legates with the
assistance of many other intercessors to my Lord the Pope for the Bishop of
Salisbury, and in the end they obtained that his Holiness forgave him the injury
and offense done to himself, and did also write to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, entreating and conselling him to remitt the wrong the Bishop had
offered him, and releasing him of the sentence of suspension, receive him into
his favor and freindship, always provided that either in his own person he
should give him security for sufficient satisfaction, or else disigne two,
being the chiefest of the Clergy of his Church except the Deane, and send
them over who should swear how their Bishop had authorized them to make an
oath, whereby they shall protest in the name and place of their Bishop that he
shall satisfy for his injury and contumacy against the Archbishop. Whereby it
may be probably gathered that my Lord the Pope did either never know of the
Legates sentence for absolution of the said Bishop, Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist.
7.
or otherwise he never estemeed it of any validity. The same Bishop had
obtained before letters almost purporting as much, wherein neither he nor his
were obliged to any oathe, but as yet he has made no use of them, either
because they displeased the king, or in regard they were not so effectual.
What will be the success on either side was uncertain at the return of the
bearer hereof; but my Lord the Pope has answered the most Christian king that
he will not fail to succor the Church of God, and his frind of Canterbury, as
long as with justice he can releive them. Now let us pass to the parlee which
was beetweene our kings, etc. in such sort as was described this self same
year, whereby you may perceive that both agree in time year and month, being
the same wherein this author wrote these letters. Lastly toward the end of this
year, besides other Ambassadors formerly sent, the king of England addressed
two more over to Pope Alexander which were Reynold and John the Deane of
Salisbury; and the same time also Saint Thomas directed his agents to his
holiness, their names were Alexander and John whom afterward by letter he
admonished of the treacherous falsehood of Reynold, saying: [Haue a continual
eye and watch upon our adversaries, and especially that Bastard of fornication,
the enemy of the Churches peace, the son of a Priest, Reynold of Salisbury,
Lib. 3. epist. 66.
who every where (as much as in him lies) defameth and slaundereth our person,
exclayming we are traitors, and that we gave him our promise not any wa^
(...) lest his father.] And a little after. [Hee affirms (...) over, if our
Lord the Pope should depart this world, he would cause us to be blotted out
of the book (...) life, vaunting that in the court of Rome all things (...)
so set to sale as with the bounty of rewards he could purchase any thing.
He likewise moved the king of England to beecome suitor to our lord the Pope,
that his Holiness would grant authority to any Bishop in England to crown his
son and consecrate Bishops, to the end he might (were it but in this)
deceive the Pope: and when the king answered that (as he thought) he could
never obtain these demandes of his holiness, Reynold replied: the Pope should
deal like a fool if he would condescend to your requests.] Thus much of the
kings Ambassador; whereby you may see (reader) what manner of fellows they
were who accustomed to back-byte and detracte the high Bishops of Rome.
Concerning, the other his associate John deane of Salisbury, that which has
before bin spoaken plainly declares him to be a man of greater villainy. What
these the kings demandes were, and how instantly he sued for them, and how
many and great men were his mediators shall be declared hereafter in place
convenient. It is besides apparent that the king in the end of this year did
by his Agentes solicit all the Cittys which were joined in league to Pope
Alexander, beestowing a hug^ mass of money among the^, and carefully
endeauored to win the king of Cicillie and the nobility of Ro^^ to be his,
that all might be intercessors to the Pope to procure the accomplishment of
his requests agai^^^ Saint Thomas: but how Pope Alexander beehaue^ himself,
you shall hear in the beeginning of the (...) year.

Mean while the king of France, The king of France laboboring a peace
beetweene the king of England and Saint Thomas brings them to a parlee.
after the Legates were departed dispatching this business, taking up the matter
so fallen to the grownde, endeauored to bring the king of England and Saint
Thomas to a mutual parlee in his presence, hoping by these means to reunite
them in a league of peace. What the passage of that meeting was is exactly set
forth in Quadrilogus in the end of the second book; and in regard this
seems to be omitted in the epistles, the Register of them, because his
epistolary history may not be defective heerin, has so placed in this volume
this discourse before the epistles, as they ensuing and following in order one
after an other, do manifest the whole proceedinges even to the very end; by
reason whereof there wants no assistance of any history in the epistles, but
only this of the parlee written on this wise in Quadrilogus or the Quadriparte
history out of Hubertus.

[My Lord the king of France seeing his Holiness careful to conclude a peace,
himself as the son of peace and obedient to the Apostolic prelate,
interposed his endeavors with all labor and attention, whereupon at diverse
parlees, which passed between him and the king of England, he brought thither
with him the Archbishop, placing himself as an arbiter of peace beetweene
them; Among all which there was one meeting where it was reported to the king
of England that the Archbishop of Canterbury would refer the whole cause to
his own will, and therefore the king entertained this his coming more
graciously. Many of both sides assembling to see the end, my Lord of Canterbury
fell down at the king of Englandes feet, saying: I committ to your discretion
the whole controversy which has bin the ground of dissension between us,
with reservation only of the honor of God. The king hearing the addition of
these last words, was offended beeyond measure, abusing him (...) any
reproaches, vpbrayding him much, casti^ (...) things in his teeth, condemning
him for a (...) insolent, and ungrateful man, who forgot (...) royal
bountiful liberality so often extended to him.] Alanus added. [Hee said
beesides to the king of France, mark (my Lord) if it pleases you, this man,
let any thing not fit his own humor, he presently condemns it as contrary
to the honor of God, whereby he will challenge not only his own, but also
whatsoever beelongeth to me, and that it may appear I withstand not the honor
of God, nor yet of him in any thing, this is mine offer. There have binne
kings of England my Predecessors, who have raygned before me, of greater or
lesser authority then my self; and in Canterbury have bin many Archbishops
before him of great worth and holiness; what therefore the more eminent and
virtuous of his Predecessors have done to the least of my predecessors, let him
but give the like to me, and the controversy shall be concluded. Whereupon
followed an acclamation on all sides that the king had sufficiently humbled
himself.

The defense of Saint Thomas and his cause.
Here must I needs say, I marvel greatly how the king durst appeal to the
exemples of the Archbishop of Canterburyes Predecessors, of whom it is
evident that many of them did constantly resist the kings who did violate the
Ecclesiastical liberty, and upon that occasion suffered many years exile and
banishment, among who^ what great afflictions saint Anselme, and after him
Lanfrancke (who lived under this king Henry's Granfather) for the same cause
endured, is in the former Tome sufficiently declared. But let us return to
Alane who Proceeds thus in Quadrilogus.

[While the Archbishop for a little space seemed sil^^^ the king of France burst
out in these words: My Lord Archbishop will you be greater then holy men?
Will you be better then Peter? what question make you? Lo peace is even at
the door. To whom the Archbishop replied. True it is (quoth he) my Lord, my
Predecessors were much better and greater then my self, and many in their
ages, allthough they did not absolutely destroy all, yet nevertheless did cut of
some weeds which were extolled against God, for had they clean rooted out
all, what had bin now left to enkindle against me this fire of temptation,
whereby now being tried in the same furnace with them, I may with them be
found also worthy of the same praise and glory: yea God much better providing
for me it is come to pass that I have labored so securely in their lot and
meritt, as I may be partaker of their travel and reward; neither yet if any
of them came short or exceeded in any thing, am I bound to follow him in his
want or excess; for we reprove Peter in deniyng Christ, but we commend Peter
by all means who resisted the Tyranny of Nero with the loss of his life, and
why truly but because Peeter would not yield to him in that wherein he could
not without the loss of his soul dissemble? and therefore with conquering his
enemies, he dyed as to the flesh; and with such pressures as these the
Catholic Church has risen and increased: Our fathers have suffered beccause
they would not endure the name of Christ should be drawn into subjection, and
should I be restored into the favor of a man, with suppressing the honor of
Christ? God forbid (quoth he) God forbid.] Whereupon the peers of both
kingdoms turned all against the Archbishop, imputing, the want of the peace to
his arrogance; one Earl among the rest openly protesting, that in regard the
Archbishop resisted the counsel and determination of bo^^ ^domes, he was
not hereafter worthy of assista^^^ from either, but cast out of England should
no longer now be entertained in France, whereunto is added by Herberte.

[When the parlee therefore was thus dissolved, every one returned home not
without great murmuring, the Archbishoppes associates in exile being left in
exceeding despair. The kings had no sooner ended this conference, but they
hastily took horse and departed neither saluting nor yet being saluted of the
Archbishop. Yea also the king of England, who before slandered the
Archbishop fowly to his face, now in his departure among other things,
insulting said, how he had that day revenged him on his traitor; in like
sort the Courtiers, who had bin Mediators for the peace, did at the last in
his presence deeply charge him, that he was ever proud, always
high-mynded, wise in his own conceypte, a follower of his private fancy and
opinion; adding moroeuer, it was an exceeding mischeife and an immeasurable
dommage and danger to the Church that he was ever instauled a governor
thereof, and that the same being partly ruinated already by him, would now
be instantly and utterly overthrown. But the Archbishop setting a watch
before his mouth whenas sinners banded against him, was made to those who
vpbrayeded and insulted over him as a man not hearing, and with humility
answered gently saying: Beeware (brother) least the Church of God be destroyed
by you, for by me (God willing) it shall never be: and the man to whom he
directed his speech, was John, by birth an Englishman, but then Bishop of
Poytiers, one by reason of long acquaintance and society very familiar, dear
and acceptable to the Archbishop; But (...) others who reuyled him he made
no answer, being vndoubledly his Disciple, who, when he was cursed, accursed
not again, and when he suffered, threatened no revenge. And thus he departed
from the parlee in France, as he did before from the Parliament in
North-Hamptonne, being made a reproache to the rich, and contemptible to the
proud, and he with his associates returning, followed the king of France
whose lodginges were prepared in the Castle of Mount-Mirable. The Archbishop
had before lodged in this Castle with the king, who by his Courtiers did ever
provide him liberally of all necessaries; But the king did not then condescend
(as in other parlees he had bin accustomed) to see the Archbishop in his
lodging, whereupon it was presently coniectured that the king stood not so
well affected to him now as before; yet nevertheless the Archbishop showed
himself pleased and contented, neither was his countenance proceiued to be
any whit altered in this respect, wherein may be considered the constancy of
this renowned man together with the invincible courage of his mind, who in a
world thus exceedingly crossing him, showed none or very little trouble or
sign of care.

Departing on the next morrow from the Castle and coming that day to
Charters, many of the people (according to the custom) met together to see
the passengers, and asking who they were, when they understood the Archbishop
of Canterbury, was there, they pointed at him with their fingers, who knew him
not, that he was the man, and saying, (though softly) among themselves: Lo
here the Archbishop who yesterday in parlee would not deny God for the
kings, nor subject the divine honor to their wills. And many times after as
he traveled thorough France diverse of the people in this sort extolled him.
Leaving Charters he came with the best speed he could to Senon.] The
Compiler of the epistles adds thus: [When he had therefore passed three days
in the company of the king of France, in such sort as neither the king
himself not any in his name came to visitt him, and whereas in business of this
nature my lord of Canterbury was wont to be maintained by the kings
liberality, now after the parlee, and for the time that I told you he had
nothing at all beestowed on him, but that sometimes the Archbishop of Senon,
otherwhile the Bishop of Poytiers or such like his brethren, moved with his
misery in passing by him releiued him as a Beggar, a thing terrible to all his
followers, being quite distitute of all worldly help. Having thus ended the
third day of this lamentable journey, while they sat in their lodging
discoursing together hereof and devising whether to go, my lord of Canterbury
with a well contented countenance, as if he had tasted no adversity at all,
and absolute against all Fortunes power, applying his speech to his mournful
company, smyling said: against me are all these forces bent, and I once taken
away, there will be none left to pursue ye further; etc. Be therefore
comfortable, and fear nothing. Nay rather (quoth they) we take pity on you,
not knowing which way you ca^ turn your self, being a man of so great
authority, and thus left by your chiefest and last frindes. To Allmighty God
(answered Canterbury) I committ the care of my self, and since the doors of
both kingdoms are now shutt against me:] ah other way is now to be taken: I
have heard that about Araris a river of Burgundy, and from thence to the
country of Province men are of a more liberal and free disposition, to these
will we all travel on foot, who perhaps upon sight of our afflictions will
take compassion of us, and furnish us with victuals for a time, until our
lord shall better help us; for God is able even in the deepest pit of
distress to releive us, he is worse then an infidel who despayreth of Gods
mercy.

And Gods mercy was instantly at hand, for a certain seruante beelonging to
the king of France coming to them hastily, said: my lord the king calls ye
to his Court. That he may (quoth one of them) banish us the kingdom: you are
noe prophet (answered Canterbury) nor the son of prophet, do not then
foretell evil tydinges. Coming therefore they found my lord the king sitting
with a sad countenance, and not according to his custom rising to my lord of
Canterbury, which was upon the first sight an vnluckly presage, where they sat
still after this cold inuitation and remained long in silence, the king hanging
down his head, as if with grief and against his will he devised which way
he might dispatch them out of his kingdom, and they no less fearing the king
who breaking out into tears, and with sobbing rising up on the subdaine, did
prostrate himself at my lord of Canterburys feet, all there present being
amazed, and my lord of Canterbury bowing low to lift him up; The king of
France repenting, greatly humbles himself to Saint Thomas.
the king in the end hardly coming to himself (so great was his grief)
said: Truly (my lord and father) you only did see; and redoubling his sighs
with sorrow, truly father (quoth he) you only did see, for all we were blind
who gave you counsel against Allmighty God, that in your cause, yea in his
divine cause you should at the pleasure of man neglect the honor of God, I
repent me (father) I repent me withal my heart, pardon me I beeseech you,
and absolve me wretch from this offense, and here I cast at the feet of God
and you my kingdom, and from this time forward do promise never to be
wanting to yo^ and yours in any thing, so long as (God willing) this life shall
last. My lord of Centerbury therefore absoluing the king, and giving him his
benediction returned joyfully with his followers to Senon, where the king of
France maintained them royally until their teturne into England.

Upon report whereof the king of England sends word to the king of France,
that he marvelled very much how or with what reason he could in justice
maintain Canterbury against him, seeing in his own presence he so humbled
himself with readynes to endure all course of justice, neither yet that he
was any impediment to hinder Canterbury from recovering his peace, which he
proudly and contumeliously rejected, wherefore (quoth he) the king of France
ought not hereafter to yield any releife to the disgrace and reproach of his
liege man. Whereunto the king of France replying, said: Go messingers and
report this to your king, The renowned answer of the king of France to the
king of England.
that if the king of England will not endure the customs, which he calls
ancient, though (as some affirm) not agreeable to the law of God, yet as
appertayning to his royal dignity, to be any way abrogated; much less can I
of right overthrow that law of liberality, which together with the inuesture
of my Crown falls to me by inheritance; for France has bin of ancient time
accustomed to receive all distressed and afflicted persons, especially them who
were banished for justice, and until they recovered peace, to favor protect,
and defend them, the grace of which honor and excellency shall never by Gods
help, during my life upon the request of any man be diminished or denied to
Canterbury being thus exiled. And so far concerning the speech that passed
beetweene the king of France and the Agents of the king of England, which every
wise man will account worthy to be written in letters of Gold.]

ANNO DOMINI 1169.
Now ensues the year of Christ 1169. with the second Indiction, when Pope
Alexander refusing absolutely to yield to the king of Englands requests
propounded in his last Embassage, and constantly perseuering in the restitution
of Saint Thomas unto his Church, determined yet again to send other Nuntios
for regayning Saint Thomas his Archbishoppricke; Whereof meeting to treat, it
is first necessary to lay open what the king demanded of the Pope, which
consisted of two principal points; one that Saint Thomas being removed out
of France, might be called by his holiness to Rome; the other that he might
be translated to an other Sea. But with what travail and exceeding cost the
king endeauored to bring his purpose to pass and win the Popes good will,
certain letters secretly written to Saint Thomas, do in this sort declare:
Cod. Vat. lib. 2. epist. 79.
[In regard that through the Allmighty work of God, the cause of Christ and
of his Church is now restored to that security as it cannot hereafter be
endangered, because the Ringleaders of this Scysme are quayled, and the hammer
of the Church of England being taken captive in the works of his invention,
cannot as now find any on whom he may rely, being driven to the last cast,
The new and terrib^ attempts the king of England against Sai^ Thomas.
he made these dangerous attemptes, when by soliciting as well the court as
the Scysmaticke Friedricke with his accomplices, he saw he could not that way
any whit prevail against our Lord and his anointed, he fledd by his
Ambassadors to the Cittys of Italy, promising to those of Millane three
thousand mearkes toward the strong reparation of their walls, if they
together with the other Cittys, which they attempted to corrupt, could obtain
at the Popes hands the deposition or traslation of the Archbishopp of
Canterbury; for the same purpose did he likewise promise to Cremona 2000.
mearkes, to Parma a thousand, and as much to Bononia. But to my lord the Pope
he made offer to deliver him with a larges of money from the exactions of all
the Romans, and give him more over ten thousand Mearkes, granting beesides that
he should ordain at his own pleasure Bishops as well in the Church of
Canterbury as in all other vacant Seas through out England. But because his
great promises extenuated his credit in accomplishments, and that he was in
his demandes convinced of manifest iniquity, he received repulse: yet what of
himself he was not able to procure, he assayed to extorte by the power of
the king of Cycillie. But neither he, allthough the Bishop of Syracusa and
Robert Earl of Bassauile labored heerin, with their uttermost ability and the
mediation of many intercessors, was heard, notwithstanding his royalty, power,
or favor, which he enjoyed amply in the Church of Rome. The kings Ambassadors
were therefore dismissed, and their demandes rejected, this only being
granted, that my Lord the Pope, should send Nu^tios anew for procuring of
peace which were Gratian the Subdeacon, and Master Viuian Archdeacon of the
ancient City, who was accustomed in the Court to execute the office of an
Advocate.] Thus much was signified by secrett intelligence, for without
expressing any name the Inscription is thus: A frind to his frind.

Saint Thomas understanding thus much, and also at what time he should be
called to Rome by Pope Alexander, was wonderfully troubled, and writing to
Cardinal Humbald Bishop of Ostia, after many complayntes, speaks thus of
this matter. [In regard we will not transgress the law of God with giving
place to the iniquity of Tyrants, he endeauoreth without any necessity,
beesides all vtility, and against authority to translate us to an other Church,
and because we refused to follow him, when he allured us to accompany his
sin, he requires we should be called up unto you, that in our passage he
might make some bargain whatsomeuer with the consortes of his iniquity for the
effusion of blood; for what other meaning can he have in soliciting those of
Millane, Cremona, and Parma by corruption of bribes to our destruction? Wherein
have we offended those of Papia or other Cittys of Italy? We never gave them
cause to procure our exile. Wherein have we aggreeued the sages of Bononie,
who, moved by prayers and promises, would yield their consent to the cause of
our ruin, which only by relation they understood? Assuredly we never banished
Robert de bassauylle, and yet he was by sinister suggestions induced to be a
mean to you for our banishment, nevertheless afterward peaceauing treachery
and repenting this offense, he entreated that his unjust petition might not be
admitted. Richard the elect Bishop of Syracusa entised with a hopeful bayte of
the Bishoppricke of Lincoln, assisted our persecutors with money, strengthened
them with counsel, and armed them with power; Concerning the king of Cicillie
himself, in whose country you lately remained, they promised him in marriage
the king of Englands daughter, to make him their own for the overthrow of the
Church and us.

Did not they by distributing their bread, entertayne as their hirelinges the
family of Lions, the nation of thieves, and other the most powerful Romans,
not so much to bow as to break the Church of Rome; Nay they promise to
purchase peace with the Emperor and Saxons, and beesides with their bountiful
guiftes of many to draw all the Romans to do their fealty to my Lord the
Pope, if they will but satisfy the king of Englands desire in our overthrow.
You see how secure a passage, what abundant provision the diligence of man had
here prepared for us. Undoubtedly he cared not greatly how our Creditors
might be satisfied, how sufficient necessaryes might be ministered to our
companions, (if any happily might be found to travail along with us) how the
charges of the journey might be supplied with sufficient means for the
banished multitude, who now after five years exile was to be left poor,
afflicted and forsaken in the midst of so great calamityes. Truly with the
same diligence of these purueyers and harbingers (because we cannot be
persuaded to call the kings name into question) may the house hold stuff and
prouysion of our hosts be poisoned, and hardly can that man be secure of his
life whom the Commander of the family where he lodges, lies in wait to
kill. And that we may not heerin be tedious in circumstances of words; As
long as this life lasts, we will never upon any summons hazard our selves to
so many and so great imminent dangers, for if a man will upon every occasion
run desperately to death, he may with a knife or a halter more speedily
finish his days.] Afterward he proceeds to rehearse what in the end of the
last year is declared concerning the endeavors of the king or England to
deprive Saint Thomas of the king of Frances protection, which we may receive
from the report of his own mouth, for he says:] The king of England sent
lately his Ambassadors the Bishop of Sagia and Archdeacon of Canterbury to the
most Christian, king soliciting him with entreaty to bannish us out of his
Dominion; but the man replenished with God, answered, that he received by
inheritance this law from his ancestors, and that it had bin ever the custom
of the kingdom of France kindly to entertayne all such as were banished for
justice, and afforded them due and convenient courtesyes and comfortes; and
affirmed he would never upon any occasions whatsomeuer leave so laudable an
inheritance, being so acceptable to Allmighty God, Adding moreover that he
received us from the hands of my Lord the Pope, whom only in earth he
acknowledged his Superior, and therefore he would never for any Emperor, king
or wordly Potentate desist to favor us and our cause, so long as necessity
required, in regard God was on our side, and we sustained iniuryes and losses
in defense of his law. With this answer he dismissed these confounded
Ambassadors, and beecame to us (for which God reward him) more loving and
liberal then before, although he has bin ever both kind and bountiful. He
says beesides he will in this cause of ours make trial of the sincerity and
vigor of the Church of Rome, together with the virtue of our Lord the Pope,
whose faith and constancy he exceedingly commends, because he rejoices
that the king of England has received at his hands a repulse in his unjust
demaundes.] Thus says Saint Thomas of the king of France: words worthy to be
engraven in great letters of Gould.

But as the faith together with the constancy of Pope Alexander was hitherto
well known to continue immovable in the defense of justice and truth, so did
it hereafter persevere even to the very end uncorrupted, which notwithstanding
he governed with sweetenes and temperance, leaving nothing unattempted before
he would denounce the king to be excommunicate, and subject his realm to
Interdiction, which caused him to make especial choice of men who were most
famous for eminence integrity and singular learning (I mean) the fore recyted
Gratian nephew to Pope Eugenius that most renowned Bishop, Two Nuntioes send by
the Pope to the king of England. Cod. Vaet. lib. 3. epist. 12.
(for so much does John of Salisburyes epistle to the Bishop of Poytiers
signify) and Viuian a person of excellency as being a discreet and worthy
Advocate of the Roman Church. And how far the commission extended which they
received from Pope Alexander, is thus sent in a secret relation of a certain
frind before rehearsed, using these words in the Conclusion. [Notwithstanding
all this the Pope restrained these Nuntioes with the obligation of an oath to a
precise and confyned form of peace, in such sort as they should not exceed
their limited bounds, commanding also seuerly that they should abstain from
receiving any rewards of the king, or burdening him with expenses, unless the
Churches peace were first procured, nor yet make any longer stay beeyond the
settled day assigned them.] Concerning the form of peace (as it was expressed
for the Bishop) it contained nothing dishonorable or derogating either from
the Church or his person, or in any respect diminishing his authority, but that
he might freely without impediment of any occasion or Appeal exercise the
Ecclesiastical severity on the king himself, the kingdom, or any persons of
the realm, in such sort as he knew expedient for the Church of God, using
nevertheless therein the counsel of his freindes and men of discretion, that
while the treatis of peace continued, he should more mildly proceed, and
wincke at many things; but if afterward, (which God forbid) they prevailed
not for peace, he should arise (as one returning to his former strength) to
prostrate with greater power the Churches persecutors. And this was there
written concerning the commission given by Pope Alexander to his Nuntioes by
whom he sent this letter to Saint Thomas. Ibid. epist. 1.


[Wee have received lately the Ambassadors and letters of the renowned king of
England, and whereas he demanded therein of us crtayne great and difficult
matters, for obtaining whereof they labored earnestly and vehemently with us,
yet nevertheless they could not incline our mind to satisfy their desire. But
that they might not have any reason or occasion to complain of rigorous
proceeding on our part, or that we refused in any thing to yield unto them,
following the steps and examples of our Predecessors (who we doubt not are
Saints) we determined with all kindness modesty, and sweetness, to recall the
king from his perverse purpose, to mitigate his mind, and assuage his cruelty;
whereupon it came to pass that we by the grave advise and counsel of our
brethren, decreede to send to the kings presence our dearly beeloued sons
Gratian the Subdeacon our notary, an honorable and learned person, whom for the
memory of our holy father of sacred remembrance our Predecessor Pope Eugenius,
and in regard of his own most sincere fidelity and ready service, we esteem
every way dear and acceptable, and with him Master Viuian who for his long
experienced frindshippe, wisdom, and learning we love most intyrely; by whom
and also by our letters we admonish his Majesty with all care and diligence
as much as in us lies, that restoring to you his peace and favor, he would
recall you honorably to your Church, and suffer you and yours to rest in all
peace and tranquillity. Wherefore we entreat you and advise your brotherhood
that carefully weyghing the difficultyes and malice of the time, and
considering with your self how our forefathers have beehaued themselves for
avoiding such storms as these in days of like extremity, you would endeauore
by all means, as far as with preservation of the honor of your place and
office may be done, to recover the favor and good will of your king, and
labor to mitigate his mind, in showing such patience, gentlnes and meekenes,
as none may justly say your self was in fault, whereby his love and kindness
was not fully obtained; we request also your wisdom, ye we warn counsel
and command you that before the departure of our Nuntioes you proceed not in
any sentence against the king or any persons of his kingdom, or against the
realm it self: and if perchance (which we beeleeue not) you have already
pronounced any, you do now suspend the same until that time be expired: all
which we say to the end we may take away from him all occasion and matter of
complaynte, and by such means overcome the hardness of his heart. But if it
fall out otherwise (which God forbid) we will by no means deprive you of your
authority, but rather preserve the same entire, and carefully affourd you
therein our assistance and counsel. The rest which remains we have left to
be declared by our Nuntioes, to whose words we wish you to give creditt, and
also to yield to their counsels and exhortations.] Thus did Alexander write to
Saint Thomas, Ibidem epist. 3. The Popes letter sent by his Nuntios to the King
of England.
and likewise to the king of England other letters in these words.

We have received with fatherly love your Majesty's letters which you sent us
by our beeloued sons Reynold of Salisbury and Randulphe Archdeacon of Lau^
being both of them wise and discreet men, and withal careful and diligent
in the business committed to their charge, and with attention and consideration
have we heard the contents of the same. And when we had fully understood
your royal demandes, as well out of the substance of your letters, as the
relation of your Ambassadors, and had together with our brethren taken long
advice thereupon, it could not appear to us that we might with our honor and
the estimation of the Church yield to any of them in such sort as you
required; notwithstanding to the end we may in all things, so far as stands
with the glory of God and his Church, assent to your Majesty, and that you may
be resolved that what we do, proceeds not any whitt out of obstinacy but
necessity, we have sent to your royal presence our beeloued sons Gratian
the Subdeacon our Notary, together with Master Viuian, being both of them
grave and discreet men, and most dear and acceptable as well to us, as the
whole Catholic Church, by whom we have at large signified to your Majesty
our pleasure and will, and with all what shall concern your honor and
advancement, and ought truly to be most convenient for your royal dignity.
And whereas we understood out of your Majesty's letters that you have so far
overcome your will and mind in the business concerning our venerable brother
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, as for the reverence you bear to the Church
and us you will suffer him to return home and quietly enjoy his pastoral
office in peace, yielding to you what of duty he owes; we embrace the same
as a thing most grateful and acceptable to us, giving therefore the greatest
praise and thanks we can unto the divine clemency which has heerin
undoubtedly inspired your heart, instantly beeseeching your Majesty, yea and
inioyning you for the remission of your sins that in this importunate matter
you will respect rather God then man, and submitt your self heerin only for
the love of our Allmighty Lord. Concerning that you said was signified to your
Majesty of us and the alienation of our affection from you, it is not
convenient your discreet wisdom should credit every spirit, since there are
many detractors and slanderers in whose words (howsoever they seem) there is
nevertheless no trust to be had; and for our parts we have a will and desire
to love you with all our heart, as our most dear son in Christ; nor any way
to proceed severely against you, unless (which God forbid) your self enforce
us thereunto. Dated at Beneuent the day before the Kalends of March.] Whereby
you may concture what time the Nuntioes undertook their journey.

Cod. Vat. lib. 3. epist. 2.
But the same Pope wrote an other letter to the said king in substance like,
although somewhat longer on the sixth I Would of May or March, for the word to the
reader seems uncertain.

Concerning the time when the Nuntios descended into France we may well
conjecture the same by the letters of John of Salisbury written to the
Archdeacon of Excester, who thus declares in what sort he met them. Ibidem
epist. 5.
[I came lately in the feast of Saint Mary Magdaleine to Viziliake where I
encountered my Lord the Popes Nuntios: upon occasion (to learn what my Lord of
Canterbury might hereby either hope or fear; for these news (as it is
thought) posessed the tongues and ears of both kingdoms, and not only those
of the Clergy, but for the most part also the Layety. I desired to see the
man who boar my name, for he was called John which signifies grace whence
Gratia^ is derived, and which is more my Cou^tryma^ and in a sort my brother;
Gratian (to whom as you remember) you were assigned to be Tutor and Teacher at
Ferentyne by Eugenius the Pope of late holy memory; I name him confide^tly my
brother with whom I observe the same laws of faith and society, and allthough
we had not both our original in one City, yet no man will question but we
are both of one country, who calls to mind the country of Christ's
soldiers, a place common to us both, and whereunto charity directs us. Being
therefore received kindly and with respect, as well by him as his Associate
Viuian, they declared in familiar sort unto me that my Lord the Pope and the
Church of Rome did favor greatly the Archbishop of Canterbury, yea so far
forth, as unless the king according to the counsel of his holiness did conclude
a peace with my Lord of Canterbury, they were to denounce to his Majesty that
he should not only be yielded up into the Archbishoppes hands, but that the
Pope himself would also proceed severely against him.] And a little after.
[And truly the Nuntios have a form prescribed them, the limitts whereof they
dare not attempt to break, because they are by an oath bound thereunto; in
such sort as they are commanded, unless peace be established, to forbear so
precisely from receiving any of the kings rewards, as they were not permitted
to take any thing for defraying their charges.] Now as touching the proceedings
of the Nuntios afterward, there is a most exact relation of a secret friend
(I suppose by all likelihood it was Peter of Bloys) who remaining with the
king, did by privy letters signify to saint Thomas whatsomeuer he saw,
Ibid. and Epist 6 The meeting beetweene the king and the Popes Nuntios.
which we will here set down word by word: for thus it was.

On the day of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady were delivered at Argenton
unto the king my Lord ^he Popes letters concerning the Nuntios, upon perusal
whereof the king was much troubled: On the morrow he sent John Deane of
Salisbury and Reynold to meet the Nuntios. On saint Bartholmewes Eve the
Nuntios came to Danfront, whose approach when G. Rydell and Nigell de
Sackeuylle understood, they suddenly and speedyly departed from Danfront; why
they conveyed themselves away in this manner is sufficiently known unto you.
On the feast it self late toward the Evening the king coming from the
woods, before he would go to his own lodging, went to the Nuntios, receiving
them with honor; and while he stood as yet discoursing with them, my Lord Henry
the kings son accompanyd with a troop of the nobility every one of them
winding a horn (as the fashion is at the fall of a Stagge) came and presented
the Nuntios with the same entyre, which they did to fill the ears of the
Nuntios, and make a show to the people. On the morrow about one of the clock
came the king to the Nuntios lodging, and with him the Bishops of Sagia and
Rodon entered their chamber, after a littell pause John Deane of Salisbury and
Reynold the Archdeacon were admitted to the conference, and even presently also
the Archdeacon of Landaff, where standing until nine of the Clock they talked
together sometimes in peace sometimes in anger and tumulte: My Lord the kings
intention was, that the excommunicated Clearkes should not be sworn. A little
before sunset the king departed mightily enraged, greiuously complaining on my
Lord the Pope, that he would never yield to him in any thing, and in a
disdaynfull fashion said, answer. Gratians
By the eyes of God I will take an other course. To whom Gratian graciously
replied: My Lord threaten not, for we dread no^ threats, because we are of
that Court which has bin accustomed to rule over Emperors and kings.

Then were called together all the Barons and white Monks, I mean Cistercians
being there present, with all those of the Chapel, and my Lord the king
requested them, that when time required, they would witness in his beehalfe what
and how great offers he made for restitution of the Archbishoppricke and
confirmation of peace, seeming in the end with some contentment, to depart,
and assigning the eight day following for his resolute answer.

At which appointed time upon summons came the Bishop of Roan, and by chance
he of Burdeux to Cenoman together with all the Bishops of Normandy, the
Bishop of Worcester was not there on the day when these things were to be
handled and treated of but being expected, on the morrow came thither,
excusing himself in regard of a Prouincial counsel that he held of
Poytiers, which being once determined, he proffered then his ready attendance.
The day after the Kalends of September the Nuntioes presented to the king at
Bayos my Lord the Popes letters, wherein his Holiness beesought him to grant
restitution and peace. The king making a preamble of all such matters wherewith
he was accustomed to charge you, said: if I do any thing for this man upon
my Lord the Popes entreaty, he is bound to render me great thanks therefore.

On the Morrow assembling with the Nuntios all the Bishops at a place called
Lebur, and as soon as they came, the king entered into a place called Part
together with the Bishops, none else but such as were especially called by
name being admitted, and presently the king went to counsel with the Nuntios
alone, beeseeching them to absolve the Clearkes without ^endering any oath,
which when they resolutely denied to do, my Lord the king hasted to horse, and
getting up swoare in the presence of all there, that he would never dureing
life harken again to my lord the Pope or any other for your peace or
restitution. Whereupon all the Archbishoppes and Bishops there present came to
the Nuntios beeseeching them for Gods love to accomplish his requests,
whereunto with great difficulty they assented, which being granted, the king
alighted and beeganne again to consult with them, and presently after calling
all (who were in peace) together, the king beegan to discourse saying: He
would have them all understand, that you departed not out of England at his
instance, and that he had often recalled you back again to return and give
him satisfaction for such matters as he alleged against you, and you ever
refused, but now the case so stood, that he upon the entreaty and
commandment of my Lord the Pope did fully restore unto you your
Archbishoppricke, and peace to all those who for your sake departed his
dominion. This grant of peace the king confirmed about nine of the clock,
remaining, afterward very pleasant, and causing certain other matters to be
handled in his presence, which being finished, he returned again to the
Nuntios, desiring them that the Bishops might go over into England for
absoluing them who were there excommunicate. Which when they absolutely denied,
the king grew angry, and made a new request: that at the least one of them
would pass over while the other remained there, and if that were distastefull
to them they would send but one of their Cleakes, whom he would enrich with
revenues before his return: all which when Gratian (who as we hope is the
son of grace) again denied, my lord the king being very much enraged,
departed away saying in their hearing, Do what you like, I weigh neither you
nor your excommunication, nor prize them the value of an egg, and with these
words he mounted on horseback to get him thence, but the Archbishoppes with
all the Bishops followed, telling him, that he spoake impiously, Afterward
he alighted and consulted with them, in which counsel was concluded; that all
the Bishops should write to my Lord the Pope certifying him, how the king in
their hearing offered you peace, and was in every point ready to obey my Lord
the Popes commandment, but the Nuntios were in fault, whereby it was not
performed.

Afterward having wasted a little time in indighting these letters, and the
king as one enflamed with a wonderful fury, leaving them often, the Bishops
coming to him said, what would these Nuntios have? And showing him my Lord
the Popes Mandate, inioyninge them to accomplish the Nuntios commandment, the
king answered, I know, I know, they will interdict my land, but cannot I, who
am every day able to take a most strong Castle, take one Clearke who shall
interdict my land? Yet when in the end they yielded in some degree to satisfy
his desire, the tempest of his anger was laid, and returning to himself he
said: unless ye conclude this night a peace, ye shall never come so near
this point again, and when they had awhile traveled in the business,
assembling them all together, he used these words: It is convenient I should
do very much at the entreaty of my Lord the Pope, because he is our Lord and
father, in regard whereof I restore to the Archbishop his Sea with my peace,
and the like to all those who for his sake have departed the land. Whereupon the
Nuntios and all there present thanked his Majesty, and then the king moreover
added; If I have not as now done sufficiently, I will to morrow by your advise
supply what is yet wanting.

On the morrow being the Kalends of September about twelve of the Clock they
assembled together, ad having long treated about absoluing the Excommunicate
without obligation of oath: it came to that pass as G. Rydell with Nigellus de
Sackeuyle and Thomas Fitz-Bernard laying their hands on the Bible there
present said, that in the word of truth they would accomplish the Nuntios
commandment. Then was it required of the Nuntios, that all they upon whom my
Lord the king in this time of disturbance had beestowed your Churches might
enjoy them according to the tenor of his Majesty's guifte: but as we heard,
the conclusion was that they should be left free to your disposition.
Afterward it was determined the Bishops should set down in writing the
form of peace which the king had granted. And this did the king to the end
that one of the Nuntios should pass over into England for absoluing the
excommmunicate. And being departed upon these terms after three hours within
night, the king said he would have inserted in the articles of peace these
words; with the reservation of the dignity of his kingdom; whereunto (as we
heard) Gratian absolutely denied ever to yeilde, and upon this word as yet they
differ, determining to return on the Nativity of Saint Mary the Virgen to
Cane, there finally to conclude more fully the whole business. Thus far
concerning the meeting of the Nuntios with the king.

Gratian is highly commended who would never condescend to admit this form of
words, concerning which John of Salisbury wrote in this sort to John Bishop
of Poytiers. [Many conceive a hope that the son of grace (whose name agrees
with his actions) the Nephew of blessed Eugenius will sincerely proceed
according to the Evangelical truth, the glory of the Apostolical Majesty,
and the honor and peace of the distressed Church; for he knows assuredly
that taking this course he shall purchase to himself eternal glory before
God and men: And in regard he finds but few upon whom he may boldly rely,
I beeseech you to confirm and strengthen in our Lord his constancy: The king
by Gods favor is well able to pay, and for penitents it is certain, the sin
shall not be forgiven unless what is wrongfully taken away be restored etc.]
For whereas he thought there was no reconciliation of peace without restitution
of the goods taken away from the Church, Salisbury praising these his
proceedinges says: [The king (God willing) is well able to satisfy, and
penitents may be assured they can never obtain remission of their sins, if
what they have taken away be not restored when they have ability to do it,
for otherwise it is not penance but a feigned Hypocrisy] And he again as
touching absolution given without promise of satisfaction, and also concerning
that clause with preservation of the dignity of the kingdom, being the words
which Gratian rejected, says moreover: [If the king have his will to inserte
in the articles of agreement The preservation of the dignity of his kingdom,
he has the victory for confirmation of his customs with only alteration of
the words, and has banished clean out of England all the Authority of the
Roman Church: But God forbid that ever assent should be given to any of these,
and I am assured my Lord of Canterbury will rather make choice of banishement
during life, then for recovering his peace, the Church of God should sustain
damage, or the Apostolic Sea be deprived of her privilege; Persuade therefore
my Lord Gratian to proceed warily in all affairs, but above all in these
Articles, least (which God forbid) he be deceived by the subtle wits of
lurking Foxes.] You see his unadvised arrogance, he who the last year (as you
have heard) scorned peace because saint Thomas endeauored to maintain that
form of speech which was: I commend the whole cause to your disposition with
the reservation of the honor of God, for which only words he reuyled the
saint with slanders and reproaches, now extolling himself above all whatsoever
is worshipped, he would not have the reservation of the honor of God, but the
preservation of his kingdoms dignity concluded in the conditions of peace.

Because, therefore the Bishops, who were elected by the king to pen the
form of peace, could not persuade the Nuntios to admit the form aforesaid;
they deuysing with themselves an other form of peace, A new form of peace
devised by the Bishops.
did by the Bishop of Roane signify the same to the king in these words.

We could by no means obtain of the Nuntios to admit that form of peace
which you left with us in regard of the Clauses that as well by you as them
were set down on either side both manifould and doubtful; Cod. Vat lib. 3.
Epist. 13.
and for them to depart abruptly, and with despair of peace, seems neither
agreeable to your honor or profitt: having therefore considered many ways with
our selves, we happened in the end on such a form of words wherein there is
not the least derogation to your dignity and honor, nor yet can be ministered
hereafter to Canterbury any cause of contention: which is thus: That for the
love of God, and respect to our Lord the Pope you give the Archbishop leave to
return into England and cause him to have his Archbishoppricke as amply as he
enjoyed the same before his departure, and also restore to them who either
with him or for his cause left the kingdom, their own again. For this short
and plain form of words pleased us best, because it seems not enwrapped in
any suttell devises or suspicions, whereupon we consell and persuade you that
you question not to yield your assent thereunto. And thus much Roane deliured to
the king.

But the king understanding by the Bishops that the Nuntios would in no case
admit the former clause which was, The reservation of the dignity of his
kingdom, being greatly incensed with anger did instantly heerupon send away
two Ambassadors to Pope Alexander with letters farced with complayntes
requiring also the Bishops whom he assembled for this purpose to write by the
same Ambassadors to his Holiness, word by word to the same effect, all which
are yet extant. Ibid. Epist. 19.20.21.22.
But Viuian one of the Popes Nuntios perceauing how the king addressed
Ambassadors in this sort to his Holiness, fearing they should any way
undermine him, determined instantly to send a messanger Post, by whom he
certifyed the Pope in writing the true and faithful relation of all their
proceedinges hitherto; out of the contents whereof, besides the fore recyted
dealinges, let us here lay open such occurrences as beefell after the Nuntios,
failing of their purpose, departed from the king. These are the words.

The Bishops being very earnest on the kings beehalfe that we would admit
these words, Ibid. Epist. 26.
with reservation of the dignity of the kingdom: We answered, we will agree
to the words of the king, so as ye will consent to the words of our Lord,
we meant with preservation of the liberty of the Church, which they would not
allow; neither yet the king, allthough he knew that the liberty of the
Church consisted in the honor of God, as he said, would nevertheless in any
case subscribe thereunto; and being not able to prevail against us in these
formal words, they made rather choice, that the Archbishop (as before is
said) should safely return to his Church, and with good peace and security
receive the same in as ample manner as he inioyd it before his departure
without mention of any condition either on the one side or the other, and his
followers in like sort restored to their own; and at their instance we
condescended thereunto. Lastly being called by the king to Roane, we came
thither with a laboursome journey, and to conclude he signified to us by his
Agents in the Court of the Archbishop that he would never be dissuaded
from those words, Saving the dignity of his kingdom: so as neither the
first, nor second, nor yet the third form of words devised by the foresaid
persons could on all parts be approved, and in this sort (most blessed
father) we departed; whereupon we commanded the Archbishoppes by their
obligation of fidelity, wherein they stood bound unto us, to denounce to them
whom we had absolved upon assurance of the oath which they swore to us, and to
declare to their Lord the king, that if peace ensued not before our departure,
they should loose the benefitt of their absolution, and be inuiolably subject
to the sentence pronounced against them by the Archbishop of Canterbury. And
thus far concerning our proceedinges with the king in these matters.

We signified afterward the kings formal words to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who enduring all with patience, was willing also to preserve the
dignity of the kingdom, so far as it might stand with the conservation of his
order, and his fidelity to the Church of Rome; and if any one shall certify you
to the contrary concerning this business, be your Holiness persuaded nevertheless
that it is no otherwise then we have reported; neither yet in regard my Lord
Gratians name is not subscribed to these letters, does it therefore follow that
he saw them not, nor carefully perused them, but that happened in respect he
hastened to return, and required these letters might be more breifely
contryued: All which we write that your Holiness may give no credit to the
kings Agents against us before our return.] And adds lastly, that in the
end he sent a Messinger to the king named Peter Archdeacon of Papia, who
being kindly entertained by the king, but nothing prevayling in his motion of
peace, was in his return spoiled of all he had, and one of his campany being
endangered for his life, was hardly rescued. The determined day appointed by
Pope Alexander for conclusion of the peace was the feast of saint Michael the
Archangell, which being once passed, they who were absolved upon this
expectation of peace must now fall back again into their former sentence of
excommunication inflicted on them by Canterbury, Cod. Vat. lib. 3. Epist. 36.
concerning which the letters are yet extant which Gratian did write to the
excommunicated.

But why, after this prefixed day, when Gratian did according as he was
commanded presently return, Viuian remained nevertheless behind, why Viuian
remained beeh^nde after Gratians departure.
is here to be showed out of the letters of saint Thomas. The expected time
prescribed by Pope Alexander being expired, not only Gratian but also the
Archbishop of Senon who was called in as a Mediator of peace between the king
and the Archbishop, departed both together from the king, which taynted him
with no small disgrace, for redemption whereof not knowing what to do, he
devised as his last refuge to retain Viuian in the traffic of peace, with a
certain assurance of accomplishing the same, who not suspecting any deceypt or
falshoode to lurk under the Majesty of a king, reposing all confidence in him,
as one secure of peace did congratulate with his freindes for his prosperous
success therein, indighting also these letters to saint Thomas the Archbishop
of Canterbury.

To Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury Master Viuian wishes health with victory
to overcome this instant trouble to the honor of God and his Church.
To the end we might with my Lord of Towers or his Messingers make our
speedyest return to the Court, we left Towers, and on the fourth of the
Kalends of November received the letters of the king of England, the Archhishop
of Roane, and the Archdeacon of Canterbury, by the hands of the Prior of Be
and an other being a noble Gentleman, the copys whereof we sent to your
blessed self, beeseeching you not to listen to any Clearkes suggestion,
allthough he be most eminent in dignity, unless you have first the kings
letters patents, which (as it has bin often proposed) beeseemeth best your
honor: and we entreat moreover that you send instantly to us a Post or some
Clearke by whom if you please, you may signify your will to us, neither yet be
you so much addicted to Master Gratian, as to contemn in our person the honor
of your most dear friend, the chief Advocate of the Roman Church.

Thus far to saint Thomas after the receypt of the kings letters for his
return to the Court.

But upon Viuians coming to the king how he proceeded with his Majesty, his
letters to saint Thomas fully declare, congratulating with him more openly for
the conclusion of peace in the^^ words.

[Blessed be God and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ibid. Epist. 9.
Viuian deluded with a vain hope.
who beeyond the opinion of many is now even ready to unite in the surest band
of charity the walls that were disioyned by the suggestion of the wicked.
Being recalled we returned to his Majesty's presence, where by the operation
of the divine grace we found those proceedinges wherein the honor of God and
his Church was no whitt violated: If therefore you have now received any message
from the most Christian king of France and my Lord of Roane (as we certainly
suppose you have) we are very gladd thereof, for so was it appointed, and, if
Master John of Salisbury your Clearke and our most dear companion is returned
to you (as we hope he is) we rejoice therein, because he has a message to
you. But (reverent father) whatsoever it is, we beeseech you, and beeseeching
counsel you on the beehalfe of our Lord the Pope and the Roman Church, that
setting all fea^es a side, you would be willingly present at saint Denises the
first Sunday after the feast of saint Martyne being the place and day
appointed for confe^ence beetweene the two kings, because you shall ^here
(God-willing) hear the Angelical Hymn: Glory be to God on high, and peace
on earth to my Lord of Canterbury etc.] And thus far Viuian concerning an
assured peace. But saint Thomas knowing more inwardly the kings suttlety,
neither yet (as it was con^enient) having any confidence heerin, and being
^uspiciously fearful, answered with this letter being ^f greater weight, as
well for wisdom as gravity.

Thomas by the grace of God the humble servant of the Church of Canterbury, and
Legate of the Apostolic Sea, Ibid. Epist. 10.
to Master Viuian his faithful friend and Advocate of the holy Roman Church
wishes health and in all things rightly to consider and understand.
Weyghing with my self the Legantyne power committed to your charge, and the
business imposed on you, I see nothing has yet miscaryed in the substance of
the matter by your trauail to my Lord the king of England, (...) dangers has
hitherto bin to the authority of him who sent you, nothing attempted, said, or
done to our discommodity; for so far forth, as this action extends it
self, having accomplished the office commended to your care, were the success
either good or ill, the prefixed time which limiteth your Legantyne bounds
ought to make you, being a man learned in the law, and professing the
knowledge thereof, on all sides sufficiently circumspect. Be ware therefore that
you are well advised, and proceed wisely, least you be made a fable and
derysion among the nobility. But if of your self you have undertaken a new
created Legantyne authority, let him obey the same who is interessed in it, and
him undergo the burden, to whom the profit appertains, for mine own part
that Jurisdiction no way commands me.


And thus he wrote because the time of his Leganty^^ power was now expyred,
and himself bound no long^^ to obey, but whatsomeuer he did was of his own
f^^^ will, and thereupon adds afterward: [But in that yo^^ exhort us to
descend to a parlee appointed between the kings on the next Sunday, at Saint
Denyses; (...) we cannot out of your mandate understand with wh^^ certainty,
what reason, or what hope of peace you require it thus instantly, so on the
othersyde we very much wonder how you are in this sort invited to summon us;
yet for the reverence we bear to the sacred Roman Church, and for the love
we owe you, we will (allthough we are suspended in vncertaintys and fears)
upon your request give you meeting (God willing) on Friday at the Castle of
Corbule, that we may better learn from your own mouth what fruit we may
reap by your labor and travail, and what honor and grace your self may gain
thereby. God be with you and bless you so as you be not taken in the trappe
which hardly any can avoid who traffickes with them.] Thus Saint Thomas, and
truly no false prophet, as will appear by the sequel.

But concerning the proceedinges from the time of the recalling of Viuian
until his departure, being after the meeting of the kings at Paris, there
remains an ample relation in the letter of Saint Thomas written to the
Archbishop of Senon in these words.

To the reverent father and his most dear friend William by the grace of God
Archbishop of Senon, Thomas the humble servant of the Church of Canterbury
wishes as much as the devotion of a banished and distressed person can.
It is impossible the mind of the wicked should rest being continually gauled
with the prick of conscience, Cod. Vat. lib. 3. epist. 60.
and tormented with an endless fear least he should every instant receive the
due punishment of his deserts; and so ^s his troubled soul ever oppressed
with care, as while be wastes himself in false suspicions of his well
meri^ing and intirest friends, through the defecte of his own ^alshoode, he
deemeth the faith to be wavering in others which he knows to be wanting in
himself: Thus the king of England, upon report of your journey as one guilty
of his iniquity and dreading the laws severity together with the perseverance
of virtue which you have and do exercise in our lord, is affrighted
exceedingly least your holy self should be armed with Legantyne authority
over his principalityes on this side the sea, because there is not any one
beesides your self in the whole Church who dares with stand him in repressing
and confounded his malice: neither yet in the Church of Rome (as his followers
witness) does he stand in awe of any but my Lord Gratian, because if his
vauntes be true, whosoever besides upon any occasion have had any access unto
him, were heretofore ever bowed to his will, yea sometimes with the taynte of
a sinister opinion. Understanding therefore that you and my Lord Gratian were
returned, be was so much distempered, as he could not dissemble his minds
disturbance, saying he should by ye two be constrained to make a peace or
sustain an eternal igno^^ny with the great damage of him and his: in regard
whereof he recalled Master Viuian being partly by the letters of my Lord of
Roane and G. Rydell, and (as Viuian in the public hearing of many confessed)
gave him his corporal faith, that in the reformation of the Churches peace he
would subject himself to the Popes Mandate and his counsel: he caused
moreover letters to be signed with his own seal (which Viuian showed
publicly (...) his pleasure) wherein was promised that for the love be bare to
my Lord the Pope, he would restore to us the Church of Canterbury together
with all the possessions taken away from us and ours, and peace also which
security. that by these powerful means he might more easily draw my Lord
Viuian to treat again of peace, which he seemed to seek for fear of you
and my Lord Gratian, whatsomeuer any other does glory: but concerning things
taken away, he made no mention saving only a show that if in the Conclusion
of peace we would submitt ourselves to his pleasure, he would make us the
chiefest of his kingdom, and never suffer us to want.

Master Viuian therefore being thus recalled, and remaining confident in his
words, the king with a feigned pretense of devotion went to saint Denyses, hut
in very deed to compass what he almost brought to pass, which was to
circumuent the most Christian king: for they conuenanted in the parlee at saint
Denyses, that our king should deliver his son Richard into the king of
Frances hands to be brought up and instructed by him; and moreover he should
summon the Earl of saint Gyles to appear at Towers there to answer the said
Richard, concerning the Earldom of Tolouse, for the place seemed in the
judgment of wise men most convenient, where either part with their assistants
might with greatest safety assemble, the Advocates on either side more freely
plead, and the judges without any fear or delay give sentence against the
person whom reason convinced. My Lord the king of France and Master Viuian with
some others of great discretion invited us to the conference, that we being
at Paris, and our king at saint Denyses, our peace by reason of the
neighboring places might be more commodiously handled, where the often named
Viuian more earnesty and diligently pressing the king to perform faithfully
his promise, he according to his accustomed manner flew of from it, beehauing
himself in such sort, as Viuian returning back to us said openly in the
presence of very many; he could not remember that during his life he ever
saw or heard of so deceytfull a person, yea he forbore not to tell the king
to his very face before diverse (as they declared afterward to us) his mind
plainly, and reproving openly his double and deceytfull dealing, recovered
again for the most part his reputation, which before he had greatly
wronged, lamenting much that h^^ was ever so entrapped by his subtle frauds.
Which we signify the rather unto you, because if in his return to the Church
of Rome, he shall presume to favor the side (...) couller the wayles of this
cunning deceauer, your devotion may lay open plainly before my Lord the Pope
and the Cardinals the whole truth of the business: For even as it happened by
Gods appointment that my Lord Gratian should return, having worthily
discharged his office, and that you whom God (we speeake it prosperously) has
placed in his Church as a most constant pillar, and to whom the manners of this
man are apparently known, should hasten your journey to the Apostolic Sea;
even so we deem it has by the same providence bin permitted that Vi^ia^
contrary to his minds intention, should remain i^ France, to publish, with
renown the justice of the Church, and manifest far and wide her glory, wherein
the king of England by the very man who favored his cause, should be more
perfectly discovered to those whom he commonly before deceived, and the
fallacy of his words hereafter far less beeguyle our Lord the Pope and his
court, that heretofore were too credulous in beeleiuing him.

When as the king of England departing from saint Donyses, passed on his
journey near the Montayne of the Martyrs, we presented our selves before him,
humbly beeseeching him by the Meditation of the reverent Lords the Bishops
of Roane and Sagy; with others who assisted in this business, that for the love
of God, and my Lord the Pope he would restore to us his peace, and to ours his
favor, peace, security, possessions; with other things wrongfully taken from
them, tendering him our ready service so far forth as any Archbishop ought to
perform unto his Prince. Whereunto he answered that for his prate he forgave
very willingly from his heart all offenses and quarells conceived against us,
and for such things as were objected against him, he was ready to stand to
the judgment of his Lord the King of Frances Court, or the determination of
the Church of the same kingdom, or the sentence of the university of Paris;
Whereupon we replied that if it pleased him, we would no way refuse the
judgment of my Lord the kings Court, or the Church of France; yet if it liked
his Majesty: we had rather have with him a loving composition then a
litigious controversy, and if he would graciously restore to us and ours, our
Church possessions and other things injuriously taken away, and yield us his
grace, peace, and security in the kiss of peace, we were ready to receive the
same, desiring he would restore one half of the goods wrongfully with houlden
from us unto the Church for discharging the debtes of us and ours, for
repayring dilapidations, ordering our Graunges, and delivering from diverse
necessitys the Church which has bin by the wastefull spoil and deceyptes of
his officers cast into the depth of calamityes: and that our petitions might
not seem to exceed reason and the couenantes, for avoiding the kings
wavering uncertainty, being set down in writing, might remain more
authentical, we caused to be presented to him this supplication, which you
shall here withal receive, being temperately corrected according to his own
Agents desire, to the end the world may know that we will refuse no condition
of peace which is any way tolerable in the Church of God. But the king having
heard our petition read, which was approved by all, in regard of our moderate
demandes, answered in his mother tongue, couching his ambiguous words in that
obscurity (a thing usual with him) as to the simple he seemed to grant all
our requests, but to the judgment of the wiser, intermingled all with tedious
and insufferable conditions, yet they all agreede in one, which was, that he
no way consented to receive us in the kiss of peace, and this made the
Christian king say: that he would not for all the gold our king was worth,
counsel us to set footing in his land, without having first received the
kiss of peace. And Count Theobalde added, that to do the contrary were a most
foolish presumption: many of the assembly discoursing much among themselves,
and calling to mind what beefell to Robert de Silliacke, because not this
very kiss appeared in him a sufficient warrant for the maintenance of his
peace and security: nether yet would he afforde us this answer upon the
mediation of the foresaid Bishops the Arbiters of peace (as we hoped)
neither upon the instance of any others, yea while we awayted his resolution
he turned away toward Medantan. Then was presented to him on the way my Lord
Phillip the blessed son of the most Christian king, whom (as they say who
brought him) our king sowerly beeheld, slenderly saluted, and hastily
dismissed. Moreover (he says) the king of France, who accompanied him on his
journey departed from him discontented, having apparently seen the disposition
of his mind, subuerting all things with suttletyes.

And afterward he writes thus of his attempting Viuian with brybes.

[And thus we returned without any answer from the king to the place of our
repose, which Allmighty God had provided for us, casting our hope on him who
never forsakes such as trust in him, and attending the comfort we expect
from your charity. But for the king of England he sent a messinger with twenty
Mearkes to Master Viuian, entreating him yet once again to undertake this
reformation of peace, which money (as we certainly hear) he refused,
answering him by letter, the copy whereof we have heerewithall sent you, nether
is there any thing so much urges him to seek for peace, as the fear he
conceaueth of the journey intended by your self and my Lord Gratian to his
Holiness, nor yet does he insinuate himself with Viuian for any other end, but
to prevent that he fall not into the Lord Gratians hands and yours. Moreover
we understand he has sent Gyles Archdeacon of Rone, John of Oxeforde, and
John of Segia to the Court, of purpose to work, that we may not have any
Legantyne authority granted us over his land, nor any thing else which may be
incommodious to him or the Earl of Flanders, you partly know the messingers,
but perchance are better acquaynted with us, who by your favor are conversant
with you; Since therefore the king of England, is stroaken with so great a
fear by reason of your sanctity and the faithful dealing of my Lord Gratian,
whereof he ha^h had experience, it is most evident, that if my Lord the Pope
had at the first rather terrifyed with the power of a high Bishop, then
endured him with the charitable love of an indulgent father, the Church of God
had long before this bin cleared of her storms, and the fury of the man
assuaged, who prosecuteth without pity such as fly and are feeble, and
yields to them who manfully resist him.]

But because Saint Thomas highly commended Gratian in regard of his return
to Rome: For an example to them who on the beehalfe of the Apostolical Sea
shall undergo matters of that importance with great princes, we have set forth
here a few lynesout of the Saints letter written to Gratian in these words.
[The endeavors of sinners cannot in the end any way hurt the children of
Grace, Cod Vat. lib. 3. epist. 63.
because God suffers them not to be tempted above their power, directing all
things for the benefit of his elect, and drawing miraculously out of the
several events of matters a glorious profitt, and God undoubtedly respected
your faithful dealing, who converted Master Viuians stay and the managing of
his business in France after your return to the glory of your name, making you
a God to Pharao.] And afterward. [Whosoeuer beeheld the end of the exceeding
familiarity which passed beetweene the king and Viuian, or heard Viuian
discoursing thereof protested openly, that among them all who were employed by
the Pope to the king of England, Gratian only proceeded advisedly, Ihid. epist.
65. Ibid. epist. 61.
etc.] Saint Thomas wrote also thereof to Pope Alexander and Viuian himself
certifyed his Holiness to that purpose. But for the letter which Viuian sent to
the king of England upon refusal of his money, the copy whereof the Bishop of
Senon and Gratian (as you have heard) received from Saint Thomas, we do here
present it unto you.

To the most renowned Lord Henry by the grace of God king of England Master
Viuian Advocate of the holy Roman Church wishes health with a true assent to
sound advise.
Ibid. epist. 62.
How much I have labored for your honor, how far I have endeauored that you
should to the glory of God conclude your peace with the Church, God himself
knows and your wisdom ought not to be ignorant: For I have bin so forward
on your behalf, as I have thereby lost the favor of many and great persons,
and am beecome the fable of detracting tongues, which causes me to wonder
that you have a will to make me infamous by corruption of money, whom you
would not hear when I counseled you for your honor and profitt: But in
regard I beegan to respect you with my best observance and service, and am
not accustomed easily to forsake my freindes, I beesech you, and by all means
possible counsel you to return to your self, and confirm with your Charter
the petition which my lord of Canterbury preferred to you, and withal to
receive him in the kiss of peace, sending to him and recalling him back
again before your land be interdicted, and excommunicated whose names are
already conceived in the book of their condemnation, for they are many and
your nearest servants; beesides your time of respitt is very short.

Thus wrote Viuian to the king of England. And so concluded this Legantine
office executed this year by Gratian and Viuian being Nuntios sent by Pope
Alexander to the king of England.

Moreover when in the midst of this serious business Pope Alexander understood
how the king of England would not suffer Bishops to be chosen for the vacant
Seas, he sent comminatory or threatening letters of great importance unto the
king, in the conclusion whereof he threatened thus: [And if truly you will (as
you are bound) have a care to accomplish that which by our admonitions in the
spirit of meekenes and with all humility we have forewarned you, you shall
undoubtedly procure thereby your glory and salvation, and perform that which to
God and us is most grateful and acceptable; otherwise allthough we desire
earnestly to love you as our dearest son and a most Christian prince, and to
augment the greatness of your glory, yet can we no longer withhould the hands
of Saint Peeter and us from inflicting punishment on you, but (as we ought)
dreading rather God then men we will endeavor with the authority granted us
from heaven to preserve the laws and honor of the Catholic Church pure and
untouched. Dated at Beneuent 7. Ides of Octobr.

The Pope beesides did this year publish a constitution against such as
received of the Layety inuestitures of Churches or their goods, dated in the
month of May and indighted in those words to all the Bishops of England.

[Wee have received as well by a vulgar report, as also the relation of many
how since the miserable contention which for your greiuous sins was raised,
and yet continues beetweene our most dear son in Christ Henry the renowned
king of England and our reverent Brother Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, a
certain wicked custom has grown in those parts for laymen to beestowe on
any at their pleasures throughout the kingdom of England, Churches and
Ecclesiastical benefices, and to inuest Clearkes by their own authority;
wherefore because this is known to be so contrary to the institutions of the
holy fathers, as both the giver and receauer from the lay hand incurreth
Excommunication, and also in regard it redoundeth undoubtedly very much to the
overthrow of the Churches liberty, we by the authority of Saint Peter and us
do abrogate absolutely and denounce for void all such Collation made in this
turbulent time by lay men to any persons of any Churches whatsoever; and
therefore we severely command and in the virtue of obedience straightly enjoin
ye all by these our Apostolical letters, that with all care ye admonish
diligently and instantly exhort all such as have received from the hands of
the Layety any Churches, Prebendaryes, or other Ecclesiastical benefices
whersoeuer throughout England, especially in this troublesome season, to
resign without contradiction or appeal into our hands, the said Churches,
Prebendaryes or Benefices, together with the profits thereof received, and to
leave the same to their disposition, unto whose ordination by the
Ecclesiastical laws these appertain; which if upon our commonition or
warning they refuse to do within forty days after the receipt of these our
letters, then ye by our authority setting aside the remedy of Appeal, and not
respecting the fear, favor or forbidding of any, do presently pronounce the
sentence of Excommunication against them, and cause them throughout your
parishes as persons excommunicaed to be eschewed of all men, until they shall
resign the foresaid Churches and Ecclesiastical Benefices freely up to them,
unto whose collation and ordination they appertain, leaving them peaceably and
making sufficient satisfaction for the Churches profittes so taken by them:
and if ye are negligent or remiss in the execution hereof, then we our
selves by the authority we enjoy denounce the sentence of Excommunication
against them all, and charge that they be avoided of all men as excommunicated
by us, because they are known to receive (as aforesaid) Churches or other
Ecclesiastical benefices from the hand of the Layety without assent of the
Bishops to whom their donation appertains, unless they obey our
cammandementes within the former appointed time. Dated at Beneuent 14. kalend.
Iunij.]

And four days after he wrote to the king of England, first commonitory
letters of admonition, and then comminatory or threatening letters by certain
Nuntios chosen for that purpose called Simon Pryor of Gods-Mount, and Bernard
of Corilo, who were appointed to deliver unto the king, first the comonitory
letters, and that done (if need required) the cominatory. Both which to the
king of England are yet extant, dated this year on the eight of the Kalends of
June, the which his holiness commended first to the Bishop of Belleten and the
Pryor of the Carthusians, as it appears by the letters; but being uncertain
whether they would carry them to the king or not, he made choice of Simon a
most reverent man and Bernard his associate, unto whom the letters are yet
remaining written by his holiness concerning this Legantyne office imposed on
them, Ibid epist. 1.
where he mentions in this sort of his letters written to the king.
[Deliuer him our commonitory letters instantly adding withal in the spirit of
fortitude and lenity our admonition, if so he will not harken unto ye, but
rather continue still in his hardness and obstinacy, give him then our
cominatory letters declaring to him with all constancy on our beehalfe that we
will no longer any way shutt up the Archbishoppes mouth, nor unless before the
beeginning of Lent, a time now near at hand, he will fulfill what before
we have said, will we grant hereafter any inhibition, but that he may by
virtue of his office with the swoard of Ecclesiastical severity bouldly
revenge with rigor the iniuryes offered to himself, his Churches and
followers: For the king ought not to beelieue or think with himself that our
Lord, who is yet sleepeing, will never be awaked, or Saint Peeters swoard is
so outworne with rust, but that it may be drawn to work a due revenge.
Lastly we command ye (as we have said) diligently to execute these our
designs, unless our reverent Brother the Bishop of Belleten and our beeloued
son the Prior of the Carthusians do perform the same in such sort as we
required them. Given at Beneuent 8. Kalend. Iunii.] On which day also were
delivered (as we read) the cominatory letters sent by the Pope to the king of
England, that are likewise registered in the same book, and dated 11. Kal.
Iunij, which Roger in his Chronicles recyteth in these words.

Alexander Bishop servant of the servants of God to his beeloued son Henry
the renowned king of England health with Apostolic benediction.
Your royal wisdom is not ignorant how fatherly and mildly we have often
persuaded and by sundry letters and Nuntios diverse times exhorted your Majesty
to reconcile (according as you are bound) our reverent brother Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury unto your favor, Cod. Vat. lib. 4. epist. 4.
and restore to him and his the Churches with other commodityes wrongfully
taken from them, being an injury notoriously known almost to the whole
Christian world. In regard whereof because hitherto we cannot any way profit
herein, nor allay with sweet and gentle means your destempered mind, we
conceive exceeding grief and sorrow, and lament to see our selves frustrated
of our hope and confidence, especially since we love most entirely as our
dearest son in our Lord yourselfe, Isai. 58.
over whom we beehould for this a greiuous danger to hang; and for that it is
wrirten. Cry out and cease not, as a trumpett exalte thy voice, and declare to
my people their offenses. And an other where. Unless you shall lay open unto
the wicked his iniquity, I will require his blood at your hands. Eccles. 22.
And in an other place by Solomon, The sloughthfull man shall be stoned with
the dung of Oxen: We have resolved no longer to tolerate (as hitherto we
have done) the hardness of your heart against justice with the prejudice of our
soul, neither will we hereafter upon any occasions shutt up the mouth of the
aforesaid Archbishop, but permit him freely to execute his office, and with
the swoarde of Ecclesiastical severity to revenge the iniuryes offered
himself and his Church. And what is not fully signified in these our letters
concerning this and the rest, our beeloued sons the Prior of Gods-Mount, and
brother Bernard of Corilo, as they who dread rather God then man, shall by
word of mouth declare at large to your Majesty, unto whose admonition we
beeseech him, whom to serve is to reign, and in whose hands are the hearts of
kings, to incline your mind and will, that you may rather choose to be bowed,
then stiffely to continue any longer in the willfullnes of so great an
obstinacy against God and your own salvation. But if you will not harken to us
in their persons concerning those things which on our beehalfe they shall
deliver unto you, you may undoubtedly fear least the revenging wrath of God
will shortly fall upon you.


Now what the proceedinges of these Nuntios were, their own relation which was
sent to Pope Alexander declares at large in these words.

Ibid. Epist. 8.
[Wee traveled lately together with Brother Bernard of Corilo unto the renowned
king of England to perfect a peace and agreement by virtue of your Mandate
beetwene him and my Lord of Canterbury: and to bring our purpose more easily
about, we drew my Lord of Canterbury to the place, where the kings (God so
working) were reconcyled one to an other.] Here we see the kings at their
late parlee in Paris departed a sunder discontented, and that an other meeting
was afterward appointed, which (we suppose) was this. Then he proceeds.
[Hauing delivered the king of England your comonitory letters, and having done
our uttermost dillige^ce, which we thought most likely to prevail with him,
we admonished and counseled my Lord of Canterbury to humble himself to the
king and endeavor to assuage the rigor of his mind with lowely prayers and
ready service, in like sort the most Christian king of France, the
Archbishoppes, with other Lords there present jointly persuaded him: Being
urged with the exhortations of the king, Bishops and Barons, the Archbishop
of Canterbury consented, and in that open assembly came to the king of England,
and falling down on his knees commended himself to God and the king, speaking
to the honor of God and his prince in these formal words: To the honor of God
so to procure his peace and favor. But the king in regard of those words, to
the honor of God, would not receive him into his favor, saying openly before
them all; least it should be thought the Archbishop sought to conserve the
honor of God and not of the king. And after many words (which would to God he
had forborne) he said he required nothing else of the Archbishop, but that
he as a priest and Bishop should before them all promise him in the word
of truth to conserve without any deceypt the customs which the holy
Archbishoppes of Canterbury had observed unto their kings, and which the
Archbishop himself had once promised him to do. Whereunto the Archbishop
answered that he had done him fealty, which he was bound by the obligation of
an oath to keep inviolable, that is to say, life, lymmes and worldly honor
with the preservation of his order, and all this he was ready most faithfully
to accomplish, neither was any whit more exacted of his Predecessors, or was to
be required of any: But the king standing still most peremptorily on this
Article, my Lord of Canterbury said moreover; allthough none of his
Predecessors had done, yea or undertaken thus much, nor yet himself was by law
tied any way thereunto, he professed nevertheless that for obtaining the peace
of the Church and regayning his favor, he would promise, that such customs as
his Predecessors had observed to their kings, he would with reservation of
his order observe inuiolably unto him, so far forth, as he could do without
offending God, and would perform for winning his good opinion again, what
soever could be done with the honor of God, protesting he was never in his
life more willing to serve him, then to accomplish this, if it pleased him to
accept thereof. Yet the king refused him upon these terms, nor would receive
him unless he would precisely and absolutely bind himself by oath to observe
his customs, because he required nothing else at his hands; which in
regard the Archbishop (allthough many did instantly persuade him thereunto)
would not condescend to do, the king departed without conclusion of peace.

But when (according to your Mandate) we exhorted the king to receive the
Archbishop again into his favor and restore him his Church with peace: He
answered. For his Church it may be the counsel of his freindes might so far
prevail, as in the end he should render him the same again, but denied ever
to restore him his favor, for then were the privilege void, which your
Holiness granted him, by virtue whereof you suspended the Archbishoppes
authority until such time as he was restored into his favor.] What this
suspension was we will declare hereafter. But to return to the Nuntios
letter, he thus proceeds: [And because you commanded us to admonish him
first with the spirit of lenity by your Comonitory letters, we deferred to
another time the delivery of your Cominatory. Mean while we beeseech
Allmighty God (in whose hands are the hearts of Princes) to mitigate and
assuage his mind and reunite this peace to the divine glory, and the Churches
vtility. The rest of your Mandate we will by Gods leave in convenient time
execute with all diligence, and will be careful to signify to your Holiness
the event of the business in such sort as God shall determine it. Brother
Bernard being desired to certify your Holiness (as we do) of the proceedinges
and success hereof, answered it was forbidden in his order, that any brother
should write to you or others about any affairs, but promised to declare
before your Nuntio Master Lumbard (who delivered him your letters) the whole
state and process of the cause, that he may signify the same unto you as
faithfully and amply as if himself had bin there present.] And thus did Simon
write to the Pope. But what ensued afterward, the said Nuntio in another
relation, sent also to Pope Alexander, laid open in these words.

[According to the commandment of your Holiness we delivered to the renowned
king of England your Comonitory letters doing our uttermost labor and
diligence to persuade him, Cod. Vat. lib 4. Epist. 10.
according to your admonition, to receive my Lord of Canterbury into his favor
again, to restore him his Archbishopricke with peace, and suffer him freely to
dispose of his Church; we long expected hoping and praying that Allmighty God
would molify his heart. But when by our forbeara^ce we profited nothing, we
presented unto him in the next parle of the kings, your cominatory letters,
which having at the last with great difficulty received upon the instant
entreaty of us and many noble personages, after many words too long here to
rehearse, he answered thus: I never banished my Lord of Canterbury out of the
kingdom, nevertheless for the reverence I owe to my Lord the Pope, if he
will perform to me what he ought to do, and observe to me what his
Predecessors have observed to my Progenitors, yea what himself has promised,
he may return into England, and enjoy his peace, And after sundry diuersitys
of answers he lastly said: He would assemble together the Bishops of
England, and take their counsel, but appointed no day, nor more could we get
at his hands, whereby we might be assured of my Lord of Canterburys peace, or
the execution of your Mandate. And because we found him often altering in his
answers, we demanded of him, if my Lord of Canterbury might return to his
Archbishoppricke, and use it in peace. Whereupon he replied: That the
Archbishop should never come within his land before he did to him accordingly
as he ought to do, and had undertaken to observe, what others had observed,
and what himself had already promised.

Lastly we beesought him he would write and signify by his letters patents
his answer, because we ought to declare unto you a certaynty which hitherto
we had not, in regard he varyed so often in his answers, whereunto he would
not agree. But the Archbishop (when we delivered thus much unto him) said:
he would be ever ready to obey the king wherein he ought, and observe
whatsoever was observed by his Predecessors so far forth as he could with
reservation of his order, but to entangle himself in new obligations that were
never offered to his Predecessors, and undertake to perform any such without
preservation of his order, was altogether unlawful for him without my Lord
the Popes authority, first because it is pernicious to bring a new form into
Gods Church, and then in regard he was forbidden by your Holiness ever to make
any such promise, but with the reservation of Gods honor, and of his order: And
said moroeuer your Holiness with rebuking told him, that he ought not for
safeguard of his life to bind himself to the observation of such customs, but
with preservation of his order. Yet if the king would (according to your
Mandate) restore to him his favor with peace and the free inioying of his
Church together with such things as were wrongfully taken away from him and
his, he would most willingly perform at his pleasure whatsomeuer he could
possibly do without offense of God and breach, of his order, and will endeavor
most dilligently and devoutly to serve him with all his power. Please it
therefore your Holiness to succor the afflicted Church and to persevere in that,
which to your great commendation you have already beegunne, because (as we
have heard of many, and do certainly beelieue) if you persevere, the peace and
redress of the Church is even now at hand.] Thus wrote Simon of Gods-Mount
after he had worthily performed his charge, and to the same purpose did the
Archbishop of Senon (who was there present) and saint Thomas also, Cod. Vat.
lib. 4. Ep. 7. Ibidem Ep. 6.
signify to his Holiness.

Mean while the king of England dealt by his two agents with Pope Alexander,
that the authority of faint Thomas might be suspended until this matter were
handled by the Popes Nuntios, as it appears by the Popes letters to the king,
which Roger in his Chronicles of England recyteth in this year, beeginning
thus. [Your Majesty's Age^tes our beeloued son John Cumin etc. and written in
secret (as the Pope witnesses in his own words) which nevertheless the king
with great vaunting diuulged. For as we see in the first conference of the
kings, the king of England protracted the peace, least he should otherwise
loose the privilege which (as he said) he receaueth from the Pope, to wit,
that the Archbishops authority should be suspended until he had obtained the
kings peace, upon occasion of which grant, you may conceive the Pope was
hardly spoaken of by many; the king of England, who was the only procurrer
thereof, in kindling hatred and wrath against him, by showing publicly, with
great ostentation and kingly pride, the Popes letters, and causing them
especially to be read in the last royal conference, whereof saint Thomas
wrote thus to Conrade Archbishop of Mountes. Ibidem Epist. 15.
[The king of England publicly boasts of our suspension by proclayming the
same in the open streets of either kingdom, and for a testimony of my
confusion, and to make me more burdensome and odious to the world, he lays
open the Apostolic letters. He gloryeth also of the term of the prerogative
assigned him, being until he receaueth me into favor, which if it
remains in his power, shall be at the Grecian Kalendes, I mean, never etc.]
Whereof he vaunted upon this only reason, because Pope Alexander being
importuned and deceived by the king, did write that saint Thomas should suspend
his authority so long over the king and kingdom, until he purchassed the
kings peace, which benignity of the Pope the king abusing, did of set purpose
defer the peace, because until that was concluded the Archbishoppes
authority was suspended, by reason whereof the Pope was inueyghed against, Cod.
Vat. lib. 4. Epist. 14. Ibidem Ep. 18.22. Ibidem Ep. 19. Ibidem Ep. 20.23 25.2
Ibidem 16 8
not only by the Archbishop himself, but likewise by the king of France, as
also his Queen and many others being incensed with the zeal of justice.

Pope Alexander therefore assaulted with so many and so great complayntes, by
his letters to S. Thomas excused himself thus.

[Wee suppose your wisdom is not ignorant how Henry the famous king of
England sent his Agents unto us and with what unreasonable and injurious
demandes which afflicted much our mind, the urged us on his beehalfe breathing
out terrible threats, unless we would condescend to his will, whereupon we in
regard the stormy persecution of the Church is not yet laid, nor the fair
calm of peace, as it was expedient, has hitherto shined on us, allthough we
would not grant his requests, were nevertheless careful to temper and assuage
the fury and outrage of his mind, dreading greatly least he should (as once
he did) join in any league of society with Frederick the Emperor that tyrant
and wicked enemy of the Church to the hindrance and disturbance of her peace,
or pick any quarrel to departs from the Church and our devotion: this was the
reason that we, considering the malice of the time; did with the joint
counsel of our brethren by our Apostolical letters command your brotherhoode
(upon the conceyte of a certain hope and confidence he would receive you into
his favor, and restore the Church of Canterbury to your free disposition) that
you should not publish against him or any persons of his kingdom or against
the kingdom it self any sentence of Interdiction, Excommunication or
Suspension, unless you first received from us other letters wherein should be
signified that if the king would not reconcyle himself in peace unto you, you
should have leave to execute your office against him and his. Wherefore in
regard we desire to conserve by all means to you as our dear brother, also
to your Church due honor and liberty, if he shall not effectually fulfill
before the beeginning af Lent what we hope he will do as we have propounded
to him, but persevere still hardened in his obstinacy, we do the^ restore to
you again your authority, to have fre liberty without any bar of Appeal to
execute the power of your office, as well against the persons as also the
kingdom, yea the king himself, if you shall judge it convenient and expedient
for your self and your Church, Cod Vat. lib. 4. epist 17. and 51. to the king.
reserving ever that gravity and Pontifical discretion which beehoueth you.
[Thus wrote Alexander to Saint Thomas, sending an other letter unto him also to
the same purpose, and certifying likewise the king of France to the said
effect. And so the Pope reformed that which the king of England used not for
establishing of peace, but abused for the prolonging of discord I mean this
privilege of time granted without limitation. Cod Vat. lib. 3 epist. 1. and
23.
These letters of reuoking this suspension Alexander this year commanded to
be delivered by the aforesaid two Nuntios unto the king, who perusing them
was exceedingly moved, exclayming against his holiness, that he had within the
compass of one year published two decrees contradicting one an other, one
being for him, the other against him, unless he would agree presently to a
peace. What ensued afterward we will in place convenient declare the next
year.

ANNO DOMINI 1170.
The last Legates sent by the Pope to Henry King of England on the beehalfe of
S. Thomas.
Now follows the year of our Lord 1170. and the third Indiction. When Pope
Alexander addressed yet once again certain Bishops as Legates to Henry king
of England: For which purpose he selected Rotroche Archbishop of Roane with
Bernard Bishop of Niuers, to whom was after added William Bishop of Senon a
prelate of approved fidelity and assured integrity: For the better executing of
which office Pope Alexander directed his letters (which are yet extant) to
either of them severally, Cod Vat. lib. ^ epist. 2. and 4. Ibid epist 5.
dated after Viuians return, beesides others to them jointly containing their
treaty to be had with the king: which was that S. Thomas should return to his
Church and receive all the possessions taken away from his Church; that others
exiled for his sake should every one be restored to his own; the king should
grant him a perfect peace in a holy kiss; if he would not yield thereunto,
because he had sworn the contrary, he should perform it by his son
according as he had promised; he should abolish and absolutely condemn the
wicked customs contradicting the Churches liberty, and the Legates should
absolve from their promise the Bishops who undertook to observe them; if there
were any hope of peace, they should then absolve the Excommunicates, but under
this condition, that if the peace succeeded not, they should fall back again
into their former excommunication without any remedy of Appeal; all which
couenantes he commanded precisely to be performed within the compass of 40.
days: And if the peace could not be perfected within that limited time, nor
these conditions accomplished, they should presently interdict the Province on
this side the seas where the king as then remained. This was the charge imposed
by Pope Alexander on the Legates, as appears by his Apostolical letters
dated this year at Beneuent 14. Kalend. Februarii. The Pope sent also diverse
letters to others concerning the same Legation, and especially to king Henry
himself.

Whilst this business was in hand, there brake forth a new discord: king Henry
would have his son crowned king by the Archbishop of york, being an office
appertayning to the Prime seat of England, which is Canterbury; wherefore the
Pope understanding theerof directed his letters to the Archbishop of york, and
all the Bishops of England in this sort.

Cod. Vat. lib 4. Ep. 42.
[In regard we are long since certifyed by the relation of many, that the
Coronation and unction of the kings of England appartayneth to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, as an ancient custom and dignity annexed unto his Church, we
do by these presents and our Apostolical authority streyghtly inioyne your
brotherhood, that, if the renowned king of England will have his son crowned
and anointed king, during the time our reverent brother Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury remains in exile, none of ye attempt to impose hands on him, or
presume any way to intermedle in the business; which if any of ye shall be so
bold as to do, let him undoubtedly know that it will highly redounde to the
peril of his office and order; for heerin we will cut of all remedy of
Appeal, and exclude all occasion of malignity. Dated at Cisuinary 4. Kalend.
Martii.] He wrote also severally to the same Bishops of England and likewise
to saint Thomas, Ibid epist 44 Ibid. epist. 3. Ibidem epist. 42. and 4^.
the privileges of whose Church should be heerby infringed. Saint Thomas
moreover writing in the name of the high Bishop of Rome to the Archbishop of
york and other Bishops of England in like manner forbad the same to be
done. Upon receipt of which letters the king of England and his followers were
so far enraged, as they caused them all to take an oath not any way to obey
the constitutions of the Pope and Archbishop forbidding this same, which so
heinous offense saint Thomas presently reproved by these his letters written to
them into England.

Ibid. Ep. 47.
[Knowe ye (my dearest) that we have written in great tribulation and anxiety
of heart, not any way to heap sorrows upon ye, but that ye may understand
what manner of charity we bear abuntantly unto ye; for God is our witness how
we covet ye in the very bowels of Christ Jesus; whereupon seeing the dangers
that nearly touch the body and soul, ye to their injury, and, which being
never heard of in these our days, are yet now beefallen, we are not a little
greiued and confounded in regard of your selves. For it is apparent by the
public report of all men, that ye have abiured my Lord the Pope who
represents the person of Christ himself, and as also who (allthough
unworthy) are nevertheless appointed the father and Bishop of your souls, yea
this is it which above other things (that we have many years according to
the example of the just judgment of Allmighty God endured) increased
exceedingly the abundance of our sufferinges; for that so detestable, so
wicked an oath how great a scandal does it breed to the world? what offense
to God? what a sin to your self? what affliction to us? For why, to abjure
them whom God has ordained over ye, is an injury to him who has ordained
them, and likewise to us who are placed in authority by him, nay rather, the
power of him who so exalted us is dishonored, the band of his obedience
broken: which vice undoubtedly (with confidence I speak it, but for your sakes
with tears) is like and equivalent to Idolatry, for (says the prophet) to
resist is the sin of Southsaying, and not to obey is the offense of Idolatry,
whereupon such by the ordinance of the old law, as were Idolatrers, sustained
the sentence of corporal death: And seem ye not to your selves to have
incurred a far greater crime in that ye do not only rebel, but also bind
your selves with an oath hereafter to rebel: and that moroeuer what a thing
is it for sheep to shake of their sheapheard? Verily for such as forsake their
shepheardes, the Wolf has already invaded them, and unless the shepherd,
whom they have now abiured, defends them, he will in the end devour them.
Many testimonies of Scriptures and examples of Saints may be produced for
detestation of your offense, but that the excess of such an enormity lies
open to the eyes of the meanest understanding.

Yet if ye were not voluntarily, but unwillingly drawn hereunto, the sin
were excused in part, but not in all: for better it is to suffer the body's
destruction, then take an abominable oath, whereby ye are beecome the children
of death; because (as the prophet says of the people) ye are stricken with
the stripe of the enemy, with a cruel chastisement. But to manifest the
watchful care we have before Allmighty God for ye, we have endeauored to
apply to so grievous a wound the salve which now only remains, and do
therefore by the power of saint Peter the Apostle, the authority of the Bishop
of Rome and of us, absolve from an oath so unlawful, all such as are
penitent, especially those who swear, imparting to our reverent brethren the
Diocesan Bisshoppes, and preistes of less quality in the vacancy of
Bishopprickes our power for inioyning external satisfaction to the before said
Penitents: Admonishing ye all, who are willing to understand it, that ye are
no way bound by such an oath nor obliged to obey it, least as Herod under
pretense of piety, ye become impious, and excuse with an oath an offense
exceeding the swearing, according to him who says: That oath is not to be
observed, whereby a sin is unadvisedly promised. And again. In promises which
are evil infringe your faith, break your vow, change your decree; do not
perform what you have unadvisedly vowed. And many other sentences which I
ouerpasse, are consonant heereunto.

And now to conclude, I, who am bound in our Lord, do here beeseech ye, yea
I beeseech ye as my children, whom I ever ought to embrace in Christ, that ye
walk worthy of the vocation whereunto God has called ye; that observing first
of all the faith of Christ, ye do next obey his Prelates, submitting your
selves unto them, for they are the Parties who keep watch over ye, as the
persons who must yield an account for your souls: For (brethren) I would have
ye understand, how as well these unlawful oaths, as also many other
enormious crimes which through wicked sugestions are committed in our cause for
the oppression of justice and truth, truth so favoring it self, will turn in
the end to the benifitt thereof, fore truth may be imprisonned or entralled,
but can never be vanquished, because she is contented with the small number
of her follwers, and never caught with the multitude of men; and let the spirit
of counsel and wisdom inspire ye all with that discretion one to an other,
as being all of one mind, ye may with one mouth honor the Pastors and
Bishops of your souls, whom that great Pastor of flocks Jesus Christ has
ordained in the blood of his eternal testament, and that by the Charity of the
holy Ghost ye stretch out the hands of your prayers to help me your father
in this ^^y extreme peril, whereby I may be delivered from those Infidells who
forbid that in this my restraynte I should be assisted with prayer, a suffrage
commonly beestowed both on the faithful and unfaithful. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with ye all who have corrected your error concerning this
wicked oath, and bin worthily and humbly contryte therefore; for the contrary
side, I beeseech God either instantly to convert them, or temporally to punish
them until they amend, and do condign penance for their offense.] Thus
wrote saint Thomas unto his. Cod Vat. lib. 3. Ep. 18.
But it appears by the testimony of John of Silisbury, that all did not
equally condescend to this oath, and that persecution was threatened from the
higher powers against such as refused to swear: For he says: [It is a
public report, that the above mentioned Archdeacon of Canterbury persuaded
the king to pass over into England, and there to torture the Bishops with
those of the Clergy, who would not swear against my Lord the Pope and their
mother Church of Canterbury; on every side is fear: perplexitys on every side
etc.]

The king mean while did with all diligence possible hasten to accomplish the
Coronation at whitsuntyde, but concerning such things as foreranne the same,
there is extant the relation of a faithful friend who remained with the king,
and often certifyed saint Thomas by letters of these and other occurrents, but
now in this sort: Ibid Ep. 10.
The king must be needs at London on Sunday next, for he has then summoned
thither out of all parts of the land the Archbishop of york together with all
other Bishops and Barons; that day will york assuredly crown the kings
son, his wife the king of Frances daughter being left at Cane, to the
reproach and contempt of her father as one rejected: This child whom we have
named, will when we have named, be undoubtedly crowned, unless our Lord stay
his intended passage by sea, or restrain the hands of york, or the king of
France repress it with some manner of prohibition: For the son hasteneth to
the sea and is expected by the father on the contrary shore, and by the kings
commandment the Bishops of Bay on and Segien attend his child. [And
concerning the Popes letters forbidding this same, he adds thus. For my Lord
the Popes letters forbidding this consecration, it was long ere they passed the
seas, then absolutely cast away to no purpose, and perishing in the hands of
him to whom they were committed, they were showed to none, much less diuulged
to all, how therefore could they prevail that were thus concealed? etc. But in
regard of some occasions arysing the new kings coronation was deferred till
saint John Baptistes nativity, whereof William, in Quadrilogus writes thus in
the end of the second.

[The feast of saint John Baptist being now at hand, the king under pretense
of establishing his kingdom assembling together the nobility of his realm
committed to his eldest son the raynes of his kingdom. And there wanted not
some who advised him to be very careful upon what conditions he thus
admitted his heir and successor; others answering and affirming, all this was
done in hatred of the Archbishop, and derogation of the Churches dignity. But
the Archbishop of york imposed hands on him in the Province of Canterbury,
being in saint Peeters Church at Westminster, contrary to the dignity and
ancient custom of the Church of Canterbury, the Bishops of London,
Salisbury, and Rochester as suffraganes assisting him, nor ever opening their
lips in protestation of the right of Canterbury, to whose dignity and
prerogative the coronation of the kings of England is of ancient times known
to appertain, In the celebration of the feast after the coronation the king
vouchsafed to serve the king, the father the son, and protested that now he
ceased to be a king. But according as God complayneth They reign and not by
me, so how manifestly was it in the end declared that this young king by this
bastardly consecration unlawfully acted by an excommunicated and accursed
person, purchassed not a benediction. Wheruppon this Author adds by and by
afterward thus: But let us a little consider how profane this unction was, how
odious, how offensive this consecration (if it may be termed rather a
consecration then an execration, being absolutely destitute of any
Apostolical benediction, yea absolutely done in transgressing against the
Apostolical man) which only proceeded out of mere hatred wrath and
indignation devised by a carnal father in despite of his spiritual father!
All which is proved by the lamentable euentes, that being so detestable to
all ensuing ages, sprung out of this consecration, I mean the Suspension and
Excommunication of Preistes, the murdering of an Archbishop, the sundry
battayles between the father and son, and lastly the notorious, miserable,
and untimely death of this young Prince so consecrated, being cut of in his
prime, and left an example for all times to come. etc.]

This same friend of his sent him also the report of the Coronation in these
words. [On Sunday last the king being at London endowed his son with the
girdle of knighthoode, Cod. Vat, lib. 5. Ep. 2. 3.
and york instantly anointed him king. There the king distributed his lands
to his sons, all men wondering what hereafter he would do. He causes his
journey into Normandy to be continually talked of, to the end he may be the
more dreaded, but he will not go until he has decently furnished the king
of France his daughter (remaining now in the company of the Queen at Cane)
with apparel, horse, and family, convenient to pass the seas at his
appointment; and this of purpose that the king of France hearing hereof, may
somewhat be pacifyed in regard of the indignation conceived for contempt of
his daughter. etc.] This being done, saint Thomas having certain intelligence
of all matters which had passed in derogation of himself and his Church of
Canterbury, wrote (as the same author reports) unto Pope Alexander mournful
letters replenished with complayntes, intermingled also with other
discontentes, which is to say, that the chief Ringleader of all this Scysme,
together with the Bishop of Salisbury not inferior to the former, being both
excommunicated before by the Pope himself, were to the reproach of the whole
Church loosed from the bands of excommunication by the Bishop of Senon Legate
of the Apostolic Sea; Hereof saint Thomas especially complained to Cardinal
Albert beeginning thus in bitterness. Cod. Vat. lib. 5. Ep. 20.
[I would (my he loved) your ears were open to the tongues of our
complayntes, that they might then hear what is often sung in the public
passages of Ascalon to the reproof of the Roman Church. Our last Messingers
seemed to bring us some comfort from the Sea Apostolic in my Lord the Popes
letters, but their authority is made absolutely void by letters sent from the
Legate a latere for absoluing Satan to the Churches obloquy. There are now
absolved by the Apostolical Mandate the Bishops of London and Salisbury, of
whom the first is know to be from the very beeginning the firebrand of this
Scysme and contryuer of all this malice, and to have drawn as well Salisbury
as all others whom he could into the offense of disobedience. I know not in
what sort our Lords cause is handled in the Court that Barabbas escapes
free and Christ is crucified. Now for six whole years has our banishment and
the Churches calamity bin prolonged by the Courts authority etc.] But how
iniustly all this was delivered, allthough to the holy man, it seemed most
certain, the letters of Pope Alexander to the Bishop of Senon the Apostolical
Legate declare. But first let us here report what the Legate, setting down
the same, did write to that purpose unto his Holiness.

bIid. Ep. 25.
[Let your excellency (most holy father) hear with patience what we say,
because our soul dwells in bitterness, and as well your devoute son the
most Christian king of France, as also the whole Church of France is troubled
with the scandalls which in the days of your Apostolic authority flow from
the Apostolical Sea: For why (as our country says) Satan is there set loose
to the whole Churches destruction, Christ is crucified again, and the
sacriligious wretch and murderer let go: We have labored with your Holiness
on the behalf of the Church of England, and supposed in our departure she
obtained some relief; But when you caused the Bishop of London without our
priuity to be absolved, the matter fell out clean contrary, and horns are
given to the sinner. For lo, that king (whom you have over much favored) has
caused his son to be consecrated king, if it may be termed a consecration
which is ministered by the Excommunicate, who are odious to the holy Ghost and
enemies to the Church, and this with the notorious injury of the Church of
Canterbury, and of my Lord the king of France, whose Daughter, that adversary
of God and man would not admit to be partaker of this consecration. This
consecration or rather execration was ministered by york, and (as they say)
with your authority, where London and some others named Bishops, whose
memoryes are buried in malediction, assisted him. Have a care therefore (o
father) hereafter of this Church, which has perished i^ your hands, least
the blood thereof be required of you, which we think cannot be otherwise
done for the redemption of your fame and soul, unless with your Apostolical
power you confound the foresaid Malefactors.] Thus wrote Senon to the Pope.
There are letters yet to be seen written in the Popes name to the Archbishop
of Roane for absoluing London on certain conditions; Cod Vat. l. 3. Epist. 16.
and others likewise sent by Roane to his holiness, signifying how he was
absolved on Easter day, but there is the letter of saint Thomas to Roane
affirming the absolution to be void, Ihid. Ep. 19.
because the Popes conditions were never proformed. Ibid. Ep. 24
And moreover beesides all these an other letter of saint Thomas, wherein he
complayneth to the Pope concerning these abuses. Yet be assured all this was
but a slanderous report: And first, as it was false that the Archbishop of
York ever consecrated the king by the Popes authority, as the letters before
recyted written both by the Pope and also by a frind to saint Thomas apparently
declare; so make no doubt it is as manifest a falsehood that London and his
Associate were ever absolved by the Popes Mandate; and therefore lo here the
Epistle of Apology sent by his Holiness to the Bishop of Senon.

[Wee have gratefully received, Ibid. Ep. 26.
and with dilligente care and attention considered the letters which your
devotion sent as concerning the business of our venerable brother the Archbishop
of Canterbury; The Pope purges himself of a false imputation.
But in regard the Bishop of London is not yet come unto us, we have
determined nothing in the cause: If he had appeared before us, we would have
endeauored to preserve the just title of the Archbishop of Canterbury so far
forth as we might have done with the safety of our conscience: But yet how far
we have proceeded in that controversy, we suppose we have made sufficiently
known to him in part, and also to our most dear son in Christ Jews the
famous king of France, in such sort as we enjoined you by word of mouth to
deliver, for we have therein altered nothing since your departure, nor have
we thought good to change any thing hereafter, allthough the foresaid king of
England did solicit us most earnestly by the Consuls of Lumbardy being
present before us with his agents, as also by the Ambassadors of our most dear
son in Christ Emmanuel the illustrous Emperor of Constantinople to grant
him a longer time of repite. And in regard we esteem the Archbishoppes cause
as our own and the Churches cause, we command your brotherhood by these our
Apostolical letters that you admonish carefully, and instantly exhort by
word of mouth, or otherwise by letters if they are not personally present, the
Archbishop of Roane and Bishop of Niuers dilligently and speedily to execute
our commandment, and if as yet they have no way proceeded in the business,
omit not in any case to reprehend them sharply and severely reprove them. But
if they have already pronounced according to our commandment the sentence of
interdiction upon the said kings lands, then do you firmly and straightly
observe this sentence, and cause (as far as it lies in your power) the same to
be observed without any partiality at all throughout the kings lands which
are known to ly in your Province, setting all excuse and appeal a side.] Thus
far Pope Alexander purged himself to Senon, and allthough the Pope commanded
excommunicated London to be absolved, to the end he might be an instrument
of peace (as in an other place he says) what offense was this? especially
considering he commanded the same to be done upon certain conditions. Nay
did not saint Thomas himself, this very year at such time as the Pope
commanded the excommunication to be reiterated on London and Salisbury,
beeseeche his Holiness to forbear the same for fear of disturbing the peace
now undertaken? So as it appears, not only Alexander, but also saint Thomas
himself did upon diverse occasions command and persuade the Excommunicated to
be bound and loosed, for these are his own words: [Allthough the Bishop of
Lomdon has bin the chief Leader of this sedition (that we may forbear to
call it Scysme) we nevertheless beeseech it may be lawful for us to have
compassion on him and Salisbury, if they cannot be punished according to your
commandment without renewing of Scisme.]

But the modesty of Pope Alexander was undoubtedly admirable, who although he
felt himself ouerladen with so huge a burden of wrongful accusations, yea
and was most unjustly afflicted with the co^playntes of this so Saintly a man
signified by the Apostolical Legate, as also those of the king, people and
Clergy of France, almost wholly with clamors inueyghing against him, being
made nevertheless as a man not hearing, nor having any refutations in his
mouth, he handled his cause with that unspeakable myldnes, as he abstayned
absolutely from retorting reproves or any other spytefull replication,
allbeeit he was gauled with the spurs of most sharp letters, so as it may
without all controversy be affirmed of him which was once said of Moses,
that he was of all men the meekest. But whence (will you say) arose then this
report so bruted in the mouths of all, that the Bishop of London was
absolved by the Pope? It is laid open in the Epistle of John of Salisbury
Secretary to saint Thomas, written to the Archdeacon of Excester and dated this
year, where among other occurrents (...) this time he inserteth this of this
same: [It was commonly given out that the kings Agents had then obtained
absolution for the Bishop of London and all others, Cod. Vat. lib. 5. Ep. 18.
and how the Archbishoppes authority for proceeding against the kingdom with
the persons of his realm, was withdrawn; But they were presently refuted as
manifest untruths by letters sent from his Holiness, yea before such time as
the Bishop of London undertook his journey to the Court, who doubtless would
have spared that labor and cost, if (as some feigned) he might have bin
absolved without so great difficulty.] Thus says Salisbury for clearing
Alexander from the injurious slanders raised of him by the king of Englands
Agents. Whereunto may be added the testimony of saint Thomas, expostulating
with king Henry thus: [My Lord, if you hasten the planting of your son in
your place, with the accomplishment of his consecration, why are you not
careful to exclude from the solemnity of so great a Sacrament those who are
apparently and namely excommunicated by the sentence of my Lord the Pope and
us? Can a consecration be perfected without a participation?] But if London
and Salisbury had bin absolved, being excommunicated before, as well by the
Pope as saint Thomas, these objections could never have bin made by saint
Thomas himself in that assembly where none stood excommunicate but only the
said Bishops.

For answer moroeuer of the other flaunder concerning the Popes consent to the
consecration of the king of England by the Archbishop of York, read here the
Popes letters written to saint Thomas in these words.

[Considering deeply the constancy of your virtue and faith, Ibid. Ep. 34.
with the resolution of mind which you have apparently showed for defense of
your Churches liberty; we do willingly give you as our dearest brother the
best counsel and assistance we can for obtaining those things which we
know convenient for the conservation and augme^tation of the same Church, and
will with diligent endeavor affoarde the defense of the Apostolical power
against all such as contend to diminish and disturb the rightes and dignityes
hereof. We hear of certaynty how the Archbishop of York contrary to our
prohibition and interdiction, has crowned in your Province Henry son to the
famous king of England; wherefore, in regard you affirm the same to be an
exceeding great derogation to the right and dignity of your Church, being
desirous on this beehalfe to succor both your self and Church, we ordain by
our Apostolical authority, that the said Archbishoppes act shall no way
hereafter by any means prejudice you for diminishing your right in the
Coronation and unction of the kings of England, but that you may have it in as
ample manner as your Predecessors and Church have bin known to have enjoyed
the same forty years now past.] Thus far in refutation of the scandal
concerning the Archbishop of York, and heereto is agreeable an other Epistle
written to the Bishops who were present at the Coronotion, and that letter
especially which the Pope sent to the same Roger Archbishop of York and Hugh
Bishop of Duresme indighted thus.

Alexander Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his reverent brethren
Roger Archbishop of York and Hugh Bishop of Duresme sends greeting and
Apostolical benediction.
Allthough ye are many ways commendable and grateful to us, and we on the
other side embrace ye with the arms of unfeigned charity; nevertheless we
ought not therefore to ouerpasse, but call ye to account, and with the zeal of
righteousness to correct such offenses as being committed by ye, and left
vmpunished, engender death. Our Lord speaking by the Prophet thus: If I saying
to the wicked, thou shall dye the death, thou do not declare it unto him, nor
tell him thereof, he shall dye in his sin, but I will require his blood at
thy hands. The oppression truly of the Church of England with the diminishing
of her liberty, which is known to be caused by your king, be it either of
his own motion, or else by the suggestion of others, has now long since very
much afflicted our mind, and bred us noe small care and grief; for whereas it
behooved him to deuyse how to correct those abuses which were brought in
wickedly by his Predecessors, he rather heaping sins upon sins
constituted and established with the coullor of a royal title those unlawful
customs by which the Churches liberty perished, and the decrees of Apostolic
men (as far as he could infringe them) were deprived of their power; neither
did he think it enough if under his Dominion the Divine laws in his kingdom
of England were put to silence and made void, unless he should also cast a
descent of sin upon his heirs, and make his kingdom for long time sit
solitary without Ephod, without Superhumerale, without preistly dignity: Thence
came it to pass that he procured those usurpations to be confirmed, without
any exception, by the oaths of your selves, your brethren, and the Bishops
your Associates, and condemned him to be punished as a Traitor who would not
yield consent to these wicked customs. This appears manifestly in the exile
of our reverent brother the Archbishop of Canterbury, this is openly declared
in the miserable banishment of his Clearkes and kindred, and of those who
sucking their mothers breasts cried as yet in their cradles; yea the terror of
death is threatened to all such as dare resist the same, and prefer the laws
of God before those synnefull Statutes. We our selves (by whose judgment
those offensive laws ought to be corrected and amended) were under coullor of
this vnquiett time most earnestly solicited to confirm the same, and were not
meanly labored and provoked to strengthen with Apostolic power those usurped
customs, before we were fully informed of them, and this in their very first
beeginning; and in process of time the said Archbishop remaining in exile
for executing the office of his Pastoral function, and very often requiring
from our authority the wonted assistance of the Roman Church, we sent to the
same king the chiefest and worthyest of our brethren, we sent also other
Ecclesiastical persons, supposing the hardness of his heart would be softened
with our humility and meekenes: and that (as Solomon says) The Prince will be
mollifyd with patience, Proverb. 25. Ibid. 15.
and a gentle tongue will assuage anger. But he deluding our sufferance with
the several devises of sundry Ambassadors, seems so far to obdurate his
mind against our admonitions as neither he relenteth any whitt in his wrath
against the forenamed Archbishop, nor yet endures that any one of his perverse
laws should be diminished, yea damnifyeth the Church of Canterbury it self
very much in her possessions, and spoyleth her of her ancient dignity in her
Ecclesiastical administration; for when he was disposed of late to have his
son crowned, contemning the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whose office the
same in times forepast is said of right to beelong, he caused him to be
invested with the Crown by you (brother Archbishop) and that in this Province,
noe whit appartayning to your jurisdiction. Moreover in his Coronation there
was not according to the ancient custom any condition made or (as they say)
required of him for the preservation of the Churches liberty, but (as the
report goes) he was rather bound by oath to observe during his reign
inuiolably the royal customs (as they call the^) of his ancestors, whereby the
Churches dignity is endangered: Wherein allthough the said kings violence does
greatly trouble us, we may nevertheless be much more incensed with the
imbecility of ye and your Associates the Bishops, who (not without grief
we speak it) are made like Rams without horns, Thren Ierem. 1.
and fly away without strength before the face of the Pursuer. For allthough
(brother Archbishop) you might lawfully perhaps have done this in your own
province, yet how you could with any face attempt the same in a strange
Province, especially beelonging to him who was himself almost alone content
to suffer banishment for justice, and give Allmighty God his glory, we can
neither by reason nor yet by the Decrees of the holy fathers satisfy our selves.

But if any obiecteth for excuse of so foul an offense, that in other
kingdoms also many greiuous sins have bin committed; we may in truth
answer, we have not hitherto seen any kingdom run so headlong into so
great a contempt of the divine law, as to enforce such manifest enormityes to
be established by the hand-wrytings and oaths of Bishops, unless any man
will impudently allege that which the Scismatickes, being afwardes cut of
from the communion of the faithful, have practiced with such damnable pride as
was never before heard of. In regard whereof, because according to the
Prophet's saying: Habacuc. 1.
Perverse judgment has issued out from ye, and peruersity is acted among ye.
Why do not ye who have exceeded all other Provinces in their usurpations, and
strengthened such unlawful customs with an oath, resume now to your selves
the sheylde of faith to defend the house of our Lord in the day of battle, but
rather prostrate your bodies on the ground, to make a way for passengers over
ye? And least being any longer silent the sentence of damnation should be
pronounced in the day of judgment as well against us, as ye; here by the
authority of the sacred Roman Church (where by our Lords appointment we
serve) we suspend ye from all manner of office beelonging to Episcopal
dignity, hoping at the least that now being reformed by discipline and this
fatherly correction, ye will at the last return to your selves, and endeavor
to defend the Churches liberty: But if with all this ye will not recall your
selves to that zeal which beecommeth the place of Bishops, we will by the
grace of God hereafter do that which as yet with terror threateneth ye.
Look to your selves, least that he said to ye which was spoaken to one by
the Prophett thus: Because thou have repulsed knowledge, I will repel thee
that thou shall not exercise the office of Preisthoode under me. Ose^ 4.
And for us in regard (God at his pleasure so disposing) we are here
apparently placed in his seat who neither by blows nor bands could ever be
constrained to surcease from preaching the word of God, we ought not under a
doubtful expectation of peace to lay up in a handkercheife the money of the
divine word committed to our charge, and keep it tied up so long, until the
hour of increase by little and little slydeth away, and the Creditor coming
calls us to render a severe account.

Thus far Alexander, whereby is refelled that manifest untruth, which not a
little darkeneth the fame of this Pope.

And as then also did Peeter of Bloys to the same effect write to John of
Salisbury, and having himself likewise a burning zeal for the liberty of
gods Church, which saint Thomas defended, to strengthen him the more, least
otherwise he should faynte in these seas of tribulations, he admonished John
in a large Epistle to comfort the Saint, being lines doubtless worthy of this
Author, and indighthed.

Tho his most dear friend Master John of Salisbury, Peeter of Bloys Archdeacon
of Bathe wisteth health in the Author of all health. Peeter of Bloys Ep. 22.

As often as I seriously consider with my self the ordinary oppressions of the
English Church, and the banished of your Lord Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury,
it does very much comfort me that he has erected himself as a bullwarke
for defense of Gods justice and the Churches liberty, and thereby will deserve a
glorious conclusion of this his persecution. For I see ye are now set
beetwene the hammer and the Anuyle, and sinners daily buyld upon your backs;
nevertheless if ye fight in Christ, and for Christ, he will never suffer ye
to be tempted above your power, but will make ye profitt by your temptation,
and our Lord will take away the rodd of sinners from the portion of the just,
that the just may not stretch out their hands to iniquity. If truth
misse-telleth us not, the end of your persecution will be eternal blessedness:
Math. 5.
Blessed are they (says he) who endure persecution for justice: Peeter the
Apostle says: 1. Pet. 4.
Let none of ye suffer as a murderer, or theife, or slaunderer, or a desirer
of other men's goods. For not the pain but the cause makes the Martyrdom:
But as the Apostle speaks: Ibidem 3.
If ye suffer any thing for justice, ye are blessed. For it is the guifte of
God to beelieue in him, but it is the highest guifte to endure reproaches for
Christ: Phipp. 1.
To ye (quoth the Apostle) it is granted for Christ, that ye not only
beeleiue in him, but suffer also for him. I do therefore congratulate ye in
regard ye have converted justice into judgment, because ye repress the
rebellion and disobedience of some with the castisement of suspension, if so
ye do the same upon the motion of reason and justice, and not with a thirst
of revenge, or an appetyte of iniuring. Do nothing (I beeseech ye) for malice
or hatred, but let your actions be managed with charity; nor yet shall ye
reap out of this your punishing, the harvest of salvation, unless your whole
intention proceeds out of the bowels of charity. For whereas by the furnace
in the holy Scripture wrath or punishment is signified, we are taught in
Leuiticus to sprinckle with the oil of charity the sacrifice which is to be
baked in the furnace, Leuit. 2.
least otherwise it should be burned: for the mind of him who prepares
himself to encounter with persecution, is first to be sweetened with the oil
of charity, that neither in adversity he fails of charity, neither yet be
enflamed against his brother with the fire of revenge and hatred: It is
therefore your meritt, and before God and man a commendation, if by the way of
justice ye appease the disobedience of your subjects. Psalm. 105.
For blessed are they who conserve judgment, and execute justice continually.

In the execution of justice there ought not to be any exception or respect of
persons, be he brother or child, Prince or subject; let ever the fruit of
justice beesought, and let them ever judge righteously who judge the whole
world: for when the Levites killing their brethren and children revenged the
sin of Idolatry, Moses said to them: Ye have consecrated your hands this
day every one of ye in his son or in his brother, Exodus 32.
that a benediction may be given ye. Solomon says also: Who reprove shall
be praised, and a blessing will come upon them. Your Lord is highly to be
renowned, that only he ascends on the contrary part, that he opposes
himself as a Bullwarke for the house of Israel, that he argues for the meek
of the earth? we have him as now the only and eminent man among the children
of the patient in tribulation. In place of our fathers we have a son borne
unto us, who according to the example of the Apostles does as now put in
execution revenge among nations, reproves among people; and as those Princes
of the people who being now gathered together with the God of Abraham for the
justice of Christ, are as strong gods of the earth mightily advanced, so
shall likewise the honor of this man, if he perseuereth on in administration
of justice, be highly exalted. For whereas he lives now exiled, 2. Cor. 4.
whereas many things are attempted to his reproache, all this by the benefit of
patience will be turned to his glory. This of our tribulation, which is light
and momentary (says the Apostle) works in us a maruailous weight of glory.
Show therefore your selves as the servants of God in singular patience. For
widdowelike does virtue stand, when patience sheildeth not her hand, And who
from the first infancy of the Church has ever tryumphed without patience?
Truly allthough your Lord has abundance of the spirit of fortitude, yet
nevertheless it is reported, that in regard the new king of England was crowned
by York, and for some privileges obtained by stealth to his derogation, he
is so molested, as by the pusillanimity of spirit and that tempest, his feet
are almost moved, his steps well nigh discomforted: But you who are the
bands and eyes of the Archbishop see that with your holy exhortations you
comfort his dissolved hands, you strengthen his weakened knees. It is no
marvel if he be shaken with tribulation and oppressions; but if he relyeth
wholly and cleaves to him who deeply rootethin his elect, he will rest
secure in all storms of temptation and boisterous disturbance.

The ancient fathers undoubtedly being sometimes in the pressure of
tribulation, were often wearyed with tediousnes, whereupon they seemed for a
time to wax fainte and feeble from that resolute enduring of passions which
they had with singular feruency in our lord, until being inspired with
virtue from above they returned again to themselves in the spirit of
fortitude. Elias flying away from the face of Isabell, 3. Reg. 29.
and being wearyed of his life, cast himself down under a Juniper bush, and
desired his soul might be severed by death. It suffices me (quoth he) take
away my life. The Apostle also pyning away with the like tediousnes,
complaining says. We are laden with grief above measure, 1. Cor. 1.
in so much as we are weary of our life The Prophet having often experience
of this tediousnes, speaks thus: Psalm. 38.
I have fainted by the strength of thy hand, and thou haste made my soul pine
away as a spider. But the spirit of Charity reuyued in them out of these ashes
of tediousnes, and fortititude sprung from our infirmity: A thing perhaps
incredible to some, had not the Apostle, who read it often in the book of
experience, given testimony thereof saying: For when I am weaker then grow I
stronger: And to him it is also told: 1. Cor. 1^.
Thy virtue is perfected in infirmity. If therefore in regard of the swelling
seas of mishappes, which my Lord endures, be it either for the desolation of
his frindes, or the long continuance of his exile, you see any sluggish dullnes
by stealth to surprise his mind, step in presently to comfort him, least
he despair or be any whitt wavering: For the time of his visitation is at
hand. And if the mounting surges of the seas are maruailous, God is also
maruailous in the deep, who conuerteth storms into calmes, Psalm. 92.
and the kings indignation into favor.

I understood by the Legates of the Apostolic Sea with whom I travailed from
the court of Rome to Bononi, that your Lord shall be very shortly reconcyled
unto the entire favor of the king of England, or else translated and made a
more eminent Patriarch: but howsoever he shall be disposed of by our Lord, if
he perseuereth as hitherto he has done, let him expect with security the
end of his combat: let him not therefore listen to the words of flatterers,
but follow the spirit of God, which dwells in him, and whether-someuer he
goes the spirits and wheels of Ezechiel will also accompany him: Ezech. 10.
I know the end of his agony will be glorious if he continue in the same
course of fortitude and constancy which he has already undertaken; for who
so fights lawfully shall be crowned. And whereas all other virtues run
toward the goal, yet only perseverance is crowned. Wherefore I entreat you
as my Lord and Master that you will let me often understand of your estate,
and also of his, for since I can affourde ye nothing else, I do not cease
daily to pray for ye, that by Gods assisting grace, ye may obtain the king
of Englands favor, and the free disposing of your own estates. I have perused
your book of The trifles of the Court, which delighted me exceedingly, for
it contains an excellent form of learning, and for the artificial varyety
of sentences, it is a matter of inestimable delight. God speed ye well.

Hitherto Peeter: And for the time wherein he wrote, it appears by this, that
he departed from the City toward the king of England, after the coronation
of his son was finished by the Archbishop of York. The king of England
terryfyed by the Pope.


Mean while the king of England received from his Holiness sharper letters,
commanding him peremptorily to grant saint Thomas his peace within the
prescribed time, or if he contemned to obey, then to expect the same sentence
which he had pronounced on Frederick the Emperor: where with the king of
England being terrifyed, writing from England to the Apostolical Legates, he
beegan to move them importunately to peace, being urged thereunto by Alexanders
comminatory letters: which letters though they are lost, are often mentioned in
other Epistles of S. Thomas. The king therefore thus stricken with fear, and
dealing carefully for obtaining peace, wrote these few lines for that purpose
to the Archbishop of Roane one of the Legates.

[By the advice of your self and other my faithful Barons, Cod. Vat. lib. 3.
Epist. 14.
I have signified as well by messingers as letters unto my Lord the Pope, a
form conceived for reformation of peace beetweene me and the Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Pope, as he certifyed me by his letters, received withal
thankfullnes the same, in such sort as it was devised by your counsel, and
made known to him on your beehalfe, openly commanding admonishing entreating,
and attentively persuading that I should perform the same with the consent of
your self and the Bishop of Nyuers. And therefore I will fully and freely
accomplish the same according as ye two shall arbitrate, not violating in any
thing the order which shall be proposed by your discussion. Wittnes Richard de
Lucy at Westminster. Cod. Vat. lib. 5. Epist. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39.
] Thus wrote the king. In the mean time saint Thomas sent his letters of
Interdiction (which are yet extant) into England unto the Bishops to be
published within xv. days, unless peace ensued. But the king preventing the
time, promised the Legates to confirm the peace, referring the articles thereof
to be composed by their discretion. Whereupon the Apostolical Legates offered
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury himself to devise the Articles of his own
peace, which he did, collecting them out of the former conferences had with
the king, and also out of such conditions as the Apostolical letters appointed
the king to perform: There is yet to be seen an Epistle of saint Thomas
written to the Bishop of Niuers and the Legate his Associate concerning the
whole business, wherein he first admonishes them in what sort they ought to
proceed with the king, whose manners he does exactly describe, writing thus.

Ibidem. Ep. 12. S. Thomas admonishes the Legates how to proceed with the
king in the treaty of peace.
[Allmighty God direct your steps, that in the cause of his Church, the
managing whereof is now in part committed to your charge, ye neither stray on
the right or the left hand, but pass on the high way, so as neither by fair
promises, nor yet by threats, nor by any exquisite deceyptes, he (whose
snares no man with whom he has had intercourse could ever yet avoid) may as
now prevail against your wisdom and sincerity: and unless I am deceived ye
are exposed unto the fight of beasts, since he will bring forth Bishops,
Abbottes, and discreet men, that by them he may conquer your constancy, if
he perceaueth he cannot surprise ye with proffers and fair words. Because
therefore ye cannot easily discover these manifould and prodigious deceiptes,
whatsomeuer he says, whatsomeuer form he undertakes, yet be ye ever
suspicious of all his shows, and let all be imagined full of guylded
falshoodes, those only excepted whose truth is approved by the touchstone of
their works; for if he perceaueth he cannot corrupt ye with large offers,
or terrify ye with threats, or wrest any thing from ye against your wills
and against the justice of the cause, your authority will presently vanish as
blown up in his concept, and your selves held in contempt, scorn and derision
by him and his. And if he sees he cannot bend ye from your settled course,
he will seem to grow furious against ye, for first he did swear and
deeply protest, the^ turn as Proteus to sundry shapes, and after all at the
last come home to himself again; and then, unless the fault be yours, you
shall ever beethe God of Pharao.] These and the like did saint Thomas insinuate
to them, teaching the Legates how to overcome the king, being a necessary
lesson for such as shall hereafter be appointed Legates to treat with
Princes. Afterward he adds the articles (as he calls them) for
establishing the peace with the king.

But what was the conclusion? The Legates thus instructed with the admonitions
of saint Thomas, being now to confer with the king, brought saint Thomas
also along with them, his Majesty expecting them in a place of exceeding
pleasure, named by the inhabitants (as it is written in Quudrilogus in the
history of saint Thomas) Traytor's meadowe, that the name it self might so
be answerable to the effect, the blood of the just being there beetrayde.
Where after many contentions and debates it was brought about, that the king
with a pleasant countenance (in outward show) freely granted saint Thomas his
peace. But how the business was handled is set down plainly in a discourse
concerning the same written by saint Thomas unto Pope Alexander, which being
tedious, we will here only declare such things as are necessary and worthy
of knowledge. Cod Vat. lib. 5. Ep 45.
The Epistle beeginneth thus. [God with his eye of mercy has beeheld our
Church.] And after [For lo upon receypte of your last letters, whereby you let
him understand that you would noe longer forbear him more then you spared
Frederick called Emperor, perceauing his land should be subjected to
interdiction without any remedy whatsomeuer, and the Bishops (if any of them
perchance disobeyed) suspended and excommunicated, he concluded instantly with
us a peace to the honor of God, and (as we hope) the Churches greatest
vtility. For concerning the customs, he was wont so wilfully to maintain,
he durst not speak now one word, he exacted not an oathe of us or any of
ours, he granted us the possessions (which by reason of this dissension he
had taken away from our Churches) in such sort as we expressed them in a
certain writing, he promised all ours peace and security, with the kiss also
if we would urge him so far, so as he seemed in all his actions not only
absolutely overcome, but that he was also taxed as periurd by those who heard
him the same day swear, he would not receive us with the kiss.

For we by the advice of many discreet persons, and especially of my Lord of
Senon, who furthered our peace more carefully and effectually then the rest,
came together with him to the conference had with the king. Whom by the
goodness of God (who removed all those that were accustomed with sundry deceptes
to intrappe your Holiness) we found so much changed, as his mind (to the
great admiration of all the beehoulders) appeared willingly to embrace all
counsels of peace. For as soon as he saw us approaching a far of
breakeing out from the company he met us speedely, and vnkeevering his head,
as we hastened to salute him, he saluted us first, and after a few words
had with my Lord of Senon and us, Senon withdrawing himself a side, to the
maruaille of all he took us apparte and discoursed with us a long while so
familiarly, as it seemed not there had ever bin any discord beetwene us.
Whereupon well nigh all the company there present even astonished with a most
joyful admiration, yea very many of their eyes slowing with tears, glorified
God, and blessed saint Mary Magdalene, on whose feast the king was converted
from his former ways, so as he reduced a day of delight to his whole
dominion, and restored to the Church her ancient peace again.

We reproved him, but with such moderation as was necessary; we laid open to
him the ways in which he had erred with the dangers which on every side
threatened; we beesought and exhorted him to return to himself, and doing
the fruits worthy of penance with satisfying, by manifest restitution of her
goods, the Church, whom he had not a little injured, to clear his conscience
and repair his reputation; for rather misseledde by wicked counselors then of
his own inclination he had greatly wronged both; and when he had heard all
this not only patiently, but also favorably, with promise of reformation, we
added moreover, it was likewise necessary for his own salvation, with the good
of his children and for the establishment and prosperity of the authority
granted him from Allmighty God, to recompense the holy Church of Canterbury
for that most grievous wrong wherewith he had lately damnifyed her, for he
caused his son to be without all order crowned contrary to the most ancient
custom and privilege of our Church etc.] He sets down in like sort a
matter of long debate beetweene the king and himself concerning this, whom in
the end he persuaded so far, as he promised to make void and frustrate
the Coronation, which was solemnized by the Pope, and especially executed by
the Archbishop of York, and to cause again a Canonical consecration to be
celebrated, wherein the Archbishop of Canterbury should crown the kings
son together with his Queen and wife. But of this hereafter. He dilated
also of other particulars which happened in that in meeting to be done by the
king, as where he speaks thus: [When I therefore alighting from my horse did
humble my self at his feet, he catching my stirrup enforced me to get up
again; and seeming to shed tearres, said what needs any more (my Lord
Archbishop) let us renew our old mutual freindshippe, and do all the good
we can one to an other, forgetting clean this forepassed discord; but this
let me entreat you, to do me honor before the company who beehould us a
far of. Being Saules words to Samuel when he said. Honor me before the
people. 1. Reg. 15.
] He proceeds.

And in regard we saw some there present (whose name this bearer will
deliver you) that had bin lovers of debate and sowers of discord, passing to
them he said: If I seeing the Archbishop ready to right me every way
should not on the other side be likewise good to him, I may truly be esteemed
worser then others, and shall verify the ill reports which are raised of me;
neither can I conceive any counsel to be more honest and profitable then to
endeavor to surpass him in curtesy and exceed him in Charity and benefittes.
Which words of the king were received by almost all there present with very
great congratulation; whereupon he sent this Bishops to advise us to make
our petition in that public assembly, and if we would have followed the
Counsel of some of them, we should have referred to his own arbitrament our
selves absolutely and the whole cause of the Church: For from the beeginning to
this very day iniquity has issued from his Scrybes and Pharisees, and gathered
strength from the authority of Seniors who ought to govern the people: but
blessed be God who has not suffered our soul to pass thorough their
counsel, nor permitted us to expose the Churches liberty and Gods justice to
any creatures will. Dismissing them, and aduising our selves with my Lord of
Senon and the poor of Christ the Associates of our peregrination, we
resolutely determined not any way to submitt to his will the controversy of the
customs, or the damages which he had done to our Church, or the injury
offered us by the usurped consecration, or the loss of the Ecclesiastical
liberty with the eclipse of our honor.

And so coming to the king and his Lords, Concerning restitution of
possessions to the Church of Canterbury.
we did with all humility beeseech him by the mouth of my Lord of Senon (who
was our speaker) that he would vouch-safe to restore us his favor with peace
and security to us and ours, together with the Church of Canterbury and her
possessions (which being set down by us in writing, his Majesty had read)
and that he would mercifully reform what was presumtiously down against us
and our Church in the consecration of his son, promising him all love and
honor with whatsomeuer service may be performed in our Lord by an Archbishop
to his king and Prince. The king accepting all in good part yielded us our
request, receiving us with all ours there present into his favor, and in
regard your Holiness commanded us not that he should restore what was
wrongfully taken from us and ours, we would not require it; neither on the
other side (by Gods grace) could we be content to remitt it: So according to
your Mandate those things were for the time put of, but not put away; for had
you absolutely written as in your last letters you signified, that they should
be restored, without doubt satisfaction had bin also made, with an example for
all ages hereafter very profitable to the whole Catholic Church, and
especially to the Apostolic Sea. The king therefore having had much and long
conference with us, after we two had continewed in talk alone according to
our ancient accustomed familiarity until almost the Evening, we agreed in
one, that he being departed, we should return to render due thanks unto
the most Christian king and others our benefactors, and upon the settling of our
business to come back to his Majesty and remain a while with him, before we
passed into England, to the end the world might take notice into how great and
entire favor he had received us. We intend to expecte in France the return
of our Messingers whom we have sent to receive our possessions, for we are
determined not to repair to our king, so long as he detayneth one foot of
Ecclesiastical lands; for by the restitution of our lands we shall easily
perceive how sincerely he means to deal with us.]

And thus far concerning their meeting wherein a peace was concluded. There is
also in the same book of Epistles an other report of this meetinge, which
being only gathered from the bear sayings of others, and not testified by an
eye wittnes, seems to be of less credit then the former. Cod Vat lib. 3.
Epist. 46.


And what king Henry promised saint Thomas in words, the same did he also
perform in writing, by sendinge these letters unto the king his son. Ibid Ep
43 The king writheth to his son about the peace concluded between him and S.
Thomas.


[Knowe ye that Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury has ratifyed his peace with
me according to mine own desire; wherefore I command that he and all his
enjoy this peace, and that you cause the Archbishop and all those who departed
the land with him, to have restitution of all their estates, as fully, quiety
and honorably, as they possessed the same three months before the bishop
departed out of England. And that you call before you some of the most ancient
and sufficient knights of Lyore and Salts kind, and make them upon their
corporal oaths to certify what is there heald in Fee of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and what shall be found to be of his fee you cause to be
rendered to the same Archbishop again.] Thus wrote the king to his son. And
with these letters did saint Thomas send his Agents into England, but how many
adversaries they found there, they signified by their letters back again to
saint Thomas beeginning thus. Ibid. Ep. 53.
[Wee have accomplished as far as we could your command, etc.] And upon this
conclusion of matters saint Thomas wrotte these letters to Pope Alexander.
Ibid. Ep. 52. S. Thomas writes again to the Pope.


[After the trompet of your Apostolical Cominatory (holy father) had thoroughly
sounded in the king of Englands ear, and that the severity of the Church
threatened as well himself as his dominion, he concluded his peace with us,
assuredly promising, he would not omit one iott or title of the whole
contents of your commandment, but absolutely fulfill the uttermost: and
having so avoided the blow of this imminent sentence, in some articles he
flewe of from the agreement, withoulding from us as yet certain possessions of
the Church which our Predecessor inioyde without controversy all the days of
his life, and we also afterward until the violence of this tempest arose
against the Church of England. [And somewhat after [wee truly will endeavor to
win the favor of the man as far as we can possibly with the preservation of
the liberty and reputation of the Church, together with the testimony of a good
conscience, that we may thereby make trial if all this can as yet recall him
to a gentle temper. Your clemency vouchsafed to send us letters for the
correction and chastisement as well of the Archbishop of York as other our
associate Bishops, which lines were vndoubtely inspired and conceived by the
holy Ghost, and are such as reprove the kings enormityes with an authority
beeseeming Peeters successor and Christ's vicar]

Cod Vad li. 5. Epist. 60.
These letters as yet remain being registered in the process of the work, and
are treated of in their place. To these letters S. Thomas likewise added the
letters which he received from his agents sent into England for recovering the
Churches goods, and are to be seen in the same book. And to that purpose
may you there read also the complaints of S. Thomas made to the king, Ibid.
Ep. 53.
being seasoned with very great modesty and sweetened with mildenes.

Ibid. Ep. 54.
In the mean while before Pope Alexander received the letters of S. Thomas
concerning the peace concluded with the king of England, the Pope departing
from Beneuent toward Rome, The Popes return to Rome and his letters written
on the way Ibid Ep. 65
and coming to Verula a City of the Hernicians, he directed his letters from
thence to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury beeginning thus: [Amonge the
manifold etc.] And excusing afterward himself in regard he did not,
according to the desire of saint Thomas, seem to proceed more speedily in
this cause, he adds these words. [Whereupon (most dear brother) if we
have in the eye of the world proceeded more remissely in the matter concerning
your self and the Church of England, nor yet have answered your petitions
according to your own will, the reason was not in regard we reputed not the
cause of your self and the Church of England to be our own, and as nearly
touching our selves as you, or that we would any way be wanting to you
therein, but that we thought convenient to use all patience, to the end we
might co^quer evil in doing good. We feared also least if there grew any
greater breach in the Church, it might be imputed unto our rough proceeding.
But now in respect the disturbers of the peace and the oppressors of the
Churches liberty are not (as it seems) moved with any contrition at all to
amend their fore passed abuses, yea extending their sins as a long rope,
insulte more and more as well to your vexation as the depression of the Church
of Canterbury, so far forth as they appear in your case to be past well-nigh
all hope of repentance, we do here pronounce the Canonical sentence and
suspend from Apostolical dignity your brother Roger Archbishop of York with
the other Bishops who have bound themselves by oath to observe the customs,
and do still blow the coals of so great a mischeife. And for the Bishops
of Salisbury and London who seem indebted in a greater band of gratuity, and
yet nevertheless are reported to repay for thankfullnes nothing but ingratitude,
if so they have with their presence and ministry furthered the coronation of
the new king against the prerogative of the Church of Canterbury, we recall
them into the sentence of Excommunication from which they were absolved.] And
last he thus mentions the time and place where the letter was dated: Datum
Verulae 4. what the Pope did Verule.
Id. September.

Departing from Verula he came to Ferentine a City seven miles distant from
Verula toward Rome, Cod. Vad. 5. Ep. 66.67.
where the letters of Excommunication were dated unto these English Bishops,
being London, what (...) wrote (...) Ferentine, Ibid. Ep. 5^
Salisbury, and the rest there mentioned, with an other letter aparte to the
Archbishop of York concerning his suspension, both being dated (as
appears in their conclusion) at Ferentine 16. Kaled. October. These are the
letters which saint Thomas, in his to Pope Alexander concerning the same,
commends as written with an Apostolical zeal: But in the letter to the
Arcbbishop of York he alleges the cause of his suspension not to be only
the coronation of the the kings son, but that also in the same coronation
he omitted the accustomed caution and condition for defending the Churches
liberty, or at the least in place thereof to make him take another oath usual
then to be sworn, and (which is worser) that an oath was there given for an
exact conservation of his ancestors customs directly opposite to the Church.

Going from Ferentine, his Holiness with a short journey of five miles lodged
at Anagnia which is declared by diverse Epistles to the same purpose written
thence, as first for the recalling as well of Clearkes as laymen into the
excommunication from which they were absolved, if according to their promise
they made not satisfaction in restoring possessions taken away from Churches,
limitting a term of xv. days for performing the same, Dated (as we said) at
Anagnia 8. Octobris, with other Bishops of England for continuing the
interdiction until the Church were satisfied. Cod Vat li. 5. Epist. 40.
The morrow following also were letters dated at the same place to the Bishops
of Roane and Senon, where after some other matters were these words for
observing such things as were promised by the king in his covenants of peace.

[Wee will and command, and in the virtue of obedience by our Apostolical
letters inioyne your brotherhoode, Ibid. ep. 31.
that within twenty days after the receipte hereof, ye do with all
diligence confer with the king in our beehalfe, and carefully admonish and
instantly exhort him, sincerely to accomplish the peace which he has as yet
in words only concluded with the Archbishop; and withal that ye incite him
afterward to restore all things wrongfully taken away, rapaire the damages
done by him, and absolutely abolish those wicked and destable customs. But if
he will not within thirty days after your commonition ratify the peace
according to his appointment and promise, do ye then forbid all divine
offices, beesides Baptism of infantes and penance at the point of death, to
be ministered in all his Dominions on this side on the seas, and that without
any obstacle of Appeal, and cause this sentence to be most strictly observed
until he shall give condign satisfaction. And if either of ye by reason of
extreme necessity cannot be present at the execution hereof, being a thing,
if it should so happen, much against our wills, let then the other
nevertheless do this our command. Dated at Anagnia 7. Id. Octobris. Moreover
there and then he sent other letters to Roane and Nyuers against such as
detayning possessions of the Church and would not restore them: whom he
commanded to be excommunicated unless they made within xv. days full
satisfaction.

The Pope removing from Anagnia to Signia a city seven miles thence; where 3.
Ibidem 32.
Id. October. he directed his letters to all the Prelates of the Provinces
beelonging to the king of England on this side the seas, for putting the
interdiction in execution, unless the king made again to saint Thomas, together
with a perfect peace, restitution of his poss^ssions; he, the same day at the
said place, wrote also a letter to saint Thomas, in these words.

[Wee are oppressed with grief and bitter sorrow so often as we recall to
mind and carrefully consider the troubles, Ibid. ep. 29
burdens and afflictions which for the zeal of justice and maintenance of the
Churches liberty you do with patience and an undaunted courage endure. But in
regard you have atcheiued the perfection of virtue, you cannot be overcome
with adversity, nor removed from the resolution of your constancy: wherein we
commend your admirable magnanimity, and congratulate with you in our Lord for
this your singular patience. And because we have long expected with patience
and favor our beeloued son in Christ Henry the famous king of England, and
have often admonished him, seeking sometimes by sweet and pleasing words,
otherwhiles by rough and bitter threateninges to reclayme him; now if he
performs not really, as well to you as yours, the peace concluded with you,
nor yet restore you your Churches possessions together with your deprived
honors, we give you here ample authority to exercise your Ecclesiastical
justice beelonging to your office, notwithstanding any obstacle of Appeal,
upon the persons and places subject to your jurisdiction, excepting only the
king, the Queen, and their children, wishing you ever therein to use the
wisdom and consideration beeseeming all preistly modesty. Dated at Signia 3.
Id. October.

Alexander leaving Signia came to Tusculan: where with longer stay he remained
awhile, which is apparent by his letters Dated there 8. Ibid. ep 68.
Kalend. December. wherein he cyteth the Bishops of London and Salisbury to
Rome for making satisfaction, and this unless the peace were absolutely in all
respects concluded. He wrote also the^ by the same messinger (unto whom he
delivered his former letters) to the king of England in these words.

Ibid. ep 55.
[Vnderstanding by the letters of our reverent brother Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, that laying aside all disturbance and malice, The Popes letters to
the king of England.
you have restored him to your grace and favor, we have conceived therein so
much the more joy and gladness, by how much we consider the same to be more
grateful and acceptable to God, honorable to your self, and profitable to
your soul. For we know the Archbishop so far to excel in Religion,
wisdom, honesty, and the virtue of faith, as we doubt not but he will be
faithful and devoted to you and your kingdom, able in power and ready in
mind for your honor and augmentation, and ever truly and carefully vigilant to
increase your glory and exalte your magnificence. Yet because the offense is
not remitted unless restitution be made of things wrongfully taken away,
allthough the Archbishop himself in respect of his patience, and for the
tender love he bears you, forbeareth to require the same; we nevertheless,
who covet especially your salvation, ought not to be silent therein, nor yet
does it beecome your Majesty (whom God has made so mighty and pote^t) to
withhould the rightes and goods beelonging to the Church of Canterbury:
Wherefore with all entreaty we admonish and earnestly exhort the clemency of
your royal excellency, that following the example of Zacheus who says in the
Gospel: Beehould, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have
defrauded any one, I restore foure-foulde, you would endeavor to render to the
Archbishop and his Church what is wrongfully taken away, and speedyly to
recompense the damages and detriments they sustained by your means, that you
may so appease the wrath of Allmighty God wherein you have offended him, and
we forgive you absolutely so great a sin, and the Archbishop be for
ever bound to rest most ready at your service and devotion, and increase the
renown of you and your heirs: Moreover that you favorably listen to such as
have furthered and performed this peace beetweene ye, not hereafter harken to
them whom you know to have kindled the coals of this dissension; beesides
that you warn and persuade your son to give due satisfaction to the
Archbishop and his Church concerning the article of his oathe omitted by him
for conservation of the privilege and liberty of the Church of Canterbury, in
such sort as kings and Princes of England have heertofore sworn, making him
to perform what is hitherto let pass: and that as well your self as your
son do freely and quietly resign the ordinations of Churches with other
matters appertayning to Ecclesiastical persons, unto the same Archbishop, and
other Ecclesiastical men. That in so doing you may offer to our Lord a
worthy sacrifice of praise, and purchasse to your self an eternal kingdom.]
Thus wrote Pope Alexander to the king, who added also theerunto other letters
to the Clergy and people of England, Cod Vat. li. 5. ep. 56 The meeting of S
Thomas with the king at Towers.
admonishing them all in any case not to disturb this settled peace.

But how matters proceeded in the mean time beetweene the king and saint
Thomas, let us here declare out of Quadrilogus (the history of saint Thomas)
writing thus. [The king inclining to alteration, yea rather denying to make
restitution of the possessions taken away from the Church of Canterbury, and
this coming to the ear of saint Thomas by the relation of John of Salisbury,
Quadrilogus lib. 3. cap. 3.
whom together with Herbert he sent to treat with the king. The Archbishop
understanding that a parlee was shortly to be held beetweene the king and a
noble man called Theobald Earl of Bloys, the day before the conference went
to the king at Towers: The king hearing before of the Archbishoppes coming,
sent some of his Court unto him, passiing also himself out of the City
toward him, and meeting together, not the eyes but the countenance of the
king (as it may be said) was settled on him. Whereupon (a thing noted by many
of the Archbishoppes train) neither did the king nor any of his vouchsafe to
visit the Archbishop that night in his lodging, but rather early in the
morning caused a Mass for the dead to be celebrated in his Chapel, fearing
(as it was reported) least if the Archbishop were there present, he would
otherwise offer him at Mass the kiss of peace, which then to refuse were not
the part of a Christian, but Christ's enemy. When the Mass was ended, the
king departed the City hastening to the Parlee etc.

The Parlee with the Earl being finished, saint Thomas speaking with the king
beesought him that before his return into England his possessions might be
restored, which the king denied, saying, he should first return, and
afterward have restitution of his possessions.] And thus much concerning this
encounter at Towers. Saint Thomas came afterward to the king (as Herbert
continuinge this history says) at the Balde Mountain near Bloys, where he
could obtain nothing of the king but only promises without any performance:
Whereupon saint Thomas returning to Senon and taking his leave of the king of
France, traveled to the haven of Whitesand there to take ship for England:
and there (says Herbert) the Archbishop before he embarked himself sent over
first my Lord the Popes before rehearsed letters of the general suspension of
the English Bishops, together with the Excommunication of some, certain of
which number being Roger of York, Gilbert of London, and Ioceline of
Salisbury coming thither for passage into England, did even in the port
receive their letters of Suspension and accursing. But allthough the
Archbishop had warning as well by the Earl of Boleyne, as also by those who
arrived from England, that nothing but chains prysons and treasons were
prepared for him in England, He nevertheless answered; Neither yet if I should
be torn peece-meale in sunder would I desiste from my intended journey; no
force, no torture shall retain me dastard-like any longer; it suffices that
our Lords flock has now seven years mourned for their Pastors absence. And
what he professed in words, the same did this Saint also confirm by letter,
writing to his king these his last lines worthy an Apostolic man, who dreaded
not to suffer death for his flock being these words.

[It is known to Christ the searcher of hearts, the judge of souls and
revenger of sins, Cha^ Vat. li. 5. Ep. ^4. The last letter of saint Thomas to
the king of England.
with how great purity of mind and sincerity of affection we concluded our
peace with your Majesty, beeleiuing, you would have proceeded plainly and
justly with us: for what else (most excellent Lord) could we conceive of your
words, which either in arguing or courtesy out of your favorable goodness you
communicated with us? The letter moreover you directed to my Lord and king your
son for restoring to us and ours all the possessions we held before our
departure from England, what could it pretend but good will, piece and
security? but lo, that which God knows we account more grievous for the
edangering of your renown; then the loss of our commodity, the want of
performance bears no coulor of simple meaning or faithful dealing; for the
restitution you willed to be made to us and ours, was put of for fifteen
days in regard of Raynulphe, with whom, being of counsel to my Lord your
son, they thought convenient in the mean time to confer about the
accomplishment of this your commandment. What manner of persons these are, and
how, and with what justice this business is carried, you at your pleasure may
examine. For us, we are persuaded all this is done to the dommage of the
Church with the danger of your salvation and renown, unless with diligence you
reform it. For the said Raynulphe mean while makes havoc of the Churches
gooddes, and even now carries openly away in great abundance our house-hould
provision as we hear by their report, who (if it pleases you) will be
ready to justify the same, and lastly has vaunted in the presence of many that
we shall not long enjoy your gracious peace, because we shall not eat a
whole loaf in England, before (as he threateneth) he beereaueth us of life.
You know (most excellent Lord) he is accessory of an offense, who, when, it
is in his power to correct an others sin, neglects to amend it. And what
can that Raynulphe do, but by your leave, and armed with your authority? And
what answer he will make to the letter of my Lord and king your son writing
to him on this occasion, your wisdom will hear and judge thereof as it likes
you. And because it is now manifed by apparent proofs that the holy Church of
Canterbury mother of the Britanns perishes for the very hatred of our life, to
the e^d she may not dye, but be freed of danger, we will by Gods grace in her
quarrel expose our life as well to the said Raynulphe as other his
co^federates the Churches persecutors, being prepared not only to dye, but
also to suffer a thousand deaths and all torments whatsomeuer for Christ's
sake, if he of his grace wouchsafe to grant us the fortitude of patience. I
determined (my Lord) (...) have returned unto you, but that necessity draws
me a wretch to my wretched Church, repayring to her with your favor and
license, and (it may be) perishing, least otherwise she perishes, unless your
piety vouchsafes to yield us presently some other comfort; but whether we
dye, or live, we are and shall ever be in our Lord yours, and whatsoever
beecommeth of us and ours, God ever bless you and your issue.] And thus the
good Shepherd, being now ready to offer his life for his sheep, delivered
himself most Christianlike, as the follower of Christ, out of the purity of
his conscience, and the sincerity of his faith, which had bin able to have
melted Pharaos most hardened heart.

But in regard (as it is already said) before ever he set foot in
England, he sent over the Popes letters of Excommunication and Suspension
against the Bishops, let none impute it to any rashness of his for disturbing
the public peace; but that whatsomeuer he did was by the kings counsel and
approbation, as he often professed openly when his adversaries in England did
on that occasion rise against him, whose words so many times recyted by
Herbert in Quadrilogus are these. [Concerning the Bishops whom ye allege to
be suspended or excommunicated by me, or thorough my procurement; be ye in
your discretion without all doubt certifyed, that whatsoever was done, was by
the kings consent and counsel: For when on the feast of saint Mary Magdalene,
a peace being concluded beetweene us, he received me into his former favor,
I theruppon complaining before his Majesty of the iniuryes and insolencyes
committed against me and mine, especially by the Bishops, who in despite of
their Mother Church of Canterbury beelonging to my charge, were not afraid to
usurp, he granted me most graciously his leave ^o obtain from my Lord the
Pope any censure whatsomeuer to repair my wronged right, so as not only he
inclined to consent, but vouchsafed also to promise me his assistance.] And
thus publicly professed saint Thomas before those cruel kinghtes of the
kings Guarde.

But let us pursue the history, and especially concerning the time when he
took shipping for England, whereof Herbert in Quadrilogus of the life of S.
Thomas discourses thus. [In the year therefore of our Saviors Incarnation
1170. and the seventh year of his exile, being now beegune, on the second
and third day of our Lords Aduent, the glorious friend of God, and most
constant defender of the Church Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, with his
followers being embarked in the night, launched forth, and having a prosperous
wind according to their desire landed in England.] So much concerning his
sailing and arrival. And John of Salisbury whom saint Thomas had sent before
into England persuaded the people by his letters yet extant, Cad. V^^ li. 5.
(...). 65.
to meet their Pastor according to the example of their ancestors who met
saint Anselme in his return from exile: But therein were they hindered by the
envy and hatred of his adversaries. Now for the passage of matters after his
coming into England, thore remains a large relation of John of Salisbury to
Peeter Abbot of saint Remigius; Ibid. ^p. 6^
yet let us ne^ertheles hear a more certain report of these occurrents
written by saint Thomas himself to Pope Alexan^^^, being the last of all his
Epistles, for not many days after was he murdered by the kings Guarde. This
of his to Pope Alexander was indighted in these words.

[Vppon how just and honorable conditions we^e concluded our peace with my Lord
the king of England I suppose your Holiness is certifyed as well by The (...)
^^^stle of sa^^^ Thom^^ to the Pope.
the relation of us as diverse others who have traveled beetweene: neither yet
do we think you to be ignorant how my Lord afterward flewe of from these
his conuenants and promises, which nevertheless we beelieue not to be so much
his fault, as the fault of the Preistes of Baal, and the children of the
false Prophetts, who from the beeginning have bin the fuel of this
dissension: But the chief leaders of these are that York and London, who
sometimes when you were at Senon, upon their return from you, having neither
seen our king nor heard him speak, were not afraid to beereaue us of our
possessions, being then present in the Court of your Clemency; allthough it
was undoubtedly known to them, as being the parties appealed, how me
prosecuted two appeals before your Holiness. When therefore these Ringleaders of
the Baalamites were advertised of the peace we made with my Lord the king,
joining to them Salisbury and other their confederates, they sought by sea and
land to cut in sunder this knott of united peace, persuading as well by
themselves as others my Lord the king and his counsel how unprofitable and
dishonorable this concord should be to the kingdom, unless the indowments of
our Churches, which his Majesty had made, should remain stable, and we also
be enforced to observe the customs of the kingdom being the cause of all
this controversy; Whereupon they prevailed so far in their peruersityes, as
my Lord the king by their instigation took from us and ours all our rents from
the time of the peace which was concluded on saint Mary Magdalens day, until
the feast of saint Martin, yielding us then at last empty houses and ruinated
barnes; and yet notwithstanding his clearkes G. Rydell and Nigell de Sackeuylle
do at this day withhoulde from us two of our Churches which they received from
a lay inuesture, and the king himself denies us many possessions of our
Bishoppricke which in the reformation of this peace he undertook to restore.
But albeeit (as it is known to many) he beehaueth himself, otherwise then it
beeseemeth against the artickles of peace; considering nevertheless the
outrageous and irreuocable spoils of the Church, and for preuentio^ of far
greater, having also taken advise with my Lords the Cardinals, we resolved
to return unto our torn Church thus troaden under foot, which if we cannot,
as we would, raise again and repair, yet at the least dying with her we may
more confidently in her presence spend our life for her sake: which
determination of ours when these our enemies did more certainly understand, I
know not upon what fear they consulted with the kings officers and that most
sinful child of perdition Raynulphe Broc, who abusing the power of the
public government against the Church of God, has now for these seven years
made havoc more freely thereof.

Whereupon they concluded to keep most carefully with armed men and a
continual guarde of scoutes and soldiers the sea coasts and havens, where
they supposed we would arrive, that we might not land before they had
searched all our lading, and taken away all such letters as we obtained from
your Majesty, But by the goodness of God it so fell out that all their
attemptes were made known to us by our freindes, who suffered not their
impudency builded upon presumption to lurk concealed. For these armed scoutes
did scour the sea coasts running here and there according as the foresaid
Bishops of York, Londom, and Salisbury, directed them; and they made choice
for execution of their malice, of such as were known to be our greatest
enemies, being Raynulphe de Broc, Reynold de Warrenne and Geruase shyreefe of
Kent who threatened openly to cut of my head if we presumed to arrive. These
before recyted Bishops came often to Canterbury, that if this armed route were
not outrageous enough, they might yet more incense them: Having therefore more
thoroughly understood their determination, we sent away your letters a day
before we took shipping, excepting for the suspension of York, and the
recalling of London and Salisbury into their former sentence of
Excommunication, which were delivered to their hands. On the morrow we went
to sea, and sailing prosperously arrived in England, taking a long with us,
according to the kings commandment, How saint Thomas was used at his landing
in England.
John Deane of Salisbury who not without sorrow and shame beeheld these armed
troops posting to our ship of purpose to assault us in our landing; wherefore
the Deane fearing least if any wrong should be offered to us and ours, it
would redound to my Lord the kings dishonor, met the soldiers and charged
them in the kings name neither to hurt us nor ours, because it would taynte
the king himself, beetweene whom and us a peace was now concluded, with some
note of treachery, and therefore conselled them that laying arms aside they
would come peaceably to us. Yet they in regard we brought with us Simon
Archdeacon of Senon, who came over to visit his freindes in England, required
him to take the oath of fealty to our kings the father and son, and that
against all men, not so much as excepting your Holiness, us, or any other. But
we would not suffer any such oath to be tendered, fearing least the Clergy of
the kingdom should be enforced to swear in like sort, if those of our own
househould should be thus entangled in these bands, which York, London, and
Salisbury together with their confederates to the damage of the Apostolic Sea
endeavor, to the end the authority thereof may be blown up, or at the least
diminished in the kingdom. But the officers, who exacted this oath, because
they were not accompanyd with many, were not able in that place to enforce us
to any thing otherwise then we would, for the people rejoicing at our return
could easily have ouermatched them if they would have stood upon their
strength. Passing thence unto our Church we were with great devotion received
both of the Clergy and Layety; allthough the intruded incumbentes, do as yet
violently possess our Churches, among which are chiefest as well for the
plague as vexation of the Church Gaufride Rydell our Archdeacon, and Nigel de
Sackeuille his Clearke, of whom the one, I mean Gaufride Rydel, houldeth the
Church of Otforde, and the other Nigel de Sackeuyle the Church of Berges, which
together with the fruytes reaped thence, they were by your Mandate bounden to
restore to us and our Clearkes the true owners of them; for you commanded my
Lord of Roane and the Bishop of Niuers to absolve them, having first according
to custom received the Sacrament of the Church, and then being enjoined by
your authority to restore us our Churhces, with their commoditys.

Being come to our Church, there were presently with us the kings officers,
demanding on his beehalfe (as the Lord of York and the Bishops of London and
Salisbury informed us) that we should absolve the suspended Bishops and the
excommunicated, because whatsoever was done against them, redounded to his
Majesty's injury, and withal to the overthrow of the regal customs,
promising how the Bishops of our Province, after this absolution, should
repair to us, and with reservation of the kings honor, willingly obey our
jurisdiction. Whereunto we answered, that it was not the part of an inferior
judge to dissolve the sentence of his Superior, and how noe man could infringe
what the Apostolic Sea had decreede: Yet nevertheless in regard they urged
more insta^tly and threatened that my Lord the king (unless we assented to
them) would attempt such matters as would amaze and astonish us, we told
them, if the Bishops of London and Salisbury would swear before us
according to the form of the Church, that they would obey your commandment,
we would then for purchasing the Churches peace, and for the reverence we
bore to the king, with the advice of himself, my Lord of Winchester, and
others our breathren, by making a trial, undergo the danger, and do therein
what possibly we could, with preservation of your reverence; and moreover love
them as our dearest brethren, and use them with all sweetenes and gentles;
which being declared, by Bishops, who passed beetweene, York seeking
occasion of dissension, answered together with others, who blewe the coals of
Scysme, that such an oathe was not to be taken but with the kings consent,
especially by Bishops, because it was contrary to the Princes dignity and
the customs of the kingdom; whereunto on our part we replied: That whereas
the same Bishops were before excommunicated by us, they could not by us be
absolved, but with the assurance of an oathe, after they had with earneste
suits solicited us: and then if our sentence could not be loosed but with the
caution of an oathe, much less could yours which is far stronger, and without
comparaison exceeds us and all mortal men in authority.

Upon which our speeches (as some told us who were present) the Bishops
were so far moved, as they determined to come to us, and receive absolution
according to the manner of the Church, not esteeming it safe to oppose
themselves against the Church, and impugn the Apostolical decrees for
preservation of the royal customs: But that man the Adversary of peace and
disturber of the Church (York I mean) dissuaded it, aduising them rather to
fly to our Lord the king, who ever hitherto patronized the^, and likewise to
send Messingers to our new king who might persuade him that we intended to
depose him; whereas (God is our wittnes) so it might be to the Churches
avail, we had rather he should possess, not only this one kingdom, but
also the most and most ample dominions of the world. The chiefest medler in
this message was our Archdeacon, For York with the other two forenamed
Bishops passed speedily over the seas, that (which God forbid) they might
inueagle our Lord the king, and incense him to bitter wrath against the Church.
They caused also to be summoned out of the land six persons of the vacant
Churches, to the end they might there with their counsel, contrary to the
Cannons, before our king in an other kings dominion, the rest of their
brethren being absent, celebrate the election of the Bishops of our Province;
which Bishops so elected if we refused to censecrate, then seemed they to
have occasion enough for sowing dissension beetwene our Lord the king and us:
For there is not a thing which they more fear then the Churches peace, least
then their works should be discovered, and their enormityes corrected. The
rest being much more we refer to his Messingers relation, which least it
should be tedious, we forbear to write. What appertains to your Holiness,
if it pleases you, vouch safe with clemency to hear our petitions.] This was
his last Epistle written to Pope Alexander, taking leave for evermore to speak
by letters.

Wherein especially because there remains with such ample notes so precisely
pourtrayted forth the wickedness of most unworthy preistes and principally of
York his most potent and impudent adversary, Cod Vat. lib. 3. Epist 94.
the fire and fuel of all these mischeifes, A narration of the Archbishop of
York.
to whose counsel and suggestions the king consenting was drawn headlong
thorough the craggie rocks of discord to all miseryes, and distracted from all
peace and tranquillity, we intend here before we enter farther into this
deadly discourse, to lay down of him to the world what his beeginning was, all
which you are to receive from the relation of John of Salisbury the most exact
writer of that time, out of that Epistle (I mean) which he sent to the Bishop
of Senon after the Martyrdom of saint Thomas, where first rehearsing the same
he uses afterward, these words.

[The chief leader of all these was that York who^ you beeheld and heard
openly in the Court persecuting the Archbishop.] And again thus. [Yea you
know this Caiphas of our age, who under the coulor of a Playntiffe persuaded
it was convenient that one man should dye, or be apprehended, least otherwise
the whole nation should perish; you were in England with your uncle my Lord of
Winchester, when this same Caiphas, then an Archdiuell procured one Walter to
be beereaued of his eyes, the beauty of whose youth he fowly loving, was
usually dilighted with the abominable abuse of his body; and this he did,
because Walter with bitter words freely disgorged his stomach of the foul
reproach he had suffered to the shame of nature; nor yet contented heerewith,
this Archdiuell corrupting the Judges (who decyded secular causes) enforced
him, to be hanged, for that afterward he reproved his wickedness. So this
man no less merciful then chaste requyted the affection of his Dove, so he
rewarded the wonted service of his once beeloued, as after the horrible injury
to his miserable body, he punished him more miserably being now penitent for
consenting to this loathsome sin with scourging and loss of eyes, and lastly
most miserably strangled him on the Gallows, because with all the clamor he
could he protested these wrongs. We devise not this, but endeavor to recall
it to your memory, if perchance that may possibly slip out of your memory,
which, as with an iron anchor upon the report of many, and those of great
estimation and worthy of credit, has bin more deeply fixed in your mind:
For this sorrowful history even to this very day is sung up and down to the
disgrace, yea contempt of the Church. But it may be some will ask how he
could pass unpunished having committed so great and manifest an offense,
especially since blessed Eugenius then governed the Catholic Church? And
doubtless (as we constantly beelieue) he had never escaped but by the industry
of saint Thomas, who wrought thorough the mediation of those reverent men
Hillary Bishop of Chichester and John Bishop of Winchester that he might
receive his purgation before Theobalde of worthy memory late Archbishop of
Canterbury. Yet perceauing afterward how the Church of Rome took in ill
part the order of this purgation thus secretly carried, as being only in a
Chapter of Monks, and not in a solemn assembly, being careful of his estate
he passed over to Rome to that famous Merchant Gregory Cardinal of saint
Angelo, whom my very soul has ever hated, and by his procurement thorough the
multitude of rewards sowed in the Court, obtained to return home justified
in his house, being reserved I know not by what dispensation of God, to
committ far more heinous offenses, as wittnesseth this present day wherein the
Church is dyed purple with the blood of an Innocent.] Thus writes John of
Salisbury of this detestable man, whom in steed of an Archdeacon he terms
an Archdiuell, and being afterward preferred to be an Archbishop, he
calls rightly an other Caiphas of this time, the executioner of saint Thomas,
who perhaps had before favored him too much. But how these warring vessels of
iniquity incensed the king against saint Thomas, is thus described by Herbert
in Quadrilogus. The king was so troubled and deeply offended, by the
accusatio^s of these Bishops, against saint Thomas, whom with exclamations
they called the Molester of the kingdom, the persecutor of Bishops, the
enemy of all good men, and the Princes professed foe, as outrageous with fury,
he fell into those most bitter words, whereby they who guarded his person were
incited to attempt the murder of this most holy man. For (says he) being
very often enraged with wrath, breeaking out into those deadly words, The king
by his rash and unadvised words gives occasion of the murder of S. Thomas.
He cursed all whom be had nourished, who by the special grace of his favor
and larges of his benefittes were bound unto him; because they would not
revenge him of one Priest who so disturbed his person and kingdom, and sought
to deprive and disinherit him of his dignities. And ever breathing out these
and such like speeches, the king stirred all his followers extremely against
him, among whom fourre knights more desperate then the rest, combining
together, conspired the Archbishoppes death, and passing speedily into England
came to the Arch-Bishope, where quarrelling with foul reproaches and rising to
contentious words, they picked their wished occasion out of the Archbishoppes
freedom in speaking. And then lastly the next day after the feast of the
Blessed Innocents, they assaulted him in the Church with naked swoardes being
there at Euensong. First the saint reproved the Clearkes, because they
intended by shutting the Churches doors to exclude them, saying: The Church was
not to be kept as a castle. The whole matter with all circumstances which
foreran and succeeded the Martyrdom are at large delivered in Quadrilogus, and
many things are there laid open which are omitted in other Authors, who have
to their commendation labored in this work, all which Roger in his Chronicles
of England has breifely collected, in such sort, as, by living in that time,
he knew them to be acted, which he left written in these words.

[Scarce therefore had our Father continued a full month in his Church, when
lo the fifte day after our Lords nativity, came to Canterbury four knights,
yea rather soldiers of Satan's Guarde, The Martyrdom of S. Thomas.
whose names were. William de Tracy, Hughe de Moruyle, Richard Bryton, and
Reynold Fitz-vrse, men truly of eminent familyes, but now instantly confounding
with eternal infamy, for attempting a detestable offense, the glory of their
knighthoode and tytles of their descents. Wherefore entering into the
Archbishop, because salutation was not directed in their hands, letting pass
all usual salutations, out of their conceived malice they burst to words of
Pride and arrogance, they receive and retorte answers, heaping threats on
threats, and leaving beehind them despightes and reproaches, depart: But
instantly returning all armed, and an armed troop attending them, they entered
with force the Cloister of the Monks, while with modesty and gravity the
Archbishop passed on before them into the Church, being persuaded yea
compelled by the Monks, in regard of the solemn feast, to solemnize
Euensonge, when looking back he saw them in arms persuing him amid the
Cloisters. The horror of the sin ought to have restrained them from entering
the Church, but neither the reverence of the solemnity could make the^ desiste
from this monstrous offense, nor the innocence of the Patriarcke could terrify
them from shedding his blood, yea so far, forth did the impudent resolution of
committing this heinous wicked act possess and blind them, as they neither
respected the loss of their knighthoode, nor had the least consideration of
any ensuing danger: Headlong therefore and senseles of the sin, making after
the Archbishop with naked swoardes, they rush into the Church asking with
furious exclamations: Where is the Taytor? But no man answering, redoubling
again they demanded: Where is the Archbishop? Wherefore the Confessor of
Christ now instantly to be crowned with Martyrdom knowing the first
slanderous name to be falsely imposed on him, but the last agreeable to him in
regard of his function, descending the steps, and meeting them said: Lo
here I am!

And beehaued himself with so great constancy, as neither his mind seemed
any way to be moved with fear, or his body astonished with horror: To whom
one of these cruel knights in the spirit of fury said: Thou shall instantly
dye, for it is impossible thou should longer live. Whereunto the Archbishop
answered with no less constancy of words then mind. I am prepared to dye for
the cause of God, the defense of Justice, and the liberty of the Church: But if
ye seek my life, I forbid ye on the beehalfe of Allmighty God, and under the
pain of incurring his curse, to hurt anyway any other, be he Monk, be he
Clearke, be he Layman, be he more, be he less, but let them be free
from the pain, as they are no parties to the cause. These words in his
suffering seem like to those of Christ in his passion saying. If ye seek
me, suffer these to depart. Then laid the kinghtes instantly hands on him
to draw him out of the Church, and so to murder him, but could not move him.
Wherefore the Archbishop seeing these his executioners with swords ready
drawn, as one praying, bowed down his head uttering these his last words I
commend to God, our Blessed Lady with the Saints Patrons of this Church and S.
Denise my self and the cause of his Church. And so this Martyr with an
invincible mind and admirable constancy did not in all his tortures speak one
word, yield any noise, give any sighe, or heave his hand against any blow,
but held his inclined head thus exposed to the swords immovable, till all
was ended.

The knights on the other side fearing least the multitude of men and women
flocking all about would rescue him out of their hands before they
accomplished their intent, hastened their heinous sin: When one of them
lefting up his sword to make a blow at the Archbishoppes head cut of the
arm of a Clearke called Edward Grimfere and wounded with all our lords
Anointed. The cruelty used in the slaughtering of saint Thomas.
This Clearke stretched out his arm over his Fathers head to receive the
blow, or rather to beat it away. As yet stood the just, suffering for
justice, as an innocent Lamb without murmurre, without clamor, and offerring
himself as a sacrifice to our Lord, he prayed to his Saints for assistance.
And that none of this accursed crewe might in forbearing the Archbishop be
found guiltles of this foul crime, the second and third of them dashed cruelly
their swords on the head of this constant Champion, and breaking his brains
whurled headlong down to the grownd this oblation of the holy Ghost. And
lastly the fourth outrageous with more then deadly yea hellish cruelty, when
the Saint was now prostrate, yea yielding up the Ghost, cut of his shaven
crown, broake in pieces the scull of his head, and thrusting in the point of
his swoard, threw out on the pauement of stone his brains together with the
blood.

Our Abel having therefore consummated the glory of his Martyrdom, Tho time of
the Martyrdom of S. Thomas.
in breife accomplished many times; for the seventh year of his exile now
beeginning, the a fore said Martyr Thomas for the law of God and the Churches
liberty, which in the English Church was almost wholly perished, co^bated even
to death, and dreaded not the words of the wicked, for being founded on a
firm rock, which was Christ, he for the name of Christ, in the Church of
Christ, on the fifte day of Christ's Nativity, being the day after the feast
of the Innocents, was himself an Innocent slain, whose innocent life and
death for the meritt of the cause precious in the sight of God, have bin
manifested with many miracles, which not only in the place of his rest, but in
diverse other nations and kingdoms are also with admiration showed. The same
day was the passion of saint Thomas revealed by the holy Ghost to blessed
Godric an Anchoryte at Fintz-hall, a place distant from Canterbury above an
hundred and three score miles.

Hereupon the Monks of the Church of Canterbury shutt up the doors of the
Church, which remained in such sort suspended from the celebration of Mass
for almost a whole year; until they received the Churches reconciliation
from Pope Alexander. Concerning the Martyrs body, the Monks taking it away
placed it the first night in the Quire, The buryall of S. Thomas.
perforning over it the Exequies of the dead, and it is credibly affirmed that
the Obsequies being ended, lying in the Quire on the Bear, about the break
of day he lifted up his hand and gave them his Benediction, afterward they
buried him in a vaulte.] Thus far Roger writing of the Martyrdom and buryall
of saint Thomas. And this was the end of this most glorious Martyr, who
conquered with his blood, and tryumphed in the torments of a violent death, and
now renowned with the Garland of a most famous Martyrdom, is mounted up to the
Court of heaven, leaving to all posterites an example of singular constancy to
fight even to the last gasp for maintayning the Churches liberty. But
instantly fell headelong on his enemies now vanquished and overthrown by their
own wicked victory, horror and dread, as men afflicted on all sides with
remorse revenging sin. But of this shall be hereafter our later discourse,
as a tracte more miserable.

As touching the time of his noble Martyrdom, allthough it appears out of
so many before recyted Epistles, that the most holy man was this self same
year on the said day slain with the swords of the impious; yet nevertheless
in some Authors his Martyrdom is found to be mentioned in the year
following, as in the Epitaph recited by Roger in the Chrinicles of England, and
by Robert de Monte, being thus written.

A thousand, hundred, seauenty one it was
When Prymate Thomas with the sword was slain:
The fiste of Christmas from the world did pass
This worlds fair flower, whose fruit with God does reign.
But where they affirm his passion to be in the year a thousand one hundred
seauenty one, it proceeds hence that they beegan their year from our Lords
Nativity: For they who reckon from the Kalends of January or the Incarnation of
our Savior do truly and boldly allege this same to be the year of his
Martyrdom, as the writers of Quadrilogus in these words: [Thomas that notable
Champion of God, Archbishop of the Church of Canterbury, Prymate of all
England, and Legate of the Apostolic Sea, suffered death in the year after
our Lords incarnation one thousand one hundred and seauenty, being aged fifty
three, on the fourth of the Kalends of January being then Tewseday about the
eleventh hour of the day; so the fifte day of our Saviors birth into this
world of misery, was his birth day unto eternal glory.] Thus there.

The same year also, the Church of Canterbury being thus deprived of saint
Thomas, The waueringe state of the Church of Canterbury.
beegan to waver, when the Cathedral Monks of the said Church would have
elected a successor, without any reguarde of the Bishops of the Province, unto
whose office the same appertayned, which their bold attempt is reproved by
Peter of Bloys, a man of great authority in the Church of England, having first
most amply enlarged himself in the high commendation of saint Thomas on this
wise.

To his most dear brethren and freindes Cannons of Beweueiwe Master Peeter of
Bloys Archdeacon of Bathe Lends greeting with all love. Apud Petrum Blese^
Epist 27. A consolation for the death of S. Thomas.

The Pastor of our souls is passed hence, whose decease I meant to have
lamented, but he is departed, not dead; arrived to life, not deprived of
life; for death whereby our Lord has made his Saint so maruailous, is not
death, but a sleep, the port of death the porche of life, an entry into the
delights of that heavenly country, into the Powers of Allmighty God, into the
infinite brightness of eternal glory: For vndergoeing a long journey, he took
with him plenty of money, intending to return in the full of the Moon, his
soul (I say) rich in merittes, leaving the body, shall in the general and
last resurrection return again full fraught to her old habitation: Having
gathered together many virtues, like sundry Marchandises into one bundell, he
passed therewith to the heavenly Mart; that wretch laden with days, I mean
the death of this miserable world, that mischeeuous, contentious, wayward,
importunate, envious, hurtefull and suttell old woeman beegan to undo and
search precisely his carryages, to see if there were any thing among those
collected merittes, which was subject to her command: But he as a circumspect
and discreet man would not endure ought that might endamage his life, for long
before had he desired to be dissolved and be with Christ, and then did he
especially thirst to depart, out of the body of this death; he cast therefore
into the mouth of this old wretch a little duste as a tole or tribute; hereupon
the same false rumor beeganne to be diuulged and spread among the people,
Genes. 36.
that a most cruel beast had devoured Joseph: Indeed the coat whereof he was
dispoyled was a deceytfull messinger of his death; for Joseph lives and
reigns throughout the whole land of Egypt; Idem 45.
his blessed soul disburdened of this corruptible load and now freely
discharged of the dust of his earthly conversation, has taken her flight to
heaven, She is assumpted by him who said: I go to prepare a place for ye,
Joan. 14.
and I will return again and assume ye up unto me; being in breife
absolutely perfect he closed up many times; he is taken away least malice
should pervert his understanding; And to heaven now called is he, whom this
world was not worthy to hold; neither yet is his candell extinguished, but
snuffed with transitory affliction to the end it may shine more gloriously, and
not longer hid under a bushel, may now give light to all throughout the house;
he appeared in the eyes of the foolish to dye, but his life rests hid with
Christ in God: death seemed to vanquish and swallowe him up, but death it
self is swallowed up in victory.

Thou have given him (o Lord) the desire of his heart, for he was long a
soldier under thy banner, keepeing warily severe ways in regard of the
words proceeding from thy lips. Assuredly from the very first conditions of
his tender yough he beegan to grow in the ripenes of manners gravely old,
repressinge with watching, disciplines, haircloth and the girdle of continual
continency the motions of fleshly insolency: and therefore was he called by our
Lord as an other Aaron to distribute the science of salvation unto his people,
to frame a nation acceptable to our Lord, a pursuer of meritorious works, and
to prepare for our Lord a perfect multitude. Our Lord did choose him for a
Priest to serve him, that he might he a guide to his congregation, a rule of
life, a form of penance, an example of sanctity. Allmighty God the Lord of
all sciences, beestowed on him a learned tongue, and powered into him abundantly
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, to the end he might be among the
learned more learned, among the wise more wise, among the good far better, among
the humble a companion, among the greatest yet greater. He was a Preacher of
the divine word, a trumpet of the Gospel, a friend of the spouse, a pillar of
the Clergy, an eye to the blind, a foot to the lame, the salt of this
earth, the light of his country, the Minister of the highest, the Vicar of the
anointed of our Lord. The whole conversation of his life was a scoole of
honesty, a a form of manners a frame of salvation. He was in judgment
upright, in disposing dilligent, in commanding advised, in speech modest, in
counsel circumspest, in feeding himself most sparing, in feeding others most
bountiful, in anger a peace maker, in flesh an Angel, in suffering iniuryes
meek, in prosperity fearful, in adversity most courageous, in alms
liberal, in mercys wholly drowned.

He was the glory of the Religious, the delighte of the Laietie, the terror of
Princes, the God of Pharao. Of this man we may bouldly say and sing: that he
strayed nor after gold, nor yet trusted in the treasures of money, who
disdayned to be either a receauer of brybes, or an accepter of persons. Other
men advanced to the heyght of Cathedral dignity being presently to have a
special care of the Clearkes, they look more warily to their diett, they
fear no less a sickness of their body then hell it self, affecting in all
things to prolonge their lives: but this Saint from the very first entrance
into his promotion, longed with a singular desire for the end of his life, or
to speak more truly, for the beeginning of his eternal being. For as Solomon
says: When he ends, then beeginneth he. So his departure out of this
transitory life was his entrance to that life which does neither fade nor
perish. Eccles. 18.
Beeginning from his very childehoode he labored in every several age of his
life, as in the sundry divided hours of a day like a dilligent and painful
workman in the Vineyarde of our Lord of Sabbath, and so concluded the course
of a temporal life in the full perfection of Saints. Thus being a long time
in his conservation, heavenly, and traveling from his body, he desired
exceedingly to pass thorough a short conclusion of an earthly life to those
celestial pleasures; Catching therefore the intent and token of his
perigrination, he drunk of the brook in the way of this world, and has for
that cause his name exalted in the heavenly country.

So the Masters our brethren the Cathedral Monks now left as Orphans without
a father: Allmighty God who raised from the dead the great Pastor of his
stock our Lord Jesus Christ in the blood of his eternal testament provide a
man (that I may use the word of Moses) to be over this multitude: Number. 27.
For many complain and endure it most impatiently that Christ's coat without
seame is now rent beetweene them and the Bishops of the Province, The Scysme
raised in the Church of Canterbury.
and that not only the Cow and the Ram, but also the Turtle and the Dove are
divided and separated one from an other. That Mistrisse of discord, that
mother of hatred, that presumptious occasion of scandalls, that usurpation (I
mean) of syding and singular election, has presumed to break in, even to the
very professors of Religion, so as contemning and casting away the general
counsel of the Bishops and Abbottes, they have made a secret and stolen
election contrary to customs, enemy to laws, condemned by Decrees, reproved
by practice. All others, who account now this election made by the Monks to
be to their derogation and disgrace, would willingly and with one consent
without any division or scandal have conferred their voices on the person by
them named; but as this case stands, I fear least this election (which God
forbid) prove his deiection, and this attempting of a feigned liberty, turn to
Christ's Church, into a matter of thralldome.

This plague truly and many others do at this day generally infecte and
corrupt the body of the Church: Laymen intrude themselves into the holy
Sanctuarys, and the stones of the Sanctuaryes are dispersed apparently in all
high streets, Cloisters are now converted to Castles and Marketplaces,
Religious men to Ethnickes, Pastors to Wolves, Lillyes to thorns, Gould to
dross, Corn to Tares, Wine to Vinager, Oil to Lees. Let Allmighty God yet
cast an eye back on the face of his Testament, neither let him give over to
be troaden under foot the Vine which he has planted with his right hand,
the Church which he has purchased with his precious blood; let him stir up
the spirit of Moses, and erect the horn of that Unicorn, that only high
Bishop, and without comparison most universal, so as his hand may execute
judgment, that with his horn he may blow over Siria, thunder against Edom,
send out lightning against the Calfes of Bethel, against the Idols of Egypt,
against the fatt Cowes of Samaria, against the Preistes of Baal, against
Shepherdes who feed themselves, against judges who enact unjust laws, against
dumb dogs which are unable to bark, against the earthen pott of Zachary,
against the vessels of the foolish Pastor, against the ambition of Simon
Magus, against the tyranny of the world, against the presumption of the
Cloister, against deceytfull dealers, against oppressors of the poor, against
disturbers of the Churches peace, against the subuerters of faith.

Thus wrote Peeter, the rest we refer to their propper place.

AN. DOM. 1171.
Now follows the year of our Lord 1171. with the fourth Indiction. When the
horrible murder of the most holy Martyr Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury being
spread far and near, all the Western world was astonished, and the sighs
of all devout people every where breathed out, especially by letters from all
parts, and those replenished with lamentations, and sent to Pope Alexander
from sundry persons, being such, and in such sort, as you may well say they
were so many glorious trumppetts and renowned Epithapes to celebrate the
funerals of this most worthy Martyr. Among which receive here first what the
king of France wrote to Pope Alexander.

To Alexander by the grace of God High Bishop Jews by the same grace king of
the French sends salutations with due reverence. The king of Frances letter
to the Pope about the death of saint Thomas.

The child reuolteth from the law of humane piety, who disgracefully abuses
his mother, neither are they myndfull of their Creators benefitts who are not
moved with sorrow for the abuses offered to the holy Church: whereupon we
have now an especial cause of lamentation, and a new cruelty never heard of
before beegetteth a new sorrow: because malice rising against the Saint of
God, has run her swords point into the very aple of Christ's eye, and no
less cruelly then fowly slaughtered so great a light of Gods Church. Stir
up therefore some kind of exquisite justice, and vnsheath saint Peeters sword
for punishing the murder of the Martyr of Canterbury, because his blood cries
out for the whole Church; not so much exclayming revenge for his own
particular as for all. And beehould at the Tomb of this Champion (as it is
reported to us) the divine glory shyneth with mirackles, and God shows from
heaven where he rests on earth, who in his quarrel so courageously fought.
The bearers of these letters, who are beereft of this their father will relate
the whole matter to your Holiness; yield therefore a most gentle ear to the
testimony of this truth, and as well heerin as otherwise beelieue them as you
would beelieue our selves. God prosper you ever.


Thus the king. The Earl of Bloyes also wrote to the same effect unto his
Holiness. More over the Bishop of Senon then Legate for the Apostolic Sea sent
two Epistles to the Pope about the death of saint Thomas. But omitting these,
as te^ding all to one purpose, let us see the rest, the messingers, I mean,
sent by the king of England to Rome, who offered the vndergoeing of penance
for killing the martyr, as also of the diverse and excellent mirackles now
beegun to be published at the Martyrs sepulcher with other things appertayning
thereunto.

The Martyr thus killed in the end of the last year there was presently great
recourse to the Pope, lying in Rome, of some (as you see) detesting and
complaying of this damnable sacrilege, the accusers were pious princes, as, the
king of France, the Earl of Bloys, and Bishops who were Legates, especially
he of Senon; others excusers, being an assembly of Bishops, among whom he
of Lizieux in all their names wrote thus to Pope Alexander.

[At such time as being gathered together with our king, The assembly of
Bishops excusing the king of England.
we determined to handle great matters concerning both the Church and
kingdom, a rumor on the sudden overwhelmed us all in a lamentable confusion
of sorrow concerning our Lord of Canterbury, so far forth as in a moment our
calm was turned in to a turbulent tempest, our consultations into sighs: For
by some returning from England we were assuredly certifyed, that some of his
enemies being (as they say) with his sundry and severe preceedinges against
them provoked to anger and madness, rashly assaulted his person, and (what
without grief we cannot, nay ought not to speak) cruelly persisting, did
strike and murder him: This unhappy report came in the end by the relation of
some to the kings ears; because it was unlawful to conceal from him, what
by the right of his power and sword appertayned to him to punish; who
instantly in the first uttering of this deadly discourse, as one changed and
given over to all sorts of compassionate lamentation, quite altering his
royal Majesty into haire-cloth and ashes, showed himself more truly a friend
then a king, being sometimes astonished, and from astonishmentes falling into
more greiuous sighs and bitter sorrow: then almost three days solitary,
retired in his chamber, he neither endured to receive sustenance nor admit
consolation, but seemed wilfully by a more deadly grief to design himself
to a voluntary death: Miserable was the face of our mischeifes, and our inward
greifes fraighted with care, because we who first lamented our Priest, beegan
now thereupon to despair the recovery of our king, and beeleiued that in the
death of one both would pitifully perish. But his friends and principally the
Bishops complayninge especially that he would not suffer himself to return
again to himself; he answered, he was in fear least the Authors and
complotters of this horrible act, upon confidence of the old discord
promised themselves pardon of the crime, allthough himself by fresh iniurys
and sundry bad turns had heaped new dissentions; and therefore thought the fame
and glory of his renown might be clowded with the slanders of his
aduersarys, and so falsely bruted that this matter proceeded from his own will;
But he protested, as Allmighty God should judge his soul, that this accursed
deed was neither acted by his will nor consent, nor wrought by any devise of
his, unless heerin were perhaps his error, that as yet he was thought too little
to affect him; but in this also he absolutely submitted himself to the
Churches judgment, and would humbly undergo whatsoever for his souls health
should be imposed and enjoined him. Consulting therefore together, we accorded
all in this, that his Majesty should refer himself to the wisdom and
authority of the Sea Apostolic, which the Christian faith professes more
amply to abound with the spirit of sapience, and fullnes of power, and
indeauor there by lawful and canonical means to approve his innocence. We
therefore humbly beeseech that according to the spirit of counsel and
fortitude beestowed by God on you, you would with severity punish the Authors
of so heinous an offense according to this their enormious deserte, and your
Apostolic piety would with more singular affection conserve our kings
innocence in his former estate. Allmighty God preserve your person very long in
health to his Churches vtility.] Hitherto the Bishop of Lizieux in the name
of these assembled Bishops. With these letters were messingers also sent to
Pope Alexander from the Bishopps and others. aparte from the king, and some
likewise before these from the Bishop of York to sue for absolution from
his excommunication; of all which there remains a relation from the kings
Messinger the Archdeacon of Poytiers in these words.

[Who were the first, Messingers from the Bishops and king of England to Pope
Alexander.
and who the second Ambassadors of the king, and what as well these as these
petitioned, and in what sort they departed from the Court, I will as breifely
as I can rehearse. First were John Cumin and Master B. sent to seek absolution
for the Bishops; but John Cumin came to the court fifteen days before
Master B. and after great importunity, having first made a promise of 500.
Marcks, was admitted to audience, the Clearkes of the Archbishop of York and
the Nuntio of Durhame partaking with him, and alleging much in excuse of the
Bishopps, and they had, I think, obtained absolution, had not the rumor of the
Archbishoppes death come on the head of it, which absolutely disgraced all:
for my Lord the Pope was therewith so exceedingly troubled, that for almost
eight days not so much as his own followers could have conference with him,
and it was generally conceived that no Englishman should have access unto him,
and so all their business remained in suspense.

The next Messingers were the Bishops of Worcester and Ewreux, the Abbot of
Valace, the Archdeacons of Salisbury and Lizieux, S. Robert of Newborough,
Richard Bar, Master Henry Pichim and one of the Templars, being all sent to
excuse the king, that Canterbury was neither killed by his commandment nor
will: yet was it not denied, but that the king had given cause of his death,
and spoken somewhat whereupon those Murderers took occasion to kill him;
neither did those Messingers come together to the court, nor yet were admitted
by my Lord the Pope, nor could appear in his presence. Afterward upon suit of
some Cardinals, the Abbot and Archdeacon of Lizieux were received.

Thursday before Easter approaching, it was generally said in the Court, that
my Lord the Pope would that day pronounce sentence of excommunication against
the king, and kingdom: Whereupon the Messingers stroaken with fear, by the
intercession of some Cardinals, signified to my Lord the Pope, that they had
received commandment from my Lord their king to make oathe in his presence,
that the king should obey his Mandate, and that the king should in his own
person swear as much. The same Thursday about nine of the clock, as well the
kings messingers as the messingers of the Bishops were called in the
general Consistory. The kings Messingers being the Abbot of Valace and the
two before recyted Archdeacons Henry and Richard Bar were sworn, that the
king should stand to the Popes judgment, and that when his Holiness should
command him, he should take thereupon his Corporal oathe. Nevertheless the
Pope generally excommunicated the same day the Murderers of saint Thomas, and
all that gave counsel, aid, or assent thereunto, and all who should receive
them into their land, or any way abett them.

After Easter came the Bishops of Worcester and Eureux with Robert de
Newboroughe, The Relation of the Messingers proceedinges with the Pope.
and whether the said oath were required of them, I know not, but that they
swore not, I am certain; and when they had attended the Court xv. days and
more, they were called in to receive their answer; for they with others agreede
as well in excusing the king, as in accusing, according as has bin said: And
when it was supposed they should have carried back a happy doom, my Lord the
Pope confirmed the sentence of interdiction given by the Bishop of Senon
against the kings dominions on this side of the Seas, with the sentence of
suspension and excommunication which was denounced against the Bishops of
England; adding withal that he would send his Legates to the king to see and
understand his humility. Afterward at the great instance of the Messingers,
by the intercession also of some Cardinals and large sommes of money (as it is
said) this was obtained: our Lord the Pope should write to the Archdeacon of
Bitureux, that if within one month after these Messingers coming into
Normandy he heard not his Legates had passed the Alps, then he should
absolve the Bishops of London and Salisbury from excommunication, first
taking of them an oathe to obey our Lord the Popes Mandate, they and the rest
remaining nevertheless still in suspension. Thus departed our Lord the kings
Messingers from the court, neither yet carried they back any thing else. But
when they shall come, or who shall undertake this journey, I think it is
hitherto unknown to the Cardinals: Only now, as I beelieue, you need not
fear the Interdicton of England, so as the king will submitt himself to the
Legates. And our Lord the Pope writes to him, and inuyteth him to humility,
yet hardly could he be wrought to write to him.]

Hitherto is the relation of one of the kings Messingers. But these letters of
Pope Alexander to the king of England are lost. Now let us hear a more
faithful and certain report made by other the kings Messingers unto the
king himself, where no mention of money either offered or received (as the
other upon his false conjecture rehearsed) is made, although it contains a
most exact recytall of all and singular matters and words that passed: for
thus it is.

To his dearest Lord Henry the renowned king of England, Duke of Normandy and
Aquitayne and Earl of Anioue, R Abbot of Wallacia, R Archdeacon of Salisbury,
R. Archdeacon of Lizieux, Richard Bar and Master Henry send greeting with due
obedience in all things and every where.
These are to certify your Majesty that when Richard Bar going before us
had with great danger and trauaille come to our Lord the Popes court, we
four with the two Bishops, the Deane of Eureux and Master Henry with much
difficulty attained Seen; where for some days we were constrained to stay;
for Count Macarius had on all sides so beeset the ways, as there remained no
passage for any. When we four together with the Bishops (who earnestly
desired to depart) could not as we would, in regard of these exceeding
difficultyes, consulting in one, at midnight, with all secrecy we set
forward, and so by craggy mountains and places almost unpassable, with
extreme fear and danger we came in the end to Tusculan: There found we
Richard Bar, allthough (as beeseemed him) careful of your honor, and
laboring discreetely and instantly for your commodity, yet much troubled and
confounded, in regard neither our Lord the Pope had yet received him, nor
others had courteously and gently entertained him: And for us at our coming
the Pope would neither see us, nor receive us at his feet, yea many of the
Cardinals would hardly afforde us a word. Remaining therefore long and
anxiously troubled in the bitterness of our souls, we by all means humbly
besought those who more e^tirely affected to you, that our Lord the Pope by
their intercession would some way vouchsafe us a hearing. The Lord Abbot of
Wallacia and R. Archdeacon of Lizieux as men least suspected were first
received to audience. But when they in salutation on your beehalfe beegan with
your name in^ytleing you the most devout child of the Roman Church; The name
of the king of England now hateful at Rome
The whole court cried out: forbear, forbear! As if it were abominable to
the Pope to hear your name. So coming from the Court, in the evening they
returned again to our Lord the Pope, delivering to him by the advice of us all
what by your Majesty was commanded us, declaring also distinctly the sundry
benefittes beestowed by you on Canterbury, with the diverse excesses and
importunityes committed by him against your dignyty, and all this first in
secret, then before our Lord the Pope and the whole College of Cardinals,
where Alexander of Wales and Gunter of Flanders Clearkes of the Church of
Canterbury contested and contended against you.

Thurseday before Easter being now at hand, on which day according to the use
of the Roman Church our Lord the Pope was accustomed to absolve or
excommunicate in public; whereas we were certain that with great attention
they had long handled this weyghty cause which so near touched your self and
your kingdom, we aduysed with those, who (as we knew) most favored your
Majesty, we mean the Lords of Portua, and Hyacinth, The Cardinals who
favored the king of England.
the Lords of Papia and Tus^ulane with Peeter Lord of Mirle (for the Lord John
of Naples was absent) importuning them with all labor and instance to lay open
unto us our Lord the Popes intention, and what he determined to decree
concerning your self. But they on the other side reporting nothing but
disasters and matters disgraceful to your renown, we perceived out of the
sights and sorrowful relation of the^ all, especially of your faithful well
wisher brother French, that our Lord the Pope had that day resolved absolutely
with the joint consent of all his brethren to pronounce the sentence of
interdiction against your self by name, and your dominions as well on this
side as beyond the seas, and also confirm the same sentence, which was
already diuulged against the Bishops. Besett therefore with these extremityes
we attempted with our uttermost endeavors as well by the Cardinals as those
our Associates who had access to his holiness, and likewise by his inward
freindes, to make him desist from this purpose, or at the least defer it
until the coming of your Bishops: which when it could no way be obtained,
we according to our bounden duty to you, because we were neither able, nor
ought to endure the great disgrace of your person, with the agreiuances of all
your principalityes, consulting in the end with our Associates before certain
Cardinals, devised a way good and secure for your state and honor, profitable
to all your dominions and necessary for your Bishops; whereby we avoided
that ignominy and danger even now threatening your person, subjects, and
Bishops, and exposed our selves wholly to the uttermost peril for this your
delivery, beelieuing and having a singular hope that it is (according as we
think) to your wished desire. For astonished with fear we signified to our
Lord the Pope by the intercession of the same Cardinals, that we had received
a commandment from you, to swear in his presence that you shall obey his
Mandate, and how your self in person shall make the said oathe.

The same thursday about nine of the Clock, were the Messingers called in, as
well yours as the Bishops, The Messingers sworn in the kings name.
and in the general consistory were we sworn, the Abbot (we mean) of
Wallacia, the Archdeacons of Salisbury and Lizieux, Master Henry and Richard
Bar, that you shall stand to the Popes Mandate and take your corporal oathe
at his appointment to this effect. Then the Messingers of the Archbishop of
York and of the Bishops of London and Salisbury swoare in like sort, that
their Lords should subject themselves to the Popes commandment and take an
oath to that purpose. Nevertheless the same day he generally excommunicated all
them who murdered Canterbury, and all who gave counsel aid or assent
thereunto, and all who should wittingly receive them into their lands, or any
way foster them. Our Lords the Bishops of Worcester and Eureux, Robert of
Newboroughe of Eureux, and Master Henry were presently to follow us, whom we
left exceedingly igreeued and troubled, that they could not according to their
desire come to dispatch your business, and it was their aduyce that we should
by all means make haste before, to hinder and avoid the disgrace and calamity
which your adversaries had prepared against you: For we were assured the sword
was ready in the court to strike you, and we feared that days wo^ted custom.
God send your Majesty long to prosper and flourish. Be comforted in our Lord,
and let your heart rejoice, because after this present cloud, a fair calm
will to your glory ensue. On Sattursday before Palm Sunday we came to the
Court, and the Bearer of these letters departed on Easter day from us.


Afterward, Easter being passed, Alexander adressed Legates to examine the
king of England. Concerning this legation from the Pope, Herbert in Quadrilogus
treats writing in these words. [But because confession, as it neither can,
nor ought to be made by letters, so neither can nor ought it to be made by
Messingers, and the lively voice of the penitent, by how much the more it
increases devotion, so much the more has it of virtue, the Apostolic man
Alexander sent two Cardinals a latere Master Theodinus of holy memory priest
of the title of saint Vitalis or Vestina (for it has both names) and Albert of
saint Laurence in Lucina priest Cardinal Chancellor of the Church; men truly
endowed with all sanctity and knowledge of Religion. But what was done by them
shall hereafter in the proper place be declared.

Legates to the king before the death of S. Thomas.
Mean while this same year, an other Legation sent by Pope Alexander to the
king of England, before any thing was known of the death of saint Thomas,
came to urge with Ecclesiastical censures the king, who (as he, understood by
the letters of saint Thomas) revolted from his promise. What the Legates were,
and how the king handled matters to euacuate their authority, Roger thus
delivers this year. [In the mean time came from Pope Alexander into
Normandy two Cardinals, Legates a latere, who before (as has bin said)
exercised the same Legatine office. Gratian (I mean) and Viuian, who assailed
the king of England with great and diverse vexations, intending to cast him and
his country into interdiction. But the king forewarned, and thereby armed, did
before their entry into his land appeal to the Popes presence, and so kept
himself and his dominions free from aggreiuance, but fearing yet the severity
of the Apostolic Sea, he hasted to the seas side, and passed over from
Normandy into England, giving a straight command, that none who brought any
breife from the Pope, of what condition or order someuer he was, should be
suffered to pass from Normandy into England, or from England into Normandy,
unless he first entered into good security that he sought noe hurt nor
molestation to the king or his kingdom.] Hitherto concerning this Legation
sent before the Martyrdom of saint Thomas.

This Author proceeds to the kings journey this year into Ireland, Ireland
yielded to the king of England.
which kingdom he challenged as yielded to him by the consent of the whole
country; where there was a counsel celebrated of four Archbishoppes and 28.
Bishops, all which received the king and his heirs for their kings,
confirming the same with their Charters. A Counsel in Ireland.
This Counsel held at Casselen decreed many things commodious to the Church,
as for Baptism, Tithes, and Marriages, which the king sent to Pope Alexander,
The Pope confirms the kings title.
who confirmed to the king and his heirs the kingdom of Ireland according to
the tenor of the Irish Bishops Charters. All which Baronius recyteth out of
Roger; the king remained in Ireland from the feast of saint Martin until the
beeginning of Lent.

AN. DOM. 1172.
Here ensues the year of our Lord 1172. with the fifte indiction. Legates
so^e to the king of England.
When the Legates of Pope Alexander sent the last year to king Henry the
father, concerning the murder of that most holy man Thomas Archbishop of
Chanterbury, came into Normandy: whom the king returning lately from Ireland
into England, and thence sailing into Normandy, received, and performed what
beeseemed a true penitent king and a most pious Christian, obeying in all
things the chief Bishop of the universal Church, who by most choice
persons for so great a work, being Cardinals of the sacred Roman Church,
and most blessed men Theodinus (I mean) priest Cardinal of the title of saint
Vitalis called also saint Vestine, and Alberinus priest Cardinal of the title
of saint Laure^ce in Lucina Chancellor of the holy Roman Church most happily
finished the whole business. Intending therefore to treat heerof, and how these
matters so passing difficult were managed with so great facility, God
disposing the kings heart to penance, first of all the time wherein it was
handled is to be discovered, being this very year whenas it was
accomplished, according as Roger an Author of that age has in his Chronicles
of England exactly declared: In the year one thousand, one hundred, seauenty
two, was all this business concluded after the kings return out of Ireland,
being the time when he received the same into his subjection (as in the
former year out of the said Author is rehearsed.) As touching the passage of
matters beetweene the Legates and the king, being first entangled with
difficultyes, and after by the inspiration of the holy Ghost absolutely ended
according to the Legates desire, there is a relation left in writing among the
Epistles of saint Thomas and Pope Alexander, set down in the often recyted
book of the Vatican, The relation of the proceedinges with the king.
in these words.

[The king and the Legates first met at Gorna on wednesday before the
Rogation, and there mutually were received in the kiss of peace. On the
morrow they came to Sauiniacke where the Archbishop of Roane withal the
Bishops and Nobility assembled. And after long debate for conclusion of
peace, because the king absolutely denied to swear to their Mandate, he
departed with indignation from them, using these words: I will return into
Ireland, where I have many weyghty occasions, (to be dispatched as he meant)
for your parts take on your journey in peace at your pleasures throughout my
land, and perform your Legation according as ye are commanded; where with he
departed. Then the Cardinals having more advisedly consulted, called back the
Bishop of Lizieux, John of Poytiers and the Bishop of Salisbury by whose
endeavors it was agreede that on Friday following the king and Cardinals
should meet again at Abrincke, where was a final conclusion made between
them, so as the king very m^^dely under went and performed whatsomeuer the
Cardinals on their parts proposed to him. But in regard the father would
have his son there present, that whatsomeuer the father promised, the son
should also make good, the determination of the business was deferred until the
next Sunday following, being the Sunday before our Lords Ascension. Then in
an open Audience, The kings oathe.
the King laying his hand upon the Evangelists made oathe; that neither by his
commandment, nor his will, the Archbishop of Canterbury was killed, and that
hearing of his death he rather sorrowed then rejoiced. He added moroeuer on
his free will, that he never so much grieved for the death of his father or
mother as for his: and lastly swear, that what penance or satisfaction someuer
the Cardinals would enjoin him, he would amply fulfill.

He said beesides, before that great assembly: that he was not ignorant, he
was the cause of the Arch-Bishoppes death, and that whatsoever was do^^^, (...)
done for his sake; not that he commanded it but th^^ his freindes and
familiars seeing the disturbance of his countenance and looks, understanding
likewise the grief of his heart, and hearing often his words breaking into
complayntes against the Archbishop, prepared to revenge his injury, without
ever acquainting him therewith. And therefore he professed he was most ready
with all humility and devotion to accomplish whatsomeuer the Legates should
command.

Then the Legates declared to him: that he should maintain upon his cost
200. knights for a whole year, The conditions of the kings absolution.
giving every knighte 300. crowns, in the land of Jerusalem against the
Paganes, in such sort as the Templars should dispose.

Secundly, he should absolutely disannull the wicked statutes of Claringtonne
(being the place where they were enacted) with all other ill customs, which
were in his reign intruded on Gods Church: and if there were any unlawful
ordinances before his time, he should according to our Lord the Popes
Mandate, and by the Counsel of Religious men mitigate them.

Thirdly, that he should restore to the Church of Canterbury all her whole and
entire right in lands and other things, as fully as it was the year before
the Archbishop incurred the kings displeasure, and he should amply render
his peace and love, with all their possessions to all those with whom he was
offended for the Archbishoppes sake.

Fourthly, that if need required, and our Lord the Pope commanded him, he
should go into Spain, to deliver that land from the Infidells. They enjoined
him also secretly, fastes, and alms, and other things not publicly known.

To all these the king with singular meekenes gave his assent, so as he said
in the hearing of all. Beehoulde (my Lords and Legates) my body is wholly in
your hands; and be assured whatsomeuer ye command, be it either my going to
Jerusalem, or to Rome, or to saint James, or whatsoever it be, I am resolved
to obey. In so much as scarce any there present, seeing his humility and
devotion, could abstain from tears.

These things ended, that nothing might be wanting for the full
accomplishment of his good, the Legates did lead the king, yielding thereunto
of his own accord, out of the doors of the Church, where, upon his knees,
without laying aside his garments, and without any show of disciplining
rods, he was absolved, and so again brought into the Church. And that some
of the kingdom of France might know their proceedinges heerin, they appointed
that the Archbishop of Towers with his Suffraganes should personally atte^d
on him at Cane on the next Wednesday after our Lords Ascension. What the king
did swear, the king his son confirmed with his hand in the hand of my Lord
Albert the Cardinal, that he for his own part would observe; and if the
king prevented with death or other casual means could not perform his
penance, that he himself would do it.] Hitherto this relation: Whereunto
accords the Cardinals letter concerning this matter, and beeginning in these
words. That things now hanled may not be called in question etc. Heerunto
was added, That on the next feast of our Lords Nativity, he should undertake
the Cross, and for three years make war in the holy land, unless Pope
Alexander or his lawful successor thought it unfitting: Now for the Oathe it
self made by the king and his son in the hands of the Legates, it is
reserved entirely among the acts of Pope Alexander in these very words.

I King Henry do here take mine oathe upon these holy Evangelists of our
Lord God, That I neither thought of, nor knew, nor ever commanded the murder
of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. And when I understood the same to be
committed, I more grieved therefore, then if I had heard of the slaughter of
mine own son. But herein I am not able to excuse my self, that upon
occasion of my turbulency and wrath which I conceived against that holy man,
he was killed. In regard whereof, for this offense, being as it seems the
cause of his death, I will out of hand send to Jerusalem upon mine own charges
200. soldiers to serve there for one whole year in defense of Christianity,
or give so much money as may there maintain so many soldiers for a Twelve
month. I will also undertake, till three years be expired the sign of our
Lords Cross, and in mine own person go thither unless the Pope license me
to stay. I do absolutely abrogate all those unlawful customs, which I have
in my reign ordained thorough out my land, and from this time forward decree,
that they be never observed. I will likewise hereafter suffer all Appeals to
be freely made to the Apostolic Sea, and herein I will not prohibit any man.

These and other the like are rehearsed out of Roger, saying: all these
matters, Acts iterated in the Provincial Council.
so handled about our Lords Ascension, were recyted in the Council of the
whole Province, which was held in the month of September, where the Legates
and both the kings the father and son met together with the Bishops. For
thus he writes.

[Henry king of England and king Henry his son, Rotrude Archbishop of Roane
with all the Bishops and Abbottes of Normandy assembled together at the City
of Abryncke in the presence of the Cardinals Theodine and Albert, in whose
hearing the king of England the father on the fifte Kalends of October being
Wednesday and the feast of Saints Cosmus and Damianus Martyrs, in the Church
of Saint Andrew the Apostle, declared his innocence before the above named
Cardinals, Clergy, and people, by taking his oathe on the Relics of Saints
and only Evangelists, that he neither commanded nor wished the Archbishop
of Canterburys death etc. As before: Adding thereunto the public instrument
made then to that purpose, beeginning with these words: And that these may be
ever retained in the memory of the Roman Church, the king the father caused his
seal together with the recyted Cardinals seals to be set to the writing,
wherein the Articles aforesaid were contained, beeginning in this form.

To Henry by the grace of God the renowned king of England, Albert of the
title of saint Laurence in Lucina and Theodine of the title of saint Vitalis
Preistes Cardinals and Legates of the Sea Apostolic, health in him who
gives health to kings.
To the end that things done may never be after questioned, These Acts
published in writing.
it is accustomed, and the consideration of the public vtility requires,
that they should be recorded; whereupon we thought it convenient to draw the
Mandate into writing, which we do especially for your sake, in regard you
fear malefactors, who murdered Thomas of holy memory, late Archbishop of
Canterbury, proceeded to the execution of that unlawful act upon occasion of
your anger and distemperature. In which action nevertheless you have of your
own accord in our presence made your purgation, that you neither commanded nor
wished him to be killed, and when you heard the report thereof, you
exceedingly sorrowed. Wherefore from this instant feast of Pentecoste to the end
of one whole year, you shall give so much money, as by the judgment of the
Templar Knights, will maintain 200. soldiers twelve months for defense of
the holy land.

Touching your self, you shall from Christmas next three years are fully
accomplished, take the Cross, and in proper person undertake your journey
thitherwarde by Gods conduction the next summer, unless you stay by appointment
of our Lord the Pope or his Catholic successor.

But if upon urgent necessity you make war against the Saracens in Spain,
for the time you undergo that voyage, so long you may defer your journey to
Jerusalem. You shall not hinder Appeals nor suffer them to be hindered, but
that they may be freely made in Ecclesiastical causes unto the Pope of Rome
in good faith, without fraud or any ill intent, that causes may be handled by
his Holiness, and obtain their effects; yet so nevertheless as if you shall
have suspicion of any, they shall give you security, that they shall not
endeavor to iniure your self or your kingdom. You shall absolutely disanull
the custumes brought in during your time the Churches of your land. Concerning
the possessions of the Church of Canterbury, if any have bin taken away, you
shall restore them to that fullnes, wherein she enjoyed them a year before
the Archbishop departed England. Moreover you shall restore to the Clergy, and
Layetie of both sexes, peace and your gracious favor, with all the possessions
which they lost for the Archbishoppes sake. All this by the authority of our
Lord the Pope we inioyne you for remission of your sins, and command you to
observe the same without fraud or deceypte. This have you sworn in a great
Audience with reverence to the divine Majesty. Your son has likewise sworn
the same, excepting only what in particular concerned your self: and ye have
both sworn not to leave Pope Alexander and his Catholic Successors so long as
they shall use ye as they have used your Predecessors, and other Catholic
kings, And that this may be firmly recorded in the Roman Church, ye have
commanded this same to be confirmed with your seals.

Afterward the same Roger adds the Epistle of the Legates written at that
time to the Bishop of Reuenna declaring matters then handled in these words.


To the Reverent in Christ and our beeloued brother Gilbert by the grace of God
Archbishop of Rauenna, Albert by the divine goodness of the title of saint
Laurence in Lucina and Theodine of the title of saint Vital Preistes
Cardinals and Legates of the Apostolic Sea, what God has promised to such
as love him.
In regard we suppose you are desirous to hear of our state, and the good
success of the business commended to our charge, we thought convenient to
signify to your brotherhood by these letters how God has at this time dealte
with us, and wrought by the ministry of our unworthiness. Be ye therefore
certifyed, that after the renowned king of England knew by certain relation
that we were come within his Dominion, setting aside all obstacles of delay,
he presently returned from Ireland into England, lettinge pass the businesses
which then imported him, and from England arrived on the coaste of Normandy,
sending instantly sundry Messingers and honorable personages from us to
understand at what place we thought most conveniently to meet him and treat
of these affairs. It pleased us at length to meet at the Monastery of Sauyne,
that we might there confer, where we should be assisted by the prayers of
the Religious. We met there together, and there met with us many persons of
either order of his kingdom, and we treated as dilligently as we could of
what appertayned to the good of him, and the charge imposed on us. But not
aggreeing in all points, he departed from us, pretending to pass into
England, we expected, intending the next day to go to the City of Abryncke.
On the morrow, came to us the Bishop of Lizieux, with two Archdeacons, and
condescending to our request we passed on to the said City; whether on the
Sunday in which is fung vocem iucunditatis we assembled with very many persons
and they also with us: and with so much humility he accomplished what was
promised, as without all doubt we may beeleeue it was his work, who looks
on the earth and makes it tremble. Truly to declare how much he endeauored to
humble himself to God, and show his obedience to the Church, it is not a
matter in these few lines to be uttered, his deeds do sufficiently manifest
it, and hereafter will manifest it more fully, as we assuredly hope it will
appear.

First therefore not upon any constrainte or request of ours, but of his own
free will, he cleared his conscience by an oathe upon the holy Evangelists
concerning the death of Thomas of blessed memory late Archbishop of
Canterbury, swearing that he neither commanded nor wished that the Archbishop
should be killed, and upon the report thereof, he was exceedingly greiued.
Yet because the murder was committed, and he feared he gave occasion thereof,
for making satisfaction, he took this oathe. First he swore he would never
leave our Lord Pope Alexander and his Catholic successors, so long as they
used him like a Catholic and Christian king, and this also he caused his
son and heir to swear in the Charter of absolution for the death of blessed
Thomas. He swore likewise other things very necessary for the Clergy and
Layety all which in order, according as he swore them, we dilligently
recorded in the Charter of his absolution. Other matters he likewise promised
of his own accord not convenient to be delivered in writing. But this we
have written, that you may see his obedience to Allmighty God, and how he is
far more encouraged then hitherto he has bin, to the service of his
Savior. Know beesides that his son concerning the unlawful customs has
made oathe jointly with him. Moreover what was there done he resolved to
iterate again as Cane more publickely in a greater assembly of people, to the
end there might never be question made to the contrary. Lastly be released
the Bishops of the promise they gave for observing the customs, and promised
himself never hereafter to exact them.

Thus far the Legates Epistle* then proceeds the Author.

On the morrow the aforesaid Cardinals celebrated there a great Counsel
together with the Archbishop, The Counsel in Normandy.
Bishops and Clergy of Normandy, and there concluded and joined all firmly
and inuiolably to observe these decrees following.

The Decrees published at Abryncke by Theodine and Albert Cardinals.
FIrst, that no children shall be admitted to the government of those Churches
and the administration of them whereunto appertains the Cure of souls.

Item the children of Preistes shall not be placed in their fathers Churches.

Item Lay men shall have no part of the oblations of the Church.

Item Churches shall not be committed to annual Vicars.

Item Preistes of great Churches who have liuinges sufficient therefore, shall
be enforced to maintain under them each one another priest.

Item no Preistes shall be ordained without a certain title.

Item let no Church be farmed at on annual rent.

Item let nothing of the third part of the tithes be taken from him who
serves the Church.

Item let such as have Tithes by inheritance be lycenced to give them at their
pleasures to any being meet and able Clearkes, upon condition that after
the^, the Thythes ruturne to the Churches to which by law they beelong.

Let not any man enter into Religion, whilst his wife remains in the world,
nor on the contrary side, unless they both exceed the age of ability for use
of marriage.

Item in the Aduent of our Lord let all who can, but especially Clearkes and
soldiers, fast, and be commanded to abstain from flesh.

Item let not Clearkes be appointed judges especially to administer the
jurisdiction of Secular powers, and who presume to do the contrary, let them
be excluded from their Ecclesiastical Benefyces.

Item concerning the new books of the Excommunicated, and the goods of the
dying which preistes take, with the blessings of the espoused and Baptism,
and xvliii. exacted for the Absolution of the Excommunicated, nothing was
perfected, because the Bishops of Normandy would not receive the Decree.

In the same Counsel the Archbishop of Thomas challenged the Archbishoppricke
of Dole to beelong of right to his Archbishoppricke, affirming no Archbishoppes
seat ought to be there; but the Clearckes of Dole did constantly contradict
it. Hitherto concerning matters handled there by the Legates; who, before
they departed, received these letters from Pope Alexander for reconciliation of
the Church of Canterbury being polluted with so enormyous a sacrilege.

[Wee command ye that ye cause the Church of Chanterbury to be reconciled,
The reconciliation of the Church of Canterbury.
yet in that sort as the sacrament of the former Dedication be not again
reiterated; but as it has bin accustomed in the Church of saint Peeter, let it
only be sprinkled, with holy water.] Thus Pope Alexander to his Legates. And
the Legates again to the Clergy of the Church of Canterbury wrote in these
words.

[Wee rejoice, yea the whole congregation of the just which hears thereof
rejoiced, that God does manifest the death of Thomas of holy memory sometimes
your Archbishop to be so precious in his sight, and has made famous with
so many miracles the venerable memorial of him, as the sweetenes of his
oyntmentes has now dispersed it self almost over the whole body of his
Church, and his virtue is generally renowned from the East to the Weste; so
as they, who whilst he lived inuyed his prosperous successes, now he being
disburdened of this world, and translated as we beeleeue (his faith and
preistly zeal deserving the same) to the society of the higher powers,
reverence his virtue, giving due thanks to him, who works only great
miracles. Because therefore it seems convenient that the glorious miracles,
which multitudes of people report to be done among ye, may resound with
tha^kes-giuings and voices of praise in your public Church which the divine
grace has endowed with so bountiful a guyfte: It ought no longer upon
occasion of this execrable act forbear to glorify the Creator: Returning
therefore to you mutual salutations and willingly consenting to your devout
petition, we command your Brother hoode, that assembling together the Bisoppes
and Abbotes of your Province whom ye shall deem meet for this purpose, ye
do according to the rule of the Ecclesiastical solemnity accustomed among our
Predecessors, consecrate again your Church. And if any thing be wanting in
the solemnity, it may be supplied with the illustrous glory of the divine
miracles. As touching us, if there be ought in our power which we are able to
do for the good of your selves and your Church, what by Gods grace we may, we
will most readily perform.]

Thus wrote the Legates of the Apostolic Sea, who admonished thereof by Pope
Alexander, made dilligent inquiry of the miracles of the most glorious Martyr
Thomas, and send a most exact relation of them all to his Holiness, which being
thoroughly understood, he without delay wholly bent himself to perfect the
Martyrs solemn Canonization, This he wittnesseth in his letters afterward
indighted and to be recyted when we speak of his Canonization.

So therefore by how many miracles, by so many divine testimonies it is known
and made apparent by witnesses, that not only they, who for defense of the
Catholic faith suffer death, Every Bishop may have occasion of Martyrdom.
but such also as for conservation of the laws, rightes, and possessions of
the Church, offer themselves to the slaughter do a work most acceptable in
the sight of God and deserving crowns; which occasion of enduring Martyrdom
is not to be sought a far of from Infidells, but is always ready at hand to
every Bishop, if he laboreth in all respects to perform the duty of his
charge, Now the Legates returning back brought to the City the holy relics
of the late Martyr being the Brains of his head, that were dispersed on the
pauement of the Church, and also his coat imbrewed in his blood, which are to
this day religiously kept in the Church of saint Mary Mayor.

Famous me^ of the family of S. Thomas.
Thus having seen what appertains to the glory of the Martyr, we are not to
let pass in silence his fellow soldiers who followed him banished in his
seven years exile, being all famous and renowned men, much honored for their
glorious confession; whose excellent praises are severally set forth in the
book of the Vatican after Quadrilogus; where among them is first and
principally one by name and nation Lumbard of the country of Placentia an
excellent scholar, who was created Cardinal of the sacred Roman Church being
called from exile, and lastly made by the same Pope Archbishop of Beneuent.
Next is John of Salisbury a man of mauellous learning, and raised after the
Martyrdom of saint Thomas to the Bishoppricke of Charters. Then Robert an
Englishman created Bishop of Hereford. After him Reynold also of England
surnamed Lumbard preferred to the Bishoppricke of Bathe, whom we suppose to
be corruptly inserted, for we find him not any where in the Catalogue of the
Saints familiar frindes who followed him in his persecution, for whom, being
rather numbered among his enemies, Peter of Bloyes wrote an Apology, which
shall after appear. Geralde insueth, who was promoted to the Bishoppricke of
Couentry; and Huhge by nation a Roman who succeeded Geralde in his
Bishoppricke. Moreover Gilbertus Angelus afterward Bishop of Rochester. And
likewise Rafe made in his exile Deane of Rhemes. Lastly after others who were
honored with Ecclesiastical dignityes, is Hubert of Millane first instauled in
the Archbishoppricke of that Church, and after called to the high Pontifical
authority of the Church of Rome by the name of Urban the third. Others are in
like sort remembered as worthy of so great a father and Master, who, as they
were partakers of his passion, so were they of his glory. Such was the family
of this most famous man, not serving him to please the eye, but endowed with
like constancy as their Master in suffering laborious afflictions, truly
Apostolical men gloriously shyning with Apostolical forces, and therefore
reputed worthy to be promoted before others in Ecclesiastical honors.

Pope Alexander being refused by the Romans, and lying at Tusculan, sent from
thence these letters to the Archbishop of Biturees and the Bishop of Nyuers
upon occasion of the excommunication denounced by saint Thomas against the
before recyted Bishops of England.

Alexander, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his reverent brethren
the Archbishop of Biturees and the Bishop of Niuers sends greeting with
Apostolical benediction.
We suppose it is not unknown to your brotherhood, how Thomas of holy memory
late Archbishopp of Canterbury upon our commandment denounced the sentence of
excommunication against the Bishops of London and Salisbury; The Popes letter
for absolution of two English Bishops.
the which we ratifying and confirming corroborated the same with our
Apostolical authority: Now because the said Bishops, being both aged and
one of them sick, cannot travel to our presence, we have thought good to
commend to ye, of whose wisdom and honesty we are confident, their
absolution, for which the Messingers of Henry king of England, with the
Messingers also of the same Bishops have bin earnest suitors. Wherefore by our
Apostolical letters we command your brotherhoode, that if within one month
after the bears hereof return home; ye hear not our Legates have passed
the Aples, which Legates we have determined to send to those parts, as well
to understand the depth of that heinous offense lately committed, as also for
the king, absolve them from the bands of excommunication, taking first,
according to the manner of the Church, an oathe of them to obey our Mandate;
the sentence of Suspension, given upon the same cause for which they were
lastly excommunicated, remaining nevertheless still in the former vigor. And if
it appears unto ye that the Bishop of Salisbury by reason of his sickness
cannot travel to ye, then (which will please us right well) that ye will
personally go unto him; or if ye cannot go, then that ye will send over
some sufficient men, whom we and ye may confidently trust, who taking first
an oathe of him publicly in the face of the Church to obey our Mandate, may
thereupon absolve him. But if you brother Archbishop cannot personally execute
this, then do you brother Bishopse taking with you the Abbot of Pontianacke,
carefully perform it according to these our directions. Dated at Tusculan 8.
Kalend. Maij.

Hitherto Pope Alexander as it is rehearsed in Rogeres Chronicle.

Now amydd all this, The Murderers of S. Thomas fly to the Pope for their
remedy
these sacrilegious murderers of the Martyr, who hitherto remained in the
furthest part of England, on the lands beelonging to one of them, when they
saw all men fly their company, yea and that the very unreasonable creatures
eschewed them as accursed, for dogs (albeeit hungry) abhorred to eat the
bread they gave them, as taynted with the poison of excommunication, and above
all, their own consciences guylty of this great sin enforcing them
principally to detest themselves, calling on the Saint whom they slaughtered,
they sought mercy at his hands to whom themselves had bin most unmerciful and
cruel. Wherefore amyd their showers of tears and clouds of sorrow, there
shyned out to them a beam of hope for obtaining pardon, and one only way
appeared, being this, to travel unto Rome to Pope Alexander Christ's Vicar,
and falling down at his feet, and opening the enormity of their offense, to
receive from him the medicyne he would apply to them. They came to Rome, and
fled to that Pastor, whom, he from whom he received that supreme power, had
taught not to kill and spoil, but carry on his shoulders the lost sheep: where
that renowned Pastor byndeth up what is broken, strengthens what is infirm,
seeks out what is lost, and recouereth what is cast away; this wise
Archsurgeon pouring oil and wine into the deep hearts of the wounded so
waked them up, as he delivers them from all evils that may happen. They are
therefore enjoined for remission of this intolerable sacrilege, to travel
beeyo^d the seas to the regions which were glorified with our Saviors
presence, even to those places, that, where Christ wrought our salvation in the
midst of the earth by shedding his blood for the redemption of mankind, they
who had most wickedly shed the most innocent blood, might there be purged
with the blood of his passion.

Their death who killed S. Thomas.
In their journey, one of them, and he the cheifest who encouraged the rest,
and first wounded the most holy man, whose name was William Tracy, coming into
Calabria and remaining a while at Consentia, being there taken with a grievous
infirmity of his body, was compelled to stay, the other three goeing on as they
were enjoined. So truly for an example of the justice of Allmighty God he
could pass no farther then Italy, that the Western world might be
admonished, and none should hereafter dare for fear of so severe a
punishment to lay rash and violent hands on our lords anointed: For God
stroke him with so terrible a sickness, as his flesh rotting, and his very
synewes and bones appearing, the same being dissolved from the joints, either
of it self fell away, or was haled of with his hands, being impatient of his
grief, and his own executioner, yet ever until the very last gasp imploring
the assistance of saint Thomas, whom himself had martyred. All which being
published to the Christian world by the Bishops of Consentia, is affirmed in
the end of the often recyted history of Quadrilogus, whereunto all other
writers, who report the life of saint Thomas agree. And that not only he who
dyed at Consentia but also the other three who sailed to Jerusalem lived not
above three years after they had martyred the Saint, is constantly alleged in
the aforementioned history; so as they exceeded not the limitts of the next
year following. For they being upon the Popes commandment restrained in a
place called the Black-Mountaine, a prison of penance, did there as penitents
finish their days, and were graced with a seemly buryall before the door of
the Temple with this inscription (as Roger says) over them. Here lie the
wreched men who martyred blessed Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. So let
this be the period of this years history.

AN. DOM. 1173.
Next follows the year 1173. with the sixth Indiction. The Cannozation of S.
Thomas.
Whenas Pope Alexander upon return of the Legates, late sent to the king of
England, hearing of them what miracles were wrought by God with a mighty hand
and a high arm in Thomas the new Martyr, and thereupon taking advice with his
brethren the Cardinals of the sacred Roman Church, by the general consent of
them all, Cannonized him among the number of the holy Martyrs. Treating
therefore hereof, let us first make dilligent search of precedent matters.

After this blood so shed (says Edward) God by many miracles published his
sanctity, but at the first they lay concealed, as not purchaceing creditte,
till by the multitude of them the impiety of his aduersarys was vanquished, and
the mouths of the wicked stopped: for so far truly the number and greatness of
his miracles grew manifest, as in their open show, saint Thomas seemed not
only nothing inferior to other renowned Saints, but also excelled them: as
wittnesseth Peeter of Bloyes an eye witness, and John of Salisbury sometimes the
holy Martyrs secretary: for Peeter with great confidence writes thus to
Richard Bishop of Siracusa, saying: [Reioice England, and let the Western
worlk triumph, because the East has visited us from high: India and the
Eastern regions gloryed in Thomas the Apostle; But he has respect to the
Wersterne Church who dwells in heaven and looks down on the humble; God
has beestowed on England our Thomas; we envy not India for their Thomas; let
Thomas the Apostle possess India, Let Thomas our Martyr inhabit England, that
by these two witnesses of Christ even from the rising of the sun to the
setting thereof the name of our Lord may be praised. Some there are who travel
into India to gain the suffrages of the blessed Apostle; so long a pilgrimage
is to paynfull for me, my Thomas suffices me. He touched our lords side,
and the piercinges of the nails, and because he saw, beelieued: Blessed is
he who not seeing, beelieued, nor ever doubted, but offered hinselfe to Christ
and for Christ a sacrifice. I labor not to compare a Martyr with an Apostle, an
Apostle ever excelling a Martyr; but it is glorious for us to enjoy a Martyr,
who bearing the name of an Apostle, imitateth, or rather exceeds an Apostle
in miracles. The Apostle is not offended, because our Lord himself is not
offended with Apostles and Martyrs, if at any time the holy Ghost pours out
himself more fully often on any in the operation of virtues: and says our
Lord, you shall do these, and greater then these.] Thus Peeter recyted by us
to declare the famous miracles so wrought, which God in his new Saint then
showed. But let us hear John of Salisbury somewhat moved against Pope
Alexander, as seeming too slow in the Canonizatio^ of the Martyr; since God
abundantly published (as it appeared) by so great and so many miracles, that
he had received him into heaven among the number of his Martyrs. Yet the Pope
was to be excused if he deferred the same until the return of the
Cardinals his Legates, by whose relation he might exactly and securely
understand all. Nevertheless let us see Salisburys complaynt poured out with
great assurance to the Legate of the Apostolic Sea.

To his reverent Lord and most dear father William by the grace of God
Archbishop of Senon, Legate of the Apostolical Sea, John of Salisbury sends
greeting with the obedience of his most ready devotion.
Allthough a huge desolation has confounded hitherto the English Church, John
of Salisburys Epistle of the miracles wrought b^ S. Thoma^
her sorrow neuerthles has now for the most part bin altered into joy, and
her lamentation changed with a blessed and pleasing transmutation into
Ca^ticles: for miracles so seldom heard of are at our Martyrs memorial so
often showed, as others otherwhere heard of can hardly be compared to his: for
as in every thing his noble mind ever endeauored to excel all who lived in his
age; so now (that I may speak it by the leave of other Saints) he exceeds
others of whom we have read or heard of in miraculous operations, which I am
easily persuaded are therefore effected, that God may stir up in many of these
in our parts of the world, faith, not laid asleep but almost extinguished,
that he might more soundy confirm charity, and stop the mouths of the
wicked who detracted the holy man in his life, and for private hatred
persecuted the cause of Christ. For who can now misdoubt the Christian doctrine
to be otherwise then true and faithful, since he rewards with so great
felicity a man known to us, and constant to him? Who, unless misled by the
devil, will say the cause was unjust, the Patron whereof God has crowned with
so great a glory? Many have questiond whether our Lord the Popes title, for
which we contend, be grounded on justice, but this glorious Martyr has
cleared it from any suspicion of scysme, because had he bin a supporter of
scysme, he could never have shined with so great miracles. Moreover he was a
man of that excellent wisdom, as he could not easily be supplanted with
error in a matter so near concerning his soul.

I should assuredly very much maruayle why our Lord the Pope has not already
commanded him to be numbered in the Catalogue of Martyrs, but that I remember I
have read in the Ecclesiastical history, that when Pylate sending a relation
of proceedinges asked advise of Tyberius Caesar, if Christ who had don so many
and so great miracles, and was of very many worshipped as God, ought to be
honored as God, the Senate being asked by the Emperor their opinion, answered,
he was verily to be reverenced as God, but that diverse of sundry Provinces
had already without the Senates authority presumed to do it: which was truly
by the divine providence so answered, that the Deity of Christ, whose name was
to be preached to the Jews and Gentilles, should not seem to be^ subject to
any earthly power, neither the Gentills vaunt it was obtained by petition,
which against their wills they were compelled to hear. Because our Lord has
reigned, let the people be angry, and the earth rejoice wherein Christ's Church
is founded. And so verily I think it was the divine will that this Martyrs
glory should neither by Po^tificall decree nor royal authority be advanced,
but be established by the power of Christ, whose honor during his life he
labored to enlarge: for he ever delivered himself, that he would have
Christ's honor still preserved, when he treated with the king concerning his
peace. And shall not Christ again do the same for him? God forbid that truth
should not fulfill her promises. We read in the Acts of Apostells: They
received the holy Ghost: And shall the Council of Apostells any way
contradicte the same? Undoubtedly where God is the Author, in vain is required
the authority of a Superior. If any desires to eclipse the glory of this so
great a Martyr, whosoever he be, before we beelieue him, let him work
greater, or at the least the like Mirackles, otherwise he may be supposed to
sin against the holy Ghost, whose works he fears not to detracte.]

Thus John of Salisbury to Senon Legate of the Apostolic Sea, before
Alexander had cannonized S. Thomas among the number of the holy Martyrs, which
this very year he did.

So he, who greeuing that the Cannonization of the Martyr was delayed, which
God by so many and so great beams of Miracles shyning from heaven had now
showed to be divinely established from above, did not think it needful to
be supported with humane authority, according to that of the Apostle? Who
shall accuse against the Elect of God? God it is who iustifyeth, who shall then
condemn? Yet nevertheless the authority of the Church is necessary to be
required for learning the certainty of the miracles, least any deceytes or
impostures by stealth surprise us. So the determination of divine works ought
to be governed by the Churches censure, according to the same Apostels saying:
The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: And that of saint
John: The Churches necessary ministry in probation of Saints.
Prove the spirits if they are of God. Which judgment of the Church rests
principally in her visible head, whose sentence is first to be expected in
such an examination.

Wherefore, as has bin said, upon return of the Legates, after due
consideration and examination had of marters related by them, this very, year
in the sixth Indiction, Pope Alexander being at Signia, with rightes of
solemnityes cannonized the holy Martyr saint Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury;
of which cannonization the written book of the Vatican rehearses in the life
of Alexander these words. [Meane while, when most blessed Thomas, the glory of
the English, shyned in the brightness of miracles, and not only his freindes,
but also his persecutors beesought pardo^ne of their sins, who seekinge these
means of salvation continually flocked to his Church; the Pope of Rome at the
instance of the people and Clergy of England, by Apostolical authority
cannonized the same Martyr, and commanded him to be numbered among the Saints:
for on the day of the Purification of our Blessed Lady, assembling together at
Signia the Bishops and Abbottes of Campania, S. Thomas Canonized,
he celebrated a solemn Mass especially to his honor, and ordained that the
memory of his passion should be for ever kept 4. Kalend. Ianuarij. Whereupon
the Church of the west tryumphed in marvelous great joy, and the glorious
Martyrs name increased in the duplication of his virtues; so far forth, as by
foreign nations of renowned he grew more renowned; Allmighty God has
apparently by his merittes raised the dead, given sight to the blind, hearing
to the deaf, and to the lame their limbs, he has cleansed Leapers, healed
the sick, cast out devils, with many other rare miracles, which God would
have miraculously wrought by him. Whereupon very many of the faithful have for
his honor and praise to the glory of our Creator buylt Churches; and endowed
them with possessions and guiftes.] Hitherto there. But let us look into the
Apostolical letters written concerning his cannonization.

Alexander Bishop servant of the servants of God to his beeloued children the
Prior and Monks of the Church of Canterbury salutation with Apostolical
benediction.
All Christian people are to rejoice for the miracles of that holy and reverent
man Thomas lately your Archbishop; The Popes letters for the Canonization of
S. Thomas.
but ye above all others ought to be replenished with so much the more ample
joy and exultation, by how much the more ye are oftener eye witnesses of his
miracles, and your Church especially deserves to be glorified with his most
holy body. And we considering the renown of his merittes, whereby in his life
he was worthily famous, and being most certainly assured of his miracles, not
only by the common and public report, but also by the relation of our
wellbeeloued brethren Albert of the Tytell of saint Laurence in Lucina and
Theodine of the title of saint Vitalis Preistes Cardinals and Legates of the
Apostolical Sea, and lekewise of diverse other persons, have solemnly
cannonized the foresaid Archbishop in the beeginning of the fast with a great
assembly of the Clergy and Layety in the Church, having first had deliberate
counsel thereof with our brethren, and have decreede that he shall be numbered
in the Catalogue of the holy Martyrs, commanding by the Apostolic authority as
well your selves as all the faithful thorough out England, that ye celebrate
every year with due reverence his feast day wherein he finished his life with
a glorious passion. Moreover because it nobly so deserves, and is most
expedient for ye, that his holy body be shryned with all devout reverence
and honor, we do by the Apostolical authority command your discretion, that
assembling together the Clergy and Layety, ye do upon a festival day with a
devout, religious, and solemn procession, place his body worthily in some
Altar, or else seating it in some comely enclosure (as it is beehouefull) ye
raise it up on high, and endeavor hereafter with your holy prayers to obtain
of our Lord his patronage for the salvation of the faithful, and peace of the
universal Church.

Fare ye well, Dated at Signia 4. Id. Martij.

Thus to the Clergy of the Church of Canterbury. There were also the same day
other general letters written to all Christian people in these words.

General letters for the Canonization of saint Thomas.
[England sweetly smeelleth with the fragrant odor and virtue of signs which
Allmighty God works by the merittes of the holy and reverent man Thomas
sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury; and the whole Christian religion of the
faithful every where rejoices, because that he who is marvelous and
glorious in his Saints, has after his death renowned his Saint, whose
laudable life shyned with merittes, and lastly was finished with the Martyrdom
of a most noble combat. And allthough no man can make doubt of his sanctity,
who considers his praise worthy conversation, and weygheth his glorious
passion; Our Redeemer and Savior nevertheless would have the ensigns of his
sanctity shine with magnificent miracles, that he who with the constancy of an
invincible virtue suffered for Christ tribulations and dangers, may now be
known by all to have received in that eternal blessedness the triumph of his
labor and combat. And we truly haueing heard the innumerable and great
miracles which the whole multitude of the faithful declare to be daily
wrought by the merittes of that holy man, and moreover being especially
certifyed hereof, not without our too great contentment, by our beeloued
brethren Albert of the tytell of saint Laurence in Lucina, and Theodine of the
title of saint Vitalis Preistes Cardinals and Legates of the Apostolic Sea,
who more perfectly discovered those miracles, as having bin near the place
where they were wrought, and giving credit as we ought to the testimony of
diverse other persons, have solemnly in the Church, a great assembly of the
Clergy and Layety being present, in the beeginning of the Fast with the
deliberate advise of our brethren, cannonized the said Bishop, and decreede
that he should be numbered in the Catalogue of Saints. Wherefore we admonish
all in general, and by the power that we enjoy streyghtly command ye, that
ye celebrate yearly with solemnity the festival day of the foresaid
glorious Martyr being the day of his passion, and labor by our devout
prayers unto him to purchase remission of your sins; that he who for Christ
suffered in his life exile, and in his death by virtue of his constant passion,
Martyrdom, being now daily solicited with the suffrages of faithful, will
make intercession to God for us. Dated at Signia 4. Id. Martij.] There are
afterward extant in that volume of Epistles, Apostolical letters sent to the
Bishop of Auersane, and letters patents and circular to all Bishops of the
Catholic Church. And lastly the pain pursues the sin. Gods reverence upon
the king of England for the death of S. Thomas.


For king Henry the younger when he could not obtain of his father one City
in England or Normandy for himself and his Queen the daughter of the king of
France to inhabit in, extremely moved with this denial, raised a most
unnatural and terrible war against the king his father, wherein not only his
wife and all his sons together with his nobility, subjects, servants, and
bosom freindes conspiring, rebelled; but also the kings of France and
Scotland, the Earls of Flaunders, Poytiers, and others confederating, joined
all their powers against him: and was, originally by his owe children, brought
into extreme miseryes and troubles, who had before raised an ungodly
persecution against saint Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury his spiritual
father. Hereupon ensued huge slaughters of his people, and he like an other
David terryfyed with the powers of those Absalom's was enforced to fly for
succor to the Pope against them, as saint Thomas was constrained to appeal to
the Pope against him. O wonderful mutability of worldly fortune! or rather, o
marvelous judgment of Allmighty God! He that was wont so victoriously to
preuaille against all his enemies, in so much as he said himself, he was
every day able to conquer a castle, is now plunged in these necessityes. The
Pope assisteth the king of England against his sons and Adversaries.
But Pope Alexander drawing saint Peeters swoard excommunicateth without remedy
of Appeal, unless they return to obedience, his rebellious wife, sons and
subjects, wherein Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, and Rotrode Archbishop of
Roane as well by godly discreet and perswasiue letters, as by thundering out
this dreadful sentence, labored to reduce them to natural and dutiful
obedience: but the king of France was in that hight of displeasure against the
father, and lincked with so straight a league confirmed by oath unto the
sons, that earthly hopes on all sides vanishing, he was left for his only
refuge to the prayers and patronage of S. Thomas the Martyr, whom he had
before afflicted with so many iniuryes.

ANNO DOMINI 1174.
Wherefore An. Dom. 1174. commending Normandy with all his Dominions to the
protection of God and his Martyr, he sailed over into England, and setting
aparte all other important matters, traveled toward Canterbury, before the
entrance whereof, The kings admirable penance at the shryne of S. Thomas.
as soon as he discovered the Metropolytan Church, wherein the blessed Martyrs
body rested, changed from the Majesty of a king to the show of a most silly
man, with naked feet and naked body, beesides one only contemptible coat upon
his naked skin, with unspeakable devotion and humility, like another David
on his bare feet in the sight of all the people passed his pilgrimage through
the durty ways and streets: thus he whose power was terrible to kingdoms
and Nations, now dreading and trembling with deep sighs and lamentations came
most poorly to the Martyrs sepulcher, and there beestowed a whole day and
night in fasting, waching, and prayer; then assembling together the Bishops
with the sacred Convent of the Monks, and submissiuely bowing down his head
into the Martyrs tomb, God and his Martyr beehoulding it, received upon his
naked skin from every Bishop five, and from all the Religious above
foureskore blows with Disciplines; at the sight whereof all the standers by
broke out into abundance of tears: Moreover the king, as truly penitent for
his offense, and to give full satisfaction to the Martyr, did for the honor and
devotion which he owed him, abrogate again all his wicked customs, being
the causes of this dissension, enacting for the time to come just ordinances.
All this being therefore so deuoutely and humbly accomplished, the king on the
morrow as a pilgrimme, after celebration of the Mass of a Martyr before the
relics of this Martyr, returned submissiuely, as he came, on his naked and
durty feet without receiving any sustenance, having a singular hope shortly to
recover under the patronage of the Martyr redress of his misfortunes. Neither
was it a vain expectation; for being with such religious and severe, penance
reconcyled to the martyr, Allmighty God by the Martyrs intercession and meritts
rescued him from these calamitys; ye a maruaillous thing to tell, as well for
the Martyrs renown, The kings enemies conquered by the Martyrs merits.
as the kings effectual penance, the same day being Sattursday, and the
same hour, when as the Mass was said in honor of the Martyr, and (the Saint
being as it were pacifyed) the king licenced to depart; at the very instant
of the divine sacrifice (as the world does wittnes and the king himself
confessed) the king of Scotts, one of his greatest enemies, armed with a huge
host of men, straggling a side from his mighty power, was surprised without
wound or blow by a few soldiers of no great account, which yet remained
faithful to king Henry the father. Neither only was this king as a prisoner in
this sort subjected to his mercy, but all the other adverse forces also
shortly vanquished or vanished, his wife and children reduced to obedience, and
the clouds of misfortunes thus dispersed, king Henry the father as before
victoriously shyned. All which as he attributed only to Allmighty God and his
Martyr, so humbly commending my self to the mercys of the one, and the
patronage of the other, I here conclude this Translation.

FIN.

