ARTICLES To be inquired of, in the first Metropoliticall visitation, of the
most Reverend Father, GEORGE, by Gods providence, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Primate of all England; in, and for the Dioces of (...) in the year of our
Lord God, (...) and in the fifth year of his Graces Translation.

HEB DDIEV HEB DDIM


LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard.

The Tenor of the Oath, to be Ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you, and every of you, shall duly consider, and
diligently enquire, of all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and
that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain, or fear of
displeasure, or malice set aside; you shall present all and every such person,
of, or within your Parish, as has committed any offense, or made any default
mentioned in these, or any of these Articles; or which are vehemently suspected
or defamed of any such offense or default: Wherein you shall deal uprightly and
fully; neither presenting, nor sparing to present any, contrary to truth:
having in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain
truth, and to suppress vice. So help you God, and the holy Contents of this
Book.

Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches possessions.
1 IMprimis, whether have you in your several Churches and Chapels, the whole
Bible of the largest volume, and the Book of Common Prayer, lately set forth
by his Majesty's authority, both fairly and substantiallie bound: a Font of
Stone, set up in the ancient usual place: a convenient and decent Communion
Table, with a Carpet of Silk, or some other decent stuff, continually laid
upon the Table at time of Divine service, and a fair Linen cloth upon the
same, at the time of the receiving of the holy Communion. And whether is the
same table placed in such convenient sort within the chancell or church, as
that the Minister may be best heard in his Prayer and administration, and that
the greatest number may communicate: And whether is it so used out of time of
Divine service, as is not agreeable to the holy use of it; and by sitting on
it, throwing Hats on it, writing on it, or is it abused to other prophaner
uses: and are the Ten Commandments set upon the Eastend of your church or
chapel where the people may best see and read them, and other sentences of
holy Scripture, written on the walls likewise for that purpose?

2 Item, whether have you in your said church or chapel, a convenient seat
for your Minister to read service in, together, with a comely pulpet set up in
a convenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for tho same, a comely
large Surplice, a fair Communion cup, with a cover of Silver, a Flaggon of
Silver, Tin, or Pewter to put the Wine in, whereby it may be set upon the
Communion Table, at the time of the blessing thereof, with all other things and
ornaments necessary for the celebration of Divine Service, and administration
of the Sacraments? And whether have you a strong Chest for Alms for the poor,
with three Locks and Keys, and another chest for keeping the Books, and
Ornaments of the Church, and the Register Book. And whether have you a
Register Book in Parchment, for Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, and
whether the same be kept in all points, according to the Cannons in that
behalf provided? And whether have you in your said Church or Chancell, a
Table set, of the degrees wherein by Law Men are prohibited to marry?

3 Whether are your Church and Chapels, with the Chancels thereof, and your
parsonage or vicarage house, your Parish Almes-house and Church-house, in good
reparations: and are they employed to godly, and their right holy uses? Is your
Church, Chancell, and Chapel decently and comely kept, as well within as
without, and the seats well maintained, according to the 85. Cannon, in that
behalf provided? Whether your Churchyard be well fenced, and kept without
abuse: and if not, in whose default the same is, and what the defect or fault
is? And whether any person have incroached upon the ground of the Churchyard,
or whether any person or persons, have used any thing or place consecated to
holy use, profanely or wickedly?

4 Whether have you the Terrier of all the Gleabe Lands, Meadows, Gardens,
Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tiths
(whether within your Parish or without) belonging unto your parsonage or
vicarage, taken by the view of honest men in your said Parish? And whether the
same Terrier be laid up in ye Bishops Registery, and in whose hands any of them
are now. And if you have no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his
absence, with your Minister, are to make diligent inquiry and presentment of
the premises, and make, subscribe, and sign, the said Terrier, as aforesaid?

Concerning the Ministers.
1 Whether does your Minister, distinctly and reverently say Divine service
upon Sundaies and Holidaies, and other days appointed to be observed by the
book of Common Prayer; as Wednesdaies, and Fridaies, and the eeues of every
Sunday and Holiday, at fit and usual times? And does your Minister duly
observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies, prescribed in the said Book of
common Prayer, as well in reading public prayers and the Letany, as also in
administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the sick,
burying the dead, Churching of Women, and all other like Rites and Offices of
the Church, in such manner and form, as in the said Book of Common prayer he
is enjoined, without any omission or addition. And does he read the Book of
the last Cannons once yearly, and wear a Surplice according to the said
Cannons?

2 Does your Minister bid Holidaies and Fasting-daies, as by the Book of
Common Prayer is appointed? And does he give warning before hand to the
Parishioners, for the receiving of the holy Communion, as the two and twentieth
Canon requires: and whether he does administer the holy Communion so often,
and at such times, as that every Parishioner may receive the same, at the least
thrice in every year: whereof once at Easter, as by the Book of Common Prayer
is appointed? And does your Minister receive the same himself, on every day
that he administreth it to others, and use the words of Institution according
to the Book, at every time that the Bread and Wine is renewed, accordingly as
by the prouiso of the 21. Canon, is directed: And does he deliver the Bread and
Wine to every Communicant severally, Whether he has admitted to the holy
Communion, any Offender or Schismaticke, contrary to the 26. and 27.
constitutions, or received any to the communion being not of his own Cure, or
put any from the communion, who are not publicly infamous for any notorious
crime? Does he use the sign of the cross in Baptism, or baptize in any Bazon,
or other vessel, and not in the usual font, Or admit any Father to be
Godfather to his own child, or such which have not received the holy
Communion, or baptize any Children that were not borne in the parish, or
wilfully refuse to Baptize any Infant in his parish, being in danger, having
been informed of the weakness of the said child: and whether the child
dyed through his defaulte without Baptism?

3 Whether has your Minister married any without a King, or without Banes
published three several Sundays or Holidays in time of divine service, in
the several Churches or Chapels of their several abode, according to the
Book of common Prayer, or in times prohibited, albeit the Banes were thrice
published, without a License or dispensation from the Archbishop, the Bishop of
the Diocese, or his Chancellor, first obtained in that behalf? Or not betwixt
the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoone, or have married any in any
private house, or if the parties be under the age of 21. years, before their
parents or governors have signified their consent unto him?

4 Does he refuse to bury any, which ought to be interred in Christian burial,
or defer the same longer then he should, or bury any in Christian burial,
which by the constitutions of the Church of England, ought not to be so
interred?

5 Is your Minister a preacher allowed? If yea, then by whom. If not Whether
does he procure some who are lawfully licensed, to preach monthly amongst you
at the least?

6 Does your Minister (being licenced,) preach usually according to the
Cannons, either in his own Cure, or in some other Church or Chapel near
adjoining, where no Preacher is, and how often he has been negligent in that
behalf, and does he Preach standing, and with his Hat off? Or whether does he
or his Curate upon every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read an homily, or
some part thereof, according as he ought to do: or in case he be not
licensed to Preach, does he take upon him to preach or expound the
Scriptures in his own Cure, or elsewhere: If so, then you are to present the
same, the time and place, when, and where he did it.

7 Does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King James, and for
the Queens Majesty, the Prince, and all their Royal Progeny, with addition of
such style and Titles as are due to his Highness, and exhort the people to
obedience to his Majesty, and all Magistrates in authority under him?

8 Is your Minister continualy resident upon his Benfice, and how longtime has
he been absent, and in case he be licensed to be absent: whether does he cause
his Cure to be sufficiently supplied, according to the Cannons: or in case he
has another Benefice, whether does he supply his absence by a Curate
sufficiently licenced to preach in that Cure where he himself is not resident.
Or otherwise, in case the smalnesse of the Living cannot find a Preaching
Minster, does he Preach at both his Benefices usually?

9 Does your Minister or Curate, serve any more Cures then one: If yea, then
what other Cure does he serve, and how far are they distant?

10 Does your Minister every Sunday and Holliday, before Evening Prayer, for
half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons of
his Parish, in the Ten Commandments, Articles of the Belief, and in the
Lords Prayer, and the Sacrament, according as it is prescribed in the
Catechism, set forth in the Book of Common Prayer?

11 Does your Minister in the Rogation days, go in perambulation of the
circuit of the Parish, saying and using the Prayers, Suffrages, and
Thanksgiving to God, appointed by Law, according to his duty, thanking God for
his blessings, if there be plenty on the earth: Or otherwise, to pray for his
grace and favor, if there be a fear of scarsity?

12 Has your Minister admitted any Woman, begotten with child in adultry or
Fornication, to be Churched without license of the ordinary?

13 Has your Minister or any other Preacher, baptized children, churched any
woman, or ministered the holy Communion in any private house, otherwise then by
Law is allowed?

14 Does your Minister, being a Preacher, endeavor and labor diligently to
reclaim the Popish Recusants in his parish from their errors, (if there be any
such abiding in your parish.) Or whether is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, over
conversant with, or a favorer of Recusants, whereby he is suspected not to be
sincere in Religion?

15 Has your Minister taken upon him, to appoint any public or private
Feasts, Prophecies, or exercises, not approved by Law, or public authority, or
has used to meet in any private house or place, with any person or persons,
there to consult how to impeach or deprave the Book of common prayer, or the
Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England: If yea, then you shall present
them all?

16 Has your Minister stayed the publication of any excommunications or
suspicions, or does he every half year denounce in his Parish church, all
such of his parish as are excommunicated, and persevere therein without seeking
to be absolved or does he wittingly and willingly keep company with such as
are excommunicate: And has he admitted into your church any person
excommunicate, without a certificate of his absolution from the Ordinary, or
other competent Judge?

17 Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from
time to time call upon his Parishioners to give somewhat, as they can spare to
godly and charitable uses, especially when they make their Testaments?

18 Whether your Minister or any having taken holy Orders, being now silenced
or suspended, or any other person of your knowledge, or as you have heard, hold
any conuenticles, or does preach in any place, or use any other form of Divine
service then is appointed in the Book of Common prayer: If yea, then you are
to present their names, and with whom?

19 Whether is your Curate licensed to serve, by the Bishop of this Diocese,
or by any other, and by whom?

20 Does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his apparel, as
by the 47. Cannon is enjoined: and is he of sober behavior, and one that does
not use such bodily labor, as is not seemly for his sunction and calling?

21 Is your Minister noted or defamed, to have obtained his Benefice or his
orders, by Symony, or any other way defamed, to be Symoniacall person, or any
way noted to be a Schismaticke, or scismaticallie affected, or reputed to be
an incontinent person, or does table or lodge any such in his house: or is he a
frequenter of Tauernes, Innes, or Ale houses, or any place suspected for ill
rule: Or is he a common Drunkard, a common Gamster, or player at Dice, a
Swearer, or one that applies him self not at his study, or is otherwise
offensive and scandalous to his function or Ministry?

22 Does your Preacher or Lecturer read Divine service, and Minister the
Sacraments twice a year at least in his own person, according to the Cannons?

Schoole-Maisters.
23 Does any in your Parish take upon him to teach School, without License of
the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the Religion now established? And does
he bring his Scholars to the Church, to hear Divine service, and Sermons?
And does he instruct his Scholars in the grounds of the Religion now
established in this Church of England, and is he careful and diligent to
benefit his Scholars in learning?

Parish Clearkes and Sextons.
24 Have you a fit Parish Clearke, aged twenty years at least, of honest
conversation, able to read and write? Whether are his and the Sextons wages
paid without fraud, according to the ancient custom of your Parish: if not,
then by whom are they so defrauded or denied? By whom are they chosen? and
whether the said Clearke be approved by the Ordinary? and has he taken an
Oath, as in such cases is fit and required: and is he diligent in his Office,
and serviceable to the Minister, and does he take upon him to meddle with any
thing above his Office: as Churching of women, burying the dead, or such like?

25 Does your Clarke or Sexton keep the Church clean, the doors locked? Is
any thing lost or spoiled in the Church, through his default? does he suffer
any unseasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in your Church? Or does he
(when any is passing out of this life) neglect to tole a Bell, having notice
thereof.

Concerning the Parishoners.
1 Whether any of your Parishioners, being sixeteene years of age or
upwards, or others lodging or commonly resorting to any House within your
Parish, do wilfully absent themselves from your Parish Church, upon Sondayes or
Holidaies, at Morning and Evening Prayers? Or who come late to Church, and
depart from Church, before service be done upon the said days? Or who do not
reverently behave themselves during the time of Divine service, devoutly
kneeling, when the general confession of sins, the Letany, the ten
Commandments, and al Prayers and Collects are read, and using al due and lowly
reverence when the blessed Name of the Lord Jesus Christ is mentioned, and
standing up when the Articles of the Belief are read; or who do cover their
head, in the Church during the time of Divine service, unless it be in case of
necessity, in which case they may wear a Nightcap or coyfe? Or who do give
themselves to babbling, talking, or walking, and are not attentive to hear the
word preached, or read: or reading, or praying, during the time aforesaid?
Whether any of your parish being of sixteen years of age or upwards, do not
receive the holy communion in your Church thrice every year: whereof once of
Easter, and whether they do not devoutly kneel at the receiving thereof?

2 Whether any of your Parishioners, being admonished thereof, do not send
their Children, Servants, and Apprentizes, to the Minister, to be Catechized
upon such Sundaies and Holidaies as are appointed? Or whether any of them do
refuse to come; or if they come, refuse to learn those instructions set forth
in the Book of common prayer.

3 Whether any of your parish do entertain within their house, any soiourner,
common guests, or other persons, who refuse to frequent Divine service, or
receive the holy communion, as aforesaid? Present their names, their
qualities, or conditions.

4 What Recusant Papists are there in your parish? present their names,
qualities, or conditions? whether keep they any Schoolemaister in their house,
which comes not to church to hear Divine service and receive the Communion?
What is his Name, and how long has he taught there, or else where?

5 Whether any of the said Popish Recusants, do labor to seduce and withdraw
others from the Religion now established? Or instruct their Families or
children in popish Religion: or refuse to entertain any especially in place of
greatest service, or trust, but such as concur with them in their papistry?

6 Now long have the said Popish Recusants abstained from divine service, or
from the communion, as aforesaid?

7 Is there any in your parish that retain undefaced, or sell, utter, or
disperse, any popish Books or Writings, or other Books, Libels, or writings
of any Sectuaries, touching the Religion, State, or Government Ecclesiastical
of this Kingdom of England, or keep any Ornaments of superstition uncancelled
or defaced?

8 Whether have you any in your Parish, which heretofore being Popish
Recusants or Sectuaries, have since reformed themselves, and come to Church to
heart Divine Service, and receive the Sacraments: If yea, then who they are?
And how long since have they so reformed themselves? And whether they still
remain and abide in that conformity?

9 Is there any in your Parish that refuse to have their Children Baptized, or
themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking
exception against him, and what causes or exceptions do they allege; or have
any married Wines refused to come to church, according to the Book of common
Prayer, to give God thanks after their Childbirth, for their safe
deliverance? And whether do any of, or in your Parish, refuse to have their
children Baptized in your parish church, according to the form prescribed in
the Book of common Prayer?

10 Whether any of your Parish having a Preacher to their parson, Vicar, or
Cudite, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to other places to
hear other Preachers? Or whether any of your parish do communicate or baptize
their Children in any other parish?

11 What persons within your parish, for any offense, contumacy, or crime, of
Ecclesiastical Conusance do stand excommunicate? present their names, and for
what cause they are excommunicated, and how long they have so stood, and what
parson or persons do writingly and usually keep them company?

12 Whether any, not being in orders, do execute any priestlie or ministerial
office, in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, and what be their names?

13 Whether any in your parish that having heretofore taken upon him the order
of Priest-hoode or Deacon, has since relinquished the same, and lives a
Layman, neglecting his vocation?

14 Have any person in your Parish, quarrelled, or stricken, or used any
violence to your Minister, or have stricken or quarrelled with any other person
within your Church or Churchyard, or demeaned himself disorderedly in the
Church, by filthy or profane talk, or any other lend or immodest behavior?
Or have disturbed the Minister in time of Divine service or Sermon, or have
libelled or spoken slanderous words against your Minister, to the scandal of
his vocation, or diffamed any of his Neighbors, touching any crime of
Ecclesiastical conusance?

15 Whether any of, or in your Parish, without consent of the Ordinary, or
other lawful authority, have caused any to do penance, or to be censured or
punished for any matter of Ecclesiastical conusance, by any Vestry meetings,
or otherwise by their own authority? Or have taken any money or commutation
for the same? Present their names that have done it? And who have been so
punished? In what manner, and upon what cause?

16 Whether any person in your Parish, do exercise any Trade or labor, buy or
sell, or keep open Shoppes or Warehouses upon any Sunday or Hollidaie by
themselves, their Servants, or Apprentices, or have otherwise profaned the
said days, contrary to the orders of the Church of England? And whether
there be any Inne-keepers, Ale-house-keepers, Victualers, or other persons,
that permit any persons in their Houses, to eat, drink, or play, during the
time of Divine Service or Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoone or
afternoon, upon those days?

17 Whether the fifth day of August, and the fifth day of November, be kept
holy, and thanksgiving made to God, for his Majesty's and this States happy
deliverance, according to the Ordinance in that behalf?

18 Whether any of your Parish hold or frequent any conuenticles or private
Congregations, or make or maintain any constitutions, agreed upon in any
such assemblies? Or any that do write, or publicly or privately speak
against the Book of Common prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against
any of the articles of Religion agreed upon, in Anno 1562. or against the
Kings Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, or against the Oath of Supremacy,
or of Allegiance, as pretending the same to be unlawful, and not warrantable
by the word of GOD? Or against any of the Rites or Ceremonies of the Church
of England now established? Or against the government of the Church of England,
under the Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Arch-Deanes and other Officers of the same: affirming, that the same is
repugnant to the Word of GOD, and that the said Ecclesiastical Officers, are
not lawfully ordained? Or whether there be any Authors, Maintainers, or
Favorers of Heresy or Scisme, or that be suspected to be Annabaptists,
Libertines, Brownistes, of the Family of Love, or of any other Heresy or
Scisme? present their names?

19 Whether any in your parish have ^arried within the de^rees by Law
prohibited, or any couple in your parish being lawfully married, live apart one
from the other, without our separation of the Law, or any that have been
divorced, which keep company with any other at B^ode or at Board, and when and
where were they married?

Physicians, Surgeons, and Mid-wiues.
20 HOw many Physicians, Chirurgions, or Mid-wiues have you in your parish? How
long have they used their several Sciences or Offices, and by what authority?
And how have they demeaned themselves therein, and of what skill are they
accounted to be in their profession?

21 Whether do any persons administer the goods of the dead without lawful
authority, or suppress the last will of the dead? Or are there in your parish,
any wills not yet proved, or goods of the dead dying intestate) left
vnadministred? By authority in that behalf, you shall not fail to present;
the Executors, and all others faulty therein: and also how many persons being
possessed of any Goods and chattels, have died within your parish since the
xvii. day of April. 1613.

22 Whether any withold the stock of the church, or any goods, or other
things, given to good and charitable uses.

23 Whether your Hospitals and Almes-houses, and other such houses and
corporations, founded to good and charitable uses: and the lands possessions,
and goods of the same, be ordered and disposed of as they should be? And do the
Masters, Governors, Fellows, and others of the said Houses and
corporations, behave and demean themselves, according to the godly Ordinances
and Statutes of their several Foundations?

24 Whether have you any in your parish to your knowledge, or by common fame or
report, which have committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest; or any which
have impudently bragged or boasted, that he or she have lived incontinently
with any person or persons whatsoever: or any that has attempted the chastity
of any woman, or solicited any woman to have the carnal knowledge of her
body, or which are commonly reputed to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of
Gods holy Name; common Sweaters, common Slanderers of their Neighbors, and
sowers of discord, filthy and lascivious Talkers, Usurers, fr^monicall persons,
Bawdes, or Harborers of women with child, which be unmarried, or conueying or
suffering them to go away before they have made satisfaction to the
congregation, or any that having heretofore been presented, or suspected of
any the foresaid crimes, have for that cause departed your Parish, and are now
returned again? Or any which have used any enchantments, sorceries,
incan^ation^ or witchcrafts, which are not made felony by the statutes of this
Realm, or am which have committed any periuty in any Ecclesiastical Court, in
an Ecclesiastical cause, or which have committed any forgery, punnishable by
the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the procurors and abeitors of the said offenses:
You shall truly present the names of all, and singular the said Offenders, and
with whom they have committed the laid offenses, in case they have not been
publicly punnished to your knowledge for the same cr^mes?

Touching the Churchwardens, and Sidemen.
1 WHether you and the Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen from time to
time, do, and have done their diligences, in not suffering any idle person to
abide either in the Church yard, or Church Porch, in Service or Sermon time,
but causing them either to come into the church to hear divine Service, or to
depart, and not disturb such as be hearers there? And whether have they, and
do you diligently see the parishioners duly resort to the Church every Sunday
and Holliday and there to remain during Divine Service and Sermon? And whether
you or your predecessors, Churchwardens there, suffer any Plays, Feasts,
Drinkings or any other profane vsages, to be kept in your church, chapel or
churchyards, or have suffered to your and their uttermost power and endeavor,
any person or persons to be tippling or drinking in any Inn or Victuling House
in your parish, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon, on Sundaies and
Hollidaies?

2 Whether, and how often have you admitted any to preach within your church or
chapel, which was not sufficiently licensed? And whether you, together with
your Minister, have not taken diligent heed and care, that every of your
parishioners being of sixteen years of age o^vowards, have received thrice
every year, as aforesaid: and also that no stranger have usually come to your
church, from their own parish church?

3 Whether have there been provided against every communion, a sufficient
quantity of five white bread, and of good and wholesome wine forth communicants
that shall receive? And whether that wine be brought in a clean and sweet
standing pot of pewter, or of other purer Metal?

4 Whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the parishioners?
And have the late Churchwardens given up a just account for their time, and
delivered to their Successors the Money, and other things belonging to the
Church, which was in their hands? And are the Alms of the Church faithfully
distributed to the use of the poor?

Concerning Ecclesiastical Magistrates and Officers.
1 Whether do you know or have heard of any payment, composition, or
agreement, to, or with any Ecclesiastical M^gi^trate Judge, or Officer, for
winking at, or sparing to punish any person for any offense of Ecclesiastical
Conusance, or for suppressing or concealing of any excommunication, or any
other Ecclesiastical Censure, of, or against any Recusant, or any other
offender in the cases aforesaid? what sum of Money, or other consideration
has been received or promised, by, or to any of them, in that respect, by
whom, and with whom?

2 Has any person within your parish, paid or promised any sum of Money or
other reward, for comutation of penance for any crime of Ecclesiastical
Conusance? If so, then with whom? When, and for what, and how has the same
been employed?

3 Are your Ecclesiastical Judges and their substitutes Masters of Arts, or
Batchellors of the Laws at the least, learned and practiced in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws: Men of good Life and Fame, zealously affected in
Religion, and just and upright in executing their offices? Have they heard any
matter of office privately in their Chambers, without their sworn Registers,
or their Deputies presence?

4 Do you know, or have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or
Minister, has received or taken any extraordinary Fees, (...) other rewards or
promises, by any ways or means, directly or indirectly, of any person or
persons whatsoever, either for the granting of the administration of the Goods
and Chattelles of those that have died intestate, to one before another, or for
allotting of larger portions of the goods and chattels of those that have dyed
intestate, to one more then to another: or for allowing large and unreasonable
accounts, made by Executors or Administrators: or for giving them Quietus est,
or discharges, without Inuentory or account, to defraude Creditors, Legataries,
or those who are to have portions. And what sums of Money do you know, or
have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer has taken out of the
state of any dying intestate, upon pretense to bestow the same, in pios vsus:
and how have the same been bestowed?

5 Has any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, Officer, or any other, exercising


