ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF IN THE DIOCESE OF CARLISLE, in the Visitation of
the Reverend Father in God, Francis, Lord Bishop of Carlisle.

Anno Dom. and Consecrationis suae

Imprinted at London. 1627.

The form of the Oath to be ministered unto the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you, and every of you, shall duly consider, and
diligently enquire of all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and
that all affection, favor, hope of reward and gain, or fear of displeasure,
or malice set aside, you shall present all and every such person of or within
your Parish, as has committed any offense, or made any default mentioned in
these, or any of these Articles; or which are vehemently suspected or defamed
of any such offense or default: Wherein you shall deal uprightly and fully;
neither presenting, nor sparing to present any, contrary to truth: having in
this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth and
virtue, and to suppress vice. So help you God, and the holy contents of this
Book.

ARTICLES TO BE ENquired of in the Diocese of Carlisle, ANNO DOM.
Articles concerning Religion and Doctrine.
1 WHether be there any abiding in, Heretical opinions.
or resorting to your Parish, that have wilfully maintained and defended any
heresies, errors, or false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ, and holy
Scripture?

2 Jtem, Whether does any in your Parish, Absence from Church.
being 16. years of age or upwards, or others lodging, or commonly resorting to
any house in your parish, wilfully absent themselves from your parish Church,
Chapel, or Oratorie, upon Sundays and holidaies, and other days appointed,
at Morning and Evening prayers? Or who come late to Church and depart from
Church before divine Service and Sermon be ended? Or whether be there any, that
persuade others to forbear or abstain coming to Church, to hear divine
Service, and receive the holy Communion according to his Majesty's laws in
that behalf enacted?

3 Jtem, Whether be there any in your parish, that has been, Unlawful
conuenticles.
or is vehemently suspected to have been present at any unlawful assemblies,
conuenticles, or meetings, under color or pretense of any exercise of
Religion; or does any affirm and maintain such meetings to be lawful,
contrary to his Majesty's statutes in that behalf?

4 Item, Whether be there any within your parish, that deny, Impugners of the
Kings Supremacy.
or persuade any to deny, withstand and impugn the Kings Majesty's authority
and Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical within his Realm?

5 Jtem, Whether be there any abiding in, Popish Recusants.
or resorting to your parish, that be, or are commonly reputed or taken to be
Recusant Papists, refusing to repair to the Church to hear divine Service,
and receive the holy Communion, and being disobedient to his Highness Laws in
that behalf provided? Or do any publish, fell, or disperse any superstitious
books or writings; or other books, libels, or writings of any lectuaries,
touching the Religion, State, or Ecclesiastical gouermnent of this Kingdom of
England? Present their names, qualities and conditions. Does any Papist keep a
Schoolmaster in his house, which comes not to Church, as is required? What
is his name, and how long has he taught there or elsewhere?

Articles concerning Public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments.
deprauing the Book of common Prayer, and Ceremonies.
FIrst, Whether has any of your parish spoken, or declared any thing in the
derogation, or deprauing of the form of Gods Worship in the Church of England,
and Administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies, set forth and
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, by the Kings Majesty authorized and
confirmed? Do any preach, speak, or declare, that it contains any thing
which is not agreeable to the holy Scriptures?

Persuading any Minister to alter the form of common Prayer.
2 Item, Whether has any in your parish caused, procured, or maintained any
Minister to say any common or public prayer, or to administer either of the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, otherwise, or in any other manner
and form, then is mentioned in the said book of Common Prayer: Or whether has
any interrupted, hindered, let, or disturbed the Minister to read divine
Service, and administer the Sacraments, in such manner and form as is
mentioned in the said book, or interrupted him in his preaching and Sermons?

Observation of the form of Baptism, and Cross.
3 Item, Whether is the Sacrament of Baptism rightly and duly administered,
according to the prescript Form expressed in the book of Common Prayer, with
due observations of all Rites and Ceremonies prescribed in the administration
of the same, without adding, or altering any part or parcel of any prayers,
interrogatories, or not using the sign of the Cross in the administration of
the same? Children refused to be baptized, or dying without Baptism. Parents
of children admitted Godfathers.


4 Item, Whether is the Sacrament of Baptism refused to be administered to any
children borne in or out of wedlock, their birth being made known unto the
Minister of the parish, and offered to him to be baptized; or have any such
children dyed vn-baptized?

5 Jtem, Whether be the Parents of any child to be baptized, admitted to be
Godfathers and Godmothers to the same?

6 Item, Private Ba^tisme.
Whether have there any children been baptized in private houses, by any Lay
person, or Midwife, or Popish Priest, or by any other Minister, but upon urgent
occasion, when the child was in danger of death?

7 Jtem, Baptizing Papists chi^dren.
Whether have the children which have been borne to any Popish Recusants, or
begotten by them in your parish, been publicly baptized in your parish
Church, by your Parson, Vicar, or Curate; or by whom were they baptized, or
where to your knowledge?

8 Jtem, Receiving the Lords S^per thrice a year.
Whether has the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly and
reverently administered every month, or thrice every year at least, whereof
once at Easter, within your parish Church, to every parishioner being of
sixteen years of age, or upwards?

9 Item, Whether is the said holy Sacrament delivered unto, Kneeling a^ the
Comm^nion.
or received by any of the Communicants within your parish, that irreverently
sit or stand, or do not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees?

10 Item, Whether has any of your parish, Notorious ^fenders admitted to the
Communion
which be openly known to live in notorious sin without repentance, or
excommunicate persons, or Schismatics, common and notorious deprauers of the
Religion and government of this Realm, without unfeigned sorrow shown for
their impiety and wickedness, been admitted to be partaker of the said holy
Communion?

11 Jtem, Debarring others with cause.
Whether has any of your parish been debarred from the said holy Communion,
without just cause, and without intimation first given to the Ordinary or
Bishop of the Diocese: and by whose default?

Articles concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches
Possessions.
FIrst, Whether have you in your Church or Chapel, Books and ^naments in the
Church
the whole Bible of the largest Volumne, and of the last translation, the book
of Common Prayer, lately set forth by his Majesty's authority, the two books
of Homilies, and Bishop Jewels Apology, all well and fairly bound: a Font of
stone set up in the ancient usual place: A convenient and decent Communion
Table, with a Carpet of silk or some other decent stuff, continually laid
upon the Table at time of divine Service, Abusing of Communion Table.
and a fair linen cloth at the time of administering the Communion: And
whether is the same Table placed conveniently as it ought: And whether is it so
used in or out of time of divine Service or Sermon, as is not agreeable to the
holy use of it; as by sitting on it, and by throwing hats on it, or writing on
it; or is it abused to other prophaner uses? Are the ten commandments set
upon the East end of your Church, with other sentences of Scripture about?

^ings apper^ning to ^urches.
2 Item, Whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient seat
for your Minister to read divine Service in, together with a comely Pulpit set
up in a convenient place, with a decent cloth or Cushion for the same; a
comely, large and fine Surplice; a fair Communion Cup, a Flagon of Silver or
Pewter, with all other things and ornaments necessary for the celebration of
divine Service, and administration of the Sacraments: and whether have you a
Chest for Alms, with three locks and keys and another Chest for keeping the
Books and Ornaments of the Church, and the Register Book? Have you a Register
Book in Parchment, ^^gister book.
for Christenings, Weddings, and burials, and is the same kept in all points
according to the Canons? And have you a Table set in your Church, of the
degrees wherein by law men are prohibited to marry?

^parations Churches, ^^d Parsonage uses.
3 Item, Whether is your Church or Chapel, with the Chauncell thereof, and
your Parsonage or Vicarage house, in good reparations; if any be ruinated and
wasted, in whom is the default? Is your Church, Chancell and Chapel, decently
and comely kept, as well within as without; and be the seats well maintained,
the Steeple and Bells preserved; the windows well glazed; the floor kept
paued, plain and even, ^eping clean Churches.
and all things in orderly and decent sort, without dust, or any thing that may
be either noisome or unseemly for the house of God, as is prescribed in the
85. Canon?

^ncing and ^eping the ^hurchyard.
4 Item, Whether be your Churchyards well fenced, and kept without abuse; if
not, whose default is it: has any person encroached upon the ground of the
Churchyard: Has any used a place consecrated to holy use profanely or
wickedly: have any quarrelled or stricken another in Church or Churchyard:
^ophaning ^d annoying ^e Church^^rd.
have any annoyed your Churchyard, or the fence thereof, by putting in of
Cattle, by hanging of clothes, or by laying there any dust, dung, or other
filthiness?

^hurches ^acant.
5 Item, whether is your Church full, or vacant of an incumbent; if vacant, who
receives the fruits thereof, and who serves the Cure, and by what authority?
And whether is it a Parsonage, Vicaridge, or Donatiue, or Appropriation?

oncealing of church goods.
6 Item, What legacies have been given to the use and benefit of your Church;
how have they been bestowed; who received them, and detaineth them without due
employment? Does any detain or embezell any of the Church goods, or any other
gifts given to charitable uses?

7 Item, Whether has any in your parish defaced, Defacing o^ seemly or^ments.
Burying of P^pish Recusants.
or caused to be defaced, any monuments or ornaments in your Church?

8 Item, Whether has any Popish Recusant, being lawfully excommunicated, been
enterred or buried in your Church or Churchyard, before absolution of that
censure and excommunication? If yea, then by whom and when?

9 Jtem, Whether be not the profits, tithes, Alienation o^ tithes and profits
of the Church.
and other commodities Ecclesiastical, impiously and wickedly, to the
dishonor of Almighty God, and prejudice of the sacred Ministry, converted to
the use and benefit of covetous Patrons, and by them received and detained, and
how long have they been so used to your knowledge?

10 Jtem, Whether have you the Terrier of all the gleab-lands, A Terrier o^
Glebe lands and other possessions the Church.
meadows, gardens, orchyards, houses, stocks, implements, tenements, and
portions of tithes (whether within your parish or without) belonging to your
Parsonage or Vicaridge, taken by the view of honest men in your said parish;
and whether the said Terrier be laid up in the Bishops Registrie, and in whose
hands are any of them now? And if you have no Terrier already made in
Parchment, you the Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or
Vicar, or in his absence, your Curate, are to make diligent enquiry, and
presentment of the premises, and make, subscribe, and sign the said Terrier,
as aforesaid.

Articles concerning Ministers, and Preachers of Gods holy Word.
FIrst, Whether is your Minister, Parson, Vicar, or Curate, Degrees of
Ministers.
a graduate in either of the Universities, or no: if yea, then of what degree?
Is he a public Preacher of Gods word and by whom is he so licensed?

2 Item, Whether does your Minister distinctly, and reverently say Divine
Service upon Sundays and Holidayes, Observation of the form and time of
common pray^ and Sacraments.
and other days appointed to be observed by the book of Common Prayer, as
Wednesdaies and Fridaies, and the Eues of every Sunday and Holiday, at fit and
usual times And does your Minister duly observe the orders, Rites, and
Ceremonies prescr^bed in the said Book of Common Prayer, as well in reading
all public prayers, and the Letanie, as also in administering the Sacraments,
solemnization of Matrimony, visitation of the sick burying the dead,
churching of women, and all other like Rites and offices of the Church, in such
manner and form, as in the said book of common prayer is enjoined, without
omission or addition of any thing: And does he read the Book of the last
Canons yearly?

^ontinuall ^ating of the ^rplice.
3 Jtem, whether does your Minister, both morning and evening, reading divine
Service, and administering the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, wear
the Surplice, according to the Canons: And does he never omit wearing of the
same at such times?

^bseruation (...) Rites.
4 Jtem, Whether does your Minister bid holidayes and fasting-daies, as is
appointed? Does he administer the holy Communion every month; or thrice in the
year at least, whereof once at Easter, to every parishioner: does he receive
the same himself on every day that he administreth it to others, and uses
the words of Institution according to the book, without alteration, at every
time that the bread and wine is renewed? Does he use and never omit the sign
of the Cross in baptism, or does he ever baptize in any Basin or other thing
but the usual Font? Does he marry without a Ring, or in times prohibited, or
without the banes thrice published, without a special License from the
Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, or his Chancellor, first had and
obtained?

^reachers without ^cence.
5 Item, Whether is your Minister a Preacher licensed or no? If no, whether does
he take upon him, in his own Cure, or elsewhere, to expound any Scripture or
matter of doctrine, and does not keep himself to the reading of Homilies
published by Authority? And if he be licensed, does he preach usually
according to the 45. Canon, in his own cure, or some other neighbor Church,
where no Preacher is: does he preach standing, and with his hat off? Or whether
does he or his Curate, Reading Homilies when ^here is no ^ermon.
upon every Sunday when there is no Sermon, read an Homily, or some part
thereof, according as he ought to do?

Preaching of false doctrine, and new opinions.
6 Jtem, Whether does your Minister publish in his Sermon any doctrine which is
new and strange, and disagreeing from the Word of God, and from the Articles of
Christian faith and religion, agreed on and published, Ann. Dom. 1562. or
whether do they teach any thing, which they would have the people rel^giously
to observe and believe, but that which is agreeable to the Scriptures, and that
which the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have gathered out of that
doctrine, according to the Canon?

Names of ^trangers to be taken.
7 Item, Whether are any Ministers admitted to preach in your Church, who do
not, before the Churchwardens, subscribe their names in your book for that
purpose, the day when he preached, and the name of the Bishop of whom he had
license to preach? And is any one admitted to preach, before he shows his
license?

8 Item, Opposition of Preachers in their Sermons.
Does any Preacher in your Pulpit particularly impugn and confute any doctrine
delivered by others his fellow Preachers, before he has acquainted the Bishop
of the Diocese therewith, and received order from him, what to do in that
case?

9 Jtem, Praying for his Majesty, etc.
Does your Minister use always to pray for the Kings Majesty, the Queen,
Clergy, Council, etc. giving them their full titles, as in the Canon is
required?

10 Item, Whether is your Minister resident upon his Benefice, Non residence of
the Minister
or absent; if absent, by whom is the Cure served, the fruits received? Does
your Minister or Curate serve any more Cures then one? If yea, then what other
Cure does he serve, and how far are they distant?

11 Jtem, Whether does he catechize the youth of his parish upon Sundaies and
holidaies before Evening prayer, for half an hour, Catechizing.
or more, in the Catechism set forth in the book of common prayer: and
whether do all the parishioners diligently attend his catechizing? and who
refuse to send their children and servants to be catechized by him?

12 Item, Ministers to call for relief of the poor, and almsdeeds. Symonie.
Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from time
to time call upon his parishioners, to give somewhat according to their
ability, to godly and charitable uses, especially when they make their wills?

13 Jtem, whether is your Minister suspected or known to have obtained his
Benefice, or spiritual promotion, by any symoniacall compact, directly or
indirectly?

14 Item, Demising of Benefices.
Whether does your Minister demise the profits of his Benefice to any Layman,
above one year, and is not resident there; and keeps no hospitality upon his
Benefice being of sufficient value?

15 Item, Does your Minister, in the Rogation days, Observing of Rogation
week.
go in perambulation of the circuit of the parish, saying and using the
prayers, suffrages, and thanksgiving to God, appointed by law, according to his
duty, thanking God for his blessings, and praying for his grace and favor?

16 Jtem, What Curates or Preachers do read prayers, Curates not licensed,
and Laymen doing offices of Minister.
or administer the Sacraments in your parish, without lawful license from the
Bishop of the Diocese, under his hand and seal, according to the Canon: or
does any Layman, not having holy orders, presume to read public prayers in
the Church?

Lectures and Preachers to read Service.
17 Jtem, Whether have you any Preacher or Lecturer in your parish, and whether
(if any such be) he does twice at the least every year read himself divine
Service both morning and evening two several Sundaies publicly in his
Surplice; and also twice in the year administer both the Sacraments, with such
rites and ceremonies as are prescribed in the book of commom prayer, according
to the 56. Canon?

Conversation of the Minister.
18 Jtem, Whether is your Minister studious in the holy Scriptures, and
abstaineth from mechanical trades, or labor not be fitting his function, and
from apparel unseemly for his calling, and from gaming, Ministers forsaking
their calling.
swearing and drunkenness, or such notorious crimes: or is there any in your
parish, who having been admitted into holy orders, either Deacon or Minister,
does relinquish and forsake his calling, and lives in the course of his life
as a Layman?

Ministers revealing private confessions.
19 Jtem, Whether does your Minister before the several times of the
administration of the Lords Supper, admonish and exhort his parishioners, if
they have their consciences troubled and disquieted, to resort unto him, or
some other learned Minister, and open his grief, that he may receive such
ghostly counsel and comfort, as his conscience may be relieved, and by the
Minister he may receive the benefit of absolution, to the quiet of his
conscience, and avoiding of the scruple; And if any man confess his secret and
hidden sins being sick or whole, to the Minister, for the vnburthening of his
conscience, and receiving such spiritual consolation, does or has the said
Minister at any time revealed and made known to any person whatsoever, any
crime or offense so committed to his trust and secrecy, contrary to the 113.
Canon?

Articles concerning Matrimony.
FIrst, Marriage within Leuiticall degrees.
Whether be there any in your parish, that have married within the degrees of
affinity or consanguinity by the Law of God forbidden? If any, what be they?

2 Item, Whether have any been married secretly in private houses, Private
marriage, and without consent of parents.
or without their parents or governors consent signified, being under the age
of 21. years?

3 Item, Whether do any persons lawfully married, Married persons living ^part.
live asunder unlawfully, and in whom is the default?

4 Item, Marriage without banes and license.
Whether any persons (the banes being not thrice published in the Church) have
been married without license; who were present at such marriages, and what
Minister married them?

5 Jtem, Whether any persons by license or without, Persons married out of
their Parishes.
have bin married in your parish Church, neither of them at that time dwelling
in your said parish?

6 Item, Recusants marriage.
What Popish Recusants or their children have been married in your Parish, in
what sort was that matrimony solemnized; when, and by whom?

7 Item, Is there any in your Parish, that is voyced, noted, Bigamy.
and credibly reported and accused to have two wives living, or two husbands?

Articles concerning the Churchwardens.
FIrst, Whether be the Churchwardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners,
according to the 89. Canon; Election of Churchwardens.
and whether has any taken upon him to be Churchwarden, being not so chosen:
or has any continued above one year in his office without a new choice?

2 Jtem, Churchwardens due account.
Whether have any Churchwardens detained any of the Church goods, and not made
a just account of what they have received and expended?

3 Item, Have they been, and are they diligent in their office, Churchwardens
diligent in the Church
to see decency kept in the Church, and order in the time of Common Prayer,
and administration of the Sacraments, and that there be no disturbance, but
soberness and quietness in the Church?

Articles concerning the Parishioners.
FIrst, Whether do any in your Parish profane the Sunday by unlawful games,
drinking or tippling, Profaning the Lords day.
especially in the time of common prayer, or Sermon: or by working, and doing
the ordinary works of their vocations and trades?

2 Item, Is there any in your Parish, Impugn the Rites and government of the
Church.
that do impugn or speak against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, or the lawful use of them; and the government of this Church under
his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers?

3 Item, Reverent behavior at divine Service.
Who in your parish do come to the Sermon only and not to divine Service; and
who do not reverently behave themselves during the time of divine Service,
devoutly kneeling when the general Confession of sins, the Letany, the ten
Commandments, and all Prayers and Collects are read: and using all duly and
lowly reverence when the blessed Name of the Lord Jesus is mentioned, and
standing up when the Articles of the Belief, the Magnificat, Nunc dimittis,
the Te Deum, Benedictus, and Gloria Patri, etc. are read, or who do cover
their heads in the Church, during the whole time of divine Service, unless it
be in case of necessity; in which case they may wear a nightcap? Or who do
give themselves to babbling, talking, or walking, and are not attentive to
hear the Word read and preached?

^eauing their ^wn Churches ^o go to others.
4 Item, Is there any of your Parish, having a Preacher to their Minister, that
do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to other places to hear
other Preachers: or do any in your Parish communicate, or baptize their
children in any other Parish?

Exception against the Minister. Churching of Women.
5 Item, Is there any in your parish, that refuse to have their children
baptized, or themselves to receive the Communion of your Minister, taking
exception against him? or have any wives refused to come to Church, according
to the Book of Common Prayer, to give thanks to God for their safe
deliverance, in a decent habit, as has been anciently accustomed?

Disgracing of Ministers.
6 Item, Has any in your parish spoken slanderous and reproachful words
against your Minister, to the scandal of his vocation; or against their
marriage or wives, against his neighbor, defaming them touching any crime of
Ecclesiastical cognizance?

Opening of ^hops upon ^olidaies.
7 Jtem, Whether do any in your Parish exercise any trade or labor, buy or
sell, or keep open shops, or set out any wares to be sold, upon Sundaies and
Holidayes, by themselves, their servants, or apprentices, or have otherwise
profaned the said days?

Keeping holy of the 5. of August, and the 5. of November.
8 Item, Whether is the 5. of August, and the 5. of November kept holy, and
thanksgiving made to God, according to the order set forth in that behalf?

9 Jtem, Is there any in your Parish, that be, ^dultery, for^ication, in^est,
etc.
or are commonly known or reputed to be blasphemers of Gods holy Name,
drunkards, adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons, concealers or
harbourers of fornicators or adulterers: have any been detected of such
notorious crimes, and what penance have they done for the same?

Commutation ^f penance.
10 Jtem, What corporal punishments for any such offenses, have been commuted
and changed into a pecuniary mulct or sum of money by any Ecclesiastical
Judge exercising jurisdiction within this Diocese, by virtue of any grant or
Commission; or what was the sum of money by them or any of them so received
and taken, and to what uses was the same bestowed: or whether upon some
commutations, was the unfeigned repentance of the delinquent published in the
Church?

Persons dying ^nce the 2. of ^ebr. 1626.
11 Item, What person or persons have died and departed this mortal life, since
the 2. day of February last past, and whether did they make any last wills or
Testaments, and who were their executors, or whether died they intestate, and
who has the administration of their goods; and what be the names of such
deceased, and executors, and administrators.

12 Item, Administering of goods without authority.
Whether have any in your parish administered the goods of any person deceased,
without lawful authority, and before he or they have proved the will or
Testament of the party deceased, or have obtained Commission from the Ordinary,
to dispose the said mouable goods; or are there any wills unproven, or goods
not administered?

13 Item, What persons be excommunicate within your Parish, Excommunicate
persons.
and for what cause to your knowledge: and whether do any of them repair to
the Church, in time of Prayer vnabsolued.

Articles concerning Schoolemasters, Physicians, and Chyrurgions, and Parish
Clarks.
FIrst, Schoolemasters not licenced.
is there any Schoolmaster in your Parish that teaches publicly or
privately, not licensed by the Ordinary, or the Bishop of the Diocese? Does
he teach any Papists or Sectaries children, that come not to Church? Duty of
all Schoolemasters.
And does he instruct all his scholars to learn the shorter Catechism by the
law estabished, contained in the book of common Prayer? Is he a graduate, and
sufficient to teach?

2 Item, What Physician or Chyrurgion is in your parish unlicensed, Physicians
no^ licenced.
and being not a Doctor of Physic in either of the Universities, does
practice physike? And what ignorant persons have left their trade, and taken
upon them to profess Physic or Chyrurgery; and who be they that so abuse the
people?

3 Item, Have you a fit parish-Clarke, aged 20. years at least, Parish Clarks
of honest life, able to read and write? Are his and the Sextons wages paid
without fraud? if not, then whose default is it? by whom is he chosen: is he
diligent in his office, and serviceable to the Minister; does he meddle with
any thing above his Office; does he keep the Church clean, the doors locked?
Is any thing lost and spoiled by his default, and does he execute his office
duly.

Articles concerning Ecclesiastical offices.
FIrst, Excessive fees.
Whether be there any ecclesiastical officers that exercise ecclesiastical
jurisdiction within this Diocese that take and receive, or exact any
extraordinary and excessive fees for any cause. Whether have your Churchwardens
and Questmen concealed any abuses or offenses punishable in the Ecclesiastical
Court; and whether such offenses being presented, are suppressed and unpunished?

2 Item, Table of fees in Courts.
Whether is there not a Table of Fees in every Court of the Consistory,
Archdeacons, and Commissaries, allowed and subscribed by the Judge and Register
of the Court of Consistory, Ann. Dom. 1597. and the same every Court day hung
up in some public place of the Court and Registry?

^eeding of ^cts without Notarie.
3 Item, Does any Ecclesiastical Judge speed any act in any cause privately of
himself, and not in presence of some public Notarie or Actuarie?

^buses in Ap^aritors and ^umners.
4 Item, Whether is there any excessive number of Apparitors and Sumners in this
Diocese; or have any of them, under pretense of authority, cited and summoned
any person unlawfully, or has taken any reward for the concealing of any
offense or sin, or the avoiding of punishment of the offenders; and who be
they that have done so; or do they take any fees not accustomable? have they
threatened any to prosecute them, if they had no reward? and do they summon any,
without a Citation first had?

Abuses in Ecclesiastical offices.
5 Jtem, Has any Ecclesiastical Judge, or Officer, Advocate, Register,
Procter, Clarks, or other such ministers any way abused themselves in their
offices, contrary to the Law and Canons in that behalf provided?

Sincerity and ^mpartiality ^n the Inquisitors.
6 Item, Lastly, Whether have you and every of you, sincerely, uprightly, and
without any impartial affection and concealing, presented and made known all
and every the offenders, in any of the matters mentioned in the precedent
Articles exhibited unto you, either as they are taken in truth to be, or by
common fame reported?

If you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical cognizance, you
are to present the same.

The Ministers of every parish may join in presentment with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen: and if they will not present, then the Ministers themselves
(being the persons that should have the chief care for the suppressing of
sin and impiety in their parishes) may present the crimes aforesaid, and such
things as shall be thought to require due reformation. Can. 113.

There must be several presentiments made to every several Article.

FINIS.
Hos Articulos sub hisce Titulis in hac visitatione, proponit inquirendos,

FRANCIS. CARLIL.


