Articles to be enquired in the visitation, in the first year of the reign of
our most dread Sovereign Lady, Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England,
France, and Ireland, Queen, defendour of the faith. etc.

Anno. 1559.



ARTICLES.
First, whether any Parson, Vicar, 1. Residencie.
or Curate, be reside^t continually upon his Benefice, doing his duty in
preaching, reding and duelye ministrynge the holy Sacraments.

2. False miracles.
Item, whether in their Churches and Chappelles, all Images, Shrynes, all
Tables, Candelstickes, Trindelles, or rolls of war, pictures, payntynges, and
all other monumentes of feigned and false miracles, pylgrymages, idolatrye, and
superstition, be removed, abolyshed, and destroyed.

3. Lords prayer.
Item, whether they do not every Holydaye when they have no Sermon, immediately
after the Gospel, openly, plainly, and distinctly, resite to their
paryshyoners in the Pulpitte, the Lords prayer, the belief, and the ten
Commandments in English.

4. To bring up youth.
Item, whether they do charge fathers and mothers, masters, and governors of
youth, to bring them up in some virtuous study and occupation.

Item, 5. Curates.
whether such beneficed men as be lawfully absent from their benefices, do
leave their cures to a rude and unlearned Parson, and not to an honest well
learned and expert Curate which can and will teach you wholesome doctrine.

6. Redyng the Scriptures.
Item, whether they do discourage any person from readyng of any part of the
Bible, either in Latin or Englysh, and do not rather comfort and exhort every
person to read the same at convenient times, as the very lively word of God,
and the special food of man's soul.

7. Tauernes and games.
Item, whether Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and other ministers, be common haunters
and resorters to Tauernes or Alehouses, geuyng them selves to drynkyng,
ryotyng, and playing at unlawful games, and do not occupy them selves in the
readyng or hearing of some part of holy Scripture, or in some other godly
exercise.

Item, 8. Preachers.
whether they have admitted any man to preach in their cures, not being
lawefully licensed thereunto, or have been licensed accordyngly.

Item, 9 Superstition.
whether they use to declare to their parishioners any thing to the extollyng
or setting forth of vain and superstitious religion, pilgrimages, relics, or
images, or lyghtyng of candelles, kyssyng, knelyng, deckyng of the same images.

Item, 10. Register.
whether they have one book or Register kept, wherein they write the day of
every weddyng, chrystenyng, and burying.

Item, 11. Obedience.
whether they have exhorted the people to obedience to the Queen's Majesty, and
ministers, and to charity and love one to another.

12. The Sacrament.
Item, whether they have admonyshed their parishioners, that they ought not to
presume to receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ before they
can perfectly the Lords prayer, the articles of the faith, and the.x.
commandments in English.

Item, 13. Hospitality.
whether they be resident upon their benefices, and keep hospitality or no.
And if they be absent and keep no hospitality, whether they do relieve their
parishioners, and what they give them.

Item, whether proprietaries, Parsons, 14. Reparations.
Vicars, and clerks, having Churches, chapels, or mansions, do keep their
chauncels, rectories, Vicarages, and all other houses appertaynyng to them, in
due reparations.

15. Prayer in English.
Item, whether they do counsel or move their parishioners rather to pray in a
tongue not known, then in English, or put their trust in any certain number
of prayers, as in saying over a number of Beads, Beads.
or other like.

16. Diffamed persons.
Item, whether they have received any persons to the communion, being openly
known to be out of charity with their neighbors, or dyffamed with any
notorious crime, and not reformed.

17. Poor men's box.
Item, whether they have provided and have a strong chest for the poor men's
box, and set and fastened the same in a place of the Church most convenient.

Item, 18. Testamentes.
whether they have dil^igently called upon, exhorted and moved their
paryshioners, and especially when they make their testamentes, to give to the
said poor men's box, and to bestow that upon the poor, Poor men's box.
which they were wont to bestow upon pilgrimages, pardons, trentalles, and
upon other like blind deuocions.

19. Sick. Buryall.
Item, whether they have denied to visit the sick, or burye the dead, being
brought to the Church.

Item, 20. Symonye.
whether they have bought their benefices, or come to them by fraud, guyle,
deceit, or symonye.

Item, 21. Adulterers.
whether they have given open monition to their parishioners, to detect and
present to their Ordinary, all adulterers and fornicatours, and such men as
have two wives living, within their paryshes.

22. Church goods.
Item, whether they have monyshed their parishioners openly, that they should
not sell, give, nor otherwise alienate any of their Church goods.

23. Many Benefices.
Item, whether they or any of them do keep mo benefices and other
Ecclesiastical promotions, then they ought to do, not having sufficient
licenses and dispensations thereunto, and how many they be, and their names.

Item, 24. Communion.
whether they minister the holy Communion any otherwise, then only after such
form and manner as it is set forth by the common authority of the Queen's
Majesty, and the parliament.

25. Letters of the word or preaching.
Item, whether you know any person within your paryshe, or else where, that is a
letter of the word of God to be read in English, or sincerely preached in
place and times convenient.

26. Goers out of the Church.
Item, whether in the time of the Letanye, or any other common prayer, in the
time of the Sermon or Homelye, and when the Priest reads the Scriptures to
the parishioners, any person have departed out of the Church, without just
and necessary cause, or disturb the Minister otherwise.

27. Church money.
Item, whether the money coming and rysyng of any cattle or other moveable
stocks of the Church, and money given and bequeathed to the fyndyng of torches,
lyghtes, tapers, or lamps, not paid out of any lands, have not ben employed
to the poor men's cheste.

28. Kepers of the Church money.
Item, who has the said stocks and money in their hands, and what be their
names.

29. Contempt of Priests.
Item, whether any indiscrete persons do uncharitably contemn and abuse
Priests and Ministers of the Church.

30. The kings Grammar.
Item, whether there be any other Grammar taught in any scoole within this
Diocese, then that which is set forth by the authority of king Henry theyght.

31. The time of service.
Item, whether the service of the Church be done at due and convenient hours.

32. Talkers in the Church.
Item, whether any have used to common, tangle, and talk in the Church in the
time of the prayer, readyng of the Homylye, preaching, readyng or declaryng of
the Scripture.

Item, 33. Heresies.
whether any have wylfully mainteyned and defended any heresies, errors, or
false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ and holy Scripture.

Item, 34. Dronkardes
whether any be common dronkardes, swearers, or blasphemers of the name of God.

Item, 35. Adulterers.
whether any have committed adulterye, fornication, or incest, or be common
bawdes, or receivers of such evil persons, or vehemently suspected of any of
the premises.

Item, 36. Brawlers.
whether any be brawlers, slaunderers, chyders, scolders, and sowers of discord
between one person and another.

Item, 37. Sorcerers.
whether you know any that do use charms, sorcery, enchauntmentes,
inuocations, circles, witchcraftes, southsaying, or any like crafts or
imaginations invented by the devil, and specially in the time of women's
travail.

Item, 38. Pulpittes.
whether the Churches, Pulpittes, and other necessaryes apperteynyng to the
same, be sufficiently repaired, and if they be not, in whose default the same
is.

39. Resorters to other Churches.
Item, whether you know any, that in contempt of their own paryshe Church, do
resort to any other Church.

Item, 40. Inholders.
whether any Inholders, or Alehousekepers, do use commonly to sell meat and
drink in the time of common prayer, preaching, readyng of the Homylyes or
Scripture.

Item, 41. Divorce.
whether you know any to be married within the degrees prohibited by the laws
of God, or that be separated or divorced without the degrees prohibited by the
law of God, and whether any such have married again.

42. Privy contractes.
Item, whether you know any to have made privy contractes of Matrimonye, not
calling two or mo witnesses thereunto, nor having thereto the consent of their
parents.

Item, 43. Banes.
whether they have married solempnly, the banes not first lawfully asked.

Item, 44. Erecutours
whether you know any executours or administratours of dead men's goods, which
do not duelye bestow such of the said goods as were given and bequeathed,
or appointed to be distributed among the poor people, repayryng of high ways,
fyndyng of poor scollers, or marying or poor maidens, or such other like
charitable deeds.

Item, 45. Images.
whether you know any that keep in their houses undefaced, any Images, Tables,
Pictures, payntynges, or other monumentes of feigned and false miracles,
pylgrimages, idolatry, and superstition, and do adore them, and specially such
as have been set up in Churches, Chapelles, or Oratories.

Item, 46. Books.
what Books of Gods Scripture you have delivered to be burnt, or otherwise
destroyed, and to whom ye have delivered the same.

Item, 47. Brybes.
what brybes the accusers, promoters, persecutors, Ecclesiastical judges, and
other the Commissioners appointed within the several Diocese of this Realm,
have received by them selves or other, of those persons which were in trouble,
apprehended, or imprisoned for Religion.

48. Loss of goods.
Item, what goods, moveable lands, fees, offices, or promotions, has been
wrongfully taken away in the time of Queen Mary's reign, from any person
which favored the Religion now set forth.

49. How many burnt.
Item, how many persons for Religion have dyed by fire, famine, or otherwise,
or have been imprisoned for the same.

50. Certificat of the dead.
Item, that you make a true presentment of the number of all the persons which
dyed within your parishes, sithen the feast of Saint John the Baptist, which
was in the year of our Lord God a thousand five hundredth fifty and eight,
unto the same feast last past. Making therein a plain distinct declaration,
how many men, women, and men children the same were. And the names of the men.

51. Secret Masses.
Item, whether ye know any man in your paryshe, secretlye or in unlawful
conuenticles, say or hear Mass, or any other service prohibited by the law.

52. False rumors.
Item, whether you know any person in your Paryshe, to be a slaunderer of his
neighbors, or a sower of discord between party and party, man and wife,
parents and their children, or that has invented, bruted, or set forth any
rumors, Unlawful books.
false and sedicious tales, slanders, or makers, bryngers, buyers, sellers,
kepers, or conueyers, of any unlawful books, which might stir or provoke
sedition, or mainteyne superstitious service within this Realm, or any
aydours, counsaylours, procurers, or maynteyners thereunto.

53. Patron. Tithes. Vacation.
Item, whether the Church of your paryshe be now vacant or no, who is the
Patron thereof, how long it has been vacant, who does receive the tithes,
oblations, and other commodities during the time of the vacation, and by what
authority, and in what estate the said Church is at this time, and how long
the Parson, or Vicar has had that Benefice.

Item, 54. Minstrelles.
whether any Minstrelles, or any other persons do use to sing or say any
songs or dytties that be vile or unclean, and especially in derision of any
Godly order now set forth and establyshed.

55. Letany in English.
Item, whether the Letany in English, with the Epistle and Gospel, which was by
the Queen's highness Proclamation wylled to be read to the people, were put in
use in your Churches, and if not, who were the letters thereof.

56. Distinct readyng.
Item, whether the Curates and Ministers do leysurely, plainly, and distinctly,
read the public Prayers, Chapters, and Homylyes, as they ought to do.

God save the Queen.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN Powles Church yard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


