ARTICLES ECCLESIASTICAL TO BE INQVIRED OF BY THE CHVRCHWARDENS AND THE
SWORNE-MEN WITHIN THE Dioces of Hereforde in the visitation of the reverend
father in God, Harbart Bishop of the said Dioces: this present year
M.D.LXXXXII. and in the XXXIIII. year of the reign of our most gracious
sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, etc.

And so hereafter till the next visitation, and from time to time to be
presented.

Imprinted at Oxford, by Joseph Barnes Printer to the University.

ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF, IN the Dioces of Hereforde.
FIrst ye shall enquire and truly present upon your oaths taken whether you
do know of any, which has thrust himself into any funccion Ecclesiastical
without ordinary calling, as, to say public service in church, or chapel, not
being lawfully ordered Deacon at the least?

2 Whether your Parson or Vicar be known, suspected or reported to have bought
his benefice, or come to it by any simonicall compace made either by himself,
or others, directly, or indirectly: or do let out his living, or any part
thereof to any, in consideration that he has obtained the same:

3 Whether your Parson, or Vicar, Curate, or minister, or any other Priest or
laiman or woman do wilfully maintain or defend any heresies, false opinions,
or popish errors, contrary to the laws of almighty God, and true doctrine, by
public authority now set forth in this realm, and what be their names?

4 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, do not say common prayer in your
Church, or Chapel, distinctly, and reverently, and in such order as is set
forth by the Laws of this Realm without any kind of alteration, and at
du^^^^d convenient hours? And whether your Minister do not so turn himself
and stand in such place of your Church, or Chancell, as the people may best
hear ye sue? And whether the holy sacraments be not likewise ministered,
reverently in such manner, as by the Laws of this Realm is appointed, and
whether upon wednesdaies and Frydaies not being holy days the Letany and other
prayers appointed for the day be not said accordingly?

5 Whether your Minister or any other not being licenced take upon him to
expound scripture, and thereby omit upon any sunday the reading of a part of
an Homily, at the least, or upon any other occasion do omit the same?

6 Whether your Minister do not read the co^mination against sinners, with
certain prayers appointed, at the least thrice a year besides the lent time:
and whether he does not read the Queens Majesty's injunctions quarterly in
the church?

7 Whether he have preached or caused to be preached his monthly or quarterly
sermons at the least, and who they be that preached them, and whether he have
suffered any not licenced to preach, or forbidden any that was licenced, and
whether he, or any other, have preached, declared, or spoken any thing in
derogation of the book of common prayer, which is set forth by the laws of
this realm, dispraysing the same, or any thing therein contained.

8 Whether any open notorious fornicatour, adulterer, or evil liver, by whom
the congregation is offended, have without due penance first done, been by your
Minister admitted to the holy communion, or any malicious person, that is
notoriously known to be out of charity, or that has done any open wrong to
his neighbor by word, or deed, without due reconciliation first made to the
party, that is wronged: or any that at the time stood excommunicate, or a
stranger of another parish?

9 Whether, your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, have admitted to the holy communion
any of his parish being above twenty years of age, either mankind or
womankinde, that cannot say by heart the ten commandments, the articles of
the faith, and the Lords prayer in english, and what be the names of those,
that cannot say the same, or being above fourteen years and under twenty
that could not say the catechism allowed and set forth in the book of
common prayer. And whether your minister at times convenient before he
administer unto them, and namely before Easter yearly do use to examine his
parishioners, whether they can say by hare the same, which is required in this
behalf. And whether he marry any persons that were single before, that cannot
say the aforesaid catechism?

10 Whether your Minister on every sunday and holidaie in the after noone
before evening prayer do call for, hear, and instruct, al ye youth within your
parish of convenient, age of both sexes in the catechism, or at the least so
many of them by course, as time will serve, and as he may well hear and
instruct for half an hour at the least, before evening prayer in the ten
commandementes the Articles of the belief, and the Lords prayer, and
diligently examine and teach them the catechism, as it is now allowed and set
forth? And whether for that purpose he does take the names of the^ all, and by
^ourse call certain of them by name every sundaie and holiday to come to the
teaching of the same, and present to the ordinary such quarterly as refuse to
come to be catechized, and whether he do diligently visit the sick and
comfort them with exhortation to contribute by will for the relief of the
poor, as their ability shall serve?

11 Whether he be diligent in study of the holy scriptures for further increase
in knowledge and for that purpose (if he be under the degree of a Master of
art) has of his own at the least, the new testament in latin, and English,
and whether he does daily confer certain chapters thereof together, and
observe such orders, as for his increase in knowledge, are set down by his
ordinary, using at vacant times such good and seemly exercises as may keep
him from sluggishnes and idleness?

12 Whether any Minister have married any in times forbidden by the
Ecclesiastical Laws, or without banes thrice asked, otherwise tha^ by license
of the ordinary, or has used the form of tha^kesgiuing, for woman after
childebirth, being unlawfully begotten with child otherwise then in a form of
a penitent person viz. in a white sheet or other habit prescribed by the
ordinary, or upon any other day than a Sunday, or holyday: or before sufficient
caution taken, that she should not depart the Parish, til she should perform
such penance, as should be enioined by the ordinary.

13 Whether your Minister use any other Rite, or Ceremony in the Church, than
is prescribed by the book of common prayer, and whether he or any other,
keep, or use any secret Conuenticles, Preachings, lectures, or Reading
contrary to the Law, and what be their names?

14 Whether your Parson, or Vicar, does not in his own person at the least,
sometimes in the year, both say public prayers himself, and also administer
the holy communion, according to the book of common Prayer?

15 Whether for the retayning of the perambulation of the circuit of your
parish the Parson, Vicar or Curat, churchwardens and certain of the
substantial men of the parish in the days of Rogation, commonly called the
gange days, walk the accustomes bounds of your Parish, and whether in the
same perambulation and going about, the Minister do use any other rite, or
ceremony, then to say or sing in English the one hundred and three and one
hundred and four Psalms, and such sentences of the scriptures, as are
appointed by the Queens Majesty's Injunctions with the Letany, and suffrages
following the same, and reading of one homily already divised and set forth
for that purpose, with out wearing any surplesses carrying of banners, or
handbels, or staying at Crosses, or any such like popish ceremonies?

16 Whether any do serve as a Minister, or Deacon not licenced under the
Ordinaries seal, or serve two cures, and whether any Minister coming out of
another Dioces, has not the Ordinaries letters testimonial concerning as well
the cause of his departure as his behavior, and what stipend your Curate has
by year?

17 Whether is your Minister a peace maker and exhorter of his parishioners to
obedience toward their Prince, and all other that be in authority, and to
charity, and mutual love among themselves, and such a one as is no sower of
discord amongst neighbors?

18 Whether your Parson or Vicar, suffer his buildinges or Chaunsell to fall to
ruin or decay, and whether he or any other have taken away, or discovered
any Church. Chapel, or Chauncel, or any part of them: any church porch,
vestrie, spittle, almes-house, or such like, or has pulled down the belles,
or has made any spoil or wast upon his benefice, either in his timber, or
woods, or by felling trees in the church-yearde?

19 Whether the Minister and churchwardens (according to her Majesty's
Injunctions) do keep well the Register book, and therein register al
weddings, buryings, and Christnings, and once every year exhibit a copy
thereof by Indenture to the office of the Ordinaries Register and if it have
not been done, which of them it was long of?

20. Whether your minister has executed and published all such processes and
other things as has from time to time since the last visitation been sent
unto him from the ordinary. And whether he has made any certificates of
penance orderly and penetently done, which has indeed been scoffingly, or
impenitently performed or done at other times, or in other sort then was
prescribed by the Ordinary, or else not done at all?

21 Whether your Parson, or Vicar has at any time since the thirteenth year of
the Queens Majesty's rain, made any manner of lease, or grant, of his
Parsonage, or Vicarage, or any part thereof (he being absent, and (...)
resident upon the same) to any other, then to his curate, that did or does
serve his cure, in his absence?

22 Whether has your Parson or Vicar mo benefices then one, how many, and in
what countries be they, and what be the names of them, and whether is he
absent from among you above eighty days in any one year in all, not being
lawfully qualified and dispensed withal, and being so licenced, whether is the
Cure served by an honest learned Curate, whether does he not at the least for
one month in the year, keep hospitality at his living, and also give, if his
benefice be above twenty pounds a year, the fortith part thereof to the Poor?

23 Whether any Minister do forsake his function and give himself to any
other trade of life, then is fite, or may be incident with that calling?

24 Whether does your Minister keep any suspected woman in his house (or being
not married) any woman not of near kindred unto him, or does he live in any
tavern, or alehouse, or commonly resort thither, or is he a hawker, or hunter,
or a gamester, at any game or other then at shooting, or otherwise suspected of
any notorious crime, or any evil example of life?

25 Whether does your Minister keep, or suffer to be kept any Alehouse
Tavern, or Victualing house in his Personage or vicarage house?

26 Whether does your Minister use any excessive, or unseemly kind of
apparel not commendable in that calling?

27 Whether the Patron have freely bestowed the benefice without any Simony,
directly, or indirectly, between him and the incumbent, or any other?

28 Whether your Scholmaster teaching within your parish openly, or within any
noble or gentleman's house, or in any other place there be licensed there (...)
by the ordinary? Whether, does he teach such books, as be commanded to be
taught, and that diligently? And whether is he reputed of sincere Religion, and
honest conversation, and frequenteth divine service or no?

29 Whether have you in your Parish Church, or Chapel the book of common
Prayer, with the new Kalle^der, two Psalters, the great English Bible, the two
Volumes of Homilies, the Paraphrase of Erasmus in English, the Table of the Ten
commandments, whole, and untorn, the Table of degrees of Consanguinity, and
Affinity, a convenient Pulpit, a decent Communion Table on a frame, a Linen
Cloth to cover the same, with some other covering of silk or such like, a
Communion Cup, and a cover of Silver, a decent Surples with sleeves, a sure
Coffer with two locks for the Register book, a strong Chest for the Alms
Box, with three locks thereunto, and all other things necessary to the
Premises?

30 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Minister wear any Cope in your
Parish Church or Chapel, or minister the holy Communion in any Chalice
heretofore used at Mass, or in any profane Cup or Glass, or in any other
kind of liquor, then wine?

31 Whether are all Altars taken down, to the very foundation, and the place
whited, and paued underneath, and the Roode-lofte down to the Cross beam, all
superstitious books used either in the Church, or otherwise defaced, together
withal monuments of Superstition and Idolatry, as Vestiments, etc. And if not,
in whose custody are they, or any of them?

32 Whether any Churchwardens since the last visitation have suffered any
unmarried woman begotten with child to depart their Parish before such penance
done as was enjoined.

33 Whether is your Church, or chapel, and chauncell sufficiently repaired,
and churchyard decently and sufficiently fenced and kept clean: if not, in
whose default?

34 Whether have your churchwardens from time to time truly levied xii. pence
for every day, of those who absent themselves from church, and whether has the
same been bestowed upon the poor as it ought, or no: And whether the
churchwardens themselves have absented themselves, or been negligent in their
duty, or in frequenting divine service, and whether does you Minister ^^monish
the churchwardens, openly in the church after the second lesson at morning and
evening prayer to look to their charge in this behalf?

35 Whether have any of your churchwardens or swornemen, since the last
visitation, or at that time, concealed any disorder or crime done in your
parish, or not presented the same to be reformd?

36 Whether any of your churchwardens without just cause have or do delay, to
give account every year of the church goods and rentes, and whether they or
any of them detain any of the churchgoods or common stock in their own
hands? And whether is the stock of the poor man's bo^e faithfully, and
indifferently distributed to the poor without any partial affection?

37 Whether any churchwardens, have continued in that office, at any time,
above one year without a new election?

38 Whether the clarke be appointed, according to the custom of your Parish,
whether is be obedient to the minister in such things, as belong to his
office and uses diligence in keeping all such things, as belong to his charge,
decent and clean; whether is he able to read distinctly, and to answer as
appertains to him in the church, and whether is he suffered to read any thing
in the church, save the first lesson and the epistle?

39 Whether when any man or woman is passing out of this life, the bell be
touled to move the people to pray for the sick person, and whether there be
any ringing for any that died out of the Parish, and whether for any dying
within the parish there be any more ringing than one short peale before, and
another after the burial: and whether on Alsouls even or day, or any Saints
even, or on any abrogate holidaies, ther^ (...) any other ringing then is
usual on common working days, or other th^n ringing to common, prayer, or
sermons, and that but moderate: and whether there be any ringing at all in time
of common prayer, reading of homilies, or of preaching?

40 Whether the minister and churchwardens have suffered any lords of misrule,
dancers, plaiers, or any other disguised persons to dance, or play any
unseemly parts in the church or churchyard, chapel or chappel-yarde, if
they (...) what be the names of such lords of misrule, dauncers plaiers etc.
And whether are there any plays or any drinkings kept in any of the said
places, who maintain and accompany such?

41 Whether any excommunicat person (...) intrude himself to divine service or
the Sacrament, and who are encoragers and keepers of company with such as
remain excommunicate?

42 Whether any holy days, or Fishdaies abrogated by authority, are either by
your minister bidden, or by any other observed superstitiously, or any
festival days used a new by any without lawful authority?

43 Whether all superiors, as parents, masters, etc. do as much as in them
lies to bring to the church to be chatechised on holy days and Sundaies in
the afternoon before evening prayer, their children, servants, and apprentices
both mankind and womankinde being above seven years of age, and under twenty,
which have not learned the catechism, or at the least, such and so many al
them, as your Minister shall appoint to come thither for that purpose, and to
cause them there diligently and obediently to hear and to be ordered by the
minister until such time as they have learned the same catechism: and what
their names be that neglect so to do: and who betwixt the said ages cannot
say the catechism?

44 Whether there be any that refuse to come to divine service in their parish
church or chapel, or do not faithfully and diligently endeavor themselves,
to resort thereunto with their children and servants: And whether being of
convenient age any do not communicate orderly thrice (...) at the least, and
namely once about Custody or receiving ^^ue not signified the same to the
minister in time convenient, that he might examine them how they were
instructed for partaking of so high mysteries; and whether there be any
strangers, that soiourne in your parish, especially about Easter, and do
absent themselves from church, or any that be hinderers, or deriders of true
religion, or of those which profess it?

45 Whether any do pray in a tongue which they understand not, or upon
beads, or do any way number their prayers superstitiously?

46 Whether any be in your parish which at time of divine prayers, do use any
iangling talking, walking, or other unseemly behavior in church, or
churchyard, or do any way disturb common prayer, or any part of the divine
service, or do use any game, or pastime abroad at those times, or sit in the
tavern, or Alehouse, or streets at such times, or which do work on Sundaies
any handicrafte work, or which keep open any shoppes, for sale of wares til
evening prayer be finished, or which depart before prayers be finished, or
comes say without cause sufficient, or which be brawlers, or fighters in the
church or churchyard?

47 Whether any in your parish be known, or suspected to use any witchcrafte,
or sorcerie, charm, enchantment, or unlawful invocation, and namely, midwiues
at the labor of women, or any that resorteth unto such for help and
counsel or finally blasphemers of the name of God, or swearers among you?

48 Whether any be known or suspected to be adulterers, fornicators,
incestuous persons, bands, or recettors of incontinent persons into their
houses, or which convey or suffer the^ to go away before they do make
satisfaction to the congregation offended, any drunkards, ribalds, malicious,
contentious, and uncharitable person, common slaunderers, railers, scoulders,
or sowers of discord amongst you?

49 Whether any child being borne since the eighteenth year of the Queens
Majesty's (...) has not been brought to be baptized to your parish church, but
has been baptized at home, or had their baptism deferred without just cause,
or remain yet unbaptized and whose children the same are, and whether any have
been admitted to be godfather or godmother, which had not before that time,
received the communion and by where they were admitted?

50 Whether there be any man that has or has had at one time two wives, or a
woman two husbands, any married within degrees of consanguinity, or affinity,
by the laws of God forbidden, so set out for an admonition, in a table
appointed to be affired in every parish church within this dioces? any divorced
keeping company still together, any married without the degrees forbidden,
which without law have forsaken their wives or husbands, or live not together,
any married that have made precontractes to other, any that have made privy
contractes or married without consent of their parents or governors, any
married without banes thrice sole^nly asked, or out of the parish church where
the solemnization ought to have been, without the Ordinaries licens under his
seal?

51 Whether there be any that directly, or indirectly, do take usury, or
interest contrary to the laws of God, and the Realm, who they be, and what is
the manner of their usury?

52 Whether any set down in the last will and testament, of any, as executors,
do presume, to execute, or deal with the deads goods before the will be
proved, or any presume to administer, before administration committed unto
them, any hinderers of the performance of such will, any forgers, or changers of
wills, or any executors which have not fulfilled their testators will, in not
paying legacies, given to good and godly uses?

53 Whether do you know, or have you heard of any man or woman that has
practiced, or does practice Physic or surgery within this dioces of Hereford,
not being licensed so to do by the ordinary of the same, under his hand and
seal, accordingly to the statute in that case provided, (...) it is his, or
her name which does or has so done?

54 Whether your churchwardens have sold any your church-goods, if they have,
what be they, and to whom, and whether to the better benefit of your church or
no, and how has the money thereof coming been employed?

55 And generally whether you know any of the Queens injunctions, broken, or
any other Ecclesiastical matter worthy of redress or no, and if you do, by
the oaths that you have taken you shall truly present it, as well now as
hereafter, from time to time when it shall come to your knowledge?

(...)

FINIS.
Item that you present as near as you can, the month, and year, when the
faults in the said Articles mentioned were committed?


