ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF, WITHIN THE ARCHdeaconty of Gloucester, in the
gerall Visitation of the Right Worcester: M. Samuel Burton, Archdeacon of the Dioces
of Gloucester.

Holden in the year of our Lord God, 1618. In the 16. year of the Reign or
our most gracious Sovereign Lord James, by the grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter. 1618.

The tenor of the Oath to be ministered to the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOu shall Swear, that upon due consideration of the Articles given you in
charge to present unto; You shall particularly present all the Wants and
Defects; and also all offenses and offenders therein required of: wherein you
shall deal truly and faithfully: So help you God.

LEVIT. 19.12. Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely; neither shall thou
profane the Name of thy God.


ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF WITHIN THE Archdeaconrie of the Diocese of
Gloucester, in the Visitation to be holden in the year of our Lord God, 1618.
Articles concerning the Clergy.
WHether has your Minister read the Constitutions set forth by his Majesty,
once every year, upon some Sundaies or Holidaies, in the afternoon, before
divine service; according as by the Canons he is bound?

2 Whether does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King James,
and for the Queens Majesty, the Prince, and all their royal Progeny, giving
unto him such style and title of Supreme Governor, in all causes, and over all
persons, as well Ecclesiastical Temporal, as by law are due unto him,
exhorting their Parishioners to yield him obedience, according to the same: and
also in their said Sermons, do pray for all Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, according to the fifty five Canon?

3 Whether is the prescript form of divine Service used by your minister upon
Sundays, Holidayes, Wednesdaies, and Fridaies, according to the Book of
Common Prayer? And whether does your minister duly observe all the orders,
rites and ceremonies prescribed in the said book of common prayer, as well in
reading public prayers, the Letany, as also in administering ye Sacraments in
such manner and form wearing the Surples, as in the Book of common prayer by
law now established, is enjoined.

4 Whether does your Minister administer the holy Communion so often, and at
such time, as that every Parishioner may receive the same at the least thrice
in every year: whereof once at Easter, as by the book of Common Prayer is
appointed? And whether does your Minister receive the same himself on every
day that he administreth it to others, kneeling at the same, and administreth
it to none but such as do kneel at the receiving thereof, and use the words of
the Institution according to that book at every time that the bread and wine
is received, in such manner and form as by the promise of the 21. Canon is
directed, or wherein is he faulty, and whether is warning given by him before
hand for the Communion, as the 22. Canon requires?

5 Whether has your minister admitted any notorious Offenders, or
Schismatiques to the Communion, contrary to the 26 and 27 constitutions,
without satisfaction, by due course of Law before enjoined them; or rejected
any from the Communion, who were not by public presentment or other open
scandal infamous and detected of some notorious crime, by common fame
published in the Parish?

6 Whether the Minister, together with the Churchwardens and Quest-men, do
take diligent heed and care, that not only all, and every of your
Parishioners do receive thrice in every year, as aforesaid: but also that no
strangers of any other Parish do forsake their own Minister and parish to
receive with you, contrary to the 28 Canon?

7 Whether does your Minister use to sign the children with the sign of the
cross when they are baptized, according to the Book of Common Prayer, and the
thirtieth canon? and whether he has deferred, or wilfully refused to baptize
any infant in his parish being in danger, having been duly informed of the
weakness thereof: and whether the child has died in his default without
baptism, contrary to the 68 and 69 canons?

8 Whether is your minister continually resident with you upon his Benefice, or
for how long time has he been absent: and where is he resident for the most
part, and what other Benefice has he.

9 Whether does your minister, being a Preacher, preach usually, according to
the constitutions, either in his own cure with you, or else in some other
church or chapel near adjoining, where no Preacher is: according to the 45
Canon: or how often has he been negligent in that behalf.

10 Whether is your minister a Preacher allowed: if yea, then by whom: if not,
whether does he procure Sermons to be preached among you once in every month
at the least, by such as are lawfully licensed, according to the 46 canon, or
does contribute toward a licenced Preacher, if his living will bear it?

11 Whether has your minister another Benefice, and whether does he supply his
absence by a Curate that is sufficiently licensed to preach in in that cure of
his, whereon he himself is not resident: or otherwise, in case he does not
find a Preaching minister there, by reason of the smalnesse thereof, whether
does he preach at both of his Benefices usually himself, according to the 47
canon?

12 Whether is your Curate licenced to serve by the Bishop of this Diocese, or
by any other, and by whom? whether does your minister or Curate serve more
cures then one, contrary to the 48 canon: if yea, then what other Cure does he
also serve?

13 If your minister be not licenced to preach as aforesaid, whether does he
read homilies, or rather take upon him to expound the Scriptures either in his
own cure or elsewhere, contrary to the 49 canon. If yea, then you are to
present him, and specify the place where he has so preached.

14 Whether has any person been admitted to preach within your church or
chapel, but such as you have well known to be sufficiently licensed: whom
have you so admitted, you shall present their names, and how often have any such
been admitted to preach, and by whose procurement; and whether have you caused
every strange Preacher, licensed or not licensed, to subscribe his name,
together with the day when he preached, according to the 50 and 51 canons: and
if he were licenced, then by whom he was licensed: And whether have they, or
any other preached in your church, not being soberly and decently apparelled,
according to the 74 canon?

15 Whether does your Lecturer and Preacher, read divine service, and
administer the Sacraments in his own person, twice every year, observing all
the ceremonies in the Book of common Prayer established, according to the 56
canon.

16 Whether does your Minister wear the Surplice whilst he is saying the
public prayers, and administering the Sacraments: and if he be any Graduate,
whether then does he also wear upon his Surplice, during the times aforesaid,
such a hood as by the order of his University is agreeable to his degree,
according to the 58 canon.

17 Whether does your Minister on every Sunday and Holiday before Evening
prayer, for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons of his parish, in the ten Commandments, the Articles of Belief, and
the Lords Prayer, as also the Catechism, last set forth in the Book of
Common Prayer, whereby the children of the Parish may be prepared for
confirmation according to the 90 canon?

18 Whether has your minister without license from the Archbishop, the Bishop
of the Dioces, or his Chancellor, solemnized marriage betwixt any parties, the
Banes not being three several Sandayes or Holidayes, first published, in time
of Divine service, in the several churches or chapels of several abode,
according to the book of Common prayer, and the 62 canon: and that also
betwixt the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoone, contrary unto the 102
canon?

19 Whether has your minister, since the last canons published, solemnized any
marriage betwixt any persons, being under the age of 21 years, although the
Banes be thrice asked, before such time as the Parents have made known unto
him their consent thereunto, contrary to the 99 and 100 canons: and whether has
he married any of another Diocese: and who are they: and by what authority,
and when?

20 Whether does your Minister upon Sundaies at morning prayer, declare unto
the Parishioners, what Holidaies and fasting days are appointed to be kept
the week following, according to the 64. Canon, whereby they may be put in
mind to prepare themselves accordingly, and to repair to Church to public
prayer, as by law they are bound.

21 Whether does any Minister in the Rogation days, use the perambulation of
the circuit of the Parish appointed by law, and in the same perambulation,
move the people to give thanks to God for his benefits, using such Psalms,
Prayers, Homilies, as are to that end set forth.

22 Whether does any man (being neither minister nor Deacon) read Common
prayer openly in your Church or Chapel, or administer the Sacrament of
Baptism, or solemnize matrimony, or take upon him to practice any other
ministerial duty in the Church, that is prescribed to be executed
particularly by such, as are either ministers, or Deacons: and what is his
name that so does.

23 Whether does your minister every six months denounce in his Parish, all
such of his Parish, as do persevere in the sentence of excommunication, not
seeking to be absolved: and whether has he admitted any person
excommunicate, into the Church, without a certificate of his absolution from
the Ordinary or other competent Judge, under his seal, according to the
Canons.

24 Whether does your Minister, being a Preacher, endeavor and labor
diligently with mildnes and temperance to confer with, and thereby to
reclaim the popish recusants in his Parish from their errors, if there be any
such there being: and whether is he painful in visiting the sick, according
to the Book of common prayer, and the canons in that case provided.

25 Whether is your Parson, Vicar, Lecturer, or Curate, too much frequent, or
over conversant with, or a favorer of Recusants, whereby he may be suspected
not to be sincere in Religion.

26 Whether has your minister, or any other taken upon him the place of a
minister, preached, baptized children (unless in case of necessity)
solemnized marriage, churched any woman, or ministered the holy communion in
any private house or houses: If yea, then where: whom, and how often has he
so offended in any of the Premises.

27 Whether has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or
private fasts, or prophesies not approved and established by law, or public
authority, or has he attempted upon any pretense either of possession, by
fasting and prayer to cast out devils, contrary unto the 72. canon.

28 Whether has your Minister, or any other person or persons within your
Parish, used to meet in any private house or other place, and to hold
private conuenticles, contrary to the 73. Canon; if yea, then you shall
present them all and every one of them.

29 Whether does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his
apparel, as by the 74. Constitution is enjoined, as be all at home, as when he
goes abroad.

30 Whether do you know in your parish, any that having heertofore taken upon
him or them the order of Preisthood, or of a Deacon, has since relinquished
the same, and betaken himself in the course of his life, as a lay man,
neglecting his vocation: if yea, then you shall present his name, and the place
of his abode.

31 Whether is your Minister noted or defamed to have obtained his benefice by
symonie, or reputed to be an incontinent person, or does keep any man or
woman in his house, that are suspected either to be of evil Religion or bad
life; himself to be a common drunkard, or to be a common hunter of Tauernes,
Ale houses or other suspected places; a common gamester, or player at dice, or
other unlawful games; a common Swearer, or notorious person, or faulty in any
other crime punishable by the Ecclesiastical censures, whereby he is offensive
and scandalous to his function or ministry.

32 Whether does your Minister use the form of Thanksgiving to to women after
childbirth: and whether has he admitted any thereunto that was begotten with
child in adultery, or fornication, without license of his Ordinary? And
whether have any married wives refused to come to Church according to the Book
of Common Prayer, to give God thanks after childbirth, if any be faulty
herein, you shall present their names.

33 Whether does your Minister baptize any children in any Basin or other
vessel then in the ordinary Font, being placed in the Church, according to
the 81. canon, or does use to put any Basin into it.

Articles concerning the Church.
WHether have you in your several churches and chapels the book of
constitutions, or canons Ecclesiastical, ready to be read by your minister,
according to his Majesty's pleasure, published by his Highness authority
under the great seal of England.

2 Whether is there in your church or chapel one parchment Register Book
provided for Christnings, Marriages, and Burials: and whether is the same duly
and exactly kept according to the Constitutions in that behalf provided? and a
transcript thereof brought in yearly, within one month after Easter, into my
Lord Bishops principal Registers Office? And whether does your minister upon
every Sundaie read the names of all such as have been married, christened, or
buried in the week before.

3 Whether have you provided a fair great Bible of the last Translation, the
book of Common prayer, lately commanded by his Majesty's authority only to be
used: and the Book of Homilies, and two Psalters: and whether have you in your
Church or Chapel a Font of stone set up in the ancient usual place, a
convenient and decent Communion Table, standing upon a frame, with a carpet of
silk, or some other decent stuff, and a fair Linen cloth to lay thereon at
the Communion time: and whether i^ the same then placed in such convenient sort
within the Chancell or Church, as that the minister may be best heard in his
prayer and Administration, and that the greater number may communicate: And
whether are the Ten Commandments set upon the Cast end of your Church or
Chapel, where the people may best see and read them, and other sentences of
holy Scriptures written on the walls likewise, for the same purpose?

4 Whether have you a convenient seat for your Minister to read service in,
together with a comely Pulpit set up in a convenient place, with a decent cloth
or cushion for the same: a comely large Surplice, a fair Communion Cup of
silver, and a cover agreeable for the same, with all other things and ornaments
necessary for the celebration of Divine Service, and administration of the
Sacraments; and a strong chest for the Alms of the poor, with three locks and
keys, and another chest for the keeping of the Ornaments of the church and
Register book.

5 How many Bells are there at this present hanging in the Bell-free of your
Parish church? And how many have there been heretofore? whether any of your
said Bells have been taken down and sold, or made away, and what other church
goods are now wanting in your said church?

6 Whether are your Churches or Chapels, with the chancels thereof, and your
Parsonage, or Vicarage house, and all other housing thereto belonging, in good
reparations, and decent and comely kept, as well within as without, the seats
well maintained, your church yards well fenced, and kept without abuse,
according to the 85 canon: If not, then through whose default, and what defects
are? All these things in these Articles, to be prepared, according to the
canons under the Title appertaining to churches.

7 Whether have you since the last Metropoliticall Visitation of the most
Reverend Father, the now (Lord Arch bishop of Canterbury) taken a true Terriar
of all the Glebe land, Houses, Tenements, Orchyards, Gardens, and portions of
Tithes (whether within your Parish or without) belonging to your Parsonage or
Vicarage, and delivered the same into the office of the Register of this
Diocese?

Articles concerning Schoolmasters.
WHether the Schoolmasters or Schoolmasters within your parish, openly or
privately, in any Noble or Gentleman's house, or in any other place, be of good
and sincere religion, life, and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of youth, and whether they have been examined, allowed, and
licenced for Schoolmasters, by the Ordinary in that behalf: and how many
several Schoolmasters have you, and what be their names?

2 Whether your Schoolmasters or Schoolmasters, do themselves receive the
holy Communion as often as they ought to do: and whether do all your
Scholars, which be of age sufficient, and of capacity by instruction, to
receive the Lords Supper, come to the Communion, either in your Church, or
where their Parents dwell, once every year, and be diligent to hear common
prayer?

3 Whether the Schoolmaster, or Schoolemasters, either private or public, do
teach their Scholars the Catechism authorized by public Authority, at the
least once every week, and do enstruct and examine them in the same, and do
teach any other catechism, and what catechism is it that they do so teach?

4 Whether your Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters, or any of them, be known or
suspected to read unto their Scholars privately, any unlawful books, or
privately to enstruct them in their young years, either in popery,
superstition, or disobedience, or contempt to his Majesty, and his Laws
Ecclesiastical by public authority allowed?

5 What Recusant Papists are there in your Parish: and whether do they, or any
of them keep any Schoolmaster in their house, which comes not to Church, to
hear Divine Service, and receive the Communion: what is his name: and how long
has he taught?

6 Whether the Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters within your Parish, do teach
his or their Scholars any other Grammar then that which is called the Kings
Grammar; set forth by the authority of King Henry the eight, teaching the
prescript form thereof, whereby the Scholars may perfectly understand their
Grammar rules and constructions.

Articles concerning Parishioners, and ^^hers of the Laytie.
WHether is there any within your Parish, that has or do^^ impugn the Kings
Majesty's Supremacy and authority in causes Ecclesiastical, or do any way,
or in any part impeach the same, being restored to the Crown by the Laws of
this Realm established in that behalf?

2 Whether is there any in your Parish that denies the Church of England, by
Law established under the Kings most excellent Majesty, to be a true and
Apostolical Church, teaching and maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles.

3 Whether is there any in your Parish that do impugn any of the Articles of
Religion, agreed upon in Anno 1562. and established in the Church of England?

4 Whether is there any in your Parish, that does impugn or speak against the
Rites and Ceremonies established in the Church of England, or the lawful use
of them? you shall present their names.

5 Whether are there any in your Parish that do impugn the government of the
Church of England, under the Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear office in the same; affirming
that ye same is Antichristian, or repugnant to ye word of God.

6 Whether is there any in your Parish, that impugn the form of consecrating
and ordaining of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, or Deacons: affirming that the
same is repugnant to the word of God, or that they, who are so ordered in that
same form, are not lawfully made.

7 Whether is there any in your parish, that does hold or frequent any
conuenticles or private meetings, and there do confer, to agree upon any
private orders, other then such as are by the canons set forth by public
authority, to be by them, or any others in Church government observed?

8 Whether any persons have lurked or tippled in Tauernes or Alehouses on
Sundays or other Holidayes, or used his or their manual craft or trade, to
keep their shops open upon the said days, or any of them, and especially in
the time of divine Service.

9 Whether are there any in your Parish that do or have profaned (since his
Majesty's last general pardon) the Lords day, called Sunday, or other
Holidaies, contrary to the orders of the Church of England prescribed in that
behalf.

10 Whether has any person in your parish quarrelled, stricken, or used any
violence unto, or with your Minister, or any other in the Church, or
Churchyard, or used himself disorderly in the Church by filthy and profane
talk, or any other rude and immodest behavior.

11 Whether is that due reverence and humble submission used in your Church or
Chapel in the time of divine Service, as by the ^8 Constitution is
prescribed: and whether each one in the Church or Chapel do apply and order
himself there, in time of divine Service, as by the latter part of the same
Constitution is commendably enjoined?

12 Whether the Churchwardens and Questmen, from time to time, do their
diligence in not suffering any idlepersons or Loiterers to abide either in the
Churchyard or Church Porch in Service or Sermon time, but causing them either
to come into Church to hear Divine Service, or to depart, and not to disturb
such as are hearers there.

13 Whether the Churchwardens do provide against every communion with the
advice of the minister, a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and of good
and wholesome wine for the number of the Communicants that shall receive, and
that to be brought in a clean and sweet standing pot of Pewter, or other pure
metal?

14 Whether have any in your Parish been Godfathers or Godmothers to their
own children? or whether your Minister, or any Godfathers or Godmothers have
used, or do use any other form, answer, or speech in Baptism, then is in
the book of common prayer appointed? Or whether any which have not
communicated, be admitted to be Godmothers, contrary to the 29 canon.

15 Whether is there any in your Parish that do refuse to have their children
baptized, or themselves to receive the communion at the hands of your Minister,
because he is no Preacher? you shall present their names. And if your Minister,
sithence the publishing of the said Book of Canons, have received any such
persons (being not of his own cure) to the communion, or baptized any of their
children, you shall likewise present him.

16 Whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses, cause their
children, servants, and apprentises, to come to the catechism upon the
Sundaies and Holy Days before Evening prayer, to hear, and to be enstructed
and taught therein: and those that do not their duties herein, you shall
present their names.

17 Whether have you or your predecessors Churchwardens there suffered since
the last pardon, any plays, banquets, feasts, church-ales, drinkings, or any
other profane vsages, to be kept in your church, chapel, or churchyards, or
bells to be rung superstitiously upon Holidayes, or eues, abrogated by the book
of common prayer, contrary to the 68 canon.

18 How many inhabitants within your parish, men or women, above the age of
xvi. years, do refuse to frequent divine Service established by public
authority of this Realm, or to receive the holy Communion, or are negligent
therein: what be their names, and of what degree, state or trade of life are
they? you are to present them all of both sorts.

19 Whether do any of the inhabitants of your said parish entertain within
their house any soiourners, lodgers, or any common resorters and guests, who
refuse to frequent divine Service, or receive the holy Communion, as aforesaid,
what be their names, of what quality or condition are they?

20 Whether are any of the said popish Recusants of insolent behavior not
without public offense, or do boldly busy themselves in seducing and
withdrawing others, either abroad or in their own families, by enstructing
their children in popish religion, or by refusing to entertain any, especially
in place of greatest service or trust, but such as concur with them in
opinion of Relgion, and what be their names that so do?

21 How long the said Popish Recusants have obstinately abstained either from
divine Service, or from the Communion, as is aforesaid: whether of any long
time, or only since his Majesty's reign, and how long?

22 What persons aforesaid within your Parish, either for the offense
aforesaid, or for any other contumacie or crime, do remain excommunicated,
what be their names, and for what cause, and how long have they stood
excommunicate?

23 Whether were you the Churchwardens and Quest men chosen by the consent of
the Minister and Parishioners in Easter week, according unto the 89 and 90
Canons, and whether have the Churchwardens before you, given up a just account
for their time, and delivered to you their successors whatsoever money, or
other things of right belonging to the Church, that was in their hands:
according to the 89 canon?

24 Whether do all persons above the age of sixteen years, usually resort to
hear divine Service upon Sundays and Holidayes approved, and whether has
each one of your Parishioners (being above the age of sixteen years, as
aforesaid) received the holy Communion thrice this last year, chiefly once at
Easter in your parish Church kneeling? if no, then you shall present their
names which have not so done.

25 Whether have you a fit parish Clark, aged twenty years at least, of honest
conversation, and sufficient for reading and writing, and whether he be paid
his wages without fraud, according to the most ancient custom of your parish;
if not then by whom is he so defrauded and denied, and whether he be chosen by
the Parson, or Vicar, or by whom, according to the 91 canon? is the Parish
Clarke approved by the Ordinary, and does he keep the church clean, and the
doors locked, is he diligent and serviceable to the minister?

26 Whether have any in your parish been married within the prohibited
degrees, forbidden by the Law, and expressed in a certain Table, published by
authority in the year 1563. if yea, then you shall present their names: and
whether have you the said Table publicly set in your Church, and fastened to
some convenient place there?

27 Whether does any heretofore divorced, keep company with any other at bed
and at board, as man and wife, what be their names, when and where they were
married, and how long they so continued?

29 Whether have you any in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame
and report, which have committed adultery, fornication, or incest, or any
Bawds, harborers, or receivers of such persons, or publicly suspected thereof,
which have not been publicly punished to your knowledge: if yea, then with
whom: And whether are there any which are by common fame and report reputed and
taken to be common drunkards, blasphemers of Gods most holy name, common and
usual swearers, filthy speakers, raylers, sowers of discord among their
neighbors; or speakers against Ministers marriages, Usurers, contrary to the
statute made in the 37. year of Henry the eight, Symoniacall persons,
fighters, brawlers, or quarreliers in Church or Church yard? you shall not
fail to present their names.

29 Whether have any in your parish received or harbored any woman begotten
with child out of wedlock, and suffered them again to depart without penance
first enflicted upon them by the Ordinary: You shall truly present as well the
party harboring, as harbored, and who is suspected to have committed
Incontinency with her.

30 Whether any person or persons suspected or detected heretofore of
incontinency, and therefore departing out of your Parish for a season, is now
returned again, or in what place else is he or she now abiding to your
knowledge, or as you have heard: you shall not fail to present the whole truth
in that behalf.

31 Whether there be any person or persons, Ecclesiastical or Temporal, within
your Parish or elsewhere within this Diocese, that have retained or kept in
their custody, or that read, sell, utter disperse, carry or deliver to
others, any English books or libells, set forth either on this side, or
beyond the Seas, by Papists or Sectaries, against the Kings supremacy, in
causes Ecclesiastical, or against true Religion and Catholic doctrine now
publicly professed in this Church, or the Government or Discipline of the
Church of England, now within this Realm received and established by common
Authority, and what their Names and Syrnames are?

32 Whether there be any in your Parish, who are noted, known, or suspected to
conceal, or keep hidden in their houses any Masse-bookes, Portesses,
Breuiaries or other books of Popery or superstition, or any Chalices, Copes,
Vestments, Albes, or other Ornaments of superstition, uncancelled or undefaced,
which is to be coniectured, they do keep for a day; as they call it?

33 Whether any of your Parishioners, having a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, or do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to any other
place to hear other Preachers.

34 Whether there be any Inkeepers, Ale-wiues Victuallers, or Tiplers, that
suffer or do admit any person or persons in their Houses, to Eat, Drink, or
play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Bowls, or such like Games, in the time of common
Prayer, or Sermon, on Sundaies or Holydaies; or any Butchers or others that
commonly use to sell meat, or other things in the time of common prayer,
preaching, or reading of Homilies? And whether in any Faires or common markets
falling upon Sundaies, there be showing of any wares before morning prayer be
done? And whether any Markets and selling of wares, be used or suffered in any
Church yards, on the Saboth day, by common Pack men and Pedlers, going about,
or any Butchers?

35 Whether has your Minister or any of your Parish, without the consent or
priuity of the Ordinary, caused any to do penance, or be punished, either
openly or otherwise, for any crime, punishable by Ecclesiastical Laws only:
and what be the Names of the parties that have been so punished, and in what
manner?

36 Whether there be any in your Parish, who will come to hear the Sermon, but
will not come to the public prayer, appointed by the book of common prayer,
making a Schism or division (as it were) between the use of public Prayer and
Preaching. And whether there be any who being present at public prayer, do
not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees at such times as by the book
of common prayer they are appointed; to wit, when they make a general
confession of their sins: when all Prayers and Collects are read? and at the
receiving of the Holy Communion, etc. And what are their Names, that have at
any time showed themselves undutiful and irreverent in that behalf.

37 Whether there be any married women or others within your parish, which
after child birth, refuse or contemn to come to the Church, to give God thanks
for their safe delivery, and to have their prayers publicly appointed in that
behalf, by the book of Common Prayer.

38 Whether any within your Parish, do resort into Barnes, Fields, Woods,
private houses, or to any extraordinary exposition of Scriptures, or
conferences together: or that be drawers, or perswaders of others, to any such
schismatic conuenticle.

39 Whether any do keep their children unbaptized longer then is convenient:
unless that it be for sickness of the child, or other urgent occasion? And
whether any do carry their children from the Parish they are borne in, to
other parishes to be baptized, and so refuse their own parish: or do bring
strange Ministers into their own houses, to baptize their children privately,
according to their own Fantasies?

40 Whether you have known or heard any Fiddlers or Minstrels, or any other
persons, which go under the name of Musicians and Waytes, which either at
Weddings, Churchings, or any other Feasts, or meetings, have sung, or use to
sing any Songs, Ballads, or Rimes, tending to the disgrace of Religion, or the
Ministers thereof: or tending to Profanenes, or the corruption of good manners?
You shall truly present the names of such, if you know them, or can learn
them: As also the names of the Householder, or Householders, in whose house or
houses they have sung such songs, as also the particular names of them before
whom they have sung them.

41 Whether do the Churchwardens of your parish, look diligently to the
mending of the Church ways: and whether the said ways be at the time of the
year so sufficiently mended, that the Parishioners may conveniently come to
Church, from all places of the parish in winter time.

42 Whether do you know of any other matter, of Ecclesiastical cognizance,
worthy the presentment in your Judgment, above not expressed, which you hold
fit to be reformed. And if you do, you shall likewise present the same, by
virtue of your Oaths.

AT the delivery of your bill of Presentment, you are likewise in the said bill
to set down the names of all such as have been buried at any time, since the
last Visitation, being Men, Mayds, or Widows. And likewise the Minister,
Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every parish, must in the said bill of
Presentment, set down besides their presenting, which they make of all
Recusants and Non-communicants, this Note following.

Recusants Men -- Recusants Women -- Non-communicants of both Sex Communicants
of both Sex -- in the whole Parish.
So set down the number of every one, The Minister, Churchwardens, and
Sidemen, must put their hands to this note. And the old Churchwardens are to
be chosen Sidemen.


