ARTICLES To be enquired of by the Churchwardens and Sworne-men, within the
peculiar Jurisdiction of the Deane and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of S.
Peter in Exeter.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot.

An. Dom. 1609.

The tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOU shall swear, that upon due consideration of these Articles given you in
charge, you shall present every such person of or within your Parish, as you
shall know to have committed any offense, or omitted any duty mentioned in
any of these Articles, or which are publicly defamed, or vehemently suspected
of any such offense or negligence: So help you God, by the contents of his
holy Gospel.

Touching the Church.
WHETHER is your Church or Chapel with the Chauncell thereof, and every part
of either of them, well and sufficiently repaired, the windows well glased,
the floores paued plain and even, without dust, or any thing noisome, or
unseemly.

2 Whether is your Churchyard well fenced with walls, rayles, pales, as has
been accustomed; if not, whose default is it.

3 Whether has there bin any fighting, chiding, brawling or quarrelling, any
plays, feasts, temporal Courts or Leets, lay Iuries, Musters, or other
profane usage in your Church or churchyard any Bells superstitiously rung on
Holy Days, or their Eeues, or at any other time without good cause, allowed by
the Minister, and Churchwardens: have any trees bin felled in your churchyard,
and by whom?

4 Whether is the Mansion house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, with all the
buildings thereunto belonging, your Parish, Almes-house, and Church-house
sufficiently repaired, maintained, and to godly, and their right uses employed.

5 Whether have you in your Church, the Bible in the largest volume, the Book
of common Prayer lately authorized by his Majesty, the books of Homilies
allowed, ye two Psalters, a convenient Pulpit for the preaching, a decent seat
for the Minister to read service in, conveniently placed, a strong chest with
a hole in the lid, and three locks and keys, one for the Minister, the other
for the Churchwardens for the alms of the poor, and the keeping of the
Register Book of the Christenings, Marriages, and Burials.

6 Whether have you in your Church, a Font of stone for baptism set in the
ancient usual place, a decent Table for ye Communion conveniently placed,
covered with silk, or other decent stuff in time of divine Service, and with
a fair linen cloth over that, at the administration of the Communion.

7 Whether have you all such Bells, Ornaments, and other Vtensils as have
ancientlie belonged to your Church, a communion cup of silver with a cover, a
fair standing pot or stoape of pewter or purer metal, for the wine upon the
communion table, a comely surples with sleeves, a Register Book of parchment
of christenings, marriages, and burials, a book for ye names of al strange
Preachers subscribed with their names and the name of the Bishop or others
where they had license?

8 Whether is the alms for your poor quarterly at the least distributed by
you the Churchwardens and the Minister in the presence of six of the chief
Parishioners, to your poor? And are weekly the names and surnames of all
persons married, christened and buried and of their Parents with the day and
year entered in your said parchment book, and is every leaf being full,
subscribed by you the Minister and Churchwardens.

9 Whether are the ten Commandments set up in the East end of the Church and
other chosen Sentences of holy Scripture upon the walls in convenient places,
are all your seats in your Church in good repair cleanly kept conveniently
placed, and the parishioners in the^ or elsewhere or o^^ly set, and is there no
contention or striving for any seat or place amongst them?

Touching the Ministry, Service, and Sacrament.
WHether is the common prayer said or sung by your Minister both morning and
evening distinctly and reverently every Sunday and Holy Day, and on their
Eeues, and at convenient and usual times of those days, and in most
convenient place of the Church for the edifying of the people?

2 Whether does your Minister observe the orders, rightes, and ceremonies
prescribed in the book of common prayer, in reading the holy Scriptures,
Prayers and administration of the Sacraments, without diminishing in regard of
preaching or any other respect, or adding any thing in the matter or form
thereof.

3 Whether does your Minister on wednesdaies and fridaies not being holy days
at the accustomed hours of Service, resort to the Church and say the Letanie
prescribed, and does your Clarke or Sexton give warning before by tolling of a
bell on those days.

4 Whether does your Minister as often as he administreth the communion, first
receive it himself? whether does he use any bread or wine newly brought,
before the words of Institution be rehearsed, and the bread and wine present on
the table, does he not deliver the bread and wine to every communicant
severally?

5 Whether does your Minister give warning publikly in ye church at morning
prayer on the Sunday before ^ee administreth the Communion, for the better
preparation of the Parishioners?

6 Whether has your Minister admitted to the Communion any notorious sinner
openly known or defamed, or any who has openly and maliciously contended
with his neighbor, before repentance and reconciltation made and done by
appointment of the ordinary?

7 Whether has your Minister admitted to the Communion any Churchwarden or
Side-man, who has wittingly and willingly neglected contrary to his oath, to
present any public offense or scandal, being moved to present either by some
of his Neighbors, the Minister, or his Ordinary?

8 Whether has your Minister administered the communion to any but such as
kneel? or do any refuse to kneel? has he administered to any who refuses to
be present at public Prayer: or who has depraved the Book of common Prayer?
administration of the Sacraments, or the rights and ceremonies prescribed or
the Articles of Religion agreed upon, or the Book of ordering Priests, and
Bishops? or against his Majesty's Supremacy? or have any been for these
causes repelled, and have they repented in writing, or otherwise, and what be
their names?

9 Whether has your Minister more Benefices the^ one? if he have, how far
distant are they, how often is he absent in the year? when he is absent, has
he an allowed Preacher for his Curate?

10 Whether is your Minister an allowed Preacher? if he be, does he every
Sunday in your Church, or some other near adjoining where no Preacher is,
preach one Sermon every Sunday?

11 Whether does your Minister being no Preacher allowed, presume to expound
the Scripture in his own Cure, or else where does he procure every month a
Sermon to be preached in his Cure by Preachers lawfully licensed, and on every
Sunday when there is no Sermon does he or his Curat read some one of ye
Homilies prescribed?

12 Whether is your Curate allowed by the Ordinary under his hand and seal to
serve in your Cure, and whether does he serve two churches or chapels in one
day?

13 Whether does your Minister always in saying the public Prayers and
administering the Sacraments, wear a decent surplesse with sleeves, and being a
Graduate, does he always wear therewith a Hoode by the order of the
Universities, agreeably to his degree.

14 Whether has your Minister or any other Preacher in your Church, preached
any thing to confute or impugn any doctrine delivered by any other Preacher,
and has he and they prayed for Christ's Catholic Church, as is prescribed by
the Canon?

15 Whether has, or does any preach in your Church which refuses to conform
himself to the Laws, Rites, and Ordinances established, or which has not
first showed a sufficient license?

16 Whether does your minister in his sermons four times in the year at the
least, teach and declare the Kings Majesty's power within his Realms, to be
the highest power under God, to whom al within the same, owe most loyalty and
obedience, and that all foreign power is justly taken away?

17 Whether does your Minister every Sunday and Holy Day half an hour before
Evening prayer or more, examine and instruct the youth in the ten
Commandments, the Belief, the Lords prayer, and the Catechism, set forth in
the Book of common prayer?

18 Whether has your Minister married any which have not bin three several
Sundaies or Holy Days asked in your Church in yt time of divine Service
without license, or has he with license or without married any whereof neither
dwelt in your Parish?

19 Whether has your Minister with license or without, married any at any
other times than between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the fore-noone, or
in any private house, or when there is no license, before their Parents or
Governors, (the parties being under ye age of 21) have testified their
consents?

20 Whether does your Minister declare to the people every Sunday at the time
appointed, what Holy Days or Fasting days be in the week following? does he
being a Preacher confer with all Recusants and persons excommunicate or
suspended? being no Preacher does he procure a sufficint Preacher to reclaim
them thereby?

21 Whether does your Minister keep a Note of all persons exco^muicate, and
once every six months, does he denounce them which have not obtained their
absolution, on some Sunday in service time, that others may be admonished to
refrain their company?

22 Whether does your Minister having notice given him, diligently visit the
sick (the disease not being infections) does he instruct and comfort them,
does he then move them to make their Testaments, and remember the poor, and
other works of charity, and the passing bell tolling, does he then neglect his
last duty?

23 Whether has your Minister refused to baptize any Child brought to the
Church upon any Sunday or Holy Day, or to bury any Corpse brought into the
Church or churchyard; or to church any women, having had warning thereof.

24 Whether has your Minister being truly informed of the danger of death of
any Infant unbaptized, and being desired to go to the place where the child is,
to baptize it, neglected to go, by means whereof the child died unbaptized?

25 Whether does your Minister at any time preach or administer the communion
in any private house, except when any are so impotent, that they cannot go to
Church, or very dangerously sick.

26 Whether do any Chaplens, in your parish preach or administer the Sacrament
in any Chapel not consecrated, or in any house having no Chapel allowed by
law, and do the Lords and Masters where such chapels are, resort often to
the parish Church, and there receive the communion once at the least every
year?

27 Whether has your Minister held or appointed any public fast, or been
present at such, does he or any other in your parish hold any Lecture or
Exercise, or attempt by fasting or prayer, or otherwise to cast out any Devils,
without the license of the Bishop under his hand and seal?

28 Whether has there been any secret conuenticles or meetings in your parish
by any Priests, Ministers, or others, tending to the deprauing of the form of
prayer, doctrine, or government of the Church?

29 Whether does your Minister and Preacher, being at the least a Master of
Arts, or Bachelor of Law, usually wear his Gown with a standing collar, and
sleeves straight at the hand, or wide sleeves, and therewithal a Hood or
tippet of silk or sarcenet, and a square cap?

30 Whether does your Minister having not attained those degree, wear the like
Gown, and square cap with a tippet?

31 Whether does your Minister in his journey wear a cloak with sleeves called
a priests cloak with gards, welts, long buttons, or cuts?

32 Whether does your Minister wear a wrought nightcap at any time, or does
he wear any cut or pinkt apparel, does he in public go in his Dublet and
Hose without a coat or cassocke, and does he wear any light colored stockings?

33 Whether does your Minister resort to any Tauerns, or Alehouses, except for
his honest necessities, or does he boorde or lodge in any such place, does he
use any base or servile labor, drinking, riot, dice, cards, tables, or any
other unlawful games? is he contenuous, a hunter, hawker, swearer, dauncer,
suspected of incontinencie, or give evil example of lift?

34 Whether is there in your Parish any Minister or Deacon who has forsaken
his calling, using himself in his course of life as a lay man?

Touching Schoolmasters.
WHether have you in your Parish any Schoolmasters, who teaches either in
public School, or private house? does he give any evil example of life, is
he allowed by the Ordinary under his hand and seal, or does your minister or
Curate teach, and is he allowed in like manner?

2 Whether does your minister or Schoolmaster, who teaches, teach the
Catechism by authority set forth, does he when there is any Sermon, or divine
service, bring his Scholars to Church, and see them quietly and soberly
ordered, does he examine them after their return what they have learned of the
sermon?

3 Whether does he at other times teach them such sentences of holy Scripture,
as may endure them to all godliness, does he teach the Grammar set forth by
King Henry the Eight, continued by King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth?

4 Whether has your Schoolmaster an Usher under him, are they both diligent,
is your Usher allowed by the Ordinary, does your Schoolmaster direct his Usher
ye form and manner of teaching and does he weekly take account of him and the
Scholars under his charge how they have profited, and what they have learned
and out of what author?

5 Whether has either of them spoken, writ, or taught against any thing
whereunto he formerly subscribed as ye Kings supremacy, ye Articles of
religion, book of common prayer, or any thing therein contained?

Touching the Parish Clarke and Sexton.
WHether have you a parish Clarke sufficient for his place of ye age of 20.
years at the least, is he of honest conversation, can he read, write, and
sing, is he diligent in his office, and serviceable to his minister?

2 Whether does your Clarke meddle with any thing above his Office, as
churching of women, burying the dead, reading of prayers, or such like?

3 Whether does your Clarke or Sexton keep your Church clean, the doors safe
locked, is any thing by his default lost or spoiled in the Church, does he
suffer any unreasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in your church?

4 Whether does your clarke or Sexton, when any is passing out of this life,
neglect to toll a bell having notice thereof, or the party being dead, does he
suffer any more than one short peale, and before his burial one, and after the
same another?

5 Whether does any of your Parish refuse to pay unto the Parish clarke or
Sexton such wages as are unto them due, and have been accustomablie paid.

Touching Parishioners.
WHether has any in your parish spoken against, or any way impugned the Kings
Majesty's supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, the Truth and Doctrine of the
Church of England, ye form of Gods worship contained in the Book of common
Prayer, and administration of Sacraments?

2 Whether has any in your parish spoken against or impugned ye Articles of
religion, agreed upon in An. 1602. the rites, and ceremonies established in the
church, the government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons and others
that bear office in the same?

3 Whether has any in your parish spoken against, or impugned the form of
making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, or have any separated
themselves from the society of the congregation and combined in a new
Brotherhood, or depraved ye Synod lately held by th Kings authority?

4 Whether has any in your parish maintained or defended any such Ministers or
Schoolemasters as refuse to subscribe to the order of the Church, have they
affirmed that such Ministers, and their adherents may make rules, and order in
causes Ecclesiastical without the Kings authority?

5 Whether does any in your parish profane, violate, or mispend the Sabbath,
or holy-daie, or any part of them using any offensive conversation, or worldly
labor in those days, or any of them?

6 Whether has any in your parish, in time of divine service covered his head,
albeit he have infirmity, in which case a cap or night-coyfe is allowed, or is
there any who has not reverently kneeled when the general Confession,
Letanie, and other prayers are read, and which have not stood up at the saying
of the Belief?

7 Whether has any in your parish disturbed the Service or Sermon by walking,
talking, or any other way, or departed out of the Church, during the service or
sermon without some urgent cause, or loytered about the Church, or church porch?

8 Whether do all parishioners receive the holy communion thrice every year
at the least, whereof the Feast of Easter to be one, and have all being of the
age of 16. years duly received, or not?

9 Whether has any Parent been urged to be present, or admitted to answer as
Godfather for his own child, or has any Godfather or God-mother made any
other answer or speech, than is prescribed by the Book, or have any been
admitted for such at baptism, who have not first received the Communion?

10 Whether does all fathers, mothers, masters, mistresses come and cause their
children, servants, and apprentises to come duly to the church, according to
the ministers direction, to be instructed and catechized, or who be they that
have not obeyed the minister herein?

11 Whether have any persons married together within the degrees of
consanguinitie or affinity prohibited, set forth in a Table appointed to be
placed in every church, or have any married or contracted themselves under the
age of 21. years, without the consent of their Parents, or Governors, if
their Parents be dead?

12 Whether have any persons once lawfully married, forsaken each other, or do
live a sunder without the authority of the Ordinary, or do any being divorced
or separated, marry again the former wife or husband yet living?

13 Whether have any been married in ye times wherein marriage is by law
restrained, without lawful license, viz. From the Saturday next before Aduent
Sunday, until the Foureteenth of January: and from the Saturday next before
Septuagesima sunday until the Monday next after low Sunday: and from the
Sunday before the Rogation week, until Trinity Sunday?

14 Whether has any of your parish irreverently used your minister, or have
any laid violent hands upon him, or disgraced his Office and Calling by word or
deed?

15 Whether have you in your parish any dweller or soiourner, a maintainer of
Popish doctrine, or suspected to keep scismatical books, or to favor any
heresy or error?

16 Whether have you any common resorts to your church, which are not of your
parish, or do any such receive the communion amongst you: what be their
names, and of what parishes are they?

17 Whether have any in the time of service, opened their shops, exercised
their trade, used any gaming, been in any Tavern, or Alehouse, or otherwise
ill employed?

18 Whether are there in your parish any Adulterers, Fornicators, incestuous
persons, bawdes, receauers close favorers, conueyers away, or which suffer to
depart any incontine^t person unpunished, any blasphemers, Common swearers,
Drunkards, Rybands, Usurers, malicious slaunderers, Scolds, or sowers of
discord, or any defamed of the said crimes?

19 Whether do any in your Parish administer the goods of the dead without
authority, or suppress their will or Testament, have any Executors neglected
to perform their Wills, especially in paying of Legacies given to the church,
to the poor, or to any other charitable, or godly uses?

20 Whether do any refuse to pay to the reparations, ornaments, and other
things required in your church, as they are ceased by a lawful vestrie, or
any dwelling out of your parish, which hold land in your Parish?

21 Whether has any person suspended or excommunicated, been suffered to
hear Divine service, or the sermon, to receive the sacraments, to be married or
churched, or have any Excommunicants been buried in christian burial?

22 Whether have any in your Parish been christened, churched, buried, or
received the communion, or been married out of your church, both parties
dwelling in your Parish?

23 Whether have all women in your parish delivered of child, come at
convenient time after to church to give thanks, and have they been churched
according to the Book of common prayer?

24 Whether has the perambulation of the circuit of your Parish been observed
once every year, if not whose default is it?

25 Whether have any in your Parish given the churchwardens or Sidemen, or any
of them evil words for doing their duty, according to their oath and
conscience in making presentment for any fault.

Touching Churchwardens and Swornemen.
WHether do any in your Parish take upon them to be churchwarden or Sideman,
which is not lawfully chosen by the Minister and Parishioners according to the
Canon, or do any continue that Office longer than one year, except they be
chosen again, and are all such Officers chosen yeerelie in Easter week?

2 Whether do your churchwardens within one Month at the most after their
year ended, before the Minister and Parishioners, give up a just account of
all such money, and other things, as they have received and bestowed? have they
delivered all remaining in their hands belonging to their church or parish, by
bill indented to be delivered to the next churchwardens?

3 Whether have the Churchwardens with ye advise of the Minister from time to
time provided a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and wholesome wine for
the number of Communicants?

4 Whether do the Churchwardens and Swornemen before every Visitation, and at
other times when there is just occasion, meet and confer about their
presentiments, and the answering of these Articles, and who has (after notice
given him of the time and place) carelessly absented himself?

5 Whether the forfeiture of xij. d. for absence from Church appointed by
Statute to the use of the poor, be taken and levied by the Churchwardens, and
employed according to the same Statute: and whether is the same forfeiture
taken of all persons which stand wilfully suspended or excommunicated?

6 Whether have any churchwardens lost, sold, or detayned any Goods,
Ornaments, Bells, Rents, or Implements of the Church?

7 Whether do you the Churchwardens and Sidemen about the midst of divine
Service usually walk out of the Church, and see who are abroad in any
Alehouse, or elsewhere absent, or evil employed, and have you presented all
such to the Ordinary?

8 Whether do you know, or have heard a fame of any offense committed, or
duty omitted by any of your Parish before your time, and heretofore not
presented to the Ordinary, or as yet not reformed, and have you presented the
same?

9 Finally, do you know of any matter or cause which is a breach of the laws
Ecclesiastical here not expressed, and have not presented the same?


