Merry Tales of the mad men of Gotam.

Gathered to gether by A. B. of Phisike Doctor.



Here begins certain merry tales of the mad men of Gotam.
The first tale.
THeare was two men of Gotam, and the one was going to the market to Nottyngham
to buy sheep and the other did come from the Market, and both met together
upon Nottingham bridge. Well met said the one to the other. Whether be you
going (said he that came from Nottyngeham, to him that went to Nottingeham.)
Marye said be that went to Nottyngham, I go to the market to buy sheep.
Buy sheep said the other? and which way will thou bring them. Marye
said the other. I will bring them over this bridge. By Robyn hoode said he
that came from Nottingham, but thou shalt not. By Maid Maryon said he that
went to the market but I will. Thou shalt not said the other. I will said
the other. Let bear, said the one. Shows theare, said the other. They beat
their staves against the ground, one against the other, as theare had been a
hundred seepe betwixt them. Hold in theare laid the one. Beware of (...)yng
over the bridge of my sheep said the other, I care not sa^d the other, they
shall not come this way by the mass. By the mass said the other, but they
shall. Then said the other, and thou make much to do, I will put my finger
in thy mouth. A turde thou will, said the other. And as they wear at this
contencyon, another man of Gotam did come from the market with a sack of meal
upon an horse. And seeing and hearing his neighbors at strife, for sheep,
and none betwixt them said a fools will you never learn wit. Help we said
be that had the meal, and lay my sack upon my shulder, they did so. And he
went to the one side of the bridge, and un losed the mouth of the sack, and
did shake out all his meal in to the river, now neighbor said this man,
how much meal is theare in my sack now, marye theare is noue at all said
they, Now by my faith said he even as much wit is in your two headdes, to
strive for that thing which ye have not.

Which was the wisest of al these three persons? Judge you.

The ii. tale.
THeare was a man of Gotam did ride to thee market with two bussheles of
wheat, and because his horse should not bear heavy, he carried his corn
upon his own neck, and did ride upon his horse, because his horse should
not carry no heavy burden.

The iii. tale.
On a time the me^ of Gotam, would have py^ned the Cockow, that she should sing
all the year and in the myddest of the town they did make a hedge (round in
compass,) and they had got a Cocow, and put her in it and said, singe here all
the year, and thou shalt lack neither meat nor drink. The Cocow as soon
as she was set with in the hedge, flew her way. A vengeance on her said
they, we made not our hedge high enough.

The iiii. tale.
THere was a man of Gotam the which went to the market to Nottingham to sell
cheese. And as he was going down the hill to Nottingham b(...)e, one of his
cheeses did fall out of his poake, and did run down the hyl. A horsons said
the fellow, can you ru^ne to the market alone I will send the one after the
other of you. He laid down his poake, and took the cheeses, and did trundle
them down the hill one after another: and some ran into one busshe, and some
into another. And at the last he said I charge you all meet me in the market
place. When the fellow did come into the market place to meet his cheeses,
he did tarry till the market was almost done. Then he went about, and did
inquyre of his neighbors, and other men if they did see his cheeses come to
the market? Who should bring them? said one of the market men. Marye them
selves said the fellow, they knew the way well enough. He tarried still till it
was night. At night he said a vengeance on them al. I did fear to see that
my cheeses did run so fast, that they run beyond the market: I am sure
that they be almost now at York. He hired a horse to ride after to York to
seek his cheeses wheare they wear not. But to this day, no man could tell
him of his cheeses.

The v. tale.
THeare was a man of Gotam and he did buy at Nottynge ham a Trefete (or a
Brandyron.) And as he was going home, his shoulder did ache: And he did set
down his Trefete, and see that it had three feet said, a horsen, haste thou
three feet, and I but two, thou shalt bear me home if thou will, and did
sit down on the trefete and said, bear me as long as I have borne the, for if
thou do not, thou shall stand still for me. The man of Gotam did see that his
Trefete would not go further, stand still said he in the Mares name, and
follow me if thou will, I will tell thee the right way to my house. Wha^ he
did com home to his house his wife said, where is my Brandiron or trefete. The
man said he has three legs, and I have but two legs, and I did teach him
the way to my house, let him come home if he will. Wheare left ye the Trefete
said the wife, at Gotam hill, said the man. The wife did run and fetch home
her trefete, or else she had lost it.

The vi tale.
THeare dwelt a smith in Gotam the which had a Waspes nest in the straw in the
end of his Forge. Theare did come one of his neighbors to have his horse
shooed, and the waspes wear so busye that the fellow was stong, with a waspe.
He being angrye said, art thou worthy to keep a Forge, to have men st^nge
here with Waspes? O neighbor said the smythe, be content. I will put them
from their neste bye and bye. He took a Coulter and heated it in his Forge
glowyng hot, and thruste it into the straw in the end of his Forge. And so
he did set his Forge a fire, and did burn it up. Than said the Smythe. I
told thee that I would fire them forth of their nestes.

The vii. tale.
WHen that good Frydaye was come, the men of Gotam did cast their heads
together what they should do with their white hearing, and their red hearing,
and their sprottes, and salt fyshe, One consulted with the other, and agreed
that all such fysh should be cast into their po^d or poole (the which was in
the myddle of their town,) that it might increase against the next year.
Every man that had any fish left, did cast it into the poole, the one said I
have thus many white hearinges, the other said, I have thus many sprots,
another said I have thus many red hearings, the other said I have thus much
salt fyshe. Let all go together in to the poole or pond, and we shall fare
like Lords next lent. At the beginning of the next lent, folowinge, the men
did draw their ponde to have their syshe: and there was nothing but a great
Ele.

(A said they all) a mychiefe on this Ele, for he has eat up all our fyshe.
What shall we do with him said the one to the other. Kill him said another.
Chop him al to pieces said another. Nay not so said other, let us drown him: be
it said all.

They went to another poole or pond by, and did cast in the Eele into the
water. Lie theare said they and shift for thy self, for no help thou shalt
have of us. And theare they left the Eele to be drowned.

The viii. tale.
ON a time the men of Gotam had forgotten to pay their rent to their Lord. The
one said to the other, to morrow is our pay day, and what reamedy shall we find
to send our money to our Lord? The one said this day I have taken a quick
Hare, and he shall carye it, for he is light of foot. Be it said all, he shall
have a letter, and a purse to put in our money and we will tell him the way.
When the Letters wear wryt, and the money put into a pursse, they did tie them
about the Hares neck saying, first thou must go to Lowghburrow, and the^ to
Leyceter, and at newwarke theare is our Lord, and commend us to him, and
theare is his duty. The hare as soon as he was out of their hands, he did
run a clean contrary way* Some cried out to him saying thou must go to
Lowghburrow first. Some said let the Hare alone, he can tell a nearer way
the^ the best of us all: let him go.

The ix. tale.
ON a time theare was one of Gotam mowynge in the meades, and found a great
grasshopper. He did cast down his sithe and did run home to his neighbors
and said that there was a Devil in the fyelde that hopped in the grass. Then
there was every man ready with clubbes and staves, with, Halbardes, and
other weapons, to go to kill the Grasshopper. When they did come to the place
where that the Grasshopper should be. Said the one to the other, let every
man cross him self from this devil, for we will not meddle with him. And so
they returned home again and said, we wear well bleste this day that we
went no further. A cowardes said he that had the sithe in the mead, help me to
fetch my sith. No said they, it is good to sleep in a whole skin: better
it is to leese thy sith, then to mar us all.

The x. tale.
IN a certain time theare wear twelve of Gotam did go a fysshyng, and some
did wade in the water, and some stood a dry land. And when that they went
homewarde, the one said to the other, we have ventured far to day in wadyng
I pray god that none of us (that did come from home) be drowned. Marye said
the one to the other, let us see that, for theare did twelve of us come out.
And they told themselves, and every man did tell a leven, and the twelfe man
did never tell him self. Alas said the one to the other there is one of us
drowned. They went back to the brook whear that they had been fishing and
sought up and down for him that was drowned, and did make great lamentacion. A
Courtyer did come ridyng by and did ask what that they did seek. And why
they wear so sorye. O said they this day we went to fysshe this brook and
there did come out twelve of us, and one is drowned. Why said the Courtier tell
how many be of you. And the one told. xi. and he did not tell himself. Well
said the Courtier what will you give me and I will find out twelve (...) Sir
said they, all the money that we have. Give me the money: said the courtier.
And he began with the first, and did give him a te^o^be^tibus over the
shoulders that he groned, and said there is one: so be served all that they
groned on the matter when he did come to the last he paid him a good saying,
here is the twelfe man. Gods blessing on your heart said nil the company, that
you have found out our neighbor.

The xi. tale.
THere was a man of Gotam did ride by ye way and did find a cheese in the bye
way, and he pulled, out his sword, and poryd and prieked with the point of his
swerd to take by the cheese. Theare did come another man by and did a light and
took up the chese and rid his way. The man of gotam did ride back to Nottingham
to buy a longer swerd to take up the cheese. And when he had bought his swerd
he ^turned back.

And when he did come to ye place wheare the cheese did lie he pulled out his
sword and prycked at the ground saying, a murryon take it, if I had had this
sword I had had the cheese.

The. xii. tale.
THere was a man of Gotam and he did not love his wife: and she having a
fair hear, her husband said diverse times yt he would cut it of, and he
durst not do it when she was waking, but when she was a sleep. So on a night
he took up a pair of sheres and laid them under his beads head, the which
the wife perceived. And then she did call to her one of her maids and said,
go to bead to my husband, for he is minded to cut of my hear to night, let
him cut of thy hear, and I will give thee as good a kyrtle as ever thou dydst
wear. The maid did so, and faynded her self a sleep the which the man
perceyuyng cut of the maids hear and did wrap it about the shetes and laid
it under his beaddes head, and fell a sleep. The wife made her maid to arise,
and took the hear and the sheres, and went into the hall and burnte the
hear. This man had a horse the which he did love above all things. The wife
went into the stable, and cut of the horse tail. and did wrap the sheres in
the horse tail, and laid it under her husbands head. In the morning she did
rise be time, and did sit by the fire keyming her head. At last the man did
come to the fire, and seeing his wife keyming her head marvelled on it the maid
seeing her master standing in a brown study said, what a devil aileth the
horse in the stable for he bledeth sare, the good man ran into the stable, and
found that h^s horse tail was cut of he went to his beads head and did find
the sheres wrapped in his horse tail, and did com to his wife saying, I cry the
merit for I had thought that I had cut of thy hear to night, and I have cut of
my horse tail. Ye said she self do self have, many a man thinks to do
another man a shrewdde turn, and turnethe often times to his own self.

The. xiii. tale.
THere was a man in Gotam that laid a wager with his wife that she should
not make him cokold. No said she but I can. Spare not said he, do what thou
canste, On a time she hyd all the sypggots and fassets in ye house, and she
went into her but terie and set a barrel a broche, and cried to her husband
and said, I preye you bring me heather a spyggot and a fasset, or else all the
ale will run out. The good man sought up and down and could find none.
Come hither said she than, and hold your finger in the tap hole. She pulled
out her finger, and the good man put in his. She then called to her a Tailor
the which did dwell at the next door, with whom she made a blind bargyne.
And within a while she did come to her husband and did bring a spiggot and a
fasset with her saying pull out your finger out of the tap hole gentle Cockold
for you have lost your bargayn. I be shrew thy hair for thy favor said the
good man. Make no such bargaynes then said she with me.

The xiiii. tale.
THeare was a man of Gotam that had take a Bustard, and to the eating of it be
did did. iiii. or. v. gentlemen's servant. The wife had killed an old broone
goose: and she and two of her gosseps had eaten up the Bustarde. The old
goose was laid to the fire for the gentlemen's servants. When that they were
come, and the old goose set before the^, what is this said one of the men? The
goodma^ said, a good fat bustard. A bustard said they? it is an old goose, and
thou art a knave to mock us. And in a great anger they departed out of the
house and went home. The fellow was sorry that the gentleman's seruanntes wear
angry, and did take a bag and did put in the Bustardes feathers, and thought to
go to them and show them the feathers of the Bustarde, and so to please them.
The wife prayed her husband (or he went) to fetch in a block to the fire:
and in the mean space she did put out all the Bustardes feathers, and did put
in the goose feathers. The man taking his purse or bag, went to the gentlemen's
servants and said. I pray you be not angrye with me for you shall see here
that I had a bustard, for here be the feathers* and he opened his bag, and did
shake out the goose feathers, The gentlemen's servants seeing the goose feathers
said, why knave could thou not be contented to mock us at home at thine
own house, but art come to mock us here, the one took a waster, and did give
him a dosen stripes sayng, take this for a reward, and mock us no more.

The xv. tale.
THeare was a young man of Gotam the which should go a woing to a fair maid:
his mother did warn him saying, when than do look upon her, cast a sheep
eye and say, bow day sweet pigs aye? The fellow went to ye butchers and
bought vii. or. viii. sheepeseyes, and when this lusty woer did sit, at di^t he
would look upon his fair wench and would cast in her face a sheep eye
saying, how do you my pigges nigh. how do I (said the we^ch swines face, why
do you cast the sheep eye upon me. O sweet piggs eye said he, have at thee
another. I defye thee swynes face said the wenche. The fellow being abashed
said, what sweet pygge be content for and if thou do live until the next
year, thou will be a foul sow* Walk knave walk said she, for if thou dust
live til ye next year, thou will be a stark kneue a lubber, and a fool. Here
a man may see, for a man's good will he shall have evil will and dipleasure.

The xvi. tale.
A Man's wife of Gotam was brought a bed of a man child The father did vyd the
gossops, the which were children of viii. or nine years of age. The eldest
childs name that should be godfather was named Gylbert. The second child was
named Hu^fry. And the godmothers name was Christabell. The friends of them did
monyshe them saying, that diverse times they must say after the priest. When
all wear come to the church door, the priest said, be you agreed of the name?
be you said Gylbert agreed of the name? Be you said Hu^fry agreed of the name.
Be you said Chrystabell agreed of the name, the priest said whearfore be you
come hither? Gylbert said, wherefore be you come hither. Humfry said wherefore
he you come hither Christabell said whearfore, be you come hither. The priest
being amassed could not tell what to say, but whisteled and said whew,
Gylbert whisteled and said whew, Hu^fry whistled and said whew, and so did
Christabell. The priest being angry said, go home fools go home Go home fools
go home said gilbert, go home fools go hom said Humfry, go home fools go home
said Christabell. The priest then provided for God fathers and Godmothers. Here
a man may see that children can do nothing with out good instructions. And they
be not wise yt will regard childre^s words.

The xvii. tale.
THere was a man of Gotam the which should be married, and when the day of
marriage was appointed, and the time came that they should be married together,
the priest said say after me. The man said say after me. The priest said, say
not after me such words but say after me as I will tell thee. The fellow said,
say not after me such words, but say after me as I will tell thee. The priest
said, thou do play the fool and the knave, to mock with this holy
sacrament of matrymony. The fellow said, thou do play the fool and the knave
to mock with this holy sacrament of matrymonye. The priest could not tell what
to say, but said what shall I do with this fool? The fellow said, what shall I
do with this fool. Farewell said the priest, I will not marry thee.
Farewell said the fellow, I will not marrye thee. The priest departed: how
be it the fellow (by other men) was instructed how to do: and after that he
was married. And I hard say such a folish pranke was played at Kingston of late
days.

The xviii. tale.
Theare was a Scottish man the which did dwell at gotam, and he had taken an
house a little from London, and of it he would make an Inn, and to his Sign
he would have a Bores head. And he went to London to have a Bores head made.
He did come to a Caruer (or a Joyner) saying in his mother-tonge, I say spek,
kens thou make me a Bare head?; ye said the Caruer. Than said the skotyshman,
mek me a bare head anenst yowle, an thowse bus have xx pence for thy hyre. I
will do it said the Caruer. On S. Andrews day before Chrystmas (the which
is named yowle in Scotland, and in England in the north.) the skottish man did
com to Londe^ for his Bores head to set at a door for a sign. I say speak
said the skotish man, haste thou made me a Bare head? Yea said the Caruer. Then
thowse a gewd fellow. The Caruer went and did bring a man's head of wod that was
bare and said, sir here is your bare head. I say said the skotyshman, the
mokyl devil, is this a bare head? Ye said the caruer. I say said the
Shotishman, I will have a bare head, syk an head as does follow a Sew that has
Gryces. Sir said the caruer, I ca^ not tell what is a Sew, nor what is a Gryce.
whet herso^, kenst thou not a sew that will greet and groan, and her gryces will
run after her and cry a weke a weke. O said the Caruer, it is a pigge. Yea said
the skotish man, let me have his fathers head made in timber, and mek me a bird
and set it on his skalps, and cause her to sing whip whir, whip whir. The
caruer said, I can not cause her to singe whip whir. When horson said the
skotish man gar her as she would singe whip whir.

Here a man may see that every man does delight in his own se^ces, or does
rejoice in his fantasy

The xix. tale.
IN old time when as these before said Jestes was (as me^ of that country
reports) that such fantastical matters wear done at gotam (the which I can
not tell half.) The wives wear gathered together in an ale house and the one
said to the other yt they wear all profitable to their husbands. Which way
good gossips said the Ale wife. The first said, I shall tell you all good
gossips: I can neither bake nor brew nor I can do no work, whearefore I do
make every day holiday and I go to the ale house, because at all times I cannot
go to ye church, and in the ale house I pray to God to speed well my husband.
And I do think my prayer shall do him much more good then my labor if I could
work. Then said the second, I am profitable to my husband in saving of
ca^dels in winter for I do cause my husband and al my house solkes to go to
bead by daylighte, and to rile by daylight. The third wife said, and I am
profitable to my husband in spending of bread, for I will eat but little, for
to the drinckyng of a galon or two of good ale, I care for no meat. The fourth
wife said, I am loath to spend meat and drink at home in my own house, where
fore I do go to the wine tavern at Nottingham, and do take wine, and such
things as god shall send me theare. The fifte wife said a man shall ever have
more company in another man's house then his own (and most co^monlye in an Ale
house is the best cheer in a town.) And for sparing of meat and drink and
other necessaryes, I do go to the ale house. The sixth wife said, my husband
has woll, and flax and tow: and to spare it, I go to other men's houses to do
other men's work. The seventh wife said, I do spare my husbands wood and cole,
and do sit talking all the day by other men's fires. The eight said, beef,
mutton, and porcke is dear, wherefore I do spare it, and do take pigge, goose,
hen, chicken conye and capon, the which be of lower price. The ninth said, and
I do spare my husbands soap and lie, for when he should be washed once in a
week, I do wash once in a quarter of a year. Then said the ale wife, and I
do keep my husbands ale (that I do brew,) from sowryng. For wheare as I was
wont to drink up all, now I do have never a drop.

The. xx. tale.
ON Ash wednesday the priest of gotam would make a colacion to his parishoners
and said, freyndes the time is come that you must use prayer and fasting, and
alms deeds, and this weke cum you to shryfte, and I will tell you more of my
mind, for as for prayers, I think theare bit not two persons in the parish can
say half their Pater noster. As for fasting you fast still: for you have not a
good meals meat through the whole year. As for alms deeds, what should you do
to give any thing, that has nothing to take to. But when that you do come to
shrift, I will tell you more of my mind. After mass, ye good man that did keep
the ale house, did come to shrift, and above al things be confessed himself
to be drunck diverse times in the year, specially in Lent. The priest said in
Lent thou should most refrain from dru^kenes, and abstain from drink.
Not so said the fellow, for it is an old proverb, that fish must swim, Ye
said the priest, it must swim in water. I cry God mercy said the fellow. I
thought it should have swom in good ale.

The xxi tale.
SO one after another the men of Gotam did come to shrift, and when they were
shryue^ the priest said I cannot tell what penance to give you. If I should
enjoin you to prayer, there is non of you that can say your Pater noster, and
you be now to old to learn. And i^ (...) ^nioye you to fast, it wear but
folyshnes, for you do not eat a good meals meat in a year. Wherefore I do
inioyne the to labor well the week, yt thou may farewell to diner on the
sondaies: and I will come to dnner and see that it be so, and take part. Another
man he did enjoin to fare well the monday. And another the tuesday. And so
one after another, that one or other should fare well once a week, that he
might have part of the meat. And as for alms deeds ye priest said, you be
but beggars all, except it be one or two, therefore bestow the alms on your
own selves.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletstret, beneath thf Conduit, at the sign of S. John
Evangelist, by Thomas Colwe^.


