ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF In the General Visitation of the ARCHDEACON of the
Diocese of GLOUCESTER.

Holden in the year of our Lord, 1635.

POST TENEBRAS LVX


Printed at London, 1635.

Directions to be followed by the Churchwardens and Sidemen for the orderly
and legal making of their presentiments.
LEt the Churchwardens and Sidemen upon the receipt of the Book of Articles,
address themselves to the Minister of their Parish, or in his absence, to some
other Clerk that can read and write (in case they themselves be ignorant) and
let the Clerk write in a fair sheet of paper the head of the Presentment
thus, The Presentment of the Churchwardens and Sidemen of (...) exhibited in
the Visitation of the Arch Deacon of Gloucester held at (...) the (...) day of
(...) Anno Dom. 1635. Then taking the book of Articles, and distinctly reading
the same from Article to Article (as by the tenor of their oath they are bound
to do) at the end of every Article let the Clerk enquire what they can say to
that Article. If they have ought to say, then let him write thus, To the first
Article concerning the Church we present that, etc. And so proceeding in the
several enquiries set down in the Book, let them not fail impartially with
due respect unto their oath, to answer to every Article negatively or
affirmatively as truth shall lead them, and to present the several Offenses
and Offenders within their Parish therein enquired after, seriously considering
how dreadful and damnable a sin it is to profane Gods most holy Name by
perjury and forswearing themselves; especially in such a case, where they make
themselves accessory and liable to those sins and the punishments of the
same, which by their connivence and concealing they suffer to pass unpunished
in others.

The Tenor of the Oath to be ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall Swear, that upon due consideration of the Articles delivered you in
charge, all affection of hatred, favor, hope and fear being laid aside, you
shall present all and every such person that now is or of late was within your
Parish, as has committed any offense, or made any default mentioned or meant
in those or any of those Articles, or which is vehemently suspected or defamed
for any such offense or default, wherein you shall deal faithfully and fully;
so help you God according to the Contents of this Book.

ARTICLES
Concerning the Church.
1 IMprimis Whether have you in your several Churches and Chappells, a fair
great Bible of the last Translation, the Books of Common Prayer and Homilies,
the Book of Constitutions or Cannons Ecclesiastical, and a parchment Register
book, provided for Christnings, Marriages and Burialls, duly and exactly kept
according to the constitutions in that case provided; and a transcript thereof
brought in yearly within one month after Easter, in the Lord Bishops
principal Register his Office?

2. Item have you a cenvenient seat for the Minister to read Service in,
together with a comely Pulpit, set up in a convenient place, with a decent
Cloth or Cushion for the same; a comely large surplesse; A Font of stone in the
ancient usual place; a convenient and decent Communion Table, with a carpet of
silk, or some other decent stuff^ laid upon the same in time of Divine
Service, and a fair linen cloth thereon at the Communion time; a fair
Communion Cup with a cover both of silver, with all other things and Ornaments
necessary for the celebration of Divine Service, and administration of the
Sacraments; and a strong chest for keeping of the Ornaments of the Church and
Register book, with another chest for the alms of the poor, both having three
locks and keys? Have you the ten Commandments set upon the East end of your
Church or Chapel, where the people may best see and read them, and other
sentences of holy Scriptures written on the walls for the same purpose; A Table
of the degrees, wherein by law men are prohibited to marry, set up and fastened
in some convenient place?

3. Whether is your Church or Chapel with the Chancles thereof, and your
Parsonage or Vicarage house, and all other housing thereto belonging, in good
reparations, and decently and comely kept, as well within as without, the
seats well maintained, your Churchyards well fenced and kept entire from
encroachment and without abuse? If not, then through whose default?

4 Are any of your Bells or other Church-goods wanting, any glass windows
defaced, or ancient Monuments of your Church spoiled, and by whose fault?

5. Have the Churchwardens there suffered any plays, feasts, banquets,
Church-ales, drinkings, or any other profane usages to be kept in your Church,
Chapel, or Churchyard, or bells to be rung either unseasonably or
superstitiously, contrary to the 88 Cannon?

6. Is there a true Terriar of all the glebe-land, houses, Tenements, Orchards,
Gardens, and portions of Tithes (whether within your Parish or without)
belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, delivered into the Office of the
Register of this Diocese?

Concerning the Clergy.
FIrst, Whether does your Minister distinctly and reverently read Divine
Service upon Sundays, Holidays and their Eeves, upon Wednesdaies, also and
Fridaies according to the book of Common Prayer at fit and usual times? And
does he duly observe all the orders, rites and ceremonies prescribed in the
said Book of Common Prayer, as well in reading public Prayers, and the
Letany, as also in administering the Sacraments, solemnizing of Matrimony,
visiting the sick, burying the dead, Churching of women, and all other like
Rites and Offices of the Church, in such manner and form as by the book of
Common Prayer is enjoined without any omission or addition thereunto?

2 Does your Minister administer the holy Communion so often and at such times,
as that every Parishioner may receive the same at the least thrice in every
year, whereof once at Easter? And does he receive the same himself on every
day that he administreth so others? And does he deliver the Bread and Wine to
every Communicant severally and kneeling, and use the words of institution
according to the Book, at every time that the Bread and Wine is renewed, Can.
21? And is warning given by him before hand for the Communion, Can. 22: as
likewise for Holidays and Fasting days, Can. 64?

3. Whether has your Minister admitted to the holy Communion any strangers of
another Parish, any scismatickes, any which be openly known to live in sin
without repentance, or have maliciously and openly contended with their
neighbors before reconcilement, or lastly any Churchwardens that in their
presentiments have notoriously and wilfully forsworn themselves? Or has your
Minister rejected from the Communion any without such just cases?

4. Has your Minister Curate, or Lecturer publickely or privately affirmed or
maintained any thing repugnant, contrary or derogatory to the 39 Articles,
Canons of the Church, Books of Common Prayer, Homilies or consecrating of
Bishops and Priests, or the form of Government by Bishops and others in this
Church of England?

5. Has your Parish been any time destitute of a Curate? and by whose
default? And is your Parson or Vicar continually resident with you upon his
Benefice? or if he be lawfully absent or reside upon another Benefice, does he
supply his absence by a Curate that is a licensed Preacher for that cure; or if
the smalnesse of the Living will not bear a Preaching Curate, does he Preach
himself usually at both his Benefices, Can. 47?

6. Whether is your Minister a Preacher allowed? if so, does he Preach every
Sunday (having no lawful impediment) either in his own cure with you, or some
other near adjoining where no Preacher is? If he be not an allowed Preacher,
does he procure Sermons to be preached amongst you monthly at least by
Preachers lawfully licensed, if his Living will bear it: and on every Sunday
when there is no Sermon Preached, does he read some one of the Homilies
prescribed by authority?

7 Does your Minister or Curate serve more Cures than one? If so, what are
they, and how far distant? And whether being no Preacher allowed he take upon
him to expound the Scriptures openly?

8. Has any person been admitted to Preach within your Church or Chapel,
but such as you have well known to be sufficiently licensed? whom have you so
admitted, and how often have any such been admitted to preach, and by whose
procurement? And have you caused every strange Preacher, licensed or not
licensed, to subscribe his name, together with the day when he Preached, Can.
50 and 52? And if he were licensed, then by whom he was so licensed? And
whether have they or any other preached in your Church, not being soberly and
decently apparelled, Can. 74. as in a cloak and not in a gown?

9. Does you Minister and Lecturer use to pray before his Sermons for the Kings
Majesty, the Queen, Prince Charles and all the Royal Progeny, giving unto
the King such Style and Titles as by law are due unto his Highness, exhorting
his Parishioners to yield him obedience accordingly? And also in these said
Sermons do they pray for all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
persons, Can. 55?

10. Does your Lecturer or Lecturers, read Divine Service according to the
Common Prayer Book in his Surplice and Hood before the Lecture? And does every
Beneficed man, though chiefly attending to Preach, and having a Curate under
him for other duties, yet in his own person read divine Service two several
Sundaies both morning and evening every year: And do both Lecturer and
Preacher themselves administer the Sacraments also twice every year, observing
all the ceremonies in the book of Common Prayer established, Can. 56?

11. Whether does your Minister at the reading of public Prayers and
administration of the Sacraments wear the Surplice, and a Hood thereon
agreeable to his degree in the University, if he be a graduate? Can. 58.

12. Does you Minister every Sunday and Holyday, before evening Prayer, for
half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons of
the Parish, in the ten Commandments, the Articles of the Belief, the Lords
Prayer, and the Sacraments according to the Catechism set forth in the book
of Common Prayer only, whereby the children of the Parish may be prepared for
Confirmation? Can. 59. And are the afternoones Sermons turned into Catechizing
by question and answer?

13 Whether has your Minister without license from the Archbishop, the Bishop
of the Diocese or his Chancellor, solemnized marriage betwixt any parties in a
time prohibited, or the banes not being three several Sundaies or Holy days
first published in time of Divine service, in the several Churches or Chapels
of their several abode, Can. 62? or has he married any not betwixt the hours
of eight and twelve in the forenoone, or without a ring, or the parties being
of another Diocese, or when the parties are under the age of one and twenty
years before such time as the Parents or Guardians have m^de known unto him
their consent thereunto Can. 100?

14. Whether does your Minister in the Rogation days use the perambulation of
the circuit of the Parish, according to the ancient and laudable custom of the
Church: and in the same perambulation bless the fru^tes of the earth, and move
the people to give thanks to God for his benefits using such Psalms, Prayers
and Homilies, as are to that end set forth?

15. Whether does any man being not in orders take upon him to exercise any
part of the Ministerial duty in the Church? and what is his name?

16. Does your Minister, every six months denounce in his Parish Church, all
such of his Parish, as do stand contumacious under the sentence of
excommunication, not seeking to be absolved? Or has he admitted any person
excommunicate into the Church, without a certificate of his absolution from the
Ordinary, or other competent Judge under his Seal? or has he stayed the
publication of any excommunications, or suspensions?

17. Does your Minister, being a Preacher, labor diligently from time to time,
to confer with, and thereby to reclaim, the Popish Recusants in his Parish,
from their errors, if any such be there. Can. 66? And does he carefully visit
the sick, according to Can. 67?

18. Whether is your Parson, Vicar, Lecturer, or Curate, too much frequent, or
over conversant with, or a Favourer of Recusants, whereby he may be suspected
not to be sincere in Religion?

19. Has your Minister, or any other, taking upon him the place of a Minister,
Preached, Baptized Children, Solemnized Marriage, Churched any woman, or
Ministered the holy Communion, in any private house or houses, otherwise then by
Law is allowed? If yea, then where, whom, and how often?

20. Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private
fasts, prophesies, or exercises, not approved by law, or public Authority? Or
has he attempted under any pretense either of possession, or obsession, by
fasting and prayer, to cast out devils, Can. 72? Or has he used to meet with
any other person or persons in any private house or any other place, there to
consult how to impeach or ^eprave the Book of Common Prayer, or the Doctrine,
or Discipline of the Church of England, Can. 73? If yea, then ye shall present
him, and all that join with him, in any of the premises.

21. Whether has your Minister refused, or delayed to Christen any Child that
is brought to the Church to him upon Sundaies or Holidayes, or to bury the
dead, such as ought to be interred in Christian burial, having convenient
warning before? Especially whether he has neglected to baptize any Infant in
danger, having been duly informed of his weakness, so that the child has
dyed by his default, without Baptism? Or has he neglected to use the sign of
the Cross in Baptism; or baptized any in a Basin, or other vessel, and not
in the ordinary Font; or admitted any Father, to be Godfather to his own
child, or such to be Godfathers, or Godmothers, as have not received the holy
Communion? Or has he baptized any children that were not borne in the Parish,
or buried any in Christian burial, that dyed excommunicate, or wilfully
destroyed himself?

22. Has your Minister, admitted any woman to be Churched, that was begotten
with child in adultery, or fornication, without license of his Ordinary?

23. Whether does your Minister use such decency, and comeliness in his
apparel, as by the 74 Can. is enjoined him, as well at home as abroad? And is
he of sober behavior, and one that does not use such bodily labor as is not
seemly for his Function and calling?

24. Is your Minister noted, or defamed to have obtained his Benefice, or his
Orders by Simonye, or otherwise to be Simoniacall, or scismaticall, or reputed
to be an incontinent person, or does he keep any man or woman in his house,
that are suspected to be either of evil Religion, or bad life? Or is he a
common drunkard, or a common haunter of Tavernes, Alehouses, or other suspected
places; a common gamester, or player at dice, or other unlawful game, a common
swearer, or one that neglects his study, or is any other way notorious,
whereby he is offensive and scandalous to his Function or Ministry?

25. Do you know in your Parish, any that having heretofore taken upon him the
Order of Priesthood, or Deacon, has since relinquished the same, living as a
Lay man, and neglecting his Vocation?

26. Whether has your Minister, Curate, and Lecturer, duly observed the Kings
Majesty's Instructions, and his Declaration for settling of Questions in
difference, set before the Articles of Religion Printed 1629? And has your
Minister read the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, once every year
upon some Sundays or Holidaies in the afternoon before divine Service?

Concerning Schoolemasters.
1 HOw many Schoolemasters, or Teachers, of Youth have you in your Parish,
either public or private, and what be their several names? Whether be they
of good and sincere Religion, life and conversation, and diligent in teaching
and bringing up of Youth; Have they been licensed for Schoolemasters, by the
Ordinary?

2. Whether your Schoolemasters do come themselves, and bring their Scholars
to the Church, to hear divine Service and Sermons, and such as are of age to
receive the Communion? Do they instruct their Scholars in the grounds of the
Religion now established in this Church of England, and no other; or do they
teach them any other Catechism than is authorized by public authority, or
not examine them therein once every week at the least? And what Catechism is
it they do so teach?

3. Whether your Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters do teach his or their
Scholars any other Grammar than that which is called the Kings Grammar, set
forth by the authority of King Henry the eighth, teaching the Prescript form
thereof, whereby the Scholars may perfectly understand their Grammar rules and
constructions?

Parish Clerks and Sextons.
1 Whether have you a fit Parish Clarke, aged twenty years at least, of
honest conversation, able to read and write? And whether he and the Sexton be
paid their wages without fraud, according to the ancient custom of your
Parish? if not, then by whom is it so defrauded and denied? by whom are they
chosen? Is the Clarke approved by the Ordinary, diligent in his Office, and
serviceable to the Minister? And does he meddle with nothing above his place,
as Reading of Prayers, Churching of women, burying the dead, or such like?

2 Does your Clarke or Sexton keep the Church clean, the doors locked at fit
times? Is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church through his default? Are the
Communion Table, Font, Books and other Ornaments of the Church kept fair and
clean? Does he suffer any unseasonable ringing or any profane exercise in your
Church or Chancell? or does he (when any is passing out of this life) neglect
to toll a hell having notice thereof?

Concerning the Parishoners.
1 Whether is there any within your Parish that has or does impugn or
impeach any way the Kings Majesty's Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, or the
oath of Supremacy or of Allegiance? or that denies the Church of England by
law established under the Kings most excellent Majesty to be a true and
Apostolical Church, teaching and maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles? or
that impugneth and speaks against the Book of Common Prayer, any of the
Articles of Religion agreed upon in Anno 1562, or the Rites and ceremonies
established in the Church of England or the lawful use of them, or the
government of the Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons and
the rest that bear office in the same, affirming the same to be Antichristian
or repugnant to Gods Word; or lastly that does impugn the form of
consecrating and ordaining of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
affirming that the same is repugnant to the Word of God, or that they who are
so ordered, are not lawfully made?

2 Is there any in your parish that does hold or frequent any Conventicles or
private congregations, or make or maintain any private orders or constitutions
agreed upon in any such private assemblies, other than are in the Cannons set
forth by public authority? Or have you any Schismatickes that separate
themselves from the Church of England, or any that maintain Scismatickes?

3. Whether any of your Parish have profaned the Lords day commonly called
Sunday, or other Holidays by working or laboring in their manual trades, by
selling, or buying, or keeping open their shops for sale of wares, by lurking
and tippling in Tavernes or Alehouses, especially in the time of Divine
Service? And whether any Inne-keepers, Alehouse-keepers, Victualers or others
permit any person or persons in their houses, to eat, drink or play, in the
time of Common Prayer or Sermon, on Sundays or Holydaies?

4 Whether any of your Parish disturb, let or discourage others from lawful
sports and recreations upon the Lords day, so far as they are allowed by the
Kings declaration in that behalf? Or do any of your Parish abuse that liberty
allowed them, by using unlawful sports, as Beare-bayting, Bull-bayting,
Interludes or Bowling upon the Lords day; or by using lawful recreations
before the end of all Divine Services for that day, or having absented
themselves from the same?

5 Whether any of your Parish being sixteen years of age or upwards, or
others lodging or commonly resorting to any house within your Parish, have
wilfully absented themselves from your Parish Church upon Sundays or Holidayes
at Morning or Evening prayers or came late to Church, or departed out of Church
before the end of Service and Sermon without some great cause? Or have any
behaved themselves irreverently during the time of divine Service, covering
their heads, or not kneeling when the general confession, Let any and other
Prayers are read, and standing up at the Belief, or not doing lowly reverence
at the name of our Lord Jesus, or talking, walking sleeping or any other way
busying themselves in the Church then in quiet attendance unto Gods Service? Or
have any disturbed the Minister either praying or preaching by word or deed?

6 Whether any of your Parish being siixteene years old and upwards have not
received the holy Communion in your Church thrice this last year, whereof once
at Easter, and that kneeling? And who are they?

7. Is there any in your Parish that refuse to have their children Baptized, or
themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, for some
exceptions against him? And what exceptions do they allege? And do any of or
in your Parish refuse to have their children Baptized in your Parish Church,
according to the form prescribed in the book of Common Prayer?

8 Whether any of your Parishioners being warned thereof, have not sent their
children, servants, and apprentices to the Catechism upon Sundays and
Holidays before evening Prayer, to hear, and to be instructed therein? you
shall present their names.

9. How many Inhabitants within your Parish men or women, above the age of 16
years do refuse to frequent Divine Service established by public authority
of this Realm, or to receive the holy Communion? present their names, and of
what degree, state, or trade of life they are.

10 Do any of the Inhabitants of your said Parish entertain within their
house any sojourners, lodgers, or any common resorters and guests, who refuse
to frequent Divine Service, or receive the holy Communion as aforesaid? What be
their names? of what quality or condition are they?

11. Whether any of the said Popish Recusants, or other Sectaries, are of
insolent behavior, or do boldly busy themselves, in seducing, and withdrawing
of others?

12. How long the said Recusants, have abstained either from Divine Service, or
from the Communion, as aforesaid: And if any of them have lately reformed
themselves, what be their names?

13. What persons within your Parish, either for the offense aforesaid, or for
any other contumacy or crime, do remain excommunicated? What be their names,
and for what cause, and how long have they stood excommunicated, and what
person or persons do wittingly, and usually keep them company?

14. Have any in your Parish married within the degrees forbidden by law? Where
and by whom? Or does any couple married lawfully, now live apart, without due
separation by the Law: or any heretofore divorced, keep company with any other
at bed or board as man and wife?

15. Whether have you any in your Parish, to your knowledge or by common fame
and report, which have committed adultery, fornication, or incest, or any
Bawds, harbourers or receivers of such persons? Or which are by common same,
reputed for common drunkards, blasphemers of Gods holy name, common swearers,
filthy speakers, raylers, slanderers, sowers of discord among their neighbors,
or speakers against Ministers, Marriages, Usurers, contrary to the Statute made
in the two and twentieth year of our late Sovereign King James. Simoniacall
persons, or perjured in any Court Ecclesiastical, or any that use
Enchantments, Sorceries, Charms, or Witch-crafts (which are not made felony by
the Statutes of this Realm) or any that seek to such for help? You shall not
fail to present them all.

16. Have any in your Parish, harbored any woman with child unmarried,
conveying, or suffering her again to depart without due penance? You shall
truly present, as well the party harboring, as harbored, and who is
suspected to hau^e committed the incontinency with her: Or is any, heretofore
suspected or detected of incontinency, and therefore departing out of your
Parish, returned now again? Or in what place else is he or she now abiding to
your knowledge, or at you have heard? You shall not fail to present the whole
truth in that behalf.

17. Be there any in your Parish, that retain, or sell, utter, disperse,
carry, or deliver to others, any English Books, or Writings, either of
Papists, or Sectaries touching, and against the Religion, State, or Government
Ecclesiastical of this Realm, or keep any monuments of superstition
uncancelled, or undefaced?

18. Whether any of your Parishoners, have usually gone to hear Prayers, or
Sermons, in other Churches? Or have they communicated or baptized their
children in any other Parish, or brought strange Ministers into their own
houses, to baptize their children privately, according to their own fantasies?

19. Has any of your Parish, behaved himself irreverently, in word or deed,
toward your Minister or his Vocation, by quarrelling, striking, slanderous
speeches, or libels? Or has any offered violence, or quarrelled with any other
in the Church or Churchyard; or used himself disorderly in the Church, by
filthy or profane talk, or any other rude or immodest behavior?

20. Whether has your Minister, or any else of your Parish, without the
privily and consent of the Ordinary, caused any to do penance, or be punished,
either openly or otherwise for any crime punishable, by Ecclesiastical laws
only? And what be the names of the parties, that have punished, and have been
so punished; in what manner, and for what cause?

21. Be there any in your Parish, who will come to hear the Sermon, but not to
the public Prayers, according to the Book, making a scisme, or division as
it were between the use of public Prayer and Preaching?

22. Do any Women of your Parish, after Childbirth, refuse to come to the
Church, to give God thanks for their safe delivery, according to the Book of
Common Prayer? Or do any neglect to keep the fasting days, appointed by the
laws:

23. Whether have you known or heard of any Fiddlers, or Minstrels, or any
which go under the name of Musicians, within this Diocese, that either at
Weddings, Churchings, or any other Feasts, or meetings, have sung or use to
sing any songs, ballads or rimes, tending to the disgrace of Religion, or the
Ministers thereof; or tending to profaneness, or the corruption of good
manners? You shall truly present the names of such if you know or can learn
them; as also the names of the householder, or householders, where they have sung
such songs, as also the particular names of them, before whom they have sung
them?

24 Whether do the Surveiers of your high ways look diligently to the
mending of the Church-wayes; that the Parishioners may conveniently come to
Church from all places of the Parish in Winter time?

Concerning the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1 Whether do ye the Churchwardens and Sidemen from time to time take care
that no idle persons or loyterers abide either in the Churchyard or Church
porch in Service or Sermon time but cause them either to come into the Church
to hear Divine Service, or to depart and not disturb such as be hearers
there? And do ye take care that the Parishioners duly resort to the Church
every Sunday and Holyday, and there so remain during Divine Service and
Sermon? And that none be tippling or drinking in any Alehouse, Inn, Tavern,
or Victualling house of your Parish during the times aforesaid, as far as you
are able to hinder it?

2 Do ye assist your Minister diligently in bringing the youth of your Parish
to Catechizing; in the Perambulation the Rogation days, and such other things
as send to the furtherance and advancement of Gods Service: especially in
taking diligent heed and care that (...), or sometime (...)?

5. Does any man trouble or molest you for doing your duties?

6. If you know of any other matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance, worthy
presentment in your judgment above not expressed, you shall likewise present
the same by virtue of your oath.

FINIS.

