Articles to be enquired in the visitation, in the first year of the reign of
our most dread Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England
France, and Irelande, Queen, defendour of the faith etc.

Anno. 1559.

decorative border R. I.
OMNIA DESVPER printer's or publisher's device

Articles.
FIrst, whether any Residencie.
or Curate, be resident continually upon his benefice, doing his duty in
preaching, readyng, and duly ministering the holy Sacraments.

Item, whether False miracles.
Shrynes, all Tables, Candelstickes, Trindelles, or roles of wax, pictures,
payntinges, and all other monumentes of feigned and false miracles, pylgrimages,
Idolatry, and superstition, be removed, abolished, and destroyed.

Item, whether they do not every Holy day Lords prayer.
immediately after the Gospel, openly, plainly, and distinctly, resite to
their parishioners in the Pulpit, the Lords prayer, the belief, and the ten
Commandments in English.

Item, whether they do charge fathers and To bring up youth.
to bring them up in some virtuous study and occupation.

Curates.
do leave their cures to a rude and unlearned Parson, and not to an honest well
learned and expert Curate, which can and will teach you wholesome doctrine.

Readyng the scriptures.
either in Latin or English, and do not rather comfort and exhort every person
to read the same at convenient times, as the very lively word of God, and the
special food of man's soul.

Tauernes and games.
be common haunters and resorters to Tauernes or Alehouses, giving them selves
to drynkyng, rioting, and playing at unlawful games, and do not occupy them
selves in the reading or hearing of some part of holy scripture, or in some
other godly exercise.

Preachers.
not being lawfully licenced thereunto, or have been licenced accordyngly.

Superstition
pilgrimages, relics, or images, or lyghtyng of candels, kyssyng, kneelyng,
or deckyng of the same images.

Item, whether they have one book or register Register.
wherein they write the day of every weddyng, christening, and burying.

Item, whether they have exhorted the people Obedience.
and ministers, and to charity and love one to another.

Item, whether they have admonished their The Sacrament.
that they ought not to presume to receive the Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ, before they can say perfectly the Lords prayer, the articles of
the faith, and the ten commandments in English.

Item, whether they be resident upon their Hospitality
And if they be absent and keep no hospitality, whether they do relieve their
parishioners, and what they give them.

Item, whether Proprietaries, Parsons, Reparations.
and Clerks, having Churches, Chapels, and Mansions, do keep their Chauncels,
Rectories, Vicarages, and all other houses appertaynyng to them, in due
reparations.

Item, Prayer in English.
whether they do counsel or move trust in any certain number of prayers,
Beads.
as in saying over a number of Beads, or other like.

Diffamed persons.
being openly known to be out of charity with their neighbors, or diffamed
with any notorious crime, and not reformed.

Poor men's bore.
and set and fastened the same in a place of the Church most convenient.

Testamentes.
exhorted, and moved their parishioners, and especially when they make their
testamentes, to give to the said poor men's box, and to bestow that upon the
poor, which they were wont to bestow upon pylgrimages, pardons, trentalles,
and upon other like blind devotions.

Sick. Burial.
or burye the dead, being brought to the Church.

Symonie.
or come to them by fraud, guyle, deceit, or symonie.

Adulterers.
to detect and present to their Ordinary, all adulterers, and fornicatours,
and such men as have two wives living, within their parishes.

Item, whether they have monished their parishioners Church goods.
nor otherwise alienate any of their Church goods.

Item, whether they or any of them do keep Many benefices.
not having sufficient licenses and dispensations thereunto, and how many they
be, and their names.

Item, Communion
whether they minister the holy Communion

Item, whether you know any person within Letters of the word or preaching
that is a letter of the word of God to be read in English, or sincerely
preached in place and times convenient.

Item, whether in the time of the Letanie, Goers out of the Church.
in the time of the Sermon or Homyly, and when the Priest reads the
scriptures to the parishioners, any person have departed out of the Church,
without just and necessary cause, or disturb the Minister otherwise.

Church money
and money given and bequeathed to the finding of torches, lights, tapers, or
lamps, not paid out of any lands, have not ben employed to the poor men's
cheste.

Kepers of the Church money.
and what be their names.

Item, whether any indiscrete person do uncharitably Contempt of Priest.


Item, whether there be any other Grammar The kings Grammar.
then that which is set forth by the authority of king Henry the eight.

The time of service.


Talkers in the Church.
and talk in the Church in the time of the prayer, readyng of the Homylye,
preaching, readyng, or declaring of the Scripture.

Heresies.
errors, or false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ and holy
Scripture.

Item, whether any be common drunkardes, Drunkards.


Item, whether any have committed adultery, Adulterers.
or be common bawdes, or receauers of such evil persons, or vehemently
suspected of any of the premises.

Item, whether any be brawlers, slaunderers, Brawlers.


Item, whether you know any that do use Sorcerers.
inuocations, circles, witchcraftes, soothsaying, or any like crafts or
imaginations invented by the devil, and specially in the time of women's
travail.

Item, whether the Churches, Pulpittes, and Pulpittes.
be sufficiently repaired, and if they be not, in whose default the same is.

Item, whether you know any, that in contempt Resorters to other Churches.
do resort to any other Church.

Item, whether any Inholders, or Alehouse-kepers, do use commonly to sell meat
and drink Inholders.
readyng of the Homilies or Scripture.

Deuorse.
or that be separated or deuorsed without the degrees prohibited by the law of
God, and whether any such have married again.

Privy contractes.
not calling two or mo witnesses thereunto, nor having thereto the consent of
their parents.

Banes.


Executours
which do not duly bestow such of the said goods as were given and
bequeathed, or appointed to be distributed among the poor people, repayryng of
high ways, fynding of poor scollers, or marying of poor maidens, or such
other like charitable deeds.

Images.
Tables, pyctures, payntynges, or other monumentes of fained and false
miracles, pilgrimages, idolatry, and superstition, and do adore them, and
specially such as have been set up in Churches, Chappelles, or Oratories.

Books.
Item, what books of Gods Scripture you have delivered to be burnt, or
otherwise destroyed, and to whom ye have delivered the same.

Item, what brybes the accusers, promoters, Brybes.
and other the Commissioners appointed within the several Diocese of this
Realm, have received by them selves or other, of those persons which were in
trouble, apprehended, or imprisoned for religion.

Item, what goods moveable, lands, fees, Loss of goods.
has been wrongfully taken away in the time of Queen Mary's reign, from any
person which favored the religion now set forth.

Item, how many persons for religion have How many burnt.
or have been imprisoned for the same.

Item, that you make a true presentment of Certificate of the dead.
sithen the feast of Saint John the Baptist, which was in the year of our Lord
God a thousand five hundred fifty and eight, unto the same feast last past:
making therein a plain distinct declaration, how many men, women, and men
children the same were, and the names of the men.

Item whether you know any man in your Secret Masses.
parish, secretly or in unlawful conuenticles, say or hear Mass, or any
other service prohibited by the law.

False rumors.
or a sower of discord between party and party, man and wife, parents and
their children, or that has invented, bruited, or set forth any rumors,
false and seditious tales, slanders: or makers, bringers, buyers, sellers,
kepers, or conueyers of any unlawful books, Unlawful books.
which might stir or provoke sedition, or maintain superstitious service
within this Realm, or any aydours, counsaylours, procurers, or maynteyners
thereunto.

Patron. Tithes. Vacation.
who is the Patron thereof, how long it have been vacant, who does receive the
tithes, oblations, and other commodities during the time of the vacation, and
by what authority: and in what estate the said Church is at this time, and
how long the Parson or Vicar has had that Benefice.

Item, whether any Minstrelles, or any other Minstrelles.
and especially in derision of any godly order now set forth and established.

Item, whether the Letanie in English, with Letanie in English.
which was by the Queens highness Proclamation wylled to be read to the
people were put in use in your Churches, and if not, who were the letters
thereof.

Item, whether the Curates and Ministers Distinct readyng.
read the public Prayers, Chapters, and Homilies, as they ought to do.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


