ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF. 1548.

Articles to be inquired of, in visitacions to be had, within the Diocese of
Cantorbury: in the second year of the reign of our most drad sovereign
Lord Edward the.VI. by the grace of God, King of England, France, and
Irelande defender of the faith and in earth of the Church of England and
also of Irelande, the supreme hedde.






make not special mencio^ of his majesty's name in the same.











of God, in every of their Cures, every quarter of the year, once at the least,
exhortyng their parishoners, to the works commanded by scriptures, and not to
works devised by men's pha^tasies besides scripture, as wearyng or praiyng
upon beads, or such like.



Pater noster the creed, and the.x. Commandments in English.

Pater noster, the Articles of our faith, and the.x. Commandments in English.





of Erasmus, also in English upon the Gospelles, and set up the same in some
convenient place in the Church, where their parishoners may most commodiously
resort to the same.













Pater noster the Articles of the faith, and the ten commandments in
English.



















in the Church, and at Euensong the Respondes with all the Memories.





Papa, and the name and service of Thomas Bequet, and prayers having rubrices,
conteinyng pardones or indulgences, and al other supersticious lege^des and
prayers.





they abstein from working upon those days, that then they do grievously
offend and displease God.













































scripture to the parishoners, any person have departed out of the church,
without a just and necessary cause.













that which is set furthe by the kings majesty.

































mages, any Tables, Pictures, Paintynges, or other monumentes of fained
miracles, pilgremages, Idolatry, or supersticio^.

IMPRINTED IN LONDON the last day of August. M.D. xlviii. in the second year
of the reign of our most drad and sovereign lord King Edward the: VI: By
Richard Grafton Printer to his highness:

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


