ARTICLES To be ministered, enquired of, and answered in the Visitation of the
right Worshipful JAMES HVSSEY Doctor of the Civil Law and Commissarie
general to the most reverend Father in God the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
his Grace within the City and Diocese of Cant.

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London

The tenor of the Oath to be mininistred to the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOu shall swear, that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and
gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice set aside, you shall upon due
consideration of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such
person of, or within your Parish, as has committed any offense mentioned in
these or any of these Articles, or which are vehemently suspected, and defamed
of any such offense: wherein you shall discharge your consciences uprightly,
and according to truth, neither of malice, presenting any contrary to truth,
nor of corrupt affection sparing to present any, and so conceal the truth,
having in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain
truth, and to suppress vice: So help you God, and by the contents of this
Book.

God save the King.
THE ARTICLES.
INprimis, Book of Canons.
Whether have you in your several Churches and Chapels the book of
Constitutions or Canons Ecclesiastical, ready to be read by your Minister,
according to his Majesty's pleasure, published by his Highness authority,
under the great Seal of England: and whether has your Minister read the same,
or any part thereof upon Sundays and Holidays in the afternoon before divine
Service accordingly, yea or not?

2 Item, Articles of Religion.
whether is there any in your Parish that does impugn any of the Articles of
Religion, agreed upon in Anno 1562. and established in the Church of England?

3 Item, Pray for the King, etc.
whether does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King James,
Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine, with the Lady Elizabeth his wife, and
all their royal Progeny, with addition of such style and Titles as are due
and appertaining to his Majesty, and exhort the people to obedience to his
Highness, and other Magistrates being in authority under him?

4 Item, whether is there any in your Parish, Impugn the Rites or Ceremonies.
that impugneth or speaks against the Rites and Ceremonies established in the
Church of England, or the lawful use of them? you shall present their names.

5 Item, Impugn the Church government.
are there any in your Parish that do impugn the government of the Church of
England, under the Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear office in the same; affirming that
the same is Antichristian, or repugnant to the word of God?

6 Item, Profaning the Sabbath.
whether any persons have lurked and tippled in Tauernes or Alehouses on
Sundays or other Holidayes, or used his or their manual craft or trade upon
the said days, or otherwise profaned them, or any of them, in any sort, and
especially in the time of Divine Service.

7 Item, Prescript form of Divine Service.
whether is the prescript form of divine Service used by your Minister upon
Sundays and Holidayes, according to the book of Common Prayer: and whether
does your Minister only observe all the orders, rites and ceremonies
prescribed in the said book of Common Prayer, as well in reading public
prayers, the Letanie, as also in administering the Sacraments in such manner and
form as in the book of Common Prayer is enjoined?

8 Item, Bravvling in Church or Churchyard.
whether has any person in your parish quarrelled or stricken, or used any
violence unto, or with your Minister, or any other in the Church or
Churchyard, or used himself disorderly in the Church by filthy and profane
talk, or any other rude and immodest behavior?

9 Item, Reverence in time of divine Service.
whether is that due reverence and humble submission used within your Church or
Chapel in the time of divine Service, as by the eighteenth Constitution is
prescribed: whether each one in the Church or Chapel do apply and order
himself there, in time of divine Service, as by the latter part of the same
Constitution is most commendably enjoined?

10 Item, Bread and wine at the Communion.
whether the Church wardens do provide against every Communion, with the advice
of the Minister, a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and of good and
wholesome wine for the number of the communicants that shall receive, and that
to be brought in a clean and sweets standing pot of pewter, or of other pure
metal?

11 Item, Ministering and receiving of the Communion.
whether does your Minister administer the holy Communion so often, and at such
time, as that every parishioner may receive the same at least thrice in every
year, whereof once at Easter, as by the book of Common Prayer is appointed:
and whether does your Minister receive the same himself on every day, before
that he administreth it to others, and use the words of the institution
according to the book at every time that the bread or wine is renewed, in such
manner and form, as by the prouiso of the 21. Canon is directed, or wherein he
is faulty: and whether is warning given by him before hand for the Communion,
as the 22. Canon requires?

12 Whether does your Minister administer the said Communion to any that does
not humbly kneel at the receiving of the same? what are the names of them that
refuse to kneel at the receiving thereof?

13 Item, Offenders not to be admitted.
whether has your Minister admitted any notorious offenders or schismatics to
the Communion, contrary to the 26 and 27. Constitutions?

14 Item, whether the Minister, No strangers to be admitted.
together with the Churchwardens and Quest men, do take diligent heed and
care, not only that all and every your own parishioners do receive thrice in
every year, as aforesaid, but also that no strangers of any other parish do
come often and commonly to your Church from their own parish Church: and you
are now to present the names of all those, who being 16 years of age or
vpwardes, have not in their own parish received the Communion at or since
Easter last?

15 Item, Sign of the Cross.
whether does your Minister use to sign the children with the sign of the
cross when they are baptized, according to the book of Common prayer: Refuse
to baptize.
and whether he has deferred, or wilfully refused to baptize any infant in his
parish being in danger, having been duly informed of the weakness thereof: and
whether the child has died in his default without baptism; or whether has
he at any time refused or neglected to bury the dead, or to minister the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper to any being in extremity of sickness, having
been required thereunto?

16 Item, Residencie.
whether is your Minister continually resident with you upon his Benefice, or
for how long time has he bin absent: and where is he resident for the most
part, and what other Benefice has he?

17 Item, whether does your Minister preach usually, Preaching according to the
Canons.
according to the Constitutions, either in his own cure with you, or else in
some other church or chapel near adjoining, wherein no Preacher is: or how
often has he been negligent in that behalf.

18 Item, More Cures than one.
whether does your Minister or Curate serve any more Cures than one: if yea,
then what other cure does he serve?

19 Item, if your Minister be not licensed to preach, Licensed to preach.
whether does he take upon him to expound the Scriptures, either in his own
cure, or elsewhere?

20 Item, None to preach but licensed.
whether has any person bin admitted to preach within your church or chapel,
but such as you have well known to be sufficiently licensed?

21 Item, Preachers to read Service, etc twice a year.
whether does your Lecturer and Preacher, your Parson or Vicar, read divine
service, and administer the Sacraments in his own person, twice every year,
observing all the ceremonies in the Book of common prayer established?

22 Item, Not to refuse the Communion because the Minister is no Preacher.
is there any in your Parish that refuse to have their children baptized, or
themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, because he
is no preacher? you shall present their names. And if your Minister, sithence
the publishing of the said book of Canons, has received any such persons
(being not of his own cure) to the communion, or baptized any of their
children, you shall likewise present him.

23. Item, whether are there any private meetings, assemblies, or conuenticles,
either by day or by night, used or had within the Parish by any Minister, or
Ministers, or any Laypersons tending to faction and schism? Declare the
parties names, the places where, the times when, and how often have you known
any such meetings, assemblies, or conuenticles.

24. Item, Surplice, Hood, etc.
whether does your Minister wear the Surplice whilst he is saying the public
prayers, and ministering the Sacraments: and if he be any Graduate, whether then
does he also wear upon his Surprice, during the times aforesaid, such a hood
as by the order of his University is agreeable to his degree?

25 Item, Catechism.
whether does your Minister on every Sunday and Holiday before Evening prayer,
for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons
of his Parish, in the ten Commandments, Articles of Belief, and in the Lords
Prayer, as also in the Catechism, set forth in the Book of common Prayer, and
whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, cause their children,
servants and apprentises, to come thither to hear, and to be instructed and
taught therein: and those that do not their duties herein, you shall present
their names?

26 Item, Unlawful marriage.
whether has your Minister, without license from the Archbishop, the Bishop
of the Diocese, or his Chancellor, solemnized marriage betwixt any parties,
the banes not being three several Sundaies or Holidaies first published in
time of divine Service, in the several churches or chapels of their several
abode, according to the Book of Common Prayer, and that also betwixt the
hours of eight and twelve in the forenoone: and furthermore, whether has your
Minister since the last Canons published, solemnized any marriage betwixt any
persons, being under the age of one and twenty years, although the hanes be
thrice asked, before such time as the parents have made known unto him their
consent thereunto: and whether has he married any of another Diocese, who are
they, and by what authority, and when?

27 Item, Bid holidayes and fasting-dayes.
whether your Minister do every Sunday bid Holidaies, and fasting days, as by
the Book of Common Prayer is appointed?

28 Item, whether does your Minister every six months, Denounce excommunicate
persons.
denounce in his Parish all such of his Parish as do persevere in the sentence
of excommunication, not seeking to be absolved? and whether has he admitted
into the Church any person excommunicate, without a certificate of his
absolution from the Ordinary, or his Substitute?

29 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, Excommunicated persons not to
be present at public prayer in the Church.
has celebrated and said divine Service and prayers in the Church, when any
person that he knew to be excommunicated or denounced for an excommunicate
person, was present in the same Church at that time among the Congregation: and
whether he has suffered any excommunicate person (being a member cut off from
the Church and from Christian society) to be partaker of those prayers, and
has not commanded the Church wardens of the parish, or some other, to put him
out of the Church, or otherwise ceased from saying any divine prayers during
the time of the presence of such excommunicated person thereat, and present:
who has offended herein, and how often?

30 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate, Staying the publishing of
excommunication or suspensions.
of any your churches or chapels, having received any excommunication,
suspension or aggrauation from his Ordinary, or his Substitute, against any of
their parishioners, have presumed to make stay of, and not published such
excommunication, suspension or aggrauation, according to the tenor thereof, the
next Sunday or Holiday after the receipt of the same in your church or chapel
at the time of divine Service: if any be faulty herein, present their names,
and how often default has been made in that behalf.

31 Item, Visit the sick.
whether is your Minister painful in visiting the sick, according to the
Book of Common Prayer?

32 Item, Favorer of Recusants.
whether is your Parson, Vicar or Curats: suspected to frequent, or to be
ouer-conuersant with, or a favorer of Recusants, whereby he is suspected not
to be sincere in Religion?

33 Item, Lay persons executing the office of a Minister in the Church.
has any presumed to execute the office of a Minister or Deacon in any your
Churches, and to say and celebrate the divine Service there, or to serve the
Cure of your Parish, not being a Minister or Deacon: and whether any Deacon
has presumed to minister the Sacraments in any your Churches, not having first
received the full Orders of Priesthood: if yea, present what his name is, where
he dwells; and how often he has offended herein.

34 Item, Register book.
whether is there in your church or chapel one parchment Register Book
provided for Christnings, Marriages and Burials: and whether is the same duly
and exactly kept according to the Constitutions in that behalf provided?

35 Item, Decency in apparel.
whether does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his apparel,
as by the 74. Constitution is enjoined?

36 Item, Schoolmaster
does any take upon him to teach School in your parish without special
license of his Ordinary: and whether does your Schoolmaster bring his
scholars to the Church to hear Divine Service and Sermons: and whether does
he instruct them in the Catechism?

37 Item, Book of common prayer, and things required in the Church.
whether have you provided the Book of Common Prayer, and the Bible of the new
Translation lately set forth by his Majesty's authority, and the book of
Homilies: and whether have you in your Church or Chapel a Font of stone set
up in the ancient usual place, a convenient and decent Communion Table, with a
carpet of silk, or some other decent stuff, and a fair linen cloth to lay
thereon at the Communion time: and whether is the same Table then placed in
such convenient sort within the Chancell or Church, as that the minister may be
best heard in his prayer and administration, and that the greater number may
communicate: and whether are the Ten Commandments set upon the East end of
your Church or Chapel, where the people may best see and read them, and other
sentences of holy Scriptures written on the walls also for that purpose?

38 Item, Things necessary for divine Service.
whether have you a convenient seat for your Minister to read service in,
together with a comely Pulpit set up in a convenient place, with a decent cloth
or cushion for the same: a comely large Surplice, a fair Communion cup of
gold, silver, or other pure metal, and a cover agreeable for the same, with
all other things and ornaments necessaris for the celebration of Divine
Service, and administration of the Sacraments?

39 Item, whether are your Church or Chapels, Reparation of the Church,
Parsonage-house, etc.
with the Chancels thereof, and your Parsonages or Vicarage house, and all
other housing thereto belonging, in good reparations, and decent and comely
kept, as well within as without, the seats well maintained, a sure coffer with
three locks and keys for the safe keeping of your Rigister Book, your
Churchyards well sensed and kept without abuse? if not, then through whose
default, and what defects are therein?

40 Item, whether do you know, Gifts given to the use of the Church.
or have heard of any legacy by any man's will, or any gift otherwise given to
the poor, to the church, or to any other holy uses, and not performed or
bestowed according to his will and gift, and in whose hands the same does now
remain?

41 Item, how many inhabitants within your parish, Recusants.
men or women, above 16. years of age, be Popish Recusants, or do refuse to
frequent Divine Service established by public authority of this Realm, or to
receive the holy communion, what be their names, and of what degree, state or
trade of life are they? you are to present them all of both sorts.

42 Item, How long they have bin Recusants.
how long the said Popish Recusants have obstinately abstained either from
Divine Service, or from the Communion, as is aforesaid: whether any long time,
or only since his Majesty's reign?

43 Item, Whether the Minister seeks to reclaim the Recusants.
whether is your Minister a Preacher sufficiently qualified: and if he be,
whether does be from time to time after quiet and temperate conference to
reclaim the Popish Recusants from their errors: and whether they or any of
them do refuse such conference with your Minister, or any other preacher, who
shall present unto them his diligence in ye behalf?

44 Item, Excommunicate persons.
what persons aforesaid within your Parish, either for the offense aforesaid,
or for any other contumacie or crime, do remain excommunicate, what be their
names, and for what cause, and how long they have so stood excommunicate?

45 Item, Churchwardens and Sidemen.
whether were you the Churchwardens and Quest-men chosen by the consent of the
Minister and Parishioners: and whether have the Churchwardens before you,
given up a just account for their time, and delivered to you their successors
whatsoever money, or other things of right belonging to the Church, that was in
their hands: and whether do you, and every of you diligently see, that all the
parishioners, do duly resort to their Church every Sunday and Holiday, and
there continue the whole time of divine Service, and none to walk or stand
idle, or talking in the Church, or church porch, or Churchyard, during that
time: and whether do all the parishioners and their families accordingly
frequent their parish Church, and there behave themselves soberly, attentively
and decently, all the time of Divine Service, yea or no? if no, then you shall
present their names.

46 Item, All resort to Church, and receive thrice a year.
whether do all persons above the age of sixteen years usually resort to
hear divine Service upon Sundaies and Holidayes appointed: and whether has
each one of your parishioners (being above the age of sixteen years
aforesaid) received the holy Communion thrice this last year, and chiefly once
at Easter last, in your parish Church kneeling? if no, then you shall present
their names which have not so done.

47 Item, Parish Clarke.
whether have you a fit parish Clark, aged twenty years at least, of honest
conversation, and sufficient for reading and writing: and whether he be paid
his wages without fraud, according to the most ancient custom of your parish:
if not, then by whom he is so defrauded and denied? and whether he be chosen by
the Parson, or Vicar, or by whom?

48 Item, Table for maiages.
whether have any in your parish been married within the prohibited degrees,
forbidden by the Law of God, and expressed in a certain Table, published by
authority in the year 1563. if yea, then shall you present their names, and
whether have you the said Table publicly set up in your Church, and fastened to
some convenient place there?

49 Item, whether does any heretofore divorced, Persons divorced.
keep company with any other at bed and at board, what be their names, when
and where were they married?

50 Item, To give thanks after childbirth.
does your Minister use the form of thanksgiving to women after childbirth:
and whether has he admitted any thereunto that was begotten with child in
adultery, or fornication, without license of his Ordinary? And whether have
any married wives refused to come to church according to the Book of Common
Prayer, to give God thanks after childbirth, in such usual and decent manner,
as anciently has bin accustomed? if any be faulty herein, you shall present
their names.

51 Item, whether have you any in your parish, Incontinent persons, drunkards,
svvearers, etc.
to your knowledge, or by common same and report, which have committed
adultery, fornication, or incest, which have not been publicly punished to
your knowledge: if yea, then with whom: or any man that has attempted the
chastity of any woman, or has solicited any woman, to the intent to have the
carnal knowledge of her body, or any in your Parish to be Bawds, or
receivers of any such persons, or suspected of any the crimes aforesaid: are
there any that are, or by common fame and report are reputed and taken to be
such persons, or be common drunkards, blasphemers of Gods holy name, common and
usual swearers, filthy speakers, usurers, symoniacall persons, fighters,
brawlers, or quarrellers in Church or Churchyard? you shall not fail to
present their names.

52 Item, Harboring incontinent persons.
whether have any in your parish received or harbored any woman begotten with
child out of wedlock, and suffered them to depart again without punishment
first inflicted on them by their Ordinary: you shall truly present as well
the party harboring, as harbored, and who is suspected to be the Father of
her child?

53 Item, Wills.
whether are there in your Parish any Wills not yet proved: you shall not fail
to present the Executors, and all others (...)

54 Item, Witches and such like.
(...) your Parishes, any witches, southsayers, ^ers, charmers, sorcerers, or
any that be suspected for such persons: present their names, and what special
hurt they have committed?

55 Item, Hospitals and Almes-houses
whether there be any Hospitals or Almeshouses in your Parish, and whether the
same be used, kept, and ordered according to the foundations, laws, and
statutes thereof, and in whom the fault is, that they are not so used and kept?

56 Item, Perambulation.
whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate does usually every year in the Rogation
week, gee with the Parishioners in the perambulations about the Parish,
according to the custom and use of ancient time, and does say the prayers and
suffrages appointed for the same?

57 Item, Fifth of August to be kept Holy Day.
whether is the fifth day of August (being the day of the Kings Majesty's most
happy deliverance from the traitorous and bloody attempt of the Earl Gowry
and his brother, with their adherents) observed and kept festival within your
parish, with prayer and thanksgiving, and with cessation from labor, as by
public authority it is appointed: and whether have you in your parish the
book published by authority, which contains the form of prayer, with
thanksgiving appointed for that day: and whether is the fifth day of November
observed and kept festival, Gun-povvder Treason. Nouemb. 5. Any thing else.
as by a special act of Parliament in that case provided, is appointed?

58 Do you know of any other matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance worthy the
presentment in your judgment, which you hold fit to be reformed? if you do,
you shall like wise present the same by virtue of your Oaths aforesaid.

FINIS.

