A HISTORY Containing the VVarres, Treaties, Marriages, and other occurrents
between England and Scotland, from King William the Conqueror, until the
happy Union of them both in our gracious King JAMES.

With a brief declaration of the first Inhabitants of this Island: And what
several Nations have sithence settled themselves therein one after an other:

woodcut of a map of the British Isles surrounded by a serpent swallowing its
tail and a bird on its head INNOCENTER SAPERE


Imprinted at London by G. Eld. 1607.

TO THE PRINCE.
MOST sweet Prince (give me leave to salute you, Pliny in his Preface to his
natural history.
reserving the title of Great to your royal Father, as Pliny the worlds
Historifier saluted ^itus, whom the Senate and People called Orbis amorem, and
Delicias humani generis.) This Book at first intended to do you honor,
comes now to beg some honor of you. Intended to do you honor, by reviving
and bringing to fresh memory, the many leagues and happy marriages between the
two kingdoms of this Island: to work a better conceit of either to other, then
I found in most men, for the more easy and hearty receiving (in the fullness of
time) of your excellent house, the common blood of both nations, to reign over
us: but that we might readily and joyfully embrace that, which many ages had
sought, none found, Shame and confusion to the ingratis.
and now was gratis offered unto us. But while I was framing this work to
this end, the unexpected time prevented my designs: and let me see how far
Gods vvisdome and goodness, exceeds poor men's mistie cogitations and devises,
filling our souls with comfort, by the general applause of all men, for the
most happy issue of so dangerous an alteration in our state. Since which time,
my Book has lien neglected as needless to the world, his end attained, and
date expired.

Yet for as much as some of my friends do censure me for suppressing that
which may do some good service (though not the great principally intended) when
it is now entering the view of men, it comes first to beg this honor of you,
to grace the frontispice with your most Gracious name, and shield it with your
patronage. And since by your Princely and powrefull aspect (without deminution
of his super-eminent Majesty, whence you derive it) you resemble the Sun in
the firmanent, which receaueth light from none (the Creator excepted) but
gives light and life to all inferior bodies: vouchsafe the beams of your
favor upon it, to illustrate the obscurity of the Author, and the meanness of
the work. So shall my heart be more inflamed (if yet that be possible) with
your love, and my book more welcome to all men's reading. I rest ever to be
commanded by your Highness.

EDWARD AYSOV.

To the Reader.
I Have here (courteous reader) undertaken to set down in a continued
discourse, whatsoever has passed between England and Scotland from the last
Conquest, until the decease of our late Sovereign (never to be forgotten) the
renowned Elizabeth. My travel consists wholly in this, that I have reduced
into an entire History, a true report of things passed which al other writers
before me (as far as I know) have delivered only by parts and peece-meales:
whereby you may with more delight and facility conceive and digest the
coherence of the whole, and withal carry the matter the better in memory. The
chief and principal reason which moved me to take this task upon me, I
shall not need to speak of in this place, having touched it before in my
Epistle to the Prince, and made it so apparent throughout my whole Book, as
that the reader may decerne it running. For though the right and title of King
James was pregnant enough, and even palpable to every valgar capacity:
Nevertheless what reason the best affected to the same had, to forecast some
peril in his Majesty's access and passage unto it, the sequel has declared.
But it pleased the Lord our good God (the disposer of men's wills and affections
so to work in the hearts of our grave and most prudent Senate, as by them he
brought that to pass, within the term of very few hours, which (if the
adversaries unto our happiness had had their wills) would not in so many
months, nay happily years have bin attained unto. For, did they not by
proclaiming his Majesty in tempore oportuno, without delay prevent the malice
of those two raging Bulls (not of Bashan, but of Typical Babilo^, Revel. 18.
that is to say Rome) whose pestiferous breath might otherwise have poisoned
and infected we know not how many malcontents and seditious Romanistes.
Against the former King David alone complained, Psalm. 22.
but of the latter how many Kings and Emperors shall we read of, that have bin
fronted and foiled, many brought down to their knees, others laid groueling on
their faces, some thrust out of their Kingdo^es, and some gored even unto
death. Psalm. 28.
But (O Lord) save thy people and give thy blessing unto thine inheritance.
etc. An other reason aiming at the same end was this. That whereas the
Chronicles of both Nations contain matter of reproach and disgrace one against
the other: I have had an especial care to carry my self so indifferently
between them as I hope neither of both shall have just cause to take offense
thereat. So as in that respect if any at all may be admitted (which none J
think will oppugn) then shall this of mine have privilege before all other
that J know. Since we al now: happily become Subjects unto one most gracious
Sovereign, let us value one the others virtues at one and the same price, and
setting apart all partiality, detraction, and vain glory, let us divide the
true honor and glory attained on both sides indifferently between us. Are we
not all (for the most part) the brood and offspring of the same parents, the
ancient English Saxons? what pre-eminence then shall we give to the one
Nation above the other? Admit the Englishmen have been victorious in more
battles, have entered more often and passed further in Hostile manner into the
others Countries and dominions, and have gotten greater booties both by Land
and Sea: what then? is not this our Nation far more populous and plentiful
of all store of provision and complements pertaining to war? Whereof then
shall we boast? These vauntes are therefore full of vanity: Let us now
contend who shall give more sincere and acceptable praise and thanks to the
Almighty, who in love to both has now at length made us of two discording
Nations one peaceable people under one Prince, not by conquest (the mother of
confusion) but by an happy seed and offspring proceeding from the success of
marriage, his holy ordinance: Whereby the memory of all fore-passed
displeasures and unkindness is buried in perpetual oblivion. Many have longed
and labored to work this blessed Union. How many lost their lives in the over
vehement pursuit of the intended marriage between King Edward the sixth, and
Mary the late Queen of Scotts: the success whereof, if it had been
effected, was much to be doubted. But the Eternal God in his wisdom reserved
this notable work to a more fit season, for the good especially of his Church,
having now not only united us under the external and civil government of a
terrestrial Monarchy, but also in a sincere obedience and right service of
himself under the spiritual reign of his eternal Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Almighty Monarch over Heaven and Earth. What Nation now in the
whole world has generally intertayned and submitted it self to the obedience
of the written word (delivered of more ancient time by the Prophets of God,
and lasty by the Son of God himself and his Apostles) but this our happy
Island? These holy books we receive for the only infallible Oracles of God,
what is more (concerning our Salvation) we reject as Superstitious and
Derogatory to the everlasting word of God: What is less we hold over weak
and Imperfect: let Pope and Potentate, the whole power of Antichrist do their
worst, the Lord by this Union has now established that peace to his Church
within this Island, that it shall be a sanctuary to all the true professors of
his name, even (I doubt not) to the end of the world. To whom therefore be
given all honor and praise for ever and ever. And let all true subjects to
King James our dread Sovereign say there-to. Amen. Cotham in Lincolnshiere 24.
Martii. 1606.

Thy loving friend Edward Ayscu.

A BRIEF DECLARAtion, who were first Inhabitants of this Island: and what
several Nations have sithence settled themselves therein one after another.
TO let pass the Fables of Dioclesian his Daughters, and of their successors
the Troyans, under the conduct of (I know not what) Brute, coined in some
Munkish mint about four hundred years agone, and generally received for
current payment, during the time wherein ignorance prevailed over the face of
the earth, like unto the palpable darkness of Egypt: I will begin this my
History of our famous Island of Britain, with a short declaration of the first
inhabitance of the same, grounded upon such proofs, as by probable conjectures
out of the best and most ancient Authors, shall seem to come nearest to the
truth.

Moses expreslie testifies, that the pos^^^^ty of ^apheth, the first son of
Noah, inhabited the furthest parts of Europe. Ab his separate sunt postea
regiones Gentium, etc. Genes. 10. These men speaking of the Sons of Iapheth)
divided amongst them the countries of the Gentiles, which were separated from
the Jews by the Mediterranian Sea toward the North, as the Prophet Ezechiel
expounds these words, Chap. 38. Gomerum cum omnibus agminibus suis, domum
Togarmi ad latera Aquilonis, etc Gomere and all his bands, and the house of
Togarmah of the North parts, etc. And again in the same Chapter. Postquam
veniens e loco suo a lateribus Aquilonis tu and populi tui tecum: that is,
coming afterward (speaking of Gomer) from his abiding place out of the North
coasts, thou and thy people with thee.

Thus then we may assure our selves, that all the nations of Europe took
their beginning from the posterity of Iapheph. But now if it be demanded, what
people of his progeny first settled themselves in this Island? I answer
briefly, even they which inhabited that part of the continent, that bordereth
nearest upon our coast, where the distance is no greater then that it may be
discovered by the eye. For as water being slowly powered upon an even and round
table, will naturally from the center spread it self equally on every way not
leaving any part untouched, until by little and little the whole be covered
therewith: even so it was in the propagation of mankind. For as people
increased, they dispersed themselves toward all the quarters of heaven on
every side, where they might have free passage, wherein the providence of the
Almighty Creator is worthy due observation, having in such sort disposed and
fashioned the Globe, being divided and separated into land and sea, as that no
part of the earth is further distanced from some other, but may be discovered
by interview. But now it may be demanded, how the people were called that first
transported themselves hither? Hereunto Josephus and Zonoras make answer. Qui
nunc sunt Galli, Gomari, Gomeraei and Gomeritae, a Gomero vocabantur. The
people now called Gauls (say they) were before that named Gomiries or
Gomerites of Gomer. These were afterward by the Latins called Cimbri. For
Cicero called those Barbarians whom Marius repulsed: Gauls whom all
Historiographers have since called Cimbri. In like manner Appian witnesses,
that they who under the leading of Brennus attempted the spoil of the Temple
at Delphos in Greece (whom all writers with one consent hold to be the Gauls)
were called Cimbri. Also it appears by the Prophet Ezechiell in the place of
Scripture before cited, that the Cimbrians were the offspring of Gomer, and so
consequently Gauls, for their habitation agrees with the words of the
Prophet, being situated beyond Thrace, about the Lake Meotides, as appears
by the Cimbrian strait, and the City adjoining, both which took their names
of their inhabitance the Cimbrians, whence being driven by the Scithians
toward the West, as Herodotus witnesses, passing through the countries of
Russia, Lituania, Liuonia and Borussia, they attained at length unto the
German Ocean, whereupon that part of Denmark took likewise the name of
Cimbrica Chersonesus. And afterward enlarging their dominion on both sides of
the Rheene, they settled themselves along the coast ouer-against us, from
whence they passed by a short cut, over into this Island.

And here unto also Caesar and Tacitus agree, both affirming that the Britains
took beginning from their next neighbors the Gauls. Beda (an ancient writer)
affirms as much in these words. In primis haec insula Britones solum (a
quibus nomen accepit) incolas habuit, qui de tractu Armor^ ^ano (vt fertur)
Britanniam aduecti australes sibi parts illius vendicarunt. This Island (says
Bid) was first inhabited by the Britains, of whom it took the name of
Britain, who being transported hither from the coast Armorick (whereby he
means the coast of France) did challenge unto themselves the South-parts
thereof.

Thus we see in what manner the posterity of Gomer (the Gauls our next
neighbors) first entered and possessed this Island, being the uttermost
confines of Europe. And herein the providence of God is also to be observed,
who by the signification of the name of our first parent in this part of the
world, foreshewed his purpose therein. For Gomer in the holy tongue, is by
translation into Latin, Finiens, that is, termining and ending, as Melancton
notes.

It may be further demanded what affinity in pronunciation and sound have
these words, Gomerites or Gomeries with the British language? I answer, not a
little. For the Welch-men at this day (who are the remnant of the British
blood) call themselves Kumerie or Kumeroe, the women Kumerues, which differ
very little in sound from the former.

How comes it then to pass, that this Island has been sometimes called
Albion, and more lately Britain, which names can by no means be etimologed,
either from Gomerie, Kumerie, or the Gauls, the first inhabitance thereof, as
has been proved? The name Albion no doubt was first given it by the
Gretians, whose manner it was (as Master Camden well observes) to bestow names
on all nations of their own invention. As for example, they called the
Chusians (who took that name of Chus their first parent,) Aethiopians of their
blackness: So it may well be that they called this Island Albion, of the Greek
word (...), which signifies White (whereof the Alps take their name) because
upon the Sea coasts many white Rocks appear to such as pass by the same. And
the Welch-men do at this day call this land in their language Iniswen, Inis
gwyn.
that is, the White Island. Or else they called it Albion, of Albion the son
of Neptune, in like manner as they vainly and untruly call Italy Hesperia of
Hesperus the son of Atlas, and as they called Gallia, Gallatia of a daughter
of Poliphemus of that name. But upon what occasion soever this name was first
given, most certain it is, that to distinguish this Island from the rest lying
about it, the Graecians first called it Albion.

As for the other name Britania, I prefer the opinion of Master Camden, who
compoundeth the same of the word Brit or Brith, which in the British tongue
signifies Painted, and of Tania a Greek word signifying Region or Country. So
as Britania is as much to say, as the country of the painted men. The Latins
received the name Britaniae from the Graecians, as they did these other,
Mauritenia, that is, the country of the Moors. Lusitaniae the country of
Lusus: and Aquitania ad aquas regio, that is, a country bordering upon the Sea;
in manner as the British name Armorica signifies super mare, that is, upon the
Sea. Of this word Brith a Briton is called in the British Histories Brithon.
And no doubt the Romans afterward called the Britons, Picti, of the custom
they had to Painte themselves; -- Nec falso nomine Pictos: -- Edomuit (says
Claudian the Poet) He tamed the Pictes, not untruly so called of their custom
to Painte their bodies. And Isiodore: Non abest genti Pictorum nomen a corpore,
etc. The Pictes (says he) wanted not a denomination of a custom they had to
paint themselves. For having with a Needle pricked some part of their bodies,
they infused there-into certain colors of herbs and flowers, for an
ornament to the better sort amongst them: neither were these Picts any other
then the natural Britains, who refusing to become subject to the Romans,
abandoned themselves into the furthest parts of the land Northwards, where
living unto themselves, they retained their ancient and barbarous customs,
from which the other Britains were reclaimed by the civil behavior of the
Romans, who there-vpon for distinction sake, gave to those Northern
Britains (then become enemies to the other) the name of Picts. But by Dion,
Tacitus, and Herodian, they were never otherwise called, then by the common
name to the people of this nation, viz. Britains. Ausonius calls them the
Caledian Britains, because they inhabited the more hard and barraine part of
the Island, for Kaledon in the British tongue signifies as much. Thus we have
attained (I take it) the certain knowledge what people first inhabited this
our Island, and how it came by the former ancient names.

Now it follows, that I should declare what foreign nations have from time
to time, come from other parts, and sought habitation here also. It apeareth
manifestly by the search of all ancient records, that until the coming of
the Romans this Island was never attempted by invasion, neither is there any
memory made of the Britains until that time. But when Julius Caesar that
valiant and mighty Conqueror had subdewed the Gauls even unto the coast over
against us, and there beholding a new unknown world, offering it self as it
were a preie to his hautie mind, he had not the power to confine his
Conquestes with the Ocean, but to give the more glory unto his name and his
nation, he forthwith addressed him self for the conquest of the same, and
having provided all things fit for so valerous an exploite, with much
difficulty and small advantage he arrived here in the four and fiftith year
before the incarnation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, with which
intertainement being much discontented he departed, but returning the next
spring better furnished, he prevailed so much against Cassibelan and his
Britains, that the king being unwilling to hazard the loss of the whole
land, persuaded his compeers to become tributarie to the Roman Monarchy.
Caesar here-with satisfied; at the approach of winter departed homewards,
having (as Tacitus says) only showed Britain to his nation, for during the
space of twenty years after (as Dion his words import) the Britains were
governed by their own Kings and accustomed laws, without any Roman
Lieutenant amongst them. Nevertheless it apeareth by Strabo, that certain
British Princes procuring by Embassage and duetifull demenour the amity of the
Emperor Augustus (who purposed in person to have come hither) offered in the
Capitol to the Roman Gods presents and gifts, and withal submitted themselves
unto his Sovereignty and protection, as vassales to the Empire. After this
Claudius and Vespatian subdewing the Britains reduced those parts that lie
upon the coast of France to the obedience of the Romans, who in process of
time ouerran the best part of the Island governing the same by Lieutenants, so
as after an hundred years from their first arrival, Julius, Agricola (Domitian
being Emperor) conquered the whole, and with his navy first compassed the same,
being before unknown, whether it were an Island or part of the contine^t and
firm land. The Romans reserving to themselves and their subjects the more
fertile and commodious part of Land, left unto the barbarous Britains which
would not yield to their subjection, the Northern, cold and less fruitful
soil.

The Britains continewed in their due obedience until the declining estate of
the Empire under Theodosius and Valentinian, about five hundred years from
their first compact with Julius Caesar, at what time the Roman legions being
drawn hence for the defense of France, the British nation was leaft a preie
to there bordering enemies the Pictes and Scotts, who together assailed them
so furiously that they were in the end driven for their defense to call the
Saxons over to their aid, as hereafter in place more fit shall be declared.

During the Roman Sovereignty the Britains sundry times opposed
themselves against the same. Amongst whom Caraticus was first, but after many
sharp encounters he was at length discomfited, by Ostorius Scapula and sent
Captive to Rome, for which victory the Senate had determined at his return to
have received him home with triumph. The strange courage of the Lady Voadicia,
the widow of Prasatugus exceeded all other of that sex. For having in reueng
of many injuries done unto her by the Romans, assembled an huge army, she
therewith prevailed so mightily, that had not Paulinus (the Roman
Lieutenant) by advantage of place in a battle subdewed her, she had well
near restored the Britains to their ancient liberty; Calgagus likewise made
good trial of his valor in a desperate conflict or two against, Agricola.
Prince Aruiragus, was held very renowned with the Romans themselves, of whom
Iuvenal writes to Domitian.

Iuvenal. Sat. 4.
Omen habes (inquit) magni clarique triumphi:
Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno excidet Aruiragus.
It is not be doubted but there were many other Britains, who being both at
home and abroad continually inured and trained up in martial discipline by the
Romans, atcheeued as great estimation in those days as any other people of
the world.

Though this subjection to the Roman Monarchy was many times offensive to
the Britains, by reason of the insolency of such unto whom the
administration of Justice was sometimes committed by the Emperors:
nevertheless the people were nurtured and framed to a more civil carriage of
themselves in there ordinary behavior, and also were disciplinated by them in
the practice of war and good letters, whereof it came to pass that this
nation received in this time (in some measure) the knowledge of God, in the
profession of the name and divine nature of the God and man Jesus Christ the
eternal Son of God, in whom alone the Father is manifested unto the world.
For though as yet the Roman Emperors themselves had not embraced
Christianity, yet (no doubt) many of those Romans that lived here and
married with the Britains, were professors of Christ, thorough the preaching
and good example of life of those their true pastors and Bishops, who for the
space of three hundred years together lived continually in persecution,
sealing the certainty and truth of their doctrine, with m^st horrible tortures
and torments even unto death The British King, that first together with his
people received the badge of Christian profession, was named thereupon Lucius,
which comes of the Latin word Lux, alluding (as I take it) to that place of
Esaias, cap. 60. verse. 3. where it is said of Christ; And the Gentiles shall
walk in the light, and Kings at the brightness of thy rising up: and herewith
agrees Nennius: Lucius rex agnomine Lever Maur, id est, magni splendoris,
propter fidem quae in eius tempore venit.

Last of all, it is to be observed, that during the government of the Romans
here, there was no absolute King over the whole Island, or any kingly
succession over any part thereof, as Galfred and his followers would make us
believe, who have vainly registered them in order: But diverse Noblemen of
good desert amongst the Britains, such as Edgidunus (of whom Tacitus writes)
and those other which I have before named, were admitted by especial favor of
the Roman Emperors, to be sometimes entitled Kings over some part of the
Realm, so long as they acknowledged to hold their places under them, as of
their head and sovereign Lord, wherein they graced, and gave the more glory to
their Imperial Majesty.

Now it follows, that I should declare what people the Scots were, who
joining themselves with the Picts the Caledonian Britains, invaded with such
violence those other Britains that were subject to the Roman Empire. First
it is held most certain, that before the time of Constantine the great, there
was no mention made of them in any writer, whereby it seems that till then
their name was unknown to the world. Giraldus Cambrensis in his Book of the
Institution of a Prince, writes; That at what time Maximus (who usurped the
government over the Britains) passed over into Gaul with a mighty Army, even
the strength of the whole Island, to possess himself of the Imperial Diadem,
the two brothers and partners in the government thereof, Gratian and
Valentinian sent hither by Sea, certain bands of Goths and Scithians to
invade the land, to the end thereby to procure his return, for the defense
thereof, and so to prevent his malice intended against them by that his
ambit^ous enterprice. These Barbarians being arrived, took the advantage of the
time, seized upon the North parts of the Island, and expulsing the inhabitants,
possessed themselves of that country. But as Amianus writes in his nine and
twentieth Book, Maximus at his return subdued those Scithians (whom he calls
Scots) and slew Eugenius their Captain. These being thus expelled, transported
themselves into Ireland, where they remained until the reign of the great
Oneale, for so writes the foresaid Girald in his description of Britain,
Nello magno Hiberniae monarchiam obtinente, sex filij Muredi regis Vltoniae
boreales Britannae parts occuparunt, vnde ab his gens propagata: et
specificato vocabulo Scotia vocata vsque in hodiernum, angulum illum
inhabitant, Neale the great (says he) having obtained the absolute
Sovereignty over Ireland, six sons of Murede King of Vlster possessed the
North parts of Britain, of whom afterward sprung a Nation called by a
peculier name Scotland, which unto this day inhabiteth that corner. Thus it
appears that the name Scotland was then first given unto that angle of
Britain to make a difference as it seems between the same, and that part
of Ireland from whence these people came thither, whereupon it came to pass
afterward, that their former habitation and Country was called the greater
Scotland, and the latter, the less Scotland: which alone at this day
retayneth that name. But to come more near to the knowledge of the time of
this transmigration of these Sons of Murede, we find that while Laigerius
the Son of this great Neale succeeded him in Ireland, Pope Celestine sent
Patrick thither, Palladius into Scotland, and Germanus to the Britains to
root out the Pelagian heresy. This Caelestine became Bishop of Rome not
above two years before Valentinian the third was admitted by Theodosius the
second into fellowship with him in the government of the Empire, and continewed
bishop not fully ten years: hereby it should seem that these Irish Scotts
first settled themselves in this Island, about the beginning of the reign of
the Emperor Honorius, wherewith agrees Johannes Mayor, according to the
computation of Functius. The Scots (says he) returned into Britain, having
been banished from thence three and forty years, but he fails in that his
account of the number of years, as Functius well observes, who makes the
overthrow that Maximus gave Eugenius, to come to pass about the tenth year
of Valentinian brother to Gratian, but some twenty years before.

The Scotts having then laid a sure foundation in a corner of this Island,
committed the Sovereignty over them unto Fergusius, Nephew to the foresaid
Eugenius, in the year of our Lord God (after Functius) four hundred and
four, about seven years after their return out of Ireland: in which time
they had enlarged there kingdom Southward unto the Scottish sea, now called
the frith of Scotland. About sixescore years after, as may be gathered out of
Beda, the Northumbrian Saxons being at civil dissension amongst themselves,
and greatly weakened by the often invasion of the Danes, the Scotts taking
the advantage, entered further into the Land, and enlarged their dominion over a
great part of their Country, which before was extended to the river of Cluide,
as by all antiquity is confessed. Hereupon (as Master Camden well observes)
it comes to pass, that the Scotts who now inhabit the East coast, called
Low-land-men, are descended from the English-Saxons, and still speak the same
language. But the High-land-men Westward are natural Scots, and speak their
ancient and peculiar Irish. But for more manifest proof that the Goths which
were sent hither by the foresaid Roman Emperors, were the very same people
that were afterward called Scotts, it is not to be omitted (as Master
Camden also well observes) that as the Lowe-land-men of Germany call both
Goths and Scotts by one and the same name Scutten: so the Britains (as
appears out of their Histories) called them both I-Scot. King Alfread, who
translated Orosius above six hundred years ago, turned the Latin word
Scotos into Scittan. And at this day our borderers call them Skitts and Sketts
more often then Scots. There are also certain Islands beyond those of Orkney
now called Scetlant, which no doubt took that name of their inhabitants the
Sketts. Thus it appears plainly enough, that the name Scott was first given
them by the Pictes their next neighbors and confederates, whereupon the
Saxons afterward called their country Scotlandt, in manner as they called the
Isle from whence they came Gotlandt.

The Emperor Valentinian the younger, being forced thorough want of other
means to transport his bands from thence into Gaul for the defense thereof:
the wealth of this land was not only thereby wasted, but the strength also much
abated, by reason whereof the poor Britains were left for a prey to their
enemies the Pictes and Scots, against whom they were in the end compelled to
call in the Saxons for their defense. These strangers crossing the Eastern
seas, arrived here in great numbers, and were friendly entertained of
Vortigerne (to whom the Britains had committed the sovereignty over them)
about the year of our Lord God 449. The enemy being repulsed, and the Realm
by their help reduced to a more quiet estate, the Saxons became so far in
love and liking with this Land, that they had no good will to return home
again. Wherefore being grown to a mighty People (for daily they still
flocked hither) under some colorable pretense of quarrel, they became friends
(for the time) with the Pictes and Scots, and bent all their force against the
Britains. Thus were they brought to a most miserable estate by them in whom
they reposed greatest confidence, not foreseeing how dangerous a thing it is
for any nation to entertain a foreign aid, ouer-mighty to be commanded at
their pleasure. For after some resistance made by those two Martial British
Princes Aurelius Ambrosius, and King Arthur, in the end they were expelled out
off the more fertile parts into the Western corners of the Island, called
thereupon by the Saxons, Britwalsh, and Cornwalsh, now Wales and Cornwall,
where through the natural strength by situation, they might the better save
themselves from their enemies, who never ceased to pursue them. The Saxon word
Walsh signifies Foraine, accounting the Britains, aliens and strangers unto
the^. Wales has even hitherto retained both the language and lineage of the
ancient Britains, but the Cornwalsh Britains, being neither so many nor so
well defended by the mountains relief as the other, were in short time forced
to transport themselves to their Countrymen the Britains on the other side of
the Sea, who not long before (being carried over by Maximus the Usurper (as is
aforesaid) had by force planted themselves in that Province then called
Armorica, of the signification thereof, as I have already noted. Of this
transmigration, of these first Britains, Julius Scaliger thus writes, Vicit
Aremoricas animosa Britannia gentes,
Et dedit imposito, nomina prisca iugo.


The Saxons being thus settled in this Island, divided the same into seven
principalities or little Kingdoms, which continued in that estate till Egbert
the seuententh from Cerdicius the first King of the West Saxons, subduing four
of the other Saxon Kings, took upon him the Sovereignty over the whole,
ordaining that from thenceforth it shall be called Englandt, about the year of
our Lord God, 810. After an hundred and fortye years from thence his
successors brought under their subjection the two other Provinces. So that in
the end the former Heptarchie was reduced to a Monarchy,

These Saxons were not all one people but consisted of three several Nations.
viz. The Angles (who as it appears by their possessions here, were the
greatest number) the Iutes, and the Saxons, but they were all the Inhabitants
of some part or other of Denmark. For proof whereof, besides the authority
of Bid, Master Camden cites an ancient Author, Fabius Ethelwardus who
writes thus. Anglia vetus sita est inter Saxones and Giotos, habens opidum
capitale quod sermon Saxonico Sleswick, secundum vero Danos Haithby. that is,
The old England is situate between the Saxons and the Iutes, whose chief Town
was called by the Saxons Sleswick, but by the Danes Hathbie. And as Master
Camden well observes there is at this day a province in Denmark thereabout
called Angel, from whence he supposes that these Angels or Angles came
hither.

These people were generally addicted to superstitious paganism sacrificing
human flesh to their Idols, among whom Wooden and Fria were of greatest
account. To him they dedicated the third day of the week, to her the fifth
calling them after their names Woodensday and Friday appropriated to the
service of them through out the whole year. Besides these they had an other
Goddess named Eoster in the honor of who^ they did yearly offer sacrifice in
the month of April whereupon the feast of the Pascall coming always in or
nere that month, was and is still called Easter. The word (I take it) comes
from the Greek word (...), who^ the Latins called Aurora, which is the first
appearance of the Sun in the East, which the Germans call Oost, whereupon I
gather that their Eoster, was the divine worship which these Pagans gave the
Sun at his rising in that month, rejoicing at the approach of Summer. In
imitation of whom the Christians have since used in time of prayer to turn
their faces toward the East, according to the manner of the standing of our
Churches East and West. Hereby it appears that by the coming of the Saxons
the profession of Christ, which before had taken some little root, was now
exterpate and plucked up. But after 150. years from their first arrival it
pleased the Lord to enlighten their understanding by the reading of his word,
with some knowledge of him, amongst whom Ethelbert of Kent was the first King
that together with his subjects received Baptism (the badge of our profession)
at the hands of Augustine, who^ Gregory Bishop of Rome sent hither to preach the
Gospel. But the Religion of Rome was even the^ so blemished with human
traditions and superstitious ceremonies (the invention of man's brain) that the
same consisted more in outward appearance and show, then in substance of sound
Doctrine, out off the pure word of God, the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles.

Egbert having resumed the title of absolute King over the whole Land, and
promising unto himself and his posterity, the sole Sovereignty over the
same: the height of his conceived happiness was suddenly shaken by a mighty
tempest out off the East again. For the Danes arriving here in his time, did
afterward so much prevail against the Englishmen, as that within the space
of two hundred years, Swane King of Denmark, having attained the possession
of the whole Realm, left the same unto Canutus his son, who together with
his two sons did successively reign one after another about twenty years.
After the death of the two brothers the government of the Land returned to the
English blood in the person of King Edward surnamed the Confessor, in whom also
it ended for a season. This servitude under the Danes was more grievous then
any other before or after it, as Hollinshead well observes. For the Romans
used all kind of courtesy to those Britains which continued in dutiful
obedience, always defending the^ from their enemies malice, and admitting them
kings and rulers of their own nation. The Saxons, and the Normans having in
short time attained the Sovereignty, gave speedy end to the miseries and
mischieues incident to a conquest. But the Danes a long time molesting the land
by their several invasions, did not so much desire to become conquerors, as to
make a continual spoil and prey of the inhabitants, whereby the Land was most
extremely vexed and impouerished.

These Danes were a people, that long after the ariual of the Saxons here,
succeeded them in their former habitations, being transported thither out of
the eastern Countries, from some part of Scandia, of whom these peninsule or
Ile-like provinces first took the name of Dane-marshe, because they lie low,
subject to the over flowing of the sea, according to the nature of marish
ground. Now the Country by corruption of speech is called Denmark.

The fourth and last conquest over this land was made by the Normans. The
manner whereof Master Camden (now Clarentiaulx king at arms) has very
compendiously delivered in the Latin tongue, wherefore it shall be sufficient for
me in this place to follow him word by word in as good English as I can make
him speak, as as for the most part I have done hitherto.

Edward the confessor being dead without issue, the nobles and commons were at
there wits end, how to resolve about the admittance of a new King. Edgar
(surnamed Atheling) grandchild to Edmond Ironside by his Father was the only
issue male of the Saxon blood, to whom the crown by right of inheritance
pertayned. But he being thought unfit to govern by reason of his minority,
and having been also bred and brought up in Pannonia, by his Mother Agathe
Daughter to the Emperor Henry the third, was not so gracious in the eyes of
the Englishmen, who regarded nothing more, then to have one to reign over them
of their own nation. Therefore both the eyes and hearts well near of all men
were wholly fixed and settled in affection upon Harold the Son of Godwine
highly honored and renowned for his singular dexterity in managing the
affairs of estate, as well in time of war as of peace. For although he had
no cause to boast of Nobility, receiving that only of his Mothers side, and
that his Father had stained himself with a perpetual note of infamy.
Nevertheless by his curtious carriage toward all men, his liberality, and
manly corrage, he was generally exceedingly favored. Neither was their any
other in whom was found more boldness to encounter an intended mischief, or
of better foresight how to avoid it. His late victory over the Welchmen was so
glorious in the judgment of the people, that he seemed to want no good
accomplement, requisite in a great Commander as though he had purposely been
borne to restore and uphold the English Empire.

As for the Danes who were then the greatest terror to this nation, It was
hoped he should find them favorable enough because Edithe his mother was
sister to Swane then King of Denmark. If any other resistance should arise
either at home or elsewhere, he seemed to be sufficiently guarded not only by
the hands and hearts of the communalty, but also by his affinity in blood, and
alliance with the nobility, for his wife was sister to the two brothers Morkar
and Edwine the greatest men in the Land, and Edrick surnamed the forester (a
man of an aspiring mind and in high authority) was also neerelie allied unto
him. Withal it fell out fortunatly for him that the Danish King was then set
on work at home by his enemy the Sweaden. And Philip of France was nothing
gracious to the Normaine Duke, because he much misliked that Edward the
confessor had in the time of his banishment and aboade in Normandy,
couenanted to make the Duke his heir to the Crown of England after him, if
he should decease without issue of his body. For the performance whereof
Harold had offered to become his surety and assurance, and further had
thereunto bound himsselfe unto the Duke by oath, while he also remained
Captive with him, promising withal to marie his daughter. For this cause many
thought it the best course to make the Duke their king, the rather by keeping
promise with him, not only for that they war otherwise threatened, and the
miseries commonly in flicted for the punishment of perjury might thereby be
avoided, but also for that by the addition of Normandy unto the crown of
England, under so mighty a Prince, the realm should be much strengthened and
the commonwealth enriched. But Harold preventing further consultation, even
upon the same day on which the deceassed King was put into his grave, he
forthwith put the Crown on his head without further solemnity. This act did
not a little offend the Clergy, as being a breach of the Church her holy
ordinance. Wherefore to salve that sore (being not ignorant how hard a thing it
is for a Prince newly advanced, to hold his authority without the opinion at
least of virtue and piety) and the better to confirm the same, he left
nothing undone that might advance and pleasure the ecclesiastical estate either
for matter of profit or ornament. Further he entertained the noble men with all
kind of curtisies, especially Edgar Atheling who^ he created Earl of Oxford.
As for the communalty they were well cased in their accustomed taxation and
paime^ts. And on those that lived in want he bestowed liberal maintenance. To
conclude his affability and curtious speech, his readiness to hear others
speak, his indifferency and upright carriage between party and party in
matter of controversy, made him both beloved and feared: the best supporters
of authority. When the Duke of Normandy had inteligence of the death of the
King, and what had followed thervpo^ in England, he seemed not so much trobled
with the loss of his Kinsman, as to think that therewith he should loose a
Kingdom, whereof his confident hopes had already taken full possession. Wherefore
he presently sent over some of his Counsel, on embassage to Harold, to put him
in mind of his former promise, and accordingly to demand the Crown as of
right it appertained to him. Whereunto after some deliberation they received
answer. viz. First, for the promise made by the late deceassed King, it was of
no force seeing it rested not in his power alone, to dispose of the Kingdom of
England at his pleasure, neither though the King might have done it, was he
bound to yield thereunto because he came to the Crown not by right of
succession, but by free election. And as concerning his own promise and oath,
he was unwillingly in the time of captivity drawn thereunto by force,
fraud, and fear of perpetual imprisonment, made to the prejudice or the
Realm, and the authotitie of the three estates of the same, and therefore they
were to be reputed void and of no validity, which he neither ought to
perform, neither (though he would) had he any warrant thereto, seeing the
deceassed King was not acquainted therewith, nor yet had his subjects consent
unto it. Finally that the Duke had no reason to make claim to the Crown of
England considering he was a stranger to the Saxon blood and lineage, he
himself being now by general consent and applause of the whole Nation
lawfully established in that Throne. The Duke was not a little displeased with
this answer, esteeming it a bare and badde excuse wherewith to color his
perjury. Therefore he forthwith sent over again other Ambassadors more
seriously to admonish him, what conscience he ought to make of an oath, how
odious the breach thereof was both to God and man, not only deserving
punishment in this life, dishonor and endless infamy, but withal destruction
of body and soul in the world to come. Harold now understanding that the Dukes
daughter was dead, who before was affianced unto him upon his former promise
and oath, and was the very foundation and groundwork for the same: these men
were entertained with less curtesy the^ the former, neither could they get
other answer of him, the^ before he had made. Now did al things tend to open
war. The Navy was forthwith furnished of all complements pertaining there-to:
Soldiers were mustered, watch and ward set along the seacoast, especially
in places of most advantage for the enemies landing, and whatsoever else was
thought commodious either for defense or offense was with all speed put in
readiness. First of al, Tosty the Kings brother (besides al men's expectation)
gave the onset. This Man being ambitiously minded, sometimes governed in great
authority over the Northumbrians, but abusing his place by too much severity
over his inferiors, extreme arrogancy and pride toward his sovereign, and
malice and envy at the advancement of his own Brothers, he was deservedly
banished by King Edward, and lived afterward in France. Tostie, at the
instigation of Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and of the Duke of Normandy, as it
was thought (both having married Baldwines daughters) began now to pursue his
Brother with open war, whom long before he had deadly hated in his heart. His
Navy consisted of some threescore sail, and loased from the Coast of Flanders
wherewith arriving at the Wight, he ouer-ran and wasted the I Will, passing from
thence he annoyed the Kentish Coast, but being terrified with the approach of
the Kings Navy, leaving those parts, he directed his course to the Coast of
Lincolne-shire, where at his landing he was repulsed by Edwine and Morcar, and
forced to retire into Scotland, there to repair and augment his forces.
Hereupon it was doubted, that the Realm should be assailed on that side from
thence, and on the other out off Normandy. The terror hereof made the deeper
impression, by reason of a Comet which appearing in fearful manner, for the
space of little less then a week together, disposed men's minds (as in so
troblesome a time it comes often to pass) to an opinion and expectation of
some grievous event portended thereby. But Harold having a vigilant eye to his
business on every side, strengthened the coasts all along the North parts with
sufficient defense, though not much doubting any invasion that way, because
Malcolme King of Scotts had his hands full at home thorough the sedition of his
own subjects. In the mean time the Duke of Normandy set all his wits on
work which way he might best effect his indeauors. Often he debated the
matter with his best experienced Captains whom he found always very forward
in the enterprise for England.

The only difficulty rested, by what means money might be gotten sufficient
for discharge of so costly a journey. For when at a public assembly of the
States called together for that purpose, a subsidy was demanded, answer was
made, that the country was so much inpouerished by the last war with France,
that if a new should arise, it would be hardly provided to make defense for
it self, for the which, it stood them upon much more to make provision, then
neglecting the same, to hazard all for the getting of that, which if they got
at all, they looked to come by at so dear a rate. And though the quarrel were
just, yet the war was not so necessary as dangerous. Finally that the Normans
were not bound to follow their Duke into any foraine service. Thus by no means
could they be now persuaded to part with any thing, although William
Fitzosbert (a man highly esteemed both of Prince and people) labored the matter
as much as possibly he could, and thereby to draw on others by his example,
he franckly offered at his own charge to furnish out forty ships toward this
enterprice. The Duke seeing he could not prevail this way, tried what might
be gotten by private entreaty, for the richest men in all the country being
come before him, he called each one a part from the rest, and so much prevailed
by his fair words and curtious behavior, that as if they had contended who
should give most, every one offered very liberally, so that after the particular
Items were cast up, and accounted, the total sum far exceeded the Dukes
expectation. Having thus obtained so large a contribution of his own subjects,
he further attempted what aid might be gotten of the Princes his allies and
neighbors, the Earls of Aniou, Poictou, Le-Main, and Bollogne, to whom he
promised upon his good success great preferments in England. Also he solicited
Philip the French king offering, that if he would assist him in the conquest of
this Land, to bind himself by oath, to hold the crown of him, as of his
Sovereign Lord and master. But because it seemed nothing commodious to France
that the Dukedom of Normandy, which then stood but in slender awe of the king,
should be strengthed by the addition of England (for the over great power of a
neighbor nation is held amongst Princes a dangerous point) Philip was so far
off from yielding him any aid therein, as that he did what he could to dissuade
him from it. Nevertheless the Duke would not by any means be removed from that
he had already so far forth undertaken, but was the more forward being now
also backed and incoraged by the enterposed authority of Alexander Bishop of
Rome, who now first began to usurp a Sovereignty and command over Princes. For
his Holiness ratifying the Dukes interest, presented him with a hallowed
banner, as an assured token of happy success, wherefore having gathered his
whole power in readiness at S. Valeries (a little town scituat at the entry of
the river Some) the Navy attended a fair wind, which because they could not
have so sone as they would, the Normans weried the poor Saint ( Patron of that
place) with the multitude of vows and did ouerload him with their continual
offerings. Harold, who had all this while, with his people waited in vain on
the enemies landing, determined with himself to dismiss his army, and to
dissolve his navy for that time, as well because his provision of corn failed,
as also having received letters from the Earl of Flanders, signifying that the
duke purposed to stir no further that year, which he the rather believed,
because winter approaching (for the sun was returned to his latter equinoctial
period) the season was unfit for navigations.

But his army was no sooner dismissed, but he was constrained, by an
unexpected occasion, to gather together his dispearsed forces. For Harold
Harfager King of Norway, playing the Pirat along the Northen coasts, had
already seized on the isles of Orkney, intised thereunto by Tosty, who had put
him in hope of attayning the Crown, and were together entered the river of Tine
with some few less then five hundred small vessels. There forces thus united,
they took spoil of the Countries adjoining, passing from thence along the
coast of Yorkshire, till they entered the River of Humber, making what spoil
they could on either side. In the mean time the two Earls Edwine and Morcar
gathering up certain disordred troops, such as the Country upon a sudden
could afford, made head against them, but being repulsed by the Noruegians,
many of them together with there captains saved them selves by flight, but the
greater mumber unadvisedly rushing into the River of Ouse (thereby hoping to
have escaped) perished in the water. After this blow, they prepared to besiedg
York, whether being come sooner then was looked, the City was surrendered and
hostages delivered on both sides. Within few days, Harold of England having
in his passage gathered what forces he could comes to York, from whence
pursuing the Noruegians, he found them very strongly encamped, having on their
backs the maine Ocean, on their leaft hand the river of Humber, where their
ships lay at Ancre, and upon the right hand and a front they were pretily
defended by the river Derwine. All this not-with-standing Harold assailed them
very courageously. The fight began upon the bridge whereon, it is said, that a
Noruegian alone, a long time kept back the whole army of the Englishmen from
passing over, until he was stricken through with a Dart. The armies being
joined, the fight continued a good while, with doubtful victory on either
side, but in the end the Noruegian host was wholly defeated, of whom the
greater number together with their King and his partaker Tostie, were slain in
the battle. This victory brought also with it a rich booty, for besides much
treasure, they left behind them all their ships, saving some twenty of the
worst, which were bestowed on Paul Earl of the Isles of Orkney, and on Olive
son to the Noruegian King, therein to carry home their maimed soldiers,
having first taken an oath that from thence forth they should never molest this
land again. Fortune thus smiling on our Harold, made him esteem very highly
of himself: for thinking that the Normans would now stand in fear of his
mightiness, he began to make less account of his soldiers, not respecting
how slenderly he rewarded them for their late good service, but reserving to
himself, and some few of his favorites, the whole wealth attained by this
victory, he became odious to his own subjects. The North parts being thus
distempered by this invasion from Norway, he wholly applied himself to set all
things there in good order and safety again. In the mean time the Duke of
Normandy taking the offered opportunity, about the end of September hoised up
his sails and with a favorable wind landed his whole army at Pemsey.
Peuensie in Sussex, causing his ships to be set on fire, thereby taking from
his soldiers all hope of saving themselves by flight. Having builded here some
fortifications, he marched from thence along the sea coast to Hastings, where
also he raised an other fortress, and furnished them both with sufficient
strength for their defense. Here be published the causes moving him to
undertake this enterprise, namely, to be revenged on the outrage committed
upon his Cousin Alfred, whom together with diverse Normans, Godwine, Father to
Harold had wickedly murdered. To take revenge on Harold himself as well for
causing Robert the Archbishop of Canterbury to be banished the Realm in the
days of King Edward, as also for unjustly detayning from him the kingdom of
England, contrary to his faithful promise and oath. But in any case he
strictly forebadde his Soldiers to inflict any outrageous calamities upon the
country people: knowledge hereof was presently brought to king Harold, who
thereupon without further deliberation, to the end he might the more speedily
encounter the Normans, dispatched his posts into all the parts of the Realm,
entreating his subjects to persevere in their loyalty and duetifull obedience
unto him, and having gathered what power by all possible means he could, by
long iorneyes he came in few days to London. Hither the Duke sent his
ambassador, who demanding resignation of the kingdom unto his master, very
hardly escaped with life, so much was Harold enraged against him. For by his
late victory over the Norwegians he was so encoraged, that nothing could now
appall and daunt him. He returned the Duke answer, that unless he would
forthwith draw homewards, it should be worsse for him. But the Duke in modesty
replied, and in curtious manner dismissed the messenger. Harold in the mean
season mustering his men at London, found that since the late conflict with the
Norwegians, his forces were shrewdly weakened, nevertheless by reason of the
repair of the Nobility and others (whom the love of their country brought
thither to the defense of the same, against a danger of like prejudice to them
all) a great army was from thence speedily conducted by himself into Sussex,
whatsoever persuasion, his Mother could use to the contrary notwithstanding and
with an invincible corrag he encamped his host in a fair plain with in less
then seven miles of the enemy. The Duke approaching sent forth his espiales as
the other did, to give intelligence one of the others demeaner. They of the
English part (either of ignorance or of purpose to terrify their king)
exceedingly extolled and preferred the Dukes army, both for number, furniture,
orderly disposition, and conduction of the same. In so much as Githe the Kings
brother (an expert warrior) holding it not convenient to hazard the loosing of
all upon the success of one battle, advised the King not to be over forward,
showing him how unconstant fortune uses to show her self in martial
adventures, favoring those for the more part that are of least desert. That an
advised delaie was reputed a principal point of military discipline. That if
he had promised to reserve the Crown to the use and behoof of the Duke (as it
was justified) he then held it fit, he should retire his person, considering
that without a good conscience no force or power whatsoever should stand him in
steed. That God himself would take revenge upon faith-breakers. That nothing
would more dismay the enemy, then to be set upon still afresh with new supply,
offering that if he would commit to him the adventure of that battile, he would
not fail to perform the part both of a faithful brother, and of a resolute
Captain. That he maintayning his quarrel upon warrant of a good conscience
(as far as he knew) should have more happy success against the Normans, or
not unhappily give his life for the love he bare to his King and Country.
Harold was much offended hereat, as esteeming it a speech overmuch sauouring of
disgrace and reproach to his person. For as he would take in good part
whatsoever event followed the battle, so could he not endure in any sort to
be taxed of want of courage. Wherefore as touching the commendation given to
the behavior of his adversaries, he lightly regarded that report, neither (as
he took it) could it be without great dishonor to his former renown, that
being come to the repulse of the last danger which he was like to fall into,
he should now shrink and fearfully with-drawe himself. In this manner does
fatal destinies bewitch their senses, whom they mean to bring to destruction.
While these things were thus debated, Duke William preferring the care he had
to avoid the effusio^ of much Christian blood, (which in that quarrel was
likely to be shed) before any particular respect of advantage to himself,
sent a Munke to Harold with this message: Either to surrender unto him the
Crown and Scepter of England, or else to acknowledge thence-forth to hold them
under him, as in his right. But if the title must of necessity be tried by
Arms, then to have it determined by single Combat between themselves. If none
of these offers would be accepted, then to commit the cause to the hearing and
determination of the Bishop of Rome, as an indifferent Judge and vmpire
between them. Harold answered that it was not in his power to yeald to any of
these offers, but he referred the disciding of this weighty controversy to
the final sentence and decree of the supreme and celestial Judge, and
moderator of all human actions. That on the next morning, being the
foureteenth day of October, he would not fail to give him battle, vainly
imagining to have the better success because it was his birthday. The
Englishmen spent all the next night in excessive riot, but the Normans
contrariwise passing the same without any misdemeanor gave themselves wholly to
wholesome meditations and exercises of devotion. At the apearance of day, every
man prepared himself to the fight. On the English part, the Kentishmen were
placed in the front of the battle (to whom that place pertained by an ancient
custom) with their Halberds in their hands. Harold with his Brother, the
Londoners, and the rest of his army made up the whole Battle. On the other side
Roger Mongomery and William Fitzosbert, had the leading of the Vangard which
consisted of horsemen of Aniou, and of the contries of Perch, Le-Maine and
Britain, of whom a great number served under the Britain Fergent. The middle
battle (who were Germans and Pictoines was conducted by Galfred Martell,
and a German. The Duke himself managed the rereward, wherein was placed the
strength of his nation and the flower of his Nobility. These three battles
were through out enter^ined with the Norman Archers. The Normans being thus
marshalled; sounding the alaru^ without any confused noise, advanced themselves
forward, and withal from every rank mounting their Arrows in the air, they
fell on the Englishmen as thick as hailestones, whereat they were not a little
dismaide having never before been acquainted with such kind of weapons, from
whose annoyance no man was free, even in the midst of their own forces. This
storm (unlooked for) being blown over, the Normans forthwith ran fiercely
upon the foreward of the English Army, who resolving rather to die where they
stood the^ to give ground, keeping themselves close together, repulsed the
enemy with no small loss and disadua^tage unto him. Nevertheless he forthwith
gave a fresh assalt, whereat, with terrible outcries both armies rushed one
upon the other. Being now coped together at hand blows, the fight continued
very hotly for a good season, but the Englishmen still keeping their array (as
if they had bin linked one to another) resisted the others malice. The Norma^s
having received many wounds were withal ready to give back, had not the Duke
(plaiyng the part no less of a Souldior then of a vigilant Captain) as much by
example as by direction incoraged the^ to stand to it manfully. The fight thus
still maintained on either side, the Norman horsemen, with all possible force
charged upon them, and withal pouring out, a new tempest of their airy
weapons, with the violent fall of their arrows, did seem even to beat the^
down to the ground. But the Englishmen without any disorder abide this brunt
also. For Harold performing the part of a most valiant Captain, was still at
hand, where occasion required to incorage his men. Neither came the Duke
behind him in that respect, who having now had his horse twice slain under
him, and perceauing that by the only virtue of his power he should not
prevail; assaied what might be done by slight and policy. Wherefore causing
the trumpets to sound a retreat, the Normans without breking their array, did
retire and give back. The Englishmen mistaking their meaning, thought the
victory now their own, and withal, (no respect had of keeping order) they
pursued them more egarlie then warily, which the enemy perceauing, and taking
the exspected advantage, upon a sudden turned again, and redily reducing his
troops into good order, set upon them a fresh and made a great slaughter of
them. Many were beaten down while they were thinking whether it were better to
fight or to fly. But the greater number keeping their stand close together on
the height of a hill, and incoraging one the other not to shrink, manfully
fought it out a long time, as though they had purposely chosen that place to
give the more honor unto their deaths. In the end Harold being shot into the
head with an arrow, together with Githe his brother, yielded up their fainting
spirits. Edwine and Morcar with some few more escaping by flight, gave place to
time and the divine providence, after the fight had continewed from the first
appearance of daylight unto the shutting up of the same. In this battle were
slain of Normans few less then six thousand, but of the Englishmen a far
greater number. The Duke having obtained this notable victory had no small
cause to rejoice thereat: nevertheless he attrbuted the honor and glory
thereof to the giver of all happiness, and by public thanksgiving
acknowledged the same. He lodged that night in the field, his pauilion being
set up in the midst of the dead bodies. The next day taking order for the
burial of the dead on both sides, he returned to Hastings, as well to consult
in what sort to prosecute his late victory, as also to give some refreshing to
his wearied army. But when the woeful relation of this overthrow was brought to
the City of London, and to other parts further of, the whole realm was
greatly perplexed therewith, as being then men utterly forlorn. Githe (the
mother of Harold) after the manner of women, gave over her self wholly to
grievous lamentations, and with most humble petition obtaining of the Duke the
dead bodies of her two sons, she caused them to be buried in the monastery
of Waltham. Earl Edwine sent Algithe (the Queens sister) into the furthest
parts of the realm, aduising both the Noblemen and commons to awaken their
heavy spirits, and to consult betimes upon some good course for the present
relief of their distressed and languishing estate. The Archbishop of York,
the Londoners and officers of the Navy, thought it best to make Edgar Atheling
their King, and to gather new forces out of hand to encounter the Duke. The two
Earls Edwine and Morcar secretly practiced how to set the crown upon one of
their heads. But the Bishops and Prelates, and such other as stood in fear of
the Popes thunder-botls, and damning exsecrations, held it best to submit
themselves to the Duke, and no further to provoke the Conquerors haughty mind
by taking arms afresh against him, the success whereof was doubtful. Neither
would it avail them any thing, to contend with the divine providence, which
for their outrageous sins had given them into the hands of their enemies the
Normans. The Duke in the mean time leaving a garrison behind him at Hastings,
determined to go to London, but to strike the more terror into the Englishmens
hearts, and to make all safe at his back, he divided his forces into several
companies, who ranging through some part of Kent, Sussex, Surrie, Hamshire, and
Barkshire, wasted and burned all the towns and villages that stood in their
way, carrying with them whatsoever they found worth the taking. Then passing
over Theames at Wallingford, they filled every place with horror and trembling.
The great men were so possessed with inward distrust and envy one at another,
that they wholly neglected the care they should have taken for the good of the
commonweal. For to avoid the ecclesiastical censure and threats of the
Bishop of Rome (who now began to tyrannize not only over the vulgar and
inferior sort: but also over mighty Kings and kingdoms) the realm being
false into a most desperate estate, they so firmly resolved to yield
themselves, that thereupon many providing in time for their best safety left
the City to all adventures. Alfread Archbishop of York, Wolstaine Bishop of
Worcester, and diverse other great Prelates, together with Edgar Atheling, Edwine
and Morcar, met the Duke at Barkhamsteed, and giving pledges for the
assurance of their fidelity, submitted themselves unto him. Then posting
presently to London, he was with great joy and solemn acclamation entertained,
and saluted with Viue le Roy. The Duke forthwith prepared al things fit for his
coronation, which by his appointment was solemnized the Christmas following. In
the mean time he wholly busied himself, how to order every thing for the more
firm establishment of his newly achieved and conquere^ kingdom.

Here ended the government of the Saxon Kings over this land, having continued
600. years. Some did attribu^e this notoriou^ alteration and change, ^o the
corruption in the magistrates, and the superstitious cowardlinesse of the
Clergy, others to the influence of a Co^et: others immediately referred the
cause thereof to the divine providence, that disposes of Kingdoms by an
unknown, but never unjust sentence and decree. But they that more strictly
examined that point, and looked into the next appearing cause cast the blame
chiefly upon King Edward, who thorough a vain glorious show of religious
chastity, took no more care to raise up seed unto himself, for want whereof
his Kingdom after his death was left a prey to the ambition of man.

These Normanes were a mixed people of Noru^gians, Suevians and Danes, who in
the time of Charles the great exercised piracie upon these Coasts. At length by
strong hand they seated themselves in that part of France which they hold till
this day, about the mouth of the River of Seen. That province was the^ called
Neustria and now Normandy of the name Norman, given unto them because they
came out off the North parts. These people so much prevailed afterward against
Charles of France (surnamed the Simple) that he was constrained to make peace
with them, by giving his Daughter in marriage to Rollo their Prince, together
with that whole Province for her Dowry, whereof he created him Duke, from
whom this Duke William was the fifth in lineall descent that succeeded after him.

Having thus far proceeded, and brought this our most noble and flourishing
Island of Britain under the several gouernements of the two absolute Kings of
England and Scotland; my purpose is as briefly as I can to prosecute the ioynct
History of these two Nations, only so far sorth, as the matter shall
concern them both, whether it tends to war and variance, or to peace and
amity.

William the Conqueror King of England.
DVke William having by force of arms in manner aforesaid obtained the
Sovereignty over this land, 1066.
was with much solemnity crowned King of England on Christmas day, in the
year of our redemption 1066. who taking upon him the part of a Conqueror,
performed the same in his right kind: for abrogating the ancient laws and
customs of the land, he established others, such as either he had brought out
of Normandy, or that he thought more fit for the present government of the
English nation. And further, taking from the Englishmen their lands and
possessions, he bestowed them on his followers and partakers in his conquest,
at his own will and pleasure. Hereupon (as also by many other extremities
daily offered more and more, to all degrees and estates,) the great men
especially, who (through the greatness of their minds) could worst endure so
many indignities, conuaied themselves out of the realm, some into one
country, some into another, hoping to find such favor with foreign Princes,
as with their help they might happily one day find means to be restored
again to their former estates and dignities in their native Country.

Amongst these Edgar Atheling (whom this business concerned more then any of
the rest) purposing to have sailed into Germany to his friends and alliance
there, together with his mother and two sisters, was by contrary winds (as the
Lord would have it) driven into Scotland, where they were courteously
entertained of Malcolme (surnamed Cammore) the King of that Country, the
rather because they were of the blood and lineage of King Edward the Confessor,
by whose especial means he had been established in his Kingdom. Shortly
after in respect (no doubt) of the possibility wherein she stood to come by
the Crown of England after her brother, King Malcolme took to wife the Lady
Marguerit, the elder sister. This marriage was solemnized about Easter next
following, in the year 1067. King William hearing what had passed in Scotland,
and fearing lest this alliance might work him some displeasure (for Edgar had
many well-willers in England) forthwith sent an Harold of Arms to King
Malcolme for the delivery of him, which if it would not be granted, then he
should denounce open war against him. Answer was here-unto made, that he
held it a very unjust thing, yea a very wicked part for him to deliver Edgar
into his hands, that only for fear of the loss of his life was forced to
fly out off England, being of that innocent carriage and demeanor toward the
King his Master, that even his greatest adversaries could no way touch him
with the least suspicion of disloyalty. Further that he was now bound (besides
the respect of ordinary humanity in this case) by more straight bands of near
alliance, to tender his estate. So as King Malcome was no whit terrified with
these threats, still intertaining Edgar his friends, that daily repaired into
Scotland, by whom King Malcome being encouraged, took the opportunity that was
offered. For whilst King William was occupied in pursuing the English Rebels,
he with his army entered into England, wasting and spoiling the countries of
Theisdale and Cleueland, and the lands of Saint Cutbert, with diverse other in
those parts. For the suppressing of whom, King William sent Gospatrike, whom he
had lately before made Earl of Northumberland, in the place of Syward, that
took part against him with the Scotts and Englishmen their adherents. Entering
into those parts, he made the like spoil, as was before made by the Scotts,
so as those countries were grieuouslie afflicted on both sides. But yet their
miseries had no end, for Gospatricke was no sooner returned, but the Scots
entering those countries again, exceeding their former cruelty upon the poor
inhabitance. King William to give end to these extremities, having assembled a
mighty army, in his own person, entered into Scotland about the midst of
August, pursuing the English rebels and their partakers into Galloway, but they
being not disposed to abide his approach, fled unto the Mountains; wherefore
giving them over, he turned his forces into Lothiane, where he understood that
king Malcome was encamped with all his whole power, purposing to make a
conquest of Scotland also. But when these two puissant armies were even ready
to assail one the other, the Scottish king distrusting his strength, and
fearing the fortune of the Conqueror, sent an Harrald of Arms to enter into
treaty of a firm peace between the two Nations, whereunto king William was
drawn at the length, on these conditions. First that king Malcome should do
homage unto the king of England for the realm of Scotland. On the other side
that king William should pardon all those Englismen which then took part with
Malcome against him. Further to avoid all occasion of quarrel that happily
might afterward arise about the limits and bounds of the two kingdoms, it was
agreed upon, that a cross of stone should be erected in Steenmore (which took
that name of the nature of the soil, which was very stony) bearing the Arms
and Image of the king of England, on the South Side thereof, and on the
contrary-side the arms and Image likewise of the king of Scotland, which while
it stood for many years after was called the cross of the kings. Thus were
they accorded, and thence-forth continued in friendship while they lived
together. King William in his return took the Earldom of Northumberland
from Gospatricke (on whom he had lately bestowed the same) and gave it to
Waltheof the son of Siward deceased, that held it in the right of Alfred his
wife, the daughter and heir of Aldread some-time Earl of that Province.
Waltheof was in that favor with the king, that shortly after he gave him to
wife the lady Judith his niece, daughter to Lambert Earl of Leux, with all the
lands belonging to the honor of Huntington, whereby he became Earl of
Northumberland and Huntington. Notwithstanding these especial favors, Waltheof
not long after entered into a conspiracy against the king, which although he
disclosed before it brake out into open war, king William was so highly
offended thereat, that he caused him to be beheaded, not without some note of
cruelty, having revealed the whole practice, and submitted himself to the
kings mercy. Edgar Atheling returning out of Scotland, obtained the kings
favor, and was highly advanced, but to avoid further danger (in which case a
Prince cannot be too circumspect) he was not admitted without leave to depart
the Court while he lived.

King William the Conqueror being deceased in the 20. 1087.
year of his reign, about 14. years after the former conclusion of peace,
whether it was to revenge the death of Earl Waltheof his cousine german,
executed as before you have heard, or whether he was drawn on by an ambitious
humor to enlarge his dominions, or (as some have rather thought) provoked
thereunto by some unkindness offered by K. William Rufus, who succeeded his
father here: whatsoever the cause was, King Malcolme taking the opportunity,
while the King and his elder brother Robert Duke of Normandy were at some
variance about the Crown, entered with his Army into Northumberland, preying
upon the inhabitants as far as Chester, in the street. The King of England
sent such forces against him, as that entering into Scotland, they took the
Castle of Anwicke, putting all to the sword that made resistance, where
leaving a garrison for the defense thereof, the army returned home. And for the
better restraint of further molestation on that side, the King caused the City
and Castle of Carleil, (which had been ruinated by the Danes about 200.
years before) to be reedified and peopled again, granting many privileges to
the inhabitants, which they enjoy to this day. King Malcolme being not a little
discontented with the loss of Anwicke, shortly after gathered a new power and
laid siege to the town, whereat both he himself, and Prince Edward his eldest
son, by one misfortune or other (for the writers agree not on that point)
lost their lives, and the whole army put to flight. This came to pass in the
36. year of King Malcolme his reign, and in the sixth of King William Rufus:
1093.
Anno. 1093. Though this Malcome had in his time much disturbed the English
nation by sundry harmefull invasions, nevertheless by the means of his
foresaid marriage with the sister of Edgar Atheling, the realm of England
became of an open and professed enemy, an assured friend, yea even a very
sanctuary to his poor Orphaine children: for their uncle Edgar (a man of
great sanctimonie and fidelity) wisely foreseeing, and warily preventing the
danger wherein those babes stood, under the usurped government of Donald their
fathers brother, sent presently for them into England. The three sons Edgar,
Alexander, and David, succeeded one the other in their Fathers kingdom: Mawde
the eldest Daughter (surnamed the Good) was afterward married to the first
Henry King of England. Mary the other daughter, to Eustace Earl of Bulloine
the base, whose daughter (named after her Mother) was married to Stephen King of
England. This happy progeny (the more happy for the virtues of their deceased
Mother and living Uncle) were not only educated at his charge, and instructed
in all good nurture beseeming their birth and lineage: but also when the young
Prince Edgar was come to ripe age, Edgar his Uncle obtained of king William
Rufus a competent power, wherewith now the second time (for once before he had
with the like help expulsed Donald, and crowned Duncam, king Malcomes base
Son in his place) he utterly expelled Donald, and set Prince Edgar in full
and peaceable possession of the Crown of Scotland, which he enjoyed during
his life.

King William shortly after deceasing without issue, his brother Henry (the
Conquerors youngest son) was admitted king of England by the general consent
of the whole nation, Anno 1100. King Edgar not only renewed the league with
him, which before was continued with Rufus, but for the more strengthening of
the same, he gave the Lady Mawde (his eldest sister) unto him in marriage, (as
is aforesaid) by whom he had issue that lived, Mawde the Empress, Mother to
Henry the second, afterward king of England. The mutual amity that by this
marriage was nourished between these two nations during the life of this Henry,
and the Queens brothers ( Edgar and Alexander,) was confirmed by the marriage
also of David her youngest brother, with an other Mawde, the Daughter and heir
of Waltheoff late Earl of Northumberland and Huntingto^, as before you have
heard, by which marriage, that Earldome, with a great part of Northumberland and
Westmerland, were annexed to the Crown of Scotland, as afterward shall better
appear.

Henry the first, departing out of this life, in the six and thirtith year of
his reign, leaft to succeed him only a Daughter: for his sons were both
drowned in their passage hither out of Normandy. This Lady was first married to
the Emperor Henry the 4. who dying without issue, she was married again to
Geffery Plantagenet Earl of Aniou, by whom she had issue while her father
lived, Henry the 2. afterward king of England. Notwithstanding that Stephen
Earl of Boloigne, nephew to the last deceased king (for Adela his mother was
one of the daughters of William the Conqueror) had together with the rest of
the nobility sworn unto King Henry, to admit his daughter the Empress, to
succeed him as lawful heir to the Crown of England: he nothing regarding
his oath, made no scruple to intrude himself into the royal throne.
Immediately whereupon he sent an Embassage unto K. David of Scotland, demanding
homage as well for that realm, as for all other the lands and signories which
he held of him within England: whereunto K. David answered; that both Stephen,
he himself, with all the nobility of England, were all severally bound by oath
to the obedience of the Empress his niece, as the only lawful and liniall
heir to King Henry her father, whereof he for his part made that conscience,
as that during her life he would never acknowledge any other true inheritor to
the crown of England. King Stephen not a little displeased with this his
resolute answer, invaded the territories of Scotland, whereupon much trouble
arose to both nations. But after the war had continued 2. or 3. years, with
equal loss on both sides, in the end, thorough the mediatio^ especially of
the Queen of England (who was also Niece to K. David by his other Sister Mary
Countess of Boloigne, as has been aforesaid) a peace was concluded on these
conditions. That the Counties of Northmuberland and Huntington should remain
in the possession of Prince Henry of Scotland as heir unto them in the right
of his Mother, but Cumberland should be thence-forth held and reputed the
lawefull inheritance of king David, that both Father and Son should
acknowledge and yield to king Stephen and his successors for the time, being
for these signories the accustomed services due for the same. King Stephen was
the more willing to yield hereunto, by reason of his infinite trobles, which
daily more and more increased by the plottes and practices of the friends of
the Empress, never ceasing to work him all the displeasure that possibly they
could devise, the victory falling sometimes on the one side, and sometimes on
the other. Such was the estate of this Land, during his whole reign for the
space of eightene years. In the mean season though king David preferred the
just title of the Empress before the colorable pretext of Stephen, yet he so
much regarded the word of a king, that although he was (no doubt) greatly
solicited by the Empress, to break of with her adversary, yet would he not
be drawn at any time thereunto, although that troublesome season, offered him
fit opportunity for his own advantage, which commendable and Christian
resolution well appeared in him when as afterward he intertayned Prince Henry
Son to the Empress at Carliele, who being come thither accompained with the
Earls of Chester and Hereford, and diverse other noblemen and gentlemen of
good account both of England and Normandy, of purpose (as it seemed) to draw
the king to their part (whose assistance only wanted to the expelling of the
usurper) he would by no means break his faith with England, but resting quiet
at home, nothing was at that time further attempted, whereof king Stephen was
much afraid. At this meeting the young Prince together with some other of like
age his companions in this journey, received the order of knighthood at the
hands of king David, within four years after, these two kings deceased nere
together, the one having reigned over Scotland thirty years in great
tranquillity, the other hardly twenty over England with continual vexation and
infelicity, and as they ended, so their successors began to reign together,
Henry the Empress her Son over this nation, about the age of twenty years,
and his Cousin Malcolme king David's grandchild (for Prince Henry died before
his Father) over the other about 13. years old. In the person of this Henry the
crown of England was restored to the Saxon blood by the Mother side, having
continewed in the Conqueror and his two Sons about 68. years, and now by
marriage transferred to the house of Plantagenet, an other family of France.

Hereof had Lewis the French king no good liking, being unwilling that so mighty
a Prince, and so near a neighbor should have such foot-hold with in his
dominions; for in the right of his wife Queen Elioner (who had been before
deuorsed from Lewis) he had attained the possession of the Duchy of Aquitane
and the Earle-dome of Poitou, by his mother the Empress he inioyed the Duchy
of Normandy, and in his Fathers right he seized (not without some hard
measure, toward his brother Geffrey unto whom their Father by his last
Testament had given the same) upon the Earledomes of Aniou, Touraigne, and
Maine. Nevertheless he subtilely covered his malice under pretext of
dissembled alliance, least otherwise he should have had less advantage of him.
But King Henry perceiving the deceit, was too wise to be caught by such a
Train, and therefore upon the first occasion that was offered he opposed his
open force against the others secret practices, but first, as well to keep all
safe at home on that side: as also for the better trayning of the young Prince
in feats of Arms and Martial discipline, under pretense of the performance
of the services due for the Lands he held of him, within the Realm of
England, he procured King Malcolme to accompany him over into Normandy,
where having spent some time (not a little to the loss of King Lewis) and
requited the courtesy of King David, by bestowing the like honor on him, as
before he had received, they returned together hither again, and then taking
his leave of King Henry he was honorably attended home into Scotland. His
Nobility repairing unto the Court, King Malcolme made relation of all that had
happened in this his journey, whereat they seemed much discontented:
attributing unto him want of discretion, that he would be induced (or rather
so much seduced) as to bear Arms in the quarrel, of an undoubted enemy,
against the French King and his subjects their ancient and assured friend and
Allie, that he little considered the drift of King Henry, who sought nothing
more then by some means to bring him into distrust and disgrace with King
Lewis, to the end he might the more safely offer him whatsoever hard measure
he did mean toward him. With these and such like speeches tending wholly to
withdraw their Kings affection from King Henry (he wanting years and
thereby judgment, to sound the deapth of this devise) was too easily drawn
into the French faction: for by taking part with France against England, their
mainteinance has been always much amended. When King Henry had knowledge
hereof, to the end he might in due time provide a remedy for this growing on
malady, he caused King Malcolme to be summoned to make his personal
appearance, at his high Court of Parliament holden at York, whether being
come at the appointed time, he was charged to have so grievously offended,
that thereupon by authority of the same Court he was finally adjudged to have
forfeited all those lands and Seignories which he held within England, but in
the end by mediation (no doubt) of the Empress, the king her son was entreated
to restore his cousin to his possessions in Cumberland and the County of
Huntingdon, only reserving Northumberland wholly on condition that doing homage
unto Prince Henry the kings son, (in manner as all the Nobility of England had
also done) he should further deliver into his hands his younger brother David,
and certain other the sons of the Lords of Scotland, as pleadges for the
assurance of an inviolable peace between the two Nations. All which were
performed, and peace a long time continued. Within three years after, king
Malcolme deceassed, having lived five and twenty years, and reigned not much
above twelve, whom William his second brother succeeded in the year of our
Redemption 1165. Henry in manner as before his brother had done, requesting the
king to restore unto him Northumberland, which he challenged as his proper
right. The other answered, that it rested not in his power to dispose thereof,
without the consent of his subjects, that as by Parliament the same was taken
from his brother, he would so far yield unto his demand as to the like
assembly should seem reasonable; which the King afterward performed
accordingly, rendering so much of Northumberland, as King Malcolme his great
Grandfather was seized of at the time of the Composition made with the
Conqueror, for the space of eight or nine years following these two Kings
lived peaceably together, and one to the other showed great kindness so as
King William at one journey accompanied the other into Normandy, and sundry
times afterward repaired to the English Court, where he was ever joyfully and
royally entertained. David his brother was also lovingly entreated during his
abode in England, and at Windsor honored by King Henry with the order of
Knighthood. Thenceforth he followed the King of England in his wars in
France although he was sundry ways attempted to have been drawn to the
adverse part. But in process of time, which works alteration in all
estates, thorough the instigation especially of Lewis the French King (who had
now set the two Henry's, the Father and the son, one against the other)
Amongst diverse other as well of the Nobility of England as of foreign
Princes. King William was likewise won to take part with the young King (for
his Father had caused him to be crowned) in that unnatural strife and
contention. So as while king Henry the Father was set on work on the other
side of the Sea by his seditious sons (for the rest took part with their
eldest brother) and the realm much disquieted with in it self, by the Earls
of Lecester, Chester, Lincoln Norfolk, and diverse other domestical accomplices
of this dangerous conspiracy: the Scottish king having gathered a mighty
army, entered therewith into the Marches of England: took the Castles of
Browgh and Applebie with some other, sent part of his Army into Kendale,
wasting the country where it pa^^^ most hostile manner. For the suppressing
(...) these insolences certain of the kings friends assembled themselves to
the number of 400. horsemen under the leading of Robert de Stouteuille, Ralph
Glanuille, William Vescie, Barnard Balliol and Odonette de Humfreuille, who
coming to Anwick (from the siege whereof king William was departed the same
day) took consultation what was best to be done. Very early the next morning
they followed the Scots, who little looking for any resistance then in
readiness, left their king but slenderly attended and dispersed themselves
abroad to wast and forage the country. This being made known to the
Englishmen, they pursued the advantage with so good success, that with the
loss of very little blood on either side, they took king William prisoner in
the midest of his strength, but yet not so near as thereby he could be
rescued.

This happened on the seventh of July in the year 1174. Henry at the same time
was newely returned out off Normandy, to whom the Scottish king was shortly
after presented at North-Hampton, and David his Brother was licensed forthwith
to repair into Scotland, to contain the same in their due obedience, whilst
the Kings pleasure should be further known, concerning the delivery of the
King his prisoner. In the mean season the French king being wearied with the
charge of this War in the behalf of his son in law King Henry the
younger (for he had now married the Lady Margeret his Daughter) offered
himself to become a mean to make an accord between the two Henry's,
whereupon the war ceased, and after a meeting or two for that purpose, in
the end this unnatural dissension between king Henry and his Sons (which
had continued well near two years to the great discomfort of the Father, and
vexation of the whole Realm) was well appeased. Here-vpon the Scottish king,
who remained prisoner at Faleise in Normandy, amongst other of the same
faction, to the number well near of a thousand persons of especial quality
(that at one time or other during these wars, were also taken prisoners) were
by king Henry, according to the Articles of agreement, set at liberty, in
manner as were all they, that by the adverse part, had been likewise taken
prisoners in the King of Englands service. Now again was amity and concord
embraced and cherished on all sides. For the Scottish King having left behind
him sufficient pledge for the performance of covenants, was permitted to
return into Scotland, where having spent some six or seven months, he
together with David his Brother, and a great number of the Nobility and Clergy
of that Realm, repaired to York about the twenteth of August, where they did
homage to the King of England in S. Peter's Church, and in token thereof King
William offered up his Saddle and hat on the Alter of S. Peter, which remained
there along time after. Finally it was concluded that the Scottish king should
become and acknowledge himself to be the king of Englands Liegman against all
men for the Realm of Scotland and his other Lands within England, and for them
should do fealty to the King of England as to his soueraign Lord in manner as
other his liege people accustomed to do. And further that he should also do
fealty to the Lord Henry the King of Englands son (saving always the faith
which he ought to the King his Father) Also that all the Prelates of Scotland,
and their successors should acknowledge their accustomed subjection to the
Church of England, and do fealty to the king of England, so many of them as he
should appoint. And likewise that the Earls and Barons of Scotland, and their
heirs for their part should do homage and fealty unto the King of England and
to the Lord Henry his Son, so many of them as thereto should be called, as
in the Charter following, then openly read in Saint Peter's Church, more at
large appears.

Wilhelmus Rex Scotiae deuenit homo ligius Domini regis Angliae contra omnes
homines, de Scotia and de alijs terris suis, and fidelitatem ei fecit vt ligio
domino suo, sicut alij homines sui ipsi facere solent. Similiter fecit homagium
Henrico filio regis (salua fide Domini regis Patris sui) omnes vero Episcopi,
Abbates, and Clerus terrae Scotiae, and successores sui facient Domino regi
sicut ligio Domino fidelitatem, de quibus habere voluerit, sicut alij Episcopi
sui ipsi facere solent, and Henrico filio suo and heredibus eorum. Concessit
autem rex Scotiae and David frater eius, and Barons, and alij homines sui
Domino Regi. Quod Ecclesia Scotiae talem subiectionem amodo faciet Ecclesiae
Angliae, qualem facere debet and solebat tempore regum Angliae praedecessorum
suorum. Similiter Richardus Episcopus Sancti Andreae, and Richardus Episcopus
Dunkelden, and Gaufridus Abbas de Dunfermlyn, and Herbertus Prior de Coldingham
concesseriunt, vt ecclesia Anglicana illud habeat ius in ecclesia Scotiae, quod
de iure debet habere: and quod ipsi non erint contra ius Anglicanae ecclesiae.
Et de hac concessione, sicut quando ligiam fidelitate^ domino regi, and domino
Henrico filio suo fecerint, ita eos inde assecurauerint Hoc idem facient alij
episcopi and clerus Scotiae, per conuentionem inter Dominum regem Scotiae and
David fratrem suum and barons suos factam. Comites and Barons and alij
homines de terra regis Scotiae (de quibus dominus rex. habere voluerit) facient
ei homagium contra omnem hominem and fidelitatem vt ligio domino suo, sicut
alij homines sui facere ei solent. Et Henrico filio suo and haeredibus suis,
(salua fide domini regis patris sui.) Similiter Heredes regis Scotiae and
Baronum and hominum suorum homagium and ligiantiam facient haeredibus Domini
regis contra omne^ hominem. Praeteria rex Scotiae and homines sui nullum amodo
fugitiuum de terra domini regis pro felonia receptabunt, vel in alia terra sua,
nisi voluerit venire ad rectum in curia domini regis, and stare iuditio Curiae.
Sed rex Scotiae et homines sui quam citius poterunt eum capient and domino regi
reddent, vel Iusticiarijs suis aut balliuis suis in Anglia. Si autem de terra
regis Scotiae aliquis fugitiuus fuerit pro felonia in Anglia, nisi voluerit
venire ad rectum in curia domini regis Scotiae and stare iudicio curiae, non
receptabitur in terra regis, sed liberabitur hominibus regis Scotiae, per
balliuos domini regis vbi inuentus fuerit. Praeterea homines domini regis
habebunt terras suas quas habebant, and habere debent de domino rege and
hominibus suis, and de rege Scotiae and hominibus suis. Et homines regis
Scotiae habebunt terras suas quas habebant and habere debent de domino rege and
hominibus suis. Pro ista vero conuentione and fine firmiter obseruando domino
regi and Henrico filio suo, and haeredibus suis, a rege Scotiae and haeredibus
suis, liberauit rex Scotiae domino Regi castellum de Rockesburgh and castellum
Puellarum, and castellum de Striuelinge in manu domini Regis, and ad
custodienda castella assignabit rex Scotiae de redditu suo mensurabiliter ad
voluntatem domini Regis. Praeteria pro praedicta conuentione and fine
exequendo, liberabit rex Scotiae domino Regi David fratrem suum in obsidem and
comitem Duncanum, and comitem Waldenum, similiter alios comites and Barons cum
alijs viris potentibus, quorum numerus octo-decem. Et quando Castella reddita
fuerint illis, Rex Scotiae and David frater eius liberabuntur. Comites quidem
and Barons praenominati vnusquisque postquam liberauerit obsidem suum,
scilicet filium legitimum, (qui habuerit) and alij, nepotes suos, vel
propinquiores sibi haeredes, and castellis (vt dictum est) redditis,
liberabuntur. Praeterea Rex Scotiae and Barons sui praenominati
assecurauerint, quod ipsi bona fide, and sine malo ingenio, and sine occasion
facient, vt Episcopi and Barons and caeteri homines terrae suae, qui non
affuerunt, quando rex Scotiae cum domino Rege finiuit, eandem ligiantiam and
fidelitatem domino Regi and Henrico filio suo quum ipsi fecerunt: et vt Barons
and homines qui affuerunt, obsides liberabunt domino Regi, de quibus habere
voluerit. Praeterea Episcopi, Comites, and Barons conuentionauerunt domino
Regi et Henrico filio suo: Quod si Rex Scotiae aliquo casu, a fidelitate domini
regis and filij, and a conuentione praedicta recederit: ipsicum Domino Rege
tenebunt, sicut cum ligio domino suo, contra regem Scotiae, and contra omnes
homines ei inimicantes. Et episcopi sub interdicto ponent terram regis Scotiae
donec ipse ad fidelitatem Domini Regis redeat. Praedicta^ itaque conuentionem
firmiter obseruandum bone fide, and sine malo ingenio, Domino Regi and Henrico
filio suo, and haeredibus suis, a Wilhelmo Rege Scotiae and David fratre suo,
and Baronibus suis praedictis and haeredibus eorum, assecurauit ipse Rex
Scotiae, and David frater eius, and omnes Barons sui praenominati sicut ligij
homines domini Regis contra omnem hominem, and Henrici filij Regis, (salua
fidelitate patris sui) hijs testibus. Richardo episcopo Abrincensi, Iohanne
Salisburiae Decano, Roberto Abbate Malmesburiae, Radulpho Abbate Mundesburg,
nec non alijs abbatibus, comittibus, and baronibus, and duobus filijs suis,
scilicet Richardo and Galfrido. ex Rog. Houeden.

Besides the delivery of the three Castles expressed in the former Charter, the
Scottish King did absolutely depart with all and surrender unto King Henry and
to his Heir for ever, the Town and Castle of Berwicke, which forthwith was
committed to the custody of Sir Geffrey Neuille, The Castles of Edenbrough and
Rockesbrugh were likewise kept by the kings apointment, by Sir Roger and Sir
William de Stutuille.

This meeting at York was in the year 1175. Scotland, the other toward
London. Not long after, king William upon his summons repaired to
North-Hampton, where King Henry had called a Parliament. Diverse Bishops and
Abbotes of Scotland attended their king thither to acknowledge their subjection
to the Church of England according to the Articles comprised in the former
Charter, and their ancient custom in former times, but by no means they would
yield thereunto, notwithstanding that the Archbishop of York showed sufficient
proves and privileges granted by sundry Bishops of Rome, iustifiyng the right
he pretended to the primacie over all the Scottish Clergy. But because the
Archbishop of Canterbury hoped to bring them under his jurisdiction, or else
envying that his inferior should be axalted so far above him, he so wrought
with the king his Master, as that for the present there was no subjection
acknowledged either to the one or other. These two kings lived together in all
love and kindness in so much as the king of England employed king William in
his absence, in his more weighty affairs in Normandy. Also he gave unto him
to wife his cousin the Lady Ermengard, Daughter to Richard Vicount Beaumonte
that was son to a Daughter of king William the Conqueror. The marriage was
solemnized at Woodstocke at the charge of the King, who withal resigned to the
Bridegroom his whole interest in the Castle of Edenbrough, which King William
forthwith bestowed upon his new Wife, as a portion of her dowry, augmenting
the same with an hundred pounds land by the year, and forty knights fees. Not
long before this marriage, David king Williams Brother had married also an
English woman named Mawde, one of the Daughters of Hugh Bohun Earl of Chester,
otherwise called Keuelocke, by which marriage he was strongly allied with the
Nobility of England: for his wives three Sisters, Mabell, Agnes, and Hauise,
were married to Daubigne Earl of Arundell, Ferrers Earl of Darbye, and to
Quincie Earl of Lincoln. These marriages were means of good agreement
between these two nations for a long time after. Within two or three years
after the marriage of king William, king Henry deceased, in the five and
thirtith year of his reign, whom his two Sons Richard and John succeeded
one after the other. During the reign of the former, no occasion of quarrel
was offered on either side, but the two kings lived together in all
familiarity and perfect friendship: for immediately after the coronation of
king Richard, the Scottish king being honorably attended with the Archbishop
of York (the kings base Brother) and with diverse Barons and others of
England, passed thorough the realm to Canterbury, where king Richard had
assembled in counsel his Lords spiritual and temporal.

At this meeting, king William and David his Brother, together, with the
English Lords, took an oathe to continue true to the king of England, and to
abide in due obedience under him and his laws, being now to leave them for a
season: for he was so far passed on his journey toward the Holy Land, as it
was then called. And the more firmly to bind the Scottish king by his
liberality to the observance of this oath, he there restored unto him all the
other three Castles at Berwicke, Rockesbrough and Sterlinge, and withal that
part of Northumberland, which king Henry his Father had taken from him when
he was his prisoner. Further king Richard resigned unto him the counties of
Cumberland and Huntington, but with this condition, that all the Castles should
still abide in the custody of such as king Richard should place in them.

Lastly he released him of all further paiments and sums of money due for his
ransom, excepting ten thousand marks, which king Richard presently received
toward the charge of his journey. King William to gratify the king of
Englands liberality, furnished his brother David (on whom he then bestowed
the Earldom of Huntington) with five hundred Scotishmen to attend and serve
him in that enterprise against the Sarazines. Thus parted these two Kings in
most loving manner, with so faithful a farewell, as that when John (the Kings
brother) hearing of his imprisonment in his return, would have drawn the
Scottish King to have taken his part in the attaining of the Crown in his
brothers absence (being set on work by the French King) he utterly refused to
join therein with John, which was the break-neck of that unnatural attempt.
But when King William understood of the King of England his return home, he
together with Earl David his brother (who a little before was returned into
Scotland) presently repaired to the English Court, where being entertained
with all kind of courtesies, in token of the joy that he had unfeignedly
conceived for the King of England his safe return through so many great
dangers, he presented him with two thousand marks, toward the redeeming of
his liberty. To gratify this his kindness, King Richard granted to him by
special Charter, and to his heirs kings of Scotland for ever, that
when-so-euer he or any of them should by sommons repair into England unto the
Court, the Bishop of Durham and the shiriffe of Northumberland, for the time
being, should receive him at the water of Tweede, and safely conduct him to
the water of These, where the Archbishop of York, and the Sheriff of the
Shire should receive him of them, and from thence to attend him to the border
of the next shire, and in this manner to be attended from shire to shire, by
Prelates and Sheriffs, until he came to the Court, and an honorable
allowance was made him, wherewith to defray such expenses, as he and his
train were put unto, during their abode in England.

While king William remained at the Court, king Richard (thereby to put away as
it were the reproach of his late captivity) caused himself to be crowned
again, whereat (for the more honor of that solemnity) it pleased king
William to carry one of the three Swords of estate before the King, accompanied
on his right hand with Hamling Earl of Warwick, and on the other with
Ranulphe Earl of Chester, in manner as his Brother Earl David had done
before, at the Kings first Coronation, save that the first place was then given
to Earl John his Brother. This feast was kept at Winchester on the
seventeenth day of April, Anno 1194. William being now at the point to
depart homewards offered the king fifteen thousand marks for the whole
country of Northumberland, in manner as Prince Henry his father (who never came
to the crown) held the same.

The king yielded here unto, so as the Castles were excepted, but still he
importuned him for them also. The King answered, that at his return again
(for now he was ready to pass into Normandy) he should find him willing to
satisfy him in any reasonable sort. But it was king Richardes hap after many
victories over the French Nation during his aboade on that side the Sea for the
space of four years, in the end to die of a wound which he received at the
siege of the Castle of Chalme by an inuenomed Dart, as he was viewing where he
might best undermine the same. Thus ended king Richard, after he had reigned
nine years and as many months: Whereupon John Earl of Mortaigne his Brother
being then also on that side the Sea, thorough the industry of the Queen his
Mother, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other his favorites in England, was
forthwith proclaimed king. Arthure Duke of Britain, whose right to the Crown
was by many, especially the Frenchmen, preferred before the others) they
promised king William of Scotland to obtain of king John at his return over,
whatsoever he pretended title unto, within the English Dominions.

The Scottish king being thus put in hope to attain unto his desire, in token
of his good liking and allowance of their proceedings in the behalf of king
John, sent the Bishop of Saint Andrews to his coronation, with commission and
instructions to move and prosecute his demand of restitution of those Lands
he claymed, promising withal to abstain from all forcible invasion for the
space of forty days, so as within that term he might have a resolute answer
from the king concerning the same. Here unto King John made answer, that if his
cousin the king of Scots would come unto him, he should have at his hands
whatsoever in reason he could demand. For the place of their meeting,
Notingham was first appointed, afterward York, but king William upon some
occasion, failing to come to either of these two places, king John passed over
into Normandy, where having appeased some broiles stirred up by the French
king in the behalf of young Arthure, at his return he sent an honorable
Embassage into Scotland, to safe conduct king William into England.

The two kings met at Lincoln on the one and twenteth day of November in the
second year of the reign of king John, to whom the Scottish king did there
homage and fealty: which services being performed king William required
restitution of Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmerland, which he claimed as
his right and lawful inheritance; after much parlance there about; king John
craved respite to consider further of the matter till the Feast of Penticost
next following, whereunto the Scottish king consenting, the Assembly brak up,
and king William was attended back again into Scotland, by those that brought
him thither.

But king John, either being not disposed, or not at leisure to hold the
appointed time, sent Ambassadors into Scotland to entreat king William to give
him further day, to return him answer touching his former demand. Whereunto
the other yielding, gave him Michelmasse next according to his desire. All this
notwithstanding I do not find in the History of either Nation, that king
John did at any time after enlarge his possessions within the Realm of
England. After this some unkindness arose between them about the raising of a
fortification, which the king of England had built over against Berwicke, upon
which occasion, as also by reason that while the Realm stood in the damnable
estate, as the world then believed, of the Popes terrible curse, diverse of the
English Nobility and others forsook their natural king, and for conscience
sake fledd into Scotland (such power had the Papacy over men's consciences in
those days.)

King John not contented therewith, having gathered an Army, and therewith
approaching the borders of Scotland, he was incountred at Norham with
Ambassadors from King William, (who then being about the age of threescore and
ten years, was unfit to fight. At this meeting by mediation of friends a
final peace was made between them, and for the more assurance thereof the
Scottish King delivered his two Daughters Isabell and Margaret into the custody
of king John to be bestowed in marriage, when they came to ripe age upon his
two Sons. Buchanan says that it was agreed upon at this time, that
thence-forth the kings of Scotland should no more in their own persons do
homage to the Kings of England, but those services should only be performed by
their eldest sons, and for no other then for those lands and possessions which
they held within the Realm of England. But hereof appears nothing amongst
our own writers. About four or five years after this agreement king William
departed out off this life, whom Alexander his son by the Lady Ermengard
aforesaid, succeeded, being sixteen years of age, answerable to the term
that king John had then reigned, of whom in the mean season Prince Alexander
received the Order of knight-hoode at London.

At the same time, upon complaint made by the young Prince (which title he had
newely received by creation of his Father) that diverse rebellious persons had
presumed upon the impotencie of the Father and Son, by reason of the over old
age of the one, and unripe age of the other, to oppose themselves against their
government, under the leading of one Gothred. King John either in person (as
some write) or rather in power, (as I take it) accompanying the young Prince,
did not only safe conduct him home, but forthwith joining with certain forces
of Scotland, they together incountred the enemies in a set battle, gave them
the overthrow, took their chief Captain prisoner, and according to his
deserts made him shorter by the head. Notwithstanding all this kindness yet so
fresh in memory that it could not be forgotten, immediately upon Prince
Alexander his coming to the Crown in the year of our Lord 1214 his youth
easily neglected the due regard he should have had of king John his deserts.
England, (yet by birth a Scotishman) one Eustace de vescie, that had married
one of his sisters. This Gentleman together with Robert Fitzwalter, and Stephen
Ridell had a little before conspired the death of King John, who having
knowledge thereof sought underhand to apprehend them, but they distrusting the
matter were glad to fly the Realm, Eustace into Scotland, and the other two
into France. These men did afterward so labor the two Kings of those Nations,
that King Alexander (notwith-standing the Pope was then appeased) was persuaded
to take part with Lewis the Daulphin, to whom the Barrons of England had
disloyallye bound themselves by oath to receive and serve him, as their
lawfully elected Prince and Sovereign, rejecting their due allegiance to king
John their Liege and natural king.

The Scotishmen having entered into England with a great Army, took the Castle
of Norham, wasted and harrowed the country with all extremity. King John made
have with his army to repel the insolency of the Scots, but they would not
tarry his coming. The king pursuing them to Dunbar wasted the country of
Lothian, without resistance, and in his return burned the Abbaye of
Coldingham, from whence passing along the Sea coast, not without much damage to
the Inhabitants, at last he took by force the town and Castle of Berwicke,
committing it to the custody of Hugh de Ballioll and Philip de Hulcootes,
together with all the Country bordering on Scotland beyond the River of
These. King John was hardly returned into the south parts of the Realm,
before the French king had sent over a strong army to the aid of the Barrons
against their king, who^ Lewis within few months after followed with a new
supply, unto whose obedience all the Castles, Towns and Fortresses in the
South-parts of the realm were subdued, (the Castles of Dover and Windsore
only excepted. Neither was the North part of the realm free from these
troubles: for Robert de Rosse, Peter de Brocis, and Richard Percie had brought
the City of York, with all that County, under subjection to the Frenchmen,
in manner as Gilbert de Gaunt (whom the Dolphine had lately made Earl of
Lincoln) had done there also, where the Castle only held out. Thus was the
passage prepared for the Scottish army, which advancing it self forwards in
August, about two months after the arrival of the Dolphine, first seized upon
Northumberland wholly, (the Castles excepted, which were so well defended by the
Kings party, that the Scotishmen thought it lost labor further to assail them
at that time,) but keeping their course Southward, they came to London without
any resistance or loss, saving that Eustace de Vescie (a principal leader
amongst them) was slain with an Arrowe, as he road in the Scottish Kings
company to view, where to make an assault to the Castle of Barnard in the
County of Haleewarkefolke, which belonged to Balliol. Lewis was lately
departed from London, before the Scottish army came thither, toward the siege
of Dover Castle, whither King Alexander with his whole power posted with all
speed. But that strong Castle was so manfully defended by Hugh de Borowgh and
Gerrard de Scotegame (the principal men therein) that all the power and
policy of those two Princes would not suffice to win the same, for that was
a point of such importance, as that the French king had a little before written
to his Son, that the taking of it was of more avail unto his Enterprise,
then all that he had gotten in England besides; which caused the young Prince
to re-enforce his whole endeavor for the accomplishment of his earnest desire.
Here king Alexander did homage to Lewis in manner as he had done before to
king John, acknowledging to hold of him as of the lawful king of England,
which done he took his leave of Lewis and departed homewards, but not so
quietly as he came thither. For the true hearted Englishmen observing the
behavior of the Scots, and watching every fit opportunity, took them at such
an advantage as thereby King Alexander lost a great part of his Army, hardly
escaping an utter overthrow, had not king John died at that instant which gave
them a more happy return into Scotland then they looked for lately before.

This sudden death of the king (which happened in the year 1216) wrought as
sudden an alteration in the state of the present affairs. (the fools
instructor) and by secret intilligence what little good was to be hoped for at
the hands of their French Champion, if he prevailed in his enterprise. Wherefore
diverse of the English Nobility that before had followed that faction, when
they understood that young Prince Henry the kings son was proclaimed lawful
inheritor and heir aparent to the Crown of England by William Marshall Earl
of Pembroke, Ranulph Earl of Chester, and diverse other of the partakers of the
deceassed King, they began one after an other to revolt from Lewis, and to
submit themselves to their young King, not above nine years old. Whereupon
after some few bickrings and incounters by land and sea, between the one
party and the other, wherein the French came still by the worse, Prince Lewis
was willing to hearken to peace, which being readily concluded, he bid
farewell to all former his goodly hopes, was honorably conducted to his ships,
and transported into France about a year and a half from his first arrival
in England. Thus in short time by the providence of God, and the industry and
loyalty of some principal men of the Nobility this nation was delivered from
one of the greatest dangers that ever it was like to fall into. The young king
having reigned under protection about four years, and even then purposing
with himself, after he should come to man's state (whereunto his notable and
rare towardness did hasten him on) to recover that which his Father had lost
on the other side of the sea, and withal knowing that the Scottish nation was
of old, too much affected to France: that he might therefore in time prevent
all occasion of trouble on that side, it was brought to pass at York, (where
the two kings met by appointment) that king Alexander should take to wife the
Lady Ione sister to king Henry, and further that Margaret the Scottish kings
sister should be given in marriage to Hubert de Borowgh, a man in exceeding
great favor for many worthy parts in him; whereof both his Father and he
himself had good trial, and for those his deserts king Henry afterward
created him Earl of Kent. The other sister returned again into Scotland
unmarried: these two Ladies (as you have heard before) were committed by their
Father to the custody of king John. These marriages were solemnized at York
about Mid-summer Anno. 1219. Diverse covenants were then signed and sealed by
either party for the more assurance of perfect amity between the two
Nations, which continued accordingly during the lives of the two kings
together, though there were some that practiced what they could (for their own
advantage) to set debate between them, amongst whom David the pety king of
Wales having received an overthrow of the Englishmen, and there-vppon flying
into Scotland did his best indeauor to move king Alexander to rise in Arms
against England, and by such persuasions as he used, so much prevailed that
forthwith he made preparation to invade the Realm. This was the more easily
compassed by reason that king Alexander had then buried his wife the King of
Englands sister, and not having had any issue by her, was again married to the
Lady Marie, daughter to Iugelram Lord of Coucie, a Frenchman, so that his
former love and liking toward England was now happily abated and buried
together with his late deceassed wife Queen Ione. Yet had there then bin an
other marriage concluded between the Lord Alexander the Scottish kings eldest
Son, and the Lady Margeret daughter to king Henry which took effect as
after shall appear.

The Scottish Writers report, that king Henry had then begun to build a
Castle over against Berwicke, in the same place where his father had before
laid the foundation. But whatsoever was the true cause that moved king
Alexander to invade the Realm, although king Henry was as ready to make
resistance as the other was to offer injury, nevertheless by mediation of
friends of either part, the quarrel was taken up, and the two kings
reconciled one to the other, and for testimony thereof to all posterity, a
public writing was drawn, signed and sealed by king Alexander and diverse of
the Nobility of Scotland, acknowledging their allegiance to the King of
England, as their supeor Lord, as follows.

Alexander Dei gratia Rex Scotiae. Omnibus Christi fidelibus hoc scriptum
visuris vel audituris salutem. Ad vestram volumus venire notitiam, nos pro
nobis and haeredibus nostris concessisse and fideliter promississe charissimo
and ligio Domino nostro Henrico tertio Dei gratia Regi Angliae, illustri Domino
Hiberniae, Duci Normandiae, and Aquitaniae, and Comiti Andegauiae, and eius
haeredibus, quod in perpetuvm bonam fidem, ei seruabimus, pariter and amorem.
Et quod nuncquam aliquod faedus iniemus per nos vel per aliquos alios ex part
nostra, cum inimicis Domini Regis Angliae vel Haeredum suorum, ad bellum
procurandum vel faciendum vnde damnum eis vel regnis suis Angliae and
Hiberniae, aut caeteris terris suis eueniat, vel possit alequatenus euenire,
nisi no unjust grauent. Stantibus in suo robore conuentionibus inter nos and
dictum Dominum regem Angliae initis vltimo apud Eboracum, in praesentia Domini
Othonis tituli S. Nicholai in carcere Tulliano, Diaconi Cardinalis, tunc
Apostolicae sedis Legati in Anglia. Et saluis conuectionibus super matrimonio
contrahendo inter filium nostrum and filiam dicti Domini regis Angliae. Et vt
haec nostra concessio and promissio pro nobis and haeredibus nostris perpetuae
firmitatis robur obteniunt, fecimus iurare in animum nostrum Alanum Ostiarum,
Henricum de Baliol, David de Lindesey, Wilhelmum Gifford, quod omnia predicta
bona fide firmiter and fideliter obseruabimus. Et similiter iurari fecimus
venerabiles patres, David, Wilhelmum, Galfridum and Clementem, sancti Andreae,
Glasconiensem, Du^keldensem, Dublinensem Episcopos. Et praeteria Malcolmum
comite^ de Fif, fideles nostros, Patricium, comitem de Dunbar, Malisium comite^
de Strathern, Walterum Cumin comite^ de Monteth, Wilhelmu^ comite^ de Mar,
Alexandru^ comite^ de Buchquha^, David de Hastings comite^ de Athol, Robertum
de Bruis Alanum Ostiariu^, Henricum de Bailiol, Rogerum de Mounbray, Larentiu^
de Abirnetha, Richardum Cumin, David de Lindesey, Richardu^ Siward, Wilhelmu^
de Lindesey, Walterum de Morauia, Wilhelmum Gifford, Nicholau^ de Sully,
Wilhelmu^ de veteri ponte, Wilhelmu^ de Brewer, Anselmu^ de Mesue, David de
Graham, and Stephanu^ de Suningham. Quod si nos vel haeredes nostri, contra
concessione^ and promissione^ praedictu^ (quod absit) venerimus, ipsi, and
haeredes eoru^ nobis and haeredibus nostris, nullu^, contra concessione^ and
promissione^ praedicta^, auxilium, vel co^silium impendent, aut ab alijs
proposse suo impendi permittent. Imo bona fide laborabunt erga nos and haeredes
nostros, ipsi et haeredes eoru^, quod omnia praedicta a nobis et haeredibus
nostris, nec non ab ipsis et eoru^ haeredibus firmiter et fideliter obserue^tur
in perpetuu^. In cuius rei testimontu^, tu, nos, quam praedicti Prelati,
Comites and Barons nostri praesens scriptum sigilloru^ suorum appositione
roborauimus. Testibus Praelatis, Comitibus and Baronibus superius nominatis.
Ann. regni nostri. etc.

This instrument being first signed and sealed by king Alexander himself, and
afterward by his Nobility, was sent to the King of England at Christmasse
following by the Prior of Tinmouth, who had traveled diligently and faithfully
in this business to the honor and good liking of both parties. And for further
confirmation thereof, another writing was sent to Rome, to the end that this
agreement and accord might receive the more strength from his Holiness. This
solemn league was established in the year of our Lord 1244. Whereupon Berwick
was restored to the king of Scotland, and Carliele (which had bin taken by the
Scots in the reign of king John) was likewise restored to king Henry, and the
ancient limits of the two kingdoms were bounded out by the Kings cross in
Steanmore, as before at the agreement made with the Conqueror. The often
intermariages of the one nation with the other (which is the surest band of
friendship) caused this good agreement so long between them; for when at any
time occasion of unkindness was offered by either of the two kings, the
Nobility of both sides were so lincked one with the other, in such an
indissoluble union, that they would not suffer the same to break out into any
hostility. But to consummate and perfect (as it were) this Gordian knot,
within two years after the death of king Alexander the father (which happened
in the year 1249. his son Alexander that succeeded (about eight years old
when his father deceased,) was within two years after brought to York, where
King Henry on Christmas day honored him with the order of Knighthood, and the
day following, he gave him in marriage his Daughter, the Lady Margaret,
according to the former agreement. At this meeting the young King did homage,
in manner as before his father had done, and the League was renewed between the
two Nations, which continued without any tainte many years after. In the mean
time, at sundry meetings of the two kings and their Queens, much kindness and
friendly demeanor passed between them, to the great rejoicing of their
subjects on both sides. And as occasion required, the one would aid and assist
the other. For during the troubles between King Henry and his Barons, king
Alexander did send unto his aid five thousand Scots, under the leading of
Alexander Cumine and Robert Bruis, of whom the greater number was slain in the
quarrel of the Father and Son against their rebellious subjects. King Henry
deceasing in the seven and fifty year of his reign, Scottish king and Queen
came into England to the Coronation of king Edward his brother in law, where
having passed the time in great iollitie, and acknowledged his allegiance, he
was honorably attended into Scotland. Shortly after his return thither,
Queen Margaret his wife deceased, and (not long after her death) their two
sons David and Alexander dyed also, the elder brother having lately married
the daughter of the Earl of Flanders, but left no issue behind them. The
heavy hand of the Lord ceased not here, but finally inflicted well nere an
utter ruin and desolation on that kingdom, by taking out of this world (about
twelve years after) the king himself and his whole progeny, if it be true
that is reported in the History of Scotland, this calamity may seem to be
prefigured in a prodigious apparition, at the second marriage of king
Alexander: for as he was leading the Queen his Bride in a dance (according to
the manner of such solemnities) there appeared to the whole assembly the
similitude of an human Anatomy, following and closing up the train of the
Lords and Ladies that accompanied them. The same year viz. Ann. 1285. king
Alexander was thrown from off his horse, and in the fall brake his neck: At
his death none remained living of his line save only one infant, the daughter
of his daughter Margaret Queen of Norway. King Edward understanding what had
happened in Scotland, began to think with himself, how exceeding beneficial it
would be to both nations, if by any good means they might be united and made
one monarchy, whereupon forthwith he dispatched Ambassadors thither, to make
offer of marriage between the young Lady the heir of Scotland, and his son
Prince Edward heir apparent to the Crown of England. This was no sooner moved
to the lords, but forthwith every man gave free consent, esteeming it so happy
a thing for that kingdom, as nothing could be wished more. The marriage was
therefore readily concluded upon these conditions. That the Scotishmen should
be governed by their own Lords and laws, until the issue proceeding of them
should be of age to take the government upon them. And if it happened that no
issue should thereof spring, or should die before ripe age to govern: then the
kingdom of Scotland should descend to the next in blood to the King last
deceased. Hereupon certain Noblemen of Scotland were presently sent into
Norway for the safe conduct of the young Lady, but it pleased not God at that
time to give so great a blessing to this Isla^d, for at their return home they
brought heavy news of her death also. The posterity of king William of
Scotland, grandfather to the last King, being now extinguished, great
dissension arose about the title and claim to the crown. The realm by this
occasion being divided into sundry factions, was in great danger of an utter
subversion. This controversy having depended a long time, it was thought fit
(sithence there was none amongst themselves of power and authority to decide a
matter of so great importance) to refer the same to the hearing and award of
the king of England, generally reputed of all the competitors a fit judge to
determine thereof, according as law and equity should direct him. K. Edward
being willing to bestow his travel to so good purpose, and holding himself in
a sort bound thereunto, in regard of his right of superiority over that
nation, easily consented to their petitions, appointing time and place for the
performance of his best indeuore to effect their desire. In the mean time, to
the end it might appear to the world, that he took not this office in hand
upon warrant only of the competitors entreaty, he caused all the ancient
Chronicles and records that could be found either in England or Scotland, to be
perused, that (if any question thereof should arise) his pretended interest in
this action might be sufficiently approved. But although this was made so
manifest out of Marianus the Scot, William of Malmesbury, Roger Houeden, Henry
Huntingto^, Ralph de Diceto and others, as none then living could gainsay it:
nevertheless the Scottish writers have since that time much depraved the credit
thereof by their bare surmises. And therefore it shall not be impertinent, for
the better clearing of this point, before I proceed any further in declaration
of the matter in hand, to examine how truly one of the best learned amongst
the^ has not long since peremptorily affirmed, that there is nothing to show
for the proof of this pretended Superiority over the Kings of Scotland*
praeter (to use his own words) veteres fabulas and recentes iniurias, besides
old farlies and late injuries. I will not stand upon the testimonies fetched
from beyond the Danish, and some of the Saxon Kings, because happily they may
seem not much to the purpose, being without the compass of the last
conquerors title, under which the succeeding kings of England must make their
claim; but let us see what interest they can derive from and under him. It is
granted that all the kings of Scotland from the conquest till that time, have
done homage one after other to the kings of England, but not for the Realm of
Scotland (say they) for what then? forsooth for those lands and signories
which they held of the kings of England with in England. I would then gladly
know when in the sixth year or there-about, of the Conquerors reign, upon the
conclusion of peace between him and king Malcolme of Scotland, for the
avoiding of further controversy in time to come, the two kingdoms were
severed and divided by marks and bounds, in so memorable manner as is before
declared: what lands and possessions did king Malcolme then hold pertaining to
the Crown of England? Cumberland, (says Buchanane) that part of
Northumberland (says an other) that lies between the river of Tweed,
Cumberland, and Staenmore. well; but whatsoever they were, were they not
included and contained within those limits and bounds then erected? If not? to
what purpose served that notorious division of the two kingdoms? either then
have the Sootish writers erred in the approbation of that most solemn
particion, or else must king Malcome then do homage to the Conqueror for his
kingdom of Scotland: which being granted, then let it be showed, how and when
his heirs after him were discharged of that service. Again how came it to
pass, that in the said sixth year of the reign of the Conqueror, Michael the
elect Bishop of Glascoe received consecration at the hands of Thomas then the
Atchbishop of York, as of the primate of Scotland, binding himself by oath to
the obedience of that Sea? Tothade the Bishop of Saint Androwes did the like,
at the commandment of Malcome the third, king of Scotland. If then a Bishop of
England had right to this supremacy over the clergy of Scotland, why should
then the like pre-eminence be denied to the kings of England at that time,
over the seculer state of the same kingdom? Further what moved King William of
Scotland, together with Earl David his brother, and the Scottish Lords then
present, both temporal and spiritual, to acknowledge and swear fealty to
King Henry the second: forsooth, because his subjects loved him so well, that
for his redemption they would have yielded to any conditions whatsoever. As
though king Henry was so unreasonable, that contrary to the custom of all
nations, he would not accept of any other submissio^, but that he should be the
first king of Scotland that became his vassaile, when was it ever heard before
that kings have so dealt one with another? as though an usual ransom, yea a
very small sum, (seeing he was taken with the loss of little blood or none at
all) would have bin refused for his liberty? I doubt much whether the Lords of
Scotland would ever have yielded to an exacted subjection for the love only of
their king, especially having then amongst them the Lord David, a man of so
worthy parts, as he was no way inferior to his brother. Lastly, what moved
king Alexander the third, and his Lords to acknowledge the like allegiance to
King Henry the third, the two kingdoms being separated, in manner as at the
agreement between the Conqueror and Malcolm Cammoir? Therefore these are
frivolous shifts, because they will not seem altogether mute in a matter so
much importing (as they take it) the glory of their Nation. But howsoever, some
others amongst them have been overcome with over vehement an affection
toward their native country, whereby many times they have suppressed the
truth, when it sounded somewhat too harshe for their hearing: yet I cannot but
marvel at Buchanan (a man well learned and judicious (how he could be drawn
into so perverse a conceit of King Edwards demeanure in this action. Whereunto
it is now time to return, hoping a time will come, when as this difference
shall not be offensive any more. The King of England about Easter next,
according to his appointment, repaired in^o the North-parts, and being come to
Norham, he caused all the Prelates and Barons of Scotland, to be called
before him: to whom he declared his readiness to undertake the deciding of
this great controversy, concerning a title to a kingdom. That in requiring
his assistance, and making offer to stand to his final sentence therein, they
had done no more, then by the duty of their allegiance they were bound unto;
whereof if any amongst them doubted, they might be thoroughly satisfied, by
taking a view of such records and observations as he caused faithfully to be
gathered out of the best Historiographers of both Nations, which then were
openly read amongst them, which being so fresh in memory, no man made further
question thereof. Whereupon King Ed^ard was acknowledged Superior Lord of
Scotland, of all the competitours, and a writing was drawn, subscribed, and
confirmed with their hands and feales, testifying this their voluntary
recognition in these words.

A toux iceulx qui ceste present lettre verrunt ou orrunt, etc. To all them
that this present writing shall see or hear. Florence Earl of Holland, Robert
le Bruce Lord of Auuandale, John Cumine Lord of Badenowe, Patrike de Dunbarre
Earl of March, John de Balliol Lord of Galloway, John Hastings Lord of
Abergeuennie, John de Vescie instead of his Father, Nicholas de Sules, and
Walter Rosse, send greeting in our Lord. Whereas all we pretend to have right
to the kingdom of Scotland, and intend to declare, challenge, and prove the
fame before him that has the best authority, jurisdiction and reason, to
examine our right, and that the noble Prince the Lord Edward, by the grace of
God King of England, by good and sufficient reasons, has informed us, that the
superior domination of Scotland, belongs to him, and that he ought to have
the knowledge, hearing, examining, and defyning of our right: we of our
free-willes, without all violence and constraint, do will, consent, and grant
to receive our right before him, as the superior Lord of our land. We will
also and promise, that we shall have and hold his deed for firm and stable,
and that he shall have the kingdom, unto whom before him best right shall
give the same. In witness whereof we have to these letters put our seals.
Yeuen at Norham the Tuesday next after the feast of the Ascension of our Lord,
in the year 1291. for the more strong ratification hereof, the King further
demanded full possession and seizure of the realm of Scotland, as also for the
better strengthening of his estate, to whom the same kingdom should be by him
adjudged, whereunto they all agreed by writing also, under their several hands
and seals, as follows.

A toux iceulx, etc. To all those which this present writing shall see or
hear. Florence Earl of Holland, Robert de Bruce Lord of Annandale, John de
Balliol Lord of Galloway, John de Hastings Lord of Abergeuennie, John Cumin
Lord of Badenawe, Patricke de Dunbarre Earl of March, John de Vescie instead
of his Father, Nicholas de Sules, and William de Ros, send greeting in our
Lord. Because that of our own wills and common consents, without all
constraint, we do consent and grant unto the noble Prince, the Lord Edward, by
the grace of God king of England, that he as superior Lord of Scotland, may
hear, examine, define and determine our claims, chalenges and petitions,
which we intend to show and prove for our right, to be received before him as
superior Lord of the land, promising moreover, that we shall take his deed for
firm and stable, and that he shall enjoy the kingdom of Scotland, whose right
by declaration shall best appear before him: whereas then the said king of
England cannot in this manner take knowledge, nor fulfill our meanings without
judgment, nor judgment ought to be without execution, nor execution may in due
form be done without possession and seisme of the said lands and castles of
the same. We do will, consent and grant, that he as Superior Lord to perform
the premises, may have the seizure of all the land and Castles of the same,
till they that pretend title to the crown be satisfied in the suit: so that
before he be put into possession and seizure, he find sufficient surety to us
that pretend title, and to the wardens, and to all the co^monaltie of the
kingdom of Scotland, that he shall restore the same kingdom with all the
royalty, dignity, signorie, liberties, customs, rights, laws, vsages,
possessions, and all and whatsoever the appurtinances in the same state,
wherein they were before the seisme to him delivered: unto him to whom by right
it is due, according to the judgment of his Majesty, saving to him the homage
of that person that shall be king. And this restitution to be made within two
months after the day, in which the right shall be discussed and established:
the issues of the same land in the mean time shall be received, laid up, and
put in safe keeping, in the hands of the Chamberlain of Scotland that now is,
and of him, whom the King of England shall to him join and assotiate, and this
under their seals, reserving and allowing the reasonable charges for the
sustentatio^ of the land, the Castles and officers of the kingdom. In witness
of all the which premises, we have unto these set our seals: given at Norham
the wednesday next after the feast of the Ascensio^ of our Lord, in the year
1291. Besides these two former deeds from the competitors themselves, he
received the like assurance from all the principal officers and Magistrates of
that realm. So as by a free and general consent, he was acknowledged their
supreme Lord, and was accordingly entitled in sundry Proclamations and
public Edicts, directed forth in his name.

King Edward having received at their hands these instruments of allegiance, as
their proper and voluntary deeds, and also their several homages, either in
his own person, or by his deputies, according to the order given in that
behalf: he was finally put in full possession of the realm of Scotland, and
having occasion to return presently into England to solemnize the exequies of
his Mother, he committed the government and custody of the realm in his
absence, to the Bishops of Saint Androwes and Glascoe, and to the Lords John
Cumin and James Steward, who before had given the King possession. At his
return out of England, at Midsomer following, he sent out sommons to all
those that made claim to the Crown of Scotland, to repair unto him, and
having heard what each one could say for himself, he perceived that the
question rested only between John Balliol and Robert Bruce, so as that all
the rest were thenceforth utterly excluded and barred from all further title or
claim. These two derived their titles from David Earl of Huntington, brother
to William late King of Scotts in this manner. This David had issue by Mawde
his wife, one of the daughters of Hugh Bohune Earl of Chester (as is
aforesaid) three daughters: Margaret the eldest was married to Alaine Lord of
Galloway, who had issue together, three daughters also, of whom the eldest
(named Dernagil) was married to John Balliol, the parents of this John Balliol,
one of the two competitors. Isabell the second daughter of the foresaid David,
was married to Robert Bruce, between whom was begotten this Robert Bruce the
other competitour. He claimed the Crown, as next heir male: the other made
claim in the right of his mother, who was the next heir in blood, and (as we
say in England) heir at the common-lawe. Bruce alleged, that he was to be
preferred before the Mother of Balliol, because the heir male must carry away
the inheritance of a kingdom from the heir female, meeting in the self same
degree of blood, as in this case it stood between him and Dernagill. To this
end he alleged a late president in the like controversy about the Duchy of
Burgundy, which the Earl of Neuers claimed in the right of his wife,
grandchild to the last Duke by his eldest son, which notwithstanding, the
brothers inheritance was adjudged to the Dukes younger son. King Edward having
heard the allegations and answers of both parties, caused then to be enrolled,
but because the matter was of the greatest importance (life only excepted) and
therefore required good deliberation, he referred the further proceeding
therein till Michaelmasse following, and returned into England. In the mean
time, for his better instruction, he acquainted the most learned Lawyers as
well of France as of this nation, with the whole state of the cause, and
received their general resolution therein. At the time prefixed he repaired
again into the North-parts, and coming to Berwicke, he called thither the
two competitours, together with the greater number of the Lords of Scotland, to
receive there a final end of this controversy. Out of this great assembly of
the most grave and best experienced personages of both Nations, he made choice
of a certain number, as well English as Scottish, to whom (as to a Jury
royal, sworn and admonished to deal vprightlie) the King gave full
authority, to name him, that unto them appeared, upon the examination of their
several titles, and the resolution of the Lawyers thereupon (which was
delivered unto them) to have the better right unto the crown of Scotland.
These men being put a part by themselves, and having examined, considered, and
sufficiently debated, the proves, allegations, and whatsoever could be said on
either side, they all with one full consent and voice, pronounced John Balioll
the true and undoubted heir to the Crown of Scotland. King Edward allowing
their verdit, gave sentence accordingly. Whereupon he was forthwith proclaimed
king of Scotland, on condition, that if he did not govern his kingdom with
equity and justice, then upon just complaint thereof the king of England might
put to his helping hand, by some good means to procure reformation, as he was
bound thereunto by his right of Superiority, which in him was anciently
invested. Further he awarded out his writtes of delivery of seisme at the suit
of Balliol, unto the Bishops aforesaid, and to John Lord Cumin, James Lord
Steward, and Brian Fitz-alline wardens of Scotland, commanding them to deliver
unto John Balliol, the full seisme and possession of that land, saving the
relieues and other payments due to him of the issues and profits of the same,
unto the day of the date of that writ, being the xix. of November, in the
twentieth year of the reign of King Edward, Anno Domi. 1291. also an other
writ was likewise directed the same day, to such as had the keeping of the
Castles, in form following.

Edwardus dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Edward by the grace of God King of
England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitaine, and Superior Lord of the realm
of Scotland.
To his well-beloved and faithful servant Peter Burdet Constable of the Castle
of Berwicke, sends greeting.
Whereas John Balliol in Parliament lately holden at Berwick upon Tweede, came
before us, and demanded the said realm of Scotland to be adjudged to him by
us, and seisme of the same to be to him delivered, as next heir to Margaret
Daughter to the King of Norway, Lady of Scotland by right of succession: we
having heard and understood the same petitions and reasons, being diligently
weyed and examined, we find the said John Balliol to be next heir to the
Crown of Scotland. Whereupon we have delivered unto him seisme and
possession thereof. We therefore command you, that you deliver up unto the
said John Balliol, or to his Atturneys, that shall bring with them these our
Letters, the seisme of the said Castle of Berwicke, with all the
appurtenances, together with all other things to you delivered by Indenture, in
manner as you received the same, with the custody of the said Castle to you
committed, and this without delay.

Witness our self at Berwicke upon Tweede the nineteenth day of November, in
the 20. year of our reign.
In the same form were writtes directed to all the keepers of the other
Castles and manors belonging to the crown of Scotland, and being then in their
custody to whom K. Edward had before granted the same. Then also in the
presence of the new king and the nobles of Scotland; the new seal which had
bin before committed by King Edward to the governors of the realm of Scotland,
during the time of vacancie was broken, and put up to be reserved in the
treasury of the King of England in token of his superiority, and the trust
committed unto him for the ending of this controversy. The next day the
Scottish king did fealty in the Castle of Norham, unto king Edward for his
kingdom in manner following.

This hear you, my Lord Edward, King of England, Sovereign Lord of the Realm
of Scotland. That I John Balliol king of Scotland (which I hold and claim to
hold of you) shall be faithful and loyal, and owe faith and loyalty, unto
you; I shall bear of life and member, and of earthly honor against all
people, and lawfully I shall acknowledge, and do the services, which I ought
to do to you for the Realm of Scotland aforesaid. So God me help. And for
more testimony hereof he caused letters patents to be sealed and delivered
to King Edward in the presence of the Bishops of S. Andrews and Glasco, and
of diverse others of the Nobility of both Nations. This done King Edward
appointed the bishop of Durham, and the Lord John S, John, to attend Balliol
into Scotland and to put him into the corporal possession of the Land, which
was performed accordingly. For on S. Andrews day following he was crowned at
Scone in the Marble chair in the Abbey, the solemnities ended he returned
back to New Castle upon Tine, where king Edward kept his Christmasse that
year, and there upon Saint Stephens day the Scottish king did homage to king
Edward in manner following.

My Lord, Lord Edward king of England, Superior Lord of Scotland. I John de
Balliol king of Scotland do acknowledge me to be your Liegeman of the Realm
of Scotland with all the apurtenances and whatsoever belongs thereto. The
which kingdom I hold, and ought of right to claim to hold by inheritance of
you and your heirs kings of England: And I shall bear faith and loyalty to
you and to your heirs kings of England of life, of member and earthly honor
against all men which may live and die.

The two kings having spent some time there together, with much joy and revel,
took their leaves one of the other, and parted in great kindness. Thus was this
controversy decided and taken up, which had continued from the death of
Alexander the last king before him, unto this man's coronation six years and
eight months, and now within that term of months, ended by king Edward to
the exceeding great benefit of that nation, had not their inconstancy
immediately afterward bereaved them thereof, and turned the good which they
might have gained thereby, well nere to their utter confusion, as in the History
following shall appear.

The next year after that king Balliol was thus established in his kingdom, a
controversy arose concerning titl^ of Land between Macduffe Earl of Fife
(who in the time of the interraigne was one of the six, to whom the government
of the Realm was committed) and the family of the Abernethes (men of good
place also) one of these killed the Earl, whose brother making complaint thereof
to his king, was not only little regarded therein, but upon the hearing of the
matter in controversy, he gave judgment against him. Macduffes brother
having lost both his land, and found the King ouer-slow in taking revenge for
the injury offered his family, appealed to the king of England, whereupon
king Balliol was called to London to answer to the others accusation. The two
kings sitting together in Parliament, the Plaintiff propounded his complaint.
The Scottish king being the party defendant, was entreated to remove
(according to the order observed in such cases) into an inferior place, to
answer and to plead for himself (for it is not the manner of that most
honorable asse^bly to admit counsel on either side) This disgrace (says
Buchanan) first moved king Balliol to break off friendship with England: for
the war being even then in that Parliament renewed with France, he was
thereby the more easily drawn to enter into league and alliance with that
Nation.

King Edward having had secret intelligence of the Scottish kings inclination to
revolt (being then returned into Scotland, to the end he might sound out the
truth, he required his aid and assistance in his intended war with France,
whereunto he received so doubtful an answer, as that he was thereby brought
into more distrust with the king of England, and therefore sending again into
Scotland, he required to have the custody of the Castles of Berwicke,
Edenbrugh and Rockesbrugh delivered unto him, for the better assurance of his
loyalty, during the continuance of the war with France.

Hereunto the Lords of Scotland took upon them to answer (for their king
would not yet openly oppose himself) that they were Freemen borne, and
therefore would never yield to that servitude, whereunto their king had
unadvisedly subjected himself: that his private act (how voluntary soever)
could not bind his subjects, because without the general consent of the States
of the whole Realm, nothing could be established, which concerned the whole
body of the Commonweal. That the League now renewed with France was of five
hundred years continuance, which for the conueniencie and necessity thereof,
was to be preferred before the late and less profitable amity and alliance
with England. And to approve these words with their deeds, the Townes-men of
Berwicke made an assault upon certain English Merchants that were at Anchor in
the Haven, of whom many were wounded, some slain, and the residue forced to
fly, who at their return home informed the king thereof. He now perceiving
the affection of that Nation toward him, purposed forthwith to invade that
realm. But in the mean time (thereby to conceal his resolution,) he sent a
solemn Embassage thither, sommoning king John to make his appearance at
New Castle within certain days, there to show cause, why (contrary to his
faithful promise) he had entered into league with his enemy the French King,
of whom he could not receive so much good, as he was likely to sustain harm
thereby from him, and further, that it was not possible to serve two masters
of so contrary disposition, without offense to the one or other. But King John
holding himself much injured by king Edward, returned unto him letters of
complaint, which was all the answer he would afford him. The Army being
assembled, and king Edward therewith approaching Warke Castle, seven Earls
of Scotland, namely Bouchan, Menteth, Stratherne, Lennox Ro^, Atholl and Mar,
with John Cumin the master of Badenaw, having gathered together five hundred
horsemen, and ten thousand foote-men in Amandale, on Monday in Easter week
entered into England, on that side, and passing toward Carleil put all to fire
and sword, that stood in their way, but the town was so well defended, as that
they gave over the siege on Thurseday following, and returned again into
Scotland. The same day king Edward with his army passed over the River Tweede,
and summoned Berwick, offering peace upon certain conditions: which being
refused he approached and lodged in the monastery of Caldestrenie, his army
consisting of four thousand horse, and thirty thousand footmen. He had
appointed certain ships to the number of four and twenty to scour the Coast
thereabout, to cut off access to the Town by sea, who upon some sign given
them from the army, placed on a plain in battle araie within their view,
entered the Haven, and offering to land were assailed by the Townsmen. While
the fraye continued not without some more loss on the English party, the king
with his Army having in the mean time passed over a ditch, cast upon purpose
to have hindered his approach on that side, entered the town without loosing any
man of name, save only Sir Richard Cornwall. But the Scottish writers report
otherwise of this exploite. That the King dispayring to take the town by
force, devised what might be wrought by policy, and therefore fayning to
depart raised the siege, causing a rumor to be spread by certain Scots his
adherents in heart, that king John was at hand withal his power to relieve the
Town. This news being brought to Berwicke by such in whom they reposed
trust, forthwith the Gallants and they of the best account, setting open the
Gates issued out to meet their king: King Edward watching the exspected
advantage got between them and home, and so entered without any great
resistance. Howsoever it was brought to pass, it seems by the exceeding
great number of Scots then slain, and the small loss or none at all of
Englishmen that there was some cunning used in the taking of the Town. For at
the least seven thousand of them were thereat slain, being the very choice
men of all Lothian and Fife. This happened on the thirteth of March, in the
year of our Lord 1296.

The King remained there fifteen days: in which time he fortified the Town
with a ditch cast about it fourscore foot deep and as much over. While he
stayed here he received Letters from king John, wherein he again complained
of sundry wrongs offered unto him, in regard whereof he renounced all such
homage and fealty by him and his subjects to be any more acknowledged due
unto him. The King having heard the letter read commanded his Chancellor to
inrole it. In the mean time the Scottish Army, whereof I have spoken before,
dividing it self into two several companies, the one part under the leading
of the Earl of Buquhan, entered by Cumberland, the other by Riddesdaile,
burning the villages and putting all to sword they met withal in most furious
manner, and having even glutted themselves with blood, they returned home with
all their pillage and booty. The Earl of Dunbar came to Berwicke and
submitted himself withal he had unto the Kings pleasure, but in the mean
season his Castle, by the practice of his wife was rendered unto the Scotts,
for the recovery whereof the Earls of Warwick and Warren with a great power
were forthwith sent thither by the king.

The Englishmen having beseeged the Castle were set upon by the Scots,
between whom was fought a most bloody battle: but in the end the Englishmen
had the victory, the number of Scots slain in fight and flight (the chase
continuing eight miles) were about ten thousand, the Noblemen escaped by
recovering the castle: On the next morning (being the eight and twenteeth day
of April) at the king of Englands coming thither, the Castle was forthwith
surrendered unto him, wherein were taken prisoners the Earls of Monteith,
Cassills and Ros, six Barons, namely, John Cumin the younger, William Sincler,
Richard Siward the elder, John Fitz-geffrey, Alexander. de Mortaigne, Edmond
Cumin of Kilbird, besides thirty knights, and above that number of Lairdes and
chief Gentlemen.

All these were sent into England and bestowed in places of safe keeping. From
hence the king marched unto the Castle of Roxbrough, which incontinently
yielded it self; the lives saved of all within the same. Amongst whom the Lord
Steward of Scotland was the principal man. After this the King beseeged the
strong Castle of Edenbrugh, which after fifteen days was surrendered upon the
like condition. The Castle of Striueling, at the kings approach being left
desolate, and having the gates set wide open, offered it self unto his
entrance. King Edward following his good fortune passed from hence over the
forth, and about Midsomer came to the Town S. John, While he remained there,
king John now dispayring to recover by force his manifold losses, sought by
entreaty to be reconciled and received into grace: which at length was granted,
so as king John and his Nobility acknowledging their error resigned the
kingdom of Scotland into the hands of king Edward in manner following.

Iehan per le grace de Dieu, etc. John by the grace of God, king of Scotland;
To all those that these present Letters shall see or hear, sends greeting.
Because that we through evil counsel and our own simplicity, have
grievously offended our Sovereign Lord, Edward by the Grace of God king of
England, Lord of Ireland and Duke of Aquitaine in many things, that is to say,
In that whereas we being and abiding under his faith and homage, have bound
our selves unto the king of France, which then was his enemy and yet is,
procuring a marriage with the Daughter of his Brother Charles de valois: And
that we might vex our said Lord, and aid the king of France withal our power
by war, and other means: we have at length by advise of perverse counsel
defied our said Lord, the King of England, and have put our selves out of his
allegiance and homage, and sent our people into England, to burn houses, to
take spoils, to commit murder, with many other damages, and also in
fortifying the kindome of Scotland, which is of his fee, putting armed men into
towns Castells and other places, to keep the Land against him, and defraud
him of his fee. For the which transgressions our said sovereign Lord the king
entering into the realm of Scotland with his power, has conquered and taken
the same, notwithstanding all that we could do against him, as by right he
might do, and as appertained to a Lord over his fee, because that we did
render unto him our homage, and yet nevertheless made the foresaid rebellion.
We therefore, it being yet in our power, and free will do surre^der unto him
the realm of Scotland and all the people of the same with the homages. In
witness whereof we have caused these our letters patentes to be drawn. Given
at Brechin the tenth day of July in the fourth year of our reign sealed with
the common seal of the kingdom of Scotland. This done, king Edward having
received the Son of Balliol, in pleadge of his fathers fidelity, passed on
further to see the mountain Countries, the Bishop of Durham ever keeping a
days iornay before him: after he had passed through the land of Murrey, and
was come to Elghin, perceiving all the Country quiet, he returned to Berwicke,
whether he sommoned all the Noblemen of Scotland of whom he received their
several homages confirming the same under their hands and seals in form
following.

Atouz ceux qui cestes lettres verrent. etc. To all those that these present
letters shall see or hear. We John Cumin of Badenaw etc. Do hereby vow and
promise for us and our heirs, upon pain of body and goods and of all that we
have, that we shall serve the most Noble Prince and our dearest Lord Edward by
the grace of God king of England etc. well and truly against all men which may
live and die, at all times when we shall be required or warned by our said Lord
the king of England or his heirs. And that we shall not know of any hurt to be
done unto them, but the same we shall let and impeach with all our power, and
give them warning thereof. And these things to hold and keep, we bind us, our
heirs and all our goods. And further do receive an oath thereof upon the holy
Evangelists. And after all, we and every one of us have done homage unto our
sovereign Lord, the king of England in these words.

I become your liege man of life, members and earthly honor, against all men
which may live and die. And our said sovereign Lord the king, received this
homage under this form of words. We receive it for the land of the which you
be now seized, the right of us or others saved, and except the lands which
John Balliol (sometime king of Scotland) granted unto us after that we did
deliver unto him the kingdom of Scotland, if happily he has given unto you
any of those lands. Moreover al we and every one of us by himself have done
fealty to our said sovereign Lord the king in these words.

I as a faithful and leidge man shall keep faith and loyalty unto Edward
king of England and to his heirs, of life, member and earthly honor against
all men which may live and die. And shall never for any person bear armoure,
or shall be of counsel, or aid any person against him or his heirs in any case
that may chance, but shall faithfully acknowledge and do the service that
belongs to the tenements I clame to hold of him as God me help.

In witness whereof these letters pattents are made and signed with our seals.
Given at Warke the 24. of March in the year of the reign of our said Lord the
king of England five and twentieth.


King Edward having appointed John Warren Earl of Surrey warden of Scotland,
Hugh Cressingham Treasurer, and William Drusbie chief Justice, and sent a
convenient company to attend and safe conduct John Balliol and some of the
principal Lords of that realm into England, he followed soon after him
self. Balliol had liberty to take recreation within the circuit of twenty
miles about London, the rest were charged on pain of death not to pass out of
England till the king had made an end of his war with France, which now he
was to undertake and to that end (after his return home about the latter end
of summer) having prepared all things fit for that journey, he passed over into
Flanders where he remained until the next spring, and then returned back
again, by reason of a rebellion (allreadie begun in Scotland a little before
his going over) and now by his absence was grown more dangerous, then it was
at the first thought it could prove. The chief Captain hereof was one Wallais
a Scotishman, whose mean estate had well near worn out the memory of his
ancestry, yet nevertheless showed himself, even in his greatest penury, of
courage not incident to a vulgar and base spirit. This gallant wearied with his
obscure and abject condition of life, having nothing to loose besides it,
neither valewing the same at any great price, began to pluck up his benumbed
spirits, and to be-thinke him-self, how to make way unto the atchieuement of
some famous and valorous exploite, fortune was so favorable unto him, that he
was suddenly advanced beyond al men's exspectation (for the extraordinary
success of his interprices) to the title and dignity of the viceroye of
Scotland. For, having assembled a great number of his Countrymen of like
quality unto himself, he set upon the English forces, beating them to their
holds, and recovering into his possession, all the places of strength which
they held on the further side of the frith of Edenborugh. The report hereof
being brought into England, the Earl of Surrie was succored with new supply
of Soldiers from thence, with whom he passed against the enemies then
encamped on the further side of the frith. The Earl together with the Lord
Hugh Cressingham, being come with their army to Striueling bridge, where they
were to pass over unto them, after that the greater number conducted by the
Lord Cressingham were on the further side, the bridge (being but of wood)
brake asonder, so as the residue of the army could not follow their fellows.
Walleis taking the advantage set upon the Englishmen on that side, before they
could be brought into any good order of battle, by which means being
ouerpressed also with multitude, they were well-nere all, to the number of six
thousand men, together with their Captain slain or drowned in the river.
This misfortune happened to the Englishmen about the midst of September, in
the year of our Lord God 1297. The Earl bestowing his companies there where
was most need, returned into England with all speed. But Wallais following his
good fortune, left nothing unattempted that might augment his glory and
renown. For immediately there-vpon he invaded Northumberland, from whence
passing through the Forest of Inglewood, Cumberland and Alerdaile, till he
came unto Dewent at Cockermouth, wasting and spoiling all in his walk, but
coming to New Castle, the Town was so well defended, that giving over the
siege, and having divided the spoil amongst his peogle, they returned home in
the Calends of February next following. While the Scotts thus ranged at their
pleasure in the East Marches, the lord Clifford with the power of Carliele
entered into Annandale, committing all to the spoil of their footmen. The
Horsemen (being not above an hundred) gave a charge upon the enemy near to
Annand Kirk, drove them into a Marish, wherein the English footmen (being not
far behind) assailing them, slew about three hundred, and took the rest
prisoners, with whom they returned home on Christmasse even: About the
beginning of the next Spring the Earl of Surrey (lord warden of Scotland)
desirous to be revenged on the rebellious Scots, assembled his Army at York,
having first summoned the lords of Scotland to meet him there at an appointed
day. But they in the mean time joining with Wallais, had besieged the Castle
of Roxbrough. The Earl hearing thereof, hasted thither with all speed, but
Wallais with his adherents would not abide his approach. Then having relieved
that Castle with victuals and other necessaries, he passed forth to Kelsay,
and from thence to Berwicke, which the enemy had lately desolated, the Castle
only excepted. Hither came letters from the King, showing that he had taken
truce with the French King, and commanding the lord warden of Scotland to make
no further attempt, then to defend the frontiers of England, until his coming
over, which should be very shortly. Here-vpon a great part of the army was
sent home, such only remained, which might suffice for the re-manning of the
town and castle. K. Edward at his return home, gave summons to the lords of
Scotland, to attend him at York, where he had appointed to hold a Parliament:
but because they made default of their appeara^ce at the prefixed day, he
forthwith sent out his letters to warn all his subjects, able to bear armor,
to be ready furnished at Roxburgh on Midsomer day following, which being come,
thither repaired about 3000. men of Arms, mounted on barbed horses, besides
4000. light hors-men, and a great number of footmen, the better part Welchmen
and Irishmen. The whole army being come within Scotland to a place called
Fonkerke, about four miles from Sterling where the Scots lay, was divided into
three battles. The foremost was lead by the Earls, Marshall, Hereford and
Lincoln. The second by the Bishop of Durham (a martial prelate) The rereward
was conducted by the king himself. In like manner the Scottish army was divided
into three. The first was lead by John Cumine, the second by Ioh. Steward. And
the third, by the valiant Captain William Wallais, the whole consisted of some
thirty thousand men well and strongly appointed. At the first encounter the
Scottish horsemen were put to flight, some few only excepted that kept the
footmen in order, the second battle being assailed by the Englishmen both
before and behind, after some small resistance was also wholly ouer^hrowne, few
or none escaping with life, Wallais having manfully maintained the fight while
he was able to make resistance, and now seeing himself ouercharged a front,
and Bruce at his back (who served that day on the English part) ready to
entrap him, he thought it best to save himself, in as good sort as he could,
and therefore retyring with those few that remained, to the further side of the
river Carront, he so escaped. After this overthrow he never appeared any more
in the field, but grievously complaining of the envy and malice which the
Scottish Nobility bare toward him, he renounced all the authority committed
unto him and withdrew himself to his accustomed solitariness. About seven
years after this, he was betrayed by one of his most familier friends, sent
into England, arrained and condemned of treason, and for the same executed, his
head was set on London bridge, and his four quarters bestowed upon the gates
of the chief Cities and towns of England and Scotland. The Scottish writers do
hieghly commend the notable courage and resolution of this man, who alone would
never be won by fair means or foul, to yeald him self to the enemies (as he
took it) of his countries liberty, but still to his power defended the same by
all means that possibly he could devise. This blouddy battle was fought on
Mary Magdelens day in the year of our redemption 1298. Whereat was slain John
Steward brother to the Lord Steward, Macduff Earl of fife, and the valiant
knight Saint John Graiham, besides many other of good reckning, in the whole to
the number of 1500. at the least, with very small loss or none at all (to
speak of) of the English party. This victory thus atcheiued the English army
marched forwards to the town of S. Andrews, from thence through Selkerke
forest to the Castle of Air, but nowhere they found resistance: then coming
to the town of Anuan they took the Castle of Lochmaben, and so returned into
England by the West marches. In this journey diverse of the Scottish Nobility
and others, upon humble submission were again received into favor. While king
Edward remained at Carliele he called a Parliament, whereat he bestowed lands and
possessions within Scotland on the Noblemen of England that attended on him:
unto Earls he gave Earledomes, to Barons Baronies, and to others according to
their degrees. About the beginning of the next year he returned to London. He
was no sooner out off Scotland with his army, but presently there was a new
Viceroy set up, one of the Cumines, who began to raise new stirs there, amongst
some other they took the Castle of Striueling. But understanding that king
Edward was gathering new forces wherewith to enter into Scotland again, they
began to consult what was best to be done, not only for the preue^ting of his
present approach but especially for the recovery of the kingdom, which was now
in great danger by conquest to be annexed to the Crown of Engl: In the end
they resolved with all speed to procure an abstinence from war, to the intent
that in the mean season the might labor Pope Boniface, to take upon him the
protection of the realm of Scotland: thereby to avoid and shake off al manner
of subjection to the king of England: for the Pope had lately before so far
prevailed already with king Edward, as that at his entreaty John Balliol was
committed to the custody of the Bishop of Cambray, who undertook in the Popes
behalf, that his liberty should not prejudice the quiet estate of either
nation Engl: or Scotland. According to this their resolution, the lords of
Scotl: procured Philip de Valois the French king, to effect this their desired
truce: which was granted for eleven months, to Whitsontide following, being
the more easily compassed by him, by reason king Edward had lately before
married his sister. Hereupon for this time the army was dissolved being even
ready to have entered into Scotland. In the mean time the Scottish lords sent
Ambassadors to Rome, prese^ting to the Pope a grievous complaint of the
proceedings of king Edward. That he was fully bent to make a conquest of their
country, unless it would please his Holiness, by the virtue of his prerogative
in such cases to co^pound and order all differences as well amongst themselves,
as also between the king of Engl: and them, at his will and pleasure, whereunto
they would willingly submit themselves.

The Pope gave ear to their petition, hoping to gain something by the
bargain, for with him no penny, no Pater noster. And first he began to quarrel
with king Edward, because he would not at his entreaty restore unto Edward
Balliol those lands in England which descended upon him, by the death of John
Balliol his father now lately deceassed. Then he forbad him from thence-forth
to make war with the Scots, because they had submitted themselves to the
protection of the Sea Apostolical, in whose power it now only rested to
dispose of their kingdom, as seemed best to the same. And by way of prevention
he further declared, that al such homage and fealty, as the kings of Scotland
in former times had done to the kings of England was only for Tiuidale,
Penreth, and such other Lands as they held within England, and not for the
realm of Scotland, as he would have it. Lastly, whereas the kings of Scotland
had sometimes served the kings of England in their wars both at home and
abroad, and had bin sundry times present at their coronations, all this
proceeded of their voluntary accord, and especial favor toward them, by reason
of their neerenesse in blood, and not (as he took it) of any duty binding them
thereto. King Edward in his answer hereunto, proved by evident reasons, that
the right of Superiority and command over the realm of Scotland, did justly
belong unto him, and that the allegations made to the contrary were vain and
frivolous. Besides the kings letters, the Nobility also of the realm being now
assembled in Parliament at Lincoln, joined in the framing of an other letter,
answering in the name of the three estates unto that point of the Popes
pretended right, to intermeddle in the cause, between the king their master,
and the Lords of Scotland, and that it was never before known, that the kings
of England had answered, or of right ought to answer, for any thing they
clamed, before any judge ecclesiastical or seculer, yea though the king would
thereunto yeald yet would they never give their consentes unto it seeing it
would so much prejudice, his dignity royal and the ancient customs and
privileges of the realm. This letter, bare date the twelft of February, in the
year of grace 1301. and was signed under the hands and seals of these
Noblemen whose names follow. viz.

John Earl Warren, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Ralfe de Monthermer Earl of
Gloucester and Herford, Humfrey de Bohum Earl of Hereford and Essex and
Constable of England. Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk Marshall of England, Guie
Earl of Warwick, Richard Earl of Arundel, Audomar de valence lord of
Monterney, Henry de Lancaster Lord of Monmouth, John de Hastings Lord of
Bergeuenny, Henry de Percy Lord of Topeliffe, Edmond de Mortimer Lord of
Wigmor, Robert fitzwater Lord of Woodham, John de Saint John Lord of Hannake,
Hugh de veer Lord of Swanestampe, William de Brewse Lord of Gower. Robert de
Mounthault Lord of Hewarden. Robert de Tateshal Lord of Wokeham, Reignald de
Gray Lord of Ruthin, Henry de Gray Lord of Codnore. Hugh Bardalfe Lord of
Wormegaie, Robert de Clifforde Chatellaine of Appleby, Peter de Malow Lord of
Mulgreene. Philip Lord of Kine, Robert Fitz Roger Lord of Claueringes, Ioh. de
Mohun Lo. of Dunester, Almerick de S. Amonde Lord of Widehay, William de
Ferrers Lo. of Groby, Alaine de Zouche Lo. of Asby, Theobalde de Vernon Lo. of
Webbeley, Tho. de Furniuall Lo. of Schefield, Tho. de Moulton Lo. of Egremont:
William Latimer, Lo. of Corbie. Tho. Lord Berkeley: Foulke Fitzwarren Lo. of
Mitingham: John Lo. Seagraue, Edmond de Enicourt Lo. of Thurgerton: Peter
Corbet Lord of Cans, William de Cantelow Lord of Rauensthorpe: John de
Beauchampe Lo. of Hacchie, Roger de Mortimere Lo. of Penkethlin: John Fitz
Reinald Lord of Blenleuenie: Ralfe de Neuell Lord of Rabie, Brian Fitz-Alaine
Lo. of Bedale. William Marshall Lord of Heugham: Walter Lo. Huntercombe,
William Martin Lo. of Camies: Henry de Thies Lord of Chilton; Roger de Ware
Lo. of Isefield: John de Rivers. Lo. of Augre, John de Lancaster Lo. of
Grisedale, Robert Fitz-Paine Lo of Lumnier: Henry Tregoz Lord of Garings:
Robert Pipard Lo. of Lomford: Walter Lord Faucomberg: Roger le Strange Lord of
Ellesmere, John le Strange Lo. of Cuokin: Tho. de Chances, Lo. of Norton, Water
de Beauchampe lor. of Alecester. Rich. Talbot lor. of Eccleswell: John
Butetourt lord of Mendesham: John Eugain lor. of Colum; Hugh de Poynes lor. of
Corneualet, Adam lord of Wells, Simond lord Montacute, John lord Sulle: John
de Moells lord of Candeburie. Edmond Baron Stafford: John Louell lord of
Hackings: Edmond lor. of Elchimhonocks, Ralfe Fitz-William lo. of Grimthope:
Robert de Scales lor. of Neusells, William Tuchet lo. of Lewenhales. John
Abadan lor. of Deuerstone: John de Hatterings lor. of Graston. Robert Lewarde
lor. of Whitehall: Nicholas de Seagraue lo. of Stowe. Walter de Tey lor. of
Stonegraue. John de Lisle lor. of Wodto^, Eustace Lord Hacchie, Gilbert de
Peche Lord of Corby, William Painell Lord Trachington, Roger de Albo
Monasterio, Foulke le Strange Lord of Corsham. Henry de Pinckney Lord of
Wedon: John de Hodelestone Lord of Aneys: John de Huntingfield Lord of
Bradingham, Hugh Fitz-Henry Lord of Raue^swath: John Daleton Lord of Sporle:
Nicholas de Carry Lord of Mulessord: Thomas lord de la Roche: Walter de Muncie
Lord of Thorntone: John Fitz-Marmaduke lord of Horden, John lord of Kingston:
Robert Hastings the Father, lord of Chebessey: Raphe lord Grendon: William lord
Leiborne: John de Greslock lord of Morpeith: Matthew fitz-Iohn lord of
Stokenham. Nic: de Neuell lord of Wherlton, and John Paniell lord of Ateley:
four score and fourteen Barons.

The truce expired, the King passed with his army into Scotland about Midsomer
following, where he remained all that summer, and the next winter he kept his
Christmasse at Lithcoe, where he lost many of his great horses, the season not
serving to make sufficient provision for the keeping of them there. The Scots
in the mean time having labored the French king to that end, obtained another
truce till Hallontide next, whereupon the King returned into England. Neither
ceased they still to persuade the Pope to undertake the defense of their
country: but he upon the receipt of the former letters out of England, began
to wax cold in the matter, and the rather because being now fallen out with
the French king, he hoped to procure king Edward to make war upon him, offering
to take his part in the quarrel, but neither his holiness nor hypocrisy
prevailed therein. When this latter truce was come to an end, the king sent the
Lord John Seagraue into Scotland, accompanied with Ralfe Comfrey and a
competent power to keep the country quiet, and to recover the Castle of
Sterling. The English Army entering into Lothian, severed it self into three
companies, four miles distant one from the other, to the end they might be the
more ple^tifully served of victuals. The enemy taking the advantage of this
manner of marching, sodenlie in the morning set upon the foremost company,
lead by the Lord Seagraue, and made such slaughter, as few or none escaped
with life. When knowledge was brought back to their fellows that followed
them next in order, the Lord Neuell that had the leading thereof, with certain
horsemen came upon the spurs, and rescued the Lord Seagraue, who otherwise
had bin taken or slain. Ralfe Comfrey after this misfortune, not holding it
convenient to attempt any further interprise at that time (being much
ouermatched with number and strength) returned with the residue into England:
This overthrow was given the Englishmen at Rosting within five miles of
Edenborugh the 24. day of February in the year 1302.

King Edward was not a little moved with the loss of these men, and therefore
having gathered a puissant army, about Midsomer following he made his last
journey into Scotland, purposing to bring the same wholly to his obedience. At
his approach, the enemy being not able to make head against him, gave way on
every side, flying to the Mountains, and other places inaccessible, so as the
king in manner without any resistance passed through the land even unto
Cathnesse, the furthest part of Scotland. Many of them perceiving how far
unable they were to with-stand his forces, submitted themselves, on condition
they might enjoy again their possessions, which the King had given to his
followers the Lords of England, they redeeming the same of them at some
reasonable rate: whereunto the King consented. In his return he caused the
Castle of Sterling to be besiedged, but he himself lay at Dumfermling the
greater part of the next Winter, whether the Queen his Wife (having remained a
long time at Tinmouthe) came at length unto him. The siege having continued
three months, the Castle was surrendered, the lives of them that kept it only
reserved.

Before his departure, the King caused all the Scottish Nobility to repair to
Saint Andrews Town, where they took a new oath of their allegiance unto him.
Such as he held suspected, he carried with him into England, together with
diverse monuments and antiquities: amongst which, the Marble Stone of Stone
Abbay, wherein the Kings of that realm accustomed to sit at the time of
their Coronation, was of special account. It remains at this day at
Westminster, not far from the place where he lies intombed. This Stone has
such a fatal destiny following it (as the Scotts then believed) as that
where-so-euer it should be found, over that Country should a Scottish man
reign, in how short time this may come to pass no man knows. The King at
his departure committing the government of Scotland, to the Lord John
Sea-graue, returned into England, hoping that now he had made an end of his
wars there, and brought the whole realm into a peaceable estate under his
obedience: but it did not so fall out. For about this time dyed Robert Bruise
Earl of Carrike, who stood for the crown of Scotland, against Balliol the
last King. Whereupon Robert Bruise his son began to cast about, by what means
he might now attain the fame. But whether he were set on work by the Lord
Cumin, to the end he might be so much the nearer unto it himself, (for he
was descended from Mary the other Daughter of Allaine Lord of Gallowaye, and so
after the extirpation of the two families of the Balliols and the Bruses, was
next to the Crown,) or whether it proceeded from himself (having so good
title thereunto) without acquainting the other with his meaning, he was no
sooner entered into the plot, but was discovered by the Lord Cumin: which being
made known unto him, he thought himself in no safety in England, and
therefore by secret flight passing into Scotland, he set upon Cumin at
unawares (who otherwise had been ouer-strong for him) and so dispatched him
out of the way. Then he caused himself forthwith to be crowned King of
Scotland, by the Countess of Bougham, in the absence of her brother the Earl
of Fife, then in England, at his Manor of Whitwicke in Leicestershire, to whom
that office by inheritance appertained. This Lady was afterward (for her
punishment for this offense) put into a Cage of wood, which being placed on the
walls of the Castle of Edenborough, was for a while made a gazing stock to the
passengers by it. Immediately upon the news of the coronation of Bruise, the
King sent an army into Scotland, under the conduct of the Earl of Pembrooke
his Lieutenant there, the Lord Henry Percie, and the Lord Robert Clifford,
here-with to resist the new attempts of the Scotts under their new King. Bruise
(in the mean time) knowing against whom he was to contend, sought by all
means to make himself as strong as possibly he could: and therefore ranging
the coasts up and down he assembled some few small forces, wherewith ^e
approached the town S. John's, purposing there first to make trial of his
fortunes; but the Earl of Pembrooke by chance had first entered the town with
some 300. horsemen, besides foote-men. Bruise sent him word that he was come
thither to fight with him and all his partakers, if he would come forth. The
Earl answered, he would rest that day being the Sabbath, but on the next
morning he would accept of his challenge. Bruise hereupon withdrew his army a
mile back again from the town, meaning to be-take himself and his people
that night to their rest, but he was disquieted sooner then he looked; for the
Earl issuing out of the town a little before night about the beginning of the
Calends of August, assailed them so suddenly, as that he had slain a great
numbee, before they could get armor and weapons for their defense, so as after
a little resistance the Scots with their new king were put to flight. The Earl
following the chase pursued them unto Kenter, and understanding that Bruise was
entered a Castle ther-about, he besieged and presently took the same, wherein he
found his wife and his brother Nigell with some others, but Bruise himself was
fled unto the mountains, these he sent presently to Berwicke. This Lady was
the daughter of the Earl of Vlster in Ireland, who had lately before sent over
unto K. Edward two of his sons to remain in England for pledges of their
fathers fidelity, for whose sake she found great favor. Shortly after, was the
castle of Lachdore taken by the Englishmen, and in it Christopher Seton, that
had married the sister of Bruise; by birth he was an Englishman, and had
before slain a Knight of England in some bad manner, for the which fact
especially he was by the kings commandment executed at Dunfries, where the
same was committed: the like execution was also made at Berwicke upon Nigell
Bruise, and the rest of his companions. But the Earl of Atholl (who was also
taken about the same time) was removed to London, where he was beheaded and his
head set on a pole over London Bridge. Though Bruise in the mean season was put
to many hard shifts, wandering in desert places like a forelorne man,
not-with-standing he would not give over so good a cause, but after a little
breathing, began a fresh to bestur him, so as, what by entreaty and threats, he
gathered some few troops of horsemen about him; and whilst he was thus
occupied himself in one place, he sent two of his brothers (the one a Knight,
the other a priest) into other parts of the country, to procure what aid they
could. But as they were thus busied, they were both taken, condemned of
treason, and for the same executed. These misfortunes still following, one in
the neck of another, little or nothing allaied the thirst of a kingdom, for he
knew his cause was just, and that howsoever his sins had deserved, especially
the murder he committed at the very entrance into this actio^, yet should he
die (if it came to that) in a good quarrel. Having therefore happily reconciled
himself to God, whom (...) had therein greeuouslie offended, with (...)
courage he fully resolved to pursue his (...). Being now some what better
strengthened with the aid of the Ilanders, he incou^^^^ the Earl of
Pembrooke, and put him to (...) like hap shortly after he had against the
Earl of Gloucester. These small hartnings, did encourage Bruise to attempt
greater adventures, so as within short time he recovered diverse Castles, but
being not able to man them, he cast them down to the ground. King Edward
having knowledge of these his proceedings in Scotland, by his letters directed
into certain countries fittest for that service, gave commandment that as
many as were able to use a weapon, should within three weeks after Midsomer,
attend him at Carliel. But before the appointed time was come, the king fell
sick there, from whence being removed to Brough on the sand, he departed out
of this life in the 35. year of his reign, An. 1307.

By the death of King Edward, the state of the affairs between these two
Nations was much altered, for his son and successor king Edward the second
being now not about ^^ree and twenty years old, was given (after the manner
of youth) more to follow his pl^^sures, then the cares and travels of (...).
And therefore neglecting his business (...), gave fit opportunity to his
(...) and little, (...) off the (...) which his father by his valiancie had
brought them. So as while this youthful King sought nothing more, then to
spend his time in voluptuous pleasure and riotous excess, making such his
familiers, and chief minions about him, as best fitted his humor: Bruise on the
other side wholly endeavored by all possible means, how to restore his country
to her former liberty and quiet estate, now well nere brought to the brinke of
an unrecoverable downfall. And by his good foresight and singular manhood, he
so much prevailed, as that in the space of three or four years, he recovered
his kingdom: for having bin much inured with hardness and travel, together
with his long experience in managing the affairs of state, as well in time of
peace as of war, he had no small advantage thereby of the other. The father
dying not above a week before his intended journey once again into Scotland,
the king his son finding all things in so good readiness, was advised to make
trial with these forces that were then come to Carleil, what intertainment he
should find at the Scotishmens hands: Being come to Dumfries, he summoned the
Scottish Nobility to repair thither unto him, where diverse of them acknowledged
their allegiance and homage. But here he could not now tarry, being hasted
homewards to make preparation for his journey into France, where shortly after
he married the Lady Isabell, daughter to K. Philip surnamed the fair. At his
departure he committed the wardenship of Scotland to John de Britain, whom
withal he created Earl of Richmond. Amongst all the Scottish Lords that took
part with England none was so great an enemy to Bruise as the Lord John Cumin
Earl of Buquhan, for the murder committed upon his Ancestor, as before you
have heard; now therefore to be revenged, as also to show his forwardness to
perform some acceptable service for the King of England, he gathered such
forces ( English and Scottish) as he could make, and therewith approached his
enemy. Bruise (being yet barely recovered of a late sickness) upon a
boun-courage incountred him at a strait, and in the end discomfited his army,
making great slaughter of his men. This victory did so revive Bruise his feeble
and languishing spirits, as that from thence forward he still prevailed in all
his interprises. So as following his good fortune, in short time he reduced the
conntries of Anguile and Galloway, under his obedience. King Edward not well
brooking these daily losses, raised a mighty power, wherewith about the
midst of August in the beginning of the fifth year of his reign, he intered
into Scotland, accompanied with the greater number of his Nobility, amongst
whom Peter Gauestonne (whom he now created Earl of Cornwall) was in greatest
favor with him: on whom also he bestowed the signorie of the I Will of Man,
which within three years after, Bruise recovered from him: King Edward,
raunging his people in battle array, passed thorough the country as far as
Reufren, and then returned again with little or no resistance. For Bruise
being not yet of sufficient power to encounter his huge Army, kept himself
out of his walk, knowing king Edward could not tarry long there, because he had
taken such order before, that nothing remained wherewith to relieve so great a
number. He was no sooner turned home-ward, but the Scots were ready to follow
him at his heels, so as entering into Lothian, they did great hurt to the
inhabitants, and returned at their pleasure before they could be overtaken by
the Englishmen. King Edward coming to Berwicke stayed there all the next
winter, and fortified the Town with a strong wall and ditch, somewhat he
caused to be done likewise at Roxbrugh and Norham, which two Castells he
committed to the custody of the Earls of Cornwall and Gloucester, and so the
next spring returned into England, and ceassing any further at this time to
prosecute his affairs in Scotland, he turned all his malice and fury against
his own subjects, amonst whom the Earls of Lancaster, Gloucester and Warwick
being not able any longer to endure the outrageous pride and insolency of
Gauestone, supported against them by the unmeasurable and doting affection of
the king toward him, sought means to have him apprehended, and once again
banished; or, if they failed thereof, then to be revenged some other way. The
king having knowledge of their intent conveyed him to the Castle of Scarbrugh,
not so closely, but that it was made known to the Lords his adversaries, who
pursuing him presently thither, they forced him to yield himself into their
hands, and in conclusion (without further aduisement) Guye Earl of Warwick
caused his head to be stricken off. The King (not without cause) took this
their unlawful act in such scorn, as that ever after (though for the present
he dissembled his displeasure) he fought occasion how to be revenged. By
reason of this privy hart-burne between the king and his Nobles, the Scottish
affairs were neglected on all parts, so as in the mean season Bruise had
brought under his obedience the better part of that kingdom. Wherefore it was
now high time to do somewhat, if the king made any reckoning to hold that
nation in such state as it was left by the late deceassed king his Father.
Heerevpon he once again assembled a puissant and gallant army, such, as for
multitude and gorgious array, was never seen before in Scotland purposing not
only to make a full conquest thereof, but to leave behind him such store of
English people, as should be sufficient to inhabit those Countries, which
thorough the long continuance of war were left well near desolate. Bruise
understanding of this great preparation forslaked no time to make what
resistance he could. And by how much he was over weak in power, to resist
his adversary, it behooued him to be so much the more circumspect by art and
policy to get what advantage he could against him. Having therefore brought
his army, (which consisted of some thirty five thousand such men, as reposed
their whole confidence for life, lands and else whatsoever only in the force
and courage of their hands and hearts) to the further bank of the River
Bannock, there he stayed the coming of the Conqueror. This River runs into
the Forth having very high and steep banks on both sides, and here and there
certain strait and narrow passages over it, somewhat also beneath the
cliftes before his fall, it lies flat, but the passage over there was
hindered, thorough certain suncken marrish grounds and quagmires,
nevertheless at that time of the year passable enough in many places. In
these plots he caused deep ditches to be cast, and sharp pointed stakes of
wood to be stricken down in them, in such manner as having their tops
covered with light turues, they might easily deceive those that forecast no
such peril.

And where the passage was more firm he caused Caltroppes to be scattered
for the annoyance of the horsemen. When every thing was thus disposed and
framed to his best advantage, the King of England approaching with his royal
Army, set his people in battle array on this side the river ouer-against the
Scots. The first day was spent with certain light skirmishes between the
horsemen, not much to the loss or gain of either party. Though the night at
that time of the year, was there very short or none at all, being the xxiii.
day of June: yet such was the earnest desire on either side, to join in fight,
as that unto them both it seemed ouer-long. Bruise lead the middle battle,
having his brother on his right hand, and Randolph on the left. The English
Army was marshalled in the same manner, thoroughly interlined with good store
of Archers. The men of Arms gave the first onset, and rushing together upon
the hidden points of those stakes, that were set for that purpose, they were
all ouer-throwne before they could come near the Scots, who watching the
expected advantage, and falling upon them readily, made an exceeding bloody
slaughter of them. They that escaped, made so confused a retraite, as the maine
battle of footmen that followed them was not a little thereby disordered.
The Scotts therewith joined with them hand to hand, and maintained the fight
very valiantly, but the English Archers fot a time were very troublesome unto
them, until certain light horsemen assailing them at their backs,
ouer-threw a great number, and dispersed the rest. But yet the enemies force
prevailed not so much, as did his ftaud, here again, for the rascal sort,
men, women and boys, that attended their cariages, mounting upon their
Cart-iades, and other Draught-cattle, with their sherts above their other
garments, and banners and flagges made of their sheets and aprons, and such
like stuff, fastened to the tops of long poles, showed themselves a far off,
descending from the top of an high hill, as if it had been a new Army hasting
to the aid of their fellows. This sight stroke such a terror in those of the
English Army that were nearest unto it, as that forthwith they betook them to
their heels. The rest supposing the danger greater then it was, and being
therewith much disordered, fled all for fear they knew not whereof, their
Captains not being able by any means to keep them in Exceeding great
slaughter was made of the common soldiers in the chase. King Edward with some
fifteen Earls in his company with much difficulty escaped by flight, being
received by the Earl of March into his Castle of Dunbar, from whence they
were conveyed by sea to Berwicke. Of the Nobility of England were slain
Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, Robert Lord Clifford, the Lord Giles Argentine
(whose death Bruise much lamented, for the great love that was between the^
afore-time in England) the Lord Panie Tiptost, the Lord William Marshall, the
Lord Reginold Damiecourt, the Lord Edmond de Manley (the kings Steward) with
other to the number of forty two. Of knights threescore and seven. The Earl of
Hereford, the Lord John Seagraue and others to the number of two and twenty
men of name were taken prisoners. Of the Scots were slain about four
thousand, amongst whom Sir William Weapont, and Sir Walter Ros were the
principal men of account. This was the most notable victory, that ever the
Scots had over the Englishmen, which came to pass, only by the misguiding and
want of experience in their leaders and captains, presuming over much of their
advantage in number and furniture of weapons: neither were they so circumspect,
as it behooved them to be, in the discovery of advantage or disadvantage, which
the plot of ground where the battle was fought, might afford to the one side
more then to the other. For they might have coniectured even by Bruise his
abiding in the field with so small a power against so great a puissance (being
of Englismen more then two to one Scot) that he relied more upon the success
of his hidden deceipts, then of his own strength. This battle was fought on
Midsummer day in the year 1314.

Here-upon Striueling Castle was rendered up, Bruise his wife was upon exchange
sent home, having been in England about eight years. After Bruise had thus
fortunatlie recovered his kingdom, he was by general consent of his subjects
confirmed and established in the same. The Crown was intailed upon the heirs
Males of his body lawfully begotten, and for want of such issue to remain to
his brother Edward Bruise and the Heirs Males of his body, and for default
thereof, the same should descend upon the Lady Margery the Kings eldest
daughter, whom only he begat on his first wife sister to the Earl of Mar.
Which Lady by the advice of his Noblemen, was bestowed in marriage on Walter
high Steward of Scotland, on whose posterity the Crown shortly after
descended, and in the same family continues till this day, taking that
surname of the office which their Ancestors bare, and was first bestowed on
Walter the son of Fleance, by King Malcolme Cammore, for his notable service
against the Rebels of Galloway. What thorough the loss of so many men's
lives, and the damage which our Nation sustained at this last battle, and the
great dearth and death of man and beast, that thorough the unseasonable state
of those times continued, for the space of three years after small resistance
or none at all was made against the Scots, who taking the benefit of this
advantage, ceased not exceedingly to annoye and trouble the Realm by their
continual incursions.

Hereof Pope John the 22. taking compassion, at the Kings suit sent over two
Cardinals, Gancellino his Chancellor, and Lucas de Frisco, to mediate a peace
between the two Nations.

But king Robert held it yet out of season, to hearken thereunto, having (as he
took it) not sufficiently been satisfied for his former losses and
displeasures. Whereupon these iollie Chaplains proceeded against him with all
extremity denouncing him and all his fautors accursed, and putting his
kingdom (whereof they accounted him but a usurper) under interdiction. But all
these bumbaced skarre-crowes nothing abated king Roberts courage, who still
following his good hap, while the time best served for it, held on his former
course so eagerly, as that in short time he recovered the Castles and towns
of Harbottle, Warke, Medford, and Berwicke, which last (it is said) was
betrayed by Peter Spalding the Governor, having remained English one and twenty
years together. Neither would king Robert limit his kingdom by the ancient
bounds but enlarged the same even unto New Castle upon Tine. At this time also
the Scots obtained diverse victories in Ireland, thorough the manhood of Edward
Bruise their kings brother, who nevertheless in the end was slain in battle,
and above five thousand Scots with him. His head was brought over and presented
to king Edward by John Birmingha^ for the which good service now and at (...)
other times in Ireland, the king gave him the Earldom of Lowth, to him and
his heirs Males, and the Baronie of Athird to him and his heirs generally of
his body begotten. The realm of England now being somewhat recovered of the
hard estate it stood in the last three years, King Edward was desirous to make
trial, if happily he might rub out the blemish of the late blow received of
his enemies in Scotland. Having therefore assembled his Army at York (who for
the more patt were handy-crafts men and Artificers) passing from thence he
laid siege to Berwicke. The Scotts in the mean time (under the conduct of
Thomas Randolph) entering England on the other side, put all to fire, and sword,
little resistance being made against them, for those countries lay well near
desolate since their invasion the year before. The Archbishop of York could
not endure the enemies approach so near him (being now come within two or
three days march of the City) and therefore assembling such people, as for
the present he could get (men that were readiest at his command) he
adventured like a bold Champion to encounter the Scots, of whom ouer-late he
learned this lesson, Ne suitor vltra crepidam. For the greater number of these
gallants (some two thousand) were knocked down, before they saw their enemies,
who by setting certain Haystackes on fire, and taking the wind of them, were
upon them, ere they knew what it meant. The Archbishop, and the Bishop of Elye
Lord Chancellor, with the Abbot of Selby escaped by flight, but Nicholas
Fleming the Maire of York (that stuck better to it) was slain. This happened
on the 12 of October 1319. Mitton upon Swaile. And because this army consisted
most of Surplisse men, it was in derision called the white battle, but most
of them found it a black day. King Edward feareing least the Scotts intended
some further mischief, brake up his siege and returned to York, where
understanding that the enemy was with-drawne home-ward he likewise took his
way toward London. The next year passed over without any stirring on either
side, the rather because the two Kings were disquieted at home by their own
subjects. In the mean time, at the procurement of King Edward, the Pope sent
hither his leaden bulls (which aduantaged him their weight in gold for he is
the best alchimist in Europe) to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York
commanding them, that unless the Scottish king would fourth-with make
satisfaction for the wrongs done to the realm, as well concerning the state
ecclesiastical as temporal, they should proceed to the denouncing of
sentence against him and all his adherentes. But the Scotts made no reckning
of the holy Fathers threats, whereupon the Bishops published his terrible
execrations against them, so as King Robert, James Dowglasse and Thomas
Randolfe with all their partakers were at every mass thorough out England
solemnly accursed three times. Nevertheless the next year the Scotts invaded
the land again a fresh, so that all this cost and coniuration little or
nothing auailed. One company under the conduct of the Earl of Murry assailed
the Bishopric of Durham. An other was lead by James Dowglasse, and the Lord
Steward of Scotland, who also dividing themselves, the one company wasted the
Country toward Hartlepoole and Cleueland, the other intended as much to
Richmonde, where the townes-men to redeem their peace departed with a good
round some of money paid unto them, as they had done also lately before. While
the Scotts took their pleasure in this manner in the North parts for the
space of fiueteene days, the gentlemen there about repaired to Pomfret to the
Earl of Lancaster, offering to join with him against the enemy, but the Earl
was not disposed to adventure his life in the quarrel of him, who (as he took
it) had done him much wrong. But how true soever that was, most certain it
is, that he both wronged himself and highly offended his Sovereign, in
taking arms against him shortly after, which cost him no less price, then the
loss of his life, as it be fell to diverse others his partakers at the
battle at Borowgh-bridge the sixteen day of March 1321. and possessions
that ever yet was in England, for he was together invested with the Earldomes
of Lancaster, Lincoln, Leicester, Derbie and Salisburie. So as if he had
continued faithful to his Prince, he might have been a great aid unto him
and the realm, but contrariwise (as it has been often since seen in this
land) his greatness made him an enemy both to King and country, as appeared
by diverse letters out of Scotland, intercepted in their carriage hither to the
Lords of his confederacy, which were openly read and published afterward in
London, During these troubles, the Scots and Frenchmen ceased not to molest
the realm on both sides: for King Robert about Midsomer following, entered by
the West Marches as far as Kendall, and from thence through Lancashire to
Prestone in Andernesse, burning and wasting all that stood in their way
foure-score miles within the land, and having taken their pleasure for the
space of three weeks, returned home without battle. The King of England
being thus molested by their continual incursions (having also sent his
Brother Edmond Earl of Kent, over into G^yenne for the defense thereof against
the Frenchmen) passed yet once again into Scotland. King Robert understanding
what great preparation was made and in readiness for to come against him,
thought it not fit to hazard his estate, being now brought to the height of
his desires, upon the tickle success of a battle or two, and therefore he
caused all the Cattle and Sheep in the country, to be driven up to the
Mountains, and what-so-euer else might serve the Englishmen to any good use,
was either bestowed in some place of strength, or else made unfit for any
purpose. He with his horsemen withdrew themselves further into the land,
then that it should stand with the safety of his enemies to approach them.
Hereby it came to pass, that when King Edward was come to Edenborough, he was
forced for want of victuals and other necessaries, which bred many diseases
amongst his people, within fifteen days after his entry into Scotland, to
return home-wardes, having only by assault taken Norham Castle. King Robert
understanding how much the English Army was weakened by the great mortality of
the common soldiers, ouer-passed not so fit an opportunity, but with all
speed pursued the Englishmen, wasting and spoiling the land, even as far as
York, and having gotten knowledge that king Edward was then at the Abbey of
Beighland, he so covertly conducted his Army thither, as that setting on his
enemies at unawares, he put them all to flight, the king himself hardly
escaping their hands. In this conflict (for some small resistance was made,
such as their short warning would afford) The Lord John Britain Earl of
Richmonde was taken prisoner, besides diverse other of the inferior sort. The
kings treasure and furniture with all the provision and preparation pertaining
to the host was either spoiled or carried away. This happened about the twelft of
October anno. 1322. Scotts passed further into the land, coming to Beuerley,
the townsmen gave them a sum of money wherewith they bought their peace;
having now remained in England a month and four days they returned from
thence homewards. King Edward now despairing of any better success in time to
come, and withal foreseeing what trouble was likely to arise within his own
realm, (as afterward came to pass) sought means to obtain peace with
Scotland, which in the end was yielded unto, and the same to endure for
thirteen years, and about the tenth of July in the year following it was
proclaimed in the chief cities and towns of both Nations. The Scotts were
also now content to be reconciled to the Pope, having first recovered and
obtained in England whatsoever they well-nere desired. At the same time the
league was renewed with Charles the French King, lately then come to his
Crown, with an addition to the former articles, viz: that if at any time
after, controversy should arise about the succession and right to the Crown
of Scotland, the same should be heard and determined by the Nobility and peers
of those two Nations only. King Edward having obtained peace with Scotland,
the French King began to quarrel with him for default of his personal
apearance, being summoned thereunto to acknowledge his homage for the duchy of
Aquitaine, and the country of Poytou, upon which occasion the Queen his wife
and the Prince of Walls were sent into France to treat with the king her
brother of an agreement between him and her husband, which she effected.
Nevertheless whether she was stayed their against her will upon some complaint
made of her husband, or that she could not happily endure the two Spencers, who
were then in greatest estimation with him; it seemed she had no great desire to
return into England, which being perceived, or rather plotted by diverse of the
Nobility and others favoring her part more then the kings, they daily passed
over unto her, by whom being brought into England, the greater number forsook
the King, and joined themselves with the Queen and her Son, into whose
hands he was thereby forced in the end to resign his Crown and Scepter, and
shortly after to yield his body to the violence of his cruel tormentors, who
beereaued him of life, as the others did of liberty, having reigned near
twenty years. Such was the end of this unfortunate King, by whose
misgouernment the Realm was greatly impouerished and weakened, having been
the destruction of so many noble personages and others of good account. For
besides those that were slain in the wars will (...) with near thirty
Noblemen and Knights at one time or other were by order of law beheaded and
executed. This king Edward being thus unnaturally deposed, his Son of the same
name, about the age of fourteen years began his reign in January in the
year 1326. Scots purposing to have given the young King a cooling card now in
the beginning of his iolity, attempted by treason to have taken the Castle of
Norham. But Robert Manors the Captain thereof, being made aforehand
acquainted with the practice by (...) one of his own soldiers, so handled the
matter, that when some 16. of them had mounted the walls, he suddenly fell
upon them, slew nine or ten and took the rest prisoners.

The Scots deemed this v^fortunate beginning a presagement of the like success
thorough his whole reign, which came to pass accordingly. For he was the
greatest scourge to that nation of any king of England either before or after
him, as in the process of the history shall appear. Notwithstanding this
hard beginning, king Robert thought it not good to let this land continue
quiet, but rather while the king was young, unfit to manage the affairs of war
in his own person, to get what advantage he could thereby, and so to be still
aforehand. And if that ^ourse should happen not to fall out according to his
expectation, he hoped by the help of his faithful ally the French king, so to
work with the kings mother (who governed and disposed of al things at her
pleasure, during his minority) that at any time he might obtain peace with
England at his own liking. About the beginning therefore of July following king
Robert committed his army (being now not well able, thorough the infirmities of
age to undertake that charge himself) to three Captains of especial trust
and approved valiancy, namely Thomas Randolfe Earl of Murrey, James Lord
Dowglasse, and the Earl of Mar his brother in law, consisting of above twenty
thousand horsemen well furnished at all points. King Edward being advertised
hereof, prepared to make resistance, and having assembled his forces at York,
he stayed there the longer by reason of a treaty of peace, solicited by the
Scottish Ambassadors, but when the king perceived he lost time there to no
purpose, departing thence he approached his enemies, that were lodged in the
Woods in Stanop Park, so as it was thought he had them at a great advantage.

But thorough the Treachery (as it was said) of the Lord Roger Mortimer, after
they had been pend up and well near famished, they did not only find a way
out, but some two hundred of them under the leading of the Lord Dowglasse in
the night season, desperately assailed that part of the English camp, where
the king him self was ^udged, missing not much of either taking or slaying of
him, but fearing least they should have been enclosed, being now in the
myddest of their enemies, they made the more have to be gonne, having done as
much harm as the time would suffer them. For (as it was said) they slew two
or three hundred of the common soldiers. The Earl of Lancaster and the Lord
John Beumont of Heynault (who with twelve hundred men of his country served the
King in this journey) would willingly have pursued the Scotts over the water of
Wier, but that thorough the frowardness of Mortimer, pretending a right to the
leading of the fore-ward, and giving the first onset, (though happily he had
no such meaning) they could not be suffered to proceed. Wheresoever the fault
was, nothing was further attempted at this time, wherewith the King was much
displeased. The Scotts being glad they had escaped that danger, made as much
have home as they could. The next winter they besiedged the Castells of Norham
and Anwicke, but to their loss, for at the assault of Anwicke diverse of them
were slain, amongst whom William de Mounthault, John Clappam and Malicius de
Dumbarre were of best account.

The next Summer above Pentecoste, King Edward at a Parliament held at
Northampton, thorough the working of Mortimer and the Queen, agreed to a
dishonorable peace with the Scotts, whereby the King of Scotland received into
his hands all those ancient writings, whereby his predecessors the kings of
Scotland, and the Nobility had aforetime, under their hands and seals,
acknowledged homage and fealty to the Kings of England; amongst the rest one of
principal account called Ragman, together with a black Crosier or Roode,
besides diverse other jewels sometime belonging to the kings of Scotland, and
carried from thence into England. Further King Edward hereat resigned al his
right and title to the crown of Scotland, and that no Englishmen should from
thence-forth hold and inioye any lands or possessions their, except such as
would remain their altogether, and become subjects to the Kings of Scotland.
Finally it was agreed, that Northumberland should thence-forth be reputed the
Marches of Scotland, on the East Side, and Cumberland on the West Side. In
consideration of the premises, as also for the great damage done to this Realm
by the Scotts, during the reign of the late King, King Robert couenanted to
give to the King of England thirty thousand marks sterling. For the more
assurance and full ratification of this final agreement of peace between the
two nations, a marriage was then concluded, and afterward solemnized between
the Lady Jane King Edwards Sister, and Prince David of Scotland. When King
Robert had thus politikelie brought to pass a firm peace with England, even
to his own liking and hearts desire, he betook himself to a private life,
and by reason of his great age, he committed the government of his kingdom (as
before in some sort he had done) to the Earl of Murrey, and the Lord
Dowglasse; and then having worn out one year more, he dyed in the year of
our salvation, 1329. Murrey. Here it is requisite, I should answer a notorious
untruth, wherewith the Scottish writers do most unjustly charge the King of
England, viz: That he should s^^d a Munke into Scotland, under the color of
ministering physic, to poison the Governor, and because he had not dispatched
his business in so short time as he promised, therefore King Edward caused
him to be burned alive. All this should be done (they write) in the year
1331. Robert, in which the governor also deceased, on the 20. day of July. I
would first know what should move the King of England to seek the destruction
of him, more then of any man else in that Realm? because (forsooth) he alone
was the confounder of all the hope, which the king conceived, to be sometimes
able to atchieue any fortunate interprise against the Scots. As though all that
nation could not afford his fellow. That he was the very Atlas and supporter
of their happy estate. True it is, that the deceassed king had reason to commit
more trust to him, then to any other of whose loyalty and sufficiency he had
not the like trial. But it follows not thereof, that if king Edward could
dispatch him out off the way, there had been none left to have resisted his
attempts against that nation.

But admit he was the man they make him, it is well known that King Edward
(being then not much above eighteen years old) was not only over young to
contriue such a practice, but was then still directed by his Mother Queen
Isabel, and so consequently by Mortimer Earl of March her chief Counselor,
both so great favorers and maintainers of the peace with Scotland, as that he
lost his life shortly after for the same. It is further affirmed, That this
Monk stealing secretly out off Scotland assured the King, that the Governor
could not possibly live beyond a prefixed day, in which time, the poison was
to work his effect, and that King Edward presuming thereof, gathered a mighty
and puissant army, wherewith coming to the borders, he purposed to invade
Scotland, had he not known when he came thither, that the governor was not
only living, but ready in arms to have resisted his approach. Now of all this
preparation and journey, there is not one word to be found amongst all our
Croniclers. But to the contrary it appears, that (beside^s the confirmation
of the former peace, upon the admittance of this Earl to the Regency) the
summer next before his death, was so unseasonable, as that it caused a great
dearth in England all the year following: so as it was impossible to make
provision for such an army, neither could those more Northen parts afford it
of their own store. For (it is said) that in some places of the realm,
especially North-wards (by reason of the coldness of that climate) wheat was
not gathered into the barn till hallontide, nor pease until the end of
November. Moreover King Edward was in France well near all the month of April
next before the governors death, and after his return thence he had so
little meaning to make preparation of war, as that he held solemn iustes
and turney at Dert-forde, which exercises he renewed again at London in
September following. How can all this agree with the surmised preparation of
war with Scotland, at that time? Now to the last point touching the burning
of this Monk, (whereof some of them for the vnlike-lihood-haue not spoken) it
is incredible, that a religious man, a devout Monk (as they were then
accounted) should be either murdered or executed, for not keeping promise, in
the performance of an unlawful and unchristian act. But where, when, on whom,
or by whom was this unusual execution made? to no one of these
interrogatories does any man answer, save that he was a Monk or begging
Friar. For they will not vouchsafe to give him other name, though he had been
a long time very familier in the governors house. These be therefore great
slanders, far unbeseeming the reputation of him, that not long sense has
made no conscience to report the most part of this fable for a truth.

This year Roger Mortimer Earl of March was attaynted of high treason, and
executed for the same on Saint Andrews eauen. Amongst other matters wherewith
he was charged, he was found guilty of secret practice with the Scotts at
Stanhope-parke whereby they escaped as is aforesaid, and that he received
there of the Lord James Douglas, a great sum of money for the good service
done by him at that time, and to be still continewed toward that Nation
whilst his authority should stand them insteede. Hereby also afterward he
brought to pass that unadvised peace with the Scotts at Northampton, as is
before declared.

About this time Edward Balliol, thorough the persuasion of Laurence Twine (a
Scottish fugitive) came over out off France, where he had always lived before,
to entreat the King of England to assist him in the recovery of his right to
the Crown of Scotland, which was given by a ward unto John Balliol by king
Edward the first, promising withal, that if it were his good hap to attain
it, he would acknowledge to hold the same in manner as his Grandfather held it
of the others Grandfather.

But before this motion was made to the king of England: Balliol sought the
favor of the Lord Henry Beumont (a Frenchman borne) that had married the
daughter and heir of the Earl Buquhan and likewise of the Lord William
Cumine, the lord David of Strabouee Earl of Atholl, and the lord Geffrey de
Mowbraie. These and some others that were banished the Realm of Scotland by
the late King Robert le Bruise, and now lived in England, having in hope of
preferment joined hearts and hands with Balliol in this quarrel, obtained
this favor of king Edward, that as many of his subjects, as of themselves were
willing to assist them in this enterprise should have good leave to follow them
therein. For though the young king of Scots had been affianced unto king
Edwards sister, who in respect of that alliance should not have been easily
drawn into this action: nevertheless he held himself so much disgraced and
absued in his minority by the deceitful practice of Mortimer, that nothing now
pleased him, that (together with that marriage) was then yielded unto, at that
dishonorable composition made with the Scottish king at Northampton as before
you have heard. Neither was that contract of marriage so firm, but if either
party misliked thereof when they should come to lawful age of consent, the
same might safely be dissolved. Edward Balliol having now assembled (by the
help of the other two Scottish Lords his confederates) some four hundred
horse, and about two thousand Archers and other footmen, took shipping at
Rauen-spurne in Holdernesse, from thence directing his course Northward he
entered into the Scottish fourth, and arrived near to the town Kingorne on the
first day of August, where being incountred by Alexander Seaton he slew him
in the field, together with the greater number of his people, and put the
residewe to flight. This good beeginning put such courage into these venterous
companions in arms (fighting for no less then a kingdom) that with in some
few days after (their forces being now increased to the number of about ten
thousand one and other) they attempted to assail the Earl of Muerry (then
Regent of Scotland) by night, where he lay encamped in the midst of his
army, the same being over great otherwise to be dealt withal, and took him
on such a sudden that they put him to flight, making great slaughter upon his
people. The next day the fight was renewed on both sides, but in the end the
victory fell to Balliol. This battle was fought at Dueplin on the thirteenth
day of the same mo^th, wherein was slain (now and the night before) besides
the Regent himself, Robert Bruise Earl of Carricke, William Haie Constable,
and Robert Keithe Marshall of Scotland with diverse other Lords and Leardes of
good account: in the whole to the number of above five thousand.

Hereupon (diverse of the Scottish Nobility submytting themselves to Balliol)
he was forthwith proclaimed, and on the 25. day of this present month of
August, crowned King of Scotland, in the year of our Lord GOD 1332. France,
hoping that by the help of Philip the French king, (his fathers especial
friend while he lived) he should one day enjoy his kingdom, which for the
present was thus usurped by his adversary. To which end his fauoreres in the
mean time never ceased to oppose themselves against Balliol, in so much as in
December following they drove him out of Scotland, forceing him to with-drawe
himself into Westmerland, where he was honorably entertained of the Lord
Clifford: in requital whereof he promised, that when he was once established
in his Kingdom, he would give him Dowglasse-daile, in as ample manner as his
Ancestour had the same of the gift of King Edward the first, which afterward
he performed accordingly. Balliol having renewed his forces in England, about
the beginning of the next year, (though King Edward would not openly show
himself a party therein) laid siedge to the town of Berwike, at which time
the Brusian Scotts entered into Gelsland by the West Marches, wasting the
Country where they passed along.

The King of England being advertised therof-thought himself sufficiently
discharged there, by of his promise passed aforetime to young Bruise (but he
might better have pleaded his nonage at the making thereof) and therefore took
it to be now lawful enough openly to aid his Cousin Balliol in the
recovery of his pretended title to the Crown of Scotland. It is not to be
doubted but King Edward would not in this case have preferred Balliol before
Bruise (who besides that he had married his Sister, was also in blood nearer
unto him then the other) had he not hoped (as it came, to pass) to take up
the controversy between them to his own advantage. Having therefore
assembled a strong army, he came therewith to the siedge of Berwicke, together
with his brother John of Eltham Earl of Cornwall and gave assault to the same
both by Land and sea. The town after it had been besiedged about three
months, was not able longer to hold out, which being well known to Archibald
Dowglasse (the new elected governor and head of the Brusian faction) he
approached the assailants with all the power he could make, (resolving with
himself (against the advice of the better experienced) to try it out by dint
of sword with out any more stay. Being come within the view both of his friends
and foes, he imbattayled his army in three companies on a hill directly over
against the English host, which had the like advantage of ground also. After
some pause the armies on both sides descended one toward the other.

At the first encounter the Englishmen of purpose giving ground, the Scotts
pursued them so egarlie, as that by recovering their former advantage they did
beat them downright before them, so that what in fight and slight the
slaughter was very great. For besides their general, three valiant Gentlemen
the Sons of Walter Steward (Uncles to him that succeeded the Brusian lineage
in Scotland) the Earls of Rosse, Southerland, and Carrike, Andrewe, James, and
Simon Frasier, all well near of the better sort, to the number of above four
hundred, were slain in the battle, but of the common soldiers not so few
as fourteen thousand. This bloody battle was fought at Halidon hill besides
Berwike on Mary Magdalines day in the year of our Lord 1333. Alexander Seaton
and Patrike Dumbar despayring of any succor, yielded up the town and Castle
to king Edward, life and goods only reserved, and binding themselves by oath
thence-forth to become his true subjects. Patrike Du^bar was further enjoined
to re-edifie the Castle of Dumbar at his own charge, having lately before
thrown it down, because he was unable to defend it against the Englishmen
ready to assault the same. What credit is here to be given to Hector Boethius,
charging King Edward to have unjustly executed two Sons of Sir Alexander
Seatons, the one a pleadge, the other a prisonner, because he would not yield
up the town at the approach of the governor? I leave it to the consideration
of the indifferent reader. For mine own part I cannot but hold him much
suspected, his report alone carrying so little show of truth, for as it
seems by the Scottish Cronicle, Patrike Dumbar had as great a command in
Berwike as the other, whose consent alone could not have effected King Edwards
desire, so as he might have laid the fault upon his companion and fellow
Comissioner in the government of the town, and thereby have justly excused
himself, neither surely would he have brooked so great an injury at the
kings hands, much less ever have acknowledged, and continewed his sworn
allegiance unto him, if he had had the least spark of that spirit, wherewith
Buchanan feyneth his wife to be possessed upon that occasion. The King of
England after this his first and fortunate battle in Scotland, leaving
sufficient forces behind him with the Lord Richard Tailbote, wherewith to aid
Balliol in the pursuit of this war, returned homewards. Balliol being thus
strengthened, passed at his pleasure thorough Scotland, placing Englishmen and
others his partakers, in garrison in the greater number of the Castells and
fortresses of that Realm, and in a Parliament called at Perthe in September
following, he was further confirmed King of Scotland: diverse of the Scottish
Nobility there assembled binding themselves by oaths to continue his loyal and
faithful subjects. Hereat he repealed all such acts and graunts, which
Robert Bruise late King of Scotland had ratified, for the disposing of the
Lands, and possessions of sundry Scottish Lords at his pleasure, which were now
restored to their former possessors, acknowledging their allegiance and homages
unto him for the same.

After the purification of the Virgin Mary King Edward repaired to York,
where Balliol by appointment should have met him to have don homage and fealty
unto him, but because he feared to be surprised in his passage by his
adversaries, he sent his excuse by the Lord Henry Beumont, and the Lord
William de Montaigne. The king therefore passing further Northwards, held his
VVhitsontide at Newcastell upon Tine with great royalty, whether the Scottish
king repaired, and there did homage unto king Edward for the Realm of
Scotland, and also swear fealty unto him, as to the superior Lord over the
same, acknowleding to hold that Realm of him, his heirs and successors for
ever. At this meeting Balliol freely gave to king Edward the Castells and
towns of Berwike, Roxbrugh, Peplies, Dunfries, Hadingtone and Gedworthe, with
the forestes of Silkerke and Etherike, so as all the premises should be
thence-forth cleerelie separated from the Crown of Scotland, and annexed to
the Crown of England: all this was then firmly ratified and assured by oath,
writing, and witness in the year. 1334. Edward being departed homewards,
Balliol was still set on work by them of the Brusian faction, in whose hands
still remained sundry strong Castells and fortifications, as Dunbritanie,
Lochleuin, Keldromie, Vrquhart, and the strong pile of Lowdone, so that as
opportunity served, one or other still revolted from his obedience: but at the
approach of King Edward the next winter (who was always ready to relieve him
in his extremities) the country was well appeased, and so committed to the
keeping of David Cumine Earl of Atholl, while Balliol in the mean time
accompanied the king into England. This Earl was so egerly pursued shortly
after their departure by the adverse party, that in the end he was forced to
revolt from the English. Whereupon new sturres began again to arise,
especially thorough the provocation of the Earl of Murrey and Robert Steward,
the principal men of the Brusian side. For the suppressing hereof king Edward
made his third voyage into Scotland the Summer following, in the year 1335.
Balliol, and his brother the Earl of Cornwall, diverse great Lords attending
upon them. Being entered into Scotland they divided themselves sometimes into
two, sometimes into three several companies, in which manner they passed at
their pleasure without resistance, as well beyond the Scottish fourth, as on
this side the same. In the mean time the Earl of Athol repaired to the king,
submitting himself again to his obedience, by whose example diverse other did
the like, but this Earl was shortly after slain at the siedge of the Castle
of Keldromie. At the approach of winter king Edward withdrew himself to
Newcastel, where he kept the feast of the Nativity of our Lord. Immediately
after the Epiphany he prepared to have passed again into Scotland, especially
to take revenge for the death of the Earl of Atholl, but in the mean time a
truce was taken, by mediation of the French king and the Pope which endured
till the twenty seventh of March 1336. London, wherein a final accord
between the two nations should have been treated of, and the kingdom of
Scotland established: Where the right which these two Scottish kings pretended,
should have appeared most forcible. While this good course was intended and
fully agreed upon on all sides, the Lord Maurice de Murrey slew Sir Geffery de
Ros a Scottish knight, and Sheriff of Air and Leuarke, one of Balliol his
partakers, because in time of war he had before slain his brother. By
reason of this presumptious part, and the frowardness of the Scotts on both
sides, still seeking revenge one of the other, this treaty took no effect.
The next Summer about VVhitsontide the king sent an army into Scotland under
the conduct of Balliol and diverse English Lords, who finding the town of Saint
John's defaced by the enemies (not able of themselves to hold it, caused the
same to be fortified at the charge of six of the next monasteries unto it.
King Edward about this time was at a Parliament holden at Northamptone, where
leaving his Lords and the rest to treat of such matters, as were propounded
amongst them, he posted into the North parts: coming to Berwike, from thence
with a slender attendance he arrived at Saint John's town, before any man
there had heard of his intention. Here he found Balliol and the rest of his
company. From hence the King passed forwards with some part of his army, as
far as Elgen in Murrey-land, thence to Inuernesse, much further into Scotland
then ever the King his grandfather had done before. In the mean time the Earl
of Cornwall, with the power of Yorkshire and Northumberland men, and the Lord
Anthony Lucie with those of Westmerland and Comberland, entered into Scotland,
wasted and spoiled the West parts, as Carrick and others which obayed not
Balliol. The Lord Dowglasse by coasting the Englishmen did his best to hinder
their course. At length this army having done what harm it could, was sent
home, with great prey and booty, but the Earl of Cornwall with his own
people came through to Saint John's town where he found the king returned from
beyond the Mountains. Here some of the Scottish writers charge the King to have
slain this Earl his brother, for committing over great cruelty upon the
desolate Scotts in this his last journey, especially against the men of
Religion: it may be that the King was touched with a Christian compassion over
the pore afflicted co^monalty, who commonly smart most for the obstinacy of the
mightier me^. But for any violence used by the king toward his brother, it is
so far from any color of truth, that even the better sort of their own writers
have suppressed that report, as a vain and mere forgery. For it well appears
by our own writers that this Earl died there of a natural disease, and his
body was brought to England and interred at Westminster with all solemnity
thereto belonging. The king wholly spent these 2. last years in establishing of
Balliol in the kingdom of Scotland because he was desirous to make all sure on
that side, whilst he followed his wars in France, whereon now he began to set
al his thoughts. At his departure out of Scotland somewhat before the nativity
of our Lord, Balliol withal his partakers bound themselves by an especial law,
that whenever, he, his heirs and successors kings of Eng. should make war,
either at home or abroad, they and their heirs should at their own charge, for
one whole year furnish him with 3. hundred horsemen and one thousand footmen
well appointed for service. Shortly after the kings return home, war was
proclaimed with France, and all things forthwith were in preparing for that
iorneye. The next year the war in Scotland proceeded with equal loss and
disadvantage on both sides. toward the end of the same year, the king sent
thither an army of some twenty thousand men, under the leading of the new
created Earls of Salisbury, Gloucester, and Derbie, and of as many Barrones,
Percy, Neuille, and Stafford. These besiedged the castle of Dumbar, but to
their small advantage and less credit. For having continewed the siedge about
twenty weeks; under the color of a truce, before it was distressed, they gave
it over, being more desirous to attend the king their master into France,
where there was more good to be done: Scotland then affording nothing but
hunger and blows, bear them of as they could. About the midst of June in
the year of our Lord 1338. England together with the Queen, the Prince of
Walls, and a great number of the Nobility that did attend them, passed over
into Flanders, and were joyfully entertained of the Duke of Brabant, and
others the Lords of the Empire his confederates, toward the attayning of the
crown of France, which he claimed as the next heir thereunto by Queen Isabel
his mother, Daughter to Philip surnamed the fair. This quarrel happned well
for Bruise, for (no doubt) if king Edward had a while longer pursued the
conquest of Scotland he had now easily brought the same under his
sovereignty. France would have offered him such conditions of peace, by reason
of his title thereunto, as that if he had been disposed, he might quietly have
enjoyed the Realm of Scotland both from Bruise and Balliol, and withal greater
possessions with in the French dominions, then the kings of England after him
should have happily been able to have held long, as the experience of the
times following plainly showed: in respect of which difficulty, I esteem the
realm of Scotland a more convenient and fit member of the Crown of England,
then the one half of France, how far soever exceeding the other in wealth
and magnificence. The French king now perceauing it was not king Edwards
meaning, to accept of peace, upon any reasonable conditions, and how much it
stood him upon to hinder his attemptes, thought it would be no small advantage
unto him, to keep his enemy occupied nearer home, and therefore as soon as
the King was arrived in Flanders, he sent five tall ships into Scotland,
furnished with men munition and armor, and conducted by as many experienced
Captains over them. These stood that nation in great steed. For by such aid,
as was at this time and shortly afterward sent thither out of France, in the
behalf of Bruise his party, they so much prevailed, as that within the space of
three years after (though not without some difficulty) they not only chased
Balliol, together with all the Englishmen out of Scotland, but also put King
Bruise into peacable possession thereof again, nine years after he had been
driven out of his kingdom by Balliol and his partakers the Englishmen. So as
King Edward in the mean time, got not so much on the other side of the sea, as
he lost even at his own doors at home. King David Bruise having thus beyond
all hope recovered his kingdom, slacked no time (while opportunity served) to
take revenge on the Englishmen for all the wrongs sustained by them. To which
end, within the first three years after his return, he made three iourneyes
into the land, doing what harm he could to the countries bordering upon
Scotland, but all was of no great reckning. The French King in the mean season
having received many shroud blows of the Englishmen, and his strong town of
Callice being now besiedged, thought with himself, that there was no better
way either happily to remove them, or at the least to lessen their number:
then by procureing the Scottish King (who rested wholly at his devotion) with
some mighty power to invade England, whereof he sent Ambassadors into
Scotland who easiely obtained that favor of King David. When all things were
prepared for so great an exploite, he entered the Realm with the whole power
of Scotland, hoping assuredly now in the Kings absence to atchiue some notable
victory, as well to the enriching of himself as to the advantage of his
confederate the French King. At his first entry he made many knights, whereby
to encorage them the more to show their valiancie, but amongst the rest for
his former good service he created William Douglas an Earl, whose Father was
slain at Halidone hill, as is aforesaid. The number of Noble men and Gentlemen
assembled at this time, by the confession of their own writers, were very
near two thousand; in the whole (as some write) threescore thousand. Within
ten days after their entry they approached Durham, committing whatsoever
stood in their way to the fury of fire and sword in most hostile manner. The
Queen of England, being then returned home, to repress the insolency of the
enemy, gathered together such forces as the Realm could then redily afford, to
the number of twelve hundred men of arms, three thousand Archers and some
seven thousand other, of whom a great part were Priests and Prelates, but
good talle trencher-men such as were not afraid of a cracked crown though they
had no hair to hide those hurtes withal. This army was ordered in this
manner. The first battle was lead by the Bishop of Durham, Gilbert de
Vmfree ville earl of Anegos; Henry Lord Percy, and the Lord Scroope. The
second by the Archbishop of York and the Lord Ralphe Neuille. The third by
the Bishop of Lincoln, John Lord Moubraie, and the Lord Thomas de Rooksbie.
The fourth and last was lead by Edward Balliol, (now of a king of Scotland,
become governor of Berwike) the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Ross.
Besides this the Lord Deain-court, Robert de Ogle and some other attended upon
the Queens person. On the the other side the first battle of the Scotts was
governed by Robert Steward the Son of Margery King David's Sister, that
succeeded him, and Patrike Dumbar Earl of March. The second by John Earl of
Murrey, and William Earl Douglas. In the third the King himself and his
Nobility were placed. Before the battle, the Queen of England sent an Harald
of arms to King David, requiring him to stay from further anoying the Realm,
till some reasonable order might be taken for the conclusion of a final peace
between the two nations: but he made light reckning of her request. In the
morning early before the fight, Douglas issued fourth with certain troops of
horsemen to discover the behavior of the Englishmen, and upon good occasion
offered to skirmish with them. But the Englishmen so behaved themselves as that
the Earl hardly escaped by flight with the loss of five hundred of his
company. The two armies being come within sight one of the other, David Graham
with a wing of five hundred horse, gave a full charge upon the skert of the
English Archers, hoping thereby to have distressed them. But he was so sharply
repulsed, as that loosing many of his troops, he had much ado to recover the
maine battle again. Not-with-standing these two foul foyles, they presumed
so much upon their advantage in number, that forthwith they fiercely rushed
upon the Englishmen. The fight begun about nine of the clock, and continued
till noone, at what time God gave the victory to the Englishmen. The Scottish
writers attribute the loss of this battle to the unadvised retraite of the
Earl of March, and Robert Steward; but where-so-euer the fault was, an
exceeding great number of them was slain. Of Noblemen the Earl of Murrey, the
Earl of Stratherne, the Constable, Marshall, Chamberlain, and Chancellor of
Scotland were the principal men. Together with King David (who fighting most
courageously, was sore wounded before he would yield himself) were taken
prisoners, the Earls of Douglas, Fife, Southerland, Wigton, and Menteith, This
battle was fought near Durham, at a place called Neuils-crosse, on the xvii.
day of October in the year 1346. English army following their good fortune,
forthwith passed into Scotland, took the Castles of Roxbrough and Hermitage,
and without resistance ouer-ran the countries of Anuandale, Galloway, Mers,
Tiuidale, and Ethrike forest, extending their Marches at that time, to
Cockburne, Pethe and (...) b^dge. King David was shortly, after (...) to
Calice, and presented to the King of England, then lying at the siedge thereof
who bestowed on Master Copland (that took him prisoner with the loss of two
of his teeth at a blow that the King gave him) five hundred pounds land by the
year of inheritance, The year following Balliol with the Earl of
Northumberland, made a road together into Lowthian and Clidsdaile, carrying
from thence into Galloway a great booty, where Balliol remained a long time
after. By reason of this great slaughter now of the Scotts, as also through an
out-ragious mortality, that followed the same by a general infection of the
Pestilence amongst them, they were not able of many years after to show
themselves again in the field. Nevertheless they ceased not in the
m^ane-time upon private quarrels, after their unchristian manner, to prosecute
one another even unto death: About this time King John of France, upon the
death of Philip his Father, did inherit together with his Crown, those
troubles which then accompanied the same who, to the end he might thereby
keep the King of England occupied at home, (for he was his overthwart
neighbor in France) sent certain hands of Frenchmen into Scotland, under the
leading of an expert Captain Sir Edgeny de G^^rntiers, of whom the Scottish
Nobility receiu^^ (as a present from the King their Master) forty thousand
Crowns of the Sun, to be imployde about the leuying and furnishing of some
preperation against England. This Gentleman prevailed so much with his fair
words and frank promises, as that amongst other favors, he obtained thus
much at their hands: that they would come to no agreement with England without
the allowance of his Master. Immediately here-vpon, while the Englishmen were
busily employed in France about the conquest thereof, the Scotts together with
the aid of the Frenchmen, made some light incursions with-in the English
Marches, somewhat to their advantage.

The same year, viz. 1355. Berwicke, and being come to the walls, before they
were discovered, they raised up Ladders in such silence, as that before day
they entered and took the Town, but not without the loss of diverse
principal men amongst them, namely, Thomas Vaus, Andrew ^cotte, John Gordon,
William Sienelere, Thomas Preston, and Alexander Mowbraye, Knights. Of the
English Army were also slain Alexander Ogle Captain of the Town, Thomas
^^rcie Brother to the Earl of Northumberland, and Edward Graye. But the
Castle was so well defended by those with in it, as that it did abide the
(...) of ^ing Edward to the succor th^^^bt at whose approach the Scotts
knowing themselves unable to withstand his puissance (...) the town walls,
set the houses on fire, and so b^ake up the siege, which had continued ten
weeks, making as much have home as they could. The King having taken order for
the repair of the town; passed on with his army to Roubrugh, whether Balliol
repairing, resigned over unto him, all his right, title, and interest unto the
crown of Scotland, for more assurance thereof, an instrument was drawn in
writing, signed, sealed, and delivered by him unto king Edward, hearing date
the five and twentieth day of January. This business being dispatched, the King
marches forward with his Army till he came to Halington, burning and
spoiling the country as he passed while he was thus busied by land, daily
expecting the arrival of his Navy, such a cruel tempest arose out of the
North, that many of his ships perished therewith, and (...) were dispersed in
such manner that they could not readily be brought again together. By this
occasion the King could not for want of victuals and other necessaries proceed
any further ^^ this time in his intended journey, who had purposed how to have
quieted that country for many years after. At his return he brought Balliol
with him into England, thinking that (...) ^^uld have been better appeased
thereby. He was no sooner departed out of Scotland, but immediately some busy
spirits began to raise up new troubles, chasing out such as king Edward had
left behind him in Galloway and Annandale. And yet more to despite him
withal, the two Dowglasses, Earl William, and the Lord Archibald, carrying
over with them some three thousand Scotts, joined with the French King against
the Englishmen on that side the sea: but they had better have tarryed at home,
for at the battle of Poytiers, the year following (wherein the French King
was taken prisoner by the most valiant champion Edward Prince of Wales) Andrew
Steward, Robert Gordone, Andrewe Haliburton and Andrew Vaus Knights, with
diverse other their countrymen were slain: the Earl escaped, but his cousine
Archibald was taken prisoner.

The year next following, viz. 1357. England and France, at the earnest
entreatie of the Scottish Queen, King Edwards sister, her husband was set at
liberty, and the kingdom of Scotland restored unto him, which now rested at
the disposition of king Edward, having good opportunity upon this advantage, to
have made himself if he had listed, absolute king over the whole Island. But I
cannot tell what he would have done if the Queen his Sister had dyed, during
her husbands captivity, as she did within ^ while after. King David gave for
his ransom an hundred thousand marks sterling and days were appointed for
the payment thereof. Also he couenanted to acomplish certain Castells bordering
upon England, that might prove bad Neighbors unto it, which was performed
accordingly. Moreover it seems by that which followed, that he had also
promised King Edward to make him his heir to the Crown of Scotland, being
now without hope of any issue of his body. For about seven years before his
death, he propounded such a question to his Nobility assembled for that
purpose, but the king found them so unwilling to harke^ unto it, that he
prosecuted the matter no further. But I am persuaded, if King Edward had not
conceived some such hope, he would not so lightly have laid of his hands, now
having the prey (as it were) in his paws. Much kindness passed between these
two Kings, while they lived together, for the space of twelve years after, the
remainder of King David's days. For such was the curtisie and friendly
behavior of Edward towa^ds the two captive Kings of France and Scotland, while
they remained together in England, as that thereby he won their love and favor
forever after, as appeared by their repair hither to visit the King and
Queen, and to recreate and solace themselves in their company.

And thus it came to pass, that their captivity here, turned more to their
own advantage, and the peaciable enjoying of their estats after the same, then
if it had never happened unto them. King David being dead without issue of his
body, Robert Steward his Sisters Son by the General consent of all the
estates was crowned King of Scotland, in the year of our Lord. 1370. Malcolm
Cammore in the Masculine line, which had continewed two hundred threescore and
eighteen years, and was transferred to an other ancient house of the Scottish
Nation, which in the beginning of the reign of this King Malcolm, took the
surname Steward on them, upon the office which their auncestour their bare, as
before I have touched, and this family has ever since borne the Crown of
Scotland, even unto this day. The league, which was before made with his Uncle
the deceased King, was now renewed for fourteen years.

But immediately upon the Coronation of King Richard the second, Son to that
valiant Prince surnamed Black; both the Father and grandfather being dead,
in the year of our Lord 1377. Robert was so earnestly labored by Ambassadors
out of France, to make war upon England (thereby to purchase unto King
Charles their Master the more quietness at home) that forthwith preparation
was made to put his (...) in execution. And first vn^^^^ color ascending
revenge on the English borderers, for the death of a servant of George Earl of
Dumbar^^, that by occasion of some drunken fraye the year before, was slain
at Roxbrugh fair: the said Earl, together with his bro^her the Earl of
Murrey, gathering a power, came secretly to the town the next Fayre-day, slew
all the Englishmen they found thereat, carried away their goods, and set the
town on fire: (...) his outrageous demeanor of these Scotts, Henry Percie
Earl of Northumberland, entered into Scotland with ten thousand men, and took
sufficient revenge on the Earl of March, and others the chief authors of the
former fact. Amongst the rest, Sir John Gordon took himself much injured by
this invasion, who therefore making a road into England, got together a great
booty. In his return home-ward, he was set upon by the Englishmen, but after
a long fight, they were finally discomfited, and their Captain Sir John
Lylborne, with his brother and diverse other were taken prison^^s, and carried
into Scotland. Sir John Gordon was so encouraged here-with, as that shortly
after, he together with Sir Alexander Ramsey, and forty other chosen men,
fittest to enterprise such a difficulty, a^out the latter end of November, in
the dea^ ^^^^e of the night, being come to Berwicke ^^d ^auing mounted the
walls, slew the watchmen while they were sleeping, and thereby became Masters
of the Castle, Sir Robert Boyntone Constable thereof, and such as were with
him being ouer-few upon that disadvantage, to repulse the enemy, were all
slain in their own defense. Not-with-standing they permitted his wife,
children, and some few of their servants to depart, on condition that within
three weeks after, they should either send for their ransom three thousand
Marks, or else yield their bodies again. The next morning the Scotts issuing
out of the Castle, before it was known what was happened, brought with them
into it a drove of Cattle which were pasturing there-about. The Earl of
Northumberland being advertised hereof, hasted thither, with four hundred men
well appointed, by whom the Castle was again recovered by force within two
hours, nine days after the taking of the same. The Scotts were all slain by
the assailiants, either in the defense of the Castle or of their persons after
they were entered, Alexander Ramsey only excepted, whom they reserved, by his
liberty to redeem the ransom promised before to the Scotts, for the wife
and children of Captain Boyntone. These things thus passed in the year 1378.
England all the summer following, as that a great part of those countries lay
well near desolate, not-with-standing the Scotts ceased not daily to make
roades into the land, catching up and carrying away what-so-euer (...) into
their greedy claws; so as the very herds of swine (wherewith before they
would never deal) were now accounted a good booty. Further the Earl Dowglasse
with some twenty thousand Scots, entered into Penner on the Fair day, sacked
the town, and then set it on fire, but the people saved themselves by running
away. The Scots paid very dear for those commodities. For therewith all they
carried home with them an infection of the plague, whereof in the two years
next following so great a number died (being spread well nere over the whole
land) as the like was never before known in Scotland. In further revenge of
this outrage committed at Penner, the Englishmen shortly after entered into
Scotland over Sufway, putting all to the sword that made resistance, and having
gotten a great booty together, in t^eir return they lodged in a strait valley
near to the confines of England, which advantage being espied by the Scots
that pursued them, they suddenly in the night fell upon them, slew a great
number, and put the rest to flight, and so recovered their goods again while
in the mean season the war continued very hotely by land and sea, between
England and France, John Duke of Lancaster (the kings Uncle) labored a peace
with the Scots, which was concluded to endure three ye^^es. The truce replied,
Archibald Dowlasse, together with the Earls Dowglasse and Dunbar,
understanding that the Castle of Lochemaben was unprovided of men and
victuals, necessary for the defense thereof, so sharply assailed the same, as
that the Captain thereof Sir William Featherstone, having in the mean ^^^e
received no aid out of England, as he expected, upon knowledge given to the
wardens of the English Marches, in what state it stood, at the end of eight
days (according to composition) he surrendered the Castle into their
possession, which incontinently was cast down flatt to the ground. Hereupon
the Baron of Graystock, with a new supply of men and victuals, was appointed to
relieve the Castle of Roxbrough, least it should be taken unprovided as the
former. But the Earl of March having gotten knowledge thereof, lay privily in
wait for the Englishmen, took the Baron prisoner, and carried him with his
charge to Dunbar. The Scots about this time took also the Castle of Warke, and
set it on fire. King Richard being not a little discontented with this their
fortunate proceedings, sent the Duke of Lancaster with a great power into
Scotland, having now appeased his troubles at home, raised by the seditious
rebels of Northfolke and other places, and also taken truce with France. But
the army staid so long where they were encamped within 3. miles of Edenbrugh,
that when they came thither, they found nothing but bare walls, whereat the
common soldiors not a little repined. The Scots had carried their goods to the
woods and mountains, and such places of security, while the Englishmen in the
mean time were greeuouslie afflicted with vehement cold weather, and rain,
that extraordinarily chanced, at that season (being about the tenth of April)
and the more, because before their coming to Edenbrough they had encamped
themselves for their better safety, in a low marish ground, which killed
above 500. of their horses for service, and bred diseases amongst the
soldiers. Neither had the English Navy any better success at this time, for
the Mariners thorough want of good government, ouer-boldly aduenturing to go
on land, for the desire of pillage and spoil, were in the end encountered by
the Scotts, and so hotely pursued, as that a great number of them were slain,
and the rest hardly escaped to their ships. The English Army was no sooner
out of Scotland, but that the Earl Dowglasse by his industry and courage,
presently recovered all the places of strength in Tiuidale, out of the
possession of the Englishmen, which till then they had hold ever since the
battle besides Dutham. All this summer season was spent with continual
roades, by the one nation and the other, to the small advantage of either. In
the mean time messengers were sent to advertise the Scotts of an abstinence
of war for a season, between the three nations, France, England, and
Scotland, which was observed on all sides. The truce ended, the Scots took by
force the castle of Burwicke. But the Earl of Northumberland (to whom the
keepeing thereof was committed, was thereby so much touched in credit, that
presently gathering the power of those parts, he so egarly assailed the
^^^ttes within it, as that they were constrained to come to composition with
the Earl, and so for two thousand marks the Castle was sur^endred and they
departed. The year next following viz. 1385. Monsieur de vian Earl of
Valentinois admiral of the fleet, was sent by the French King into Scotland,
with two hundred and forty ships furnished with men, munition, and all things
necessary pertaining to war, the^ were some two thousand footmen, an hundred
lances, and two hundred crosbowes, and pay for them for six months. Amongst
other presents which the French king sent to the Noblemen of Scotland, he
bestowed on king Robert forty complete a^moures to be disposed at his
pleasure.

The Scotts being thus strengthened, prepared forthwith to invade England. The
whole army consisted of fifty thousand men, over whom the Earl of Fife Son
to king Robert, was made General, being accompained with the Earls Douglas
and March, and diverse other of the Scottish Nobility. At their first entry
they took the Castells of Warke; Fourd and Corn^^ll; and over ran the Country,
lieing between Berwike and (...) In the mean time king R^chard had sent
before him the Duke of Lancaster with a convenient power, to restrain them
from doing further harm, who hearing of the approach of the Englishmen
withdrow themselves homeward. The King in the mean time making all the have,
that possibly he could after the Duke, entered together into Scotland passing
through the countries of Mers and Lothian they burned and spoiled all the
towns, villages and buildings that stood in their way as well religious as
other.

At his coming to Edenbrugh finding the town empty, he soothe houses on
fire, which together with the Church of Saint Gyles were consumed to ashes. But
at the ernest request of the Duke of Lan^^ster Holi-roode house was preserved
for the great favor the Duke had found there during the late commotion in
England. King Richard having remained about Edenbrugh five days, returned
without proffer of battle or any encounter to speak of. Monsieur de vian was
very ernest with the Scottish Lords to have adventured a battle, but being
carried to the top of ^o hill, from whence he might discover the order and
puissance of the English army, he changed his mind.

Hereupon they resolved to invade England on an other quarter, while the
Englishmen ^^oke there pleasure in the ^^pa^tes passing ^^^^^fore over the
mountayns they entered into Cumber^^^d, assaulted the City of Carliel, but
finding themselves unable to prevail there they turned home-wardes, feareing
least they should have been encountered with the English army, which had fallen
out accordingly, if the King would have been advised by the Duke his uncle.

But the Earl of Oxford (who stood more in the Kings grace) had put such a
ielosie into his head, of the Dukes meaning therein toward him, as that he was
drawn from liking of that course, and so took his way home-ward. The Scotts
having on the other side done what harm they could, returned likewise into
Scotland, but because the same was not answerable to the damage they received,
King Robert was so much offended with the Frenchmen (at whose hands he
exspected greater matters) as that he sent them home lighter laden then they
came, by the wayght of all that was worth the taking from them, in part of
recompense for the losses sustained in this journey, which was vnder^aken at
their earnest suit and entrety.

Thus they parted not in so good terms as they were entertained with all at
there arrival into Scotland. The Scottish writers attibute the cause of these
iarres and discontentments amongst them, to the lascivious and imperious
demeanor of the Frenchmen according to their usual manner, where-so-euer they
serve out of their own country, whereof the common people especially
complained, more then of any injury offered them by their professed enemies
the Englishmen. The Scotts within two years after, understanding what
troubles were arising in England, thought it a fit time wherein to be
revenged for the damages lately sustained. Wherefore about the beginning of
August, there assembled at Iedworth to the number of between thirty and forty
thousand. Here they understood by an English espyall whom they took, that the
Earl of Northumberland, intended to invade Scotland on the one side as they
did the like here on the other. Therefore having a sufficient number to make two
armies, they divided th^^selues. The two younger brothers (the Scottish Kings
sons,) with the one part, directed their course by the West marches into
Cumberland ^^^^ing as far as Durham* At length both these armies (having in
the mean time done what harm they could) met together about ten miles from
New-castell, and passing thither they besiedged that town. But the Earl of
Northumberland (who then commanded all those countries) having had knowledge
before of their purpose, had sent thither his two sons, the Lord N^^^^
(surnamed Hotespurre for his egar manner of riding) and his brother Ralphe, two
(...) ^orward Gentlemen. These with the forces they carried with them, (...)
those they found there so manfully defended the town, as that the Scotts
(being ten thousand choice men, taken out of the whole army to give the
assault) were beaten back, not without loss of many of their men. Amongst
other feats of ^rmes done at this assault (for it deserved not the ^ime of a
seidge) it fell out, that as the Englishmen defended the barriers without the
gate, the Dowglasse chanced to be matched hand to hand with the Lord Henry,
and by force pulled his staff from him, whereupon in his return, hoisting it
up on high, he cried out that he would carry the same for his glory into
Scotland, with which conquest being (as it seemed) for the time satisfied, the
next day the whole army departed home-wardes as far as Otterbourne about
eight miles from New Castle. The two Percies the next morning with more courage
then discretion (being as yet over few to encounter the enemy) issued out of
the town with such speed, as that they were upon the Scotts before they were
departed from their lodgings: nevertheless upon some knowledge given them of
the approach of the Englishmen, they were ready to receive the^ at all assaies.
The fight continued very hot on both sides for the space of so much of the
day, as remained after their meeting, and for the most part of the night
following by moone-shine. The Englismen caused the Scotts to give ground and
withal won their standard. This being perceived, Patrike Hepbourne, together
with his Son and such forces as were under his charge from out of the one
side, and the doughtie Douglas from another quarter with his men, so proudly
assailed the Englishmen, as being not able to make resistance they were forced
in the end to yield, or save themselves by flight.

This battle was fought in the year 1388. Englishmen slain (as Hector
Boethius reports) were five hundred, not without some slaughter also of the
Scotts, amongst whom the Earl Douglas was of principal account, having
received many mortal wounds. The two Percies were taken prisoners in fight,
with some other of good reckoning. But many more were taken in their flight,
for the Scotts pursued them so egarlie in the chase, as that two hundred of
themselves aduenturing over far, were taken prisoners by the Englishmen.

But Buchanan does otherwise report this journey, Viz. That after the Scotts
had divided themselves into two companies they met not again, till after the
battle of Otterbourne, also that the Earl Douglas, both at the same
battle, and also before at the assault of New-castell, had not in his army
above three thousand men of all sorts, whereas the two Percies brought with
them to Otterbourne ten thousand choice men.

But herein he does not only disagree from the other Scottish writers, but
also from himself. For (says he) when the two armies parted, it was agreed
upon amongst them, that neither of them should attempt to encounter the
Englishmen, until both the armies were met again, each of them consisting (as
some report) of fifteen thousand men a piece. And therefore it is most unlikely
that Douglas contrary to his former appointment, and against al sense would
adventure to assault Newcastell with so few as he speaks of, or willingly
abide the coming of the Percies, against the liking of the greater number of
his own people (as he reports). It is therefore more probable that when the
two Scottish armies were met again, according to their appointment, the Earl
Douglas (to whose only direction the rest referred themselves) making choice
of the most able men amongst them, sent the residewe homewards, with such
spoil as they had gotten in this journey, under the conduct of the Earl of
Fife and his brother, the rather because the King their Father was neither
acquainted with this preparation into England (as being more inclined to peace
then to war) neither knew he that his Sons were amongst them. Amongst
others that had the Englishmen in chase after this last conflict, it fell out
that James Lindsey a Scot, having the advantage of weapon and armor, took
Matthew Redman (the Governor of Berwike) prisoner, who was presently
dismissed upon his oath, that within twenty days after he would yield him
self prisoner again unto him. James Lindsey immediately returned toward
his company, which (as he took it) he had soon after in sight. But when he
was come so near, that it auayled not to retire, he found them to be a band
of Englishmen attending the Bishop of Durham. For the Bishop being come to
New Castle to join with the Percies, according to a former appointment,
understanding that they were the same day gone to seek the enemy, made but
small have after them, supposing (by reason of their weak attendance) that
they would attempt nothing before his coming to their succor the next
morning, but in their passage that night toward Otterburne, the Bishop
understood by those that had escaped by flight, that the Englishmen had
already fought with the Scotts, and were discomfeited, whereupon returning
back again to the town, he incountred Lindesey thus alone. When Captain
Redman had espied his late acquaintance James Lindsey brought to New-castell as
a captive, with all curtisie he intertayned him, and upon even hands the one
redeemed the others liberty. In like manner upon the return of of the Scotts
homewards, the younger brother of the Percies (because by reason of his wounds
he was not able to take so great iorneyes) obtained liberty to return to
Newcastell for his speedier recovery promising; that when he should be
better able to travel, he would at any time being called thereto, yield his
body again. Upon the same condition (says Buchanane) were six hundred more
at that time set at liberty to go whether they would. This custom has been
still continewed amongst the borderers of either Nation, wherein if any man
brake his faithful promise, the party victorer at the next day of truce
signifies the others default, which is reputed so great a disgrace unto his
Captain, as that his own alliance and friends will for the same cast him off
for ever.

The next year, while the commissioners of the three Nations, England France
and Scotland were busied about a treaty of a permanent peace: the Scotts were
so well fleshed with their booty gotten the last journey, as that they entered
again into Northumberland, burning and spoileing that Country on every side.
Against th^se was the Lord Thomas Mowbraie Earl of Notingham sent with five
hundred spears, but he prevailed little or nothing against them.

The Scottish Nobility tasted such sweetness in these two last roades into
England as that they were unwilling, (though their king was not against it) to
yield consent to any conclusion of peace, wishing nothing more then the
continewance of war between England and France because they fared the better
by it, but the matter was so ernestly labored by the Frenchmen, that with much
ado they accepted of peace, which was again renewed after the death of king
Robert of Scotland the year following, Viz. 1390. Ric^^^d was deposed, by his
unkind cousine Henry Plantagenet, Son to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster,
in the year of our Lord 1399.

But immediately after the coronation of king Henry the fourth, while Sir
Thomas Gray, Captain of Warke Castle, was at the Parliament, certain Scotts
assaulted and took it by force, but either dispayring to keep it, or not
dareing to auowe what they had done, (the truce still continewing) they leaft
it defaced and ruinated.

Howsoever they excused this their rough beginning, it seemed by that which
followed, that they had no great respect to the observance of peace, which had
hitherto continewed unviolated, for the term of ten years, but was shortly
after broken by them again, upon this occasion.

George of Dumbar Earl of the Marches of Scotland had betrothed his Daughter
to the King his Masters Son and heir, the Father not only consenting
thereunto, but also receiving a good part of the marriage money. This King was
named John, but because the former two kings of England and France (so called)
had such bad success, he took upon him the name of Robert.

The Earl Douglas taking indignation, that any other of that Nation, should
be herein preferred before him, and complaining that the consent of the States
was to much neglected, in not being made acquainted with a matter of that
importance, as appertayned thereunto: offered a Daughter of his own with a
greater portion. Hereof king Robert accepted, and forthwith made up the
marriage. Dumbar complaining of this wrong, demanded the money his king had
received, but he could not receive so much as a kind answer of him.

This double injury done him by the Douglas, both the loss of his money and
(which he esteemed far more) of the kings favor, did not a little trouble
him. Therefore having no other means to be hereof revenged, he leaft both
Court and Country, and repayring into England complained himself unto Henry
the Earl of Northumberland of whom he hoped to be relieved. In the mean
time, the Earl Douglas seized on the Castle of Dunbar in the King his
Masters name, which was committed to the custody of Robert Matland, at the
Earl of March his departure into England. Northumberland advised him to
return into Scotland, and to make trial if happily some other course might
prevail with his King, for the saluing of these his discontentments. But
coming to Dunbar, the Earl Douglas having fortified the Castle, would not
admit him entrance, answering that he kept it to the use of the King, who had
sent him thither to that end. The other Earl, seeing his greatest enemy so
much to triumph over him, could not brook it, but without making further
means to the King, at whose hands he ought especially to have fought for
remedy, he together with his wife, children, and allies, returned again into
England, informing the Earl of Northumberland of all the displeasures done
unto him by his adversary the Douglas, and withal desired him (seeing he could
not otherwise prevail) to aid him in the recovery of his possessions by
force, sithence by force they were kept against him. Hereupon followed some
stirs by the rising of the borderers on both sides, who joining then forces
together, did the Douglas all the mischief they could. King Robert not a
little moved here-with, did write to king Henry, that unless he would deliver
into his hands the fugitive Earl, he would take it for a breach of the truce,
and proceed against him accordingly. What answer soever king Henry made
hereunto, it deserved not so bitter a reprehension, as wher-with Buchanan does
check him. Impudency is a foul fault in a private man, much more in a Prince.
I hold him of a very froward temper, that in his writings cannot afford a King
his good words, although they show sometimes dislike of their actions. King
Robert upon the return of his messenger, caused open war to be proclaimed,
and Sir William Logon a Scottish Knight was forthwith sent to the Sea, of
purpose to set on the English fleet, that was then fishing on the coast of
Scotland about Aberden. But he was incountred with certain ships of Lin, and
by them taken prisoner. The Fishermen understanding what was intended against
them, entering into some of the Isles of Orkney, carried away with them;
whatsoever was worth their labor, and set the rest on fire. King Henry
perceiving what was to be looked for out of Scotland, thought it good in the
beginning either to draw the Scots to peace, or to resist their malice, before
further mischief should ensue thereof. And therefore having a great army, he
therewith entered into Scotland about the midst of August, being the eleventh
month from his coronation. From Hadington he passed to Leeth, using much
clemency in all places where he came, especially to the houses of religion.
Whereupon diverse Castles and Houlds willingly submitted themselves unto him.
Coming to Edenbrough, he besiedged the Castle. Hither Robert Duke of Albanie
governor of Scotland under the King his brother, (who by reason of his
impotencie could not travel in his person) sent an Harald of Arms unto king
Henry, promising to give him battle within six days at the furthest, if he
would stay so long. The King accepting the offer, gave the messenger for his
good news a chain of gold, and a Satin gown at his departure. But neither
at the end of six or sixteen days heard he any more of the Governors
coming. The Scottish writers attribute this dishonorable dealing to the Dukes
ambition, whom it would not have troubled, though the Castle had been taken,
together with the young Prince of Scotland in the same, that thereby he might
have been in so much the more hope of the crown himself, after which (it
was thought) he greatly thirsted. But on the other side, they highly extol the
singular moderation of King Henry, who by this his gentle invasion seemed
rather desirous to allure them to peace, then to afflict them with the
calamities always accompaning war. Winter approaching, the King brake up the
siedge, and returned home without any show of resistance, greatly to the
Governors reproach: neither showing himself desirous of war, nor willing
to offer conditions of peace, how apparent tokens soever was showed by king
Henry of his readiness to have accepted thereof. After some little harm done,
the next Summer by the borderers on both sides, Patrike Hepburne with some
greater power, entered further into England: and having gotten a good booty,
and therwithall returning homewards, he was ouer-taken by the Englishmen at
Nesbet in the Meirs, where their Captain, together with the greater number of
his people, well near the very flower of all the Lothian youth, were beaten
down and slain in fight. Amongst those that were taken prisoners, John and
William Cockburne, Robert Lawder, John and Thomas Haliburton, were the men of
best account. This ouer-throw was given the Scotts on the xxii. day of June,
in the year 1401. Archibald Douglas, son to the other Douglas, that was the
great enemy to the Earl of March, his Countryman, who deceased the year
before, being much moved with this ouer-throw, made great preparation against
the next Summer, to lead an army into England, therewith to take revenge for
the death of so many his good friends and contrymen. But his success was no
better then theirs. For when his army had done all the harm it could within
the realm, as far as Newcastle, and was returning homewards with an
exceeding great prey, Henry (surnamed Hotespurre) that was taken prisoner at
the battle of Otterburne, pursuing them with a power of the Northern men, and
having overtaken them, saluted there maine battle with such a forcible flight
of arrows, that the same being much beaten and broken therewith, gave way to
the Englishmen rushing in upon it, and thereby gave them an overthrow, with
very little loss on their own party. Amongst the Scotts that were slain,
Sir John Swintone, Sir Alexander Gordon, Sir John Leuestone, Sir Alexander
Ramsey, and some twenty knights more, were of special note. Besides the Earl
Douglas general of this army (who in fight lost one of his eyes) there were
taken prisoners the Earl of Fife, the governors Son, Thomas and George,
Earls of Murrcy and Angius, and five hundred more of meaner degree. This
battle was fought at Homildon hill in Northumberland, on the seventh of May;
in the year 1402. Scotts received such a blow, as for many years before the
like had not happened. For hereat were slain (one and other) not so few as ten
thousand of them as our Cronicles report. The Lord Percie following his good
fortune, forthwith entered into Tyuidale wasting the Country on every side, and
having laid siedge to the Castle of Cockla^is, Sir John Grenley (the keeper
thereof) couenanted with him to surrender it within three months, if the
siedge were not removed, but by reason his men were in the mean time sent
for, to follow the King into Wales, they could not tarry out the prefixed
time. But this Noble race of the Percies, who in the beginning of this Kings
reign were his best friends, became now his greatest adversaries, especially
for two causes. First they took it in evil part, that the King demanded such
prisoners as were lately before taken at Nesbet and Homildon. For they had
delivered none into his hands, save only Mordake Earl of Fife, the Duke of
Albaines Son, accounting all the rest their peculiar prisoners. The other
cause, and the more offensive, was the imprisonment of Edward Mortimer Earl of
the English Marches, their nearest Cousin, whom (as they reported) Owen
Glendar of Wailes, kept in filthy prison, laden with many irons, only
because he continewed faithful to King Richard his Master.

While King Henry was therefore preparing an army, wherewith to pass again
into Wales (for he had been lately there before) Thomas Percie Earl of
Worcester, gave secret intelligence thereof to his brother the Earl of
Northumberland, who together with his Son the Lord Henry, and the Earl
Douglas his prisoner, with such aid as by his means, they could get out of
Scotland, gathered a power of some fourteen thousand chosen men, of whom the
greater number were Cheshire men, and Welshmen, that were conducted by the
Earl of Worcester, and the Lord Henry: the Scotishmen by Douglas. The Earl of
Northumberland with his retinue stayed in the North, while the rest marched
toward Shrewsburie, purposing to have taken that town. But the king (by the
continual calling on of the Scottish Earl of March, who took his part) made
such speed, as that approaching the rebels sooner then they looked, that
enterprise was prevented. When the two armies were met, and every man
prepared to fight, the King offered them pardon upon any reasonable conditions.
But by the persuasion of the Earl of Worcester, (who from the beginning was
the chief worker of all this mischief) there was no way but to try it out by
dint of sword. The Scotts (as some write) had the leading of the fore-ward on
the Percies side, and intending to be revenged on the Englishmen, by the help
of Englishmen, they so fiercely assailed the Kings party, as that disordering
their ranckes, they made them give back.

But amongst the rest, the Earl Douglas showed himself that day a most
valiant man of Arms, for still aiming at the fairest mark, he struck down
three that were apparrelled like the King, (because he would not be known
from the rest) but whether he light on him at all or not, he bestowed on Sir
Walter Blunt (one of that coat (such a deadly blow, that he never arose
again. After the fight had continued three long hours with doubtful victory
on either side, in the end the rebels were vanquished and put to flight. The
Earl Douglas falling upon the cragge of a steep mountain; brake one of his
genitalls, and was taken, whom the King freely forgave, and set at liberty for
his valiancie and notable courage.

This battle was fought on Mary Magdalines evening, in the year 1403.
Northumberland found such favor, as that he was pardoned, and restored to all
his possessions, neuer-the-lesse within a year after he entered into a new
conspiracy, but when he heard the fame was discovered, and some of his
confederates executed, he together with the Lord Bardolfe fled into
Scotland, where they were entertained of David Lord Flemming: in requital of
whose kindness he gave up the town of Berwicke (which was then in his
custody) unto the use of the Scottish King. But when the Scots understood that
King Henry approached with his army, they fired the town, and so left it:
while these English Lords remained in Scotland, the king of England practiced
with some of the Scottish Nobility to apprehend them. But the Lord Flemming
giving them notice hereof, they both fled into Wales to Owi^ Glendouer a
great enemy to king Henry. Such of the Lords of Scotland as had plotted the
delivery of those fugitive Lords, having gotten knowledge that they escaped
their hands by means of the Lord Flemming, were therewith so much displeased
as that it cost him his life.

This fact sowed great discention amongst themselves, in such sort as one knew
not how to trust another. Wherefore to avoid further mischief that was like
to have followed thereof, it was thought good to sue for a truce between the
two Nations (which was effected,) and the same to endure for one whole year.
King Robert of Scotland, being taught before by his brothers disloyalty, that
there was small trust to be reposed in his own subjects, the rather because
they were so distrustful one of another, took order for the conuoye of his
other son (being a child not above nine years old) unto King Charles of
France, to receive good education there.

But it fortuned, that in his passage the Ship was met with-all by certain
Englishmen at Fl^mbrough-head in Holdernesse, about the latter end of March,
who thinking it neither fit nor convenient to suffer the same to pass any
further, without making the King acquainted therewith, the young Prince with
his train were forthwith conuaied to the Court then at Windesoure. The Child
being brought to the Kings presence, presented unto him a letter which the
King his Father had given him, to the end that if by chance he should be either
taken at sea, or forced by tempest to take land on the coast of England, he
might thereby find the more favor with the King. The tenure of which letter I
have here inserted, as I find it in the history of Scotland written by
Hollinshead.

Robert King of Scotts
to Henry King of England greeting.
Thy great magnificence humility and justice are right present with us, by the
governance of thy last army in Scotland, howbeit sic things had been
uncertain to us before: for though thou seemed as an enemy, with most awefull
incursions in our Realm: Yet we found many humilities and pleasires than
damages by thy coming to our subdittes. Specially to yame that receyuit thy
Nobly Father, the Duke of Longcastell, in the time of his exile in Scotland.
We may not ceys yairfore while we are in life but aye luys and loif the as
may Noble and Worthy Prince to ioys thy Realm. For yocht Realms and
Nations contend amang themselves for conquestes of glory and lands, it na
occasion is amang us to invade athir Realms or lieges with injuries, bot ever
to contend amang our selves, quhay sall persew other with may humanity and
kindness. As to us we will meis all occasion of battle quhare any occurres
at thy pleasure. Forther because we have na less solicitude in preserving
our Children fra certain deidlie enemies, than had sometime thy Noble Father,
we ar constreined to seek support at uncouth Princes hands. Howbeit, the
invasion of enemies is sa great, that small defense occurres against yame,
without they be preserved by amity of Nobill men. For the world is sa full of
peruersit malice, that na cruelty nor offense may be deuisit in erd, bot the
same may be wrocht be motion of gold and silver. Herefore, because we knawe
thy hienesse full of money nobill virtues, with sic pyssaunce and riches, that
na Prince in our days may be compard thairto, we desire thy humanity and
support at this time. We traist it is not unknown to thy Majesty, how our
eldest Son David is slain miserably inprison by our brother the Duke of
Albaine, quhome we chesit to be Governor (quhan we were fallen in decrepit
age) to our subditts, and Realm, beseek and thy hyenesse thairfore to be sa
favorable, that this bearer James our second and allnerly Son may have targe
to life under thy faith and iustie, to be some memory of our posterity, know
and the unstable condition of man's life sa suddenly altered, now fluris^^d and
sodenlie falling to utter consumption, for their belief well, quhan Kings and
Princes hes na other beild bot in their awin folks, their Empire is caduke and
fragil. For the mind of common pepill ar ever flowaund and mair inconstant
than wind. it quhen Princes ar roborate be amity of other uncouth Kings their
brethir and Nieghbours, na adversity may occur to eiect thaim fra their
dignity royal. Forthire gif thy hienesse think nocht expedient (as God
forbeid) to obtemper to their our desiers. it we request ane thing quhilk was
ratifiet in our last trewes and condition of peace, that the supplication made
be any of the two kings of England and Scotland, sall stand in manner of safe
conduct to the bearer. And thus we desire to be obseruit to this our allnerly
Son. And the gracious God conserve the may Noble Prince.


The Scottish writers report, that when King Robert had knowledge of the stay
of his Son in England in the nature of a prisoner, he took the matter so
grievously, that being an aged sickly man, and of long time oppressed with
melancholy, he died within three days after.

There is some difference amongst the writers concerning the time when these
things chanced. Harding places these occurre^ts in the year 1408. Buchanan
charge king Henry to have dealt injuriously, in detayning the young Prince,
not only without respect had to the King his Fathers request, but also while
the truce yet continewed between the two Nations, which (as he says) was
lately taken for eight years. But I do not see how that can be proved, for in
the English Chronicles I find no truce agreed upon since the battle of
Homildon but once, and that but for one year, in the seventh year of King
Henry's reign. Whereas it is manifest enough, that above a year before this,
the Earl of Northumberland and the Lord Bardolfe, after they had bin in Wales,
Flaunders and France, to have purchased aid against King Henry, were returned
into Scotland, and now not above six or seven weeks before the arrival of
the young Prince in England were entered into the Realm with a power of Scotts,
and coming into Yorkshire, were incountred and overthrown by Sir Thomas
Rooksbie then Sheriff of the Shire, on the nineteenth day of February in the
year 1407. Bardolfe sore wounded, as being taken, he died thereof shortly
after. Hereby it appears, that either there was no truce at al at this time,
or else the Scotts made small account thereof; taking part with the enemies of
the land against their natural King, within his own kingdom. Howsoever the
Sons captivity did for the present trouble the sickly old King his Father.
The Scotts have had no cause sin to be much offended thereat. For (as it is
confessed by themselves) king Henry took so great care for his education, in
all manner of discipline fit for his calling, as that Realm had never before a
Prince furnished with more excellent qualities. No doubt king Henry hereby
sought in kindness to bind him and that Nation to a perpetual acknowledgment
of his singular love and favor toward the one and the other. But as the
sequel showed, the same was little or nothing regarded afterward. The death
of king Robert made no alteration in the state of government in Scotland, with
him died only the title of king; for the other Robert his brother, the Duke of
Albaine in manner as before, so still he inioyed the sovereign command over
that Nation. About this time, or not long before Sir Robert Vnfreuille high
admiral of England burnt the town of Peples on the market day, causing his
men to make so good penie-worthes of the clothes they got there, as that
thereupon the Scotts called him Robin mend market. In the mean season the
Castle of Iedworth (which the Englishmen had held ever since the battle at
Durham (was taken by Tyuidale men and thrown down to the ground. Shortly
after the Earl of March (who before at a Parliament was recommended by the
commons of England, to the kings gracious consideration over his due demerites,
for his good service done in the Realm) returned into Scotland, and was
restored to his former dignity and possessions there. The Scotts thought
themselves not sufficiently revenged for the markets, that Sir Robert
Vmfreuille lately made of their goods in England, and therefore in the year
following, Patrike Dumbar, second Son to the Earl of March with an hundred
men well appointed for the purpose, came earelie one morning, somewhat before
day, to Fast Castle, and entering into the same took the Captain thereof
prisoner, who by daily out-roades greatly indamaged the Country next
adjoining. About the same time Gawin Dumbar an other Son of the said Earl,
together with William Douglas, brake down the bridge of Roxbrughe, and set the
town on fire, but durst not attempt the taking of the Castle. Sir Robert
Vmfreuille having by this time uttered all his merchandice by the measure of
his men's long-bowes, for the worth of so many yardes, thought it now high time
to make a new adventure, and therefore in the year 1410. Forth with ten
talle ships of war, where lying for the space of a fort-night together, he
sometimes landed on the one side, and sometimes on the other, carrying still
with him many good booties, not-with-standing that the Governor and the Earl
Douglas were both ready to resist him. He burned the Galliot of Scotland (a
Ship of greatest account) with many other smaller vessels lying then at
the Blackness over against Leeth. At his return into England he brought with
him fourteen good ships with many commodities, as clothes both woollen and
linen, pitch, tar, woad, flower meal, wheat and rye, making as good
pennie-worthes thereof as he did before, as long as his storehouse had any
thing leaft in it. But not satisfied here-with, he together with his Nephewe
young Gilbert Vmfreuille Earl of Angius (but more commonly called Lord of
Kin) entered the same year once again into Scotland by land and spoiled the
greater part of Tyuidale.

Thus it appears that at this time there was no peace between the two
Nations, or else it was little respected on both sides. For many years after
there was little doing beetweene them. But now approached the end of this
Noble Prince who deceasing in the fourth-teenth year of his reign, in the
year of our Lord 1412. Henry, Prince of Wailles, that was no less inheritour
to his heroycall virtues then to the same. In the second year of his reign it
was propounded in Parliament, whether it were more meet to begin with the
conquest of France (whereunto he pretended a just title) or first to reduce
Scotland to their former obedience, for it was resolved that the one or other
should forthwith be taken in hand. After long debate and consultation upon
this point, it was concluded that the war should be commenced against the
mightier enemy: for if France were once subdued, the Scotts were easily
tamed, so that now they were at good leisure either to be lookers on, or
actors on which side it pleased them. Nevertheless whether it were that their
Governor would not willingly incur King Henry's displeasure, fearing least if
he had stirred, he would have thrust him out of place, by sending the young
King home, or whether that nation doubted, that by that occasion the king would
have been provoked to set in foot for himself, under color of the defense
of the your Prince his title, or else whatsoever it was that moved them
thereunto, the Scotts made no great ado during his reign, though they were
yet once again provoked by Vmfreuille, who being put in trust, at the Kings
passage over into France, to guard the frontiers on that side, fought with them
at Gedering, with three hundred Archers, and seven score men of arms, where
after long fight, he slew above three score of them, and took three hundred
prisonere in chase, which was continued twelve miles, and then returned to
Roxbrough Castle, whereof he was Captain. This conflict was on Mary
Magdalines day, in the year 1414. Scotts made some show of a purpose they
had, to perform some great exploit, but upon the approach of the English
army, they withdrew themselves homeward without doing any great hurt. But
although they ceased from further annoyance here, yet being entertained by the
Dolphine in France, they opposed themselves there against the Englishmen. The
Scottish writers report, that seven thousand of them passed over together
under the conduct of John Earl of Buchquhan, son to their Governor,
accompanied with Archibald Douglas, and diverse other of good place. Unto these
men they do attribute the victory over the Englishmen at the battle of
Baugie, fought on Easter-euen, in the year 1421. Clarence the Kings brother,
giving too much credit to a Lumbard, unadvisedly set upon the Frenchmen and
Scotts, and was slain, together with diverse other Noblemen of England, in
the whole to the number of some two thousand. Of the adverse party were also
slain above twelve hundred, the best men of war amongst them. So as they had
no great cause to boast of the victory, how glorious so ever they make the
same, affirming that for their good service at this time, the Dolphin bestowed
great honors and offices upon them. The Scotts being thus animated against
King Henry, at his next journey into France (and the last he made) he took
with him the Prince of Scotland, to try if happily they would be thereby wone
either to his party, or at least moved to return home again. But they so
little regarded the matter, that being demanded why they would fight against
their own King, they answered; That they would not acknowledge any duty to
him, who as yet lived under the obedience of an other. Herewith (says
Buchanan) King Henry was so much displeased, that at the taking of Meaux in
Bury, he caused 20. Scots to be executed, whom he found there, because they
had armed themselves against their own King. But I see not how it can be so,
for the soldiers seeing themselves unable to make resistance, abandoned the
town, and withdrawing their forces into the market place, fortified the same,
which being afterward surrendered upon composition, the lives of poor men
only were excepted, namely bastard Vauren the Captain of the town, the
Baily, and two Burgesses, all which upon good consideration were immediately
executed, and no other. When this most victorious Prince had so wonderfully
prevailed in his intended conquest of France, as that within the term of five
or six years, he had brought the better part thereof under his obedience, it
pleased the almighty God (the disposer of kingdoms) to take him from those
earthly honors, to the fruition (I hope) of that endless and incomparable
glory prepared for them that are his, from the Prince to the Peasant. He dyed
in France in the 9. year of his reign 1422. only child Prince Henry, about
as many months old as his father had reigned years. Whose infancy was
nevertheless mightily supported, by the notable valiancie and policy of his
two Uncles Humfrey Duke of Gloucester and John Duke of Bedford, to the one was
committed the protection of his person and kingdom, to the other the managing
of the war continued in France. The death of the two kings coming together,
within two months one after the other, caused much alteration in the state,
wherein that nation presently stood. For thereupon a great number of the French
nobility, who before had taken part with the Englismen, began to revolt to
Charles the Dolphine. The Scotts also became now more ready to assist him then
before, through the hope they had of present advancement, which thing within two
years after cost many of their lives, first at the siege of Crauant, in the
County of Auxerre, and in the year following at the bloody battle of
Vernoile, fought on the 20. of August, in the year 1424. French nation, there
were slain of the Scots their partakers, the Lord of Saint John's town, Sir
John of Bulgary, S. John Turnbull, S. John Haliburton, Sir Robert Lisley, S.
William Coningham, Sir William Douglas, Sir Alexander Hume, S. William Lisly,
Sir John Rotherford, S. William Crayford, S. Thomas Seaton, S. William
Hamilton, and his son John Pillot: the Earl Buchquhan master of the French
chiualry, who in the sight lost his eye, was taken prisoner. But at the
battle of Vernoile, of the Scotts were slain Archibald Earl Douglas,
lately created by the Dolphine Duke of Turaine, James Douglas his Son Earl
of Wigton. John Earl of Bowghen, who (as it seems) had either escaped before
out of the Englishmens hands, or else had r^^^eemed his liberty, besides men of
special note, above two thousand. In the mean time, (thorough dissension that
arose between Mordo then the governor of Scotland, after the decease of the
Duke of Albaine his Father and his unruly Sons) certain Ambassadors were
sent from thence into England to treat for the delivery of Prince James of
Scotland. This young Gentleman was then greatly inamored over a beautiful
Lady, Sister to John Duke of Somerset, Niece to the Cardinal of Winchester,
and to the Duke of Excester, and near cousine to the young King himself, it
was hoped that through the alliance he should have in England by this
marriage, and the manifold favors following the same: the Prince should have
been won to a perpetual amity with this Realm, which had been now unto
him for the term of fifteen years, a very Sanctuary for the safety of his
person, and an Academie for the instruction of his mind and understanding.

The Lord protector and the Nobility of the Land were hereby moved, not
only upon very reasonable conditions to set him at liberty, but also to yield
him the fruition of her love, which happily the Prince preferred, or at the
least equally balanced with the same. Before his departure into Scotland, he
did homage to the young king of England at Windsor Castle, in the presence of
three Dukes, the two Archbishops, twelve Earls, ten Bishops, twenty Barons,
and two hundred Knights and Gentlemen, in these words, viz. I James Steward
King of Scots, shall be true and faithful to you Lord Henry, by the grace of
God King of England, and to you I make my fidelity for the same kingdom of
Scotland, which I hold and claim of you. And I shall bear you my faith and
fidelity of life and limme, and worldly honor against all men. And faithfully
I shall do to you service for the kingdom of Scotland. So God me help, etc.

This done, King James with his Queen, were honorably attended and accompanied
into Scotland, in the year of grace 1423. French in affection) this Prince of
all other showed least thankfulness: for having forgotten the former
courtesies, he entered into matrimonial alliance with France, then at defiance
with that his late affinity with England, being even then (as it were) most
nearlie naturalized, by his issue in blood and kindred thereunto. Buchanan
does greatly labor his wits therewith to wash out this blemish in the
midst of the splendour and brightness of his manifold graces. But sithence
he fails (as I take it) in the very foundation of that his Apology, the
frame which he would thereon build, must of necessity fall to the ground. For
he takes it already granted, that the king of England did both violate his
own faith, and the laws of all Nations, by detaining the Prince as his
lawful prisoner, upon his arrival here on the coast. But it is apparent
enough (as before I have showed) that either there was no truce at all between
the two nations at that instant, or if there were, the same was notoriously
broken by the Scotts, in joining those their so great forces, with the known
enemies of this realm, against their lawful Sovereign, so far within his
own kingdom. Admit all that was done without the priuitie of the King
himself. But how-so-euer, the good aged man might justly plead his
innocence herein (bearing as then the bare title of King) how can the State
be excused, against whose knowledge an enterprice of that importance, could
not possibly have been attempted? if there were any hard measure offered
herein, by king Henry, nevertheless the same was so fully acquitted by the
inestimable benefit of his precious education (for as Buchanan himself
reports thereof: Tanta ingenij celeritas and vigor in eo fuisse dicitur, vt
nullam homine ingenuo dignum artem ignorabat) that truly such a captivity
should never have moved him to have fallen out with England: upon the marriage of
the Lady Margaret (the Scottish kings Daughter) with Lewis the Dolphine: some
sturres arose between the Englishmen and the Scotts, with equal loss on
both sides, but not of much reckoning. King James neuer-thelesse being
therewith provoked, assembled a great power, and besieged the Castle of
Roxbrough, from whence he was removed by the repair of the Queen his wife
thither, that informed him of a very dangerous conspiracy against his own
person, how-be-it, shortly after his return into Scotland, he was wickedly
murdered by his subjects in the year 1436.

The young Prince his son, ( James the second) about seven years old at
his fathers death, having reigned above twenty years, was slain by
misfortune at the siege of the same Castle, where the King his Father had
knowledge first given him of the plotte of his final destruction. In the mean
time there was nothing of any importance passed between the two nations, what
was gotten by either party at one time, was lost again at another, after the
manner of the mutabilitie of those adventures: happily there would have been
more doings between them, if the continual troubles with their own subjects,
had not given both the kings their hands full at home. Besides that, king Henry
after the deaths of those two gallant warriers his Uncles, was so busied with
loosing that which his victorious father had lately gotten in France, as that
he could not attend any dealings with Scotland, though he had been more then
he was thereunto provoked. But in the end king James taking the aduantange of
time, (under color to revenge the death of Edmond Duke of Somerset his mothers
brother, who about five years before was slain at Saint Albons by the faction
of York, in the defense of the king) was encouraged to undertake this his
unfortunate journey against Roxbrugh. Notwithstanding this mishap, the Scotts
would not give over the siege, but so manfully assailed the defendants, that in
the end they were forced upon honorable conditions, to yield up the Castle unto
the young king, ( James the third) then present, being about the same age that
his father was of, when that Castle was besieged last before, but dispairing to
be able to hold it long in their possession, they cast it down to the ground,
and returned home to solemnize the funerals of the father, and the coronation
of the Son, in the year 1460. England was deposed, and so together ended the
reigns of these two kings, the one by untimely death, the other by living
longer then he knew how to reign, for having lived and reigned together, about
eight and thirty years, he was then by his own subjects deposed and
deprived of all kingly power, whereupon both he, the Queen, his wife, and
his son, fled together into Scotland for succor, from whence the Queen
passed over into France, and having gathered some aid out of those countries,
they assayed the recovery of their former estates, but all in vain, for their
adversary Edward Duke of York, (the new elected King) still defeated all
their attempts tending thereunto. The desolate king having been harbored in
Scotland about three years, adventured to return unknown into England (I
know not with what hope of good success) but being presently discovered, he
was apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London, from whence with-in
seven years after he was delivered, King Edward being driven out of the
realm by the Earl of Warwike, who before had been the chief mean of his
advancement to the Crown. But this was but a lightning before his last fall,
for within six months after, king Edward returned again into England, where
he found such friends, that forthwith without any resistance; he e^^red into
London, took King Henry (who in the mean time was newly crowned) and
committed him to his former imprisonment, where the same year he ended his
life not without suspicion of violence. By means of this civil dissension
here in England, Berwicke became Scottish, for King Henry had bestowed the same
on King James, in requital of the favor he had found in Scotland during his
abode there. Hereat King Edward for the present was not only content to wink,
but also willing to accept of a truce with that nation for fifteen years.
King James having in the mean season, through lewd counsel of certain bad
persons about him, unjustly executed one of his brothers, and imprisoned an
other, fell thereby into contempt and mislike with his subjects, and therefore
to make himself the stronger, if happily they should rise in arms against
him, he sent into England (the expiration of the former truce now approaching)
a solemn Embassage to entreat that his Son James the young Prince of
Scotland, might have to wife the Lady Cicelie, second Daughter to King Edward.
This request was so well liked of by the King and his Counsel, that the same
was easily yielded unto, and for the better assurance thereof, King Edward was
also willing presently to disburse certain sums of money, with condition
that i^ afterward upon any occasion the intended marriage should not hold,
that then the money should within a certain time limited, be repayed back
again. For the performance whereof the principal merchants of Edenbrough
stood bound to the King of England. This was thus concluded upon in the year
1481. James now hoped that all was safe on his side, by his alliance with
England, Alexander his second brother Duke of Albanie, had the good hap to
escape out of the Castle of Edenbrough, where he was imprisoned, who having
afterward spent some time in France, and not prevailing so much with Lewis the
eleventh, as that he would be entreated to aid him toward the recovery of
his former estate in Scotland, came over hither into England, and earnestly
solicited king Edward to make war upon the king his brother, thereby to take
revenge for the extreme injuries done to him and his other brother John Earl
of Mar, from whom he had taken his life, as from himself his lands and
liberty. The Duke was herein seconded by the Douglas, who long before had
been banished Scotland. These two so much prevailed with King Edward (and the
rather because the Scottish King had even then permitted his subjects, at the
persuasion of the French king, to invade the English marches, to the great hurt
and annoyance of the inhabitants) that in the end king Edward caused
preparation for to be made for the invasion of Scotland, against the next
spring. The leading of this strong army, was committed to certain Noblemen,
over whom Richard Duke of Gloucester the Kings brother, then newly come to man's
estate, was appointed Lieutenant General.

About the beginning of July in the year following, the English host encamped
near unto Anwike, and was marshalled after this manner. The fore-ward was
conducted by Henry Earl of Northumberland, under whose Standard were the Lord
Scroope of Bolton, and diverse other to the number of six thousand and seven
hundred of all sorts. In the middle battle the Duke him^e^^e was placed, and
with him the Duke of Albanie, the Lord Louell, the Lord Greystocke, Sir Edward
Wooduille, and others, to the number of five hundred and foure-score. The Lord
Neuill was appointed to follow, with three hundred. To the Lord Standley was
committed the l^^t wing, and the other to the Lord Fitz^^gh, consisting
between them of six thousand men. One thousand more attended the great
Ordinance. In this manner they marched toward ^erwicke, at whose approach the
Scotts abandoned the town.

The two Dukes without further ^^ay (leaving behind them forty thou^^d to
besiege the C^^^le, which was kept by the Earl ^othwell) departed thence with
the A^^^^ ^owardes Edenbrough, burning and spoiling the country as they passed.
Being come thither the Duke of Gloucester, entered the town without resistance,
which at the entreatie of the Scottish Duke he forbear to spoil, contenting
himself with those presents, which the Merchants offered unto him and his
Captains. Here he caused Garter (King at arms) by open proclamation to
admonish King James (who keeping himself within the Castle, world not be
spoken with-all) to observe and perform all such covenants, promises, and
agreements, as he had formerly subscribed unto, and by his seal confirmed, to
the use and behoof of king Edward. And also to make sufficient recompense to
his subjects, for all the damage they had sustained by the sundry invasions of
the Scotts, whilst the league yet continued between the two nations, and
this to be done before the first day of August next following. And further, to
restore his brother the Duke of Albanie to his former estate within the realm
of Scotland, not detracting or diminishing any part of his possessions, offices
and authority, which at any time before he held and inioyed within the same.
Otherwise if he refused to satisfy the King of England, in all and every of
those demands, then he the said Duke his Lieutenant general, would
forthwith with fire and sword, pursue the destructio^^ ^^d utter spoil of
him and his kingdom. Hereunto King James, not knowing presently what answer
to make, was altogether silent. But the nobility of Scotland (who now were not
in any great trust and favor with their King) having assembled their forces at
Hadington, and finding themselves unable therewith to encounter the puissance
of the English army, thought it best to offer a treaty of peace, hopeing in
the mean time by fair promises to allure the Duke of Albanie from his amity
with England. Here-vpon by their Letters dated the second of August, they
signified to the General, that it was all their desires, that the former
contract of marriage between the Prince of Scotland, and the King of Englands
Daughter, should take place, according to the covenants agreed upon concerning
the same. And also that a firm peace between the two Nations, might
thence-forth be duly observed on both sides, and that nothing had been done
by them tending to the breach thereof. Hereunto Duke Ri^h^rd answered. That
for the matter of marriage he was not acquainted with the King, his ^^others
pleasure therein, and therefore could say nothing to that point: but he had
commission to demand such sums of money as their King had before received,
sithence he no more respe^^ed the observance of the covenants agreed unto, at
the treaty of that marriage, and that the b^each of one principal Article
frustrated all the rest. As for peace, he answered flatly, that he would yield
to none, unless the Castle of Berwike might immediately be delivered up unto
him, or at the least unless they would bind themselves by oath, neither to
remove the siege, nor to relieve the same, till it were surrendered or taken by
force. The Scottish Lords upon these demands, sent unto the General, the
Bishop of Murrey and the Lord Dernley with these instructions. First as
touching the repaiment of those sums of money which were by him demanded, the
same was not due, the time being not yet come, wherein it was to be restored
again, according to the agreement at the treaty of marriage, for as yet both
the parties were under age. But if the Duke thought the former assurance
insufficient, they would do any thing (as far as reason required) to satisfy
him to his full contentment. Secondly, as concerning the yielding up of
Berwicke Castle, the same was situate within the ancient confines of the
realm of Scotland, and properly appertained thereunto, and therefore it
could not without open wrong, be taken and kept from them.

The Duke not-with-standing this their plea, would not harken to any motion of
peace, unless that Castle were forthwith delivered to the use of the King
his Brother. The same day being the third of August, Coline Earl of A^gile,
Andrewe Steward Lord Chancellor of Scotland and the two Bishops of Saint
Andrews and Dunkell sent to the Duke of Albaine unto the English Camp then at
Leuingtone besides Hadington, an instrument in writing under their hands and
seals, containing such offers of kindness toward the recovery of the king
his brothers favor and his former estate, that having acquainted the Duke of
Gloucester therewithal, and faithfully assured him of his loyalty in that
behalf, he was presently withal kindness dismissed, and so repaired to the
Lords his countriemen: who immediately assembling a Counsel, he was by
general consent, not only restored to his former dignities and possessions,
but withal was advanced to the highest place of government under the king, and
by open proclamation entitled Lord Leutenant of Scotland. In this assembly
the question was propounded, what was best to be done touching the d^^^nd of
the Castle of Berwike. It seemed good to the best advised Lords and others
amongst them, in that dangerous time, wherein the Realm was so greatly
preplexed by dom^sticall dissentions, rather to incline to peace, though it
were with some loss; then otherways to provoke so mighty an adversary, as
the king of England would be unto them. That a good Neighbor (according to
the French proverb) would be a good mo^^o^^. It was therefore in the end
resolved upon, without further delay to proceed to a conclusion of peace for
the present time, how dear soever they paid for it. Hereupon a deed indented
bearing date the four and tweenteth day of the same month of August, was
presented unto the Duke of Gloucester, containing a contract between him,
Lieutenant general for the king of England on the one part, and the other
Duke, Lieutenant general in like manner for the king of Scotland on the other
part: couenanting on the behalf both of the one and other, that an absteinance
of war should be observed by sea and land, from the eight day of September
till the fourth of November next following. In which time the Scottish Duke did
covenant to yield up the town and Castle of Berwike, into the hands and
possession of such, as by the king of England or his deputy should be
thereunto appointed. According to which agreement the said Castle was
delivered to the custody of Lord Standlie, on the six and tweentith day of
the foresaid month, having then been in the possession of the Scotts near
one and tweentie years, but has ever since continewed English. And it was
further couenanted on the behalf of the Scottish Duke, that upon knowledge
given, whether it was the king of England his pleasure, to have the intended
marriage between his Daughter and the young Prince to take place, or otherwise
to be broken off: that then he would proceed accordingly, either to prepare
the money paiable unto him, or else to the present solemnization of the same.
But King Edward foreseeing, what unquietness was likely to arise in Scotland
between the two brothers, and happily favoring the Duke more then the King,
resolved with himself to break of the marriage in speech between them, and
to that end he presently sent ^arter King of arms, accompanied with an other
Harald to signify the same. These men coming to Edenbrugh, eight days before
the prefixed time received answer of the Provost and burgesses (that stood
bound to the King of England) that now upon notice given them of the King their
Masters pleasure, they would ^ake provision for the repayment of the money a^ a
day appointed for the same, which was performed accordingly.

The messengers being courteously entertained, and from thence conuaied back
again to Barwicke, they repaired to New-castel, where they made relation to
the Duke of Gloucester of all their proceedings in Scotland, who thereupon with
all speed removed to Shriue-hutton and there abode. When King Edward had thus
ended his business with Scotland and was now preparing the like journey into
France, to be revenged on the double dealing be found in King Lewis the
eleventh, about the like t^eatie of a marriage with the Dolphine: that
contention was presently taken up by the messinger of God. For shortly after
they both died in one and the same year, from the incarnation of our Savior
1483. Albanie found so little saftie in his own Country, as that to avoid
the mischief, which was intended toward him by the King his brother, he was
forced to repair again into England, and to make him the more well-come to
King Edward, he delivered into his hands the Castle of Dumbar.

King Edward being deceased, he was certuously entertained of his late
acquaintance, the Duke of Gloucester, who first had made himself Lord Protector
of the Realm, but not satisfied therewith, because he aimed at an higher
dignity, within two months after he usurped the Crown and title of King,
and forthwith for his more security caused the two young Princes his Nephews
to be wickedlie murdered in the Tower of London, whither he had committed
them for that purpose. The Duke of Albanie together with the Earl Douglas (who
had remained here as a banished man near thirty years) with such aid as they
could get, made sundry roades into Scotland, but still with more loss then
advantage. Douglas in the end was taken and lead into Scotland, where he died
in the Abbey of Landoris.

But the Duke seeing he could obtain no better relief at King Richards
hands, secretly passed over into France, where he dyed shortly after of an
hurt, which he received of the Duke of Orliance, as they ran together at the
tilt. King James being now fallen into no less contempt of his subjects, through
his dissolute life, and over small regard of his nobility, then king Richard
was with the Englishmen, for his outrageous cruelty: both the one and the
other were vehemently distracted with continual fear of their utter falls. In
this perplexity they both met with one and the same conceit, which was by a
league of friendship between themselves, to strengthen and confirm one the
others desperate estate: so as King Richard had no sooner propounded an offer
of peace, but the other most willingly entertained the same. Ti^e and place was
forthwith appointed, when and where Commissioners on both sides should meet
about this business, which within three weeks was brought to this issue. A
truce was taken to endure from the end of September (which was in the year
1484. Richard entered into a treaty also, of a ^^w alliance by marriage,
between the Duke of Rothesay, the young Prince of Scotland, and the Lady ^^^e
^e ^a P^^le, Daughter to John Duke of Suffolk by his sister, whom he so much
favored, that after the decease of his own Son, he caused her Son, John
Earl of Lincoln, to be proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown disinherityng
all the daughters of his brother the late deceased king. For the effecting of
this intended marriage, both the kings did send their Commissioners again to
Notingham, (where the former peace was also concluded) which was likewise there
agreed upon, and the assurance engrossed and ratified by hand and seal, and
affiances made and taken by deputies on both sides. The said Lady was
thence-forth called and reputed Princess of Rothsay. But by occasion of the
death of king Richard (that was shortly after slain at Bosworth field) she
inioyed that title but a while. During the time of truce, some question did
arise for the restitution of the Castle of Dumbar which the Duke of Albaine
had bestowed on king Edward, as is aforesaid, but king Richard gave so good
words that, while he lived he held the same. Nevertheless before king Henry
the seventh was fully settled, the Scottish king laid siedge against it with
such egernesse, as that the defendantes dispayring of any aid in convenient
time out of England, in so turbulent a season, gave it up, not without
suspicion (it is said) of treason. This Henry having fortunatly subdewed the
tirant in the field, and thereby attained the Crown in the year 1485.
alliance and laws at home, and then by league and amity with his neighbor the
Scottish King. By his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth (the eldest Daughter of
king Edward the fourth) the two houses of Lancaster and York, which had for
many years before contended for the Sovereignty, were graciously united in the
issue, that did spring from them two, upon whom, for the avoiding of all titles
and claims (peramount) in time to come the Crown of England by general
consent in Parliament of the three estates, was limited and intayled, as in
that statute at large may appear. As for the renewing of the league with
Scotland, king James was as ready to embrace peace, as the other was to offer
it, hoping thereby more safely to prosecute his long desired revenge upon
diverse of the Nobility, that had highly (but I know not how worthily)
incurred his displeasure, which thing shortly after turned to his own
destruction. For having unadvisedly joined battle with his adversaries at
Bannocksburne, with in two miles of Sterling, he was finally put to flight
and pursued unto death. This came to pass in the year 1488. Henry at his
entreaty had sent to his aid five tall ships of war, which with the rest
of his expected succors (thorough his own over much have) came all too late
to do him any service.

These Ships (says Buchanan) lying against Dumbar, were set upon by two
Scottish Ships, conducted by Andrewe Wood, and by force were taken and
brought to Leith. But I doubt much of the truth hereof, for, neither is it
likely, that the Englishmen would yield without some loss of blood (whereof
there is no mention) or that two Scottish ships could be able so easily to
subdewe five such English, as (no doubt) were especially chosen for that
service, when as not long after (as he himself confesses) three other
endured so long a fight against them. Wherefore I rather think, that those
five ships were by some stratage^ deceived by the said Andrew: for, howsoever
afterward he was drawn from that side, it was not unknown to the
Englishmen, that the Scottish King (while he lived) reposed such trust in him;
as that he was made General over his navy, and consequently a pertaker of
their own fortunes, being all come thither to assist the Scottish king. But
be it as it may be, I must needs commend the young Prince of Scotland, for
returning home Bull and his companions without ransom or rebuke, who in the
latter conflict with Wood, contended more for glory, then upon hope of gain to
be gotten thereby. For the term of 7. years, from the death of James the
third, while the truce between the two Nations continewed, peace was embraced
on both sides. In the mean time it was devised by the Lady Margaret, Duchess
of Burgoigne, who greatly envied the prosperity of king Henry, only because he
was descended of the Lancastrian family, an ancient enemy to her line, that one
Peter Marbecke borne at Tornay of base parentage, but by her trained up and
instructed for that purpose, should take upon him the person of Richard Duke of
York, second Son to her brother king Edward the fourth, who together with
his brother were murdered in the Tower, as before I have showed. This ioylie
youth, having first assaied, what entertainment he might find in Ireland and
France, (which fell not out to his liking) transported himself at length into
Scotland, hoping there, by reason of the want of experience in the young king (
James the fourth) and the too great forwardness of his people to quarrel with
England, to find that Nation more pliable to his designments, which came to
pass accordingly. For having first priuatlie to the king, and after that in a
public assembly, made known what person he pretended to be, and with all
the skill he had, allured both Prince and people to a commiseration of his
misfortunes: whether it were that they were moved by an ouer-light belief in
pity, or a counterfeit credulity in policy, his complaint so much prevailed
with the greater number, that it was held a matter of great reproach, not to
join with him in the attaining of the Crown of England, whereunto he
pretended so just a title. Forthwith king James caused him to be called the
Duke of York. And for a further favor, to give him the more courage, and his
cause the more credit, he gave him in marriage the Lady Katherine Gordon,
Daughter to Alexander Earl of Huntley, his nigh kinsman, whose beauty better
beseemed her birth, then such a Bridegroom. King James having prepared all
things fit for the enterprice, entered into Northumberland, causing proclamation
to be made, that he would favor all those that would submit themselves to this
new created Duke, but finding none that would follow or acknowledge any such
man, the Scots committed all to the fury of fire and sword. Hereby having well
near wasted the whole country, they returned home, enriched with many good
booties, before an army could be made ready to encounter them. King Henry
being not a little moved, purposed the next spring to be revenged, but even as
the army was marching toward Scotland, under the conduct of the Lord Daubiney,
it was suddenly called back again, by occasion of a commotion begun by the
Cornish-men, so as for that time the intended journey was prevented.

King James having his Army also in readiness, ouer-slipped not the
opportunity, but while king Henry was busied about the suppressing of this
rebellion in the West parts, he invaded his dominions on the North. For
dividing his Army, he himself with a part thereof besiedged the Castle of
Norham, while the rest forrayed the country there-about. Richard Fox Bishop of
Durham (to whom the Castle appertained,) aduertising king Henry hereof, the
Earl of Surrie (that was then in readiness, upon any occasion offered to be
employed) was commanded with all speed to relieve the same. His whole army was
little less then twenty thousand men, besides the preparation at Sea, whereof
the Lord Brook was Admiral. The Earl was accompanied with diverse Lords and
Gentlemen of the North, amongst whom I find these following, appointed chief
Leaders and Commanders, namely; Ralph earl of Westmerland. Thomas Lord Dacres.
Ralph Lord Neuille. George Lord Strange. Richard Lord Latimer. George Lord
Lumley. John Lord Scroope. Henry Lord Clifford. George Lord Ogle. William Lord
Conniers. Thomas Lord Darcie. Thomas Baron of Hilton. Sir William Percie. Sir
William Bulmere. Sir William Gascoigne. Sir Ralph Bigod. Sir Ralph Bows. Sir
Thomas Aparrie. Sir Ralph Caldercarre. Sir John Constable. Sir John Ratcliffe.
Sir John Sauille. Sir Thom: Stranguisse.


Thus was king Henry set on work at home, as well by his own subjects on the
one side, as by the Scotts on the other. But he did so warily foresee all
dangers, that he easily prevented the malice of them both. For the Cornishmen
were defeited at the battle of Black-heath-field, and the Scotts at the
approach of the Earl gave over the siedge, and returned home as lightly laden
as when they came thence. The Army being come by this time within two days
march of the enemies, made all the have that could be, to have ouer-taken
them, but seeing they would not abide, the Englishmen made what spoil they
could within Scotland, where having taken their pleasures for the space of six
or seven days, they returned to Berwicke without any show of resistance,
although that at the taking of the Castle of Hayton (it is said) the Scottish
Army was within one mile of the Englishmen.

Thus was king Henry sufficiently revenged on the Scotts, that were so ready
to take part with Perkin the counterfeit Duke of York, who now had apparently
enough showed himself to the world, as that which followed shortly after
showed. For upon a treaty of truce between the two Nations, undertaken and
effected by Peter Hiolas an Ambassador of Spain, king James was contented,
for the furtherance thereof, to send the other Peter packing out of Scotland,
to seek new intertainement some-where else, where he was not so well known.
But this aduenturous Gallant once again attempting to try some maisteries
here in England, was utterly forsaken of all his adherents, whereupon for his
more safety, he committed his person first to Sanctuary, and from thence
submitted himself to the Kings mercy, who appointed a guard to attend him,
from whom escaping, he was recovered, and committed to the Tower of London,
where practicing an escape, he was finally for his several offenses executed
at Tyburne, as he well deserved. The poor Lady his unfortunate wife, being in
the mean time taken and presented to the King: his Majesty took such
compassion on her pitiful estate, that he gave order she should be
carefully conuayed to the Queen his wife, of whom she was courteously
entertained, and remained in the English Court a long time after in good
estimation.

King James well foreseeing what benefit it would be unto him, if by any good
means a firm peace and amity with England, might be obtained, took
occasion now in the time of truce to send for the Bishop of Durham, who was
shortly after admitted by king Henry to repair into Scotland. Being come to
the kings presence, after much friendly speech, he made known unto him, his
great desire to confirm a perfect peace and unity with England, by taking to
wife the Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter to the king his Master. The Bishop
willingly promised his best endeavor to bring the matter to pass, which about
three years after, was effected accordingly, not-with-standing that in the
mean season, Prince Arthur, the kings eldest son deceasing, Prince Henry his
brother remained only a bar between her and the Crown. True it is, that
this Lady was affianced, and by proxy contracted to the Scottish king, while
Prince Arthur yet lived, about six weeks after his marriage with the Lady
Katherine of Spain. Neuer-the-lesse if king Henry had been disposed (upon his
sons death) to have broken and avoided the same, it had been no difficult
point for him to have prevailed so much with the Pope, who not long after
dispensed in a matter of greater offense, with the marriage (I mean) of king
Henry the eight with the said Lady Katherine his brothers wife. It is reported
by Morgan, that when the king of Englands Council began to forecast some
peril in this match with Scotland, his Majesty upon good advise answered,
that although that thing should come to pass hereby, which they seemed to
stand in doubt of, namely, the intitling of king James and his posterity to
the Crown of England, he so little distrusted, that any inconvenience should
ensue thereof unto this realm, as that for his part he thought nothing could
happen more gracious to both nations: which by that mean should be united and
made one Monarchy. And further that Scotland being much inferior in quantity
and quality unto England, should be therefore reputed and held but a
dependence on it, as Normandy was at the time of the Conquest. And lastly
when that should come to pass, he that by this marriage should be heir to
both kingdoms, would in his style of regalitie prefer England before the
other. This was the ninth time, that since the conquest, the Scottish Kings
have married with the English Nation; and for the more part with the blood
royal, from all which some issue has sprung, two only excepted. For first,
Malcolme Cammoire king of Scotland, married Margaret, sister to Edgar Atheling,
whose son king David, married Mawde the Daughter and heir of Waltheolfe
Earl of Northumberland, whose son Prince Henry married a Daughter of Earl
Warham, whose son king William, married the Lady Ermangard, the daughter of
Richard Vicount Beaumont, who was son to a Daughter of William the
Conqueror. Alexander the second, their son, married the Lady Jane, Sister to
King Henry the second, but had no issue by her. Alexander the third his son,
married Margaret Daughter to King Henry the third, whose posterity ended in
Margaret their grandchild, the heir of Norway. After this, David Bruise (whose
great Grandmother was Daughter to Hugh Bohume Earl of Chester, and wife to
David brother to King William of Scotland) married Jane, Sister to King Edward
the second, but he dyed without issue, whereupon the crown of Scotland
descended unto the Noble and ancient family of the Stewards, the third king
whereof ( James the first) married the Lady Jane, Daughter of John Earl of
Somerset, which James was great Grandfather to this James, who now last of all
married the eldest Daughter of this King Henry, from whom James the sixth now
King is lineally descended in the third degree, both by Father and Mother.

Though in the mean time, none of our Kings have married with Scotland, save
only King Henry the first, whereby the Crown returned to the Saxon blood (as
has been declared) yet diverse of our Nobility have matched in the blood
royal of Scotland. Hereby it appears how much that Nation has always
sought to strengthen it self, by alliance with England, though France has of
late so much prevailed, that therein it has been preferred before us, but
with no very good success, as the sequel declares. During the life of King
Henry (which was within two months of six years after this marriage) no
occasion of quarrel was offered on either part, but all love and kindness,
that might be desired, passed between the two Kings. Neither did king Henry
the eight (that succeeded his Father) give his brother in law king James, any
just occasion to break friendship with him, but it seems the same wholly
proceeded from the subtle practice of France our ancient enemy, as many times
before, that Nation had done the like, for it has been ever their policy to
sow dissension between England and Scotland, to the end they might set the
king of England on work at home, fearing he would otherwise be too busy with
them. This Henry having with great felicity reigned near four and twenty
years, leaft behind him unto his Son king Henry the eight, so assured and
settled a kingdom, and withal such abundance of treasure, as never any of his
predecessors did the like before him. He died in the year of our redemption
1509. Henry's reign, it fell out that Lewis the French king made sharp war
on Pope Julius in Ittalie, whereupon thorough the solicitation of Maximilian
the Emperor, and Ferdinand king of Spain (whose Daughter king Henry had
married, by dispensation from that martial Prelate) he was easily drawn to
join with them in the Popes behalf. King James having not long before
received many favors of the French King, and amongst the rest, two ships
fraught with gunnes, spears and all other kind of munition for war, (a good
preparatiue to the practice following) was thereby made more inclinable to the
French faction. And for a further spur thereunto, diverse of his clergy, who
had likewise tasted of the liberality of king Lewis, sought all occasiones
where-by to prick him forward in that course. This could not be compassed, till
such time as they had first alienated him wholly from his former affection
toward England. To which end the Bishop of Murrey (a privy man of that
faction) was sent to King Henry, now well-nere after nine years silence, to
demand a certain precious vestement, and rich attire, which (as was pretended)
was given to the Scottish Queen by her brother Prince Arthur at his death.
King Henry distrusting some subtilty herein, to the end he would prevent all
occasion of unkindness, answered, that the king his brother should not only
have at his hands, that which was dew, but else whatsoever he desired of him.
The Bishop with this answer (which was better happily then he either wished
or exspected) returned home. But howsoever King James regarded the message,
this Bishop was forthwith sent into France, and after him certain ships
well appointed for service, which not long before had been prepared (as was
given out) to transport the king into Siria against the infidelles. This navy
should have been presented unto the French Queen for a special favor tow^^ds
her only, ^ut the same ^^d so bad success^ur the passage, a^ that neither she
or her husband had any benefit by them. In the mean season complaint wa^ made
to king Henry, that two Scottish ships, (to whom king James had granted
letters, of mart against the Port^^galls) had greatly molested the English
Merchants, and other passingers along the Coast. For redress hereof Sir Edmond
Howard, Lord Admiral of England, and the Lord Thomas Son and heir to the
Earl of Surrey, were presently sent forth with two ships of war, who
behaved themselves in ^uch sort, that within a month after, they ^^ought them
both to Black-wall. Andrewe ^arton Captain over them, died of the hurtes (...)
received in fight; they that remained alive were all pardoned and sent home.
King James took this matter so heynouslie, that writing thereof to King
Henry, he charged him with breach of the league, whereunto this answer was
returned. That the execution of Justice upon pirates (such as his people at sea
were) wa^ never held violation of amity, that he sho^^^ favor enough in
pardoning those that es^^^^ (...) danger of fight. Yet for his better sa^^^^
(...) would presently send comm^^^^^^ts to the bor^^^ to treat of this and of
oth^^ ^^^^^ders in (...) parts. The Scot^^^ (...) the mean season (...) ^ot
(...) in^^^^ng the English marches, but still to their loss. For a^ one
conflict two hundred of them were taken prisoners and many more slain. This
blow so much provoked King James, that refusing to commit the deciding of
these quarrels to any Commissioners, he purposed with himself to take
revenge, when opportunity better served. And therefore when King Henry was
passed over into France, and had besiedged the town of Turwin, King James sent
over unto him Lion king at arms (his principal Herald) with letters of
defiance to this effect. First he complained, that no restitution was yet
made, for the damages his subjects had lately sustained, both by land and sea.
Secondly that bastard Heron with his accomplices (who in the reign of the King
his Father, at a meeting for the execution of justice, had treacherously slain
Robert Car his warden) were not punished according to their deserts.

That Andrewe Barton was slain by his commandment. That his wives legacy was
unjustly detained. And though he could have borne all these injuries, yet he
might not endure the extreme wrongs offered by him, to his ancient allies and
friends, the French King and the Duke of Gelders, into whose lands and
territories he was now entered, not-with-standing he had earnestly entreated
him to the contrary, and ^^^ll hostile manner prosecuted the destruction of
them, th^^^ subjects and countries. In consideration of which dealings toward
his own person, and those P^^nces so nearly conjoined with h^^ in amity, he
held himself bound by duti^^ hi^ alliance with them to reli^ue their estates
by all the good means that lay in his power. And this he would forthwith put
in execution, vn^^sse he ceased further to molest them. This letter was dated
at Edenbrough the six and twentieth day of July, and sealed with his own
Signet, whereunto king Henry made answer as follows.

Right excellent, high and mighty Prince: we have received your writing, by
your Herald Lion this bearer, wherein after rehearsal and accumulation of many
surmised injuries, greeues, and damages, done by us and our subjects, to you
and yours, the specialties whereof were superfluous to rehearse, remembering
that to them, and every of them, reasonable answer, founded upon law and
conscience, has here-to-fore bin made to you and your counsel: Ye not only
require us to desist from further invasion and utter destruction of your
brother and cousin the French king, but also certify us that you will take
part in defense of the same king, unless we presently yield to your request.
All which tends wholly to the b^each of the perpetual peace passed,
concluded, and sworne-vnto by us both. Howbeit, if neither the love and dread
of God, nighnesse of blood, honor of the world, law nor reason could have
prevailed with you, we suppose you would never (...) so far proceed^^ against
us, especially in our absence. Herein the Pope and al Princes Christened may
well note in you dishonorable dealing, in that you have waited to take the
advantage of mine absence, whereof we need no other proof and approbation
then your own letters heretofore sent us, while we were within our Realm,
wherein you never made mention of taking part with our enemy the French King,
but passed the time with us, till after our departure thence. But now happily
supposing that we be destitute of defense against your invasion (being so
far from home) you have upon that advantage uttered the old rancoure of your
stomach, which you have hitherto kept secret. Nevertheless we remembering the
brittlenesse of your promise; and suspecting (though not wholly believing) so
much unsteadfastness in you, thought it expedient to put our Realm in
readiness, against whatsoever your interprises, trusting that by the favor of
God and the assistance of our confederates and allies, we shall be able to
maintain our right, against the malice of you, and your adherentes. And we
hope in time convenient to remember our friends, and requite you (...) our
enemies, which by such unnatural demeanor have given sufficient cause to the
disinheriting (...) and your posterity for (...) ^^ssibility, that you have to
the (...) which you are now ready to invade. The (...) lately showed v^^^ the
King of Nauar, (...) for assisting the French king was set besides his ^^ngdo^^
may be a warning unto you. Finally as t^^ching your request, that I would
desist from further attempting against our enemy the French King: we know
you are no competent judge, nor of authority to enforce us thereunto.
Wherefore we purpose (God willing) with the aid and assistance of our
confederates and allies to prosecute the war, we have hitherto prosperously
proceeded in.

Given under our signet in our Camp before Tirwin the twelft day of August.

This letter was delivered to the Scottish Herald, who immediately departed
therewith into Flanders there to have taken ship for Scotland. But for want
of ready passage he arrived not there, till the King his Master was slain
in the field. For King James with his army having pa^^ed over the water of
Tweed, the two and twenteth day of the said month of August; lodged the first
night near the river of Tinsell, and the ^^xt day laid siedge to Norham
Castle, which was easily gotten thorough want of loyalty or discression in
him that kept it. King I^^es having taken his pleasure in those parts ^or the
space of eighteen days, the Earl of Surrey Li^^^^^ant General in the Kings
absence over the North-partes of the Realm, had in the meane-time given order
(...) assemble a power ^f some six and twenty thousand men, and coming to
Anwicke the third of September, tarried there all the next day, till the whole
a^^y was gathered together, which by reason of the foulness of the ways,
could not make such speed as was exspected. The day following, his Son the Lord
Admiral, which such men of war as had bin with him at the sea, repaired to his
father, to whom he was very welcome because he could never have come to any
service, wherein his help was more needeful then at this very time. After some
parlaunce by officers at arms and others, by which means the Scotts were
politikely drawn to a more indifferent place for battle, then otherwise they
would willingly have yielded unto; at length both armies prepared themselves to
encounter each one the other. King James yet keeping the higher ground, divided
his whole army into five battles, or (after the new phrase) battalions, to
the intent the same, wherein he himself was placed, might be enclosed with
two wings on either side.

The two on his right hand, were conducted by the Earls of Huntley, C^^ford,
and Montrosse: the two on his leaft, by the Earls of Lenox and Argile: the
Lord Hume, (lord Chamberlain of Scotland:) a^^ ^^erse other were also
appoyn^^d over several companies, amongst ^^ome were certain ^^^nchmen, whom
King Lewis had sent over to trai^e the ^cottes in the feites of arms. There
great Ordinance was placed most conveniently, for the annoiance of the adverse
party, but by reason of the hight of the ground, their shot did small hurt to
the Englishmen, marching up toward them.

The Englishmen divided themselves into as many battles as were most
answerable to their enemies forces. Over the vantgard, the Lord Howard was the
commander. Sir Edmond his brother, with his charge guarded him (...) winge o^
^i^ right hand. The Earl himself le^d the middle-ward, and Sir Edmond S^anley
the reare-ward. The Lord Dacres with a woope of horse-^^n was se^ apar^ by
himself, (...) suc^ or where (...) The Ordinance was (...) to (...), and in
places (...) one and another (...) ^hought most expedient. Bo^^ the (...)
^^^^ng h^s marshall^d, Sir E^^^^d H^^^^^ (...) his people (...) of the (...) by
the Lord H^^^^, who wit^ (...) sp^^^^ ^^^led the other so viol^ntly, that had
not bastard ^^ron come readily to his succor, Sir Edmund had not escaped
death, being well near left alone of his company. Hereat the other wing of
the Scotts, that was lead by the Earls of Lennox and Argile, took such
encouragement, that leaving their ensigns behind them, and rushing upon the
Englishmen, without order, they were thereby, well near all of them (together
with the two Earls) beaten down, by that time the other Scotts were returned
from pursuing the Englishmen, whom they had in chase. These men also, being set
upon a fresh, both before and behind, were likewise well near all slain. King
James who a little before had encountered the Earl of Surrey, perceiving that
the wings of his battle were thus defeited, and that the Englishmen were now
ready to encompasse him about, was nothing abashed at the sight, but with a
cheerful countenance encouraging those that were about him, and (withal)
desperately rushing into the thickest prease on foot, maintained the fight
along time, in-so-much that piersing the Earls battle, the Scotts entered so
far within the same, that they were at point to have overthrown his
Standard. But at length the Englishmen pressed so sore upon them, that they
overthrew. Sir Adam Forman, the Scottish kings Standard Bearer: which the king
perceiving, thought s^^ely then there was no way for him to escape. W^erefore
to deliver himself from such reproach, as happily he thought would have been
^reathed out upon him, he cast himself the more carelessly into the greatest
heat of his enemies fury, and so ended his life in the midst of them. Such
was the end of this unfortunate Prince, in nothing more unfortunate, then in
that he contended with his own good fortune. For if he had continued constant
to king Henry, he might have lived many years in as great felicity, as ever
any of his predecessors did before him. Round about him died with the like
obstinacy, many of his chief Prelates, namely the Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, and two other Bishops, besides four Abbots, and of Lords and men of
special note above six and thirty. The whole number of Scots slain at this
battle, could in all likelihood, be no less then ten thousand, considering
the loss of so many leaders amongst them: and the small number of them that
were taken prisoners; amongst whom there were but two of name, Sir William
Scotte Chancelour to the king, and Sir John Forman his Sergiant Porter. Amongst
other pieces of great ordinance taken at this time, there were seven
Culuerings of like sise and making, called the Seven Sisters. This famous
overthrow was given the Scotts in September in the year 1513. Of Englishmen
were slain (as Hall reports) about some fifteen hundred: diverse were taken
prisoners by following the Scotts oueregerly in the chase, after daylight was
done. It was not well known on which side the victory was fallen, until the
next morning, for then the Lord Dacres with his troops of horsemen, being sent
abroad to view the behavior of the Scotts, found they had forsaken their
artillarie, and left the field. The Kings body being found, many deep and
deadly wounds appeared on the same, which the Earl of Surrey caused to be
imbowelled and seared, wherewith (having set all things in good order) he
returned to the Queen of England. In memory of this notable victory over that
nation, his family has hitherto borne in their Scutchions the arms of
Scotland for an addition of Honor thereunto, but with what right I know not.
Amongst other prodigious signs, immediately foregoing this bloodshed,
Buchana^ records one very memorable, received from the report of him that was
an eye witness thereof, a man of special credit with him. This it was: King
James going to his army, now ready to set forward, entered into a Chapel that
was in his way to hear euen-song (as then it was called): while he was at his
devotion, an ancient man came in, bare-headed, his golden colored locks
hanging down upon his shoulders, his forehead high, and inclining to
baldness, his garments of Azure color somewhat long, girded about him with
a Towell or table Napkin, of a comely and reverend countenance. Having
inquired for the king, he intruded himself into the prease, passing through
till he came to him: then leaning upon the Kings seat, he thus spoke, after a
good, plain, and familier manner. Sir King, I am sent to admonish thee to
proceed no further in this thy intended journey: which advise if thou do
refuse to follow, it will be worsse for thee and them that attend thee therein.
I am further charged to warn thee, not to use the acquaintance, company, or
counsel of women, for if thou do otherwise, it will turn to thy loss and
dishonor. This being said, he withdrew himself back again into the
prease. When service was ended, the king inquired earnestly for him, but he
could no where be found, neither could any of the standers by (of whom diverse
did narowlie observe him, meaning afterward to have questioned further with
him) feel or perceive how, or when he passed from them. Queen Margaret,
after the death of her husband challenged the protection of the realm, as the
king by his last Will and Testament disposed the same, so long as she
continued a widow. Being therein established, first of all she wrote to king
Henry her brother, entreating him not only to cease from pursuing war
further upon Scotland (being even then at war with it self) but also to be
a defense unto her and the infant her son (not much above a year old)
against all such, as happily would oppose themselves against her. Hereunto
King Henry answered, that with the peaceable he would have peace, but to the
froward and seditious he would be an enemy. Not long after Queen Margaret,
having married Archibald Douglas, (the prime and choice man amongst all the
Scottish nobility) the realm began to be divided into two mighty factions. They
of the Dowglassian party would have the government continued in the Queen,
because thereby the realm should still have peace with England, which at that
season was a point very necessarily to be respected. The adverse party (of whom
the Lord Hume was the principal man) pretending an ancient custom in that
case, importuned the election of John Duke of Albanie, son to the former Duke
Alexander. This gentleman for the most part had lived before in France, and was
wholly devoted to the service of King Francis, who to bind him the faster unto
him, had dealt very honorably with him at his departure into Scotland.
Immediately upon his arrival, great dissension arose betwixt him and others of
the Scottish Nobility, but especially the Lord Hume, who (as before I have
touched) was the chief mean of his preferment to that place. Queen Margaret
much fearing the issue hereof, together with her husband, and some other of
that faction, for her more safely repaired into England. During her abode
there, she was delivered at Herbottle, of a Daughter, the Lady Margaret
Douglas, grandmother to King James the sixth, now king by his father, as her
brother, King James the fifth was his grandfather by his mother. So as his
Father and Mother, were the children of brother and sister, namely of James the
fifth, and this Lady Margret his half sister. But the new Regent the Duke of
Albanie, so excused himself by Embassage to the king of England in that point,
that within a year after, the Queen returned into Scotland, honorably
attended, and richly appointed of all things fit for her estate. The Earl
Douglas her husband (who in the mean season had obtained the Regents favor)
received her at Berwicke, and from thence did accompany her home. All quarrels
in the mean time being well appeased in Scotland, the Regent passed over into
France, committing the young Prince (together with the government of the realm)
in his absence to certain of the Nobility, but above all the rest, he
reposed most trust in a Frenchman named Anthony Darcie, Captain of the
Castle of Dunbarre, whom he joined in commission with the Scottish Lords, to
the end he might give him intelligence of all their proceedings in his absence.
It was this man's hap soon after to be slain by the Scots, and for more
despite, to have his head stricken off, and set upon Hume Castle, to the view
of all that passed by. This outrage was committed the twelfe of September, in
the year 1517. Dowglassian faction bare greatest sway, for the continuance
whereof, king Henry labored the French King to keep the Duke still with him:
neuer-the-lesse by reason of some trouble likely to arise between France and
England, the Regent returned into Scotland, about five years after his
departure thence, with a purpose to abate the ouer-great power of the Douglas.
Immediately herevpo^ Gawen Douglas Bishop of Dunkell (a very reverend man) came
into England and informed the king, how great an adversary the Regent was to
his whole family, and that he alone had taken on him the custody of the young
king, the sequel whereof he much feared. This Bishop died shortly after at
London, and was buried in the Sauoy church. King Henry upon this complaint,
sent Clarentius (king at Arms) into Scotland, to admonish the Duke to avoid
the country, according to the Articles agreed upon the summer before, in the
last truce taken with the French king; for the king held it very unreasonable
and inconvenient, to admit him sole Guardian over the young Prince, that was next
heir after him to the Crown, least happily by such opportunity he might be
tempted to commit the like unnatural cruelty, which some have done in the like
case both in England and Scotland. That therefore the king his master (said
Clarentius) had great reason to provide for the safty of his nephew, whereof he
could no way be better assured, then by keeping him from that place and
authority in Scotland. But of all these threats the Regent seemed to make light
account. Now began the French king to quarrel again with king Henry, before
the truce was fully expired, whereupon all the Frenchmen and Scots, that then
inhabited in London and other places of the realm, were put to their fines,
and a strong Navy was forthwith sent to the Sea under the conduct of Sir
William Fitz-Williams Vice Admiral, and seven other were at the same time
sent also against Scotland, the which entering into the Forth, set fire on
diverse Scottish ships, and so returned with their prisoners into England. The
same year the Lord Rosse and the Lord Dacres of the North, who were appointed
to keep the borders, entered also with their forces into Scotland, and burnt
the town of Kelsoe, besides many other villages, ouer-threw sundry holds and
piles of stone, and then returned home with their booties. The Regent being
here-with provoked to revenge, raised a great power, wherewith approaching the
Marches, he fully purposed to invade England. But whether it were, that he
thought himself ouer-weake, to encounter the English army, that was coming
on apace under the conduct of the Earl of Shrewsburie, or that he stood not
well assured of some of his own company (which was more likely) he was well
contented to harken unto peace, so that a truce was taken for some few months,
and then with no little stain to his reputation he turned back-againe. In
October following, the Duke passed over again into France, promising his
favorites, that if a peace were not in the mean time concluded with England,
he would bring the next Summer such a warlike crewe of Frenchmen and Germans,
as that he should not stand in need of such of his own Countrymen, as were so
backe-ward in his former enterprice upon the borders. In the mean season, King
Henry thought it no policy to ouerslip so fit opportunity, because he well
perceived, that whatsoever was outwardly pretended, the Regent meant him no
good. So soon therefore as the truce was expired, the war was renewed to the
exceeding great damage of that Nation. For Thomas Earl of Surrey high Admiral
of England; the Marquess Dorset and his brothers with a competent power
entering into Scotland, ouerthrewe the Castells of Wederburne, West Nesgate and
Black-acre, burned near forty towns and villages, in which manner wasting
the Scottish Marches from one side to the other, without any resistance, they
returned home with the loss of very few or no men at all, the Scotts only
showed themselves in troops a far of, watching if they could have espied any
advantage. This service was thus performed the Summer following, in the year
1523. Scots waiting the opportunity, made continewal roades into
Northumberland, to the great anoiance of the inhabitants. Wherefore the Earl
of Surrey was forthwith sent back again, who entering into Scotland with some
six thousand men by the dry marches, cast down certain Castells, piles and
small holds, til he came through the dales to Iedworth: wherein lay a great
garrison of the Scotts, who at the first entertained them with a hot skermish,
but in the end they were put to flight, and the Town, Castle and Abbaie were
taken and spoiled. After three days abode there, the Earl returned into
England on the twentieth day of September following.

About this time, the Lord Dacres took also by force the Castle of
Ferniherst. The Duke of Albanie intending now to return into Scotland had
intelligence given him, that all the ports on the Coast of France were watched
by the Englishmen, to intrappe him in his passage, wherefore he bestowed his
ships, so covertly here and there in small companies, to avoid all
suspicion, of any purpose he had to stir that year, as that thereupon the
English fleet, which had attended and waited his coming forth, until the
midst of August, brake up and bestowed themselves in convenient ports
against the next spring. The Duke then watching the opportunity, and readily
gathering together his dispersed ships, to the number of some fifty sail,
embarked his men of war, being three thousand pikes, and an hundred lances,
and about the second equinoctial arrived on the West part of Scotland, about
the same season that Iedworth was burned by the English, as is a fore-sayd, in
whose company was Richard de la Poole, that had been banished out of England.
Immediately after his return he assembled the Scottish Lords at Edenbrugh,
declaring to them the great love the French King bare to them and there
Country, that he esteemed their miseries his own, and would be always ready
to assist them against the Englishmen, enemies to them both. That for the
present he had brought with him men, money and munition to be doing withal,
so as nothing now wanted but willing minds and manly corages in themselves. In
the end it was concluded that an army should forthwith be gathered, and the
eight and twentieth day of October next was set down for their meeting at
Douglas dale.

The Scotts being there assembled, at the day prefixed, the army marched from
thence to Caldestreame upon Tweed, where conuaying their artillary over the
water, on the last day of the same month they laid siedge to Warke Castle,
which was manfully defended by Sir William Lisle Captain of the same. The
assayliants so well bestirred themselves, that on the first day they won the
uttermost ward, for two days after they continewed the battery, when having
made the breach assaultable, they entered by maine force the second ward. The
Captain having already lost many of his men, and perceauing it little auailed
to defend the walls against the great ordinance, upon a present resolution
issued out with his people that remained alive, and with such fury repulsed
the enemy, that beating them from the walls, and pursuing them to the water,
he slew a great number, besides those that were drowned, and died afterward
of their hurtes; in the whole to the number of three hundred, which for the
most part were Frenchmen. The Earl of Surrey coming with a great power to
rescue this Castle, found the enemy removed to the further side of the
river, wherefore having no commission to pass the English marches, he stayed
there. In the mean time the Queen sent into England to entreat her brother
the King, to yield to an abstinence of war, hoping in that time to work some
good agreement between the two Nations, whereunto the King consenting, the
army brake up and the Earl returned to the Court. In the beginning of the
next Summer anno. 1524. Scotts began again to be busy both on the East
and West marches, so as for three months sundry bickrings passed beetweene
the one and other party, but still they came by the worse, in so much that in
the end they were willing enough to incline to peace: whereupon truce was taken
again till the feast of Saint Andrews next. In the mean season great
co^sultation was had amongst the Lords of Scotland whether it were more fit to
contineue the war, or to give it over. Many of them held it an unreasonable
thing, that for the pleasure only of the French King, the Realm should
sustain any more damage, by contineuing so needless a war, and that the
Duke was much to blame in yielding so far to the seditious humor of France.
Therefore they wished, that the young King (now grown past a Child) might at
the least bear some sway in the government of the Realm. The Duke perceiving
how the game went, saw it little auailed to strive against the stream, and
therefore in September following, taking his leave of the young King, he passed
over into France, now the third time since he was made Regent. It is said, that
at his departure; he did instantly entreat the Nobility to admit no peace
with England till his return again, which he promised should be not long
after, but in both his desire was unsatisfied, for he never came more into
Scotland neither co^tinewed the war as he wished. Shortly after the Earl
Douglas, that had been banished before by the Regent (as I have said) and had
hitherto remained in France, obtained leave of King Henry to pass safely
through England into his own Country. This favor was redily granted, being
one that was always opposite to the French faction. Queen Margaret, now
bearing the greatest sway in Scotland sought by all means how to make firm
friendship with her brother of England and to break the neck of the amity
with France, which had of late brought so many miseries upon her Sons
kingdom. Neither did King Henry forget by kind letters and messages, to
diverse of that nation, to second therein his Sisters designements, signifying
unto them that he desired nothing more then perpetual love and concord
between the two Neighbor Nations, which thing as he had ever before wished,
yet much more at this time, to the end all men might see how much he tendered
the state of their Reamle, for the young kings sake his Nephew. That if they
would be persuaded to break of friendship with France, he could find in his
heart to bestow the Lady Mary (his only Child) in marriage upon their King,
whereby the two kingdoms should be in great possibility to be made one
Monarchy, and that by the access of England unto Scotland: which would be the
more honor to their nation. That the like emulatio^ and malice has bin
heretofore known, between the like neighbor countries, which nevertheless by
marriage, intercourse, trafique, and mutual kindness has bin utterly suppressed
and buried in oblivion. These exceeding kind offers of King Henry, moved much
debate, and argument at an assembly of the Scottish Lords amongst themselves.
On the one side it was objected, that as France was far removed by
situation from them, so the people differed much from the Scotts in the whole
course and manner of life. But the Englishmen and they were bred and brought up
under one and the same climate, and were so like in there language, laws,
manners, customs, complexion, constitution of body, and disposition of mind
(wherein society especially consists) that it seemed God and Nature had from
the beginning purposed to make them one peculier people, as they hade made
there seat one soil, by it self, severed from the maine continent. Further
by reason of the distance and dangerous passage between France and them, the
one cannot receive from the other either much good being friends, or much h^rme
being enemies, whereas out of England either the one or other will be always
ready at hand, accordingly as the Englishmen ar friends or foes unto them. For
there is no other way to walk in, between France and them, but through a
dangerous part of the Ocean, which either by fury of tempests may be hindered,
or by the enemy fore-stawled and clogged. Whereof was made good proof not
much above a year ago, when as the Duke of Albanie was so pend up in France
with the English navy, that of al one whole Summer they could receive no
succors from thence, to their exceeding loss and coffeehouse. Thus much was
then alleged in favor of the league with England, whereunto not a few amongst
them were well inclined, though many other, that either lived upon rapine and
spoil (which always follows war,) or that were fed aforehand by the French
king (which course has ever much prevailed with that Nation) obstinatly
opposed themselves against this profitable and sound advise.

But being not able by any show of reason to maintain their frivolous
allegations against the truth, they subtly brake of this conference, with
this caution, that this weighty point could not be resolved without the general
consent and approbation of the Estates assembled to that end. For they were
well assured that the Duke (to whom especially the deciding of this question
pertained) would never give consent to shake hands with England,
notwithstanding Queen Margaret so labored this point, for the benefit (she
knew) would thereof come to her Son and his kingdom, that in December
following she sent the Lord Gilbert Earl of Cassels, Robert Cockburne Bishop
of Dunkeld, and the Abbot of Combuskeneth Ambassadors into England, who
coming to the Court on Christmasse eve, the King gave them audience, to whom
the Bishop made an eloquent Oration in Latin, declaring the benefits of peace,
and the manifold discommodities of war. How happy a thing it were, if by the
marriage of their young King with the Lady Mary his Majesty's Daughter, a
perpetual league and alliance might be established between them. The King
liked well of this motion, so as he might obtain his desire in two points.
First and especially, that the Scottish Nobility would renounce the league with
France: Secondly, that the young king his Nephew, would come and remain with
him in England, till he were of perfect age to marry his Daughter. But because
the Ambassadors had not commission to proceed so far, the Earl returned
into Scotland, to acquaint the Queen and Council therewith. The two other
remained at London till his return thither again. Here-vpon a Parliament was
presently holden at Edenbrough, from whence the Earl of Cassels was presently
sent again to the King of England, with a favorable answer to his two former
demands. But because that in the mean season Charles the Emperor renewed his
former suit for the obtaining of the said Lady to his wife, the King took a
pawse therein for the present time, prolonging the truce with Scotland, for
three years and a half, and then the Ambassadors were all with much
courtesy dismissed, about the beginning of the year 1525. Dowglasse, forsaken
then of the Queen his wife, and banished the realm again) made some
out-roades one into the others Marches. But all was quietly put up, and the two
kings continued good neighbors one to the other.

In the beginning of the year 1534. Charles the Emperor unto king James (who
was desirous to match in his blood) a motion was made of his cousine German,
the Lady Mary king Henryes Daughter and Heir, who (as before you have heard)
had been in question, but now for the space well near of ten years had lien
dead, and no further dealt in. King James answered in such sort, as there-by it
seemed that he had a good will to hearken unto it.

This Lady (that was afterward Queen of England) was once in speech (as is
before declared) to have been married to the Emperor himself: after that to
Francis the French king. But these motions were rather made (I take it) in
policy, then proceeding of any such meaning in either of those Princes,
neither happilye had the King her Father any such purpose, thinking her a
fitter match for his Nephew of Scotland, then for either of them. For in the
latter end of this year, the King sent thither the Bishop of Saint Dauies, and
the Lord William Howard, brother to the Duke of Norffolke, to entreat king
James to appoint some time, when the King their Master and he might meet
together, to confer of matters of great importance, tending much to the
benefit of both the Realms. Further to tell him, that it might come to pass
(if all things else sorted to his liking) he should espouse the Lady Mary his
eldest Daughter (for his other Daughter the Lady Elizabeth after her sister
Queen of England also was borne above a year before,) and with-all to make
him thereby the Monarch over the whole Island, if he dyed without issue male.

And to the end he should give the more trust and credit to these his
promises, he said more-ouer, that he would forthwith entitle him Duke of
York, and his Vicar General over the whole realm of England. King James (as
he had great reason so to do) entertained these offers with great
thankfulness, appointing a time, when he would meet the King his Uncle, and
so with many courtisies dismissed the Ambassadors. All this notwithstanding, he
was so exceedingly labored by his Prelates, that they drew him quite from that
resolution, upon this occasion. A little before this Embassage, King Henry had
sent the foresaid Bishop into Scotland with certain English pamphlets,
concerning reformation of religion: which being presented unto his nephew, with
request that he would advisedly read them over, he gave them presently to some
about him to keep, that were especial favorers of the Clergy, and the
religion of those times, who had scantly turned over the first leaf, but with
open mouth they condemned those books, for most impious and heretical libels,
telling the king, they were glad from their hearts, that he had not stained his
eyes with the very view of such pestiferous and damnable doctrine. And for an
infallible proof of this their censure upon those books, it fell out about
the same time, that the Pope had sent a messenger into Scotland, requiring king
James to join with him against the king of England, whom he had already
adjudged an Heretic, a Scismaticke, and a wedlock-breaker, for he and Queen
Katherine, sometimes his Brothers wife, for the unlawfulness thereof, were
then lawfully parted. And further this Nuncio declared, that for these heinous
offenses, the Pope had deprived him of his kingdom, which he bestowed (for in
such cases he has been always very liberal) unto James and other popish
Princes his obedient sons. Thus by the subtle practice of the Priests, who
to uphold their reputation in the world, still buzzed in their kings ears,
that his Uncle sought nothing more by this his desired conference with him, but
to withdraw him from the profession of that ancient and Catholic religion,
wherein their Fathers and fore-elders had lived so many hundred years
together, in great happiness and felicity, and withal being of himself
religiously given, according to the knowledge of those ignorant times, he was
the more easily dissuaded from this promised meeting. Though King Henry had
cause to take this part unkindly at the others hands, neuer-the-lesse he was
contented to put it up, imputing the fault to them especially, that either of
ignorance, or upon respect of their particular good, neglected the benefit that
might have followed hereof unto the weal public of the whole Island.

King Henry to show how little he was moved with this manner of dealing,
bestowed on his Nephew the year following the Garter, and according to the
ceremonies thereto belonging, he was installed at Windsor by his procurator the
Lord Erskin. Within the compass of the other seven years remaining of my
former account, king James had married two wives out of France. The former was
the Lady Magdaline, eldest Daughter to king Francis, with whom having been
married half a year, she deceased, within little more then a month after her
arrival in Scotland. The second, was Daughter to the Duke of Guise, and widow
to the Duke of Longeuille lately deceased. Within a year after this latter
marriage, Queen Margaret (his mother) departed this life, having first seen a
young Prince (her grandchild) borne into the world, but neither he, nor a
second son, lived to succeed their father in the kingdom. King Henry knowing
how much his Nephew was continually wrought, to break off friendship with him,
or at the least to use the same for his own advantage only, was much affraide
that happily he might at length be seduced, and therefore was very desirous
to have conference with him, and to establish the league that hitherto had
continued between them. To this end he once again sent into Scotland, to
entreat him to meet him at York, where he would communicate such matter
with him, as tended greatly to the good of both realms. This message thus
delivered by the Lord Thomas Howard, King James and diverse of his Nobility,
seemed willing enough to yield their consents to this journey. But contrariwise
the Prelates mightily opposed themselves against it. Amongst other things,
they alleged that King Henry went about (which touched their free hold) to
persuade their King to take that course in Scotland, which he had done at home
in his own kingdom: namely, to expel the Pope, to usurp his authority over
the Church, to dissolve religious houses, and to seize upon their lands and
revenues. But rather then he should be drawn to use any such unlawful
means, wherewith to supplye his present wants, they freely offered to give
him yearly, out of their own revenues, thirty thousand Crowns: and if that
would not serve his turn, they would undertake to advantage him an hundred
thousand more yearly, out of the lands and possessions of them, that were
already fallen from their due obedience to the sea of Rome. These fair promises
prevailed so much with King James, that this meeting was also avoided. But
with-all an Ambassador was immediately sent into England, as well to excuse the
King, as to require that Commissioners might be appointed of either party, to
meet for the ordering of some controversies then depending between the two
Nations, which was granted, and performed accordingly on King Henry's part.
Neuer-the-lesse, when after sundry injuries still offered by the Scotts, the
King of England had once or twice yielded to all reasonable conditions, and yet
not-with-standing, perceived how little from time to time they were regarded:
at the length, being not able to endure so many indignities, he resolved to end
all controversies by open war. But first, to the end it might appear to the
world, how unwillingly he was provoked unto it: before he would take arms
against his near kinsman, he caused a pamphlet to be published in Print,
declaring what moved, or rather compelled him thereunto; wherein he charged
King James especially with deep dissimulation, his words tasting of Honey, but
his deeds of Worme-wood. After a serious complaint whereof, he descends, or
rather ascends to a supposed title of Superiority, continued in a lineall
succession of the Kings of England, over that nation from Edward the first
(son to Alured king of England) for above six hundred years together, but
hereof I have spoken enough before. This done, a Navy was sent to the Sea, to
take all such Scottish ships as fell into their walk, of which they brought
into the Ports of England eight and twenty, fraught with many good
commodities.

The Scottish King here-vpon sent into England, to demand restitution, seeing
no war was as yet proclaimed. But king Henry answered, that he had no reason
to yield thereunto, till such time, as recompense was made for the harm his
subjects had sustained on the borders. In the mean season he had also prepared
an army of some twenty thousand men, and committed the same to the conduct of
the Duke of Norfolk, accompanied with the Earls of Shrewsbery, Darby,
Cumberland, Surrey, Hertford, Angus, Rutland, and diverse other Lords and
Gentlemen of the North. King James having knowledge of this preparation
entreated to have all differences and complaints on both sides put to order,
and so taken up.

Whereupon the King caused his army to stay about York, appointing the Duke,
the Lord privy seal, and others, to enter into conference with the Scottish
Ambassodours, and if possibly they could to end all controversies, whereby to
avoid the effusion of much blood. But when the Commissioners for England,
perceived that the Scotts sought only to detract time, whereby to put of the
war for that year (winter now approaching) they break of the treaty, and
having assembled the whole army, therewith entered into Scotland the twentieth
day of October in the year 1542. Berwicke the nine and twentieth day of the
same month, without resistance or show of enemy, although King James had then
in readiness (as it is said) an army of thirty thousand men, encamped at
Fallamure, but fourteen miles within Scotland. But whether it was, that they
waited some advantage, or that the Scottish Nobility were not so forward (which
is pretended) as their King would have had them, nothing was attempted against
England, until the four and twentieth day of November following, by which time
the Duke was well on his way toward London. For then king James went him self
unto the West. marches of Scotland, where he appointed the Lord Maxwell his
warden, together with the Earls of Cassels and Glencorne, and certain other
Lords there with him to invade England on that side. This army consisting of
fifteen thousand men passed over the water of Eske, and burnt certain houses
of the Greues on the very border. Hereupon Thomas bastard Dacres, and Jack of
Musgraue, with an hundred light horses made toward the enemy, having a while
before sent to Sir Thomas Wharton (Lord warden of those Marches,) to make all
the have he could after them. By that time these two valiant Captains had
begun the skirmish, the Lord Wharton with some three hundred horse more, were
come within view of the Scottish host, who supposing that the Duke, or some
other of the English Lords was turned back again with the whole army,
(otherwise they imagined those few would never have adventured so desperately to
set upon them) were with the suddenesse of this unexpected flight put into such
a Panick fear, that forthwith committing themselves to flight, as fast as
their legs could carry them, or their horses under them, they were pursued
and taken, without any resistance. Amongst whom these following were the
principal men. The Earls of Cassels and Glencorne, the Lord Maxwel, the Lord
Flemming, the Lo. Sommerwel, the Lord Oliphant, the Lord Gray, Sir Oliver
Sinclere the kings minion, John Rosse of Gragie, Robert Aesken Son to the
Lord Aesken, the Lord Maxwells two brothers, and above two hundred men of name
more. Of the common souliers not so few as eight hundred, so as some one
Englishman had three or four prisoners to his share. The Scotts lost at this
blow without any bloodshed on either party, twenty pieces of Ordinance,
four Cart-loades of spears, and ten pauilions. Thus we see, that the King
of Heaven and Earth can, and will daunt, the corrage of man, when it seems
good unto him, to the end we should acknowledge him to be the only giver of all
victory. The Scottish writers attribute the bad success of their army at this
meeting, to the unadvised course, which King James took in appointing a mean
Gentleman (Sir Oliver Sinclere) his Lieutenant grnerall over the same. For,
upon the hearing of the Kings Commission openly read, the whole army was so
^^ch of^ended ^^d ^ro^led thereat, that it ^^^oght (...) confusion amongst
them: which being observed of the Englishmen though they were but a handful
in comparison of the enemies power yet they were therewith so much incoraged
that they adventured manfully upon them and put them al thereby to flight. This
discomfeiture chanced unto the Scotts at Solloway Moss, in the latter end of
Noue^ber following, and was the most admirable ^ictory, that ever was had over
them, to be wholly referred to the immediate hand of God, howsoever they would
excuse it. King James being now at Garlan^rocke upon the borders, was
^^ruelously perplexed a^ t^^ ^ewes hereof, in so much as being overcome with an
extreme mal^ncholy passion, he never after held up his head, but still
languished till death had fully seized upon him, on the twentieth day of
December following. In the mean season, one and twenty of the chief prisoners
were conuaied to London; and committed to the Tower the 19. day of the same
month, where having ^om^ined two days, they were carried through the streets to
Westminster, two and two together in a ^anck. Eight of them being Noblemen,
were apparelled at the Kings charge, with new gowns of black damask, furd with
black ^^^ie ^o^tes of black ^el^e^, and dublets of satte^, and else whatso^uer
belonged thereto. Then they were brought before the Counsel, sitting at the
Star Chamber, where the Lord Chancellor rebuked them openly for their
misdemeanour toward the King and Realm, declaring that his Majesty had good
cause to make war upon them. First for their dissimulation in all their
treaties of peace. Then for keeping his subjects in durance without redemption,
contrary to the ancient laws of the Marches. And lastly for inuading his
dominions without open defiance, or just cause given on his Majesty's part.
Nevertheless that his Majesty more regarding his honor, then his Royal
power, was contented to render good for evil, and curtisie for unkindness.
For whereas he might by law of arms (as they knew well enough) shut them up
in close prison, he was contented that they should be committed to the
custody of the Nobles of his land, that were thought meet to take that charge
upon them, according to their own several estates and degrees. Then being
dismissed thence, they were forthwith bestowed with one Noble man or other
accordingly, of whom they had such curtious intertainment, as that they
themselves confessed, they never lived more pleasantly at any time before. On
the twentieth of December news was brought to the Court of the Scottish Kings
death. King Henry and his Counsel conceiving hereupon, that a good mean was
offered whereby without war the two Realms might be united, intimated their
meaning to the Scottish Lords, who seeming very willing therein to gratify the
King, were brought to the Court in Christ-masse holy days, where they were
lodged, feasted, and entertained most lovingly. There (as of themselves) they
motioned a marriage between Prince Edward the Kings Son now little more then
five years old, and their young Queen, that was borne some five or six
days before the death of the King her Father, promising withal to do there
best to bring the same to pass. King Henry gave them great thanks for their
forwardness therein, and was not only contented to set them freely at
liberty, but also bestowed large presents on every man according to his
degree. On New-yeares day they departed from London home-wardes, and dined at
Enfield, where they saw the young Prince, of whom they seemed greatly to
rejoice both in speech and countinance. From thence they kept on their journey,
till they came into the North-partes, where the Duke of Suffolk (the Kings
Lieutenant) stayed for their coming, with whom they remained till such
pledges were come out of Scotland as was before couenanted they should leave
behind them. With them went also the Earl of Angus, who together with his
brother Sir George Douglas, had allowance for their maintenance of King Henry,
while they remained in England, after their exile, the space of fifeteene
years. The Scottish King, while he lived had labored the deliverance of the
Earl who now upon his return home was made one of the privy Counsel,
amongst other of the Lords that had been lately prisoners here; by the Earl
of Araine, Governor of the young Queen and of the Realm, and next heir to
the Crown, according to the custom of that Country. Shortly after Sir Robert
Bows and some other English prisoners were delivered by their bands, after
the manner of the Marches.

In March following, Sir Ralfe Sadler, (who died a grave Cou^sellor in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth) being sent Ambassador into Scotland came thither
somewhat before the Parliament. His errand was to persuade the Governor to
give his consent with the other Lords, to the marriage propounded lately by
them, and that withal a firm peace might be concluded upon between the two
Nations. These points were long debated, but in conclusion (after that David
Beaton Cardinal and Archbishop of ^^^nt Andrews, the French factor, was
remo^^ed from the assembly) generally yielded unto and confirmed. And further
pleadges were promised to be sent into England for the better assurance thereof.

The Ambassador staying still behind to see every thing performed, according
to promise, on the behalf of the Scottish Lords, the Earl of Glencorne, Sir
George Douglas, Sir William Hamiltone, Sir James Leirmonth and the Secretary
were sent into England, as well to confirm, as to report what had been
established by act of Parliament, concerning the marriage intended with
England. These men remained here from the end of March till the end of Iulie
following: in which time the marriage between Prince Edward of England and the
infant of Scotland was fully confirmed, by wrytings enterchangablie signed and
sealed, and a peace concluded, for ten years. These things thus passed in the
year of Lord 1543. Scottish Marchantes were not a little glad (after their
long restraint) of their free liberty of trafique, whereupon they presently
dispatched their ships to the sea, so as in short time never a port
well-neere in England was without some of them, to the exceeding great joy of
both Realms. But this calm lasted not long, for now began France after
their old fashion, to ^^^rre up certain seditious and dispightfull sp^^^ts,
which like unto the curssed spirits of the ^yre breathed out tempestious and
boisterous blastes, wherewith to darken and disturb the former Sunshine and
quiet season. For before the years end, thorough the practice of the
Cardinal, John Hamiltone, brother to the Governor, and David Paynter, which
two last (men of most dissolute conversation) came lately out of France for
that purpose the Scotts were so wonderfully wrought, that both the Governor
himself and all they that had so lately before vowed themselves and there
service to King Henry were now again become wholly French, for these reasons.
First by this marriage, it would come to pass (as they obiectted that the
Scottish Nobolity should grow into contempt being far inferior in wealth and
possessions to the Lords of England and further removed by habitation from the
Kings presence, who (no doubt) would make the most fertile and commdious part
of England Southwards the place of his residence ordinarily. But that which
more nearely touched them, was the eminent danger, wherein to Religion would
be thereby brought, the preservation whereof they were bound to prefer before
either lands or lives, that the state whereinto England was persently fallen,
might be a sufficient warning unto them, who already were but over much
inclined that way (for about that time the Gouener had incoraged Friar Guillan,
openly to preach against Immages and foolish ceremonies, giving liberty that
who would might read the bible in English which about three years before was
openly read in very Church in England and was the very bane and break neck of
Popery, through out the whole Island. As for their promise made to King Henry,
they were persuaded, there was no cause why they should stick at that, seeing
it was lately decreed in the Counsel of Constance, that no covenant or promise
how constantly soever made, ought to be kept with an heretic, such as the
Pope had already judged him to be. The Earl of Casseles only continued
constant, though he was attempted both by fair means and foul to the
contrary, for he having two brothers his pleadges in England, protested, that
he would never redeem either his liberty or life with the loss of them:
wherefore at his return into England the King much commended the young
gentleman's resolution, and in acquitall therefore set both him and his brothers
at liberty, King Henry could not brook this manner of dealing, but resolving
to be fully revenged, he first caused all the ships of Scotland (whereof
there were good store) to be presently staid till his pleasure was further
known: then proclaming open war, he forthwith made preparation to invade
Scotland by land and sea. The Queen Mother, the regent, and the Cardinal,
being all like affected, solicited King Francis to minister aid against
England. But the money that that was thereupon sent them, and delivered to the
Earl of Lenox to be employed to that end, was by him detayned, by reason of
some iarres then amongst themselves, which brought him out of favor with the
French King, who before had used him, as a special instrument on his side.

King Henry in the mean season, having not been slow in his business,
thought good neuer-the-lesse, to make trial whether upon better aduisements
the Scotts would yield to some reasonable conditions: wherefore he sent his
letters to Edenbrough, fraught with many just complaints, and bitter threats,
but all prevailed not: wher-vpon proceeding in his former courfe, and having
furnished his Navy with all things needful, he committed the charge thereof to
the Earl of Hertford, Sir John Dudley, Lord Lisle high Admiral of England,
and the Earl of Shrewsbury, accompanied with the Lord Cobham, Clinton,
Coniers, Sturton, the Lord William Howard, with many valiant Knights and
Gentlemen. The whole Navy consisted of two hundred ships, and in them some
ten thousand men of war. Loasing from New-Castell, and entering the Scottish
Sea between the two Islands the Basse and the May. The next day they passed up
the Firthe (being the fourth of May) landing the whole Army at New-hauen, two
miles above Leith.

The Lord Admiral lead the fore-ward, the Lord Lieutenant the maine battle,
and the Earl of Shrewesburie the rere-ward. The Lord Governor being then at
Edenbrough, accompaned with the Cardinal, the Earl of Huntley, Arguile,
Bothwel, and others, with some six thousand horsemen and footmen, purposed to
inpeach their passage. At the first they made show to set upon the vantgard,
but being assailed by five hundred harquebutters, and shroudly galled, after a
light skirmish they made a sudden retraite but with such speed as they leaft
their artillary behind them, The Scotts returned to Edenbrugh, and the
Englishmen kept their course to Lies: entering the town without any great
resistance, they lodged therein that night to their best advantage. The next
day they landed their victuals and great artillary. Hither the Lord Gouerner
sent Adam Otterburne provost of Edenbrugh, with two of the baylifes, to know of
the Earl of Hertford the cause of his coming offering that what wrong soever
the Engleshmen had received of them, should be satisfied to their full
contentment and that upon those terms he would gladly receive him into the
town. The Earl answered that he had no commission to treat of peace, but he
was sent thither to take revenge on those, that had falsified their faith unto
the King his master, and therefore purposed to visit there town in such
manner, as happily they would nor like of, and soche bad him tell the Gouerner.
Upon the return of this answer the Governor taking order for the defense of
the Castle, departed immediately to Sterling. The sixth of May, the army
marched toward Edenbrugh, at the approach whereof the Provost (accompanied with
one or two Burgesses and some officers of arms) desired to speak with the
lieutenant: being brought to his presence, he offered unto him the keys of the
town on condition that the inhabitants might safely pass out with bag and
bagage, and the buildings preserved from fire. Answer was made, that he was
sent thither to take reueng (as before) and therefore unless they would yield
up the town simply without condition, and cause Men, Women and Children to
issue forth into the fields, and submit themselves to his will and pleasure, he
would proceed against them with all extremity. The Provost replied, that they
would rather stand to their defense, and so departed. The Englishmen coming to
the Cow-gate beat it open with their great ordinance, entered and slew diverse
that made resistance: forthwith the great ordinance was drawn up the high
street within reach of the shot from the Castle, so as a culluering was
dismounted, and the English forced to retire, not with out some loss of men,
night drawing on, they departed to there camp at Leith, for three days
following they continewed firing the town, and consumed a great part thereof.
In the mean season four thousand light horsemen were brought by land (as was
appointed) from the Borders by the Lord Eeuers, who joining with the army at
Leith did such exploits, that well near they left neither pile, village, nor
house unburned within seven miles of Edenbrough, besides the spoil, pillage,
and droues of Cattle, that was every day brought to the Camp. Having thus
wrought their wills there-about, they shipped their Artillarie and booties,
carried away such ships as they found in the Haven, of which the principal
were the Salamander (given by the French King at the marriage of his Daughter)
and the other (called the Unicorn) made by the last king. These two were
balanced with Cannon shot, which was found in the town, to the number of
foure-score thousand pieces: the rest, as well Scottish as English, for the
more part were laden with the spoil and booties belonging to the common
soldiers and mariners. On the fifteenth day of this month, both the army by
land, and the fleet, departed from Lies in one hour, leaving the town on
fire, which was burned to the ground. The army returning homewards encamped
that night at Seaton, seven miles from Lies, where they burned the Castle,
and (for more dispight) destroyed the gardens and Orchards, because the Lord
Seaton (owner of the same) had been the Cardinals best friend, when he was in
prison. The next night they encamped besides Dunbar, where they had an alarm
given them. In the morning they burned the town, and marching forwards, they
were somewhat stayed in the way by reason of a gross foggie mist; and a report
that the Lord Seaton and the Lord Hume, had assembled a power, wherewith to
empeach their passage at a strait called the Pease. But when the day cleared
about two of the clock in the afternoon, the army setting forward, passed
the strait without show of enemy, that would not abide their coming. That
night the army lodged at Rantton 8. miles from the borders, from whence the
next day (being the 28. of May) they came to Berwick, having lost in all this
journey not above forty persons, for which happy success they rendered thanks to
almighty God the giver of all victory. The names of the chief towns, castles
and buildings burned and ouer-throwne in this voyage, are as follows
Edenbrough the Abbay and the Kings housc. Cragmiller and Castle. Preston and
the Castle. Sengclers Castle. Lawresson and the Grange. Markley.
Wester-grange. Enderliegh. Broughton. Chester-field. Craton-end. Dudistone.
Skam house. The Ficket. Beuerton. Tranent. Shenstone. Saint Minees. Petinwames
part. Lies, the Haven and Pile. New Bottle Abbay. Musselbrough some part.
Hadington Frieries. Dumbar. Drilawe. Trapren. Kirkland hill. Hatherwike.
Belton. East Barnes. Bowcland. Butlerden. Quickwood. Blackburne. Ranton.
Bildie, All Knikorne. The Queens Ferrie. The brent Island.


The five lowest were burned by the fleet at sea, for while the army lay at
Leethe, the ships were not idle, but scouring the river up and down on both
sides, well near as high as Sterling, above fifty miles from the maine sea,
they made what spoil they could of what-so-euer fell in their way: while the
Earl lay at Leethe he made these knights, whose names follow.

The Lord Clinton. The Lord Coniers. Sir William Wroughton. Sir Thomas
Holcroft. Sir Edward Dorrell. Sir John Luttrell. Sir John Ienins. Sir Thomas
Waterton. Sir Charles Howard. Sir George Blant. Sir Peter Mewtas. Sir Edward
Warner. Sir Ralfe ^ulmer. Sir Hugh Cholmeley. Sir Thomas Lee. Sir Richard
Leigh. Sir John Leigh. Sir Lawrence Smith. Sir William Vauasour. Sir Richard
Shirburne. Sir Robert Stapleton. Sir Thomas Holt. Sir William Dauenport. Sir
Ralphe Leycester. Sir Humfrey Bradborne. Sir Thomas Maliuerie. Sir Francis
Hothome. Sir John Massy. Sir Leonard Beckwith. Sir Thomas Cokanie. Sir Peter
Freshwell. Sir Richard Egerton. Sir Anthony Neuille. Sir John Neuille. Sir
William Radcliffe. Sir George Bows. Sir Vrian Breretone. Sir William
Breretone. Sir Roger Breretone. Sir Edward Warren. Sir Brian Leytone. Sir
Robert Worseley. Sir Thomas Talbot. Sir Hugh Caluerley. Sir John Clear. Sir
Richard Holland. Sir Thomas Venables. Sir John Connestable. Sir Edmund
Trafford. Sir John Athertone. Sir Richard Cholmeley. Sir Philip Egerton. Sir
Hugh Willobie. Sir Thomas Connestable. Sir William Woodhouse. Sir Edmund
Savage. Sir Thomas Gerard.
11. May. 1544.

Matthew Earl of Lennox, being now wrought out of favor with the French king,
by the practice of the Queen Mother and the Cardinal, thought Scotland no
safe place for him, and therefore to make himself the more able to resist the
malice of his enemies at home, he made means to be entertained of the King of
England. Taking therefore the sea, with some other Noblemen of his country, he
arrived at Westchester about Midso^mer following. From thence (having first made
his way to the King) he repaired to the Court, where being well entertained, he
married shortly after the Lady Margaret Douglas, daughter and heir to the Earl
of Angus by Queen Margaret of Scotland king Henry's sister, who thereupon
endowed his Niece with an estate of inheritance of certain lands, to the
yearly valewe of seauenteene hundred marks, of rent of assisse which to this
day are called Lennox Lands. From this coople descended two sons. Henry
Steward Lord Dernley (the eldest) was Father to James the sixth that now
reigns. Matthew the other Brother married Elizabeth Candish, Daughter to the
Countess of Shrewsbury (the most famous builder (of a woman) in the world; by
whom he had only issue the Lady Arbella, (a beautiful plant) trained up (as I
hear) by the Countess her grandmother, in all commendable qualities, and
exercises of virtue and piety. King James, in regard of his just title and
claim to these lands, receives of the Queens majesty that now is an yearly
pension. The Earl of Lennox being desirous to show his good will to do the
King some acceptable service, obtaining certain bands of Englishmen entered
into Scotland but he found not that constancy in his Countrymen that he
expected, and therefore was enforced to return without atchieuing his
principal purpose; though his labor was not all-togither lost, for he raised
and took diverse Castells, as that in the I Will of Arraine belonging to the
Governor, and the Castle of Rossey in the I Will of Bute, from whence the royal
family of the Stewards (Kings of Scotland, now for the space of two hundred and
thirty years) took their beginning. Though King Henry at this time also
maintained sharp war with France, nevertheless he ceased not to take the
opportunity offered him, through the civil dissension amongst the Scottish
Nobility, making continual roads and forreis into their Countries. About the
midst of February following, Sir Ralph Eeuers, Lord warden of the middle
Marches entered Scotland with four thousand English, Irish, and assured Scots,
passing to Iedworth without any resistance. He understood there, that the
gouerner with the Earl of Angus were lately come to the Abbay Melrosse, about
8. miles distant from thence, purposing thereto atte^d the repair of their
forces, hastening thetherward. Sir Ralph therefore (about mid night) marching
from thence, hoped upon the sudden to take them at some great advantage, being
as yet over few to make resistance. But the Scotts having knowledge by their
Espialls, of his approach, (though somewhat to late) forsook their lodgings,
before they had good wills to arise, and leaving bag and baggage behind the^,
in all have they withdrew themselves to the next mountains, from thence to
observe the behauior of the English, who finding the place abandoned, took the
spoil of al they found in the town and Abbay, utterly defacing the Momuments
of the Douglasses, greatly to the displeasure of the Earl of Angus and his
lineage, and so returned back toward Iedworth: by this time the number of the
Scots was well increased, by the repair of Norman Lisle, Son to the Earl of
Rothsey (a young Gentleman of good expectation) and of Walter Scot with such
troops as accompanied the^ thither, in so much as the Gouerner was encoraged
to give the Englishmen battle before they should reach Iedworth, but because
they trusted not altogether to their strength, it was devised, that the maine
battle of the Scotts should lie closely in a vallie, to receive the
Englishmen at unawares, which took effect accordingly. For the Scotts sending
all their horses with their keepers, and those that might best be spared, to
the top of the hill, under which they were embattailed, the Englishmen were
trained within their danger, which being perceived by these Scots that came on
their side, (who were some 7. or 8. hundred) they presently fell of and joined
with the enemy. The Englishmen nevertheless stuck to it, till a great number
of the^ were slain, the rest being ouerweried with that days and the last
nights travel, betook themselves to flight. The middle battle seeing their
fellows thus discomfeited, they also turned and brake into the reereward in
such confused manner, as thereby the whole army was put out of order, no man
knowing whom to follow for his Captain. The Scotts in the mean time taking
the advantage of the wind and the Sun, were upon them before they could well
discern what they were. In this confusion, every man sought to save himself,
whereof insued a great slaughter with very small loss on the other side.
Besides Sir Rafe Euers, the Lord of Ogle and Sir Brian Layton, who were chief
Commanders, diverse other gentlemen were slain, in the whole number of two
hundred, a thousand were taken prisoners well nere, of whom some four score
were men of quality and special note. Though the benefit of this victory fell
to the Governor, the glory thereof redownded to the Dowglasses. King Henry was
much grieved for the gentleman Sir Rafe Euers, whose service had been such in
these late wars with the Scotts, that he had brought the more part of all
those, that inhabited within twenty miles of the borders of Eng. unto the
obedience of King Henry, who now were the chief cause of his destruction in
manner as you have heard. This year the French King sent Mongomery into
Scotland with four thousand Frenchmen, of whom five hundred were lances,
these joining with the Scotts, to the number of fifteen thousand in the
whole, came to the borders, encamping over against Warke Castle, from whence
passing over the river every other day, they entered into the English marches
and returned back again at night, with such booties as they got: In this
manner having prayed upon the inhabetants five or six miles compass, for the
space of a week to gether, understanding that the Earl of Hertford,
(lieutenant over the North parts) had taken such order for the defense of those
countries, that it auailed not to attempt any further invasion at that time,
they teturned home into Scotland. The next summer was spent with continual
light incursions of the borderers on both sides, with variable success on
either party. The taking of Robert Maxwell (a gallant young Gentleman, eldest
son to the Lord Maxwell) was of greatest note. At the approach of winter,
Montgomery (having first by commission from the king his Master, invested the
governor and the Earls of Angus, Huntley and Arguile, with the honorable order
of the Michell (whereof he was himself a companion) returned into France.
Though these two nations sought to molest one the other, yet in one thing (in
persecuting the true servants of God) they agreed ouer-well. For albeit K.
Henry had lately banished the usurped Supremacy of the bishop of Rome, and
also had published the New Testament in English, (a good preparatiue to the
reformation that followed in his sons days: yet it pleased not the Lord to
enlighten his understanding so far, as by his Ministry to give the Gospel
free passage in all the principal points of the true Religion. Hereof it came
to pass, that as well in the one as other nation, the professors of the gospel
were cruelly persecuted, especially for denying the real and carnal presence
of our Savior Jesus Christ (whom the father has placed far above the earth,
at his right hand in heaven) to be in the holy Sacrament of his last supper.
For about this time, George Wishart a Scottish Minister, a man of special
account for the purity of his life and doctrine, was conuented before the
C^rdinall, and by him convicted of herisie (as the truth was then called)
finally burned at S. Andrews, ouer-against the Castle (where he was imprisoned)
within ten weeks after, on the 16. of July; 1546. Anne Ayscu one of the two
daughters of Sir William Ayscu of Lincolnshire, being not above 25. years old,
for the defense of the same truth, was first most barbarously tormented on the
rack, and then (not prevailing that way) burned with others in Smithfield at
London. These saints of God, the two first of special mark (he for the
reputation of his life and learning, and she for the respect of her birth and
education) that in this Island gave their lives for the truth, left behind them
a more notorious remembrance of their christian ends, by the strange predictions
that accompanied the same. For when this man of God (the flame now ready to
incompasse him) was comforted by the Captain of the Castle his keeper, and
put in mind to call upon GOD, answered again, that though these fiery flames
are grievous to flesh and blood, yet my spirit is nothing therewith dismayed:
but he that so proudly sits yonder ouer-against us (meaning the Cardinal
that was placed in a window of the Castle to behold this spectacle) shall
within few days lie on the ground, no less reprochfully then now he does
advance himself arrogantly, which within four months after came to pass
when as the Cardinal was murdered by certain of his own clientes and
followers, in the same place, and his dead carcas showed out at the same
window, where lately before he was placed, in great pomp at the martyrdom of
George Wishart. Mine aunt Anne, after many threats and great search made for
her by the prelates her persecutors, was by casual intercepting of her own
letter discovered, and so unwillingly delivered into there bloody hands, by him,
that both loved her and the religion which she professed, but was never the
less over come with fear (for he had much to lose least happily by
concealing what was known he knew, he might so have brought himself into
trouble thus much flesh and blood prevailed with him, which often has such
power even over the most regenerat, that the Apostle Paul says of himself,
what I would that I do not: but what I hate even that I do, from the time he
had leaft her with them, till the hour wherein she suffered, a flame of fire
presented it self in the day time to vewe such (as according to his own
comparison (appears in a glass window over against a great fire in the same
room, doutlesse this sign was given him to some end, and I doubt not, but he
made good use thereof. For the sequel thus much I have since obferued, that
his Son and hair in few years, wasted the better part of his patrimony
(not to be redeemed at this day, with 20. thousand pounds) by yielding
overmuch to the unbridled vanities of another Anne Aiscu his wife. Thus it
pleased the Lord in his wisdom, to give honor to our family by such a mean,
as the world then held reproachful, and contrariwise to impair the state and
reputation of the same, by such a match, as in the judgment of man (for she was
honorably descended) should rather have given more estimation unto it. But now
to return to the contention temporal. The Earl of Hertford, with a new army
of some twelve thousand horsemen and footmen, entering Scotland, burned a great
part of the Mers and Tiuidale, amongst the rest, the town and Abbay of Kelso,
and Melrosse Abbay, the former was a while defended by 300. Scots, but in the
end the most of them were either slain or taken prisoners. The army having in
this manner passed along the further side of Tweed (but not far within the
country) returned home without encounter. In January following, this renowned
Prince, not inferior to any other living in those days (and yet that age
brought forth more excellent, then for many years before Christendom had
inioyed together) departed out of this life, who had so great desire to have
united these two nigh kingdoms, as that (it is said) he gave especial charge
to the lords of his counsel at his death, to endeavor the effecting of the
promised marriage with the young Princess of Scotland, 5. years younger then
Prince Edward his only son, now about nine years old at the death of the
king his father: wherefore the Duke of Somerset the young kings Uncle by his
mother (lately before Earl of Hertford) but now with the access of that
title, made also lord Protector of the Realm, together with other Lords of
the Council, held it expedient no longer to detract time, but once again to
assay, if happily after so many victories over the Scots in the pursuit of this
cause, they would yield now at length to that, against which they too wilfully
opposed themselves. To which end the lord Protector, being well provided both by
land and sea, passed into Scotland the next year about the beginning of
September, causing proclamation to be made in 3. several quarters of his camp,
signifying, that the cause of his coming was to make known to all that
nation, that his intent was only to renew the treaty of the long intended
marriage, between the King of England and their Princess, offering all manner
of courtesies to as many amongst them, as would show themselves favorers
thereof. The army marching along by the sea coast, was still attended by the
fleet, so as upon every occasion the one might relieve the others want. Such
Castles and houlds as were in their walk; some were rendered, others taken by
force and ruinated. As the army passed, the Scottish light-horsemen provoked
the Englishmen to skirmish, but commandment was given, that none should stir
against them. The 9. of September the Navy lodged at Preston within view of
the Scotts, who were encamped at the mouth of the river of Eske, within little
more then a mile one from the other. The Scottish prickers were now more busy
then before, showing themselves on the top of an hill in their greatest
bravery. The Englishmen could not endure to be so bearded, and therefore the
Lord Gray of Wilton (Captain over the horsemen) obtained leave at length to
set on them with a band of light horsemen, and certain demilances to back them
withal. These having mounted the hill, the Scots at first made show to give
the charge, but had no such meaning: for some 500. of them coming forward upon
the spurs with a great shout (after their manner) within their staves length of
the foremost troop, and then purposing to have wheeled about and be gone: the
Englishmen at an instant unlooked for, received them so roughly, as that at the
first incou^ter, and afterward in the chase, within three hours space, above
800. of the Scots were slain within sight of their own army. The Lord Hume by
a fall from his horse in the flight, received such an hurt that he died thereof
shortly after. His son and heir, six Gentlemen, and two Priests were taken
prisoners. On the English party, but one was hurt yet diverse were taken
prisoners by aduenturing ouer-farre in pursuit of the enemy, amongst whom were
Sir Ralphe Bulmere, Thomas Gower Marshall of Barwicke, and Captain Crouch, all
three having charge over certain comp^^ies of horsemen. After this blow, the
Scottish horsemen performed no more service worth the remembrance. The
Protector knowing that the Scotts were not a little discouraged by this
ouer-throw given the horsemen, and perceiving no disposition in them to give
battle, unless it were upon great advantage, thought it now a fit time to
make trial whether yet they would harken unto his reasonable demands, which he
signified to the Governor in writing, to this effect, as Buchanan reports.
First he earnestly entreated the Scots to remember, that on both sides they
were all Christians, to whom (if they would follow their profession) nothing
could be more acceptable then peace and amity, nor any thing more hateful then
war and bloodshed. That the war now between them proceeded not of ambition,
malice, or envy, but from an hearty desire of an assured and fi^^^e league and
amity between the two nations, which by no means else could be effected, then
by that marriage, which by their free consents had bin already faithfully
promised, and by public writing generally approved and ratified, upon such
conditions as were more favorable on their side, the^ of their own, such as
brought them into no manner of bondage, but into a friendly society of life and
community, of either fortune, good or bad. That this ma^^age would be much more
aduantagable to the^ then to the English, by how much, both the hope of good,
and the fear of harm, to the nation of less power, should be the greater.
That they could not deny, but it was necessary their Queen should marry,
consequently that their greatest care would be, how to bestow her. That if
they would make choice of a husband fittest for her, in regard both of his own
worth, and the good that should redound to their commonweal; whom could they
prefer before the King their next neighbor, borne and bred up in the same
Island, of her own blood, trained up after one manner of discipline, using the
same language, and not only in power and riches, but well nere in all things
(tending either to profit or pleasure) far before her, and which shall bring
with it, a never fading amity, and an utter burning in oblivion the memory of
all former malice and dissension? where-as if the Scots shall entertain a
stranger, differing from them in laws, language, and manner of life, what a
number of inconveniences will follow thereof? The mischief that by such
occasion has fallen upon other nations, may be a sufficient warning: and better
it were to be wise by other men's harms, then by experience to buy wit at so
dear a reckoning. That for his part, if he found them inclinable to the
marriage, he would remit some part of the former agreement, and be contented
that their Queen should be brought up amongst them at home, till she were of
age to make her choice, that in the mean season, peace should be kept between
the two nations, but with this condition, that their Queen should not in the
mean time be transported out of Scotland, and that no compact of marriage
should be made either with the French king, or any other foreign Prince. If
they would faithfully promise thus much, he would then in peaceable manner
immediately depart with his army, and what-so-euer damage they had sustained
since his coming into their realm, it should be satisfied by the judgment
of indifferent Arbitrators, chosen on both sides. The Gouerner having received
this letter, imparted the same to very few about him, fearing that if it had
passed many men's hands, the greater number would have inclined to the offered
conditions of peace, being so reasonable, which made him the rather conceive,
that unless the Duke had distrusted his strength, he would not have made so
fair wether with him. And therefore purposing to give him battle, he caused
a rumor to be spread abroad, that the Englismen were come to carry away the
Queen by force of arms which being received for truth, great numbers out of
all parts flocked unto him. The Duke perceiving their meaning, about 8. of the
clock in the fore-noone, caused the army to dislodge, and for their more
advantage, to march directly toward an hill near thereto, called Pinck hill,
nigh to Vndr^^^'^ Church. The Gouerner to prevent the Eng^ of their purpose,
commanded every man to attend his Captain to the encounter, who made so good
speed, that they were well nere come to it, before the other were gone half
the way. Thus both contending who should first possess this hill, together
with the advantage of the wind and Sun, the Englishmen were forced, by the
forwardnes of the enemy, to adventure upon a very desperate piece of service.
The Scottish army was marshalled in this manner. The Earl of Angus lead the
vant-gard, consisting of 8000. footmen, guarded with five pieces of great
Ordinance on the right hand, and about 400. horsemen on the left. The Governor
was placed behind him, with ten thousand Inland-men (as they call them)
accounted the choicest soldiers, the whole country affords. The Earl of
Huntley had the leading of the rere-ward of 8000. men, well nigh even with the
maine battle on the left side, being both flanked with 4000. Archers
Irishmen, and well guarded also with field pieces. Their armor (for the most
part) was a good skul or Jack, short sword very broad and sharp, dagger and
buckler, and a kerchiefe wreathed and wrapped twice or thrice about their
collers. In this array they stood closly together, holding their pikes in both
hands, and with-all their bucklers on the left, the point breast high, and the
other end resting against the right foot, the fore-ranck bending their knees to
give their fellows behind leave to cover the^ with their pikes, and crossing
one another in such forcible manner, as (if they stood fast) neither man nor
horse could break in amongst them, neither any strength with-stand them. On
the other side, the Earl of Warwick Lord Lieutenant of the army, conducted
the fore-ward of three thousand footmen. The Lord Dacres, the rere-ward of like
number and quality. The middle-ward of four thousand footmen, was conducted
by the General himself. The men of arms (who were six thousand) lead by the
lord Gray, lord Marshal: and the light horsemen (to the number of two thousand)
by Sir Francis Brian, together with the Ordinance, and 200. Harquebusiers on
horseback, were bestowed in places most convenient, either for offense or
defense, as present occasion required. There was between the two armies a
deep ditch which the Englishmen were to pass, before they could come to the
enemy, many that could not leap over, stuck fast therein, with no small
danger to themselves, and impediment to their fellows that followed. Besides
that, their course lay untowardly ouer-thwart plowed lands, with deep furrows,
for a stones cast, after they had passed the slough. Not-with-standing these
incombrances in their course, and the eminent peril of their enimes Pikes at
the encounter, the valiant lord Gray with his troops of men of arms,
accompanied with the lord Fitz-Waters (afterward Earl of Sussex) and 2.
Knights, Sir Ralph Vane, and Sir Thomas Darcy (of whom the former was
lieutenant of all the men of arms and demilances: the other Captain of the
Pensioners) with their several bands, to the number of 3400. men of arms
issuing out from both sides of the army, so resolutly gave the charge a front
down the hill upon their enemies pikes, that with the very terror thereof,
they were much amassed. Nevertheless the Scotts kept their order and stand so
firmly, that at this sharp encounter, six and twenty Gentlemen, besides nere
two hundred others, were slain out right, amongst whom Edward Shelley,
Lieutenant unto the Lord Graie (of his band of Bulleners) as he was the first
that passed the ditch, so in likelihood the first also that lost his life. Few
of them, that were placed in the foremost rancks, returned without hurt on
himself or his horse. The Lord Gray was dangerously wounded in the mouth with
a pike. The Englishmen had so small incoragement to maintain this their hot
beginning, that in stead of an orderly retreat, the greater number put their
horses to that speed, as thereby they showed a better will to leave the field
then to fight it out. Hereby the next ward was much disordered. But that worthy
Earl of Warwike, so cherefully incorraged his soldiers to stand to it
manfully, that what by his own industry and the diligence of the Captains
under him, the ranckes were reduced into good order, both horsemen and
foote-men, so as by the small loss at the former encounter, the whole army
attained their desired advantage. In the mean season the Scotts advanced
their bands with good corrage, though by shot both from land and sea, they were
shrowdly galled. But when they perceived, that the Englishmen (both on foot
and horseback) were now ready to assail them again, from the higher
ground, in such order as they seemed to incompasse them; the Scottish vantgard
to avoid the danger of the Spanish shot (who served on horseback,) on the
one side: and of being environed by the adversary on the other, declined on
that hand from their former direct course up the hill; whereat the Englishmen
giving a great shoute, cried they fly, they fly; the Scotts supposing their
fellows behind them had fled indeed, turned themselves about. The middle
battle, seeing their vantgard out of their course, with their faces toward
them, imagined that they had fled, and forthwith casting down their
weapons, and else whatsoever would hinder their speed, they be-tooke themselves
(every man) to his heels.

In this sort God gave the victory to the Englishmen, only by the working of
his divine power, and not by either power or policy of man. The chase was
continued outright VVest-ward about five miles, unto Lies, and wel-nere to
the gates of Edenbrough, distanced in breadth, near four miles, from the
sands up toward Daketh Southward. The slaughter was so great, that the river
of Eske was stained with blood, which lay Eastward from the place of battle,
and runs Northward into the Firth. Not so few as ten thousand Scotts lost
their lives, all within the space of five hours, from one of the clock till
six. Of this number, (besides the Lord Flemming) about two thousand were men
of good quality. Above fifteen hundred were taken prisoners, amongst whom the
Earl of Huntley, the Lord of Yester, Hobby Hamilton (Captain of Dumbar) the
Master of Saintpoll, the Lord Weames, and a brother of the Earl of Cassels,
were of best account. For to one Gentleman their were twenty of the common
soldiers taken prisoners, by reason they were all so meanly apparelled, as
that the better sort, could not be known from the rest; who otherwise might
have escaped with their lives. This victory fell to the Englishmen near
Mussel-brugh, on Saturday being the tenth day of September in the year of our
Lord God 1547. wound, but served notwithstanding all that day after.

After this the Englishmen by sea entered the I Will of Colme, a place by
situation very strong, standing in the Firthe, about four miles from Lies,
wherein was an Abbie, but the Monks had abandoned the same. Here and at the
Castle of Browghtie-Cragge (which stood in the entry into the Taie) garrisons
of Englishmen were placed, for the more anoyance of those that were to pass up
those rivers. In the return of the army by land, Hume Castle and Fast
Castle (after some resistance) were surrendered and fortified by the English.
At their coming to Boxbrugh they also erected a fortification upon the ruins
of an old Castle, and placed a garrison therein. Here the Lord Protector
received diverse Scottish Leardes and Gentlemen, of the best account through the
whole Countries of Mers and Tiuidale, unto the obedience of the King of
England, whereunto they bound themselves by several oath. The lord Gouerner of
Scotland and the Queen Mother, made semblance also by message, to be willing
to have come to a treaty with the English lords, but whatsoever their meaning
was, all their fair shows turned to nothing. And truly in the judgment of
man it was much to be admired, (considering the great good that was hoped might
have followed thereof to both Nations) what should move the Scottish Nobility
to be so much bent against this marriage, especially now that the Cardinal
was dead, who ouer-ruled the rest while he lived. But he, that sees the state
of all things and time at one instant, knows what is fittest to be admitted
in every season, and disposes of the success, of all that man purposes, to
the best advantage of such as serve him. For if this marriage, so much desired
and enforced, had then taken place, who knows into what estate, both this and
that Realm also, should have been thereby brought, after the death of King
Edward, (the young Queen having together with her title so many great friends
both in France and Scotland, and happily here also in England that would have
taken her part in that quarrel)? While the Duke of Sommerset was thus occupied
on the East part of Scotland the Earl of Lennox and the Lord Wharton (warden
of the West Marches) at his appointment entered into Scotland one that side
also.

This army consisted of some eight hundred horse, and five thousand footmen.
First, the Castle of Milk (a fortress of good strength) was surrendered,
passing from thence further into the Country, they overthrew the Church and
steeple at Annand, fortified by the Scotts, and then set the town on fire.
Here-with that Country was so affrighted, that on the next day all the
Kilpatrickes, the (...), the Le^rds of Kirke-michell, Apple-gar^^^,
^^s^^^^^r^e, ^^^^endes, Nubie and the Ir^^^^^ngs, the Bells, the Rigges, the
Murre^s, and all the ^la^nes and sur-names of the nei^^^^ p^^^ of Annand^le,
came in and received an o^^ of obedience, as subjects to the King of England,
giving pledges for their assured loyalty. They that refused to follow their
example, had their houses spoiled and burned, their goods and cattle carried
away by the English horsemen, who were sent abroad into the Country for that
purpose. Thus was that Nation pitifully afflicted for their obstinacy, which
undoubtedly proceeded from their blind zeal to popery, which they saw was
then declining a pace in England, fearing that by this marriage the same
e^^ectes would ^^^es f^llowed thereof amongst themselves. Thus much was
signified by an emblem, borne at the last battle in the banner of the
Scottish Prelates, which was a woman painted with her hair about her
shoulders, kneeling before a Crucifix, with this word written in golden
let^ers. Afflict^ sponsae ne obli^iscaris. The Lord Wharton with his company
being returned with their priso^^r^ and spoils to ^oxbrugh, received there of
^he Duke many thanks, and so were dismissed. The Duke also, having first taken
order for ^ll things needful for those g^^^sones h^^ (...) behind him in
Scotland, and committing the Li^utenancy over the borders (...) the Lord Gray,
on Michelmasse day dissolved his army, and returned into England. In this
journey were made knights by the Duke and the Earl of Warwick, these whose
names follow Sir Andrewe Dudley, brother to the Earl of Warwick. Sir Ralfe
Sadler (of whom I have spoken before) Sir Francis Brian, and Sir Raufe Vane,
were made Banneretes, which is a degree above a knight bacheler, being always
such before.

The Lord Gray of Wilton. The Lord Edward Seymer. Lord Thomas Howard. Lord
W^ldike of Cleueland. Sir Thomas Dacres. Sir Edward Hastings. Sir Thomas
Bridges. Sir John Thin. Sir Miles Partridge. Sir John Conway. Sir Gyles Poole.
Sir Raufe Bagnell. Sir Oliver Lawrence. Sir Henry Gates. Sir Thomas Chaloner.
Sir Thomas Neuille. Sir James Wilford. Sir Raufe Coppinger. Sir Thomas
Wentworth. Sir John Meruin. Sir Nicholas Strange. Sir Charles Sturton. Sir
Francis Saluin. Sir Hugh Ayscu of Comberland. Sir Richard Towneley. Sir
Marmaduke Constable. Sir George Audley. Sir John Holcroft. Sir John
Southworthe. Sir Thomas Danby. Sir John Talbote. Sir ^^^^^is Fl^^^^^g. (...)
John Gres^^^^. Sir William ^^^with. Sir John ^^^^es. Sir G^^^ge ^lage. ^ir
William Francis. S^r Francis Knowles. Sir William Thorowgood. Sir George
Howard. Sir Andrew Corbet. Sir Henry Hussie. Sir Anthony Sterley. Sir Walter
Benham. Sir Roland Clarke. Sir John Horsley. Sir John Foster. Sir Christopher
Dirs. Sir Peter Negro. Sir Alonso Deuille. Sir James Granado. These 3.
strangers. Sir Robert ^randling. Sir Richard Verney. Sir Arthure Manering. Sir
John Bertiuille.
In December following, the Earl of Lennox (being incoraged thereunto by such
as in show, seemed to favor him) repaired into Scotland, and coming to
D^^fr^^^^, he there attended certain f^^^es out of those parts, which the
Earl of Angus, and his old acquaintance the Earl of Glencorne, had promised
before to send unto him. But at the day and place appointed, of two thousand
horsemen besides footmen) which he exsp^^^ed, he was barely furnished of
three hundred, and such as lived only upon robery and spoil. This manner of
dealing, but especial^^ the inconstancy of John Maxw^ll made the Earl (not
without cause) very iolious over (...). Wherefore, that he might with the
like ^^^ning deceive them, wh^ would have deceived him, keeping still in his
company, the Earl of Glencorne, John Maxwell, and some other of the
principal Scotts, who labored his revolt to their faction, he secretly gave
order, that six hundred horsemen (some-part English and some-part Scottish)
should at midnight set for-ward toward Drwm-lamrige. Being come thither, some
four hundred of them began in disordered manner, to forrey the Country, of
purpose thereby to provoke James Douglas (the Lord of that Castle) to come
forth, and so to entrap him. But he doubting the worst kept in till daylight.
Then seeing the coast clear, with some seven hundred horse, he followed
after them with speed, hoping not only to over throw them, but also to take
the Earl of Lennox at Dunfrees. Having with his have entered the river of Nith,
hard at the Englishmens heels Master Henry Wharton (second Son to the Lord
Wharton) Captain over that Company, perceauing the behavior of the Douglas,
turned upon him with some score horsemen (for the Scotts their fellows were
lately before departed homewards with their booties) and what thorough the
advantage of the ground, and the difficulty of the enemies passage, he put
them to flight. Dowglasse escaped very narowlie, two Gentle men of his
sur-name, of especial account with him were slain, every man had his
prisoner, amongst whom diverse were of good regard, ^^^se they carried with
them to Dunfrees. This ouerthrow^ put them of Gallowaie into such fear, that
they did wholly submit themselves to the obedience of the King of England. The
Governor in the mean time having besiedged Broughty-Cragge, with some eight
thousand men and 8. pieces of artilery, (the which was valiantly defended by
Sir Andrewe Dudley) when he had knowledge of the good success the Earl of
Lennox had, after wel-nere three months siedge gave it over, leaving behind
him James Haliburtone with an hundred horse, to cut off such victuals, as by
land should be sent thither, and to a fort which the Englishmen had built on
the top of an hill near unto the other. The Earl of Lennox, being desirous
to be better revenged on his dissembling friends, his Father in Law and
others, obtained leave once again, together with the Lord Wharton to enter
into Scotland on the VVest-Marches. Their forces were some seven hundred
horsemen, and five hundred footmen English, besides some other Scottish
horsemen. About the latter end of this year, they came to Lo^h-maben and so
to Dunfrees.

The Earl of Angus being then at the Castle of Drom-lanrigge, solicited his
Son in law by messa^e, to repair unto him. The Earl pe^ceauing it was done
upon no good meaning toward him, forthwith appointed certain troops of
horsemen to foraye the Country, whereby to draw him to the field. About
midnight Master Henry Wharton set forwards with twelve hundred light
horsemen. The Master of Maxwell, afterward Lord Herries (whose advice the
Earl used in this plot) and the residue of the assured Scotts amongst them,
kept the vantgard. In the morning the Earl himself and the Lord Wharton
marched forth with the footmen, till they came ten miles beyond Dunfrees. Then
they so disposed their companies, that the Earl of Angus was wel-nere
intrapped, before he distrusted any such matter, so as he was forced to fly,
with five or six persons only in his company. The English horsemen being
come to Dusdere set the town on fire. The Master of Maxwell with the other
Scottish Gentlemen and light horsemen of the borders, to the number of four
hundred, having now trained the Englishmen into the midst of their enemies,
(for on every hill top great numbers of Scotts were placed about them)
forthwith the Leard of Drom-lanrigge, with certain chosen horsemen, advanced
forward in sight of the Englishmen; whereupon the assured Scotts, suddenly
rearing up a black pensill upon the point of a spear for a token, joined
themselves to their Countrie-men under Drom-lanrigge.

The Scotts being thus united, and thrusting in between the English horsemen
and their footmen, not without great peril to the one and other, they passed
on, toward the Earl of Lennox and the Lord Wharton, who by this time were
approached near the old Castle of Danswinton (sometimes the house of the
Cumines) bruting it abroad; that the English horsemen were overthrown. The
Earl of Lennox, beholding the manner of his adversaries approach, alighted on
foot from his horse, willing the Lord Wharton to do the like, for this day
(said he) I will die a true Englishman. By this time; the English horsemen
behind the Scotts, fetching a compass in their retreat from Dusdere, came
fortunatly to the place, where the Earl and his company being ranked in
order of battle, were ready to retire back again toward Dunfrees,
thinking no less, but that their horsemen had in deed (as it was bruted)
been overthrown by the enemy. But the horsemen now coming in, and
perceauing how the matter stood, gave a brave charge upon the Scotts (that
stood facing the Earl and his people, ready to take any advantage, that in
their retreat should have been offered) and ther-with disordered and put them
to flight. The Leard Drom-lanerigge was taken prisoner, but by corrupting him
that took him, he got away.

The Master of Maxwell had many spears broken upon him, but escaped. Besides
those that were drowned in the river Nith: four hundred were taken prisoners,
amongst whom the Abbote of Newe-Abbey, and Christie Errwing of Boushawe (a
brother of the Learde of Hempsfield) were the chief. At their return the
Earl to Dunfrees, the town was rifled, from whence Master Henry Wharton was
sent withal speed to the Court, to make relation of the good success of this
journey into Scotland, who both for his good service now and before, as also for
the counter-newes he first brought to the false report, that (till his
coming) was entertained in England, received the honor of Knighthood, as he
well deserved. Letters were returned from the Counsel to the Lord Wharton, for
the execution of certain pledges: one, for the Master of Maxwell, of his
nearest kindred, the Warden of the Graie-friers in Dunfrees, the Vicare of
Carlauerocke, and some others, who were executed at Carliele accordingly. In
the end of April the year following, Graie Lieutenant of the North-partes,
with Sir Thomas Palmer and Sir Thomas Holcroft, were sent into Scotland with
competent forces, for the fortifying of the town of Hadington, and some other
places serving best for the defense of those Countries against the enemy,
whom the Lord Protector purposed thereby (if it might be) to bring to some
reasonable conditions of peace. During the Englishmens abode their at this
time, they took and burned diverse Castells and Towns, wasting that Country
(the most firtile soil in Scotland) on every side. Upon the surrender of the
Castle of Yester; the Lord Gray was contented to pardon the defendantes only
one excepted, who during the siedge had uttered reproachful words against the
King of England. A Scotte named Newton was charged here-with, but he denying
it, accused one of the Hamiltons, who likewise forswore it. These two
gentlemen, one accusing the other without any p^^ofe on either side, required
the combat, which was granted unto them. At the appointed time, they entered the
listes at Hadington, in the market place prepared for that purpose. They were
apparelled in doublets and hose, and weaponned with sword, buckler and dagger.
At the first entry, Hamilton kneeling down made his fervent prayer, that it
would please the Lord to give victory to the truth, with solemn protestation,
that he never uttered any such speech of the King of England as his adversary
laid to his charge. Newton being troubled (as it seemed by his countenance)
with his false accusation, argued unto the beholders his gilty conscience.

The combat begun; Hamilton was so full of ^orage, that he caused the other
to give back wel-nere to the end of the listes. But Newton perceauing the
danger he was in, (for if he had been driven to the end, he should have been
adjudged vanquished) stepped forwards, and withal gave Hamilton such a wound on
the leg, that therewith he fell down to the ground, and then falling upon
him slew him outright with his dagger. Diverse Scottish Gentlemen present,
being fully persuaded, that Newton was the offender, notwithstanding this his
purgation, offered themselves to maintain the vanquished man's quarrel, but the
victor chalenging the Laws of arms, my Lord Gray would not do him that
wrong, but giving him his gown and chain then about him, he so dismissed
him.

This Newton was afterward met withal upon the borders, and pitifully hewne
and cut in pieces. I cannot see any warrant, that this kind of trial has out
of Gods word, wherefore it were good, some other more Christian course were
taken in such cases. The governor now perceauing that without the assistance of
some other Prince, he should not be able to resist the Englishmen, having
gotten such foot-hold within the Realm of Scotland, entreated the Queen
Mother, and Monsieur Doysel, Lieger Ambassador for King Henry of France whose
father (king Francis) was deceased, somewhat more then a year before, about
two months after the death of King Henry of England) to procure the said King
to send an army into Scotland against the Englishmen, enemies to both those
Nations. The Queen seeing a ready way now laid open, to bring that to pass
she most desired, which was to have that Realm ordered in all things at the
French Kings appointment, willingly undertook to accomplish his request
conditionally that he together with the States of the Realm, would give
consent, that the Princess should be conuaied over into France, and bestowed
in marriage, as stood with the liking of King Henry. The Governor consenting
thereunto, assembled the estates of Parliament, who together entered into
couenantes to that effect, and presently sent them in writing into France. The
King accepting the offer, made preparation for the transporting of an army
into Scotland with what expedition conveniently he could. For he did well
foresee (as his Father and other of his predecessors had done before him) how
inconvenient it was for that Nation, to admit of a marriage, whereby this
Island should become one absolute monarchy.

This was well observed, at what time the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Francis
this Kings Father, visited King Henry the eight at his camp besides Calice:
where they together beholding, over the entrance into the Kings Pauilion, a
devise of an Archer, imbrode^ed thereon, with this word, Cui adhaereo praeest:
Meterane
brake out into this kind of speech one unto the other, if the King of England
esteem so much of his own power and strength, in this his present estate,
having yet Scotland a bad neighbor unto him: what would he do, if he
commanded the whole Island? The Lord Gray having fortified Hadington, and
furnished it of all things necessary, leaving therein a garrison of two
thousand footmen, and five hundred horse, on the xii. of June returned into
England. While the Scottish nation was thus vexed by the English, the French
King made great preparation, as well to aid his friends there, as to annoy the
Englishmen in garrison at Bullen-berge, and other places on that side the sea.
But the Council of England warilye foreseeing, and preventing the danger
thereof, was not unprovided to resist all such attempts as on either side might
prejudice the welfare of the realm.

And further it was thought good to make trial once again, how much they
might by entreatie and gentle perswa^ions prevail with the Scottish Nobility,
in the matter of marriage between King Edward, and the Princess of Scotland
that was now offered to the French King, for his son the Dolphin. And because
they should be well assured that the same proceeded not of any particular
disposition in the Protector alone, who before (as I have showed) had to that
end earnestly solicited the Governor by his private letter) he together with
the Lords of the Counsel, jointly in all their names, signified by public
writing to the whole Scottish nation, their continued hearty desire in this
point, in manner following.

Considering with our selves the present state of things, and weying more
deeply the manner and terms wherein you and we do stand, it makes us to
marvel what evil and fatal chance does so disseuer your hearts, and makes
them so blind and unmindful of your profit, and so still to make and heap to
your selves most extreme mischiefs, the which we, whom you will needs have
your enemies, go about to take from you, and perpetually to ease you thereof.
And also by all reason and order of necessity, it should be rather more
convenient for you, to seek and require moderate agreement of us (whom God
has hitherto according to our most just, true, and godly meaning, and intents
prospered, with your affliction) then that we being vanquishers in the field,
and masters of a great part of your realm, should seek unto you. Yet to the
intent that our charitable minds and brotherly love should not cease, by all
means possible, to provoke and call you to your own good, even as one
natural brother to another, or as the careful Physician does to his careless
patient. We still call and cry upon you to look to your estate, to avoid
the calamities which ouer-whelme and oppress you, to have us rather brothers
then enemies, rather countrymen then strangers. And if your Governor shall
retain and keep from you this our exhortation, as heretofore he has done
our private Letters and public proclamation, tending to the same effect, for
his and his favorites more advantage, not regarding though you be still in
misery, so as they have governance and profit by you, and shall still abuse
you with fained and forged tales: yet this shall be a witness before GOD and
all Christian people, between you and us, that we professing the Gospel of
JESUS CHRIST, according to the Doctrine thereof, do not cease to call and
draw you from the effusion of your own blood, the destruction and ruin of
your realm, from perpetual enmity, and from servitude to foreign Nations:
to tranquillity, amity, liberty, and equality with us, yea to that, which
your own writers have always wished might come to pass. Who that has read
the Stories of times passed, and observes the incursions, roades, spoils, and
the bloody battles between these two Nations: your realm (five times)
overrun by one of our Kings: your Kings, some taken prisoners, others slain
in battle: and with-all shall consider, that as we be confined by the Ocean,
and so made one Island, even so agree we, and resemble one the other, in
language, looks, manners and conditions: shall he not think it a thing very
unmeet, unnatural, and unchristian, that there should be between us so
mortal hatred and discord, where ought to be love and perfect amity, as
between brethren of one Island, the great Britain? Though he were a stranger
to both, what could he think more fit, then if it were possible, to make two
such kingdoms one, in all respects so conformable and suitable? Now for as
much as two successors cannot concur and fall into one, by any other mean
then by marriage, where-by is made of two, one blood, one lineage, one parentage,
and so an indefencible right given on both sides, to one, without the
destruction of either: what could you wish more happy, then that, which now,
not by blind chance, but of his infinite mercy, as being careful of your
estate, he has done for you: And to the end you should the better observe the
manner of his divine working herein for your good, call to remembrance that your
last king, a Prince of much excellency, had three children. But did not the
Lord God as if it were to show that it was his will and pleasure, the long
continued war between the two nations, should take end, and they become
vn^ted and made one people: take away the two male-babes placed a sunder, both
within the space of four and twenty hours, leaving but one maiden child your
Princess: when the most wise and victorious Prince late our King ( Henry the
eight) in other of his marriages not very fortunate) had by his most lawful
wife, the virtuous Queen Jane (his other two former wives then being dead, and
never any question made of the lawfulness of that marriage, nor after her death
any motion of other wife (though the King lived eight years after) a Prince of
so high expectation, the true and undoubted heir to the crown of England, and
his Majesty's only male issue left behind him to succeed him: if nothing else
had been done, what can any wise, or any Christian man, that thinks the
world is governed by Gods providence, and not by fortune, otherwise take it,
but that it was the Lords will it should be so, to the end that these two
realms should be joined in marriage, and there-by to make a godly, firm, and
most friendly unity between them? if any man look to be confirmed herein by
miracle, observe and mark all the possibilities of the natures of the two
kings: the children first had the doubtful chance, least both of them should
have had a son, or both daughters, or not of meet ages, with other
circumstances of the one party or the other, which has not chanced in eight
hundred years before: it must of necessity be reckoned an extraordinary
course, if not a miracle. But be it as it may be, what more certainty can be
had of Gods working and will in this case, then the consideration of the former
recited occurrents does minister? call you them prouidences or mere chances,
if you shall be still afflicted? May not the Lord say unto you: I of mine
infinite mercy, and love to your Nation, had provided an undoubted heir and a
Prince to the one, and a like heir and a Princess to the other, to be joined
together in my holy ordinance, and by the law of Nature and Nations, to have
made an unity and peace there-by, between the one realm and the other; but
you refusing the offered opportunity, have made choice of dissension, rather
then of unity: of discord, then of agreement: of war, then peace: of hatred
and malice, then of love and charity. If you then smart for it, whom can you
blame, but your own bad choice. But because some of you, who oppose your
selves hereunto, cannot but confess Gods providence herein, for the uniting
of both realms, yet may neuer-the-lesse here-after object as before you have
done, our fault herein is, that we seek not equality, nor the marriage, but a
conquest, that we would not be friends and fellows, but Lords over you:
Although our proclamation, and private letters at the last wars, do
sufficiently declare the contrary, yet here we protest to you and all Christian
people, that it is the Kings mind by our advise and counsel, not to win and
subdue by force, but to conciliate by mild course: not to spoil and kill, but
to save and keep: not to disseuer and divorce, but to join in marriage both
Prince and people, to make of one Island, one kingdom united in love, amity,
concord, peace and Christian charity. If you refuse and reject this kindness,
and thereby compel us to use arms, who shall be guilty of the bloodshed? who
causes battles, burning of houses, and other extremities and mischiefs that
acompany war? can it be denied, but that we have the great seal of
Scotland, granted by general consent in your Parliament, for a testimony
against you. What was wanting, tending to the assurance of the marriage, save
only years, and so liking and consent between the parties themselves? what
end can you look for, by still opposing your selves against our honest purpose
and Christian endeavor, but such success, as you have already assaied? we offer
love, equallity, and amity, we overcome in war and offer peace, we win holds,
and withold our hands from conquest, we get still in your land, and offer you
our own, what can be more offered and proffered, then intercourse of
merchandise, and interchange of marriages, the abolishing of all such our laws,
as might be impediments to our mutual amity? We have offered, not only to
leave and give over the name, title, right, or challenge of Superiority, but
also to relinquish, the long continued name of our Nation, and the glory of any
victory (if any we have had or should have of you) and to take up again with
you, the ancient name of Britains, because nothing should be left on our
party vn-offered, nothing of your party vn-refused, whereby you might be
inexcusable. What face has this of conquest? we go not about to disinherite
your Queen, but to give her issue (if she have any) a greater inheritance.
What better defense can you wish in her nonage, then to have England your
patron and protector? neither seek we to abrogate or change your laws and
customs, but rather to establish them and redress your oppressions. These
vain fears are put into your heads by them, who in truth respect more their
private advantage and present estimation, then the good of the whole land, both
present and future. Now in this tumult of disorder, while your realm is tossed
up and down, with the waves and surges of war, they think they cannot be
espied: but look on them with the eyes of sound judgment, and then you shall
easily perceive their drift. Consider in what state you stand: to keep your
Queen unmarried, were very dishonorable: to marry her within your realm,
cannot extinguish the title we pretend to the Crown of Scotland, and what
dissension, envy, grudge, and malice, that shall breed amongst you, is easily
perceived. But you will ^^^tow her out of the Realm to a mighty Prince? Our
title stands where it was, you become subject to foraigne power, to them of a
strange land and differing language, us you have your enemies even at your
elbowes: your succors far of not passable at all times. Be not we now in the
heart of your Realm? possess we not a good part thereof? Do not many of your
own Nation take our part, moved thereunto by the equity of our demand? But
you will bring in a foraigne power, to expulse us and all our partakers. Beware
what you do. Learn to be wise by other men's harms. Consider how dangerous a
point it is, to call to your aid a Nation of greater power then your selves.
Were not our predecessors the Britains, expulsed by the Saxons upon that
advantage? How did the French thrust out the Gauls? How came the Turk by all
Grecia, and now of late by Hungaria, but by being brought in and entertained,
for their aid and succor? Did not the Goths by like means get all Italy,
and the Lombardes one part thereof now called Lombardie? What better success
look you for? Needy soldiers, having their weapons in their hands, and
knowing you cannot inioye your own without them, what will they not command,
what will they not usurp, and what will they think that you dare do against
them? Such aid will be your confusion, the victory so had, your servitude; what
is then to be thought of the loss sustained at their hands? The strangers and
mercinarie soldiers will oppress you within, our power and forces without,
were it not then much better to avoid all these mischiefs, by an happy
marriage with our King, to end all war and contention by so honorable^ peace?
Holds not the Emperor, Spain and Burgundy by right of marriage? How has the
French King Britain, now lately annexed to that Crown, but by title of
marriage? How have all the Princes of the world happily and peaceably, made of
two kingdoms, one, of several signiories, one, of sundry Nations (ever
before at war one with the other, or else in doubtful peace,) one well
governed kingdom, rule and dominion, but by that Godly, most commendable, and
honorable composition of marriage? There be only two means to work good
agreement, where two Nations pretend title one to the other: either by force of
arms, or by marriage, of these you hate the one, namely conquest, and
nevertheless refuse the other. You will not have peace, you reject alliance,
what then remains? but violence and happily conquest, whether you will or no,
which (we fear) will be less damage and dishonor unto you, then the
entertainment of a foraigne power, ouer-mighty to be removed by you when you
are weary of their company.

To conclude, we declare and protest, that although we are compelled for the
time, for the furtherance of our honest and Christian purpose, and for the
defense of such amongst you as favor the same, to keep houlds, and to build
fortifications in the Realm: Nevertheless his Majesty's mind and pleasure
is, with our advice and Counsel, that if fair means may prevail, not to use
extremities, if you will embrace amity, to leave arms, for we desire, love,
unity, concord, peace, and equality. Let neither your Governor nor your
Churchmen, nor any other, feed you with fair words, and thereby bring you
into the snare, from whence they cannot deliver you again. They will happily
provide for themselves, some pensions out of an other Realm, but who shall
provide pensions for the rest? They will send you soldiers to keep your
houlds, but who shall force them to restore them again? You shall be well
provided of munition, armor and weapons, but therewith they will be ready to
cut your own throats. Now on the other side, if we two, being made by this
marriage one People, one Nation, and one Monarchy, having the sea for a wall,
mutual love for a garrison, and God for our defense, what should we be
affraide of? who can hurt us? why are you not as willing as we be, to knit
this fast knot of amity with us. If the honor of so Noble a Monarchy does not
move you hereunto, let the remembrance of your former losses fear you, to
attempt that thing, which shall displease almighty GOD, increase your trouble,
wast your goods, and desolate your Country. We crave but your promised
Queen, your offered unity, the coniunctio^ of both nations, which God himself
of his infinite clemency and tender love toward both, has offered unto us
both, and in a manner provoked us both unto it, whose calling we acknowledge,
and will pursue the effecting of the same, by all good means. VVhere-with if
we shall not prevail, then must we be enforced to chastise the obstinate
and froward amongst you, with the angry Angels of God, fire and sword.
Wherefore we once again require and exhort you al, who love your Country, and
bear true hearts to your Queen and Mistress, regard your honors, hold your
faith and promise with us, which shall bring so great a benefit unto you. As
many of you, as shall favor and further this our interprice, be he Lord or
Leard, Gentleman or other, we will friendly intertaine him on our party, and
reward his service to his best contentment. And for a more sure proof of our
good meaning herein, know you, that the King by our advice and Counsel has
granted, and by these presents does grant, that from henceforth all manner of
Marchantes and other of your Nation, who shall enter their names with one of
the Wardens of our marches, and there profess to take part with us in this our
just and Godly intention, may (to his own pofit, and all such as be of the
same affection with us) without any let enter into any port, creek and haven
of England, and there use their traffic, buie and sell, bring in the
commodities of Scotland and carry forth the commodities of England as freely,
and with the same and none other custom or paiments, then the Kings natural
subjects do usually now pay, purposing also upon the good success of this our
offer, further to gratify the favorers of our enterprise, according to the
measure of every man's merit. All this the Kings highness, by our advice and
Counsel, has willed to be declared in writing unto you, and given in
commandment unto us and his Lieutenants Wardens, Rulers and other head
Officers, Ministers and subjects, to see done and executed, according to the
true purport, effect and meaning thereof.

Fare you well.

Diverse of the Scottish Nobility, moved hereby to a due consideration of the
present Estate of their Country, notwithstanding that the French succors were
already arrived, did not fear in a public assembly (wherein the cause was
solemnly debated amongst them) to declare, what reasons moved them to hold it
more profitable and honorable, to accept of the alliance and league offered them
by the Counsel of England, then to (...) of the hands of the Frenchmen. But
the a^uerse part^y being the stronger (for besides that a^ the Papists wel-nere
were of that faction) the French king had promised great rewards and
preferments ^o the principal men amongst the^: on the gouerno^ himself he had
bestowed a yearly pention of 12000. crowns, and a charge of an hundred lances)
the rest were ouer-ruled, and this point firmly concluded, that the young
Queen should be forthwith sent into France, to be affianced unto the Dolphine,
which was afterward effected accordingly. The French army arrived on the 19.
day of this present month of June, c^^sisting of some 6000. in the whole, Viz.
3000. footmen Germans, conducted by the R^^^graue, 2000. French, and 1000.
others of sundry Nations hors-men, over whom Monsieur D^ss^ was appointed
general, accompanied with o^he^ ^xpert Captains, namely Dandel^^, ^alle^ ^n
Da^se^, ^^^t^o, Stro^^y (an Italian) Nicholas Villegaignon Captain of the
Galleys, and Monsieur D^^d Commissary over the artilery. These togithe^ with
^ig^t tho^sand S^ottes laid siedge to Hadington, and in ^^ort time ^o battered
the walls with their great ord^^ance, that in diverse places it was
ass^^table. Nevertheless the town was so w^^^ ^^^^ded by Sir James Wilfor^ the
Captain thereof, and his people, that the enemy had small hope to take i^ by
force, wherefore they endeavored to cut of al access; whereby to famish the
defendants, and keep from them other necessaries which they wanted,
nevertheless by the policy of certain English Captains, that found a way in
the night, with 200. horsemen, through the Scottish watch; the town was
relieved in good time, whereupon within 4. days after, the Scots leaft the
siedge (five or six hundred light hors-men only excepted) and went every man
to his own dwelling. This made the Frenchmen more vigilant and wary
afterward, so as they that made the like interprice next, had not so good
success, for of thirty hundred hors-men (whereof 700. were lances) committed to
the charge of Sir Robert Bows and Sir Thomas Palmer, few or none escaped, but
was either slain or taken prisoner. This overthrow was imputed to the rashness
of Sir Thomas, because, that after his lances had before repulsed the enemies
two several charges, he would not be therewith satisfied, but presuming upon
his former fortune, adue^tured again so far within their danger, that being
inco^passed by them, the English could find no way out to escape. The Lord
Protector in the mean time, having provided an army of 15000. men (of who^
3000. were Almains) committed the conduct thereof to the Earl of Shrewsbury,
accompanied with the L. Gray lieutena^t of the North-parts. More-ouer the lord
Clinton high admiral of England (after created Earl of Lincoln by Q.
Elizabeth) with a (...) ^^sed, kept (...) with the ^^^y by land, (...) ^hey
were (...) f^^ a sonder, but the ships that had brought the French^^n into
Scotland (which they hoped to have met withal) were before thi^ time sent
homewards back again. At the ^pproach of the English, Monsieur ^essie raised
the field, and retiring his army toward Edenbrugh, inca^ped beyond
Musskelbrough, in a pla^ of ground chosen for his best advantage, the English
horse-m^^ coasting them, all the way as they passed, for the space of 7. or 8.
miles. The town of Hading^on being victualed and furnished of al necessary
provision, the Englishmen showed themselves to the enemy, who there-vpon offered
skirmish, but they, seeming as the unprovided to accept thereof, dr^w back
themselves until the other were ^ome forward within danger of an ambushment
laid purposely to entrap them. The Englishmen (...) ^^king the exspected
advantage, wheeling about, gave the enemy a charge, enforcing him to make his
cariere back with more speed, then appertained thereto, so as having him in
chase, diverse were slain and take prisoners, namely Pierre Long^^ and Luciu^^
two French Captains. By this time, 14. or 15. thousand Scots and Irish were
come to the enemies c^mpe. These new forces were ^^^^ly lodged, wh^ suddenly the
Englishmen presented themselves in good order of battle, exspecting some
profer of skirmish for the space of an hour, but perceauing they had no list
to leave their strength, they returned back to their own Camp. The Navy,
being now entered into the Firth, was not idle; for coming to the brent Island,
the Englishmen set fire on four ships, and passing thence by Leeth, they
saluted that Town with Cannon shot. Monsieur de Villegaignon, not long before
this, was departed from thence with four Galleys, wherewith compassing all
the Northern Islands of Scotland, he arrived at Dunbritton, where by
appointment he received into his charge the young Queen, betwixt five and
six years of age, attended by the Prior of Saint Andrews her bastard
brother, John Aesken, and William Leuistone, with whom at length (with much
difficulty) he landed at Breast, the Queen from thence was conveyed to the
French Court. The Lord Admiral after this, attempting to burn Saint Minets,
was there repulsed by the Lord of Dune, whereupon the Navy returned to
attend the Army, having sustained some loss at that their last bickering. The
Earl having proceeded as far as his Commission extended, dissolved his
army, and returned into England. But the Lord Gray, staying some time in the
North parts, according to the charge given him, entered again into Scotland
with the Almaigne footmen, and certain English horsemen, burning and wasting
the countries of Tiuidale and Lidsdale, twenty miles within the land, and then
returned without encounter. The reason hereof was (as it seems) (...)
quarrel, at that t^me in Edenbr^^^^, ^hen between the Scots and the
Frenchmen, wh^^ in Sir James Hamilton Larde of S^en^^house, Captain of the
Castle, and Provost of the town, tog^^^er with his son^^ and diverse
townsmen, ^^a^ took his part, were slain by the French, that without leave
would have entered the town. This broile (no doubt) bred great unkindness,
and no small jealousy in the one nation over the other, so as some
inconvenience had followed there-vpon, had not the matter in time been taken
up between them. Monsieur Dessie, to bring himself into credit again with
the Scots, adventured with his companies of Frenchmen and Almaignes, to give a
Camisadoe to Hadington; for coming thither in the night, about the midst of
October, some pretty while before day, he dispatched the watch before they
were aware of any enemy, and was entered into the base court, ready to break
down the town gate, before ^he alarm was raised, crying out, victory,
victory. The Englishmen with the suddenness hereof were much amassed, not
knowing which way to turn them. In this perplexity a soldier amongst them
(using a desperate remedy for a present cure) gave (...) with his match to a
double Cano^, that by good chance lay ready charged against the gate: ^he which
with his thunderbolts made such a passage through the Frenchmen, that were ^ow
thronging thereat, a^ the terror thereof made the residue to give back. The
Englishmen in the mean time issuing out at a posterne gate upon their backs,
^o bestirred their Halberts and black-bils, that many of their enemies were
knocked down, and the residue driven away, as fast as their legs could carry
them. Notwithstanding Desse gathering them again together, gave three assaults
that morning to the town, but was still repelled to his great loss, for they
carried away with them sixteen Carts and wagons, laden with maimed soldiers, and
dead carcases, besides nere two hundred, that were found in the base court,
whom they left behind them. Shortly after this blow, the enemy had the like
success at Dundie Forte, being already possessed of the town: for the
Frenchmen having also recovered the pile there, and purposing to finish a piece
of work, which the Englishmen had begun to their hands, the Riengraue with his
Almaignes, and Monsieur De Etanges were forthwith sent thither to that end:
while they were about this business, the Englishmen and their Almaignes,
issuing out of Broughtie-Cragge, two miles distant from it, came so suddenly
upon them, that they had no other way to save themselves but by running away.
And either at this time, or at some other shortly after Monsieur de Etanges
(who with his company of Horsemen lay in garrison at Dundie) was by them of
Broughtie-Cragge, taken prisoner, in a skirmish that was between them: this
Gentleman was no small loss to the enemy, being o^ that approved valiancie, as
not many amongst them were marchable with him. But ere it was long, the want of
him was requited by the taking of that worthy Knight Sir James Wilford (the
Governor of Hadington) by the French garrison at Dumbarre, as he passed by the
town in a conuoy: his place was supplied by Sir James a Crofts. The enemy,
perceiving how unlikely it was to prevail against the English at Hadington
and Browghtie (which were the places of greatest importance that they held so
far within Scotland,) brought his forces unto the borders, at least to defend
those countries, then shrewdly incombred by the continual incursions of the
Englishmen. During the Frenchmens abode at Iedworth, they took some strengths
in those parts in the keeping of the English, namely the Castles at Ferneherst,
Cornwall and Fourd, and also entering the English Marches, burned diverse
villages, carrying away many good booties, not a little to the loss and
annoyance of the inhabitants of those parts. The English borderers here upon
assembled themselves at Rox-brough, purposing to have assailed the Frenchmen
in th^it Camp at Iedworth, but they having knowledge thereof, and finding
themselves ouer-weake to ma^e resistance ((...) by this time many of them were
dead, through want of victuals and other necessaries which that hard country,
especially in winter, could not afford them) would not abide the hazard of
battle, but with all speed withdrew themselves further into the country:
neither from this time forward did they perform any service worthy the
remembrance. The Scots in the mean time recovered Hume Castle out of the
Englishmens hands by night, through the treachery of certain of the assured
Scots, who at all times had free access thereunto. About the beginning of the
next year, viz. 1549. England, who arriving in the Firthe; continuing their
course up the river, seized upon four ships which they found there. Coming
up ouer-against Leith, and saluting the Town with their shot, they lay at
Anchor thirteen or twelve days, in which time having landed their men on the
Island of Iuskith, and begun to fortify the Fleet, they returned to the Sea,
in hope to encounter a new supply of Frenchmen, daily exspected in Scotland:
but before the work could be brought to any perfection, Le Desse taking upon
him this piece of service, whereby to give a plausible farewell to his former
crosse-fortunes in these Scottish wars, recovered the Island, after it had
been in the Englishmens possession sixeteene days. All the Captains
well-neere were slain, and the residue taken prisoners. The number left to
attend the finishing of this Forte, were four Ensigns English, and one of
Italians. This Monsieur, having achieved the glory of this enterprice, gave up
his charge to Monsieur de Thermes, lately arrived at Dun-britaine, and
forthwith returned into France in the same galleys, which brought the other
into Scotland. The general conduct of all the French forces being now
committed to de Thermes, which with these he brought with him, was well
increased: he forthwith encamped at Aberladie, where he began a foundation of
a Fort, thereby to impeach the landing of any victuals, for the relief of
Hadington. Though the Council of England were now very busily occupied, as well
about the suppression of a most dangerous commotion within the realm, as also
in making preparation against the French king, that now invaded Boullognoies:
neuer-the-lesse, they neglected not (as far as the state of things at home
and abroad would permit) to relieve this their slippery foot-hold in Scotland.
For the Earl of Rutland (Lord President then of the North, and General of
this army) accompanied with Sir Richard Manors, Sir Francis Leake, Sir John
Saunge, Sir Thomas Helcroft, Sir Oswald Wolstropp, and others, furnished with
competent forces, both foreign and Native, entered there with into Scotland,
and did not only give relief to Hadington and the other garrisons, but with
all so distressed the Frenchmen, by setting upon them in their Trenches, that
if the advantage had been foreseen in time, the enemy had been in great
danger of an utter ouer-throw. The Almaignes, that at this service took part
with the Englishmen, having in the mean time committed the custody of their
baggage to their women and boys, were disburthened by the Scottish prickers,
of so much as was worth the carriage. But Julian Romero with his band of
Spaniards, sped much worse. For the enemies suddenly setting upon them, where
they lay encamped near the town of Coldingham, slew both their Captain, and
well-neere the whole number of them. About this time, Fast Castle was
recovered by stratagem out of the Englishmens hands. For the gate being set
open, and their bridge let down, to receive victuals brought thither by the
assured Scotts, at the Captains appointment, while the same was vnlading,
certain other Scotts, that were privily placed to attend the opportunity,
suddenly entering the Castle surprised it.

The Earl of Rutland being called home more speedily then was purposed, to the
suppressing of a new commotion in Yorkshire, that brake out in his absence,
the state of the Scottish affairs began thence-forth to decline, not only by
the tumults raised by the comminaltie in diverse parts of this realm, but also
by the disagreement between the Lord Protector, and the rest of the Nobility,
especially the Earl of Warwick Lord great Chamberlain, and afterward created
Duke of Northumberland. By reason of which unhappy iarres, it was thought
necessary to give over the keeping of Hadington, being a matter in deed of more
charge then profit, seeing it could not be victualed, but by the conuoy of an
army. The Earl of Rutland was therefore sent thither again, to see the
fortification rased, and to conduct the men and munition safely into England,
which was performed accordinglye. Monsieur Thermes and his associates being
herewith not a little encouraged, in February following besiedged
Browghtie-Cragge, which together with an other fortification near unto it,
were in short time recovered out of the Englishmens hands, wanting means to
make resistance against so strong an enemy: neuer-the-lesse they would not
yield, so long as any man well-neere was able to stand in the defend of the
charge they had undertaken. While these things were in doing, a treaty of
peace was set on foot between England and France, but the Commissioners
proceeding slowly therein, the Scotts and Frenchmen ceased not, in the mean
time, to pursue the accomplishment of their joint desires, which was, utterly
to drive the Englishmen out of Scotland. Therefore immediately after the
recovery of the former houldes, they besiedged Louder, where after some
skirmishes passed between the one party and the other, that Forte also was so
strictly bes^^ on all sides, that if the peace had not been the sooner
concluded, Sir Hugh Willoughby (the Captain thereof) must of necessity have
yielded, thorough the lack of shot and other necessaries serving for defense.
Amongst other articles comprised in this agreement, one was, that all such
Castles, Fortifications and strengths, held by the Englishmen in any part of
the Scottish dominions, should be restored to the Scots, and that the Forts of
Dowglasse, Roxbrough and Aymoth, which the Englishmen had erected in the time
of these wars, should forthwith be razed and thrown down, to avoid all
occasion of new controversy. Mounsier de Mourret was sent into Scotland from
the French King, to publish this accord between the three Nations, France,
England, and Scotland, which in the beginning of April in the year (that
followed) 1550. Scotland. And thus ended (for this time) the whote war between
these two neighbor nations, which had continued now for the space of 7. years
together, to the exceeding great impouerishment of that kingdom, and effusion
of blood on both sides. For above fifty years after, there was not any like
hostility between them. For, all that passed betwixt the one and the other
realm until the beginning of the 5. year of the reign of Queen Mary of
England, who succeeded that pearelesse Prince of most famous memory King
Edward the 6. on the sixth day of July, in the year 1553 Philip her husband of
the French King: for he thereupon solicited the Queen Regent of Scotland (who
about two years before obtained that dignity) while the Commisioners of both
these nations were busy at Carliel, about the renewing of the league, to invade
this realm. She being willing to gratify her confederate, when the
Commissioners had broken up the treaty of Peace without any conclusion,
assembled a great Army, wherewith coming to Kellsoe in the month of October
1557. Monsieur Doisell and other Frenchmen, began to persuade the Scotts to
invade the realm. The Scottish Nobility, to the end they would seem somewhat
to yield to her request, passing with the army over the river of Tweed,
besieged Warke Castle, whereat lying for the space of 2. or 3. days, and then
hearing of the approach of the Earl of Westmerland (Lieutenant of the North)
after some consultation upon this point, the Scottish lords concluded, that for
so much as the Englishmen had given them no just cause of quarrel, especially
in so high a degree and measure of revenge, that the Queen Regent had drawn
them thither, for the pleasure only of the French King and the reputation of
Monsieur Doisell his agent, who in the managing of this affair had carried
himself very loftily: therefore (I say) they concluded to break up the
siedge, and to return homewards, and so this much ado produced nothing. The
Queen and her Monsieur took the matter very greeuouslie, accounting
themselves much disgraced here-with, but because there was no remedy, for the
present time they resolved to bear it as patiently as they could, hoping a
time would come, that should make them of more authority amongst them. To this
end they labored to hasten the marriage of the young Queen (now come to ripe
age) for there-by all things should then pass without controulment, at the
will and appointment of France. The Queen Regent returning homewards, left
Monsieur Doisell with the French forces at Haymouth (where lately before he
had raised a Fortification, to counter-garrison the Englishmen in Berwicke.
Diverse foot-bands also of Scottishmen were waged by the French King to lie at
Kelso, Roxbrough, and other such places on the Scottish Marches, for the
defense of the country, and the annoyance of the Englishmen as occasion served.
Amongst many other roades and adventures, which passed this winter between the
one nation and the other, with variable success on both sides, that between
the Earl of Northumberland, and Sir Andrew Carre was of most reckoning,
wherein after doubtful victory a long time, at length the English prevailed:
the Scottish Captain and diverse other being taken prisoners. Sir John Foster
at this service bare himself very valiantly, for besides that his horse was
slain under him, he received two dangerous wounds, the one thorough his neck,
the other on his thigh. On the four and twentieth day of April, the year next
following, viz. 1558. Francis the Dolphine with Queen Mary of Scotland, was
solemnized at Paris with great triumph and rejoicing, which afterward brought
that flourishing kingdom into danger of an utter subversion; for her Uncles,
especially Francis Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorraigne his brother,
by reason of this marriage, bare themselves so loftily, and so egerlie strove
thereby to advance their house, that they turned France up and down, ruling
all things at their own wills and pleasure. The summer following, sundry
out-roads passed between the borderers on both sides, but with more loss to
the Scots then to England, for besides 2. chief leaders of their footmen, the
Lord Keith son to the Earl Marshall, and Patricke L. Gray, were in those
broiles taken prisoners, but on the English party Captain Edrington only. Some
service by sea also, was performed by the Englismen, for Sir John Clear, being
sent with certain ships of war to the coast of Scotland, coming to the Isles
of Orkney, and having landed some part of his company, such a tempest did
sodenlie arise, that perforce he was driven back to the maine sea, where
striving a long time in vain to recover the Island again, he was forced to
leave them behind him, who were thereby all slain and taken prisoners by the
Ilanders. But the Earl of Sussex joining with Sir Thomas Cotton, and Sowthwick
his Vice Admiral, had better success in Kniter, the Isles of Arraigne and
Cumber, where they made great spoil, and had done much more there-about, if by
out-ragious storms and tempests they had not been hindered. Of all the
English Gentlemen that served these last two years with charge, I know but one
living at this day, namely Thomas Marckham (commonly called Blacke-Marckham)
who lead the band of footmen, of Sir John Marckham his Father.

As for the war maintained in Scotland, Elizabeth (who to the exceeding great
comfort of all the true Christians of this whole Island, succeeded her deceased
Sister, on the seventeenth day of November, in the year before named) the
same was from time to time, always undertaken by her, at the earnest petition
and request of the Nobility of Scotland, to the common good and well-^are of
both nations: For when that realm, in the beginning of her reign, became
ouer-burthened by the daily repair of the French forces, sent thither to the
aid of the Queen Regent, and her pertakers in the defense of the Romish
religion: the better sort of the Scottish Nobility, as the Duke of Chateaule
reault, (who attained that dignity of the French King, for yielding up the
gouern^^ (...) the Queen Mother) the Lord James Prior of Saint Androwes, the
Earls of Arraine, Arguile, Glencarne, Rothowse, Southerland, Monteith,
Huntley, Catnesse, Erolle, Marshall, Cassels, Eglenton, Montrosse, the Lords
Ruithen, Boide, Ogletree, Ayskin, Drommond, Hume, Rosse, Chrieghton,
Leuenstone, ^^mmerwell, the Master of Lindesey; and the Master of Maxwell,
did all join in request unto the Queen of England, that it would please her
Majesty to assist them against the injurious demeanure of the Frenchmen, who
sought not only to extirpate the profession of the Gospel, which they had
lately embraced, but also practiced the utter abolishment and ruin of their
ancient laws and liberties. Their suit was the more willingly yielded unto,
because it was doubted, that if the Frenchmen had once set good foot-hold in
Scotland, some trouble might have come thereof to this realm, through the
ambition of the Queens uncles the Guises, who abusing their authority under
Francis the second (the young King) had all things at their command in France.
The suspicion hereof did first arise, when immediately after the death of Queen
Mary, the Scottish Mary (pretending a title to the Crown) usurped the arms
and style of England. Hereupon in the latter end of February, the Earl of
Arguile, the Prior of Saint Andrews, the Master of Maxwell, and the young Lord
of Ledingtone (the Secretary) met the Duke of Northfolke at Berwick, who was
sent thither for that purpose. Here it was concluded, that whatsoever stranger
should invade either England or Scotland, that then the one nation should
minister aid to the other: that what Scottishmen should serve her Majesty in
her own realm, or what Englishmen should serve in Scotland, all should
receive pay only of the Queen of England: that what booty or prey should be
gotten by the English serving in Scotland, the same should become their own,
(the Towns and Castles excepted) which should forthwith be restored to whom
by right they did appertain.) For the better assurance hereof, five young
Gentlemen were shortly after sent into England, as pledges in the behalf of
the Lords of Scotland: namely the Lord Claudie Hamilton (fourth son to the
Duke) Robert Douglas half brother to the Lord James Steward, Archibauld
Cambell Lord of Lowghennell, George Grayme second son to the Earl of
Monteith, and James Canningham son to the Earl of Glencarne. All these were
to remain in England during the lives of the Scottish Queen, and of the
French King her husband together, and one year more next after his decease, if
it first happened. While this business was in hand, the Frenchmen being then
at the mouth of the water of Leuin in Fife, making head to the Scottish Lords:
descryed eight ships ready to arrive, which at the first sight, they took to
be sent out of France to their succors. But when they perceived that they were
English, with all possible speed they posted to Leethe, forthwith beginning to
fortify the town. The Englishmen having cast Ancre in the road there, the
Queen Regent sent to Master Winter (the Vice Admiral) to know for what cause
he was come thither, who dissembling with her for the present, answered, that
having been at the Sea to pursue certain Pirates, and not finding them
abroad, hoped to have heard of them there. With-in few days after this, the
whole Navy repaired thither unto him, wherewith becoming commander over the
Furthe, the Frenchmen were penned up both at Leethe, and in the Island of
Iuskeith, so as no victuals could be brought them by Sea.

About the beginning of the year next following, viz. 1560. English army,
consisting of two thousand horsemen, and six hundred footmen (over which the
Lord Gray of Wilton was General) coming to Hadington within Scotland, was at
the first saluted by the Earl of Arraine, the Lord James Prior, the Master of
Maxwell, Sir William Kircawdie Leard of Graunge, and diverse other of the
Scottish Nobility, attended with three hundred horse. After mutual
congratulations, the Scottish Lords departed for that night. The next day
(being the first of April) the Lord Lieutenant accompanied with Sir James
Croft (an assistant unto him in that charge) the Lord Scroope Lord Marshall,
Sir George Howard (general over the men of arms and demie-lances) with
diverse Captains rode to Muskelbrugh Church, where the Scottish Duke (after
some stay) entertained them, being accompanied with his Son the Earl of
Arraine, the Earls of Arguile, Glencorne, Southerland Montieth and Rothes, the
Prior of Saint Andrews, the Lord Ruithuen, the Lord Ogletree, the Lord Boied,
the Master of Maxwell, the Leard of Ormestone, the Master of Lindsey, the
Bishop of Galloway, the Abbot of Saint Colmes-inch, the Abbot of Culrose, the
Leards of Pettierowe, Cunninghamhead, Grange, and diverse other to the number
of two hundred horse. After many courteous embracings and kind salutations,
they spent two hours together in Counsel, then brake up and parted for that
night.

The army lay still at Preston from Monday till Satterday, being the sixth of
April, to the end that in the mean season, the Scottish Lords might make
trial once again whether the Queen Regent (who now for her more saftie
remained in Edenbrugh Castle) would be drawn to any reasonable conditions of
peace, to which end they did write unto her in manner following.

We have often heretofore earnestly entreated you, both by word and writing,
that it would please you to remove the French forces, which now for the term
of one year more have many ways intollerablie oppressed the poor, and put
the whole Nation in fear of a most miserable bondage and thrawldome. But when
we perceived, that these our just petitions did prevail nothing with you, we
were then enforced (by way of complaint) to lay open our pitiful estate unto
our next Neighbor Prince, the Queen of England, and with tears to crave aid
of her to repulse by force of arms (if otherwise it cannot be) those
strangers, that seek to bring us under their subjection. But although she
(being moved with compassion over our calamities) will undertake the defense
of our cause: notwithstanding to the end we may perform our duties toward
the Mother of our Queen, and (as much as we may) refrain from the effusion
of Christian blood, and then only to arm our selves, when otherwise we
cannot obtain our right: we held it our parts to beseech you again and
again, that forthwith you will command all the French forces to depart hence.
For whose more speedy passage, the Queen of England will not only grant
them safe conduct, to pass through her kingdom, but will presently take order
they shall be transported by her navy into France. If you make light reckning
hereof, we call God and man to witness, that we have not armed our selves
upon malice or stomach, but are unwillingly and of mere necessity enforced
to adventure upon extreme remidies, least otherwise we suffer the
commonweal, our selves, and all our posterity to be cast down headlong,
into an irrecouerable deapth of infinite calamities. Neither yet shall any
danger whatsoever (though presently we sustain much evil, and more is like
to fall on us) cause us to depart from our duties to our Queen, or to resist
the King her husband in any thing, which shall not manifestly tend to the
eminent danger and destruction of our selves, our posterities, and ancient
liberties. But (most gracious Prince) we do humbly again beseech you, that
weighing the equity of our request, and foreseeing what evil may ensue of
War, and how necessary a thing Peace shall be to the mis-affected estate
of this your daughters kingdom: it would not displease you to confirm your
will to our just petition, which if you do, you shall not only leave to all
Nations an acceptable memory of the moderate carriage of your self in place
of government, but thereby also give tranquillity and rest to the greatest
part of Christendom.

Farewell. At Dalkeith the fourth day of April. Anno. 1560.

These last words, in the shutting up of the letter, were spoken (I take it)
of the present estate of Scotland touching Religion. For now had the better
part of the Nobility taken upon them the defense of the Preachers of the
Gospel, whereupon they were named the Lords of the Congregation. And this was
the principal occasion of these broiles betwixt the Queen Regent (who would
have maintained popery) and those of the Nobility. How honorable and Christian
a part was it then of the Queen of England, to interpose her self into so
just a quarrel, as is the defense of the most ancient, apostolical, and
undoubted Religion? and how much shall that Nation be for ever bound unto her
Majesty, for so inestimable a benefit, as thereby it has hitherto happily
enjoyed? What answer the Queen made to the Lords I find not, but still one or
other labored by all possible means, to work a reconciliation, but al was in
vain, for the Queen would not yield to the sending away of the French forces,
on which point the Lords stood stiflie. At the approach of the army to Lies,
on the sixth day of April, the Frenchmen to the number of thirteen hundred,
issuing out of the town, took possession of a little Knole, (called the
Halkes-hill) thereby to prevent the Englishmen from incamping there, but at
length the enemy (with the loss of some seven score men, was beaten back to
the very gates of the town. Diverse Englishmen were also slain, and many more
hurt, but if it had been known, what advantage was offered by the French,
their whole power (it was thought) might thereby have been utterly overthrown.
While the Lord Graie was at Muskelbrough, on his way thitherward, he sent Sir
James Croft and Sir George Howard unto the Queen, to entreat an abstinence of
war for four and twenty hours, that in the mean time he might make known
unto her the cause of his coming in that manner: and further that upon some
conditions he would accept of peace. The Queen (consenting hereunto) sent an
Harauld to Lies to give knowledge thereof, but whether the fault was in the
messinger, or in the Frenchmen, the English army was enforced to the fight:
after which he refused any more parliance. But proceeded to the siedge of
Lies, which was no less valiantly assailed by the English, then by the
adverse party it was defended. During which, an accident happned in the town,
that more endangered and damnified the enemy in one night, then the
assiliantes had done before in twenty. For on the last day of April, about
two hours before Sunset, a sudden fire arose in the town, which being
increased by an outrageous wind then aloft, continued till the next morning,
having consumed a great part of the buildings, and amongst the rest certain
common Garners and Storehouses, wherein was great provision of corn and
victuals. Neither were the Englishmen slow in pursuing the advantage thereof.
For by removing their great Ordinance on that side the town, they beat back
those, which labored to quench the fire, and entering the ditches, took the
height of the wall, and so egarly assaulted the breaches, that had not the
Frenchmen foreseen the danger they were fallen into, and continewally applied
their business, and stood to it manfully on every quarter, that nights work
(as it was thought) would have ended the war for that time. The siedge
continued near six weeks longer, in which time many lost their lives on both
sides. At one assault (which was the sharpest of all the rest) an eight score
Englishmen were slain outright, and not so few maimed and hurt. But still,
through the especial care and good foresight of the Duke of Northfolke (then
appointed to remain in the North-partes for the direction of this service)
their wants whatsoever, were from time to time supplied. The French King,
understanding into what distress the town was brought (for the Frenchmen were
now worn and ouerweried with continual watching and warding) sent two
Ambassadors into England, County Randon and Monluc Bishop of Valence, to treat
with the Queen for a peace with Scotland, his wives kingdom. For he held it
an indgnity to seek it at his subjects hands the Scottish Lords. Her Majesty
being not unwilling to accept of any reasonable conditions, so as the French
might be removed, was content to associate unto them Master Secretary Cecill
(afterward Lord Burley and high Treasurer of England whilst he lived, mine
honorable good Lord and Master) and Doctor Wutton deane of Canterbury and
York. These passing together into Scotland after some three weeke^ travel,
concluded a peace on the eight day of July following, which was immediately
proclaimed at Lies in these words.

The most mighty Princess Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England,
France and Ireland, defender of the faith etc. And the most Christian King
Francis and Marie by the same grace of God, King and Queen of France and
Scotland, have accorded upon a reconciliation peace and amity, to be inuiolably
kept between them, their subjects, kingdoms, and Countries. And therefore in
their names, it is streitly commanded to all manner of persons borne under
their obedience, or being in their service, to forbear all hostility, either
by sea or land, and to keep good peace each with other, from this time
forwards, as they will answer thereunto at their uttermost perils.

The most material articles were these: that all the Frenchmen should depart
the Realm, with bag and bagage, within the term of twenty days next
following. And because they wanted (at that present) ships enough to receive
so great a number, the Queen of England should furnish them therewith,
leaving behind them pleadges for their safe return. That Lies should be
delivered up to the Scotts, the walls and fortifications about it raised and
thrown down. That the fortification erected by the Frenchmen, before the
Castle of Dumbar, should be also cast down. Thus much being performed on the
French party, the Englishmen should forthwith break up the siedge and
depart. That Mary Queen of Scotts, with the consent of her husband, should by
an act made to that end, bury in oblivion all attempts and actions done or
interprised by the Scottish Lords against their authority, from the tenth day
of March, in the year 1558, to the first of August this present year 1560.
which act should be ratified in Parliament then immediately to be holden by
the estates of Scotland, with the approbation and allowance of the said King
and Queen of France and Scotland. That threescore Frenchmen should still
abide in the I Will of Iuskeith, and as many in the Castle of Dunbarre, least
otherwise the Queen might seem to be dispossessed of the whole Kingdom.
Lastly that the King and Queen of France and Scotland, should not from
thenceforth usurp the title, or bear the Arms of England, sithence the same
only belonged of right to the Queen of England. Whilst these Ambassadors
were passing into Scotland, the Queen Regent deceased at Edenbrough, which
happily gave readier dispatch to this business. Thus was that Nation
disburthened of this servitude to the Frenchmen, amongst whom Monsieur la
Brosse (one of the chief Commanders under the Queen Regent) advised his
master the French King (as by intercepting of his Letters was discovered) to
have brought the Nobility of Scotland to utter destruction, and of their
livings and yearly revenues, to maintain a thousand men of Arms, to keep
the commons in perpetual bondage. At the Parliament holden in August
following, the Act of Oblivion (according to the former articles) was
ratified, and the question of Religion debated, and there-vpon a confession of
the faith established and published. Shortly after, the Earl of Morton, the
Earl of Glencarne, and the young Leird of Ledington repaired to the English
Court, in the behalf of the other Lords, to render thanks to the Queen of
England for the great favor her Majesty had done them, in reducing their
distressed country to a peaceable estate, for the which they acknowledged
themselves bound unto her for ever. In December next, Francis the French King
deceased, whereupon Queen Mary returned into Scotland, the twentieth of August
the Summer following, in the year 1561. William Metlaine was sent into
England, to make known her safe arrival, and to recommend unto her Majesty
most kind salutations from the Queen his Mistress, and her great desire to
continue amity and concord between their kingdoms.

Then he presented to her letters from the Lords, wherein after a due
remembrance of thankfulness for the late received favors, they humbly
entreated her Majesty, not only to carry her self in such sort toward their
Queen, that she might there-by be moved to continue amity with her: but
that it would please her, by as straight bands as possibly might be, still to
bind her more and more unto her, promising that for their parts they would let
slip no occasion, as far as it rested in their powers where-by to
perpetuate the late league between the two nations. Further that the most
assured mean, where-by to bury in perpetual oblivion the memory of all
former dissension, and clearlie to take away all occasion of future quarrel
rested herein, that it would please her by act of Parliament to establish the
succession of the crown of England (for want of issue of her own body) upon
the Queen their Mistress, who in blood was next unto it: Having proved by
sundry arguments and examples, that this their request was both just and
agreeable to the practice of the Kings over both these nations in former times,
he concluded that their Queen expected that favor at her hands. Hereunto
the Queen of England answered. I looked for another kind of Embassage from
your Queen, I marvel she has forgotten, what at length she promised before
her departure out of France, which was to ratify the peace made at Leeth, and
that immediately after her return into Scotland, I should be certified thereof.

I have now long enough (said her Majesty) been fed with fair words, it is
high time (if your Queen regard her credit with us) that her deeds be
answerable thereunto. The Ambassador in her excuse answered, that he was sent
out of Scotland within few days after their Queens return: that she had not
then entered into the handling of any matter of State, but was wholly busied in
giving intertainement to the Noblemen, for the more part unknown unto her:
neither were they all come at his departure, whose advice it was fit she
should use in a matter of that importance (especially touching the establishing
of Religion, which how difficult a point it was, she her self knew by
experience) and without whose consents she neither could nor ought to conclude
of any thing. The Queen of England being heere-with more moved, replied.
What needs (I pray you) any further consultation to effect that, whereunto
your Queen has already bound her self by her hand and seal? what answer I
should make hereunto (said he) for the present I know not, having received no
warrant here-in from our Queen, who looked not that this point should have
been so far urged now. This is all I can say unto it: Your Majesty may
easilye see, what just occasion she now has, to defer that business until
a more convenient time, when as I doubt not, but you shall be better
satisfied. After some further speech, her Majesty coming to the most
material point of this embassage, I well remember (says she) what you have
delivered unto us, in your Oration from the Nobility of Scotland, in the
behalf of your Queen. First that she is the next unto us in blood, and
therefore I should show greatest affection and love toward her, which we
neither will nor can deny. For the whole world can witness with us, that in
all our actions we never attempted any thing against the good and safety of
her self or of her kingdom; that when she claimed and challenged our kingdom,
and usurped the arms of the same, yet neuer-the-lesse we could not be
persuaded, but that it proceeded rather from some bad counsel about her, then
from her self. But how-so-euer it was, we hope she shall not be able to
take our Crown from us, or from my issue, if I leave any such to succeed us.
If I dye without children, she shall not find any thing done by us, that may
prejudice her right to the Crown of England. What that is, we never yet
thought it needful to examine, neither purpose we heere-after to trouble our
self there-with-all, but we leave it to them, to whom it pertains to look
unto it.

If your Queens title be good, we will no way impair the same. And I call
GOD to witness that for our part, we know none, next my self, whom I
prefer therein before her, or (if the matter should come in question) can
exclude her. Who be the competitours you know (said she) well enough. But
what are they (poor souls) to attempt a thing so far above their strength?
After some speech more of the mean estate of those Ladies (all being the issue
of the Lady Mary, second Daughter to King Henry the seventh) at length she
concluded, that this their request was a matter of a very great weight, and
that she had never yet entered into any due consideration thereof, and therefore
it was requisite, she should have longer time to think better of it. After
some few days, she called the Ambassador again unto her, and told him, she
could not find out, what the meaning of the Lords was, to make this petition
so presently after their Queens return home, especially knowing, that the
occasion of the former greeuances was not yet taken away, what other thing is
it (said she) they require, but that not-with-standing the manifest wrong
offered us, we should without further satisfaction, gratify their Queen in
yielding to a point of that importance? if they take this course (said she) let
them know, that we have as good means as they, both at home and abroad,
whereby to hold our right. The Ambassador answered, that their desire herein
proceeded from a care they had, not only to further the advancement of their
Queen: but, that which touched them nearer, over their own estates, which by
any trouble arising hereafter there-about, might happily fall into danger of an
utter ruin. That the Lords were imboldned the more freely and plainly to
impart their minds unto her, by the experience they have had of her Majesty's
good affection toward them, and of the care she had always showed over the
continuance of their present estates, and therefore he hoped, she would make
the best constructions of their meanings toward her, in this their petition,
proceeding upon so necessary considerations. If we had (said she) attempted
any thing, hurtful to your Queens title, then had they had good cause to have
moved us to take some other more moderate revenge. But to persuade me to have
(as it were) my winding sheet laid before me, while I live, is such a
petition, as was never yet made to any Prince. Neuer-the-lesse we do not
mislike their honest meaning herein, either in respect of the good toward
their Queen or themselves. For, we must confess, it would cost many men on
both sides their lives, if happily any adverse party amongst those
competitours should oppose her self against your Queen. But who should she
be? or what means can she make?

Well, letting this doubt pass, wherein there is no doubt to be made, admit
we were inclinable unto that they desire, would we, think you, be drawn
unto it, thereby to gratify those Noblemen, rather then your Queen her self?
surely no. But there be many more reasons then yet I have made, to keep us
from yielding thereunto. After she had in a long discourse declared, what
she had observed both particulerlie in the disposition of her own subjects:
and more generally in the corrupt nature of mankind, and with-all had alleged
sundry examples in other Christian kings, how jealous they have been even
over their own children, who by the laws of God and Nature, were to succeed
them: she concluded, that by them she was taught, how dangerous a point it was
to make their Queen her known heir to the Crown of England, the more in
that she was already a mighty Princess of her self, and therefore she should
with the more difficulty, upon such a grounded hope, contain her self
with-in the due bonds of law and equity. Upon further conference with her
Majesty at another time, the Ambassador at length obtained, that the former
treaty of Peace, and the articles then set down, should be retracted, and
enlarged in this manner. That the Queen of Scots should no longer bear the
arms of England, nor usurp the title of Queen over the same, during the life
of the Queen of England, or of her issue after her. On the other-side, that
the Queen of England should promise and covenant for her self, and her issue
after her, that neither she, nor they should make or do any act, that might
prejudice the claim and right of succession, which the Queen of Scots has to
the Crown of England.

In like manner, when as after the broiles in Scotland, which followed the
detestable murders of King Henry, the Queen of Scotts her second husband,
Father to the King that now reigns, and of the Earl of Murrey their Regent,
they of her faction (she being then fled into England for her more safety,
and remaining there in a favorable kind of captivity) practiced her
deliverance, by stirring up a dangerous rebellion in the North parts of
England, and that the principal conspirators the two Earls of Northumberland
and Westmerland were fled into Scotland, and harbored there: the Queen of
England being moved thereunto, as well in respect of her own safety, as of
the tender and motherly care, she had over the Infant King her near kinsman,
whose life was brought thereby into no less danger then her own: her Majesty
was easily drawn by the entreaty of the Scottish Nobility of that faction,
to take upon her the defense and protection of them and that kingdom, against
the common enemies and disturbers of the peaceable and quiet estate, of the one
and other Nation, who (besides their privy practices) had also by open
hostility and invasion, provoked her Majesty to take arms against them. For
even the next night, after the Regent was slain, Walter Scotte, and Thomas
Carre ^^ ^^^miherste, at the instigation especially of the Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, entered the English borders, and in outrageous manner, with fire and
sword, wasted and spoiled the country adjoining. Neither were the adversaries
satisfied with this, and the like displeasures sundry times afterward, but
they were not ashamed with most despightfull terms to reproach her Majesty.
Of this faction, the Hamiltons were the principal heads and leaders, not so
much (as it was thought) for any good meaning toward the Scottish Queen,
whose party they would seem to take, but rather by bringing her again into
Scotland: they hoped to work the destruction both of the Mother and Son, and
there-by to set the Crown of Scotland upon some of their own heads,
pretending to be next in blood after them to the same. The Queen of England
being thus provoked to revenge, by her adversaries on the one side, and on the
other side entreated by her well-willers, to join with them against those, who
were enemies both to her and their own King, commanded the Earl of Sussex
(Lord Lieutenant then of the North parts) to gather such forces there, as he
thought convenient, where-with-all to enter into Scotland, so as on the
eighteenth day of April, in the year 1570. English Marches. The principal
Army was conducted by the Lord Lieutenant himself, accompanied with the Lord
Hunsden Governor of Barwick, and Sir William Drewrie Marshall there. The next
was lead by Sir John Foster warden of the middle Marches: the third by the Lord
Scroope warden of the West Marches. The two former, entering into Tiuidale,
wasted and destroyed what-so-euer stood in their way, until they met at
Crawling, where they also rased the Castle. From thence passing to Iedworth,
they were so well entertained, that in requital thereof, they forbear to do
any harm there. Departing thence, the Army sundry times divided it self, the
more to afflict the countries where they passed: Upon the two and twentieth of
the same month they returned together to Barwick.

The Lord Scroope, in the mean time, with his people, having ranged the
enemies Countries, as far well near as Domfries, gave them sundry
ouer-throwes, took many prisoners, burned diverse Towns, and returned also in
safety. In these iourneyes, above fifty Castells and places of strength, and
not so few as three hundred Towns, Villages, and dwellings, were rased,
burned, and spoiled: so as none well near in all those parts, who had either
received the English rebels, or had by invasion indamaged the borders of
England, had left unto them, dwellings for themselves or their followers,
besides the great loss of their goods wasted, consumed, or carried away by the
Englishmen. During these exploits, the Marches of England were on every side so
guarded by the Lord Euers, Sir George Bows, and the Bishoprick-men, as the
enemy durst not once offer, to carry so much as a Cow out of England. The
Lord General, having stayed three days at Berwicke for the refreshing of his
army, and making preparation for the siedge of Hume Castle, he then assailed
the same so egerlie, that within three days more it was surrendered. This
Castle was committed to the custody of Captain Wood and Captain Pickman,
with whom leaving a garrison of two hundred soldiers, he returned again to
Berwicke. At this siedge but four were slain on both sides, two English and
two Scottishmen. The fourth of May, the Lord General lying sick at Berwicke,
sent Master Drewrie with some two thousand men, to take Fast Castle, which
upon the first summons yielded it self; it was kept by half a score Scotts,
and committed to the custody of as many Englishmen, who were thought able
enough to hold it against all the power of Scotland, the same by situation was
naturally so strong. The General at his return made him Knight, together with
Sir Thomas Manners, brother to the Earl of Rutland, Sir George Carry, now Lord
Hunsdon, and Sir Robert Constable. While these things were in doing, the Earl
of Lennox, being thereunto ernestly labored by the Lords of the Kings party his
countrymen, obtained leave of the Queen of England. (where he then remained)
to join with them in the King his grand-childs quarrel. But because the
adverse party had gotten such head (whilst that Realm was without a head)
that with his safety he could not pass alone unto the^: it pleased her Majesty
(such desire she had to advance the good estate of that Nation) not only to
safe conduct him th^ther, but also to give him such aid, as he should not
stand in fear of the malice of his enemies. For Sir William Drewrie General,
with the other three new made knights, and certain companies of horse and
foote-men, to the number of sixteen hundred in the whole, setting forth of
Berwicke together with the Earl and his Scottish retinewe, on the twelfth day
of May, made so good speed (the foote-men being a days journey before them)
that on the next day they came to Edenbrough, where they found there
confederates the Scottish Lords, amongst whom the Earls of Morton, Mar and
Glencarne were the principal. In the mean while for the better assurance of
such covenants, as were agreed unto by those Lords (at whose entreaty also this
aid was granted) certain hostages were sent into England. The Duke of
Chateau, and his adherents of the adverse party, hearing of the approach of
the Englishmen, was lately departed thence, and had dismissed his army,
having first attempted and failed of the taking of the Castle of Glascoe with
some loss of his men, but more of his honor. The matter of greatest
importance atcheeued by the Englishmen and Scots there associates, at this
journey, was the taking of Hamilton Castle, which was presently raised. The
town of Lithquo (which had bin a great enemy to the Kings party) at the ernest
entreaty of the Earl of Morton, was nevertheless spared, the Dukes house only
excepted. Here was the Earl of Murrey (late Regent of Scotland) despightfully
murdered, by James Hamilton of Bedwell, for the which it deserved the less
favor. But such was the compassion of this worthy Gentleman, over the penitent
offenders, both now and before, that a Scottish writer has brought him into
some suspicion of over much partiality toward the adversaries, although the
same Author confesses that the Englishmen in all this journey spared neither
the goods, lands nor houses of any of the Hamiltons, or other that were either
suspected of confederacy with the murderer of the Regent, or had received into
their protection any of the English rebels, especially all along the tract of
the river of Cloid, where for the most part their possessions lay. The
beginning of the next month, the Englishmen returned to Berwicke, and the Scots
their confederates, each man to his own house. Shortly after the Queen of
England reco^mending unto the Scottish Nobility, the fidelity and trust, they
might safely repose in the Earl of Lennox, thereupon by general consent
(where before he was entitled Lord Governor, or Lieutenant of Scotland) they
made him their Regent, the rather (as it seems) because the Earl of Huntley
had a little before taken upon him the Lieutenantship of that Realm, in the
name and behalf of the Scottish Queen, and had also summoned a Parliament to
be holden at Lithquoe in September following. In the mean time the Earl of
Sussex and the Lo. Scroope were sent again into Scotland, with certain bands
of horsemen and footmen, to pursue the English rebels, where having as before
made great spoil at Dumfrees and other places, as far as the Castle of
Carlauerock (which they blew up) after six days they returned to Carliele on
the eight and twentieth day of August, where the Earl made these knights for
their good service at this journey. Sir Edward Hastings brother to the Earl of
Huntington. Sir Francis Russell Son to the Earl of Bedford, Sir Valentine
Brown, Sir William Halton, Sir Robert Stapleton, Sir Henry Curwin, and Sir
Symond Musgraue. For above two years after this, no further aid was sent out
of England by reason (I take it) her Majesty and the counsel were wholly
busied, in the discovery of the secret and dangerous practice of Thomas Lord
Howard, Duke of Norfolk, in contriuing marriage with the Scottish Queen, for
the which he was now again the second time (having before been delivered
thence) committed to the Tower of London, where he remained prisoner from the
seventh of September till the thirteenth of January following, on which day he
was arraigned in VVestminster-hal, before George Lord Talbote Earl of
Shrewsbury (high Steward of England for that day) and there by his Peers found
gilty of high treason, and according to the judgment passed upon him, was
beheaded on the Tower Hill, between seven and eight of the clock in the
morning, the second day of June in the year. 1572. Babilonian Circe, that man
of Rome, and his agentes, as that he could not foresee the danger, whereinto he
was fallen by undertaking that unhappy enterprice, who if he had been better
advised, might long have continewed a principal pillar of our common weal. On
the 22. of August following Thomas Lord Percy Earl of Northumberland, having
before been attainted of high treason by Parliament, as being one of the
principal conspirators in the late rebellion, and now brought out of Scotland
whether he was fled, was likewise beheaded at York, about two of the clock in
the after noone. But Charles Neuil Earl of Westmerland his associate in the
said rebellion, finding no safety for himself in Scotland, got over into the
low countries, where he lived a long time after. While these things thus passed
in England, the adverse faction of Scotland (who were the fuel of this fire)
ceased not in their accustomed manner still to cross the proceedings of the
Lords of the Kings party: for the Earl of Lennox enjoyed not the Regencie
hardly one year, before he and the rest of his adherents, were suddenly set
upon by their adversaries at Striueling, where, before the Earl could be
rescued out of their hands, he was so wounded by the shot of a Pistolet, that
he died thereof the same night. After whose death the Lords made choice of the
earl of Mar to succeed him in that dignity. The Queen of England still
labored by all good means to accord these iarres in Scotland, but it would
not prevail, by reason the French king never ceased to animate and encourage
the Scottish Queens party to stand out, who from the death of the earl of
Murrey was possessed of the Town and Castle of Edenbrough, the strongest hold
and chief town of that realm. For the recovery hereof, the Queen of England
was entreated by the other party, to assist them with some competent forces.
Here-vpon Sir William Drewry was once again sent into Scotland accompanied
with Sir Francis Russell, Captain Read, Captain Erington master of the
Ordinance and Provost Marshall, Captain Pikeman, Captain Gamme, Captain
Wood, Captain Case, Captain St^rrey, and Thomas B^rton, to whose charge was
committed one thousand Soldiers, three hundred Pioners, and certain pieces of
battery, viz six double Canons, fourteen whole Culuerings, two Sacres, two
mortuis pieces, and two Bombards. Certain other Gentlemen, accompanied the
General, as voluntary followers: namely, Sir George Carry, Sir Henry Ley,
Master Thomas Cecill (now Lord Burghleigh) Master Michell Carry, Henry
Carry, William Knowles, Thomas Sutton: Cotton, Kelloway, Dyer, Tilney, William
Killigrew, William Selbie, and others. The Englishmen being come to
Edenbrough, some four or five bands of the Scottishmen joined with them, and
brought three or four pieces (...) of Artillarie. The footmen ha^ing without
r^sistance entered the Town, the Canon from the Castle was sundry times
discharged upon them, but did no harm, saueing by beating up the Stones in the
street (...) Brickman was thereby hurt in the face. The same day the Castle
was summoned by a Messenger of Arms, in manner following.

Sir William Ker^andie, some times of Grange Knight. For as much as the Queens
Majesty (my Sovereign Lady) ^^ the earnest request of her dear Cousin the
King of Scotts your Sovereign Lord, made to her Highness by his R^^^^
Nobility, and (...) of the realm, after all good means used by ^reaty to
have reduced you to dutiful obedience of his authority, which hitherto you have
not duly harkned unto, to the only hinderance of the universal peace in this
realm, by withholding this his Highness Castle, meaning (as it seems) to
reserve the same for a receptacle of foreign forces, to the manifest danger of
this realm, and of my Sovereign, and therefore necessarily to be in time
removed: for which consideration her Majesty has sent her aid and succors
of Men, Ordinance and Munition, under my charge and leading for the expugnation
and recovery of the said Castle, to the said Kings use and behoof. And
therefore according to her Maiestes commandment and commission, this shall be
in due manner to warn, require, and summon you, that you render and deliver the
said Castle, with all the Ordinance, Artillary, Munition, Jewels, household
stuff, and such other implements within the same to me, to the use and behoof
of the King your Sovereign and his Regent in his name, immediately after this
my letter of So^mons, or knowledge of the same shall come unto you; which if you
obey (as of duty you ought) then will I, in her Majesty's name, enterpose my
self to travel with the Regent, Counsel, and Nobility here, for the safety of
your lives. But otherwise if you continue in your former obstinacy abiding the
Canon, the^ look for no further grace. But you and the rest within that Castle
shall be pursued to the uttermost, and holde^ as enemies to his majesty your own
sovereign and Country General Ed^^^^ ^^gh, by me Willi^^ ^^^^^y Knight,
General of her Majesty's forces now in Scotland, this 25. day of April in the
year 1573. Englishmen, that the enemy was forced to a parley, wher-vpo^ on the
third day following, being the 28. of May, the Castle was surrendered into the
hands of the General, and his Ensign was erected in sundry places thereof,
until he delivered the same over again, to the use of the King of Scotts,
together with the prisoners taken therein, namely Sir William Kerkandy the
Captain, the Lord (...), the Lord of Ledington Secretary; the (...) of Peterro
Constable of the Castle; the Countess of Arguile, the Lady of Ledington and
the Lady of Grange. The private soldiers and other their servants were
licenced to depart with bag and baggage. This Castle was never before taken
by force, the same being always thought of such impregnable strength, through
the natural situation thereof, as by no engine and device it could possible
be achieved. But what can now withstand the force of the Cannon if the same
be subject to battery?

Since that time, now for these thirty years wel-nere, nothing of importance
has bin attempted by the one or other Nation, to the breach of the most happy
peace and concord between them. Though (it may be) some turbulent and unquiet
spirits, did what they could, upon the execution of the Scottish Queen in the
year 1587. England. But the Lord God did give his Majesty grace to carry
himself more warily. For though good nature might work in his Majesty a due
commiseration over the Queen his mother her lamentable end: yet well weighing
the quality and measure of her offense, the lawful and orderly proceeding
against her, (having received an honorable trial by six and thirty of the
greatest and grauest personages of this realm) and considering how much her
life afterward would prejudice, not only the safety of the two royal persons,
but withal the quiet estate of the whole Island: the most prudent King well
ore-saw, what wrong he might have wrought unto himself by entering into any
violent course It was apparent enough to the whole world, how the King of
Spain, by his subtle agents the Jesuits, never ceased while the Queen his
Mother lived, under pretense to set her at liberty for the adua^cement of
Popery, to (...) ^p sundry wickedly disposed persons, to ^y murdering hands
upon Queen Elizabeth, ^^ by treachery to bereave us of her. This if by any
me^nes he could have brought to pass (from which the Lord God did ever
deliver her) his ambition was such, that he would undoubtedly have done his
best to have set the Crown of England on his own head, or else have bestowed
it on his Daughter the Infant of Spain, whom a principal member of that
seditious fraternity has since by public ^^iting entitled unto it. Parsons.
This was so well known to King James, as that not long after, his Majesty
gave commandeme^^ by open Proclamation to all his subjects o^ Scotland, to
repute and hold King Philippe of Spain, as great an enemy to him and his
estate, both present and in exspectance, as to the Queen of England, when in
the year next following, that his invincible Navy (as it was termed)
attempted the conquest of this Land. But what success the same had, his
Majesty has committed to eternal memory in this his elegant poesy.

The Nations banded against the Lord of might,
Prepared a force, and for them to the way.
Mars dressed himself in s^^^ ^ ^awfull plight,
The like whereof was never (...) (they say)
They forward (...) in (...) way.
(...) Sea and Land beset us e^^rywhere,
Brags threatened us a ruinous decay
What came of that the issue did declare.
The winds began to toss them here and there.
The seas begun in foming waves to swell,
The number that escaped, it fell them fair:
The rest were swallowed up in gulfes of hell.
But how were all these things miraculous done?
God looks at them out of his Heavenly Throne.
How truly and Christanly these two most worthy Princes loved one the other,
while they lived together, well appears not only by the continuance of an
assured peace and concord between these their two kingdoms: but also by the
manifold blessings, that have been thereby heaped upon us their subjects. For
when did these two Nations ever before, inioye the like felicity, as they have
done under their Kingly Sovereignty? This may appear the more admirable, if
we consider the sex of the one, and the long and dangerous mimority and
nonage of the other. But it has pleased the eternal God (according to the
saying of the Apostle) by the weak things of the world to confound and bring
to naught the mighty and powerful malice of his enemies and ours. For how
often have they both (but especially her Majesty) miraculously escaped the
treacherous attempts of their bloody adversary, that Antichristian Romish
Sinagoge?

Queen Elizabeth having lived well near threescore and ten years, and
happily reigned above forty four, exchanged (I doubt not) this her earthly,
and transitory Crown, for an immortal and heavenly Diadem, on the four and
twentieth day of March in the year 1602. James, not many hours after her
death, was proclaimed in London (and else where over the whole realm, with as
much speed as possible might be) the only lawful, lineall, and rightful King
of England, France and Ireland, with as great joy and general applause of all
estates, as the fresh remembrance of the late loss of such a gracious
Princess, would in true love and loyalty admit and tolerate in a subject.

God grant his Majesty may have a long and prosperous reign, and maintain
amongst us the profession of that undoubted Christian faith and true Religion,
wherein both his Majesty himself, and the young Prince of Scotland his son
(eight years old the nineteenth day of February last) have been baptized, by
and in the name of Queen Elizabeth, eight and twenty years one after the
other.

FINIS.

