THE COURT OF THE MOST Illustrious and most Magnificent JAMES, the first; KING
Of Great-Britaine, France, and Ireland: etc.

WITH DIVERSE RVLES, MOST PVRE PRECEPTS, AND SELECTED DEFINITIONS lively
delineated.

Principibus placuisse viris, non vltima laus est. To please the Best, best
praise I do it judge;
Let Grill be Grill: I pass not Enui's grudge.


LONDON Printed by EDW: GRIFFIN, in Eliots-Court in the Little-old-Baily, near
the King's Head. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable George, Marquisse Buckingham, Vicount VILLIERS, Baron
of Whaddon, Lord high Admiral of ENGLAND, Justice in Air of all his Maties
Forests, Parkes, and Chases beyond Trent, Master of the Horse to his Majesty;
and one of the Gentlemen of his Maties Bedchamber: Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable (...) Counsel of
England, and Scotland.
Right noble and most honored Lord,
AS an humble and most obsequious Stranger, having spent diverse years in this
flourishing Kingdom, and received many comfortable and worthy favors, from
sundry honorable and eminent personages, in this renowned Court, whose rare

(...) and famous PRINCE, are divulged and dispersed over all the principallest
regions of the Christian world: I could not but distaste the perverse petulancy
of many Poets, which laid fo many odious aspersions upon Courts, as if no
virtue had in them any residence, but that like dangerous shelfes and rocks,
they should be shunned and avoided, by all those that mean to square their
lives and actions, by the rule of true virtue and piety: whereas rather their
own insufficiency and weakness, making them incapable of high action and
employment; and being altogether unable to resist the infinite objects of
worldly temptations, they are enforced to retire themselves to a certain
unprofitable contemplation, wherein they study to bark and snarle at the
honorable labors and endeavors of others, being in themselves absolutely
immeritorious, to discharge the noble functions and offices of such high
places, and dignities. And because your most honored Lorpship does truly
exemplify, what I have undoubtedly by long experience observed, I have
presumed to shelter this my brief and sincere treatise, under the wing of your
Honorable protection. Whose rare and admired virtues having to the ancient
Nobility of your blood, added the accumulation of many honors and great
dignities, my unworthy humble self in (...) and glorious (...) in all humble
service and ^

Your Lordships most humbl^ devo^^^ and ^^^ection^^^, A. D. B.

TO THE COVRTIER OR KIND READER, HEALTH.
COurteous Courtier, and gentle Reader, having here in a plain manner, and
direct method described certain rules and precepts of a Courly and Political
life; I must crave thy friendly censure and courteous connivence, in that I
have not in this Treatise over curiously or nicely tied my self to the
observation of logical rules and prescriptions. Let him who slights me,
learn this one document, from me, That it is the condition of truly generous
and indici^us men, not captiously to carpe and catch at the shadow of words,
but wisely to fasten on the substantial matter it self. Now as touching the
matter I doubt not, but that I have so composed and compiled the same, as to
give, if not plenary satisfaction, yet at least, sufficient content to the
expectation of every indifferent Courtier, especially of the unexperienced and
newly initiatd thereinto. I purpose not here to discourse of the infelicities
or (as I may so term them) the Gay-greivances of a Courtiers life; Neither
yet to write of the immunities and commodities of the contrary to this, a
private life: This I suppose has been done by others, as cunningly and
skilfully as their wit could stretch unto: who indeed seem to have made this
the full scope and end of their studies: namely, contumeliously to disparage
the renown of Princes; and ignominiously to inveigh against and calumniate the
lives of Courtiers. To which Fellows (doubtless) if we should give credit.
Courtiers would a great deal rather follow the Cart than Court, and more
desire to live in base and ignoble Shepherds cottages, than in or about their
Princes noble Palaces. But sie upon the ridiculous speeches of such idle
Idiots; Avaunt, such fond opinions of men so ignorant and merely besotted:
Whose judgment if it were not most corrupt and unjustifiable, we might quickly
for all civil gouer^ment wholly dimolished, and the Courts of Kings
disgracefully relinquished. This then we must both hold and know for a truth;
which also is especially advertised and intimated in this little work, that
there is no estate or condition of life whatsoever, but has in it, the thorns
of many miseries and shackles of incarcerating encombrances. And if the credit
of the most wise Philosopher may gain any credit with us, Nihil aliud in
humanis rebus magnum, nisi animus magna despiciens. This his noble Sentence
will declare unto us that there is nothing in the whole world, that may justly
be termed Great, except the mind lightly regarding Great-things. Whither then
thou be a Courtier, or a Countryman, it is neither this nor that condition of
life, which can make thee happy: but the mind well formed and informed by
nature, and as it were watered with the divine dew and grace of GODS gracious
Spirit.

In brief (kind Courtier and friendly Reader) Quamcunque Spartam fuerimus
nacti etc. Whatsoever estate or office we have obtained, from the great
Steward, or rather the suprcame Prince of heaven, let us so carry our selves
therein, that to the utmost of our power, we may adorn and beautify the same.
But if we will needs be carping and biting at, those things which appertain
not to us; let us on Gods name hate men's vices but not their persons: Let us
not kick against that political regiment and ordination, whose original is
from God himself. For, hereunto we are invited by the precepts and counsels
of the grauest and most wise, especially of that Poet:

Parcere Personis, dicere de vicijs; That is,
It Is wisdom, wisely, in these sinful times
Men's Persons not to harm, but charm their crimes.
But to conclude in a word, for I desire to be brief; I grant (indeed) that
some Courtiers are too immoderately and ambitiously prone, to hunt after
honor, preferment, rule and riches, and (which do as it were naturally grow
out of them) to pleasure and voluptuousness; and that they do more highly
estimate these external unconstant and slippery things, than is consonant, or
convenient either to time, place or persons: Yet notwithstanding it is no
consequence that for some particular ill addicted and vicious Courtiers, the
Court and Courtiers in general who officiate good and necessary services to
their Prince, should be utterly condemned, or that such infamous aspersions
should be so generally cast upon them all.

The opinion therefore, of Lucan we utterly dislike and re(...)e as must absurd:

Exeat Aula
Qui volet esse pius; virtus and summa potestas
Non coeunt, etc.
Depart from Court, if thou will pious be
Goodness and Greatness will not, there, agree.
It is a flash, a gow-gaw, a mere fervolous trifle; unless we have respect
only to those Monsters of men, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Julian the
Apostata, Phocas, and such like firebrarnds of fury, and Patrons of impiety;
Never casting our eyes upon, nor rightly recogitating the most noble and
renowned actions of those truly pious and prudent Courtiers, the most
profitable and comfortable organs and instruments both of Church and
Commonwealth; in the number of whom I may first rank, the most pious
Patriarch Joseph, who at Court became the Prince and prime of all his Brethren,
the Establisher of his people, yea the very Basis, and (under God) the Atlas of
his Nation; to whom I add Moses, Abdias, David, Daniel and M^rdocai, who with
great prudence and providence having, waded through and vanquished the various
storms and i^^pardous casualties, of the turbulent sea (as I may so say) of
the Court; have even therein most gloriously atcheiued the eminent and
euer-permanent renown and excellency of virtue; wit, dignity and perfect
piety, yea and have shown themselves the maine props and pillars of the Church
of God, and their Weale-publike. And doubtless (indicious Reader) unless we
wholly delight in ancient, foreign, and farfetcht examples, and do vilipend or
reject new and domesticke patterns hereof. May we not most apparently behold
and perspicuously perceive a lively, real and royal pattern of majesty,
grace, wisdom, learning, mercy, justice, pity, and piety, in that most
renowned Courtier, our most sacred Sovereign King JAMES? Yes doubtless. And
none, I dare confidently a vouch, except he be a perjured enemy to all truth
and equity, will, or can if he would, deny this truth. Let Lucan then, in this
respect, with all his lunaticke Companions go shake their ears; who so
unjustly judge, and untruly do teach, those things to be so reluctuously
repugnant, which here we see are so harmoniously consonant. But be it as twill
be, here is my determinate resolution and firm conclusion:

Ire, redire, sequi Regum sublimia tecta*
Eximius status est --
The noblest state of life under the sun
Is, for my King, to live, to ride, to run.
And this, to thee alone (ingenuous Courtier) do I heartily desire: Until
thou shall be translated from this transitory and momentany Court, into that
celestial Palace eternally blessed and blissful, without all sighs and
sorrows, toil and turmoile, even the mansions of the heavenly Jerusalem. And
this Christ Jesus grant, who sits at the eternal ternall stern of his
heavenly kingdom; under whose banner all Christians whether Kings or Subjects,
Courtiers or Countrymen, do all fight, are all Conquerors, are all crowned.

To Momus his own Murderer.
HEalth also to thee Momus, who whiles thou bereaust thy self of the sweet
fruit of Good both received and sought for; do dilacerate, wound and deadly
wound thine own heart, with the infectious fangs of Envy: And, which is far
the worst, do denudate and strip thy self bare of the sovereign grace of
God: Thou I say, who thus do pine and punish thy self in sense, in soul;
take thou this one Disticke from me, and, if thou can farewell, farewell.

Non legis, and carpis; quae nec capis, inuide, carpis:
Inuide, quae carpis, fac meliora, legam.
That is,
Read, Momus; rail not; try, ere thou taunt, mine:
Commend, or, mine come mend; then, I Will read thine,
Thine if thou be thine own. A. D. B.

TO HIS WORTHY AND well-deseruing friend Master A. D. B.
MOst truly have thou shown the diffrence great
Betwixt a Country life and Courtly seat,
That every calling subject is to Fate,
As well the Private life as Public state,
By vice or virtue, Both, to try and choose;
Good, Bad; Best, Worst; as we them use, abuse:
To teach all men, since, all men's states are such,
Nor Court, nor Cart, to love, to loath, too much.
I. V.

ILLVSTRI ET GENEROSO D. D. GEORGIO BVCKINGHAMO viro familia and virtute nobili.
INgenium, virtus, probitas, and forma decora,
Seu placeat verae Nobilitatis honos.
BVCKINGHAMVS adest, qui cuncta haec possidet vnu^,
En, facies certis iudicat ipsa notis.
O nimium foelix, o fausta sort creatum,
Cui tam constanter, sors magis aequa fluit?
Hane DEVS omnipotens dedit and Natura, GEORGI,
Firmauit magni mox tibi REGIS amor.
Quem tua promeruit virtus and gratia (...)
Opto tibi REX hunc continuare velit.
The same in English.
WIt, virtue, beauty, sincere honesty,
True real badges of nobility.
All met in One, to make a man of Fame
All shining bright in noble BVCKLNGHAM:
O happy, o thrice happy by blessed Fate,
Whose stars, his honors, thus accumulate.
GOD and the KING, yea Nature, all concur,
To grace great George with Honors golden-spurre.
O, never may thy King, to love thee, cease,
But thy rare parts, his hearts true love increase.
A. D. B.

THE Court of King JAMES.
AFter that I had resolved, and with my self determined (Illustrious and
thrice Noble MARQVESSE) to A preamble wherein is briefly discoursed the cause
of this Treatise.
diuulge and set forth unto public view, somewhat concerning the life of a
Courtier; And having spent much most serious and incessant deliberation, and
constant consideration, to whom I might exhibit and present, this offspring
and tender Infant of mine, the fruit of my Labors; at last I most fortunately
thought upon your Right Ho. Lordship, for which I most submisly crave your
Lordships pardon: and most humbly desire that you would vouchsafe to entertain
so courteons a persuasion, and favorable an opinion of me: that I have not
either with any impudence, much less Imprudence, attempted ought herein. Many
of my nearest and dearest friends, assuring me that it would be worth the
labor; persuaded yea constrained me, by (...) this most, humble Present. The
(...) most Royal King, unto your Honor: In (...) you (right Noble Lord) for
your exce(...) singular, both internal and external virtues and endowements,
do most resplendently glister and shine, like a most precious Jewel richly
garnished in the purest Gold. Therefore it cannot, doubtless, be Impudency
in me, thus to endeavor and desire, that these my labors, may have your
Lordships worthy approbation; whose daily endeauours are most industriously
employed, in the negotiation of the profitable affairs of your King and his
commonwealth. And to this end and purpose, and for this special cause, do I
most prostrately proffer and present unto your Honor, this small volume (...)
title of the Court of JAMES King of Great Britain. Neither yet do I doubt,
but that this my labor herein, will receive a grateful acceptance from all
those who not so much with their Corporal, as their Mental eyes of
Intelligence, do see and thoroughly see into the generosity of your lineage, the
great and most grave wisdom, which does inhabit in so green and young a
Breast, your modesty, affability and great humanity. A figg for envious
Critics, therefore, of most dejected and degenerous condition; who practice
nothing so much, as basely and malignantly to censure men's persons, faults, and
infirmities. But the judgment of the most judicious and just judges may give
both (...) and all good men full content; principally the great love and ^^^our
of our most potent and prudent King, who back graciously elected and made
choice of your Honor, as a man most excellent most accomplished: on whom (many
others being neglected) he might confer, yea accumulate the favorable
effects of his Princly benevolence, bounty, and benignity. This your Honors
lovely lot and felicity, no doubt may bite to the quick, and even (as it were)
boil the hearts of the malicious: but good and honest minded men, who are the
lovers and embracers of your Honors virtue and integrity, do contrariwise
undoubtedly rejoice at, and heartily congratulate the same. Thus have I, (I
hope) freed my self from suspect of Impudence. Now again if any accuse me of
Imprudency, to avoid this imputation, I thus answer. That I undertook not
this work by mine own authority, motion, or instigation, but as having been
vrgently solicited thereunto, by the vehement persuasions of some worthy
personages, who themselves have observed diverse Pamphlets, touching the Court
to have binne formerly published, which seemed rather to have been composed,
in the disgrace of Princes, and derision of their followers, then soundly or
sincerely to instruct or show them, what is to be followed what to be avoided.
I also (for mine own part) do assuredly know, that there are and have bin,
both in our own and in the memory of our forefathers, such men, who are as
it were naturally borne, to pervert and deprave things, both well spoken and as
well performed: whose custom and counsel I utterly detest, and in this
treatise, do faithfully protest; that I have endeavored what in me lay, to lay
hold on the goulden-meane; for what soever I have judged commendable, I have
accordingly commended, and what soever I have contrariwise thought to be
culpable, I have likewise condemned. Which my impartial and indifferent
dealing herein, I hope no good man, no honest hearted man will disallow; as for
dishonest (...) follows, whether they praise or dis(...) herein, neither I,
nor any wise man shall (...) our selves hurt, or take it to the heart. Yet this
(...) confidently avouch, that if I had an intention to (...) over all things,
that have bin promiscuously and confusedly, both said and written by many men
against Courtiers; the Court would (I am persuaded) be most distasteful to
many, to whom I know it is now most pleasant and delightful. But this my little
volume (I hope) shall be profitable to many, grateful to the good, hateful to
none but to the Impious and Envious. I do herein frequently admonish those
Courtiers, who have a determination to hoyce up sail and to lanch out, into
the deep of this difficult and turbulent Sea; that wisely and (...) they sail
with a fortunate and favorable Gale of wind, least by the Syren-like
allurements, or rather the most violent and tempestuous storms of immoderate
desires they be desperately driven upon Scylla or Charibdis, or be dashed against
the wrath and indignation of their Prince, as against a dangerous
death-threatning Rock. These admonitions have I (for this cause) thought most
pertinent and necessary, because now a days, almost all things universally
are full yea too-too-full, of brazen faced boldness and precipitate
haire-braind, heed-lesse, rashness. Doubtless young men, yea all subjects
ingenerall, when they shall understand and consider, the difficulties and
dangers of preferments, and the burden of a Courtiers life, will, I am
persuaded, less e^milate and hate either Courtiers or Magistrates; yea and
these will hence learn better to rule, and those to obey. But enough of this.
It now remains that I endeavor to purge and put away, one other note of
Imprudence in me, to wit, that too like unto Phaeton.

Nimis magna peto, et quae non viribus illis,
Munera conueniunt etc.
Ambitiously I take a Task in hand,
Whose greatness with my weakness cannot stand.
If any do sound such a note in mine ears, and think thereby, to deter me
from my purposed progress; I wish him to take this for his answer, that I am
not ignorant of mine own calling and condition of life, which is Private:
neither again is that unknown to me, which is related by Cicero, of a
certain Peripateticke Philosopher, whom Hanniball had in derision, calling him
a Dottrell and a giddy-headed fellow, that he was not afraid to dispute a bout
military discipline, in the presence of him so potent and politic a
commander. Yet not withstanding, this seems not to me, a sufficiently
important, or just cause, why I should in this regard acknowledge in myself,
any Imprudencie or Temeritie.

This I say in modesty and humility (that your Honor may hold me excused) for
the equity and protection of my cause now in controversy; that I doubt whether
Hanniball, as great and egregious a commander as he was, thus contemptuously
disdaining this man of Greece, who notwithstanding that he never saw the face
of his Enemy, nor ever was in a pitched field, yet delivering precepts of
martial prowess) did not disdainfully cast his eyes upon, and that with just
cause, though with barbarous arrogance and haughtiness of mind; did not I say
behold and cast his eyes upon those reasons and rules (what ere they were) of
that so excellently learned Grecian: for it is scarsely probable or credible,
but that by* the way he delivered somewhat, which might mislike and displease,
so skillful and soundly experienced a Captain and commander as he; since that
(unless we will too much extenuate the credit of that old Proverb) which is,
sometimes the blind may hit the marks. It was therefore snapish and impudent
disdainfulness, yea beastlike and Inhumane Insolence in that Carthaginian,
that, That which he (forsooth) would not approve or allow of* he must furiously
b^ndy and forth with reject. But the issue and e^ent did evidently declare,
that Hanniball was no (...) superexcellent or invincible a Captain, as that it
should seem undeniable, that he could be admonished of any oversight in any
warlike affairs. Furthermore, they whose whole knowledge and experience of
milita^^ discipline, does wholly consist, in custom, practice, and exercise,
and are so opinionated, that the power of wit and experience* gotten and
gathered by industrious diligence, from learned authors writing to that
purpose, is not of any moment or validity; that one example of L* (...) only,
mentioned also (by Cicero) in that book of his, which goes under the name and
title of Lucullus, may justly refell and repel, the opinions of such men.
Indeed I do inge^^ously acknowledge and confess, the the prince and
principal furtherance to the performance of high Actions and notable exploits,
is, that a ^an ^e (as it were naturally) addicted and adapted thereunto* But
yet believe me litterature or learning (if that of the (...) (...)) in a
generous and Her^il^^ Spirit, Vimpl(...) does promote and much enlarge, that
(...) and policy, which is (...) and genuine. In which respect, if unto
natural promptness and pro(...)ty, learning and experience be associated;
then indeed, may a man perfectly perform any noble, eminent, and excellent act
or employment. But peremptorily to avouch or affirm, that men Famous for their
excellent parts of virtue, learning, and intelligence, cannot be able soundly,
exquisitely, and considerately, to discuss or discourse of, even those things,
whereof they never were personal Actors and Agents, is, doubtless the badge
and cognizance, of an ignorant and illiterate man; yea of one who never knew
the majesty and excellency, the light and delight of Science, and
intelligence, which, Antiquity was wont to call the Muses; nor, a Limine
Salutarunt (as it is in the old Adagie) did they ever stand at the threshold,
to bid the Muses Good Morrow. And Hesiod has left this testimony in writing,
that He himself got al his knowledge and experience in Navigations, from these
Tutors and Teachers. But whither runs all this prolixitie? Even hither (Right
Ho.) this is the end thereof; that your Honor would vouchsafe to hold me
excused, if peradventure (as has bin foresaid) I do not in its proper colors,
pourtray and delineate to the life, that plat-forme and similitude of the life,
of a Courtier, which either your Lordships nobleness may require, or those
courtiers may expect, whom, in this point, much time and practicke experience
(the best Schoolmaster) may more firmly have informed in the rules and
customs of the Court. But as for others, happ, what hap may, when the dice are
to be cast, and my chance to be chosen, I had rather with some impeach to my
name, write and say something (according to my weak Talent) which might be
truly acceptable to you right Honorable Marquess; then unseasonably or
uncivilly to be wanting in my bounden duty. Therefore this one thing (...)
submissiuely and earnestly desire, that you^ (...) would be pleased courteously
to respect (...) heart, most faithfully and affectionately ho(...)ing and duly
reuerencing your venerable and noble virtue; and that in your accustomed
courtesy, you would favorably accept and protect this my peculiar Dedication
to your Lordship; of which your Honorable favor, I am most confidently
persuaded, whose worthy and meritorious actions, not only toward your own
Country and kingdom, are by the Trump of ^ame blazoned abroad; but even your
Lordships manifold favors and benificent courtesies toward strangers also,
are every where extant, which blessed Britain with most due and deserved
praises, does publish and (...)lgate, and even we that are strangers, yea all
neighboring Nations both far and near do most worthily wonder at. Nor need
I fear, least what I have herein writ, should rather seem to savor of
gnathonicall flattery, then reverently to love and embrace your Honors noble
virtues with true integrity: for, All that know your Lordships Excellency, your
so great gravity and Temperance, all (I say) which do nearly and thoroughly
look into them, do know that I speak, but what is most sincerely true and
faithful.

Finally that I may omit nothing, which may conduce to the accumulation of your
Lordships worthy praises, the elegancy and graceful pleasancy of your Honors
Behavior, is such and so singular: that not only these present times, but
even succeeding posterity, will doubtless with a cheerful voice commemorate
and immortalize the same. And, than this, what, Greater, Better, Trulier can be
said? This is it which has purchased and procured unto your Ho: the
reputation, approbation, love, and singular supportation, of our most
religious, gracious, potent, and most prudent King; whereby we may and that
with very good reason, most duly and truly here take up that verse, as true
as ancient.

Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. Virtue is more lovely, much more
acceptable,
Proceeding from, a Bersonage amiable.
But I stray to far, time calls upon me, now to set upon the Subject it self,
before I proceed, to any other matters. First then let the Courtier or
whosoever else, which has determined with himself, to bestow and dedicate his
endeauours, to the service of Princes, often deliberate, and think upon this
one thing, that the Court The Court compared to a warre-fare.
in some sort, does represent and resemble, love, or a warfare, and lovers we
know, will diligently remove every rub, obstacle, or impediment, whereby they
may content and please their beloved: Soldiers also do labor, and endeavor,
with all care and diligence, and make this Courtiers to Soldiers.
the mark, whereat, they wholly level and aim, namely to follow their
Captain or leader; and as much as in them lies, to do what he commands: so
should an honest Courtier, adorned and endued, with wit and discretion, bend
and incline, all his study and industrious endeavors, not only with
diligence, to entertain his Kings, or Princes commission and command; but
promptly, speedily, and with all care and fidelity, to discharge the charge,
which is committed unto him: And he which lays this foundation of a Courtiers
life, shall doubtless (...); in the sight of his Sovereign. (...)
(...)soever* well nurtured, and generously co(...) man, will deuote and
consecrate himself (...) follow the Court, let him not presently imagine, or
conceit with himself, that he is to lead a soft, delicate, easy, or calm
kind of life; but now must he learn to bear patiently, the courts
encombrances: yea to digest and swallow down many leasings, much envy,
greiuous contumelies, and malicious detractions. Assuredly it is no fiction I
tell thee, but let every Courtier, which does aspire and desire, to attain
unto that celestial and eternal court of Heaven, and which intends, both
constantly, and sincerely, to say and to do, that which may be grateful to
God, and the common weal; (...) address himself, to this point, to this
resolution. For, that Courtier is in a great error, and very much mistaken,
which hunts, and hopes, for nothing else in the Court, but honor, riches,
pleasure, power, and authority, and long before he enters into the Court(...)
not seriously, consider with himself, that even in these seeming sweet, and
odoriferous roses of Courtly delights, full many thorns and thistles do
privily grow up: for, if we do but judge and examine one thing by another,
and let truth take place, we have both known and read of, in the memory of
ancient and modern times, many noble and worthy men; yea such as have
exceedingly well deserved, both, of their Prince and commonweal, who in Court
have wasted and spent the most flourishing time of their youthful years, with
great praise, and applause of their Prince, and all good people; who not with
standing all this, have oftentimes, even for triuiall or small causes, yea
sometimes none at all, bin most lamentably molested, and with envy and
detraction, subtly circumuented: yea which is more and most miserable have
bine either woefully dejected, and clapped up into Prison, banished into bitter
calamity, or even unto death it self, punished and condemned.

Whereof, that we may not wander far for examples, call to remembrance (good
Courtier) the memorable, and remarkable examples, of such like doleful and
unfortunate misfortunes, in Papinian, Comineus, Moore, Bussonus, Consalnus, and
innumerable more, whose name, and fame, as well for that they have most
profitably spoken, and learnedly written, as for their many employments very
honorably performed, is most excellent, eminent, and permanent. We have
especially in the Courts of the Princes of Germany, very many demonstratiue
arguments, and pregnant documents hereof, both ancient and fresh in memory,
which here I had rather wrap up in silence, then with tedious prolixity, too
much wrong my courteous Readers patience. But yet I cannot by any means, omit,
or let slip, that which at this present, for the newnes, and late performance
thereof, is fresh, and frequently objected to the eyes, ears, Ambitious and
perfidious Barneuelt.
and apprehensions of all men, namely the Tragical Catastrophe of that great
Advocate, Statesman, and stately Courtier of Holland, who was that Phaeton, who
for many years together, was (as it were) the Waggoner and Sterneman, yea the
King and Keeper of all Holland. This was he, who with the bridle of his
authority, and with a certain confidence, or rather foole-hardinsse, and
presumptuous rashness, did reyne and restrain, as in a Charret, violently
drawn, by force of most fierce horses, the various motions, and commotions, of
the minds of all men. This was he who audaciously and aduenturously, without
due consideration, attempting many matters, by making as it were a confused
Chaos of heaven and earth, by confounding and mingling sacred and profane
things together, turning all things topsie turuey, with a most impious and
pestiferous intention, would have wrought his Commonwealths detriment and
destruction, but (and that most justly) received his own utter decay, and
worthy confusion. What needs many words? This was I say that Phaeton, who was
the Waggoner or Coachman of the current and swift gliding affairs of the
Commonwealth of Germany. And I say not that he was for his Phaetonicall
insolence dashed out of his Charret, and tumbled down headlong into the River
Padus, by Jupiters furious and Sulpurious lightning: but being by the just
judgment of God, and upright sentence of condemnation after judicial
proceedings, convicted and condemned, at the Hague in Holland, his high
aspiring head was cast down to the ground, and his ambitiously consulting and
insulting heart received its deserved final and fatal wound. And thus this
politic Pilot, and Prince of Holland,

Magnis tandem excidit Ausis. Was tumbled headlong from his Chair of State,
Who sought his Country thus to ruinate.
I here let pass that other late and lively example, which happened also in
this famous kingdom; together with that in France, of that most factious and
filthy Italian, a man most deboyst in his whole life and conversation.
Whosoever sees not and considers not these, I hold him to be even pore-blind,
and to have no smacke or taste of wisdom or understanding in the least
degree. Courtiers then may learn by these exemplified reasons, drawn out of
these famous Kingdoms, as out of the most spacious and specious Theater of the
whole world, how alternate and variable the vicissitudes and alterations of
things are in a Court, and if not always, yet for the most part that they
which being puffed up with excessive covetousness and inordinate desire of
having riches, and are violently carried away with the spirit of ambition,
being utterly unmindful of those damages and dangers, which do begirt and
hedge in Courtiers on every side; that they I say do but ride post and make
haste unto some disasterous and sinister fate or destiny, and in the interim
whiles they thus repugne the sweet sayings, sentences, and suffrages of the
most wise and prudent,

Propositumque premunt, flagrantque Cupidine Currus. They quite destroy the End
of their desire,
And burn Hopes Charret, with lusts furious fire.
These and such like, which only (...) we briefly touch by the way, laying
hold on the utmost tops as it were of these matters, may every Courtier
reiterate and ruminate again and again in his mind, and unless he have a
heart well fortifide and confirmed, to endure many evils, inconveniences, and
misfortunes, let him forsake the Court, and betake himself to a retired and
private life, which also, though it may have its own difficulties, distress,
and scarsitie, yet if the reputation of most excellent and considerate men may
have any credit or estimation with us, nothing, as they truly hold, is more
happy, or more blessed then a private kind of life, moderated and decorated
with the Golden mean and The praise of a private life.
mediocritie. He then whose portion or condition of life is neither too high
erected, nor too low dejected, but indifferent between both; he certainly
(if any thing in this wretched worldmay be termed a Summum bonum, a special
and principal Good-thing) is the Heir, owner, and true possessor thereof.
Very elegantly and eloquently has Politian painted out, and expressed the
tranquillity and sweet security of a Countrey-mans private life, whosoever
therefore does love to live the same, to wit, a free, calm, and quiet life, I
wish him to read and diligently to observe these his verses following;

O dulces Pastoris opes! O quanta beatam,
Quam tenet hunc tranquilla Quies? vt pectore tote.
Laetitiam, totaque fouet bona gaudia mente!
Nempe edij, fraudumque expers, exemtus nani.
Ambitione, vacansque metu, ipse liber and insons,
Natiuo cultu, and Gaza praediues agresti,
Ipse sibi viuit, Nullo sub test, suoque
Pendet ab arbitrio, suusipse est censor, etalto,
Calcat opes animo, ac sums deridet honores.
Which thus may be Englished.
O the rare riches of a Shepkeards life!
O how much blessed is he from storms of strife!
O how he lives in peace and quietness!
Free from annoy, full of all ioyfulnesse;
He fears no fate, no hate, nor foul deceit,
Nor strives to be ambitious-vicious Great:
He Is guiltless, guilelesse, fearelesse; he is most free,
His Corn and Cattle, his rich Treasures be;
T'himselfe he lives, under nones ouer-fight,
By none contrould, performs his own delight,
With deep disdain, he kickes at gold and pelf,
And scorning Honors, thus contents himself.
Assuredly Politian thou do most truly, and egregiously confirm, that which
before thy time, learned and grave Seneca did also affirm in his Hippolitus,
concerning a private life:

Non alia magis est libera, and vitio carens,
Ritusque melius vita quae priscos colat:
Quam quae relict is moenibus, campos amat,
Non illum auarae mentis inflammat furor.
Quise dicauit montium insontem iugis:
Non aurae populi; et vulgus infidum bonis,
Non pestilens inuidia, non fragilis favor:
Non ille regno seruit, aut regno imminet.
Vanosque honores, sequitur, aut fluxas opes,
Spei metusque liber.
That is;
There is no life more free;
More void of vice and blame,
Or in their Rites the same,
Which former Times did see:
Then that which sweetly's led,
In fields remote, and far
From Towns and Holds of war.
Where Is naught but fear and dred.
The greedy hope of gain,
Sets not his heart on fire,
He harmless does desire,
On Mountains to remain.
Men's fawning flatteries;
Or Common-Peoples train,
Which do good men disdain;
He wholly does despise.
Envy pestiferous,
Can have no place in him,
No favor frail, though trine,
Makes him ambitious.
He serves not to a Crown;
Nor's eminent in State,
He seeks not vain renown,
Frail riches he does hate;
And fears not Fortunes frown.
Wherefore, that we may be at liberty, and void of all fear; let us have this
in continual contemplation, and consideration, that the sorrows,
difficulties, and distresses wherewith every Christian in this wretched life is
environed, are manifold. Let us therefore with heedfull hearts conjecture and
cast in our minds, by what especial A remedy to avoid danger in the Court.
means we may subiugate and overcome them. Art thou then (kind Courtier)
willing to receive a remedy against them? then let this be thy sweet and
sovereign Antidote, that with grave Cato, you be of an honest and uncorrupted
life and conversation; that with invincible Virtue, modest bashfulnesse, and
innocent abstinence, thou strive to get the maistery, and to be good in deed,
rather than seem so to be, whereby it will come to pass, that by how much the
less thou shall seek after honor and preferment, by so much the more thou will undoubtedly atcheiue the same. Now all this while, it is not unknown to
me, that it is a general rumor and report, that there be not many good men to
be found in the Court, and that according to the opinion of many, few men do
bring good Arts and Sciences to a Camp or a Court; and therefore some no doubt
may say, that I do but wash an Aethiopian-Blackmoore, in inuiting and inciting
Courtiers to such integrity of life: God forbid, yet indeed, I confess, that
it is extreme hard and difficult, for one particular man alone, at a
delicious, sumptuous, and bountiful banquet, at which there is extraordinary
great provision of meat and drink, to be sober and satiate, and yet some one
of a more sage and temperate condition then the rest, may so moderately and
discreetly govern himself, that he do not either in meat or drink exceed
the bounds of modesty and competent satietie: Even so (kind Courtier) although
in Court, thy virtue, integrity, and sincerity, may be disquieted,
disheartened, yea, and that it may seem to live in exile or banishment; yet if
thy mind be well formed and conformed therein, it will assuredly cause, that
amongst many fawning smooth-bootes, false hearted flatterers, and crooked
perverse minds, thou shall still be of a right and upright courage and
condition; yea, and from this fountain thou shall derive all those silver
streams, and comfortable currents, whereby thy Calling, whether Courtly or
otherwise, though formerly obnoxious to grievous and dangerous defects, shall
yield back and repay unto thee gracious and prosperous effects. If hereupon
thou firmly fasten thine Anchor, then fear no Ship wrack, but with
unconquerable courage and animositie, Launch out into this turgent and
turbulent Sea of the Court, and undoubtedly thou shall vanquish and overcome
the insinite swarm of amphibious and prodigious monsters of impiety, which
may make incursions, and encounters upon thee. Therefore (generous Courtier)
start not back at these evils, but step forward against them, with a bold
Spirit, proceed I say, and put this counsel in practice, and let not the
Philosophy of effeminate and fainthearted men distract or disturb thee from
thy purpose, and determination, which of it self is most honest and laudable;
reject and cast from thee unprofitable and improbable speeches, and hearken to
God the fountain of infallible and invincible verity it self. Maledicta
Terra in opere tuo: In sudore vultus tui vescer is pane tuo. Cursed is the
ground for thy sake; in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. From
whence we may infer and firmly believe, that every estate and condition of
life whatsoever, has in it the Thorns and Thistles of losses, crosses, That
no estate is free from trouble.
and calamities; especial fince this sentence denounced against man, even from
the worlds original, being registered and recorded in the Book of God it
self, is most authentical, is most undeniable true and faithful, and is of
every as well private man as Courtier to be accordingly received and believed.
Now whereas many men, of no mean rank and quality, do learnedly magnify,
and with much wit dignifie a solitary and private life, as was The disprayse of
a mecre private life.
formerly intimated, they err exceedingly, and are in my judgment
marueilously mis-taken, which are of opinion, that a private life is in it
self happy and blessed. For, if that be true, which the most eloquent Orator
and excellent Philosopher has left in writing, in the first Book of his
Offices, according to the opinion of divine. Plato. Non nobis solum nati sumus,
ortusque nostri partem parents, partem amici, partem patria sibi vendicant;
that is, We are not borne only to our selves, but our Parents, Country, and
Friends, do challenge unto them a part in our being. Then no occasion
questionless, whereby a man may deserve well of the Weale-publike, can be
wanting to any man so much as to them which lead a private, obscure, and
solitary life, living unprofitably, to themselves alone; being nothing at all
beneficial to the Commonwealth, whereinto, and whereunto they were borne and
brought up.

He therefore which is by propagation and education, generous, liberal, and
free-hearted, does rightly understand and know that true glory, reputation, and
renown consists in Virtue, which also is especially illustrated and made
famous by worthy and meritorious actions, and employments in a Commonwealth.
So that Salust that excellent Writer, not without just cause, left us also this
his testimonial in writing. Pulchrum est benefacere Rei-publicae. It is a very
noble and worthy thing, to do good to the Commonweal. Furthermore, let every
Courtier, and honest man whatsoever, consider thus much in his mind, that to
deny to dedicate, and deuote his best services to God, his King, and Country,
is nothing else in deed, than as if he would wilfully expose himself to exile
and banishment. That true and ancient Adagie, which we frequently use, does
verify and ratify this truth, (...) Every good is that which distributes,
imparts, and Communicates it self to others. Again, (...). A good man (as the
saying is) is a universal good. For shame therefore, let us never praise, or
approve that merely imaginary and erroneous opinion, that in those things,
which are commonly and customarily contingent to Nature in general, any man
should therein promise to himself, beyond all others, any particular or
private felicity; unless he can persuade himself, that he is able (by a
certain incredible and unheard of magnanimity of mind) to curb and correct
all Fortunes and Misfortunes whatsoever. Wherefore, let us never suppose, that
true Fame or Felicity, does consist, in a private or retired life, which is
both full of crafty fetches, and faint-hearted fearfulness: No nor in the
vainglorious bragges, of bags of Gold and great possessions, but rather in
the good and gracious constitution and condition of a man's mind.

Whosoever then frequents and follows the Court, let him carefully, and very
circumspectly, consider these things. Neither let him be led to believe those
sottish and unsavory fellows, by whose silly advise, or rather shallow
devise, such a kind of absolutely blessed life, were to be desired and enquired
after, in seeking whereof, a man should far sooner forsake the world, than
find it in the world. Auaunt, all such absurd and witless fellows, of whom I
wish all wise men would beware: and with the ingenious Poet, would sing unto
them this their due Dittie;

Stulti dum vitant vitia, in contraria currunt. Fools voyding Vice, the
contrary commit,
Like ships that scaping Gulfs, on Rocks are split.
But thou (kind Courtier) which either art already entered, or shortly
intendest to enter and adventure thy fortunes in the Court, with a considerate
and constant courage spurn at, and despise those partial speeches of the
Common people, and wisely apprehend and entertain the words of the most wise:
yea, even Philosophy and Wisdom it self: embrace this in thine arms, as
the The Courtier must endeavor to get Wisdom as his best guide.
Founder and Fountain of all Virtue, and as the sovereign Salve against all
corrupt concupiscence: for, this will conduct and instruct thee, in the true
knowledge of that which is just and honest, teaching thee what is to be
followed, and what is to be refused. Out of this pure Wellspring of perfect
wealth, thou shall draw out such true knowledge, as shall cause thee
perspicuously to perceive, that too much dignity, riches, and authority,
being little better than the very Hang-men, and tormentors of men's minds, are
of wise men to be contemned, and despised. This Instructrix and faithful
Mistress, will demonstrate unto thee, what a multitude of men do fondly admire
and much wonder, what should be the cause, why they are so greatly and
grievously day and night vexed and perplexed. Finally, He which is well
fraught, and furnished with the wholesome precepts of Philosophy, shall in
conclusion bring himself to the King of Kings, and Prince of all Princes, that
is, he shall be reduced from the unlimited and illegitimate worship of the
Creature, to the Creator himself; and sure, I think, that he which is thus
prudent and provident, is not wise in the least degree; for, every Christian
Courtier ought especially to take care, and make a Conscience hereof, namely,
that he be so exercised in the Court of his Prince here, that hereafter he may
without Shipwreck of Conscience, atcheiue and arrive, at the Haven of the
Heavenly Court, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Now then after the study of Wisdom, let not the Law, Languages, Eloquence.
Courtier by any means omit, or neglect the Study of Law, Languages, and
Eloquence; and let him especially, bend his best endeavors, to attain unto the
prompt, perfect, and most commendable Knowledge of Histories, History.
and Antiquities, to which, indeed I cannot sufficiently move and admonish him:
For, this Knowledge is the Testis of the Times, the Light of Truth, the Life of
Memory, the Mistress of Life, and the Messenger of Antiquity. Yea, this same
Historical Knowledge (if we may believe Polybius) is a most sound and sure
direction, instruction, and preparatiue, to all well managing of politic
affairs, and is, indeed, a singular tutrixe, and faithful informer, how to
abide and suffer patiently the inconstancies, and mutabilities, of brittle and
fickle Fortune. If therefore (friendly Courtier) thou would not continually,
show thy self a child, and Non-proficient, in the Court of thy Prince, be not
(I say) rude, but well read, and a skillful Antiquary in Histories and
Chronicles.

Thus the Courtier, being adorned and dignified, with these wholesome precepts,
and also fortified with Gods gracious aid and assistance, and being lawfully
elected and incorporated, into the Society of Courtiers, let him thus proceed,
and leave the issue and event to God, who doubtless will direct and protect,
all his affairs so fortunately, and effectually, that he shall with prosperous
success, wade over, and wisely wind himself out of all difficulties, and
disturbances whatsoever. A rush, therefore, a straw for the witless words of
unwise men.

Aula domus feelerum, Nutrix est Aula malorum,
Exeat ex Aula, qui cupit esse pius.
The Court's the Stage, and Station of all ill,
Let none come there, who has a gracious will.
It Is trash, trumpery, and mere foppery, for (as we have already specified)
he which will in this sense be good and godly, must not only leave the Court,
but even the whole world. For, if we love and believe, if we Nothing in this
life is absolutely good.
will hear and bear the Truth; Is it possible I pray, that any thing can be
absolutely clean and pure, in this unclean and obscene Scene of the world?
No, no, but be thou (good Courtier) urgent and instant, even as it were, to
strain and constrain Almighty God, by thy ardent and fervent prayers, in
inuocating his divine Goodness, and saying;

Duc me, nec sine me, per me, Deus optime Duci,
Me Duce, nam, perco; Te Duce, Fausta gero.
Lord, not without me, by me, be my Guide,
Thou Guide, all is well; I Guide, I deadly slide.
Again.
Vt viuas been, viue Deo; Patriaeque and Amicis
Vtilis: haud vlla est, viuere vita, sibi.
Would Live well, live to God, thy Country, Friends,
That Life's no Life, when led to private Ends.
And that.
Vna est in dubia mihi re medicina Salutis,
Cor patrium, os verax, omnipotensque manus.
One thing I Am sure will Health procure,
And with my Credit stand:
A Country-louing heart; True Tongue;
An all-assisting Hand.
Finally, let this most memorable Verse also, like and delight every Courtier,
and honest Christian.

In manibus Domini, Sorsque Salusque mea. In Gods Almighty Hand of Providence,
Lies all my Lot, Health, Wealth, Inheritance.
What if the Courtier also, after this frail and transitory Court, seriously
desiring and aspiring, unto the Celestial Court, should in pious feruencie,
break out into these holy and heavenly words. Benedictus Dominus Deus,
miserator and Redemptor meus, in te solum confido, non erubescam: that is,
Blessed be the Lord God my Consolation, and Salvation, my hope and help is in
thee, therefore will I not be ashamed. Now then the Courtier, being thus
soundly and sincerely furnished and garnished, with the fear of God, and
Precepts of Piety and Philosophy, needs no longer dread or be afraid, of any
iniquity, impiety, or gross enormitie, which like hideous Hydra's, or
mortiferous Monsters, the Court may feed and foster; but with a hardy and
hearty courage, to wit, a blotles and spotless Conscience, and innocence and
integrity of life, and conversation, may boldly enter into the Palace of his
Prince.

But whosoever (not being as yet entered thereinto) does honestly and discreetly
desire to provide for, and to forecast his own well fare and future felicity.
Him I admonish, that he be inquisitiue and careful, to seek out the Court of
a most potent Prince or Monarch, rather To live in greatest Cou^^s.
than of an infirm, weak, and less puissant King or kingdom: and according
to the counsel of the old Proverb, Ad faelicem se inflectat parietem. Let
him lean and trust to a strong wall. Yea, and let the Courtier, no less
wisely and willingly, search out, and desire to serve, a most prudent, than a
most potent Prince, or Potentate: for, this is a Maxim as true as Truth it
self, that the Offices and duty of Servants is evermore adorned and
illustrated, by the honor and dignity of their Master: let him therefore be
persuaded, that to live under a most wise and mighty Monarch, is not thraldom
and seruilitie, but freedom and liberty. Wherefore he which finds such a
Court, to wit, a good, a great, and a gracious Prince: a Prince, for his sound
judgment and much experience, most Prudent, and for his great dignity and
authority, Potent, and Puissant, I counsel and advise that Courtier, by all
means to follow such a King, such a Court. And And let not any fleeting or
flying tales so move thee, as to remove, separate, and alienate thee, from so
good a Prince. If in the mean while, any sinister, distastefull, or adverse
accident, oppose or oppugn thee, bear it patiently, harden thy self against
it industriously and constantly, and doubtless Time will (in due time)
demulceate, mollify, and mitigate those things, which formerly seemed most
obdurate, difficult, and intricate. For, even as a Soldier in his kind of
life, and a Mariner, or Seaman, well seasoned with skill for all seasons,
perceiving dangers as iminent as evident, knows which of them, will prove most
perilous, hurtful, and pernicious. Even so ought every Courtier, so soon as
ever he has cast and contrived, to lay the platform, and foundation of a
Courtly life, to see and foresee, what in the Court is hopeful, what hurtful,
what is profitable, what unprofitable; Yea, what is seasonable and befitting,
and what is unseasonable and unbefitting: For, they are fools, and by no
means to be endured, which will hope beyond and against hope, that is, being
altogether anxious and uncertain, do depend upon an obscure, blind and
hopeless hope. Let him then which is wise, beware of this, least thus he lead,
and mis-lead himself and others. And indeed, how is it possible for him, who
with such vain hope, brings himself into a fools Paradise, to order and
frame his counsels and affairs, to a direct and desired end and conclusion?

Let the Courtier therefore, with all convenient expedition, endeavor and
desire to know, whither he be to settle his hope, upon the rising, or
declining estate of his Prince. Moreover, let the Courtier apply, and bend all
his power, so long as he continues in the Court, that as much as in him lies,
he be very morigerous, and gratefully officious to his Prince, but yet so, as
that he do Observance or obedience.
nothing with prick of his own Conscience. By obedience I here understand
piety, or an honest, reverent, and religious care, whereby we heedfully hear,
and dutifully finish, and accomplish, the Commandments of one lawfully
commanding. For, what can such a man do or well perform, which is not of a
quick, and nimble hearing, but is so dull and vndiligent, in understanding and
apprehension, that he does not rightly conceive, nor is duly and truly capable
of what is either commanded or demanded. Be thou therefore (good Courtier) very
well affected to this Virtue, if thou desire to insinuate, and creep into the
favor and affection of thy Prince. Think with thy self, that there is
nothing more vnindifferent, unreasonable, or more void of discretion, than for
a man to desire to be reuerenc't, and obeyed by his Inferiors, who himself is
most way-ward, and undutiful to his own Superiors: therefore he is surely a
happy and fortunate man, who unto his facility and easiness in hearing, and
apprehending, does couple and conioyne promptitude and readiness in
performing, but always with this Prouiso, and exception, that he undertake not
to finish or effect, any dis-honest, unjust, or unlawful Command whatsoever;
but let him kindly and courteously entertain, that excellent saying of
Aeschylus, (...). Obedience is the Mother of felicity. Let the Courtier then
which rightly and honestly desires, to deck and adorn the form and fashion
of his life in the Court, and to make his Prince his friend and favorer; as
also to be expert and cunning in counselling himself, and contryuing all his
actions and affairs. Let him (I say) diligently ponder, and seriously consider
these things. But after that his labors have been with prompt expedition,
sustained and concluded, since the estate and condition of Courtiers is very
slippery and uncertain, as they, who indeed are too often and too easily
circumuented, and environed, with the fraudulent accusations, and malicious
detractions of wicked men: Let the Courtier therefore, well and wisely To
demand his Pardon.
shift for himself, and provide a remedy against them: let him (I say) in his
first entry or ingredience into the Court, Covenant, or Compact with his
Prince, that he will vouchsafe unto him a general pardon; and let him
diligently take heed, that this Patent of his Purgation be not by the
necessity of the Time, subtly, or violently taken from him.

Now as touching Liberty, and Freedom in speaking, Of liberty of speech.
which Princes (for the most part) do take very distastefully, I must herein
also admonish the Courtier, because indeed they are but few, which freely and
faithfully do advise, admonish, and advertise Princes; Thou therefore
whosoever thou be, which wilt show thy self not to be a counterfeit, false
hearted, or sained, but rather a faithful servant to thy Prince, follow not so
fast, seek not so much the glittering splendor of fickle Fortune, and thine
own private commodity, as the Truth, which by no Truth.
means should be concealed, but honestly revealed, whenever it may redound,
and be conducible to the commodity, and honest utility of thy KING, and his
Commonwealth; therefore thou being wise, wisely forbear to speak, until fit
time and occasion, be happily offered unto thee. Hear what Solomon says to
thee. Mars and vit^ in manu Linguae. Life and Death are in the power of the
Tongue. Wherefore, be thou neither a futile, or unprofitable babbler, by
unseemly Loquacitie, Neither contrariwise, let thy Tacitarnitie or secrecy,
be dishonest, but just and ingenuous: And esteem that Silence necessary and
sufficient for thee, whereby without either contempt of God, or the common
good, thou do retain, and keep unto thy self those things thou know;
least they be dispersed and spread abroad, to the prejudice of thy Prince, or
any other person.

But now that I may return to speak of the study of Verity or Truth,
whereof (kind Courtier) I heartily desire, What Truth is.
thou would be a heartie-louer: and wherein I wish thee, not only a studious
Practitioner, but a perfect Proficient, which that thou may the better
understand, I thus define. Verity or Truth I take to be such a Virtue, whereby
we speak of, praise and promote any thing, so, as the Person, or thing praised
or spoken of, is, absolutely of it self. Hence then is commanded that we
speak no otherwise of any thing, than as the matter is plainly in it self.
But thou will peradventure object, thou fear danger or despite thereby:
fear it not, for it is far better, and much more commendable, to suffer death it
self, than either to oppress or suppress Truth or good council, And
questionless a good Prince, does much more highly estimate, and value a
faithful Councellor though dead, then a false-hearted flattererand disembler,
though alive.

For, no vain counterfaite or profane, thing can be of long continuance*
wherefore, let neither the time terrify, nor necessity dishearten, nor wicked
and malicious men, move, curb, or disturb, the good and faithful courtier,
from truth and honesty; but with constant Socrates, let him be still the same,
immutable, immouable. Excellently says Cassidore, concerning Justice, Justice
(says he) knows no father, nor mother, it knows Truth, but makes no
difference of persons, it directly immitates God. Do thou the same, (kind
courtier) and that thou may come, very near to the nature, condition, and
disposition, of God himself; love Truth: And if thou desire, that others
should speak the Truth to thee, do thou hate and abhominate, untruth in thy
self: But perhaps, thou will say with the Comicall Poet, Veritas odium parit,
Truth hatcheth Hatred. And what hatred I pray thee Co^median do thou mean?
why man, Truth brought even death it self to Pollodorus, that noble
Architector, to Papinian the Lawyer, to Socrates, that famous Philosopher, yea
and to many others besides, what then? shall we therefore, maintain a lie
against truth? God forbid. Indeed it is true, I confess it, that truth, is
oftentimes abused, misused, troubled, and tormented; yet for all this, as
Solomon testifies Labium veritatis, firmum erit in perpetuum, The lips of
truth, shall endure steadfast for ever. And Cicero, in his Oration for Caelius
says Omagna veritatis vis etc. O the admirable power of truth, which can most
easily, sustain and maintain it self, against all the sagacity, and most
acute subtilty, craft, and collourable treachery, of man's brain, or breast
whatsoever. Esteem it then a greater glory and grace, to suffer disgrace for
truth and verity; then to receive much honor, and present preferrement, for
falsehood and flattery. It may be, the hatred, which thou pretendest that this
truth will engender, is with the vulgar sort, or common people; well, be it so,
yet assuredly, amongst true and faithful friends, nothing is more acceptable,
nothing more delactable, than truth and sincerity, if it be not imbittered,
with churlish, or uncivil asperity, and improper or ill proportioned, with
rigid roughnes and severity, which evermore should be absent from amiable
truth. But I am the more willingly inclined, more copiously to inculcate, and
entreat of this virtue, which, since it cannot by any means be kept in
corners, but will abroad into the light; may not slightly be glanc't at, or
lightly be passed over.

Unto all these sound and solid arguments, some Courtier may peradventure, yet
farther object and say, that it is dangerous, all ways to speak the truth in
a Court, esspecially in difficult, doubtful and intricate matters: Indeed I
cannot gainsay it, and I know assuredly, that in such cases, a man had need of
a more than vulgar or common with and judgment, and that in such astraight
exigent, if a man will keep and conserve, good will and reputation, and avoid
the infamous blot and spot, of disloyalty, he has now something, to set his
wits a work on.

Go to then, put case it be thus, yet not witstanding I will (as God shall
enable me) take away the obstacle, and remove the rub and scruple, which may
in this case, seem to trouble thee. Of this then I first of all admonish thee,
that it is more correspondent, and agreeable, to wisdom and discretion,
always stoutly and manfully to deliver thine opinion, then with pusillanimity,
and unseemly fearfulness, to hold thy peace and say nothing. If the matter,
about which the question grows, be absolutely true, and perspicuously
apparent, then I know thou art not moved with it: but if it be utterly unknown
to thee, and more intricate, than that thy present intelligence, is able to
wind into; then thou make a demurre, and art peradventure at a nonplus:
Thou may then, with these and such like formal speeches, justly excuse thy
self to thy Prince. As touching this matter, or counsel, as a thing both
profitable and honest, I thus deliver my mind, so far as the matter is
manifest unto me, As I conjecture, as it seems to me, So far as I can
guess, apprehend, and understand. These and such like forms and kinds of
speeches, being honestly used, and modestly delivered; the Prince, may receive
very sufficient content and satisfaction: and if his counsels and
consultations, obtain not a happy and hoped issue and event, the Courtiers
just excuse and purgation, need not be to seek, which also a gracious Prince,
will doubtless accept and take in good part.

Now it follows that we speak somewhat concerning the delivering of our
suffrages, judgment and opinion, in public, serious, and important
deliberations and consultations; Observe this, that in many other matters, Rash
speech Condemned.
delays are dangerous and unprofitable, but here, procrastination or discreet
deliberation, is very behoofeful, beneficial, and comfortable. Beware
therefore that with the hasty and furious Dog; (as the Proverb is) thou bring
not forth blind whelps, and that thou be not too forward, to utter any
unsavory, unreasonable or unseasonable words, which are indeed irreuocable.
Have this also in frequent consideration and often remembrance, that the
entrance and beginning of all things, is at the first onset, hard and
difficult; And even after the same manner, the the foremost voice, in all
counsels and deliberations of importancy, is most hard and hazardous. Therefore
he does wisely, which makes one more wise than himself, his President and
Precedent, and discreetly adheres and cleaues to him; and yet so, as that he
do especicially depend and rely, upon his own opinion, judgment, and
arbitriment, not altogether upon an others, for, as almost in all other things:
so likewise here.

Alterius non sit, qui suus esse potest. He Is not another man,
Himself, which counsel can.
So likewise the Courtly Counselor, in matters of moment, in grave and great
affairs, must be both eloquent and evident, plain and intelligible, that he
may descend and come near unto the matter in hand; and not with frivolous
circumstances, or superfluous circumlocutions, to go about the Bush. Neither
must he, according to that old saying, Wrest an Interpretation hit^er and
thither, as if he would be the breake-necke thereof; nor must he dissipate or
spread abroad anxious vncertanities: but, even as becomes a sage, grave, and
judicious man, must precisely, and inexpresse terms, speak both of matters
and men, (...) in plain words call, a Ship a Ship, and a Spade a Spade.

Furthermore here may arise another question, as that, if the Courtier coming
into the Court, finds other Courtiers at variance, dissension, and
controversy amongst variance or dissension.
themselves, whither he may partially take part with either side, or keep
himself neutrally indifferent between both? I answer, that Neutrallity or
partiallity, is rather to be fled then followed; what then? Choose me out (kind
Courtier) him which is most wise, most intelligent, most capable of reason and
understanding, and this man, even by the uprightness and equity of his cause,
will easily break the passion and power, and allay and qualify the hot
courage, of his Corriuall and envious competitor. To which purpose says Ovid.

Frangit and attollit, vires ni mil^ite causa,
Quae nisi iusta subest, excutit arma pudor.
The Soldiers cause erects, deiects his might,
Which, if unjust, shame shakes of force to fight.
Even so do thou also: join thy self to that party which maintains a just
cause, for as for Neutralitie (as they call it) we must so assign and define
it, that it rescues or redeemes no man from the snares or ambush of his
enemies; neither does long keep or conserve, loyal or faithful friendship;
let Neutralitie therefore go pick a Sallet, as the saying is, but not
mistrust or Suspicion, without which indeed, a Courtier cannot live; Let him
not therefore be too credulous, or apt to believe every one, for although the
old vulgar verse tells us;

Fallitur in multis suspiciosus Homo. That jealous men we see,
Oftentimes deluded be.
Yet (friendly Courtier) let not this much move or Not to be too credulous.
molest thee, but take heed whom thou trustest, for in trust is treason. And in
this regard, let every Courtier be most curiously circumspect and vigilant, and
what Homer requires in a Prince, namely, that he be quick sighted, and
watchful, (...), having eyes both behind and before. Let the wise Courtier (I
say) prescribe unto himself the same rule. And let him not inconsiderately,
lightly, or slightly, put confidence in a glauering, crooching, and deeply
protesting or swearing Friend. If thou any thing at all, esteem me, hear and
believe this from me, else thou will soon or late repent, that ere thou did
trust a Saint-like salvation and protestation. Let Epicharmus his wisdom be
forcible and effectual in thee. Nulli Fidere, To trust none. Unless thou do
so, it is a thousand to one, but that crafty Ulysses, will at one time or other,
encounter chollericke Ajax. And thus thou shall be a debtor to thy self, to
condole thine own folly, and to others also, to laugh thee to scorn. If
therefore thou will cover thee with a Shield, against this sharp Dart, I
admonish thee Courtier, and that most seriously; that thou neglect not this
counsel: for, it will then undoubtedly confound thee.

Furthermore, in whatsoever Court thou live, let this also be thy care, and a
cautelous observation unto thee, that thou strive not either to ascend too
high, or to descend too low. What then? Beware of Extremes, and persuade thy
self of the truth of that which the Poet sings;

Medio Tulissimus ibis. To keep a virtuous measure,
Is surest, purest Treasure.
Let then (I say) Mediocrities golden Rule, which is Medi(...), or a Mean^.
so frequently, so vehemently pressed and praised, and that most deservedly, by
the most ingenuous and judicious, both Poets and Philosophers, be evermore thy
love and thy delight. Excellent is that of one Pallas, who thus wished. Vtinam
ego neque, nimis faelix, neque miserabilis essem.. O would I might be neither
too mighty, nor too miserable; because indeed Mediocritie or a Mean, is the
most desiderable and delectable thing in the world: and places of highest
Honor, do cause and procure the greatest dangers. And contrariwise,
Experience it self, which nener deceiues, teaches us truly, that a most
dejected and low estate, ingenders disdain, contempt and contumely: they
therefore are truly wise, which both say and do, as Phocylides did: (...). I
desire to be an indifferent Citizen: for, many most excellent things consist
in Mediocritie. To shut up all in a word; They, which in all their endeavors,
desire to keep the Golden mean live most sure, most secure from fear of
distress and danger. Such a soft and sweet kind of life therefore, which
Solomon the worlds wonder for Wisdom, sought and besought of God, giving the
reason of his request, which was to a most honest and holy end, as is
excellently set forth Pro. 30. Such a kind of life (I say) if thou be wise, I
wish thou would especially desire and delight in. And assuredly, if thou
greedily gape not after more, or more necessary things, than are competently
sufficient; this may very well satisfy and content any man to live an honest,
wise, and blessed life.

Moreover, if the affairs of thy Prince call thee to the expedition, of any
great, notable, and important employment, be not too highly conceited or
affected with Of employments.
this honor, or preferment. Neither be thou of opinion, that thy reputation,
or authority, cannot well consist in safety, unless actions of such
consequence, rely and depend upon thy performance. Avoid rather (good
Courtier) if I may advise thee, by the examples of others, the too much
intermedling in the difficult affairs, and secret counsels of thy Prince; but
so far forth as they are just and honest thou may, under go them; yet I
say do not greedily desire to have the specially hand in them. For, if those
employments (though never so great implicit and intricate, do not gain and
obtain a happy and hopeful issue and success, then thou, who building
Castles in the air, had purposed thereby to have set up the plumes of thy
fame and renown, shall contrariwise now become a grievous and egregious
consumer and bankrupt, as it were, of thy former hoped fame, by a future
happening shame.

Now also as touching Matrimony or Marriage, I first Of Matrimony, or Marriages
of Princes.
of all and especially admonish thee, that unless thou be thereunto solely or
singly constrained, thou put not thy self forward in such a business, for we
find it true by experimental proof, that many men (others being debarred and
kept out) have been admitted, or rather have intermingled and inuolued
themselves into the secrets, and matrimonial negotiations of Princes; as if
they were the only ominous Augours, and solid South-sayers of Nuptials and
Marriges; but have thereby even plunged and ouer-whelmed themselves, into great
and grievous dangers, especially when the event has not fortunately answered
the intent.

Again, let the Courtier take heed in this respect, and Of Hum (...).
embrace the good counsel of Polypus, which is, that he highly esteem
Sobriety, and Humility, least being by any thing puffed up with pride, the
Prince do not only perceive, but punish the same, in that such a one would
seem and be esteemed, more wise and prudent than his Prince. This is an
infallible truth, that Princes indeed do delight in, and love men famous for
their learning, virtue, long grounded and grave experience: but they will, by
no means, admit or permit with a patient mind, any whomsoever, that goes about
to promote and prefer themselves above him; nor those who for cruill
government are more highly prized or praised than himself: Assuredly it has
been in times past, is at this present, and will be in time to come, most
faithfully true; that,

Nulla fides regni socijs, omnisque potestas
Impatiens Consortis erit, etc.
A Kingly Throne or Crown will near permit,
Corriuall or Copartner there to sit.
But I speak not this, to that end and purpose, that all (...) all freedom
and liberty of speech, should be taken from Courtiers, being both grave,
wise, and understanding men; For, neither is it befitting, nor does it stand
with reason, that they should so low deiect and abase themselves, as either to
allow and approve of the illiberall and servile opinions of others, or
themselves to speak unfaithfully; which absurdity and impiety (if we will
believe Plutarch) is most worthy to be reproved, and reprehended of all men.
Let not then the Courtier, if an honest, grave, and discreet man, fear the
displeasure of his Prince, whereby he should be restrained, not freely to
deliver those things, which he has truly and wisely conceived in his heart.

Moreover, let both Simulation and Dis-simulation, Simulation and dissimulation
in speech.
that is, all counterfeiting or colorable dissembling, be far from the
Courtly Counselor, whenever he is to give his Judgment, or deliver his
opinion, concerning any matters already propounded. Let him not then so much
desire to insinuate, and creep into the favor and gracious acceptance of his
Prince, by fraudulent cozenage, dishonest tricks, or false tales; as by virtue,
wit, eloquence, excellency, and integrity, with all which notwithstanding
that he may be enriched and richly garnished, yet let him not for this cause
deride and laugh others to scorn, or basely esteem and vilify them; Nor so
admire and magnify himself, that by this means, he as it were pess^ndate and
tread ^^em under his foot. But what then? Why assuredly whosoever treades this
path, walks hastily into the highway of his own ruin and destruction, which
happily has not hap^ed to any one in our, or our Ancestors knowledge and
remembrance. Doubtless this same Philautia, or self-love never makes mention
or motion to any goodness. Neither is it repugnant to reason and equity, that
he which only desires to please and content himself, and contemptuously
scorns and contemnes others, should semblably be of others disdained,
rejected, and scorned.

Furthermore (kind Courtier) I would here admonish Honest advise in Counsel.
thee this one thing also, That if peradventure, by the authority of thy
Prince, thou be to sit in Counsel about matters of great Consequence; that
thou seriously and sedulously ponder in mind, and strictly examine, whether the
Counsel or business to be then undertaken, in the name and right of thy
Prince, be pleasing to God, profitable to the Common wealth, befitting the fame
and reputation of the Counselors themselves, as also easily and harmelesly to
be affected: For, those Counselors do very badly advise and counsel their
Prince, who many times are the special causes, that they erect and build
Towns, Towers, Trenches, Bulwarks, or Warre-like Rampires, and such like,
little or nothing profitable to them, and by this means omit others more
necessary and commodious. In these, and such like affairs, let the Courtly
Counselor be always most ready pressed to appoint such works, as may be
propice and profitable to his Prince and Country: Herein I say let him be
very discreet and prudent in counselling, as also most cunning and quick
witted, to display and lay open, what he has Delay, discommended.
to that purpose, in his heart excogitated: For, Princes especially are of all
other men most impatient of delays. Therefore to use delay or protraction of
time, and either by reason of the dullness of wit, or slow motions and
conceptions of the mind, or else through want of mature Judgment, to
procrastinate and put off from day to day businesses, and employments of great
importance, and especial moment, will not only be very prejudicial and
obnoxious to thy credit and estimation, but even to thy Prince himself most
unpleasant and unacceptable.

Again, let the Counselor or honorable Ambassador, Not to discover Secrets.
mind and mark this, that he be not too forward to divulge and make known the
weighty and important affairs, committed to his trust and fidelity; but what
in him lies, let him cover and conceal them until such time, as they be
effectually dispatched and concluded. But if otherwise, some with envy will
speedily so prosecute and persecute thee, as very much to hurt and hinder thy
noble actions, or else others will not stick to accuse thee of remissness,
and want of wisdom, that such and such businesses were not with more
celeritie, and expedition performed. Be careful therefore without any rumor
or noise, speedily to strike the stroke of thine intended actions, year any man
have time, so much as to muse or think thereon.

Furthermore, I would here suggest and put into the To be always in action.
mind of the wise Counselor, this needful and necessary admonition: namely,
that like the Sun he be always as it were in continual action; that is, That
as much as in him lies, he live not without employment; this is the means to
acquire and get a noble name, renown, and reputation, especially if he do
speedily and fortunately officiate the affairs of his Prince.

Now in the true and due deliberation and execution of such actions, let the
Courtier be hereof most advisedly careful, that he wrap up in silence,
whatsoever may either be hurtful, or not helpeful therein. For, in this case,
as the saying is, Grau is iactura loquelae est, Great damage Silence is
commendable.
and detriment arises from indiscreet speech; but commendable and comfortable
is Silence, and Secrecy: For, as Bablers are in every business very
unnecessary and unprofitable, so especially, in high, great, and important
affairs. Excellently therefore does that most wise King reprove and reprehend
sutilitie, or foolish babbling. Pro. 20. Non admisceto te cum illo qui arcana
detegit, Keep not company with him which reuealeth secrets. That, therefore,
which thou would not have another to blab, do not thou thy self blaze
abroad.

Now after all this, these subsequent considerations will To do nothing
without the Princes knowledge.
also deserve thy frequent meditation, to wit, that thou attempt not any thing,
though thou assuredly know it never so profitable, without the priuitie and
consent of thy Prince, especially if he be not far remote and absent from
thee: for, what may he thence collect and conclude, but that thou did
contemn his Princely prerogative; neglect him not therefore by any means,
neither determine any thing, though in the smallest matters, or most easy and
commodious manner, thy Prince not being therewith first acquainted.

Likewise, if the Courtier have commission to execute Rules for an Ambassador.
the place and employments of an Ambassador, let him not either by his own
authority, or by occasion of more commodious managing of his Embassage, alter
or change any part of his charge therein contained: but let To tie himself to
the rule of his Commission.
him refer all his proceedings to the rule and form of his Commission, or
else upon some new and inopinate accident, let him speedily advise and consult
with his Prince: For although it be determined and concluded by the Civil
Laws, that sometimes an Ambassador may exceed the bounds and limits of his
Commission, if more amply and orderly the Embassage may be executed, than was
therein commanded. Yet notwithstanding (kind Courtier) that, is not to be
understood of public, but of private affairs. That of Valerius, may give
thee satisfaction herein, Romanos Legationem, quibus acceperant verbis,
peregisse. That the Romans delivered their Embassage in the self same words,
wherein they had received it. And that also, of that most famous Father, divine
Bernard is in this case worthy remembrance, and deep meditation, Non attendit
(says he) verus obediens quale sit, quod praecipitur, hoc solo contentus, quod
praecipitur. The truly obsequious and obedient Ambassador, considers not what
kind of Commission or Command he has received, being only satisfied with what
he is commanded. Hear this (kind Courtier) and perform the same: and
acknowledge thy Prince lawfully, using his imperious prerogative, thy supreme
Superior, to whom thou ought to be most morigerous, and dutiful.

Again, whither thou be sent as an Ambassador, Orator, Interpretour, or
Ledger, in time of War, or of Peace; either for the present, or for long
continuance; for parle or performance of any affairs whatsoever, Not to
undertake matters above his power.
thou must now most diligently enter into consultation with thy self, and
examine thy power and faculty, what in such a case, is thy ability, or
debilitie soundly and substantially to effect and accomplish the same. For,
there is not a greater token of foolishness, or fool hardiness, than for a
man to take upon him the execution of such a Function or Office, as he is not
able safely to undergo. Beware therefore I say, and that seasonably, that thou
do not at any time, affect or desire those things, which either thou know,
or at least should know, will be by thine impotencie, infirmity, and debility
most obnoxious, most pernicious unto thy self, or others, be heedfull herein I
What is required in an Ambassador.
advise thee, and with a judicious heart, poyse and consider in mind, the
possibility, and efficacy, as well of thy body, as of thy wit and
diseretion; What thou art able to compass by thy wisdom, learning, and
eloquence: as also how expert and circumspect thou art to contriue any thing.
Neither is it impertinent, that I added the habilities of the Body: for, it is
undoubtedly without all controversy, that in an Ambassador is required a
fair and comely constitution of Body, that is, such an external beauty, and
pleasant personablenesse, as may be most amiable, and lovely in the eyes of his
beholders. For, no wise man surely will gainsay, but that even in the majesty
or gracefulness of the body is a certain genuine and imbred honor, and
reverence represented. Do thou desire examples? They are pregnant. For, we
read that Alexander the Great, was most coyly and disdainefully beheld by the
Queen of the Amazones, for no other reason, than that she found not in that
so potent and mighty Monarch, such beauty and comeliness of body, as she
expected in him; whose not able fame of admired deeds of prowess, had been
from far bruted and divulged unto her. Very memorable also is that of the
Stoic Cato, who derided and iested upon those Ambassadors of Room one of
whom, had a very foul and unseemly scarre upon his head, caused by a blow
with a stone: the other being lame The Senate of Room (says he) have sent an
Ambassador, which has neither head nor feet.

Here also (least we prove a most thanklesse and ungrateful A Brief
memorial of that most memorable Queen Elizabeth.
Posterity) let me step one foot out of the way, and add one more as a
personal pattern, and lively example hereof; How great and gracious heroicke
imperial, and specious majesty, was in that most magnificent, and royal
Elizabeth, so long as she lived Queen, of this famous and flourishing Island?
our neighbors, The Low countrymen Germans, French, Itallians, Spaniards and
Polonians, knew thee well, o thou never sufficiently praised Princess! yea, I
say the Grecian and Barbarian Ambassadors, held it an especial cause of
exceeding great reverence, only to see thy beauty, and no less then an
admirable wonder to hear Thee speak. But, of thee, thrice noble Princess, in
whose body and soul, was seated and settled divine Grace and Majesty, what can
I say without thee? save only this that so long as any state and condition of
mortal men shall remain; thy name, and fame shall remain* and freshly
flourish; neither shall any age, or posterity smoother up in silence or cast
into the pit of oblivion, the worthy praise of thy Majesty, Gravity and
magnanimity, which was most illustriously garnished, and as it were varnished,
with unspeakable and unheard gracious courtesy, and affability, Farewell then,
thou celestial and imperial Princess, the most excellent, and eminent
Phoenix, fautrix, and favorer of learning, and all virtuous Arts and Sciences:
Thou art now blessedly ascended, from this momentany and temporary Court, into
a heavenly Palace; into that place where thou now enioyest eternal joy without
annoy or bitterness, and everlasting quietness without all care or
disturbance. Thou o Angelical Sanited soul, year thou wast old, wast careful
to live well, that when thou wast old* thou might die well. We also in the
interim whiles here we as it were, creep up and down on the obscene Scene of
this wretched world, do all of us bend our course thither, do all have and
run to that goal. But what do I, whither do I run, by digressing too far
from the end, where unto I intend my journey? I must therefore now return,
from that Court to this Court.

After all these things, which we have admonished, and demonstrated, to the
Courtier, Let the Courtly ambassador, do his best endeavor, so to dispatch
and perform his embassages; and so discreetly to order and dispose of all his
several actions therein, that he may not I^pudency or (...) to be avoided in
an ^^mbassador.
with many others before him, fear that; Legato deesse os, The Ambassador has
no face, that is, he is such a one, as is not a shamed at any thing he does.
Therefore (kind Courtier) that thou may be gracious in the acceptance both of
thy Prince, from whom, and to the Prince, to whom thou art sent; be by all
means furnished with a quick and nimble wit, that thou may answer subtly
and eloquently, together with a certain gravity, gracefulness, and
delectable sweet utterance, both to say and do matters premeditated, or not
premeditated, with solid polisht and acute judgment for many times (beleeiue
me) such accedentall matters may in thy imploiments be contingent and fallout,
as will not admit delay, nor time for consultations.

Let the courtly Ambassador or Orator observe and mark this also, that
although, eloquence in speaking be Not to be too Rhetorical
very excellent and commendable; yet not withstanding he must discreetely,
moderate his speech from too many Rhetorical glosses, and figurative
illustrations; I deny not, but that such like painted amplifications, being, as
it were, the most beautiful lights of an Oration, may have their most
pertinent, and exquisite use in the Schools, Temple, and Seat of Judgment,
but not before a Prince Let therefore thine Oration or speech to a Prince be
elaborate and well fraught, and furnished with grave reasons, and pithy and
substantial sentences, rather than with the weight of words only; a pure,
simple, smooth, and plain speech, is certainly most pleasing to a Prince: And
contrariwise, an intricate, coullerable, and curiously, contrived speech is
most displeasing.

Furthermore, let the Ambassador be well seen in the To be expertin the
language of that Country whither he goes Ambassador.
Language of that Country, or Kingdom, whither he is sent; but especially, in
that which he may understand, the Prince; to whom he is sent, is most
delighted withal. The Latin Tongue, vndoubredly is very acceptable every
where: wherefore let him be most skillful therein, that he may be able to
speak it most promptly, familiarly, and exquisitely. Thou hear not any
Nicepherus speaking to thee, who most in considerately, would have a man learn
perfectly all languages. Neither can I be persuaded that of Mithridates was
true, that he was ever able to speak 22 several languages; But we here do
only, and especially, persuade unto an Idioma, or most propper form of speech.

Again, it is not so much desired in any Ambassador, To be a good Historian
and Antiquary.
that he be a mere Philosopher, as that he be an excellent Antiquary, and
well red Historian, for things to come are for the most part, like unto those
which are already past and performed, which an Ambassador must also know, as
being indeed a Politician.

Unto these foresaid cautions I add Tempera^ce, which Temperance in an
Ambassador very requisite.
also I, as a special ornament recommend to the Courtiers, or Ambassadors,
prudent consideration; Send I pray thee (friendly Courtier) into perpetual
exile or banishment, all the vnreuerent rabble, of inordinat lusts and desires,
which are indeed at utter defiance, and open war with Temporance and Reason.

If thou be invited to Banquets, or Feasts, let amoderate and indifferent
provision, of meat and drink satisfy, content and please thee, let thy
Sermocination, or conference, be sweet and pleasant, and the good will and
cheerful acceptance of the guests, be hearty and faithful and be not over
come with wine, or strong drink; for, what soundness of wit and discretion,
can be in the head, brain, or mind of that man, which does as it were
stuff, glut, and gorge himself, with immoderatly denoured meat and drink.
Neither is it to be imagined, that Circes did Metamorphise, the companio^s of
Ulysses into Swine, by any other means than this; which, her Sorcery or
witchcraft (as the Poets feign) could take no effect upon Ulysses himself, he
being a sober, satiate, and moderate man. Let the Courtier observe, and
heedfully mark this, least by too indulgent freeness and forwardness to
drink, being by the fables and false tales of others, pricked forward and
provoked, he take such a fall as may utterly ouer-throw, the high building of
all his former credit and reputation. These things I could heartely desire,
every Courtier would at all times carefully ruminate, consider and recogitate,
but especially then when as ^^e is to have Audience, and to deliver the Sum
of his Embassage. To this purpose let him think upon Xenocrates, who being by
the Athenians sent Ambassador, that he might not in curre the the least suspect
of intemperance, is said that he would never so much as touch or taste any the
least quantity of meat or drink, until he had uttered, and delivered the
effect of his Embassage.

Honorius and Theodosius the Emperors were of opinion, To be acquainted and to
reveal the secrets of the place where they were Ambassadors
that it is not fit to search and pry into the secrets of foreign Kings; yet
in my judgment, I cannot see any just reason why it should be blameable in an
Ambassador, if when he be returned, he know and make known, those things which
may seem and that most justly, to appertain into the commonwealth; I mean
those things espicially, which belong to customs, Religion, National laws,
situations of Kingdoms, Castles, Cities, Rayments, Ornaments of Princes,
Conditions of Counselors, Originals, Families, power, possession or riches,
form and fashions of Architecture or buildings and such like. For, what can be
more disgraceful to an Ambassador than when his Prince does question him
concerning those things, to find him ignorant of them, the greatest part
whereof or at least the (...), That whereof himself was an eyewitness he
might easily have understood and have had ample information?

Let the Courtier be the first in persuading his Prince, Of dismission of
Ambassadors.
that he would be pleased (notwithstanding that the Ambassadors for diverse
reasons may be distastefull unto him) yet both royally and magnificently to
respect and entertain them, and to give them a gracious and Princely hearing,
and with a large and liberal reward to dismiss them; that they may not have
any just cause to complain of his parsimonie, ungentleness, and inhumanitie.

The Ambassador and Courtly Counselor must not Of the dispatch of an
Embassage.
(by any means) be remiss in his affairs, and yet let him be as fearful as
hopeful of the prosperous issue and event of them: least being only led with
a precipitate confidence of good success, he do the more negligently and
carelessly, put in execution the charge committed to him in his Commission.

Let him also in all other matters, hate and avoid curiosity, Curiosity.
and not excruciate himself with care for those things which he ought not:
for, as Plutarch testifies, (...), Curiosity is a vile and servile vice or
wretchedness. Therefore, though in Courts, curiosities tickling and enticing
motions be pleasant and delightful, yet let every discreet, honest, and wise
Courtier neglect, and reject it.

Let this caution also be carefully imprinted in the mind Verbositie.
and memory of every Courtier, that in his speech he express more Prudency
than Verbositie, and with the most sage and grave, to be brief and
compendious, in the handling and dispatching of any his actions and employments
whatsoever. For, there is nothing can be more irke some to a Prince, nor in
deed to any other prudent man, than to listen to those men, which like a
mighty flood of words, or an empty Barrel, do make a huge sounding noise,
without any soundness of judgment or discretion; who are, as the Countryman
said of the Nightingale, Vox tantum, praeterea nihil, Nothing but words and
wind.

Moreover, let the Courtly Counselor observe, that when he (...) or intends
any matter of moment Opportunity.
with (...) Prince, he carefully watches a ^it opportunity, and that he begin
the same from some new grateful (...), which he may think will delight, or
give content to his Prince. But if at that time, his Prince be exercised about
other serious affairs, let him desist, and wisely watch a more seasonable and
convenient occasion: how much opportunity is available, Pindarus in his
Pythies does excellently declare, (...). Time (says he) in every thing has
the supreme place. Let the Courtier therefore know, and know assuredly, that
such is the validity and efficacy of time and opportunity, that it is able to
translate and transmutate, that which is honest into dis-honestie, profit into
dis-profit; and a good turn into a shrewd turn, and the contrary. Finally,
time is able to alternate, and quite change the face, fashion, and nature of
any thing: this did Solomon that most wise king understand and teach, Pro. 15.
Laetatur homo in sentemi^ ^ris sui, and serm^ oportunus est optimus. A man has
joy (says he) by the answer of his mouth, and a word spoken in due season; is
most excellent. But enough of these things, now to the matter.

In the undertaking and handling of any public employments, let the
Counselor have an especial respect A fourfold Caution.
and regard of his honor and dignity, which he may safely provide for, by
this fourfold rule and direction, maugre all the malice, fretting; and
furring of all his envious enemies. First of all, let him endeavor what in him
lies, to live well, and well to understand the Truth, which is a most luculent
and evident argument of Sapience. Secondly, let him administer, and give good
and wholesome counsel to his Prince, which is a point of Prudence. Thirdly,
let him both desire and endeavor that which is good unto him; which is a
property of Justice. Fourthly, let him delight to do good, which is a token
of constancy and perseverance. And he certainly which is armed with this
Quadruple Shield or Target, shall not easily be over thrown from the hight of
his honor and dignity.

But (kind Courtier) in every deliberation and consultation, Inconveniences.
which appertains to public businesses, consider well, whence either greater
or lesser inconveniences may arise, and make choice (as the chief) of that
determination, whence the smaller discommodities do acrew, and which come
nearest to the Laws and written word of God: Let the Courtier settle his
aboade here as in a most exquisit, smooth, and plain way, namely, that he
meditate, and muse on the most excellent things, that he speak the best, and
but few things, that he execute and perform the most singular and substantial
things, and these, all, such as may be most honest, lawful, and beneficial
either to the Church, or Commonwealth. Such a man as this may easily be
discerned, to differ from the form, figure, and similitude of a Servant, or
slavish Vassal. Neither shall he be of necessity constrained to take all he
needs from the Casket of a Woman's Nurcery, Not to rely too much upon others.
or from the brain and invention of some Courtly Chaplain. For, what has
nearer relation to the condition of Servants and bondmen, than merely to
depend and rely upon simple Women, or Ecclesiastical Courtiers, in Courtly
affairs? What is more base and abject, than, least we should be deprived of
our office and preferment, to consent and subscribe to the opinions and
purposes of others, though never so wicked, or unequal, yea, and that,
sometimes in matters of Religion, and Salvation? Oh woe! oh shame; alas, What
pen, what tongue is able to express, how shameful, gross, and grievous it
is? That a man should thus mancipate and beslaue himself to others? That
whatsoever wrong, and injustice, they allow, we must approve? Whatsoever
impiety, or dishonestie they affirm to be good, we must say and swear it is
so? Let Courtiers in this case call to mind, that notable and remarkable
example, which Theodorick Afrus has left as a pattern to posterity, who
commanded all such Gnathonicall Sycophants, to be put to death, saying: Si Deo
fidem non seruastis, quomodo homini sinceram conscientiam seruabitis? If ye be
not faithful to God, how is it possible ye can be faithful to man? Mark
this I pray thee (good Courtier) and thou whosoever thou art, whom Heaven has
advanced to I know not what Scepters, Palaces, Courts, Kingdoms, and Empires,
he certainly which is not faithful to God, or by such deceivable and
fraudulent means, gets a Crown, or a Kingdom, has undoubtedly Subjects
scarcely faithful, and a Kingdom scarce constant, or durable to him, and in
stead of renown, and I know not what majesty, which he sought for, finds
nothing, but a mere shadow, smoke, and vanity. I, of set purpose here let
pass a most terrible and lamentable example, which, alas, not many years
since did truly teach us, and the very fact it self of the murderer did
apparently prove to be most true; which (...), we do but touch by the way.
For, to desire either to rip up or rub over a fresh, the memory of which said
most sad example, were to do nothing else than to renew our grief, sorrow, and
lamentation, and to touch that Ulcer, wherewith that most prodigious Monster of
men had stricken this whole Christian Orb, yea, us and all good men, with a
most detestable, unhappy, and unlucky blow. But to the purpose: Fly, O fly I
beseech thee (good Courtier) this infamous blemish, yea this dishonest and
dishonorable stain aforementioned; seek not dainty delights, by such dangerous
endeavors, to uphold the Nobility of thy Ancestors; do not too higly extol
or magnify thy Pedigree, and the smoakie images of thy Progenitors. Neither
do thou vain gloriously brag and boast of thy valiant or victorious deeds
of Chivalry, truly it is thus, the glorious renown and fame of thy Forefathers,
is a true and vnextinguished light to posterity, and (to speak with Crispus)
suffers not their good or evil actions to lie buried in oblivion; yet hear
and believe this one thing, which I shall tell thee; since all men had nothing
but Dirt and Slime for their first and great Grandfather, as well they which
loftily and haughtily brag and vaunt it out in purple and scarlet robes, as
they which are pressed and oppressed with poverty, and sickness: As well they
which with wide mouthed ostentation, do crake and boast of stately Statues,
Trophies, Triumphs, and Consull-Ships of their Ancestors, as those who have
most privately, penuriously, and very hungrily led their lives in poor
Countrey-cottages: Do not therefore proudly, and disdainefully glory in thy
Grand fathers, or great Grandfathers Eminence, but if thou desire to mount and
to surmount others, excel and exceed them in honesty and integrity of life
and conversation; Let thy nobilities original and foundation be founded and
grounded on Virtue, whereof assuredly it is far better to have been the first
Author and Occasioner, then either being well begun by others, to be overthrow
thereof, or at least to arrogate and vendicate the same unto thy self, by
disgraceful frowardness, untowardness, and petulancy. Let then (I say) thy
deeds be more worthy than thy words; and show not thy self such an idle, or
unmanly Noble man, as only to vaunt of voluptuousness, ease and idleness,
which thou have especially got from the many worthy employments of thy
generous, industrious, and virtuous Progenitors. These things (kind Courtier)
though I thus object unto thee, yet is it not my mind or intention, to counsel
thee, that in the narrow straights of Fortune, thou should debase or abuse
the Noble Lineage of thine Honorable Ancestors, by subiecting thy self to
slavery, or baseness; but that thou should endeavor by all virtuous and
laudable means; to conserve and keep it inuiolate, unspotted, and
vndisgraced, and not suffer it ignominiously to sink into the pit of black
oblivion, or utter forgetfulness.

Here again take heed to thy self, that either by hautinesse Pride and
hautinesse of mind.
of mind, or pride of life thou do not exasperate and provoke to anger, other
men more noble, excellent, and eminent than thy self, and so kindle the
furious flames of fiery wrath, and envy against thee, especially israised
from a plebean and most mean estate, thou stretch out and extend thy plumes so
far, as to excel and surpass the noblest and most renowned men of honor
and nobility, chiefly if thou attain to this hight of honor and celsitude,
by mere grace and favor, or as some (sometimes do) by illegitimate and
dishonest stratagems, not by famous facts, or meritorious atchieuements. Let
not therefore the immodest or immoderate care, and eager desire, or rather
ardent fire of overmuch ambition, withdraw thy mind from modesty, from
equity, neither enrich or ennoble thine estate by hook, or by crook, by
right or wrong. Will thou Courtier win a Kingdom, or gain a Crown? then hate
hot lust, and base covetousness, Yea, will thou enjoy all things, then I say
thirst not after, covet not any thing?

Hear and believe Seneca, that famous Philosopher, and excellent
Schoole-Maister of man's life, Hos est Regnum, nolle regnare cum possis; This is
a Kingdom, to refuse a Kingdom, when thou might reign as King. Finally if
thy mind provoke thee to inordmate desire, let that of Lucan in his first
book, revoke thee;

Inuida fatorum series, Summisque negatum stare diu. Th'emperiall and
impartial Fates-decree
That highest Thrones shall ruinated be.
But, since all things which now seem old have binne All things have their
beginning and end.
new and did not once want their original and first being, let no wise and
discreet Courtier hate or emulate another for the honor which he has lately,
and that deservedly got and attained unto; for if thou land or commend any man,
for his riches, dignity, and prosperity, thou praisest such external matters,
as not being a man's own, but as the Philosopher calls them Bona fortunae the
Goods of fortune, are therefore due to fortune: but if thou extol and
magnify, a noble man who is of singular parts, and excellently qualified; a
great Scholar, passing eloquent, famous for councels, at home; or conquests at
war; here then indeed thou do praise the man himself, and nothing but
what is his own. Let such a Courtier, that he may the better maintain his
honor, dignity, and Nobillity, be a man of most exquisite carriage, beautified
with sweet and delicate, constitution of body; his ornaments of Apparel very
honorable rich and sumptuous, for if that be true which Homer said.

Namque viro magnum vestis decus addit honesta A man's rich clothes and
sumptuous ornament,
Adds no small honor to his high descent.
This, indeed is in some sort true, and befitting every man, but especially
him which is attendant at Court. Now to these external ornaments, let him add
the magnificence and nobleness of other things, which as in all others so
especially (as Aristotle testifies) are in a noble Courtier, most conveniently
to be provided; otherwise he loses the reputation and renown of his
magnificence and excellency.

Furthermore every Courtier must in the Court carry Of behavior.
about with him a cheerful countenance, a tongue slow of speech, and a heart
that can as it were imprison and lock up his secrets; but let him especially
take heed of ridiculous or wanton gestures: for what can be more absurd fond
and foolish than in conference to use mimicall and idle behavior, winding,
wagging and wresting the body to and fro like a vice or fool on a stage,
whereby beyond all gravity and decent sobriety, they seem to iet or dance up
and down casting their heels, hands, and feet, hither and thither and
looking another way, as if they were talking with some others. These things as
they do very much deface and disgrace even the best speechees a man can
deliver: so, are they most patent and apparent arguments, of a light and
unconstant mind, which none surely but even a mere sot, or one that has not
so much as one eye of understanding, but most certainly knows to be true.

Again I here advise every Courtier, that if at any A Caution.
time, he desire to shun, and avoid the danger and displeasure of his Princes
indignation, that he suffer not his offices, Place or dignities to be taken
from him, by any others, than by his Prince himself: for doubtless it cannot
but be very silly and absurd, for any man to expect a remuneration and
recompense from any others, than from him to whom he desires, and endeauours
his labors may worthily be approved; therefore I wish and advise thee, (kind
Courtier) that thou be not always Not to be too frequent with or absent to
long from thy Prince.
present with thy Prince, nor too long absent from him, do thou desire to
know my reason? it is this, the one procures hatred and wearisomenesse of thee,
the other causes vnmindfulnesse and forgetfulness of thee, be not therefore I
say so absent from the presence of thy Prince as that he utterly forget thee,
neither do thou so often and importunately intrude thy self into his presence,
as that thy person prove irksome, and ungrateful unto him, but that thou
may to thy special benefit and with his favor and affection, be absent
from him thou may labor to compass and procure such favorable and honorable
Embassages, as thou may imagine observe and perceive, will be gratefully
acceptable to thy Prince; by this means, though absent in body, thou shall be
still present in the heart, and affection of thy Prince, and as a new and
lately entertained favorite, may with joy and alacrity comfortably return
unto him.

Let the Courtier warily, and blamelesly learn, patiently Of envy.
to bear, contemn, and set light by Envy and Hatred, and let him in the
interim both say and do whatsoever is just and equal, for by this means, as
sure as what is most sure, it will come to pass, that thou shall undoubtedly
foil and fell thine Enemies, and envious emulatours, what ere they be. Also
let the Courtier most assuredly persuade himself hereof, that Envy does not
so much harm, to the party envied, as to the Author thereof, or party
envying, but by all means have thou a care, that thou thy self hate and
repudiate this most odious and shameful vice in thy self, which assuredly
proceeds from no other fountain or spring: nay, rather from no other sink, or
muddy pit, than a loath some and savage motion and disposition of rancour and
malice, most true therefore is that Greek Elegy, translated into Latin.

Iustius inuidia nihil est, quae protinus ipsum
Auctorem rodit, discruciatque animum.
Envy most justly does himself destroy,
Hurts his own Heart, procures his own annoy.
Thou, Courtier, then whosoever thou art, that art sick of this envious
disease, break the fury, vanquish the fellnesse thereof I advise thee. For, as
a vessel which is mustie and unclean, at the first, does quickly and most
easily putrify, spoil, and defile whatsoever good liquor or moisture is put
therein: So a mind vitiated and contaminated with this shrewd, lewd, and
dishonest disposition, and inclination to envy, can never purely possess
perfect quiet, and tranquillity. Wherefore either let the Courtier neatly, and
pleasantly, frump and flout the biting and despightfull speeches of the
envious, or else as wisely and wittily retort them, as they are maliciously
darted against him, but never let him with violence, or vehemence, repugne or
repel them, especially if they proceed from a Prince, Primate, or principal
man of authority. For it is Wisdom with patience to endure and suffer, not to
revenge and reprove that which cannot be otherwise altered. Let Courtiers also
understand and know this, that envy is (as it were) the common pestilence and
infection of a Court, which as it is connatiue with man, so does it with man
(either amongst them of equal or inferior condition) arise and grow up.
Notwithstanding (kind Courtier) do thou desire a preservative against it, and
to have a salve to heal this dangerous sore; I desire thee at least to abate
and extenuate it by courttesie, graciousnesse, and affability. If in the mean
season any chance or mischance befall thee, by the envy of the impious and
ungodly, think thus with thy self, that all men cannot (at all times)
continue excellent and eminent: for, in short time many may be erected to the
top of preferment, and the same men be as suddenly dejected to the depth of
distress and calamity, and those especially which live in Princes Palaces.
For, can any man possible be so ignorant of this our humane case and condition
The condition of a Couruer.
as not to know, and to be undoubtedly assured, that Courriers according to
the will and pleasure of their Prince, are sometimes happy, sometimes
unhappy, sometimes mighty, sometimes miserable? What if this should come to
pass, which also is a humane casualtie, and in a Prince, as he is a man
excusable, and to be endured, namely, that without any great respect of
judicious considerations, he magnify and lift up this or that man, to the
highest step of honor and dignity, or contrariwise that he vilify and thrust
down to the very bottom of baseness, a man famous for his noble lineage,
virtue, and literature; and whose merits have been most meritorious in the
Common Wealth. Thou may hence (I say) learn (friendly Courtier) by this and
such like, to endure that which thou will hardly approve: yet fear and
forbear to censure thy Prince, if thou mean not to deceive thy self; for so
far forth as he is pleased to use his own Princely power and authority, let
his will be thy rule of Justice. Neither let the old or new examples which
happened in Germany, France, and Polonia, put any other meditations and
considerations into thy heart. But let this The Princes will the Couruers tule.
just and upright Law satisfy and content thee; Principis tui voluntas tibi
sit firma, rata and grata. Let the pleasure of thy Prince settle, firm, and
confirm thine. Wander not farther then this I advise thee, if thou be wise. It
may be some subtle violent and immoderate motion of the mind may dissuade, and
persuade thee otherwise; but I say still, let reason and experience rule thee,
and judge not that to be rashness or dishonestie, which seems to thy Prince
right and equity; For surely that Courtier which by this means suffers
shipwreck, in the sea of the court, shall, Improbe and iniqne (as the Proverb
is) Neptunum accusare, Accuse Neptune unjustly. For, as the Mariner which once
or twice has suffered Ship-wracke on the Sea, if when he approaches near
dangers, he strive not to avoid them, wants not opportunity and fit occasion,
having entered into the Sea again, to fall into, and dash himself upon the
same misfortune. After the self same manner, that Courtier which has suffered
diverse and sundry sinister mischances, and disasterous slips, in this slippery
way, and unconstant favor of Princes, has no cause to promise to himself any
certainty, nor can he in such violent and turbulent ouerflowing floods, assure
unto himself a calm sea, or a sure and secure seat, I mean a peaceable and
contented mind.

Furthermore (kind Courtier) if thou have resolutely resolved, and determined
to undertake any large progress, course, and continuance under thy Prince,
enforce thy self to the uttermost of thy power, to express thy Promptitude.
promptitude and industrious diligence in thine office or calling. For, as rash
malapertnesse and disobedience, do hurt, hinder, yea, and utterly break off
Courtly proceedings; so assuredly obedience, prompt, and ready pressed
observance and diligence, do commend, promote, and advance the excellent
endeavors of an honest Courtier.

Let the Courtier also which desires and aspires to honor and preferment by
his Prince, have this care and due To be exercised in his Princes presence.
consideration, that as much as ere he may, he be ever occupied and exercised
in his Princes sight, that he may take notice of his diligence, yet let this be
done very seasonably, and not too importunely: Let him therefore in this
respect observe the most seasonable times; for usually sudden and unexpected
employments are iminent and ingruent to Princes, which they (for the most part)
will credit, and commit to their dispatch and performance which come next into
their presence.

Let the wise Courtier also observe and note this, that To prefer things
present before future things.
always he prefer things present, and not perilous, before future and
fearful things, if so be that which is good and honest do not prohibit the
same; for, he which puts not a period and just limitation to his rouing and
ravening lusts and desires, or preferres future things, which many times prove
bitter, and distastefull, before things present, greedily gaping after new
offices, and employments; does seldom or never gain much thereby, but like
Aesops dog, while they couetously snatch at a double doubtful commodity, they
most commonly loose their single certainty. Wherefore I again and again
exhort the Courtier, that he herein be advised, and that he loose not certain,
for uncertain things: for to use a measure in our desires, is a special point
of wisdom, and modesty, and not Spem praetio emere, to buy our hope at too
heavy or dear a ra^e, as Terence his Sannio well and wittily does admonish us.

Let us also know thus much, that although young Courtiers be for the most part
very rude and foolishly insolent, yea, in many things much to be reprehended;
yet they not being grossly defiled with any heinous offenses, or capital
crimes, are therefore in some sort pardonable, and to be excused: For it is good
that every one should have this in due consideration;

Nam vitijs nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille est,
Qui minimis vrgetur.
Sin, from our Birth has all our hearts possessed,
He then which has least sin, is blessed and best.
If then in that more licencious life, which for the most part, Courtiers do
enjoy in a Court, there be over much and immoderate looseness of life and
conversation, it is better (but no farther than we may with a good conscience)
in some measure wisely to excuse them, than by putting oil and fire together,
to disquiet and trouble them with ignominious and bitter speeches. Let us be
guided with this rule, through the whole course of our life, that we may (what
in us lies) have Peace with all men; and wage War only with their vices. Now
in the mean while, even those Courtiers which, as much as they are able, do
cover and conceal the outward apparances, and demonstrations of their inward
conditions, and inclinations, do, notwithstanding soon or late break forth,
and discover what is in them: so that they which with so great care and
circumspection, would have cloaked and kept close, what manner of men they
were, have (at length) in one vice or other, bin openly detected. Let Courtiers
therefore in this regard, look to themselves, and although they may fondly
say, and so saying deceive themselves, That no man sees or can witness against
them, yet let them know and know assuredly, that the All-seeing eye of Gods
knowledge does (as it were) through the Looking-glass of Heaven, presently
behold and discern whatsoever the heart of man, most privily and privately
conceiueth. Wherefore it can nothing Neither greatness nor priuacie of place,
can hide our sins from God.
at all profit or avail the Courtier to be great in grace, and great favor
and authority, or to seek out the most retired, or solitary places that may
be, whereby he may the more eagerly, and conveniently without disturbance or
discovery, think upon and put in practice, the high displeasure,
dissimulation, and other private motions and machiuations of his mind: God I
say, who, as the Prophet testifies, Scrutatur corda and renes, Is searcher both
of the heart and reins, sees and fore-sees all the most secret thoughts and
intentions of thy mind. Neither be thou of opinion, that the impious
imaginations which thou have excogitated and ruminated in the depth of thy
heart, though in most secret and obscurest places, if against the express rule
of Gods word and truth, can ever have a good end and prosperous conclusion.
Thou may paraduenture (occasion being offered) broach them abroad, but either
wrath, rage, dissimulation, or faction, and such like, will assuredly cross,
if not utterly confound thee. For, it is as true as old a saying, Qui fo^^ea^^
alteri fodit, incidit in illam. He which digs a pit for another falls into it
himself; So likewise after the same manner, he that pulls down his Neighbous
hedge, is oftentimes by deceit, as a lurking Serpent, sorely wounded, if not by
his venomous and mortiferous sting, stung, to the death: so I say, they which
machina^t or invent any treacherous destruction to their King or prince (not
only because they contest with one more mighty) are themselves confounded; but
especially because God himself has commanded that the Majesty of a King,
being as it were his representation and Vicegerent on earth, shall be held
most holy and inuiolate; And that he therefore will so surely, and severely, be
the revenger of such impieties, as An admonition to perfidious Traitors and
bloody Iebusites.
that scarcly any I say not gracious Kings, but even graceless Tirants, shall
be peradventure destroyed or supplanted by them, but that after the same
manner, a like revenge shall be retaliated and paid home into their own Bosom.

Think upon this then, you Courtly Politicians, ambitious Swash-bucklers, and
Blood sucking Traitors, which think to shroud and shelter your selves, under
the most holy and immaculate name of Jesus. it is not your solitary, or retired
places, it is not your couzenage and equluocation, it is not (I say) the authority
of your great High Priest* or the dignity of a Cardinal, no nor the fained and
false Vizarde of your Catholic, Apostolic, Re^^ish Religion, that can make
such evil to be good, It Is better, yea I say it is far better, if perchance
thou be expelled from the presence of thy Prince or removed from thy due
dignities and preferments; not only to cover Not to revenge our own wrong^
and dissemble thine injuries and greiuances, but even patiently, and with a
contented mind to sustain and endure the^. Neither should any wise or
understanding man nor any that has the fear of God before his eyes, think
that he may justly revenge his own wrong, and either in word or deed intend
or attempt any thing, that may redound to the prejudice of his Prince.

Furthermore thou (kind Courtier) which art a man, Not to be ruled by women
and borne to be of a manly spirit and disposition, suffer not thy self to be
over ruled by women, especially simple and ignorant women; for, nothing almost
can be to any man more wretched and slavish, then to abase and indignifie
himself so far, as to obey the rigid rigorous and many times unjust command,
of imperious and impetuous women: whereby indeed he does no better than
apparently seem to neglect, reject, and refuse, that Honorable prerogative
wherewith God his all blessed Creator, had from the beginning honored him.

Now come we to lay down some few directions and instructions, how the
Courtier may carry himself in the change and alteration of a King or kingdom.
As in all other things, so likewise in this, a mean is the best. How to carry
himself in the change of a Prince.
Wherefore a new Prince being inaugurated and invested into his Crown and
kingdom, show not thy self too sad and sorrowful, nor too glad pleasant and
joyful; what then? hear; and make use. Let thy countenance be modest and
grave, and when thou may without harm to thy credit and reputation, temper
thy joys with some tears of sorrow, and soberly and discreetely intermingle
some sighs and lamentation with thy present obsequious obseruances.

When the Courtier perceiues that his Prince in his benign, bountiful, and
liberal disposition, is forward and ready to confer and bestow upon him, any
honest and Princely profer or present pay of ready money; let him use no delays
but with all celerity and expedition, let him (yet with an honest mind and
carriage) receive and accept of it; for, assuredly it is far better to have in
present possession, than to hope with long expectation, and once tene, tene, is
better than an hundred times Cape, Cape.

The Courtier endeavoring to compass a courtly Of the Princes liberality.
life and being promoted thereunto, must give out and report abroad that he did
not so much gain the same by his own proffered Service, but rather that, that
his office or place of preferment, was conferred and imposed upon him, by the
especial and free election and choice of his Prince* for, thou being by this
means, admitted and placed therein may deal with thy most intimate friends
as touching thy Prince, or his administrations and emploiments, always
directing thy words to such a sense as that they may not maliciously be wrung
and wrested to the worst; if thou be not careful herein, it is likely that one
subtle Ulysses or other, will circumuent and intrapp stupid and hasty Ajax,
and thereby shall thou greiue thy self, and make others scorn and scoff at
thee. Let the Wisdom of Epicharmus therefore, I wish thee, be thy Wisdom,
especially in Princes Palaces, Nulli fidere, To trust no man. For it cannot be
Wisdom or discretion in any man to put confidence in Courtiers rewards,
gifts, and fair promises: because indeed many of them will seem even to load
those men with rich gifts and presents, only out of mere pride of mind and
vain glorious oftentation, to whom notwithstanding they bear intestine hatred
and rancorous displeasure. And what then? Why even those will counterfeit and
dissemble, that they rejoice at thy prosperity and welfare, whereas indeed
they envy the same, and do inwardly grieve, when they seem outwardly to
smile. Neither are these the tricks of Courtiers only, but even of the whole
world, which indeed makes those that desire and look for that better life in
heaven, to despise and hate this here on earth. And who indeed that has any
spark of grace, or is possessed with any contempt of the vanity and villainy
of this present life, is not ashamed to think, that he can gather Figs from
Thistles, Grapes from Thorns, or pure Wheat out of dross and Darnell.

But I proceed, and here admonish the Courtier, that he beware of those
dignities and preferments, which by reason of too eager desire, to bring his
friends also into office and promotion, are a great hindrance to the better
performance of his own proper, and peculiar affairs. Beneficence is indeed a
noble virtue, whereby we according Of Beneficence.
to our power, do assist, and do good to those which are worthy the same. To
our power, I say, because it is not fit I should water another man's ground,
mine own being dry and thirsty; for, perfect Charity begins at home. Let
us therefore be very wary and careful, that our good Deeds ill placed prove
but bad Deeds, which certainly then comes to pass, when we immoderately and
unlawfully seek the good of others, and bring thereby much harm to us and
ours. Wherefore let the Courtier, yea, every one take heed, that when he stiffly
intends to do a pleasure to his friend, he do not as great, or a greater
displeasure to himself, and those which appertain unto him. But if thou have
a desire to enlarge thine own estate, be most sedulous therein, especially
when thou shall perceive thine enemies or emulators, either drowsey or lazily
disposed to sloth and idleness, or following their own lusts and pleasure,
or busily exercised, about toys, trifles, and vain sports, then is a fit
occasion offered thee, which to neglect, and not to lay fast hold on, were
exceeding great folly and imprudence; yea, and then also not to confront and
oppose those thine adversaries, but to the prejudice of thy self or others,
were an apparent token of gross and egregious negligence, and inexcusable
carelessness. They which tread this path, they I say which follow this
Counsel, shall not (I am confidently persuaded) have need of any ungodly and
indirect means or proiects, to solicit and suggest their Prince, that he
would incite, induce, and win those their enemies whom (by no other devise or
means they could resist or remove) to marry their kindred and Allies, that by
such unequal and subtle slights and shifts of affinity, they may ruinate and
overthrow thom.

When the discreet Courtier shall perceive, that he has What the Courtier must
do when he has inconsiderately displeased his Prince.
inconsideratly and unadvisedly displeased his Prince, let him without all
delay, by all the best means he can, study and endeavor to mitigate and
assuage his wrath and indignation. For, assuredly displeasure and injuries done
to Princes, do take a far deeper impression in their hearts, then one would
think they could* if therefore in the mean season, thou do not expiate and
pacify their conceived anger, they will find a time most lamentably, to lay open
thy final and fatal confusion.

Again, if by negligence or imprudence thou haste provoked thy Prince to
displeasure against thee, endeavor an atonement, and a reconcilement into his
grace, and favor again, either by price or petition; make such Personages thy
friends, who thou know (either for their place or person) can do much with
him. Such are for the most part his Allies, his Wife, Mother, Sister, Daughter,
and such like, all these and each of these as much as may be, let the wise
Courtier, by his honest life, manners, and meritorious demeanours, make to be
obliged and linked in love unto him, whereby the Courtier may safely sail
through the dangers both of Scylla and Charybdis, or any other courtly storms,
or tempests whatsoever; but (after this) if he perceive that for the
redintegrate favor and friendship of his Prince, he be prosecuted with envy
and malice, let him then again take heed of his emulatours or enemies: for the
continuance of a new reconcilement, into the grace and favor of thy Prince,
will again most easily and most vehemently, exasperate their hatred and
despite toward thee.

Moreover, since it is the order and observation of Historiographie, that we
therein especially set forth, and commend the truth of things, do thou also
good Courtier, if thou will be truly politic, follow love and embrace the
same. Does the consideration of the times persuade thee otherwise, and ^^uite
and incite thee to fabulous and fained matters, then for forbear to write
Hystories, for it is far better to desist from such a labor, than with
shamfull imprudence or impudence, either by flattery or forgery, to blemish and
wrong the reputation of thy name and credit. And indeed it is very conducible
to the good of the Common Wealth, not to commit any thing to the pervse of
posterity, but what we have even by experience it self, soundly and assuredly
found faithful and true. He which does otherwise, that is, which does not
place the love of Truth before his eyes, respectlesse either of good will or
hatred. Fumum quidem, ad tempus vendet, sed tandem fumo peribit. May indeed
sell smoke for a time, but at last shall perish himself like smoke.

Rude and ignorant are those Courtiers, which condemn That learning and
eloquence are excellent in Courtiers.
and disprayse, the study of eloquence, and other most excellent Arts and
Sciences: this doubtless is most true, that there have been in all ages,
political Courtiers most illustrious and famous, for their learning and
eloquence; such idle drones therefore are not by any means to be heard, much
less credited, no nor the base and ignoble opinions of the Common people, who
disallow of and much discommend men's excellent parts, nobleness and renown,
whose original being derived from a most honest and honorable foundation,
has spread abroad many admirable effects, to the health and prosperity of all
mortal men. This is it (good Courtier) to wit, Learning and Discipline, which
comforts the comfortless, makes the fearful, fearelesse, which bridles and
pacifieth the Seditious, and makes rude rustickes and uncivil people, both
gentle and courteous. These and such like noble fruits and effects of learning
and eloquence, if Courtiers would wisely examine and consider, they could not
choose, but utterly detest and cast away so hard and harsh an opinion of so
excellent things, and would freely and ingenously confess and acknowledge, the
excellent and wonderful efficacy of Rhetorical Eloquence. Commotions among
the common people how to be appeared and by whom.


Now as touching the vehement concitation of the multitude or common people;
this we must hold and believe for truth, that they will spare no man, though
nere so noble or eminent a Courtier, and which also is not seldom, they are
incensed and inflamed with fury, even against magistrates and men of especial
place and authority; wherefore let him which is wise, give way to fury and an
uncivil multitude. But to the appeasing hereof and pacification of tumults and
outrages, those courtiers are most fit, who for their excellent parts and Arts,
are most affected and reverenced, by the vulgar sort, who indeed since in the
Court they are rare and seldom seen, are therefore, with so much the more
care and diligence to be elected and made choice of. But in the interim the
speediest means to suppress a sedition, is, that the Courtier with all
expedition, cut off the heads of Commotions, and not by procrastination or too
long delays, to permit them to a greater and more dangerous head and
augmentation. And in such a case let the wise Courtier show himself very
civil and courteous of behavior, for questio^lesse thou can not (by any
means) more assuredly or speedily win, the hearts and affections of the
common people than by gentleness, and sweet humanity, wherefore let all
(...), all Rusticall or rude churlishness be far from him, yea let all
peevish and testy frowardness be banished, whereby a man does most bitterly and
grievously contradict others, and utter many things with unseemly wrath and
indignation. Let him call to mind the counsel of Solamon, Patientia Lenietur
Princeps and Ling^^ (...) ^^nfringe^ duritiam. By patience will a Prince be
pacified, and a soft answer puts away strife. That also of P: Mimus is very
pertinent to this place, Pars beneficij est, quod petitur; si belle neges. If a
thing demanded be denied with courtesy and gentle behavior; it comes very
near to a good turn. Wherefore let the Courtier (by all means) so accustom
himself to a civil, courteous, and most gentle demeanout, that it may seem
habitual in him.

Let him also here remember, that he put far from him Womanish altercation
unbeseeming a Courtier.
all womanish altercation, or chiding: for, many times it falls out, that women's
quarrels and contentions, do set both their husbands and neighbors together
by the ears: therefore I say, let him beware thereof; and in any case let him
take heed, that he seem not to strip him self (as it were) and to doffe or
put off a manly courage and condition, by wrangling about effeminate, triuiall,
and idle occasions.

And although as oftentimes it falls out, many Courtiers Courtesy and humanity.
being descended of honorable parent age; have as it were by inheritance, high
and haughty Spirits, yet for all this, let them incline to a more humble,
courteous, and noble disposition, than to be so busily intermedling in
litigious and womanish chidings and brawlings, wherefore let every wise
Courtier shun and avoid all kind of strife and contention whatsoever, as also
all private, and intestine dissension of Subjects one against another: which
assuredly does most commonly bring no small damage and detriment, not only to
the adversaries themselves, but even to the common Wealth. Let then these three
bonds or chains (even when greatest disturbance and discord is raised) bridle,
deter, and terrify every Courtier, yea, any whomsoever from doing evil,
namely, Religion, Shame, and Punishment. For, in good sooth I am of opinion,
that the Courtier, or Gallant whosoever he be, does no better than grossly
abuse and utterly cast away himself, who by this threefold cord will not be
restrained from doing ill, nor constrained to true obedience, and due
performance of that duty which may justly be exacted from him.

In Court also he whose words and deeds do not agree, To be faithful in
promises.
is not to be trusted, no though he swear and protest nere so deeply; but a
wise and religious man will always be as good as his word. And let the wise
and understanding Courtier, again and again consider this, that it is a most
shameful, yea, in many respects a most abominable thing, which also Salust
laments in the men of his days, Aliud clausum in pectore, aliud promptum in
lingua habere etc. To have one thing hatched in the heart, another thing coined
upon the tongue, not to estimate and value Amity and Emnitie, according to
their true property, but according to commodity; and rather to carry about
with us, a fair face than a faithful heart. O but do thou (kind Courtier)
fear and forbear these things, and desire rather to be than to seem to be.

Be careful also herein, namely, that thou be faithful To be faithful in
dealing.
to others, if thou will find others faithful to thee, for that man in my
judgment, unjustly, yea, fond and falsely complains he is deceived, who
himself did first deceive others. As for example, There are dishonest minded
Courtiers, who peradventure, desire to displace their enemy; and that, no
doubt many times, under a color of higher and greater preferment, will seem
to praise him for his learning, judgment, and virtue, that thereby, there may
be committed unto him, some greater and heavier charge and office, than
formerly he had, where his employments and affairs are much more dangerous,
troublesome, and intricate than before. Now what if thou in like manner (that
thou may untie one knot by another) should as subtly circumuent and
ensnare such a like adversary, with as crafty and sly stratagems as his
own, and so should retaliate and repay his deceit with deceit, craft with
craft? What if against an insnaring and dissembling enemy, thou make simulation
thy safe shield to protect thy self, and deiect him? What if in Creet thou
play the Cretian? Yet understand me not amiss (kind Courtier) I lay thee not
down rules to deceive and cousen; God forbid, I should; but even as Physicians
by poisons, do wisely expel poison, not to hurt but to heal the sick and
diseased. Even so when I here object unto thee small and innocent wiles and
subtilties, I intend them not, for the ensnaring or abusing of other men, but
as an opportune couerture, and protection of thine own estate and Fortune. And
finally, I only urged it to this end, that if occasion were offered, thou
might repay craft with craft, and recompense the malignant subtlety of thine
enemy, with Serpentine fallacy.

Furthermore, as touching matters of great moment, What is to be done in doubt
full matters of moment.
which we cannot aptly and exquisitely unfold, or lay open to our Prince, we
must demonstrate and declare to him those things, wherein custom and much use
has made him most familiar, and best acquainted; make choice therefore with all
care and curious election of such a one, who is faithful to thee, whom thou
know well, and do assure thy self is free from flattery. For, assuredly
as the ordination and institution of a Courtiers life is most ancient, so is
flattery an inueterate and venomous evil, both to the Court and Commonwealth,
yea, this evil (if we will believe Curtius) is perpetual, it does oftener more
private harm, to the welfare of a Prince, than a warlike open enemy can
do. Truly it is a thing very much to be lamented, that so many worthy men, so
honorably borne, so abundant in all wealth and prosperity that a Court or
King can afford, should notwithstanding all this, utterly banish from them
amiable Verity, and most freely give entertainment to falsehood and flattery.
For, certainly to speak the truth with Aristotle Of flattery.
the chiefest and most sage of all the Philosophers, in his fourth Book of his
Ethics, Nusquam plures qui familiari sermon, et convict u blando, gratiam
Principum aucupantur; quam in aulis. Never were there more known, which with
familiar speech, and smooth behavior, did so hunt after the grace and favor
of Princes, as in Kings Courts. There, whosoever follows the Court, does
usually approve, and praise all things at their own pleasure, thinking, and
judging that it is not fit they should trouble or molest those whom they
always flock about, and are daily fed at their Trenchers. Hence I collect, and
not without just cause conclude, that flatterers like impious impostures are
most worthy of hatred, for whiles this most pestiferous kind of creatures do
thus carry themselves, Flattery hinders the offices of sincere friendship.
all sincere offices of faithful friendship are utterly forsaken, whose
special property amongst many others, is to admonish, and be admonished, to
do the one freely without bitterness, and to endure the other patiently,
without resistance, which friendly offices whiles they be thus entertained,
they are sincerely and faithfully done, and friends hereby do not easily run
headlong in sin and wickedness but are contrariwise sweetly and seasonably
reduced and preserved from gross inormities. Examples I know more clearly,
illustrate and confirm the truth; tell me therefore I pray thee (kind
Courtier) What made Nero so cruel who was so graciously educated? Flattery;
that is, that most filthy and slavish sin whereby for his bellyes, pallats
and Lucres sake he as it were sold himself to the perpetrating and commiting
of any, most atrocious, and inhumane impiety whatsoever* what made Caesar
rebel, against his own native Other effects of Flatery.
Country? Flattery: What made Rehoboam a Tyrant. Flattery; what needs many
words: Is it not extant in histories that Dionisius his flatterers did call his
cruelty, justice, and equity? did not the flatterers of Assuerus as is
specified in the sacred Scriptures; cry out and say. Iustae est Regis
indignatio, the wrath of the King is upright and just.

But peradventure thou will object and say, a Courtier must have a cloak
against every wind that blows: Indeed I hear it, and it griues me that I
hear it, yet I can hardly, and in truth very hardly, deny and gainsay it. For
Courtierrs had need to apply and confirm themselves, to all occasions, and to
the conditions of them with whom they live; to be subtle and crafty both in
their Genius and disposition, and more mutable and variable than Proteus
himself. But here I must entreat the reader that he would not entertain
such a thought of me, as that, what is now to this purpose said or written is
out of any envy; peradventure I have writ somewhat too freely, (which if so)
yet truly it is free from all malignant bitterness. And indeed if we will
consider one thing with another, who is he that knows not that there be those
in a Court, who at the first sight do seem to have in them much gravity,
literature, and singular humanity, and yet for all this being deeply diu'd
into, and narrowly observed are known under these beautiful, and spetious
outsides and vales of virtue, to cover and keep secret the deadly poison of
flattery? And with good reason, for the Court is the flatterers stage or
Theater wherein he still does practice, to adapt and fit himself to all
assayes excelling Polypus far, yea and the Cameleon in change of coullours
and mutability of conditions. Perennius endeavoring to enlarge and amplify
his pomp and power, brought Commodus the Emperor to his utter overthrow, yea
many other, have by this hellish enchanting poison, of flattery infatuated and
finally ruinated many mighty monarchs, potent and powerful Conquerors of
kingdoms and nations. But that I may briefly contract all in a word, that, of
Gnatho, has especial residence at The perfect picture of a flatterer.
Court: Quicquid dicunt laudo; id rursum si negant, laudo id quoque: Negat quis
nego; ait, aio: Postremo ita comparaui egomet mihi, omnia assentari, is
quaestus nunc est multo vberrimus. that is, Whatsoever they say I praise it, if
again they deny it, I praise that also; does any one deny a thing, so do I;
does he affirm a thing, I do the like, to be brief, I can so carry my self
as to flatter all, and why? O this is now a days the most thrifty kind of
life.

This is assuredly the true picture of a Courtly life and Co^ditio^, this is
the most beautiful behavior of many, if not most Courtiers, whereby without
all controversy or Contradiction we may take up that of Ovid.

Agmen adulantum media procedit ab Aula. The Truthlesse Troops of flatterers
proceed,
From Courts of Kings, and there they breed and feed.
All this not withstanding, be thou (kind Courtier) which intendest to lead
this life, a lover of honesty, justice, and integrity. we deny not, but that
flattery may have his harvest (and for a time) may reap his commodities in the
Court. But this again I say with a most constant and immovable persuasion and
assurance, that the commodities, acquired and obtained by flattery, are
always, for the present, most odious and opposite, to true credit and
reputation, and will undoubtedly in process of time, bring deserved discredit
and defamation. Let all Courtiers therefore eschew this Scylla, and Charibdis;
which surely all that are wise and intelligent will do, considering that;
Nihill simulatum Diuturnum, No counterfeite thing can long continue.

Let that Courtier take great heed to himself, who presently Insolence and
Arrogance.
hopes to have honors heap't upon him, for his arrogant and vain glorious
pride and presumptuous insolence, yea rather let him carry and behave himself
more submisse more lowly, for hence shall acrew and arise unto him a twofould
benefit and Commodity, first he shall be sure thereby to continue the respect
and favor of him from whom his hope of preferment is derived; secondly he
shall by this means be free, from that common pestilence (I mean Envy)
wherewith the Court of Kings are ever infected.

Moreover, let the Courtier be mindful hereof that all wordly dignity and
honor is most frail and transitory, especially in courts. Let that also be
had in frequent and serious consideration, which Cicero left not only to
Courtiers, but to us all, Quanto sumus superiores, tanto submissius nos
geramus; by how much the more eminent we are, so much the more lowly and
courteously we should carry our selves. Let therefore I say, proud ostentation
and insolent arrogancy, be far and finally expelled and banished from every
Courtier. And let him not, attributing and ascribing too much to himself,
ouerconfidently, but rather anxiously and doubtfully, attempt the highest
things.

And when the Courtier has by his Princes bounty Gratitude or thankfulness.
and liberality, obtained any benefit or commodity, let him (setting apart
all proud ostentation, and vain glorious selfeflation) make known, and tell
abroad by whose bounty and benignity he received the same, and he must by all
means endeavor to retribute all condign thankfulness to him alone for the
same. For it were very unjust and vnindifferent for any man to seem to have
achieved, and derived that, though nere so little, from another, which has
only flowed from the fountain of his Princes favor.

Now furthermore, as touching money, he that knows Of money and covetousness
thereof.
not how to use a measure in the having and craving thereof, let such a
Courtier be expelled the Court, as having unclean hands, and a corrupted
heart. For, can there be any present good hap, or future good hope in a greedy
covetous man? He as Salust says, never endeavors to tread the paths of truth
and equity, because as he is altogether unfurnished of all good Sciences, and
honesty: so is he totally filled and fraught with craft and mere knavery.
Avarice is expert in the trade and study of fingring money, which no wise man
will immodestly desire or seek after, and with great reason, for, this, as
being imbrued and wholly infected with deadly poisons, does make both the soul
and body of man most degenerous, foul, and effeminate, it is always infinite
and insatiable, it is never abated by plenty, or poverty. Worthy Salust, thou
say most truly and wisely indeed. For, doubtless as gold is tried by the
Touch stone, so is man tried by gold. What then, can thou expect from a
Courtier dedicated and utterly addicted to an insatiable and greedy gaping
after gold, and filthy gain? In whomsoever this is found be sure to find
these also, to wit, hard-heartednesse, a troubled mind, violence, craft, and
knavery, treachery, deceit, rapine, disloyalty; And what if we hereunto add,
with that excellent Orator. Tam sanctum esse nihil vel solenne, quod non
auaritia violare solet et comminuere. That there is nothing so sacred,
sovereign, or solemn, which avarice does not violate and extenuate. I deny
not, but that it is honesty and discreet providence, for any man to provide,
and furnish himself with all useful necessaries for him and his; but have we
not seen and known, that these have been by many Courtiers got and gained
with a foul, spotted, and stained conscience: by such I say, who never had
learned wisely to limit the vnlimmitted bounds of insatiable couetice.
Wherefore be most assuredly persuaded hereof (kind Courtier) that if thou
multiply thy Riches, and amplify thy Fortunes by the ruins and wrongs of
other men, thou will not spare nor fear to be injurious to thy Country,
Prince, and nearest or dearest friends.

And though Kings and Princes (the estate and condition of things so requiring)
are most liberal and bountiful to this or that man, paying unto them, and
conferring upon them most large stipends, and rich revenues; yet be not thou
(good Courtier) so auaritiously minded as to desire and endeavor to wrest, and
violently (as it were) to extort from thy Prince his wealth and treasure,
whither he give or deny what thou desire: hear and make use of this
counsel and wholesome admonition, which that I may more perspicuously and
evidently illustrate, take by the way this short example: I suppose that no man
is ignorant, that even at Feasts, and most sumptuous Banquets, there is always
some one or other which is not so respectively entertained as the rest: so is
it in Courts, wherein some have what they hope for; othersome leap short of
that they long and look for. Let Courtiers consider this, not the new
vpstarts, or those which were lately initiated into the Court, but which have
spent and bestowed the greatest part of their Age in this kind of life, and
then I doubt not but they will ingenuously and freely confess, that what we
have herein said, is most infallibly faithful and true.

Let the Courtier also indefatigably strive and endeavor, To be industrious and
diligent.
that he may not seem to his Prince idle, lazy, or too remiss and negligent
in the speedy dispatch of businesses and employments: for such a servant
certainly will he not vouchsafe (and that deservedly) so much as to look upon,
holding him no better than a troublesome burden, or an unprofitable drone, and
as not worthy to live amongst industrious, laborious Bees, wherefore let the
Courtier be careful to express himself profitable, diligeent, and ever
ready pressed to perform what he is commanded, let him I say show himself a
labourious Be, not an idle drone, sleepie dormouse, or pernicious waspe, in
his Princes Palace.

Now I make no question, but that Courtiers are (and indeed with special good
reason, as chiefly appertaining How Courtiers may become wise and politic.
to them) very inquisitiue, and desirous to know by what means they may best
acquire and attain unto Courtly wisdom and policy; I therefore thus answer
both the Courtier and Politician, namely, that the knowledge of them both, is
thus especially obtained, by much reading, frequent employments, long
experience, process of time travail into fortaine Countries wisely disposed,
diligent observation of the lives and conditions of men; and finally, by wise
contemplation of Kingdoms, Courts, and Commonwealths. Now whosoever is
graciously and egregiously furnished with these; shall not only, in hope, be
profitable to himself; but also in deed most acceptable to his Prince: And
whatsoever Courtier shall have purchased this prudence to himself, shall
assuredly find himself intentiuely and readily prepared for all occasions
offered. And indeed, to say the truth, without fit opportunity, even virtue,
or whatsoever excellency may consist in any Courtier, yea, in any man what ere
he be, does pine, lanquish, and lie dead in him.

Moreover, let the Courtier endeavor by all possible means, that by some
honest office or other, he show himself, lovingly respective of all Princes,
so that they be not his enemies, whom he is most nearly and necessarily
obliged unto, otherwise he will be contemptible and hateful unto them. And if
he cannot perform offices of observance to all, yet at the least let him not
contemn or disdain them, and let him wisely avoid, and free himself from the
suspicion thereof, for in such and so manifold changes and chances of human
affairs, he which to day was great and mighty, may suddenly sink down, and a
mere stranger succeed him. Let Courtiers therefore weigh and well consider in
mind, that even the shortest hour of man's life, can alternate, change, and
ouerturne the lowest and highest things topsie turney.

Truly I cannot sufficiently incite and stimulate Courtiers, Obsequious
pliantnesse.
to the exquisite and ready performance of due and true pliantnesse, and
humble service; for this is, as I may so call it, the bait and birdlime,
whereby he undoubtedly purchases and procures to himself, the favor and
affection of all men, and once gained firmly, keeps and conserues the same.
To this purpose, that noble Historian Tacitus says truly, Quanto quisque
promptior obsequio, tanto citius honoribus and opibus extolletur. By how much
the more ready a man is in obsequiousness, by so much the sooner shall he be
raised to Dignity and Nobleness. Excellently also says Austine, Quid
iniquius, quam velle sibi obtemperari a minoribus, and nolle obtemper are
maioribus? What can be more unreasonable, than for a man to desire to be
reverenced and obeyed of his inferiors, and yet himself to neglect and
disobey his superiors? Therefore let the Courtier, like a Soldier, ready at
an instant, to give the onset to Battle, be most prompt and readily prepared
to put in speedy execution whatsoever things are given him in charge, but ever
with this law condition and consideration, that what he is commanded, be not
dishonest, or illegitimate, for such indiscreet facility is insufferable, and
most culpable, both in Courtiers, and all other men whatsoever.

Furthermore the Courtly Politician must prefer the A public good to be
preferred before a private.
Public prosperity of the common wealth, before all his own private
commodities, affections or injuries whatere they be, yea and must in this
respect no other wise estimate his private affairs, then he would a nut shell
or asmall lock of woll. And to this purpose let him here take (by the way)
that verse most ancient and true.

Publica private is anteferenda bonis. A Public good, must evermore take place,
Before a private or Peculiar case.
Now he which is possessed with so honest an inclination, may hence learn to
brook and bear with many molestations and griping grieuances, until he
happily ariue at the haven of his hope, and have hit the mark he aimed at,
namely, until he patiently and peaceably, ascend the right and direct steps,
unto honor and desired dignities.

But let him especially, in all his actions and attempts, check and correct
the fire of fury and heat of his hot affections, Not to be furious and
Chollericke.
for it is far more fit and convenient, to do what we intend, when the
chollericke heat of the mind is cold or quenched, then in the hot spurd heat
thereof. Wherefore let the Courtier very courteously take heed least his
unbridled fury, force him violently from temperate reason and constant
moderation, either in right governance or due observance in his accounts and
employments; the end and reward of which, eronious temerity or rashness is,
shame and late repentance.

Moreover let the Courtier heedfully endeauoure to follow the ensample of an
ingenuous generous soldier, To propound unto himself a pattern for imitation.
who intending to imitate some noble and victorious Captain in the wars,
frames and confirms, his qualities, and practices, his fortitude and
magnanimity, as much as in him consists, to the similitude and equiparation
of his Leader or Commander: Even so, what Courtier soever desires to excel, or
to be excellent in any thing, let him wisely make some worthy, eminent and
excellent Courtier his pattern for imitation, and study and strive, to follow
even to a hair (as the proverb is) his honest and laudable Arts and
exercises, this course shall the Courtier see and observe to be most succinct
and compendious, whereby he may exceeding much, and in a short space, promote
and propagate his fame and fortunate affairs.

Now as touching taking of revenge, although the Of taking revenge.
Court especially, does often times minister fit occasion thereunto, when the
state and affairs of thy foes may be for diverse reasons, in anxious and
sinister case and condition: Yet not withstanding, an honest and truly
generous gentleman, should then especially curb and correct himself. For it
were a foul shame and gross absurdity, in any man that is honestly, and
honorably bread and brought up, by wrathful revenge to perpetrate any heinous
and dishonest action, most unbeseeming his birth and breeding. Let all Courtiers
therefore know, and know for certainty, that such is the vicissitude,
alteration and mutability of man's mind, that although fortune smiling upon a
man, his goods like floods flow into his lap, yet let not his wrath and rage,
seem as it were now presently to break prison and to range a broad, but let
him wisely tame, and temper the same with the bounds of moderation, and with
the bridle of wit and discretion, let him curb and keep in the same; for, to
pardon and forgive, is to a wise and worthy man the best revenge; and it is
enough for a man of a true and noble spirit, not that he takes revenge, but
that he can revenge. Ovid. in his 4. de Trist. Elegy. 5. confirms the truth
hereof.

Quo quisque est mayor, magis est placabilis irae,
Et faciles motus men's generosa capit.
Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni,
Pugna suum finem cum iacet host is habet.
At lupus and turpes instant morientibus vrsi,
Et quaecunque minor nobilitate fera est.
Great spirits though prouokt are soon appea'sd
Their noble hearts, soon moved, are soonest plea'sd
The Lion leaves the corpse that lies prostrate,
And when foes yield the fight does terminate;
But Wolves and Bears and other beasts most base,
Spare not to spoil the corpse in dying case.
Therefore I wish that every Courtier or who soever else, that has a
vindicatiue or reuengefull mind would call to mind and consider these things,
for many times (as is manifest) it has fallen out to great and very famous
Kings, that either they have stood in need, of the favor and frindship, or
else have bin forced to fear the fury of even the meanest and most base
Peasants.

Wherefore it is not good, no truly not for those that Not to provoke to anger.
are more mighty and powerful, to give occasion of discontent, or displeasure
to any in Courts. But now adays this is the common practice amongst men, that
as the Proverb is, The thread is ever broken on the weaker fide, that is, where
the hedge is low (as our English Proverb is) the Cattle quickly tread over
it, neither is it, was it, or ere will be any new thing, but still falls out
most true, that Might ouercomes Right; and the weakest go to the Wall. And
this is also as true as Gospel, that he which lives with one more mighty than
himself, had need many times out of mere necessity, to yield up unto him that
which indeed is his own right; Yea, though he never had committed against him
the least discourte^ie, or injury that might be. Let the Courtier therefore
take heed, that he displease not, nor provoke to anger, one more potent, and
powerful than himself.

Again, those malignant and maleuolent Courtiers, are False and slaundrous
accusations.
to be detested, abhominated, and out of the Court to be utterly extirpated,
which study and endeavor, by false, fained, and impious accusations, of
mischievous deeds, or treachery, to hurt, excruciate, and incarcerate, an
honest, honorable and harmless man, a man that is a true lover of learning,
virtue, and piety: such nefarious, factious fellows, which strugle and strive
to trouble a Common Wealth, to supplant the good, and to hold the Scepter of
all sovereignty, in their unworthy fists, do most commonly linck and knit
unto them, a knot of such desperate Knaves, as formerly having thirsted after
glory, and dignity, yet could not by virtue, and the Kings hie way, that is,
by discreet or honest courses, acquire the same, or grow great in the common
weal. Let every Courtier that will be wise, flee the company of such
Catelines, and that speedily; For, experience it self does truly tell us, that
such seditious swash-bucklers, do very often, yea, most customarily, receive
the wages and reward due to such deeds of impiety: And what is that? marry a
miserable, lamentable, and tragical Catastrophe, or conclusion.

Let the wise Courtier also be slow to believe, and not Not to rely too much
upon, nor hope after Courtiers promises.
ouer-hastie to hope; neither let him take, and interpret all things, in the
best or in the worst sense. Yet seldom shall he be deceived, if he believe but
the least part of those things which are promised: For, let him ever think
this to be true, that in every kind and condition of life, it usually comes to
pass, and most commonly in the court* that;

Pollicitis Dives quilibet esse potest. Each man's a Craessus, promises has
store,
But in performance, who is not Irus poor.
Let not such a Court too much content and please the To beware of too much
licentiousness, or liberty.
Courtier, where without controulement, men may too licentiously and
contemptuously vpbraid one another with dishonest defamations, wrong one
another, with contumelious detractions, gnaw in pieces (if it were possible)
the fame and reputation of Magistrates deceased, and taunt and tare in pieces
the credit of their fellow officers, yet living. He whose hap it is to live in
such a Court, and will not as much as he is able honestly and speedily
relinquish and abandon the same, such a man I judge not worthy to be hated,
but much to be pitied, and commiserated.

In the expedition of his Princes affairs, let the Courtier Perseverance in
diligence.
with all constancy, and courage press forward the perfecting, and final
performance of those businesses which are committed to his charge; for, it is a
matter of nothing, to begin a work fortunately, unless we with industrious
perseverance, prosecute the same to absolute perfection: most agreeable
therefore to this purpose, is that which is excellently mentioned in the
Gospel. Non satis esse manum admouere aratro, si respiciamus atque opus
inchoatum deseramus. It is not enough to put our hands to the plow, if then we
look back, and leave the work unperfected. Wherefore let not the wise and
discreet Courtier too suddenly set upon a work, nor too soon set it away.
For, many things (as the Historian can tell us) as they are not to be
enterprised, so neither (being once attempted) are they by their Agent to be
easily refused, because indeed the shortest space of remiss and unsettled
inconstancy, is able oftentimes to mar, and utterly to deface the grace,
credit, and reputation of a man's whole life. Hence then may thou see, that
industry and constancy Constancy.
are marvelous useful, yea, that constancy and perseverance is a most noble
virtue. This teaches us, that things necessarily undertaken, are with
invincible courage and a safe conscience to be finished and effected. This is
that virtue which arms and prepares us to bear, and bear to the end,
crosses, losses, and misfortunes, least fearfully fainting, and yielding to
dangers, and distress, we offend against the upright rules of reason. Finally,
this virtue tells and teaches us, that he is not a man whose heart is highly
mounted, and puffed up with pride, and selfeflation in prosperity, or, is
stricken dead, and lowly dejected To suffer for well-doing.
with adversity. But that Courtier is in a most happy case, if he suffer
either for the exact observation of the constitutions, and injunctions of his
Prince formerlie deceased, or for the constant confession or profession of his
faith and religion, this Courtier may with Joseph, David, and Daniell, rejoice,
and be heartily glad in his own behalf, that he does patiently endure
violence and offense, for the defense of his inuiolate and imaculate faith,
that for his pious opinions he suffers punishment, and despightfull Not to be
ashamed to suffer for well doing.
dealings. Such a Courtier I dare boldly say, may arrogate and assume unto
himself that of Cicero; Nihil esse laudabilius, quam memoria recte factorum
and liberate contentum negligere humana: Si secuta fuerit, quae debet fortuna,
gaudebimus, sin minus, ego tamen gaudebo, quamuis qui fuerim, and qui esse
potuerim, esse non possim. That there is nothing more commendable, than for a
man to be truly content with the memory of his good deeds, and perfect
liberty, and to contemn and set at naught the things of this life; if that
good fortune which was expected have fallen out, we shall be glad; but if
otherwise, yet I rejoice, although what I have bin, and what I might have bin,
I cannot be. If thou therefore show thy self such a man, and be for the same
despised and hated, yet notwithstanding kick at and contemn even this
contempt; if so be that thou have set down this certain resolution, to
persist and persevere in doing those things which are honest, just, and true.

Moreover, let the Courtier be careful, least whiles he indeuoureth to over
come by pliantnesse and observance, he slip into Adulation and flattery, whose
picture already we have indifferently painted forth. If a Courtier being
degraded, and displaced from his hight of honor and dignity, does for all
this live more contentedly, so that his wealth will bear it, in enjoying a
peaceable and private state and condition, let him rather so continue; then
either afterward to accept of preferme^ts inferior to the former, or to adhere
to the court of a more mean and less potent Prince, then the first, unless
by his wisdom, authority, judgment, equity, and such like virtues, he be
able to win unto him the love and affection of one more mighty.

Let every wise Courtier endeavor to be the feedesman of amity and unity
between a Prince, his Brethren, Sisters, Unanimity.
and such like; not the bellows to blow the fire of brawlings, and
dissentions, let him consider, that Peace is most precious, let him I say
again and again recogitate, that they which are lovers of discord and
disquiet, have seldom or never any good and expected issue, or event of such
their impious and nefarious plots and purposes. He therefore whosoever which
will sow the seed of Sedition, or Dissension, shall reap the crop of cares,
and a vexed and perplexed mind.

Let not the wise and intelligent Courtier affect or effect Sincerity.
any enormious or dishonest thing, though with nere so fair a colorable
pretext or intention, whereby he may steal into the favor and affection of
his Prince, lest hereby he blemish, yea, utterly blot out the noble fame and
glory of his progenitors, with the black coal of ignominy, and with the
maculation of most infamous aspersions: for, they err, and err most grossly,
which for hope of gain, greedy desire of revenge of their honor, by sly
tricks and treacherous deceit, have a desire to exalt and advance their
fortunes. But alas, what is the issue of these in the end? assuredly this, that
their treachery and villainy once finished and effected, they receive the due and
just reward of their treason and disloyalty, which all ancient and modern
Histories can easily confirm and ratify. But it is undoubtedly to be
suspected, that no strongest fortifications, precepts, or exhortations are with
wicked and ungodly Courtiers of any such force, as to force them from, or to
fortify them against this impious act or artificial impiety. For, wicked and
ungodly Courtiers, by pretending and counterfeiting the contrary of what they
intend, do many times purchase to themselves great power and authority and by
this means very much increase and augment their own means, yea and by bribes
all and such like courses, do warily make or the greatest part of the
principal noble men, and magistrates, their great friends patrons and
protectours, and do creep or steal into places separated, only for
princesses and great Ladies, there to pry into the secrets of Princes wherein
as in many other such like matters most fit to be wrapped up in silence, they use
Seianus as their best tutor and Schoole-maister, whose horse they seem to have
in keeping; a very propper praise I warrant you! If thou devise or invent any
craft or couzenage against an other, o I wish it may light reside and abide,
upon thine own pate.

Cornelius Tacitus paints out in their proper colors, and delineates to the
life these goodly fellows, Corpus aulico sit laborum tolerans animus audax;
sui obtegens, in alios criminator iuxta adulatio and superbia palam compositus
pudor, intus summa adipiscendi libido, einsque causae modo largitio and luxus,
saepius industria ac vigilantia, haud nimis noxiae quoties parando regno
finguntur.

A Courtier says he, must have a body strongly enabled to under go labors
and pains taking; a stout heart, he must be a concealer of his own matters,
and a censorious and critic carper at others; of a condition partaking both
of pride and flattery; in outward show formed and adorned with modest
bashfullnesse, but inwardly most libidinous covetous and greedy to have more,
and to this purpose, to counterfeite sometimes liberality yea to be prodigal
or profuse in his expenses, and oftentimes to be industrious and vigilant,
which things are not hurtful but very helpefull, to the sly and ambitious
obtaining of a kingdom. But they which are instructed in these kind of Arts,
being once observed of their Prince, let them in due time be removed for they
are indeed no better then the plague and pestilence of men, infectious and
pernicious to themselves and all others with whom they have commerce and
dealing.

Whenever the honest Courtier shall hear (as oftentimes he may) any thing
uttered against his Prince, there being no certain author or ground thereof,
let him by all means endeavor to confute and repress such evil and calumnious
reports.

For, many dishonest vain and profane fellows will Not to permit his Prince
to be ill spoken of.
scatter abroad false rumors and reports of excellent Princes, that at one time
or other the Courtier may not want occasion, to justify and maintain the
estimation and reputation of his Prince, that (by this means) he may purchase
and procure to himself his Princes favor and affection.

Furthermore let the Courtier very carefully cover and To keep his own
secrets.
conceal from knowledge, the exordium, beginning and increasing hopes of his
Princes grace and favor toward him, otherwise, that, which was likely to have
bin peculierly appropriated and appointed to himself alone, will be converted
or communicated to his emulators or corriuals; which were neither wisely nor
warily done: wherefore Taciturnity is me thinks in this case very behoofefull
Taceturnitie.
profitable and necessary, as being indeed the best, safest and surest uniting
coard of the well managing of all our affairs. And to this purpose let him
remember that of the witty Poet.

Sed tacitus pasci si possit coriuus haberet,
Plus dapis et rixamulto minus inuidiaeque.
If Aesaps Crow had fed in private place,
He well bad fared, not shared of hates disgrace.
Let all, both inueterate and lately conceived rancor and To avoid all rancour
and heart grudging.
hatred, be far remote and removed from the Courtier, for it cannot otherwise
be, but that he which retains and maintains them within his bosom, should in
the end be the special cause and procurer of his own ruin, downfall, and
destruction. And as it is not fit he should nurse up any intestine or secret
malice in his heart, so must he be most vigilant and circumspect, that he
quench and utterly extinguish it so soon as ere it is forged and subborned
within him.

Assuredly, I easily see and foresee, that that will come to pass, if a man
know and do not hate the manners and conditions of Courtiers; Let him then
which will eschew and avoid the malice of other men, a little decline and give
back in himself.

Let the Courtier also very carefully observe this, that when as he has
happily and fortunately, according to his hearts desire, obtained the grace and
favor of his To observe his Princes inclination.
Prince, he do not regardlesly neglect or abuse it; in which respect it is most
fit he should most curiously and thoroughly learn to know the nature,
condition, and inclination of his Prince, so that as much as in him lies, he
may wholly accommodate, and apply himself to his customs, and conditions:
for, as equality and paritie of inclination does nourish and cherish amity
and friendship: so contrariwise, disparitie and inequality therein does
dimolish friendship, and in place thereof builds up hatred and contempt.

Let the Courtier have an especial care, and make principal observation of
the laws, customs, offices, conditions To frame himself to the condition of
the Court he lives in.
and dispositions of that Court wherein he lives; and undoubtedly it shall free
and secure him, if not from the malice of all, yet at least from the most. Let
him also consider and call to mind, that if (as now and than by the malice of
time, it is like enough to fall out) he be constrained to put up, to digest and
bear patiently any grievous and troublesome matters, yet let him ever
attribute and ascribe more to the love of Justice, than to the fear of malice
and mischief, for whosoever out of a fear of hatred flies Justice, shall be
sure to be sensible of the punishment of injustice, but seldom or never shall
he taste the sweet fruits of equity in himself. Wherefore kind Courtier let
me advise thee, that in a good and just cause thou be patient, and harden thy
self against adverse accidents, so shall thou be a victorious conquer and
overcome; for, this is most certainly true, that he which can wear out the
time of adversity, and according to the mutabilitie of various occurrents, can
as occasion serves, contract, abreuiate, and prorogue or procrastinate delays
in himself, may undoubtedly reserve and fit himself for the expectation of a
better time.

Now since the vulgar sort of common people is ever Not to rely on or trust
unto the love of the common people.
variable, unconstant, and murable, let the wise Courtier never put any trust
or confidence in them. For, assuredly the common people is a Hydra with many
heads, or rather a strange creature without either head or sound understanding,
this is apparently known, and Antiquities of all Pristine times, do testify
the same, that many men have perished, and made a tragical end, who have
joined themselves unto, and taken part with the common people. Therefore he
whosoever he was, said most truly and wisely;

Qui pendet ab errore and opinione vulgi
Pendet magis, atque arbore qui pendet ab alta,
Nam quod semel euenit and abijt, id nocet nil,
At quod dubijs articulis stat, instat, vrget,
Vanescit, adest: esse malum id putabo solum.
He which on common Peoples voice depends,
Hangs worse than he, that is hanged upon a Tree,
For, that which quickly comne and gone, we see;
No dire effects, or lingering harm extends:
But that which does of doubtful parts consist,
Which moves, remoues; which strains, constraines, perplexeth
Which comes and goes; which vanishes and vexes;
That, that is an Ill, or I the mark have mist.
Phocylides also has very exoellently painted out this Beast, with many heads.

Populo ne fidas, vulgus enim est varium and mutabile,
Populus certe, aqua, and ignis nequeunt plane contineri.
In The common People put no confidence,
For, they are vain, profane, and variable,
To curb or keep them in, thou art not able;
No more, than fires or waters violence.
Let every not only Courtier, but judicious understanding man whatsoever,
think, and assuredly persuade himself, that this is a most slavish condition
of life, that a man should seem to devise unto himself any proper or peculiar
estate and fortune, out of the disposition and behavior of him, to whom he is
in bondage and thraldom; and he which observes and obayes the covetous
envious, and ignorant common people, who are altogether prone to mutability,
and inconstancy, yea, and which is the head and worst of all, to those which
are most ungrateful; let him I say consider with himself, whither it is likely,
that he can ever be happy or fortunate with such men? Or shall he not rather,
as often as he remembers and calls to mind, his own estate and condition by
Nature, so often lament and complain of his slippery Fortune and calamity?

Finally, let him know this also, that he whom he commonly serves, is himself
most miserable, and in that respect let him have a great care, that in the
whole course of his Courtly life, be clear and free himself from his Princes
jealousy, and sinister suspicion of him herein, especially from the rumors
and reports of the vulgar sort, and from that infectious pestilence of a Court,
I mean Envy. Would thou enlarge the limits of thine honor and authority,
then hate and contemn the common peoples affection, who value nothing almost
according to verity, but many things according to their own opinions
vnindifferencie.

Mark this (kind Courtier I desire thee) that thou may approve these things,
whereof there are extant few or no documents in the memory of any Annals,
Chronicles, sayings, or ancient writings of the wisest authors.

By this means I say, thou shall easily gain credit and authority, and
maintain and keep it being once gotten.

Moreover, let Courtiers take heed, that they loose not the beginning or first
entrance into favor and affection; by being with their Prince at unseasonable
hours, that is, if they let slip, and do not always watch most carefully, a
mature, most fit, and convenient time, but this we have already at large
discussed.

But this one thing, which we have not hitherto admonished, To be advised what
employments he undertakes.
may not by any means be here pretermitted, namely, that the Courtier not
being heedfull, but very heedlesse, is oftentimes the cause of his own
downe-fall and subversion, to wit, when he affects and makes choice of such a
kind of service and employment, as is hateful and distastefull to his Prince.

Again, let the Courtier as far as he is able, most accurately tread in the
direct footsteps of his Prince, and To observe his Prince in all things is very
great wisdom.
observe most diligently, what he allows, what he disallowes. If the Courtier
expect any benefit or commodity as the fruit of his labor, let him be
assured, that not the least part thereof is to be expected and sought for out
of this foresaid treasury or storehouse, as I may so term it.

Let him also be hereof assured, that there is no better By his actions to
express his love to his Prince.
means to purchase his Princes grace and affection, than that he by due
actions express unto his Prince, that he is more near and dear unto him,
then his own life, and that he would be content to suffer death it self, for
his Princes life and safety. Whatsoever Courtier is of this mind, though
peradventure he may have a just occasion, for some private respects, to
complain of his Prince, yet shall (he by this means) easily avoid and put
away froward and perverse speeches, which otherwise he may To cover and
conceal discontent.
break forth into, and shall duly consider, that his superiors are of him
always reverently to be regarded. Truly he spets against himself, which
spets against heaven, he is scarcely wise who notwithstanding that the power
and authority of his King or Prince is extended over him, yet will not obey
him; But the greatest power of a Prince is apparent in this, that with his word
only he can take punishment, as well on him that is absent as present, as well
of a fugitive Traitor, as of any other malefector, according to that;

An nescis long as Regibus esse manus. Each Subject understands,
That Kings have longest hands.
He therefore shall enjoy much peace and tranquillity, which is submissiuely
obedient to his King or Prince, who thus as we have heard, is able even by his
word only, to manifest his majesty, power, and authority, when as on the
other side, wicked malefactors, and ungodly transgressors, do not a little
provoke and procure to themselves the sharpness of his maiesticall edict or
commandment.

Let the Courtier therefore study with all diligence and To get acquaintance
with the best in the Court.
care, to know the inclination and disposition of his Prince, and to be well
known himself of those which customarily are nearest about him, and so shall
he undoubtedly acquire the end of his honest and just desires. He then which
is thus resolved, must especially depend upon himself, and his virtue, and as
formerly was said, must reverently respect his Princes special favorites and
attendants, but must not (by any means indiscreetly) discover or impart his
actions and intentions to any. Let the Courtier therefore shun and avoid
indiscreet futillitie, and blabing loquacitie, nor must he unlock the closet
of his heart and so discover his secrets no not unto those whom he esteems
his most intimate friends and familiars, unless in cases of necessity, for let
him be assured that the reward of secrecy is safety, which also we have already
largely dilated.

Now therefore as the Courtier must keep to himself To be secret both to
himself and others.
his own secrets; so also must he not like a barrel full of refts and clefts
leake out on every side, or like a prattling Iay, tell abroad the secrets of
other men committed to his fidelity: for, such as these are deservedly termed
curious and audacious bablers; And if we believe Plutarch, this Idle spawne and
brood of Sycophants, is bred from the family and tribe of idle and curious
Questionists. men for the most part of ignoble and degenerous condition and
such as love to broach abroad into open view, the misery and missortunes of
other men. But do thou (kind Courtier) refrain and abstain from this so
perverse a molestation and merely pedanticall a vice, and be never unmindful
of that notable Distich, touching that once great Courtier, Te cura, et tua,
Look to thy self, and thine own office.

Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi,
Et fuge seu pestem (...)
Thine own charge to discharge, learn by my fall,
Hate like a plague to be Pragmaticall.
If at any time we fee a man exalted and erected by his Not to hate him whom
the King will honor.
Prince, to great possessions and honorable revenues, let us also attribute
unto him due honor reverence and respect, and let us not set him at naught as
an vpstart and unworthy man, or as if he were neither renowned or noble by
birth, nor adorned with learning or any excellent parts; if thou hate and
dishonor such a man whom thy King will honor and dignifie, beware that thereby
thou incur not the hatred of thy Prince himself. But peradventure thou will
tell me, he is a man much unworthy the same, and his end will prove it true:
put case he be so, And I deny not but sometimes it may be so; yet, all this not
withstanding, I wish thee, with that Author of most exquisite and profound
judgment I mean Tacitus, to use these and suchlike speeches; Great Prince,
although thou have elected and chosen, before other men much more worthy than
he, a man scarce known unto us and unworthy thy Princely grace and bounty;
yet I envy not his felicity, nor hate him for his dignity, but as a fellow
counselor and, as executing thy great affairs in the Common wealth I honor
and reverence him. Hereby (good Courtier who are thou art) thou may consider
that it is not fit thou should exasperate the indignation of thy Prince
against thee, though he be pleased to magnify or extol this or that man,
though unworthy or unlearned, and respectlesly neglect and pass by thee,
peradventure a more worthy person; think with thy self that this is a rule
observed even by Heathen, yea practiced It Is lawful for euere man to do what
he will with his own
amongst private and mean men. Qui iure suo vtitur nemini iniuriam facit. That
he which uses his own prerogative, power and authority does injury to no man.

Now if in this regard it be permitted to any private man to enjoy his own
liberty: how much more ought it to be yielded unto, that a Prince may confer
his favors upon this or that man in such or such amans opinion and judgment
unworthy the same, adn to pass over (if he please) other noble men esteemed
and reputed more worthy than the other. Yet not withstanding I am of opinion
that the excellent or grave counselor is not to be blamed, but does very
wisely and advisedly which solicites and incites his, Prince to promote and
prefer good and honest men, men that are lovers of learning and virtue, and
profitably exercised about the benefit and good of their country and common
wealth. undoubtedly a good and Godly Prince, cannot but highly approve and
allow of without suspect of error or impudence, the honest exhortations of so
wise a Councellor.

A Prince may do well to think upon that of Antiochus, A good observation to
Princes.
who twice was the Leader and commander, of an Army against the Persians; who
as in a hunt he was chasing a dear and happening into a homely cottage of a
poor countryman, did there learn; Reg^s and Principes rare veru^^ audire,
That Kings and Princes do seldom hear the truth. Therefore a wise King
should not less estimate and value his Courtiers, which are prudent pious and
lovers of truth, than those which only practice and accustom themselves to
tickle his ears, with smoothing and soothing speeches, not withstanding we
must know this for a truth, that although truly honest and religious men know
not how to lie; yet living in the Court, they are forced sometimes against
their will, even in the bosom Simulation and Dissimulatio^.
of the Court, to utter many evils yea false and fained opinions and rules much
sauouring of Simulation: yea Princes themselves (witness Tiberius) do love
and allow of dissimulation, which oftentimes for one cause or other cannot
almost by any means be wanting in a Court. What say you to David, who being
both a King and a Prophet, yet he also made use of dissimulation, neither is
that of the Emperor Sigismund unknown, who was wont to say, Qui nescit
dissimulare, nescit imperare. He that knows not how to dissemble, knows not
how to rule and govern. All this notwithstanding (if thou be wise) take the
counsel of the Philosopher, Nec dissimula, nec simula. Neither counterfeit or
dissemble, nor simulate or speak untruly; Let not the ill custom of more evil
men seduce or induce thee to be as evil or worse than themselves. And that
thou may not be entangled in this snare, nor shackled To hate filthy Lucre.
in these gyues, reject and despise foul, and filthy Lucre, and let not the
accursed hunger of gold and gain at any time too much please thy palate, or
delight thine appetite. For, he which is, and will be of this mind, shall never
be able to keep his conscience vnclogged, his tongue clean from untruths, his
hands pure from bribes, or his heart undefiled with filthy and impious
imaginations.

Again, let the Courtier learn to be his moneys master, and commander, not
his moneys minister to be commanded by it. Yea let him learn of the Comicall
Poet, Pecuniam in loco negligere interdum lucrum esse maximum. That sometimes
the forbearance of money is especial great gain. Let him also incessantly
observe this rule and direction, so long as he resides and remains in the
court, that as much as in him lies, and so far forth as he may with a safe
conscience, keeping his honor and reputation unspotted, and untainted; that he
I say so far forth as time serves, and occasion administers various and To
observe the time and place.
diverse conditions and alterations, do iudiciously and circumspectly make use
hereof; If his Prince and the affairs at Court be cheerful and merry, let him
also be merry and joyful, but if they be sad and sorrowful, let him in like
manner be the same, it is not almost to be expressed and uttered in words, what
prosperous and fortunate success, many Courtiers have obtained by this one
especial observation. But above all things let him be most mindful and
careful herein, that whenever he is to dispatch any weighty or important
affairs, in foreign Nations, he accommodate himself to the customs and
manners of the same places, so long as he there remains. I cannot
compendiously comprize or epitomize the large discourse and dilatation, which
this part of Prudence, this excellent Decorum, and most graceful behavior
might justly exact and require of me, excellently therefore said he;

Si fueris Romae, Romano viuito more,
Si fueris alibi, viuito sicut ibi.
When thou art at Rome, put on a Romans face.
Live as they live, whers^ere thou come in place.
But here kind Courtier, thou must understand, that this admonion concerns
especially the laws and institutions of those Kingdoms and Countries, wherein
we most properly live; O how ingenuous is that man which understands this
aright! o how prudent is he which is duly circumspect therein!

Moreover, the free borne Courtier, that is, he which either by his own power
and industry, or by some especial How to carry himself in his prosperity.
and singular grace and favor of his Prince has floated aloft, and ascended
unto some indifferent hight of honor, let him not bear himself too hautily
and lostily toward his superiors, too arrogantly with his inferiors, nor too
malepert and discourteously amongst his equals. I have already incited and
invited thee to humility and modesty, therefore I omit to insist farther
thereon, one only word by the way, let me add thereunto, namely, that if
humility be linkt and knit together with authority, it makes it exceeding
acceptable, yea, and to be had in wonderful admiration; Melius est vt tibi
dicatur, ascend huc, quam vt humilier is coram Principe; It is far better,
and much more credit (as that most prudent King Solamon admonishes) that it be
said to thee, come up hither, than to be dejected and set lower in the presence
of thy Prince. Finally, take and make use of that of the wise Philosopher,
whereof he very excellently advises thee. Insecundis nemo confidat, in
aduersis nemo deficiat, alternae sunt vices rerum. Let no man be presumptuous
in prosperity, nor desperate in adversity, for various are the vicissitudes of
all things.

Let this then I say, make the Courtier circumspectly To provide for his own
welfare in due time.
wise, that if at any time it so fall out, that he perceive his Princes favors
to be turned into frowns, and that the envy of his enemy begins to take
growth against him, let him then with all convenient maturitie desire an honest
dismission, to depart from the Court, and of himself to lay aside his Courtly
dignities, rather than to expect when he shall be by others enuiously eiected.
The rule is this. Praestat praeuenire quam praeueniri. It is far better to
prevent, than to be prevented. Which whenever occasion is offered, to provide
for thine honor and reputation, I wish thee to make good use of. But since
there is nothing in the Court of Princes more perilous, or pernicious to Noble
Peers, and great Statesmen, than are backbiters and slaunderers. And the
assistants and suggesters unto slander, are ignorance, jealousy, hatred,
traps, and treachery. Therefore it is not amiss even for the Prince himself in
this respect, to be very advisedly careful and circumspect, that such worthy
men and wise Counselors; men I say of most worthy merit and desert, of their
Prince and common Wealth, may not by such base and ignominious men, of whom we
have formerly made mention, be so injuriously defamed, abuied, and even
Butchered. A Prince therefore should by all means endeavor, least by liftning
to back biters, the person accused being utterly prohibited to make answer for
himself, he be not inquisiti^e about the controversy, nor give sentence
against him, until he have first iudiciously and impartially heard the other
party also speak for himself.

Now an ambitious Courtier is he, who under pretense An ambitious Courtier.
of amplifying and enlarging the royalties and dignities of his Prince, in all
his actions follows the line of his own lust, displaceth his ancient;
honest, and approved Colligues, or fellow officers, substituting, and suborning
othere, whom he pleases in their places.

If any thing be by the Prince mentioned, or proffered Of marriage.
to the Courtier, as touching Matrimony, he shall do very unwisely, if he
refuse to be directed therein by him. But let him rather so far incline
himself, that he make no contract or agreement, without the good liking,
consent, and pleasure of his Prince; What good, and how great profit may hence
arise unto him, no wise man but may well perceive, and understand.

Let the Couriter also contemn and scorn those honors, Not to use indirect
courses to rise to honor.
which he cannot attain unto, without the perpetrating of gross impiety;
for, as Violentum nihil diuturnum, Nothing violent is permanent: So
questionless, whatsoever is gotten by wiliness and wickedness, can never be
fortunate or durable. Observe good Courtier, what is preposterously repugnant
to reason, what is wicked, what unjust, and hate the same. And whither in time
of Peace or War, thou enterprise any thing, accomodate thy wit, thy will, thy
power, and policy to the full performance, and diligent dispatch thereof.

And since the affairs of great men are very unstable, anxious, and variable,
trust therefore rather to thine own power and virtue, than to any others. Let
not that move or molest thee, which no wise man wonders at, that in the Court
sometimes illiterate Idiots prove great men. Truly it oftentimes comes to
pass, that such as these do for a season, enjoy the favor and friendship of
their Prince, and do fondly persuade themselves, that they may freely without
controulment or correction say, or do any thing, what ere they please, but
alas, they quickly come down, and so do all those that are not ruled by
virtue and reason, but by their own vile and vicious affections, administering
to themselves occasion of their own destruction, and running headlong into the
pit they had prepared for others. Consider these things (kind Courtier) I
advise thee, and when thou see such a one placed and graced above thee,
though thou do not approve it, yet do not resist, but bear it contentedly.
And in the interim, be vigilant and provident, that base fellows make thee not
as bad as themselves.

Be always in all things very cautelous and circumspect A caution for rich
Courtiers.
when thou art to deal with thy Prince, but especially if thou be wealthy and
rich, least afterward thou be forced to say, and to say too truly, my village
goods and good fortune, wherein I once inebriated my self have now undone me.
This assuredly happens to many men, especially to Courtiers covetous and
desirous of domination over others, which makes them estimate and value honor,
shame, truth, body, soul, and all, but base and beggarly to a kingdom. But
these I say are most worthy to be detested and hated of Princes, and even to be
thrust out by the head and shoulders, and utterly banished the Court.

Furthermore, let the Courtier so modestly, wisely, and advisedly, behave
himself that as near as may be, he be able to approve and justify his
actions and imploiments to his Prince; nor let him undertake any thing
appertaining to the Court wherein he lives, his Prince not being acquainted
there with; so shall he repel and beat back the deadly darts of envy, which
otherwise upon light and slight occasions, may be either from his Prince or
others leueld and shot at him.

Let the Courtier also take heed, that he wrong not such To take heed whom we
provoke to anger and indignation.
a man whose brethren or kindred, may justly be feared will be furious and
fatal reuengers thereof. He that is injured writes his wrong in marble not in
dust. resist not therefore but bear with patience that which cannot by any
means be altered, be persuaded that he which yields to time, serves and obeyes
honesty, and that they do excellently bear their misfortunes, which wisely
cover and conceal them. Magnify not thy self, against those which can
suppress and pull thee down, and strive not to stand upright, there where
thou art constrained to fall down flat. This one thing remains, that thou
hurt no man, but if thou thy self be hurt or molested with petty injuries, it is
far better contentedly to endure them, than with any the least danger to
indeauoure to repel them.

Again, let the honest and religious Courtier who is of equallity in power and
authority, endeavor by all means to establish unity and concord, and let him
utterly reject and cast a way all iarres, grudges and seeds of dissension,
which are indeed more pernicious than the tooth of a fierce dog, or the sting
of a poisonous Serpent. Let him also which attempteth or enterpriseth any
thing, discreetely and prudently, recogitate yea and premeditate the same, that
so his employments (a mean being ever observed) may gain and obtain a happy
and hoped issue or conclusion; for we shall seldom see a prosperous event of
those thing, which are in considerately and precipitately attempted: wherefore
let him again, and again, cast in mind with what council with what
conclusion any thing is to be done, is to be left undone.

Seeing that Courtiers set council at sail and sell their An admon^^to
Princes.
Princes secrets, it were very material that he would take aspeciall care that
nothing at Court might be vendible, and that thereby he open not a gap to
ambition and corruption.

More over let the Courtier be very careful that he swell not in heart nor
over highly lift up his head, because peradventure he has abundantly received,
much honor and dignity, from the hands of his benign and Note this
bountiful Prince, for it may so come to pass, that all those dignities and
preferments, which through the whole course of thy life thou have acquired,
thou may in a moment of time, through thine ill usage and abuse soon loose
them, and be utterly bereaved of them, and what then; thou shall be thereby the
only occasioner, of thine own unrecoverable detriment and damage, and give
thine enemies if thou have any (as that's not to be doubted) a just cause to
laugh thee to scorn. The controullers of a Court and Tutors of young Princes,
must conuiue and wink at some matters, in that their minority and tender age,
especially if no man be damnified or hurt thereby, that in matters of higher
import and greater consequence, they may the better rule and rectify them.

Furthermore because the necessity of a man's Country, To train up and bring up
Horses.
the greatness of renown, and abundance of riches do all require that a
courtier should be very forwardly inclined to bring up horses, and by how much
the more noblely, and generously minded a man is: so much the more willingly
does he spare no cost, upon a beast of a stout stomach, tractable to be
trained up to war, and fit for the defense of his person. Therefore I say the
Courtier should not be pinching and sparing, but most forward and ready, in the
buying and bringing up of such a Beast, especially if he perceive his Prince to
be delighted with the view and exercise of the most generous stoutest and
stateliest Horses. What needs many words? he must not only train up horses,
but himself oftentimes back them and exercise his body to riding. For
assuredly that of Crisaneas in Xenophons fourth Pedia is very remarkable and
worthy observation, who so highly commended the cunning and skilfullnesse of
riding of horses, that he thought assuredly he could fly like a bird, had be
bin a of the excellency of riding Horses.
good horse man; and certainly this Horse-riding is a warrelike exercise and
most befiting a Prince or Noble Peer.

To this purpose also we read in Plutarch, that Julius Caesar was so exquisite
and skillful a rider, even from his childhood, that turning both his hands
behind him to his back, he would oftentimes use to put his Horse to the most
furious and swiftest Carreers that possibly might be.

If again, thy Prince take especial delight in hunting, The praise of Hunting.
do thou also (kind Courtier) highly allow of the same, and let neither
labor, cold, no nor the love of thy wife at home withhold thee from it. Hear
what Cicero says to this purpose, Tuse: Quest. 2. Consuetudinis vis magna est,
pernoctant venatores in niue, in Montibus se vri patiuntur. Great (says he) is
the power of Custom or exercise, it inureth Hunters to watch all night in the
Snow, and to scorch and burn themselves by day in the Sun, on the hie
Mountains. And no marvel, for, Hunting is an exercise, as pleasant, as
profitable, and commendable.

The Spartans in times past used to instruct their youth therein. And it was an
ancient custom and practice amongst the Romans, to exercise their young men,
not only to handle their weapons, to ride horses, and such like, but even to
hunting and running of Races, to exercise the agilitie, and the nimblenesse of
their bodies: For this laborious kind of exercise, puts vigor into the tender
minds of young men, it corroborates their strength, accustomes them to courage
and fortitude, increases the powers and faculties both of the body and mind,
yea, and it especially causes nimblenesse and patience to endure many brunts
and difficult exigents.

This is the exercise which very much preserues the health of the body, and
amongst Noble and renowned Princes, begets much honor and reputation, and this
does that most acute and ingenuous Poet, in his Epistles plainly ratify.

Romany solenne viris opus, vtile famae vitaque and Membris. Amongst the
Romans Hunting was a game,
For pleasure, health, and mirth of noble fame.
Since therefore not only in ancient times, but even in these our days, most
potent, and magnificent Kings and Princes have even from their childhood most
desirously and with wonderful commendation used and delighted in this noble
exercise; those Courtiers do not miss the mark, which endeavor to imitate
their Prince in so famous and worthy a recreation, and with all diligence use
it, and take especial delight in it. Neither may I wrong this so excellent an
exercise, as with silence to pass over the notable effects thereof, namely,
that the Prince, or any other honorable Courtier, having his mind and thoughts
busied, nay, even overwhelmed with the various waves of cares, and distracting
encumbrances, may even in the midst of these ouerflowing floods of trouble and
molestation, relaxate and recreate himself with hunting. For, who is so Stoic
or stone-like, as that in the very pursuit, and chase of the Dear, Yea, and in
the striking and piercing thereof, may not with great boldness and alacrity,
with the Liricke Poet say;

Quis non malarum, qua^ amor cur as habet,
Hac inter obliuiscitur?
What Is be whom loves or labours-cares so fright,
As, once to mind them, in so much delight?
Nay, to whom I pray you is it not a remedy against all his grinding and
devouring troubles, if with Ascanius;

-- -- Medijs nunc vallibus acri
Gaudet equo, iamque hos cursu, iam praeterit illos,
Spumantemque dari, pecora intermertia, votis
Optat Apru^, aut fulvum descendere monte Leonem.
Amidst the pleasant shadey Vales and Dales,
He be well mounted on a stately Steed,
Out-runs the best which in the Race preuailes,
Or with his blade makes foaming Boares to bleed;
Or from the Mountains meets a Lion strong,
Whom with his Sword he vows to lay along.
This then is the sum of all we have said hereof, namely, that the ancient
Romans had hunting in especial use and exercise, as a certain (...).
Praeludium, or Introduction unto Martial Prowess. Touching which matter he
that desires to know more, let him read Cicero. lib. 2. De natura Deorum,
toward the latter end thereof. There shall the Courtier find such things as
are not by any means to be condemned or contemned by any wise or discreet
Courtier, especially when he shall perceive that his Prince is so highly
delighted with so noble and maiesticall a pastime, which as was aforesaid, does
wonderfully augment and increase the strength, and manly vigor of the body
and mind; Wherefore Salust is not worth the listening unto in this regard, who
though otherwise a most renowned, flourishing, and politic Author, and
relator of the affairs of Rome, yet seems to liken Hunting, to Country
husbandry, and other servile exercises.

Concerning travail into other Kingdoms or Nations, Of traveling into
fotraine Nations.
I say thus much, that it is very useful and necessary for a Courtier, for the
time to come; the reason is both weighty and just: For, first by this means,
he understanding the customs and conditions of other Nations, by experimental
knowledge and much use, he grows more cautelous and circumspect over himself,
he thereby also is instructed in the knowledge of tongues, and shall behold (as
it were) the mirror or looking glass of all mortal men, and both discern
and learn many most important and profitable matters, out of the strange
variety of Nations, and their manners and conditions. I doubt not, but there
are many of a clean contrary opinion, who certainly in mine opinion are not in
this case to be credited, for if we do compare one thing with another, what
excellent knowledge and experience shall he possess, both of affairs,
customs, and tongues, beyond him which never saw any others, than such as
himself, nor ere looked farther than his Fathers cottage, or into his own
Parish Church; Travail therefore cannot questionless but be very profitable
and necessary for a Courtier, yea, for any generous or ingenuously educated
gentleman whatsoever, especially if it be ordered and undertaken, not only for
private pleasure and delight, but for a public profit and utility.

The prudent Courtier to whom this wholesome counsel may be effectual, and who
can be with Ulysses, (...), a Proteus, to temporize or frame himself to all
times, manners, and conditions, may contemplate, search out, and learn the
conditions, or manners of men, and the situation of many Towns and Cities,
that is, he may perfectly understand, and truly know, how to travail with
fruitful commodity. Now then that Courtier which is fraught and furnished with
such experience, I think cannot easily disrobe himself of that due, true, and
ancient observance, whose grace and excellent comeliness ever takes place,
least by negligent remissness, a way be opened and made ready to others,
even vpstarts, to ascend the steps to dignity and honor before him: Out of
this warehouse, or rather sweet streaming spring, the Courtier may both
exhaust, and learn to thwart and cross the counsels of his crafty enemy,
and to retort the Darts and Arrows which were directed against him, into the
face of their envious Archer.

This caution is in this place very pertinent and useful, because that
notwithstanding thou may perceive and see into the crafts and subtilties of
thine adversaries in Court, yet it is not convenient always to disclose or
discover them, but far better wisely to dissemble, cover and conceal them
unto some fitter time, which occasion may happily administer unto thee.

Now also (kind Courtier) touching wanton, wandering, Of lascivious or wanton
Love.
and unlawful love, receive some admonitions, but as brief as may be. Avoid
it, I say (kind Courtier) by all means avoid it, would thou know the reason,
one is not sufficient, I Will give thee more. First, thy fame is thereby
confounded, thy riches or substance is thereby (as with a sponge) sucked up and
drawn dry, thy reputation, name, and shame is left to the pleasure, fancy,
and will of a woman, and the vigor, virtue, and worthiness of wit is utterly
lost. Prettily says Plautus to this purpose, Vbi sum, ibi non sum: vbi non
sum, ibi est animus, cum amant is anima sit in re amata. Where I am, I am not:
where I am not, yet there my mind remains, when the Lovers mind is on the
thing beloved. Hear I pray thee good Courtier, and believe this one thing, he
was no vain, idle, or adle headed fellow, neither did he sing a mere fiction,
or fained tale, who ere he was that left these verses in writing;

Quicunque ille fuit puerum qui finxit Amorem,
Nonne put as mir as hunc habuisse manus,
Is primum vidit sine sensu viuere amantes,
Et leuibus cur is multa perire bona.
Whose Fiction sere it was that loves a lad,
O, what strange hands I pray, doo'st think he had?
For, first he sees how Lovers senseless live,
And how slight griefs, him from much good do drive.
This is certainly most true, and therefore if thou desire a salve for this
sore, and to see or to seek an end of lewd Love, take and make use of this
counsel.

Cedit amor rebus, res age tutus eris. Fly idleness and Cupid has no might,
Use exercise, and he will be put to flight.
Avoid idleness therefore, which thou may easily do, since actions of
honest and laudable employments can To hate Idleness.
never be wanting in a Court; if any man misdeeme or censure the worst of thee,
let it be thy care to depell and put from thee his sinister suspicion, and to
convince the care and fear wherein thou wast, the most artificial means
hereof is using all affability in speech, flickering enticements, and
presenting honorable gifts. For, he which will overcome his enemies, with
least detriment or danger, and most assurance of safety, must with many
benefits, fair promises, and such like artillery, assault and vanquish him.
Neither is this counsel causel^sse; for, under correction be it spoken, All
Courtiers are either by nature so formed, or by education so addicted, that
they hold it a special point of wisdom, or policy at least to cover and
coullour their hatred with false, fained, and fair concealments, and thereby
do oftentimes put forth and proffer their hand, to those whom in their heart
they hate, and give them the most smooth and glauering terms they can devise,
with out any true or sincere intention. I may easily confirm what I here
affirm, by a most probable and obseruable example. That triple headed
Cerberus, of inhumaine Tyranny, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, having destroyed
many famous and most virtuous men; whose cruelty and Butcherie a certain
ancient, Mark this.
and grave Courtier having wisely and very subtly avoided and escaped, and it
being demanded by what means he amongst so many escaped such and so many
inevitable dangers, and traps of their tyranny, his answer was, by often
enduring injuries, and by showing himself most thankful, though he had small
cause for the same. Let the Courtier by all means follow his footsteps, and
though he live not in the Court of any tyrannical King, yet though he reside
and abide in the Court of a most courteous and just Prince, let him either so
fit and prepare himself, as that he may be always ready to swallow down,
and digest many, yea, any molestations and discontents, or else let him
without delay depart from the Court, as most unfit to live therein. The reason
questionless why many Courtiers do make no progress in their proceedings,
has no other original than because their hopes are dubiously and diversely
distracted, and unsettled in that they cleave not firmly to some Patron or
Protector of them, and their fortunes. But be thou (kind Note this.
Courtier) prudent and abstinent, as also most confident that virtue is most
valiant and invincible being united to a strong adherent. And doubtless it is
far better, to combine and conioyne himself, with some Primate or chief
Peer as his Patron and to follow him, then to be a follower of many and yet
firmly affected of none, certainly as he is no where which is every where, so
questionless, he that serves and seeks after many, shall not sou^dly or
sincerely find any; for that which is diverse and separate cannot choose but be
feeble and very desperate.

Let the Courtier never be obuious or opposite to the pleasurs of his Prince,
so they be honest and warrantable, for otherwise he may quickly fall from the
favor and affection Not to be opposite to his Prince.
of his Prince, and in vain does a man strive against the stream. And
certainly a man must sometimes yield and submit to time, place, and the
person, of friends: yea, he that lives with his Superiors had not need to
contend and strive but to wink and conniue at many matters and rather
sometimes to loose his own right, than with lost labor, or rather eminent
danger to contest or contend with his Prince or superior. And yet as I have
formerly said, this is to be considered with this Prouiso that it be so far
forth, as he may with a safe conscience, excuse himselfee and the renown of
his Prince.

Furthermore some other impious and ignominious Courtiers, have a trick to try
their fortunes, and to Slanderous accusations.
hunt after the favor and affection of their Prince by being most inquisitiue
to search, and find out, those with whom they understand the Prince is
offended, that they may most maliciously and pernitiously, accuse them to their
Prince with unjust accusations, infamous lies, and slanderous imputations;
examples hereof are extant both ancient and modern in Germany, France,
Spain, and else where, but that which was most conspicuous and sensible to
Seneca is most memorable.

If in the Court, the Prince have 2. 3. or more in suspense for such and such
matters of ill demeanor, let such then as will show themselves wise, intermit
and leave off frequent conference and much private talk or whispering amongst
themselves; which if they do not they may chance to ad fuel to the fire, or
put flax into the flame; and far better it is to cease and assuage, then to
foster and increase the jealousy and suspicion of the Prince; for, since as
has formerly bin touched, the suspicious man is most commonly deceived; why may
not a Prince also err and be deceived, in his suspicious imagination; which
his error I could wish that thou (kind Courtier) would be the cause to
discover, unless by thy wisdom and upright dealings, thou can openly and
boldly annshilate the impulsive or primary cause thereof.

Let the Courtier addict himself unto, and deck himself To be of civil and
courteous behavior.
with vrbanity and most civil demenour, and be furnished with merry pleasant
and witty conceits in his conference or talk, but let him by all means avoid
both in jest and in earnest, all quippicall taunts and satiricall biting
terms. For, he which endeavors and desires to purchase and procure the
beneuolent respect of others by rudeness rusticity and barbaritie of speech,
does rather discover his own simplicity, than any smooth or facile humanity,
but that which is neatly and trimly contrived, being indeed the fruit of a
witty invention does most delight and recreate the hearers, and is more soundly
and sooner approved of by thy judgment of the most indifferent, wherefore let
thy merry jests and witty speeches be graceful and honest, not bitter or
biting scoffs Of jesting and merry speeches.
not delivering the bare truth of things, which indeed were an occasion to
bite to the quick, the party touched therein. Let the Courtier also put far
from him all Clownishnesse which in jesting and merriment shows but a dull wit
and slownesse, yea is very unsavory and merely foolishness. Let him no less
set packing all Scurrility or saucy and malapert derision, which mirth is very
shameful and unseemly. Finally let him hate as a capital enemy, uncivil
snapishnesse, which also in merriment is no better then dogged snarling, and
virulent or envious biting.

The faults and offenses of imprisoned, m incarcerated Of Courtiers committed
to Hold.
Courtiers are not to be extenuated by any others in the Court, but are to be
buried at least, in the depth of silence, and not mentioned at all by them.
Neither yet must they privily whisper, or avouch openly, that such men are
blameless and innocent, whom for envy hatred and displeasure, they apparently
perceive to be imprisoned: For certainly if it be our human condition to
err, and to be apt to slip by natural infirmity, even the Prince himself
being violently carried away with a certain precipitate heedlesnesse, and heat
of spirit, may in some one case or other commit an error, yet notwithstanding
he is not bound to give an account thereof to any private or particular
Courtier whatsoever. Let not the Courtier therefore rashly, and inconsiderately
miscensure, or disallow what his Prince may be pleased to like of and allow.
Let him not excuse or account such a man as guiltless, whom his Prince does
accuse and condemn as guilty of some notorious or public offense; Princes
have their secrets, which who so ere dares or desires to peep or pry into
shall hardly be free from danger, and give most palpable and apparent signs of
his gross imprudence. In this case therefore let the Courtier be very
cautelous and circumspect, that he diue not too deep into this dangerous
gulf, but that he keep nearer the shore, and that he wisely conceal much
more than he shall dare to reveal, and that he depresse and keep in what he
should not express; yea, let this be the period of all, that silence is a safe
and sure reward to him which imbraceth the same.

Though peradventure the Courtier may perceive, that A wise caution.
he is vilipended, and not much respected or regarded of his Prince, yet let
him very advisedly take heed, that he express not the least semblance or
appearance of indignation or discontent against him, but let him every where
carry himself with all signs of obsequious observance. He may freely think
whatsoever he pleases, for (as our English Proverb says) thought is free;
but let him take heed that he speak not openly, what he has in his heart
conceived privily.

In matters also of piety and Religion, the Courtier Not to trouble himself
about matters of Religion.
shall do exceeding wisely, if he superficially meddle not with too nice
inquisition after unprofitable and unnecessary things, as about the innovation
or alteration of Phrases in the sacred Scriptures, yea, and let him endeavor to
prevent all such like actions, that he may show he approues not the leiutie
and inconstancy of such vain and fleeting fellows, by answering and
subscribing to their conditions, and thereby show himself a companion and
copartner in their unbeseeming curiosity. I would not (good Courtier) that
thou should be too strictly bound with this indissoluble bond of Religion,
from which thou may easily untie and unloose thy self, without the prop and
protection of others thy teachers and instructors. And that this admonition is
not frivolous or fruitless, the unhappy times of our Forefathers, yea, and
this present and most turbulent time in the Low Countries, does most truly
testify.

If any discord and dissentions happen in the Court, let the courtly Chaplain
be very sedulous to appease and Of Chaplains in the Court.
qualify the same; to reconcile them as brethren, to admonish them as men, to
reprehend and reduce them as wanderers, and going astray, and with the sauory
and wholesome sweetness of courtesy and gentleness to dissolve and bring to
naught the arguments of the opponents, They must be Peacemakers
not to increase wrath, but to make peace and appease wrath, not to foster
faction amongst the contentious, but to lull it asleep, yea, into a dead
sleep, that it may not be easily awakned again. Finally, not to plant the
young sprigs, or to sow the seeds of litigious discord, and grudging between
them, but with the sickle and sword of Gods word, to supplant and eradicate the
same. Certainly such an Ecclesiastical Courtier will hereby apparently
approve indeed, that he is the Disciple of that great Doctor, that he follows
the footsteps, and treads the paths of that fruitful Pastor, which once said,
Peace (not Discord) be unto you. Wherefore as that Prince of the Celestial
Palace did especially love Peace, and live in Peace; let us also in this vale
and dale of tears, in this mansion of misery and mortality, do the same and
be the same. In the occupation and possession of Kingdoms and Provinces, it is
no small advantage for a Soldier to make use of a well spoken Prelate, or
Preacher of the Court, for if he be one that is excellently Rhetorical, and
subtle of speech and arguing, he shall assuredly do much A politic note.
more good thereby than a Soldier by his weapons in war. The actions of
those most factious Jesuits in the siege at Paris, and obtaining and taking in
of the Kingdom of Bohemia, by George Podibradius ratifies and confirms the
truth hereof, who for all his fair and smooth tales had never attaind or
enjoyed the end of his desires, if he had not used the veil and vizard of
Religion, and made Roikiranus the Priest his spokesman in the business.
Frequent examples also may we find in other Kingdoms, and Nations, which here
I willingly let pass, but this counsel although indeed it may peradventure
take effect, yet for all that if any should demand of me whither such a project
were to be practiced, or praise worthy, my answer should be, that such
counsel is not always to be administered to a Prince, by a pious, religious,
and honest Courtier.

This question also has been urged by some prudent Art and Nature.
Courtiers, namely, whither a Courtier furnished with excellent natural parts
be to be preferred before him which is adorned with Arts and Sciences, without
the former. Truly, to speak with Hippocrates, Illud optimum quod a natura;
That is best, which is established and perfected by Nature. Nature always
works more perfectly; and as another says by a certain imbred and secret
Law, is able to take revenge. These things surely we must needs say, and hold
for truth. And yet we do not utterly repudiate that Axiom, as a thing of no
import or consequence, Ars certior dux est; Art is a more sure and certain
Guide.

The Courtier which has spent the flourishing spring time, and Summer of his
Age in the Court, and which also Of giving over to follow the Court.
by the gracious aspect and respect of his Prince, has atcheiued much honor,
wealth, and dignity, must not for light and slight occasions relinquish the
Court, but if so be that the times prove dangerous, if his travails and pain,
be ouer-great and grievous; Finally, if sickness or such like, do justly move
and admonish him to another kind of life, let him honestly and discreetly
desire a dismission from the Court, rather than to change the continued course
of his life, with a too sudden or scarce honest and seasonable alteration.

Let the wise Courtier industriously and diligently consider Of entering into
familiarity.
in mind, whom and what a one he is whom he entertaines in to intimate society
and familiarity, yea, into his administration and service. Touching thy Friend
(kind Courtier) this is my advice, that thou be not ouerhastie Of Friends.
in making choice of him, and whom thou have chosen do not rashly put from
thee. Now herein there is need of sound judgment, and curious choice, for if
we will credit the Comedian, Pauci ex multis amici sunt homini qui certi sient,
There are but a few friends amongst many, that are truly faithful to their
Friend. Finally, let that friend be near and dear unto thee, whom virtue and
paritie of honest qualities and conditions, has conglutinated and knit unto
thee.

Now also concerning thy Servant, thou must sedulously Of servants or
attendants.
take heed, and seriously think upon that proverb as true as ancient, Quot
seruos habem us totidem habemus hosts, Look how many servants we have, so
many enemies we have. Let no man therefore too far trust his Servant, nor be
so conceited, that he can heartily love thee, which serves thee more for fear
then affection; And what man is he which is ignorant and knows not, that there
are and have bin many men, who instead of a faithful friend and servant, have
found a faithless and mercenary hired witness against them, yea a traitor
unto them? wherefore the wise Courtier had need to bestow no little care and
pains taking herein. But let him especially To take heed offeruants in
matters of secrecy.
take heed, that if at a feast or banquet or else where he intend to speak
somewhat more freely then ordinary of any matter whatsoever, let him as near
as possibly may be, exclude his servants from the hearing thereof; For, how
many discommodities and inconveniences those Courtiers have incurred, which
have herein been remiss and careless, is I am sure, so sure and certainly
known, as that there needs not any proofs thereof by superfluous or
needless relations.

Those Courtiers by how much the more potent and powerful they are in regard
of their Princes favor, and affection toward them, are for the most part so
much the more hated and contemned of others, unless they have fortified that
favor and affection, with singular kindness and affability in themselves.
Certainly if any remedy may be found against this mallady, or if their be any
liquidity or moisture, which can extinguish or at least diminish this furious
flame of envy; it is the sweet juice of gentleness and courtesy. Memorable
and remarkable is that which Alphonsus, that most renowned King of Arragon
Mark this good Couruer.
was wont to say: Canibus frendentibus proijciendum esse frustum panis. Thou
must cast a piece of bread to a snarling dog, insinuating and signifying that
wrathful outrageous and envious people, must be pleased and appeased by smooth
humanity, and that they cannot by any means be pacified, with bitter nesse and
rough dealing (kind Courtier) I desire thee therefore to observe and to follow
the tract, and trace of that mostnoble King.

Princes newly established, have for the most part litigrous servants, and
contentious officers: and commonly they use to contend and separate themselves
into diverse factions for chief place and priority in their contentions: In
this regard, I advise and counsel the Courtier that he take heed of those, who
for their own advantage and profit like Aesops base and turn coat Batts, do
lean sometime to this faction sometimes to that. But concerning neutrallity we
have already delivered our opinion.

Although the Prince may in his own peculiar love How to continue and increase
a Princes favor begun.
and affection, have made choice of the Courtier, yet let him, all this
notwithstanding, endeavor to procure unto himself an honest and faithful
propitious Patron, who may still kindle and increase the fire of his Princes
affection, to his farther felicity, favor, and welfare: now in the interim let
the Courtier little or nothing regard how he be estimated, or accounted of by
others, especially the vulgar sort, so that his Prince, by whom he may be
promoued, and advanced to dignity and honor, do approve and duly praise his
fidellitie, painfullnesse and industry. excellent and very considerable is
that which is recorded of Steven King of Polonia, of whom it is reported that
he should say, to Castelanus at that time his high Chancellor, standing by him
according to the fashion and custom of his ancestors, Faciam vt breui possis
sedere, I will make thee shortly sit down by me. Esteem as nothing therefore
(kind Courtier) others that would seem to pull thee down, so long as thy
Prince intends to promote and prefer thee; fear not I say, if (maugre all
the malice of any others) thy Prince be pleased to set thee down by him, who
lately did but stand, attending on him.

Concerning vestures and apparel, I advise thee (kind Of apparel.
Courtier) let it not be thy least care, for it may easily be that either by
excess or defect therein, may be engendered and occasioned either thy praise or
disprayse, observe this also, that thou follow such a habit, apparel,
consultations, and actions, as may bring credit and commendation to thee, and
breed envy in thine emulators.

This also is the true nature and property of Court-lyers, A forget of lies in
the Court.
that when they once begin; first a flying and unfaithful rumor is spread
abroad, which by flying farther, like a snow-ball rowld in the snow, grows
bigger and bigger, then some others, not of the meanest but highest rank and
order, affirm and avouch it, which thereupon is divulged, promulgated, and
made common in the mouths of all men, and by this means, do blabbing and
lying Courtiers begulle and delude the credulous common people. This
undoubtedly is evident enough, and more than sufficiently apparent to all,
which we might by most express and faithful examples more lively illustrate,
but that examples of this kind are always most odious.

Wherefore I will now go forward and here I also advise What one a Courtier
should be.
the Courtier, that it is not sufficient, that he be void of all vices, and
free from foul enormities, and gross deformities, unless he be adorned and
beautified with those virtues, whereby dignity, grace, and authority, may be
purchased. Let him not therefore be careless of his same and good name, not
covetous of other men's goods, but honestly sparing and thriftie of what is his
own* and a provident keeper and maintainer of the common good.

The Courtier being advanced and extolled to some Of his carriage in turbulent
affairs, his Prince being absent.
great and egregious height of honor, and dignity, and in the absence of his
Prince being (as it were) president or principal Agent, in an intricate
employment, and affairs of great consequence, being also desirous to frustrate
the expectation of the common people; since he is not in himself able to
bridle, curb, and keep them under, when they unjustly importune the death,
captivity, or imprisonment of any one; let him wisely dissemble his anger and
displeasure, and let him affirm and protest, that he will do more good for
them than they desire, and thereby shall he in the interim set the innocent
party at liberty, from undeserved danger and calamity. This kind of Art or
subtlety, whenever opportunity administers occasion thereunto, is very
highly to be commended in a Court.

Now the pious, prudent, and intelligent Courtier shall Of disputations in
matters of Religion.
do exceeding well, to sollidite and move his Prince, that he would not
frequently permit public disputations, or altercations in matters of Religion,
the case is plain;

Nam seruare modum laus est, nimiumque mouendo,
In dubium trabitur religiosa fides.
A measure is prayse-worthy; but true Faith
Ost moved, removed, doubtful disturbance has.
Do not those examples which we have in that famous Empire of Germany, in
France, and some of the Provinces of the Low Countries at this day, ratify and
confirm this truth? How many Oceans of evil and Troian-miseries, have flowed
from this fountain? Alas, forsooth every illiterate water-man, and paltry
Porter must now adays prove a disputant, must be showing forth the
superficies, and outsides of his wit and wiliness, and must first teach,
before he himself have ere learned, or bin taught, and all these
notwithstanding (shame and sorrow it is to speak it) they themselves do utterly
neglect to live piously, soberly, and uprightly. Gain they not a goodly
commendation? Get they not I pray a huge harvest, and a copious crop of piety,
and religion thereby. O light leaves void of fruit! O smoakie shaddew without
any true substance! Wherefore let the Courtier be such a lover of piety and
true Religion, that he may be a special means to his Prince, that refractory
and obstinate irregular men, may by his authority be forced and constrained to
live in order and true obedience.

Let the honest Courtier be ever of this honest mind, and never let him desire
or endeavor to fish with the froward in the waters of wilful obstinacy,
contention, or dissension. And indeed what other effects does difference in
Religion bring forth, but that even subjects also be at variance and utter
defiance one with another. Let the Courtier I say, understand and know this,
let him freely and faithfully put his Prince in mind of this, namely, that this
Anchor cannot so easily be moved, but that the whole ship of the Commonwealth
must needs be removed, and assuredly I am persuaded, that hatred for the most
part does inhabit the hearts of the common people (through dissension and
difference in Religion) toward those whom they hold and esteem either
perverse or adverse therein; nor be they afraid to do harm and injury to
those whom they imagine and suppose hereby to hurt even God himself.

Now whenever the Courtier conferres with his Prince, concerning these and
such like matters of great moment, let him endeavor to use a reverent,
respective, and moderate kind of speech, and not uncomely or unseemly alter
his countenance: For, doubtless such a kind of gesture and demeanor cannot but
be very acceptable, delightful, and forcible in a prudent Prince, yea, and
thereby thou shall (as it were) even set before him a mirror or looking
glass, wherein to contemplate, and behold thy modest mind, and sweet
conversation.

It is almost unutterable, how much it concerns every Affability and courteous
behavior in a Courtier most excellent.
Courtier to be, both by natural disposition, and artificial acquisition,
fashioned and made sit in the alluring and delighting men with his external
carriage and behavior. Whosoever therefore is by the goodness of Nature or
Art best garnished and furnished herewith, and can with speedy expedition
bring his affairs to a perfect end and final conclusion; Such a Courtier
whenever occasion is offered wherein he may without all Thrasonicall bragging,
manifest and declare the efficacy and power of his wit and learning, ought
ever most circumspectly, and considerately to make use of the same. As for
example, If he be to undertake a business of great import and consequence with
his Prince, let him very attentively listen thereunto, not being defatigated or
tired with any other affairs, least that which should be seasonable and
mature, become hereby unseasonable and immature, that which thou would have
acceptable, prove unacceptable, and least thou find that which should be
profitable and commodious, unprofitable and obnoxious unto thee.

Let him therefore (if he be wise) as was form erly advised, diligently observe
a fit time and opportunity, least he, both suffer his talk to be unperfected,
and his patience and hope prove vain and be fondly frustrated: for, this is
ever as sure as sure may be in the Court, Camp, and whole condition of a man's
life, that Hope and Rewards are ever most anxious, and uncertain, which as
much as may be, it is very fit and convenient to correct and rectify by a kind
of Art, and perspicuitie of wit and understanding. What herein I have affirmed
is truly confirmed by one, who so ever he was, both most learned and very well
acquainted with the varieties and vicissitudes of Courtiers conditions.

Vita quid est hominum? nisi spes incerta metusque
Haec inter dubij, viuimus and morimur.
O What Is man's life? but, Hope, Fear; anxiously,
Between both which we doubtful live and die.
Not much unlike unto this is that elegant Distich.

Vita quid est hominum, spes and formido futuri,
Multum tristitiae, Laetitiaeque parum.
Alas what is life? Hope, Fear, of future things,
Whence little pleasure, much displeasure springs.
Assuredly, it is most true, that all good men, whether Courtiers, Nobles,
Commons, yea, all of us of what so ever condition we be, do spend our space
and term of life, in good hopes, and ill haps.

Moreover, that Courtier which hopes after greatest A good observation for
Courtiers.
matters in the Court, can never make any great progress therein, if he cannot
brook and is impatient of contumely, or knows not how to endure scoffs,
taunts, or mockery. Let him therefore with patience undertake this journey,
and weaue the web of this life with these manners and demenors, namely, let him
please al men; part with what he has, observe the times and seasons, let him
learn to cover, and discover his nature, yea, let him turn and wind himself
hither and thither, which way soever occasion requires; to be sorry with those
that are full of sighs, merry with those that are full of mirth, grave with
old men, and grateful to young men. And unless the Courtier be skillful in
this Art, he can neither grow great nor long continue therein.

But wretched and miserable are those Courts of Kings wherein no man endeavors
either by honesty, learning, or industry, to ascend the steps to honor and
dignity: but where all men, either lawfully or unlawfully, by right or by
wrong, they care not how, no man by his own merit or desert, strives to
attain unto dignity, power, and p^eferment. Endeavor not thou (kind
Courtier) to creep into office and authority, by any other means than only
by virtue, and laudable courses.

If thou receive a repulse, and another inferior unto Patience in the Court is
an excellent endowment.
thee, both by lineage, virtue, and learning, be preferred before thee, yet
notwithstanding take it patiently and with a contented mind, and do not
revenge thine own quarrel, by impious wrath, or perfidious, and nefarious
treachery. It is very behoofefull, for a wise Courtier to follow evermore the
most mighty and powerful personages; and (as it were) to follow the very
tracts and footsteps of the most fauor'd and fortunate, but ever with this
caveat, that he do it no otherwise than will stand with honesty or equity.

Let the Courtier never hunt after o^ eagerly desire of The suits and desires
of a Courtier must be honest.
his Prince, any such things which cannot be had without infamy, and
ignominious disgra^e; with whatsoever show or veil of honesty, or utility,
they may seem for a season to be ouerspread and covered. Peradventure it may
seem pleasant, delicate, and delightful, being varnisht over and garnisht
with a beautiful, and probable color of profit or pleasure, but it cannot
long continue so, for, twill quickly be turned to shame and bitterness. It may
perchance (as I said before) admit some certain mantle of modesty, or cloak
of honesty, and so deceive and delude thee, but be assured, that Quod per se
turpe, nunquam erit honestum. That which in it self is filthy or shameful,
can by no means be honest. Let the Courtier therefore take heed that he
delight not or delude not himself with goods ill got, which will in the end
undoubtedly turn to his own destruction.

Let the Courtier also especially consider and meditate this one thing,
Improbum atque hominem infamem aliquando habuisse latendi fortunam nunquam
fiduciam. That notwithstanding, that the wicked and dishonest man may cover and
conceal his actions from public view, yet his conscience within will like
Cain never suffer him to trust himself.

Again, let the Courtier know thus much, that indeed wicked and ungodly
malefactors, may by favor or good fortune escape the punishment of their
villainy, but not from the terror and guiltiness thereof in their Consciences:
for proof whereof let these true and excellent ensuing verses, give thee full
satisfaction and assurance.

Honesta siquae feceris
Cum maximis laboribus
Cedentibus laboribus
Du^e is manebit gloria.
Si turpe quid commiseri^
Cum gaudijs amplis simi^
Abibit omne gaudium
Turpi manente infami^.
If thou do ought, laborious,
Yet if it honest be,
Thy name and same most Glorious
Shall rest from pains most free:
But if with pleasure and delight
Thou work a wicked fact,
Thy pleasure soon will take his flight
Shame stays and Credit's cracked.
But let the wise and cautolous Courtier, diminish or The Courtiers joy or
sorrow must be measured by the weal or woe of his Prince.
measure out his pleasures, cares, troubles, or molestations, according the
health safety sickness or bad condition of his Prince, and let him not (his
Prince being dead) like certain proud Pseudopostles and bloody factious, and
nefarious Jesuits (far from any show of sorrow and lamentation) Sing, A Te
deum laudamus, for his departure. But let him rather in a lawful, honest, and
religious manner condole his death and immature departure, in whose only life
consisted (as many times it falls out) the lives of an infinite many more, by
whose death an entire region, yea a whole Kingdom, Church and Commonweal,
have endured an unspeakable loss and detriment.

In an ungodly and an ungracious Courtier over much Wealth discouers what men
are.
prosperity, does unlock and lay open to public view, his Avarice, Pride,
and all other intestine hideous vices whatsoever, that formerly lay lurking
with in him, it is therefore no marvel, though they having been lifted and
mounted up to the top of honor and preferment, possessing to much riches and
worldly felicity, are suddenly ruinated and precipitated, into the bottom of
bitter calamity. Examples heerof are too many and too manifest, both in this
blessed Island, and in France, both ancient and modern, I say not left in the
registers of Antiquity or reports of people, but fresh and palpably objected to
our eyes and understanding. Wherefore in this respect let the Courtier be wise
and wary, to consider that he which too hastily, and to highly climbes up, is
likely most lowly and lamentably to tumble down, And to this purpose hear
what a great and most learned Doctor says.

-- Quicquid in altum,
Fortuna tulit, ruitura leuat,
Modicis rebus longius aeuum est.
What ever fickle Fortune lifts on high,
She soon throws down; In The Meane's most safety.
Moreover, let the Courtier attempt all his enterprises To be private or secret
in his intentions.
and emploiments smoothly, currently, and privately, without any the least
rumors, or reports, of what he intends to do, let him I say use all diligence,
hate all arrogance, and in the very act it self, be as private and silent as a
man a sleep. The reason heerof why thus he shall perform his actions, I have
already declared which here (with the readers patience) I shut up in silence. I
only add thus much and it is indeed a shame to be spoken: yet such is the
property and ungodly guise of most Courts, that gifts and bribing presents,
are the present and chief preparations to remove all the rubs, and to make
the way plain to grace, favor, and preferment, But the truly noble and
illustrious Courtier which has learned by virtue (a better way then by fawning
favor, and insinuated friendship) to rise and raise himself to honor and
dignity, were better to want both place and grace, than to acquire or desire
his honor, by gifts and rewards yet it is true which Salust that most grave and
learned Historian says, especially of the Court of Rome. Romae omnia esse
venalia. That all things are set to sail at Rome, so are they for the most
part at many other Courts, where little or nothing is given with out Gold or
Gain. And therefore,

Nauigat infaelix qui caret huius open. His suite must needs be cold,
That wants the help of Gold.
Nay if we will believe Aeneas Syluius, ipsae manus impositiones and Spiritus
sancti dona venduntur; quin-imo ipsa peccatorum venia nummatis in aula Romana
impenditur. The impious abuses of the Court of Rome touched.
Even the imposition or laying on of hands* and the gifts of the Holy Ghost
are sold for money; Yea I say the very Pardon and forgiveness of sins is in
the Court of Rome made only a money matter: They which know the Court of Rome,
and that monstrous great hireling of Rome himself, do know that I tell no
fabulous fiction, but know too well to the cost of many of them, that he and
his Courtiers are of Titus Vespatians opinion, Lueri odorem esse bonum ex re
qualibet: That the sent and savor of gain is sweet, by what means soever it
be gotten. This imposture, deceivable iugler, and pesantly Peddler, does foster
and favor under him such cunning cozners, and sharking shifters, as scarcely
with a good conscience or credit, do, use not from urine or stale, but even
from Strumpets, Jews, Grecians, and Barbarians to, scrape together and even
wipe their noses of myriads and millions of gold and treasure. I here omit the
epicurious gluttons, the reffuse offals and scum of all men, who when they
once, like ravening Harpies begin to hunger and gape after gain, will bring
the wealthiest men (though never so honest) within the danger of their
deuillish Inquisition. But let every wise and discreet Courtier hate and
repudiate all such dishonest wiles and iuggling tricks, and whatsoever favor,
moneys, or stipend, he shall by any means procure and store up in Court, let
him not for the present greatly regard them but in such a manner respect his
riches, and expect his remuneration or reward, even as though he were not much
troubled with the thought thereof. Since riches (as the Philosopher says) Non
nunquam comitentur indignos, Do sometimes accompany the unworthy. And Dinites
vel sint impij and iniqui, vel iniqui haeredes, Rich men (as the Proverb is)
are either impious, or unjust; or else unjust heirs of what they possess.
Whatsoever wealth or riches therefore thou do desire to acquire in the Court,
let thy eager appetite or solicitous endeavors for them be unknown rather than
seen and shown forth, that is, seem rather to have sought, than to seek
them.

Moreover, that Courtier or any else whatsoever he be, To put our hopes in
practice.
is not to be commended, which hopes for great matters, and yet attempts very
few: Let such a one know, that the saying of that most sage Philosopher, and
sweet Orator is most authentical and true. Non in verbis sed in actionibus
virtutem consistere. That, virtue consists not in words, but in works. That
Courtier therefore which desires and endeavors to promote and raise his estate
and fortune, must seriously and sedulously consider, and have a care that he be
sparing of speech, and most diligent and industrious in the expedition of his
affairs; for, a man's mind and his matters taken in hand must ever go together,
and agree in one, if he expect any praise thereby. As every Stupiditie.
work therefore which the Courtier undertakes must be far from stupiditie,
or remissness: so also from temeritie Temeritie.
and rashness, and he certainly which is thus careful, needs not deiect and
reject his hopes, though peradventure the Prince whom he serves do not
presently repay his honesty and diligence with a princely benevolence. For,
many times it is with him as with others, Quod desert non ausert, Forbearance is
no acquittance. And how know thou, or why should thou not hope, but that
he may in his Princely Magnificence reserve a greater benefit or reward, for a
wise and faithful Courtier; wherefore faint not, fear not, for, although
elsewhere delays may prove dangerous, yet here it is otherwise, where ofttimes
procrastination proves commodious; nor indeed is it fit we should prescribe
bounds and limits to a Princes bounty and liberality, but rather patiently to
expect; For, Beggars (as our English Proverb is) must be no caruers. Such a
contented Courtier, questionless howsoever the case stands with him for the
present, yet he ever retains in his consultations, reason and honesty; And
let both these be always as a light to direct him, yea, let these be the
paths he means to tread in, not turning out of them to the right hand or to
the left.

But take thou no pleasure in the conditions of crafty Not to praise any
action by, the event.
and subtle Courtiers, who in their lives and conuersations do so carry
themselves, as that, by the event they will highly praise and approve
prosperous things, though nere so shameful and dishonest, and contrariwise
will disprayse and disprove adverse things, though nere so honest and
unblameable. But let all honest hearted Courtiers, I say, eschew and avoid such
vile and servile qualities, and base conditions, and let them with me thus
heartily wish and desire.

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab-euentu facta notanda putat.
O, may he want a hopeful happy end,
Which by the Issue does the Act commend.
The wise and well experienced Courtier having to do To know men's conditions
and to be, well read in Histories.
with diverse and sundry men, must as variously as warily bear and behave
himself with them all: which he may easily do if he be well acquainted with
their qualities and conditions; but especially if he be well seen in Histories,
out of which he shall learn and discern, that the Genius and disposition of
the Spaniard is different to the nature and inclination of the Italian, the
Italians to the French, and the French to the Germans, and thence may the
wise and politic Courtier see and perceive their variety and diversity. But
what I now admonish and advise thee of, I wish may be laid up and kept safely
in the most secret closet of thy heart and memory, namely, that there are a
most pestiferous kind of Courtiers, who for filthy Lucre's sake, will avouch
and confirm falshold for truth, who will praise any thing which they have by
relation or report, either from the Prince, or Common people, whither it be
honest or dishonest, yea, and which on the other side will with the Prince or
people vilipend and dispraise any thing whatsoever, be it nere so commendable,
changing like Polypus not their superficies or outward color, but even
altering their mind and understanding with the change and mutation of their
places of aboade. Certainly such Courtiers as these, do never take any care to
keep a pure or unspotted conscience to God, nor a good report toward their
neighbors. But let us consider both Kings, Princes, and courtiers, yea al men
both public and private whatsoever, that there is above and about us, an ear
to hear, an eye to see, and a Book wherein all our words and deeds are writ
and recorded: and that therefore in whatsoever kind and condition of life we
live we especially choose and make choice of piety and integlitie, as our
chief guides therein, and let us be most cautelous and careful that when we
labor by all means to gain the grace and favor of our earthly Sovereign, we
thereby loose not the love of our celestial Savior. O let us mark and
remember this, that the conscience being maculate, and contaminated with sin
and impiety begets a worm, which will gnaw there eternally: but contrariwise,
that the conscience which is beautiful, specious, and free from gross
enormities, does wonderfully conserve, nourish, and cherish in us the special
grace and favor of the Almighty.

Whiles I advise and admonish these things, me thinks those unconscionable,
vntutred, and unlearned Courtiers, and such as are ignorant of this human
condition, may and that most justly listen to me, who to the end they may
intercept and stop up the way from better and more learned men than themselves,
by cunning craft and subtle stratagems do imagine mischief and destruction,
yea, and as much as in them lies, do press and oppress men, most worthy
eternal laud and memory. For, there is nothing doubtless more usual and
customary in the Court, than with malice, lies, and calumniations, to curb,
keep under, and ensnare, most excellent and eminent men, yea, such as have
marueilously well deserved of the Common wealth; by whom (alas) too often, and
therefore the more lamentable, even the good, discreet, and wise Prince
himself is by them sold for gold and gain.

Furthermore, unless I be much deceived, I have noted Difference between a
Courtier and a Soldier.
and observed this difference between a Soldier and a Courtier, namely, that
the Soldier for the most part uses plainly and apparently, to express and
exercise his hatred and displeasure, and to speak that with his tongue which
he intends in his heart: but contrariwise, the Courtier (I mean the sly,
subtle, and deceivable Courtier) will cogge, counterfeit, cousen, and
dissemble his hatred if time and occasion do give him leave: wherefore such as
these in time of peace, and in a calm and quiet estate and condition of
things, may easily supplant and overthrow the plain and unarmed Soldier.

Moreover, let the Courtier remember this one thing, to wit, that he, very
(...) and carefully carry himself, as well against injuries already received
as against those which are offered, and that he keep and protect himself safe
and secure from them both: Let the Courtier also Of giving Council in doubtful
matters.
know that to be able to give council in uncertain and doubtful affairs
does purchase the favor and affection of others; which doubtful businesses if
they be so anxious and intricate that thou can not deliver thine opinion of
them, without manifest danger and detriment, than it is far better and more
safe to confess thy wants, and honestly and soberly to excuse the same, than
either to plunge thy self into error or them into pernicious danger.

Let the discreet Courtier also speak of his Prince How to carry himself
toward his Prince being absent.
when he is absent as though he where present; would thou know the reason?
with patience hear it, and I shall willingly show it. Assuredly this is
undeniable, that almost in every Court, Envy and Avarice, do stand up in a
corner behind the painted cloth, but flattery, and Ambition will confront and
out face thee, let the Courtier therefore I say be advisedly vigilant, and that
I may again speak with Homer as formerly, a front and a tergo, that is,
watch on all sides, For such will seem in show to be thy friends, who indeed
are nothing less, who artificially and enuiously will coin and forge new
terms and quaint phrases, thereby to induce thee to say somewhat touching thy
Prince, all this while aiming and leuelling at no other mark, than that thou
may be induced either to make some ill report of him, or to entrap thee by
some crafty or captious apprehension of thy speeches, wherein thou may seem
to offend him absent, whereof had himself bin present to hear, he never had
made any ill construction. Wherefore let the Courtier be of Polypus mind, to
take upon him diverse conditions and disposations, several shapes, and shows
as time and place shall repuire, yet never digressing from equity and honesty.

Again, let the majesty, dignity and authority of thy Prince, be always so
reverently had in remembrance by thee, that even being absent thou so behave
thy self toward him, as if he were present, and suffer not thy tongue at any
time to let slip the least syllable, which may be either disgraceful to him or
prejudicial to thy self.

Modesty in an other kind of life does excellently season Of modesty or
Bashfullnesse.
and set forth virtue, but in Court to be bashful, and not tocarry himself
boldly (as if he came of a base or mean parentage) is most distastefull and
disgraceful in the Court, yet let the Courtier then take heed that he besot
not himself with over much modesty, which the Ethics do not improperly or
imprudently call Frigiditie or coldness of courage, pusilanimity or faint
heartedness, for he which thus indiscreetly withdrawes or pulls himself
back, being never called to the execution of important affairs, nor in any
notable or excellent emploiment assistant or serviceable to his Prince, shall
never be capable of promotion or preferrement. Let the Courtier likewise wisely
avoid to much shamefastness, that is, such an excess or extremity therein
as comes most near to rusticitie and sottishness, whereby we can scarsely do
almost any thing but that we blush and seem to be a shamed thereat,
notwithstanding that the thing which we do be honest and laudable. Certainly
this disposition or motion of the mind, is a silly servant to regal or
maiesticall government, and surely if ever this affection or disposition be to
be put away, it is as well here in the Court, as in the Martiall-Camp.

Certainly that Courtier shall be esteemed truly noble and renowned amongst the
most eminent and illustrious, who in all the actions, and offices of his life
shows himself immovable, constant, a contemner of riches, a firm keeper and
maintainer of what is just and honest, and which can with a constant and
courageous spirit, pass by and bear patiently the unjust menaces, taunts, and
threatenings of any what ere they be; The Courtier which thus behaues and
carries himself, and may peradventure at one time or other, incur the
displeasure of his Prince and be environed and hedged about with the deceit
and subtilty of his envious enemies, yet let him still by all means entertain
a good hope and honest cogitations of his Prince; for it may so come to pass
that he who to day was incensed with anger against thee, may tomorrow be
reconciled to thee; and to this purpose let the notable examples of Mordochai
and Haman, of Joseph, David, Daniell, and many such like, move and admonish
thee herein.

It is almost unutterable, how much, a good and just Of a clear Conscience.
cause, that is, a clear conscience may prevail. Listen unto and learn this
(kind Courtier) I advise thee that in every estate and condition of life thou
make use of that rule which was prescribed by that wise and witty Poet.

Sirecte facies, hic murus a-heneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi nulla pallefeere culpa.
To do well, is a wall of Brass within,
Aguiltlesse heart, not blamed, or shamed with sin.
A good conscience is indeed likened to a brazen Wall, for, Bias that famous
Philosopher, being asked by one, Quid esset in vita metu expers, what it was
that could be absolutely free from fear in this life, made answer that, it
was a good conscience. Wherefore let a man have ever a reputation or report,
and a clear conscience, as it were two strong walls of Brass, to opugne and
oppose all the calumniations, contumelies, and detractions of his malignant
enemies, yea I add this also that a man that is faithfully conscious of his
own innocence, should not be moved or molested with unjust slanders or
backbiting: nor should he think it a matter of more import and consequence to
hear himself ill spoken of by another, than to bear in himself the
testimony of his own integrity and uprightness. And let not only Courtiers
but even all men of whatsoever place and condition of life, as well Peers as
Pesants, Fathers as Children, as well the rich as the Poor, have recourse to
this haven of happiness, and fly to this Sanctuary for sauegard. Finally who
soever intends wisely and discreetly, to manage and order his life either in
Public affairs.

-- Petite hinc iuuenesque senesque,
Finem animo certum, miserisque viatica Canis.
Let him what ere he be or young or old,
Make this provision, hereon take fast hold.
But I stray to far, therefore I come to the matter; let not the wise and
understanding Courtier be too urgent, or instant for the undertaking of such
ambiguous rigid or To take heed what businesses he undertakes.
intricate matters, which he knows or fears may prove distastefull and
contrary to the desire and expectation of his Prince, notwithstanding that he
can yield some reasons and probabillities for the same, but let him rather
either utterly be silent, or at least deal therein very sparingly and
indifferently. And to this purpose let him learn in obscure anxious and
doubtful businesses to express a more benign dulcide and gentle opinion, and
(all rigor being removed and set a part) let him so far forth as the thing it
self will admit, work and win his Prince to the most soft and smooth sense or
signification thereof, especially if he himself be voluntarily inclined there
unto.

Now let the Courtier know and understand this to be The Court never empty of
falsheartednesse.
most true, which has bin else where formerly touched, that Courts are never
empty of fained frindship and secret snares and subtilties, which do for the
most part lurk and mask themselves either in the simulation of Courteous
offices, or in some bond of incroching familiarity and acquaintance; but be
very watchful to beware of these ensnaring inuolutions entrapping turnings and
windings, and of these perilous and pernicious Rocks: For truly here is need not
only of wisdom, but even of good luck as I may so say, and a fortunate
estate and condition.

In the interim if any fortifications or protections, may Munition against
falseheartednesse.
shield succor or desend thee, go forward to arm and fortify thy self with
this munition, and excellent furniture here following, first enrich thy mind
with knowledge, variety of matter and languages, but especially be expert in
histories, a skillful Lawyer, and a wise politician* furnished with solid
counsel and a discreet and sweet utterance of speech, as also an exquisite,
and excellent penman, be courteous of speech. grave in thy style, rarely
garnished with the liberal Sciencs, neat in apparel and a bountiful house
keeper. Assuredly, that Courtier which has furnished himself with these
instruments and ornaments, if he atchieue not hereby the amity and affection
of the most, yet may he certainly avoid the sly collourable and counterfeit
snares, and treachery of many; and with much praise and commendation to
himself wisely and justly delude his enemy.

The Courtier also being desirous to free and clear Of gifts or Presents.
himself, from the least occasions of offense by him given, may make the way
clear to him by giving gifts and presents, and indeed the old Proverb
testifies this to be true, which says, Muneribus vel Dij capiuntur, That even
the Gods are won by gifts. And Seneca relating the Apothegne, or witty saying
of a certain Philosopher says thus, Accipere omnium est dulcissimum, To take
or receive is the sweetest thing of all. Nor are these things repugnant or
contradictory to those before specified. And this is indeed most certain, that
the sores and swellings of a Court* must of necessity be mollified and softened
with those like poultesies, and healing plasters, whereby we may assuage and
mitigate the wicked and perverse qualities and conditions of men, and the most
vicious and pernicious customs and practices of this our Age. Wherein as the
Poet testifies;

Munera creed mihi placant hominesque Deosque
Placatur donis Jupiter ipse datis.
Men are by gifts beguild, the Gods appeased,
Yea Jupiter himself by gifts is pleased.
(...) of Plat^ is worthy remembrance.

Cum Di^is flectu^ ve^era^dos munera reges. The Gods, the greatest King,
Loves him which gifts does bring.
Wherefore let the Courtier use sometime this beneficence and liberality,
especially toward those whom he knows he has offended* and whom he is
persuaded his riches and possessions may very much resist and withstand,
questionless, if there be any hammar or wedge wherewith to pierce, penetrate,
or clean in sunder the most obdurate and stubborn heart of man, it is this,
namely* Gifts or Rewards. Yet here again it is not idle, but worth the
questioning, whither the Courtier himself may also receive gifts again, we
may answer with An(...) the Emperor, Neque omnia, neque quou is tempore,
Observe this.
neque ab omnibus, Neither may he take all things, nor at all times, nor from
all men* but each of these discreetly and wisely; For, as in all other matters,
two extremes are to be avoided, namely, Excess and Defect, even so it is
here, for the extremity of defect, is, not to receive ought from any man,
which were very inhumaine and uncivil; and the extremity of excess, is,
always to receive all whatsoever is proffred, which is most vile and
auaritious.

Those Courtiers are to be highly commended, who receive small rewards, and
that very sparingly from men Of abusiue bribery.
of mean estate or condition, especially for the propagation and necessary
execution of equine and Justice, but let them rather with a free heart, and a
grateful mind, accept of what is, for that cause, conferd upon them by their
Prince himself: But those Courtiers are contrariwise most worthy detestation
and bitter execration, which do sell Justice and Truth for gold and gain. Let
the Courtier therefore think upon that, which that most wise Otatour and
Philosopher Cicero makes mention of in the second Book of his Offices.
Fundamentum perpetuae commendation is and famae est Iustitia, sine qua nihil
potest, esse laudabile. The Basis or Foundation of eternal Fame and
Commendations is Justice, without which nothing can by any means, be praise
worthy. Excellently also said that Noble Historian. Ius aiunt nimis saepe a
veritate laborare, extingui ^unquam. It Is said, that Equity is often forced
from Verity, yet it can never be utterly extinguished or put out. Let not
therefore any gain, any gifts, though never so sweet, never so sumptuous, no
pleasant enticements or inducements of honor, favor or affection, move the
honest and conscionable couttier from the love and true delight of Justice and
equity.

Let young men also, and such as are but newly initiated Not to admit too young
men, too soon into offices in a Court.
Courtiers, be disposed of in the more inferior places of office or
employment; Nor is it indeed fit that any one should be mounted up to the high
steps of dignity, except he have by virtue, fidelity and industry ascended
the same. For, this we do firmly hold, and constantly conclude, that Arcadius
and Honorius were of an honest and upright opinion, who said, that whosoever
did rise to dignity and honor, should not by any means obtain it by
Ambition, but by much labor and industrious acquisition. Mere drones
therefore are those Courtiers, yea, dry Spunges, and blood-suching
Hore-leaches, who neither being decked with any eminent virtue, nor adorned
with the beautiful flourish of elegant Learning, no, not decorated with any
pleasant delicacie, or delightfulness of manners and humanity, yet for all
this do intercept, forestall, and incroach into those dignities and
preferments those riches and commodities, which by due desert and merit belong
and most truly appertain to others, more worthy and more learned than they.

Again, let not any Courtier of whatsoever condition Of proud bragging or
ostentation.
order, and rank show himself a vain glorious Braggad^chi^, in the presence
of his Prince; and if he know that by any exquisite seemelinesse, dexterity,
grace, or favor, he be excellent, preualent, and powerful, yet let him nor
arrogate the same to his own singularity, but wholly ascribe all things to
his Princes favor, bounty, and benignity, as having received them from him,
and rendering due thanks to him for the same. For it may so come to pass, that
thy Prince for thy ambition and vainglorious ostentation, may say to a
stranger, Come up hither, but to the Thrasonicall, and fondly insulting
Courtier, Go down lower, and learn to humble thy self.

Now whither of these two be the better and most pleasing speech, let the wise
and understanding Courtier judge and heedfully consider. Doubtless these
things cannot be too much moved, nor admonished in vain, because as Martial
says,

Arduares hec est opibus non tradere meres,
Et cumtot Croesos viceris esse Numam.
Rich (...) can b^rdly hide their qualities,
And few be thriftie, when to wealth they rise.
Think upon, yea, and in time ruminate and recogitate that of the most wise
King Solamon. Pro. 29. Superbum sequitur humilitas, and humilem spiritu
suscipiet gloria. A man's pride shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the
humble in Spirit. Intimating thereby, that the Lord will cast down and punish
Pride, but that he will magnify and exalt the humble and meek.

Furthermore, it is most decent and befitting the wise Of drunkenness or
surfeiting.
Courtier or Counselor, especially to abstain from the immoderate, or rather
beastlike abuse of wine; because where drunkenness reigns, there assuredly
can no secret be kept secret: excellent indeed is that Greek and Latin
sentence, and worthy here to be remembered, Quod in cord sobrij, id in lingua
ebrij, That which is in the heart of a sober man, is in the tongue of a
Drunkard. I will not here recite the large description which Horace makes of
the effects of Drunkenness, but yet I cannot omit nor let pass the Distich,
which Virgill has to this purpose in his Epigrams,

Vina sitim sedent; natis Venus alma creandis:
Sed fines horum transilijsse nocet.
For procreations sake, and Thirsts just use
Drink Wine; but more ingenders gross abuse.
Touching this also Ovid writes thus.

Aut nulla ebrietas aut tanta sit, vt tibi curas
Eripiat, si qua est inter vtrumque nocet.
Drink not too much; or if so, be it such
As only cheeres the heart, for, more hurts much.
Let the Courtier therefore in this respect manage or demean himself
according to the direct rules of reason, and let him always contain himself
within the bounds of modest sobriety, and firmly keep and conserve this
wholesome and healthful form and demeanor of his life and conversation, that
he do not any otherwise cocker or pamper his body than only is sufficient to
the conservation of the health and strength thereof. Let his meat only
satisfy hunger, and his drink only quench his thirst.

But I shoot beyond the mark, therefore I return to Of Petitions.
the matter. It is a very customary and usual thing in Courtiers to delay and
put of the answering of petitions, from day to day, And we read that this was
the practice of Roboam, who used to say to his suitors and petitioners Ite vsque
in tertium diem and reuertimini ad me, Depart till three days hence, and then
come again to me. He doubtless which takes notice of this delay and
procrastination and yet persists to petition to such a one, does for the most
part, but loose Operam and oleum (as the Proverb is) both his cost and his
care. Let that Courtier therefore which is wise, in due time desist from such
fruitless exhibiting of petitions, and so unprofitably to solicit and move
them with helpelesse importunity. Do thou proceed to petition and entreat?
what can thou expect or hope to obtain? assuredly nothing, but either no
answer, or, at the most, a harsh and unsavory answer, which indeed is most
commonly held in Courts, to be a fit and sufficient answer to poor men's
petitions.

Furthermore, like as many men are such blabs and bablers that even those
things which have long time lain hid and undiscovered, yet they will at one
time or other broach, and spread them abroad, as things most fresh and newly
revived so let not the honest and discreet Courtier presently publish what he
has conceived in his heart, but then also let him very advisedly watch and
expect a convenient time and an occasion most fit for his* intended purpose.

Moreover, The Courtier which has now spent much The reward of many Courtiers.
time, made a large progress in the Court and has there suffered and set
lightly by many molestations, yea much toil and travel, let him not much
admire or wonder that he has with a courage and immovable mind done well
therein; because the reward and remuneration of Courtiers labors is, for the
most part. Sapere and paenitere, to grow wise and repent what they have done.
He therefore which writ these witty and true verses, was doubtless sensible of
the truth of them by experimental proof.

Contrini misere miser tot annos,
Gustando mala, gratias agendo,
Sperando, ingenu^que seruiendo
Tantorum mihi premium laborum,
Sunt sapere atque p^nitere.
I silly wretch most wretchedly have spent,
Much time at Court, in tasting evils many
In thankfulness, in hope but small content,
Yet yiedling due observance unto any.
And now, for all my labors, what is the Prize?
But late repentance, and to grow more wise.
Certainly it is most miserable and lamentable, which I herein write and yet
^ost true notable and too well known. For how many have there at all times
bin, are there (...) there be, whose condition iumps Ingrati^^ ^e often times in
the Court.
(...) with th^^ that where as they have bin excellent (...); and have most
worthily deserved of their commonweal; yet for their notable and meritorious
actions, have undergone most disgraceful and immerited requitals: Let us
consider and call to mind, in what reputation lived Parmenio with Alexander,
Eusenides with Ptolomie the King; Pannonianus with Alcimenides, Aratus Sigonius
with Phillip of Macedon? let us also remember what a most illustrious and
renowned Captain and commander was Aetius, in grace and greatness of
authority in the days of the Emperor Val^etinian; nor may I here omit that
famous Warrier, and most valiant Commander, Bellisarius, against whom alas
what other cause of so great, cruelty could Justinian ever find out, save only
mere surmises and unjustly suggested suspicions, who heerevpon (after the
Vandalls and Persians were by him discomfited and overthrown) being
disgracefully degraded from all his honor and dignity his eyes lamentably put
out, was thus forced to get his living, by begging on the high way, by many
other examples I could amplify, and exemplify this truth, which for diverse
just c^^ses I hold sit in silence to be pretermitted, as being very unwilling
to give offense, by too largely describing the inconstancy of a courtly
condition and fortune, yet that I may not seem also too much to sooth and
dissemble with thee (kind Courtier) but to deal plainly and faithfully, I will
hear only add that most worthy sentence of Plutar^h, in the life of Aratus,
which indeed I hold most worthy due respect, credit eternal memory and
observation amongst all great Peers and flourishing potenta^es whatsoever.
Amicitiae Regum feruentes sunt a^repentine, and ardore quodam amoris sabito
incend^tur; sed labefactari expugnarique facile possunt, and veluti ventis
inuidiae atque flatibus calumniae assidue agitantur. The friendship and
affection of Kings, is for the time, very hot and hasty, and they are as it
were inflamed with a certain repentine and sudden heat of Love: but soon
alas and very easily may it be extinguished and quite quenched, and themselves
be daily driven or blown to and fro, with the winds of envy and blasts of
backbiting emulatours.

Wherefore (kind Courtier) since the case stands thus with thee, and that
Solamon in his Proverbs seems to hit the same Wight, when he says, Cum seeds
vt Comedas, cum potente, sis cautus and ponas cultrum inguttere tuo, vt serves
animam tuam. When thou sit down to eat with a ruler or mighty man,
consider diligently what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat, that
thou may save thine own life. With very great reason, says the same King
also, Iram Regis nuncium esse mortis, That the wrath of a King is the messenger
of Death. Yet notwithstanding all this courteous Courtier, I advise thee,
circumspectly and warily to wade through all these, with a good and a gracious
hope, and do not (at any time) so far distrust thine own virtuous endowments,
and immaculate conscience, but that notwithstanding, some adverse and cross
times, thou may easily overcome the danger-obuious familaritie and affection
of a Prince, especially, if thou happily happen to live with a Prince that is
pious, prudent, virtuous, and a lover of honesty.

Neither be thou herein too low dejected with fear and doubt, but that
although through defect and want of judgment, or by erroneous unadvisedness,
thou may have both said and done somewhat contrary to the will and pleasure
of the Prince: and he therefore preventing thy hope and determination, may let
loose the seines of his power, and authority to take revenge upon thee: yet
for all this it may so come to pass, that he may return to himself be better
(...), and in the end, submit himself to the rule of Gods word, to justice,
equity, and reason, especially I say if he be a Christian Prince, but as
touching those which have rejected and cast from them the sweet and easy yoke
of Christ Jesus, which do all by this rule;

Sic volo sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. Thus will I have it, this is my
command,
My lust is just, my will for law shall stand.
But as they (I say) have nothing to do with Christ, Helpefulnesse to others
required in a wise Courtier.
so we have nothing to say to them. Here also I advisedly exhort the wise
Courtier, that if God have given unto him more wisdom, dignity, authority,
virtue, and such like excellent endowments, than to many others, that he then
consider with himself, that he is so much the more obliged and bound to be
helpefull and assistant to his neighbor, yea, and that both God and nature,
yea, all wise men do consent herein, that it is very behoofefull and befitting
all men, to be profitably helpful one to another. Let not any Courtier
therefore in this respect, exalt and magnify himself, or set up the plumes of
his pride above others, but let him in the fear of the Lord, make a modest and
right use of Gods gifts, namely, that by how much he excels others, and is more
excellent and eminent than they in the exquisite ornaments of wit, or some
other singular virtue, so much the more lowly let him prize and esteem
himself, being always mindful hereof, that to whom much is given, of him
will the great Master and Prince of heaven, exact and require much again. Let
the Courtier therefore be very modest, gentle, and beneficial to others, or
apt to pleasure and do good to all men; for, herein shall he indeed most
nearly imitate God himself.

But since the Courtier (according to the opinion of the common people) lives a
soft, sumptuous, and delicate life, and is continually conversant and exercised
about some noble subject or other; namely, in doing service to his Prince; Who
is he, that can truly term that man a good Courtier, in whom the virtues and
endowments, as well of the body as of the mind, do not duly concur, namely,
a desire to be in action and employment, furnished with noble thoughts,
excellent qualities and conditions, heroicke exployts, and of a speech well
seasoned and tempered with wit and facetious pleasantness? Assuredly let him
which perchance is either ignorant hereof, or unfurnished herewith know and
understand thus much from me, that it is not enough for a man to swell and puff
himself up with pride* of some vain and bare name of a Courtier, or with the
Image and stock of honorable progenitors, yea, or with the title and indeed
tittle of Nobility, or fleeting dignity, and finally, that I may speak with
Grispus the Historian; To seem, but not to be the same he makes show of; But
this rather I say is the thing which is especially required, that he which
desires to be honored and adorned either by the Court, or any other estate or
condition of life, let him first adorn and beautify it in himself. But never
shall he acquire or attain (...) (I mean with due desert) this ornament, this
excellency, if he addict and deuote himself to ignoble and base ^loath and
idleness, to voluptuousness, vain and unfruitful pleasures, to toys and
fooleries, yea, and if he show himself an unprofitable burden to the earth he
lives on, and Catterpiller-like lives, only to devour and destroy the fruits
thereof; but if he be beautified, adornd, and decorated with those excellent
parts above specified.

Furthermore, let not a Courtier strive beyond measure Of praise.
to extol and magnify his Prince, with glorious praises, and glosing phrases;
for, as wise men will certainly be offended, if thou too bitterly and sharply
taunt and reprehend them: so questionless, will truly wise men take it in
exceeding ill part to be too extremely and vehemently commended. Praise all
things therefore sparingly, indifferently, and in due season, for as it is in
other things, so here also to observe (...) a decorum, is always very
profitable, and praise worthy.

Now even as a Physician in healing a sickness, and in curing a malady or
diseased member has a special care, that whiles he applies the plaster or
medicine to one member, he hurt not the other: even so let the Courtier or
courtly counselor so advise his Prince, that he would so prouidently and
prudently provide, and take care for his Common wealth, as that in protecting
the one part thereof, he destroy not the other, especially by exactions of
moneys, and heavy taxations. Let him also put his Prince in mind of that of
Tiberius, if at any time a fit An excellent observation.
and opportune occasion happen, to wit, Boni esse pastoris tondere pecus non
deglubere, That it is the property of a good Shepherd, to take his Sheep
fleece, but not to flea their skin over their ears. So likewise, when he sees
any Collectours of moneys, too eagerly or oppressiuely exacting and extracting
from others; let him then imitate Alexander the Great, who being moved and
urged by some about him, that he might very well impose larger mulcts,
tributes, and subsidies upon his Cities, thus answered, Olitorem odi, qui
radicitus herbas excidat. I hate that Gardener, which A Princely saying.
pulls up the herbs by the roots. Assuredly it was a most pious, Prince-like,
and renowned saying, yea, it was a speech most befitting so regal and royal a
Prince as himself was. For, what can be more shameful and absurd in a Prince,
or any other great Peer, than with Vespatian to desire Gain, yea, though it
were out of foul and filthy stale or urine?

Moreover, it is a foul shame for a Courtier to be ignorant What a courtier
must not be ignorant of.
of, and unacquainted with the state, condition, and potencie of Princes, the
Science and knowledge of Counselors, the original of Families, and
especially, all the true tokens and badges of honor, and such like, of those
Regions, Kingdoms, or Countries wherein peradventure upon his Princes command,
he is to live, and to execute any honorable Embassages. Again, it is very
pertinent to the knowledge of a prudent courtier, that he understand and know,
how many Castles, offices of eminency, Woods, Ponds, and such like, are
belonging to his Prince, what, and how many Soldiers they train up in
military discipline, how many and how well fortified Cities, as also how many
worthy men, who have bin educated in the most famous Academies of Europe, and
are exquisitely instructed in all the Sciences. Truly it is unspeakable to
declare, what especial means of honor and advancement it is for the Courtier
to be thoroughly insighted and experienced in these thing?; and (...) disgrace
and discredit it (...) him to (...) and dumb, when he is questioned concerning
all (...) of these.

Now the chief and especial means to know these* things very perfectly, is
out of Histories, and Antiquities, nor am I able indeed sufficiently to exhort,
sti^v^, Antiquities.
and stimulate the Courtier, to the most serious, sedulous, and constant
reading of them. For, out of this ^ouhtaine, especially out of the Storehouse
of the sacred Scriptures, Courtiers may collect and draw forth this knowledge;
Sacred Scriptures.
that, it is not sufficient only to know what is just and right, but that they
must of necessity do the same. Note this.
For so says the Text of holy writ, Nequequam sufficit Dei voluntatem (...)
nisi illum ipso fact^ (...) opere praestemus. It is not enough only to know
the will of God unless indeed and action we perform the same. And to this
purpose I thought it worth my labor, to add this Distich of an uncertain
Author, most worthy due observation of all good men.

Quid in^at innumeros scire atque (...) casus
Si fugienda facis, and facienda fugis.
What proffits it to read much, much to know,
If Badnesse thou embrace, Goodness for-goe.
Furthermore, let the Courtier contemn and abstain from all lying, cheating,
simulation, and dissimulation, let him here listen unto that most grave and
godly Father Saint Augustine, giving him honest and religious counsel, A good
note.
Quiescat, mi bomo lingus, and vit^^ interroga, My friend let thy tongue be
silent, and be careful to examine thy life. And why? because indeed, it is
more assuredly known and discerned what a man is by his fruits, that is, by
his works then by his words.

That Courtier (which the term of his aboade in Not to depend wholly on
princes.
this this transitory and frail Court on earth, being terminated and expired)
does look and long for a place in that perpetual Palace in heaven, after that
he has seen observed and collected both out of sacred and profaine writings,
what soever the wit of man is capable of and able to comprehend, yet let him
call to mind that of the Psalmist, and sweet Singer of Israel and with him
conclude that.

Tutius est, praestatque Deo considere soli,
Quam se principibus credere mill viris,
It Is better far to trust in God alone
Than in a thousand Kings in regal Throne.
And again.
Qui Domino fidit, felici nanigat vnda
Fidere Principibus, ventus and auraleuis.
He which on God depends, sails with best wind;
For, Princes blasts of love, prove most unkind.
Now before I put a period and full conclusion to this my labor and little
treatise, I must truly tell thee (kind Courtier) this one thing, namely that
the Court makes not a man better, but men rather may make the Court it self
better, whereby I would intimate thus much, that it is not enough to live in
Court, to go to bed at midnight* Mark this.
to rise the next morning at ten a clock, and then what with apparelling
himself, with frizling and curling his hair with his curling pin, with
poudring and turning up the fame, this way and that way, about his ears,
continuing thus in his bed chamber, even till noone at least, and then to spend
the rest of the day in feasting jesting* and many such like toys and triuiall
exercises and practices; assuredly I say (and let every Courtier believe me)
that he which is only occupied and busied in cropping these roses, shall
undoubtedly find then but pricking thorns on these trees, shall find nothing
but fruitless leaves; shall find these vines both wild and barren, in these
garners shall find nothing but chafe; and finally, in these treasuries, shall
be possessed of nothing but mere counterfeit mettle. The Courtier (I say) which
adheres, cleaues, and is inclined to these things above mentioned, cannot
rightly undertake, excogitate, do, or begin to do any thing, much less
perfectly finish or effect the same; he also which cleares not himself of
these things, shall find many defects in himself, and such, as that, if he
mend not his manners, will give him just cause to weep and lament.

Let not that Courtier therefore think himself a happy and fortunate man,
which in the Court has power to live as he lists. For if Courtiers were (which
I would to the Lord they were) the most absolute happy and perfect of all men,
then assuredly, they which would not presently profess, and embrace a
Courtiers life, might wander (as the saying is) all the world over* since we
all know that there is no time of a man's life* that can be better spent than
that which is spent, and bestowed in the sweet fellowship of wise and learned
men, yea, of such as are famous for their wisdom, and excellent parts, and
employments. Therefore that I may once for all (more perspicuously) unfold and
lay open my full scope, meaning, and intention herein, this I say is the thing
which I especially aim at, to admonish thee (kind Courtier) namely, that since
even Courts also have their brambles, briars, and thistles, no man should
therefore put too much confidence and hope in himself, notwithstanding all the
glittering and glorious show and resplendent luster of a Courtly life, and so
(by that means) alienate and estrange himself from his God; but that he should
always bear in remembrance, how many at all times in Kings Courts have been
pressed, yea, with lies, detractions, and envy oppressed, and that much sorrow
is sheltred and hid under that glorious misery; and indeed who can term it
otherwise than a glorious misery, when a man shall so live, and in such a
place, where (for the most part) he is still subject either to the danger of
other men's malice and hatred These are not only the conditions of Courtiers,
but of this age in general.
or else himself to have others in hatred and detestation; where a man in
outward show of reverence, with cap and knee makes bare his head to him; whose
head (in his heart) he desires, were smitten off; Others again to be seen to
bow themselves low, and even make a leg to him, in the working of whose
destruction, they could be better content to break their leg.

Again, is it not a thing much to be lamented, to see men daily to frequent
each others company, to laugh and rejoice together; and yet all this while to
foster within their breasts most cruel and capital enmity and hatred each
against other* Is it not intolerable, yea, incredible dissimulation, that a
man should i^ his heart bid a mischi^fe go with him, to whom he outwardly
^alneth much worship and reverence. O misery (I say not now) glorious, but most
gross and gri^^ous, yea, most vnbefitt^^^ an (...) and generous Nobleman.

These things (kind Courtier) are most true, nor yet do I fly from the
judgment and censure, which I know you your selves may urge and infer
herein. But this we must hold and be assured of, as an infallible truth, that
neither the Courtier nor any what so (...) he be, may well leave of to
complain of himself, until such (...) as ^^ does begin to amend himself;
For, certainly as it is a great folly, and mere madness, F^r^^m, qui intra
(...) delitescit, extra ^andem (...) and perfequl, Without (...) to (...)
pursue the Th^^ft, which (...), and is close hid i^ (...) of the house: so it
is a manifest token of great want of experience in us, that when we see our
selves ^^ ^^ult, we blush not, nor are a jot ashamed to lay it upon others, and
to justify our selves.

To ^^ke it appear yet more plain by example* how Every man is the cause of
his own misery.
comes it to pass, that we so travail up and down, both at home and abroad,
that we so pine, pinch, and punish our selves, that we so often break our
sleep by rising up early, and going late to bed, what necessity urges, or
constraines ^s hereunto, but an insatiate desire to satisfy our un-bridled
lusts? who I pray makes us so proud, but even our own madness? Who is it that
fetters our (...) in the gyues and shackles of envy and malice, but our own
natural defects? Who is it, that (as it were) enflames and kindles the fire of
wrath and fury, in all our inward parts, but our own impotence and impatiencie.

In brief, that I may abstract abreuia^ and epitomize the subject and
argument, of this whole treatise into the narrow lists and limits of one line:
Let the Courtier hereof be most wary and heedfull, that out of himself he
draw a rule to rectify and govern his own life, that he be content to
taste the sower with the sweet; and in Court to expect as well, burthen-some
blame and injury; as beautiful fame and dignity, yea let him know and know
assuredly, that he which enters into the Court, enters into such a kind of life
as comprehends much more labor and care, than ease and quietness.

Finally, let him thus conclude, that our whole life does ouerflow and abound
with various, yea great and greuious cares, affairs and emploiments, from
which that the Courtier may at last be set at liberty, let him accept and make
use of this my counsel, if at least which I hope it may prove honest and
wholesome unto him.

When soever he determines to bid farewell, and to Wholesome admonition. for
every Courtier.
take his Vltimum vale of the Court, let him be wholly exercised and employed in
pious readings, and divine meditations; with a constant and courageous mind,
let him deride and laugh to scorn the vanities of this world, and send back
this news to hope and fortune it self; and having once found the haven of
rest and quietness, let him with a free heart and a cheerful voice say,

Iuuem portum spes and fortuna valete,
Nil mihi v^biscum est, ludite nunc alias.
My hauen's found; Fortuen and Hope* adieu;
Mock others now* for ^ have done with you,
And truly since it is so excessive hard for any man to carry and demean
himself in every kind of life so, as that he (...) in any thing: therefore
(kind Courti^^) recei^^ these other most short remedies herein. First th^^ be
thou (...) of firmly assured that then thou have found out wisdom, When thou
d^st truly lament thine own evils past; do wisele vilipe^d all seeming good
things St. Barnard.
presant, and do heartily (...) and desire the best things to come. Also if
thine affections and desires be truly settled and fixed them, where our head and
heavenly King our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, does rule and reign in
blissful eternity. If then (kind and courteous Courtier) thou be of this mind
and blessed resolution, thou shall easily and truly understand, that it is not
the safest way, to rely and only to trust to the world or any Princes palace.
For, the world passes away, and all the pleasures thereof, but he which does
the will of the Lord, he shall endure for ever. Be advised then, ^o be
advised (good Courtier) I exhort the^, which shortly do desire to relinquish
and forsake this sickle* frail, and impure Court on earth, and to be thence
(...)stated and transported into the eternal most pure and perfect Court of
Heaven. Hold fast this resolution* (...) by ways, obstacles, obstructions,
and impediments; hinder or with hold thy progress, and constant proceeding in
this right rhode, and Kings highway; nor let any thing reduce, or seduce thee,
from that life to come, in which, is that day which admits no night and out
lasts all eternity of time. Now that thou may elect and make choice of a holy
and happy course of life, consider with thy self, What thou now art; whence
and for what cause thou art, and then thou shall find, that oblivion was our
first original, our middle being is labor, and our end is sorrow? And what
are all these being knit and conioyn'd together, assuredly nothing else than
most apparent and manifest Error. What needs many words, man's whole life is
spent and past over, in hoping well and having ill. Now therefore (courteous
Courtier) here will I conclude with these three brief The conclusion of all
with three brief notes.
observations, which I desire thou would always keep in perpetual
remembrance, and in Court always bear about thee; namely, that in Heaven
above, there is an Ear which ouer-heares thee; an Eye which ouer-sees thee;
and a book whereinto all thy words and deeds are most curiously, and carefully
written.

THese are the things (thrice Noble and Renowned MAR^QVESSE) which I have
humbly presumed, and thought good to deliver and set forth in writing, touching
the life of a Courtier, which I have especially done for the honor of the
Court of the most magnificent JAMES, King of great Britain, etc. Indeed I know
and do ingenuously agnize, that I have omitted above a thousand things, which
might worthily have been expressed, concerning the dignity, honor, and
gravity of this argument; yet howsoever, hereof I am most confidently
persuaded and assured, that I have herein accomplished and collected those
things which may in some measure, delineate and display the life, manners, and
demeanours, yea, the lively image, similitude, and portrature of a Court and
Courtier. And I hope, not altogether obscurely demonstrated to every Courtier,
what he is to follow and embrace, what to fly and utterly contemn. And
unless I be most grossly and palpably deceived, the Courtier, if he do not
unkindly neglect and reject these rules, precepts, and prescriptions, but
brings them to practicke proof and trial, by daily custom and exercise;
shall have some matters objected to the eyes of his understanding, wherein, as
in a mirror or looking-glass, ^ (...), (...) of all (...) intended ^^ the
Court of our most (...) and (...) KING, I here (...) deuote vows, and (...)
prayers* most heartily wishing and desiring that his Palace and Princely
Family, may ^euer be desolate, destitute, or distressed, but that he may
always have, such, to love him, and to (...) with him, as may ever be
assistant to him; with their loyalty, comfort, and good Counsel: Yea, that he
may ever have about him, such cons^i^^able C^ad^^t^rs, as Iethro advised Moses
his so^^e i^ (...) to ioy^^ unto him, in his counsels and consultations,
namely, Men of approved integrity, wise, fearing God, speaking the truth, pure
and vncorrupt^d. Such Courtiers and Counselors I say do I heartily desire,
may always happily attend in our most gracious, and sacred Sovereign, who
will honestly prefer a Public* before a pri(...) Good, who had rather
religiously to enjoy a mean estate, than to relinquish or forsake virtue and
honesty, which are not inclined, nor addicted to lust and volupt^^^s* (...)
and which can be content to put up a private displeasure, but are most r^^die
pressed to punish a public injury. And finally such ^^ are not selfe-fla^ed, or
affected with insolent (...) disloyalty, and covetousness. Which that the
great King of Kings, the eternal Lord of H^^sts, would graciously (...) to
confirm and ratify, I h^^bly pray, and most h^rtily desire.

FINIS.

