ARTICLES to be inquired of, by the reverend Father in God, Richard by Gods
providence Bishop of Elye, For the Churchwardens and Inquirers of every
several Parish within his Diocese, in his visitation, holden in the year
of our Lord GOD, 1573.

PRINTED AT LONDON, by Henry Bynneman, for Humfrey Toy.

To the Persons, Vicars, and Curates, Churchwardens, and Inquirers, within the
Diocese of Ely.
FOr as much as in my former Visitations, I delivered out certain Injunctions,
as well unto you of the Clergy, as unto the Churchwardens, and other sworn
men, to be diligently observed and kept: it shall not be needful to repeat
and inioyne the same again. In case any new matter of disorder may appear
unto you, by the inquiry of my Articles, ye shall do well and duetifully to
receive and take the true sense, and meaning of the said Articles, to be in
place and stead of Injunctions, both unto the Clergy, and also to the
Laytie, as we use to call them. Which Articles, by the way of questions, I
thought good to mynister unto you, to the intent both that ye may by the help
of them more easily find out, and declare all the disorders which are used in
your Paryshes, to the evil example of others, and to the high dishonor of
Almighty God. And that also by your faithful information upon your oaths, I
may be the better able to redress all disorders and faults, to the edifying
of the people in your parysh, and to the glory of the Almighty and
everlasting God. These Articles ye Churchwardens must diligently examine, and
truly answer to every Article according to your oaths:

IN primis whether your Person or Vicar, do preach against the usurped power
of the Bishop of Rome, and his romish doctrine and errors, according to the
Queen's Majesty's Injunctions.

2 Item whether he read twice in the year, the confession concerning the
principal articles of Religion set forth by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
other Bishops.

3 Item whether you have one Sermon every quarter at the least, in your parish
Church.

4 Item whether there be any Monuments of superstition remaining, as Images,
Crosses, holy water stocks, Roodeloftes, and such like.

5 Item whether there be any in your parish that speaks against any point
of Religion, now establyshed in this Realm, or any that be despisers,
mockers, or gainesayers of Preachers and Ministers doing their duties.

6 Item whether there be any known Papists, or any receyuers of such as do
not consent to the Queen her Majesty's Supremacy.

7 Item whether your Chancell, Church, and Churchyard be in good and
sufficient reparatio^.

8 Item whether your Person or Vicar have more benefices than one, and whether
your Curate serve more cures than one.

9 Item whether your Curate read distinctly, so that he may be heard and
understood of the parishioners, and whether he has special License under
the Ordinaries Seal.

10 Item whether your Curate read an Homely, when there is no Sermon.

11 Item whether the Churchwardens do collect and take, of those that do not
come to church upon the Sundays and Holidayes, the forfetures of twelve pens,
to the use of the poor, for every time that they be so absent without just
cause.

12 Item whether a Certificat be made at the least every quarter, of all
swearers, blasphemers of Gods holy name, Drunkardes, Adulterers, incestuous
persons, Fornicators, Rybaudes, Baudes, or receivers of such inconvenient
people and of strange women with child, whose husbands are unknown, or any
persons that are vehemently suspected of such faults, and al sowers of discord
between neighbors within your paryshe.

13 Item whether the Statute of the provision for the poor be duly observed
and kept: if not, in whom the fault is, and whether any refuse to contribute
to the relief of the poor.

14 Item whether there be any that do stubbornely contemn, or despise the
order of Admynistration of the holy Sacraments, set forth in the English
tongue, or have not received, or do obstinately refuse to receive the holy
Communion at the least three times in the year.

15 Item whether there be any cloth hanged on the wall, where the high alter
stood, and the table often commandments fixed to the same.

16 Item whether your Person, Vicar or Curate, say or sing his service, in such
decent vesture as is prescribed by public authority.

17 Item whether any of your Parish after that he be excommunicated, do at
any time resort to the Church, at Divine service, not being absolved and
restored to the Church again, and whether any of your Parish keep any such
excommunicated person company.

18 Item whether the Children be instructed in the English Cathechisme, lastly
set forth by authority, every Sundaye and Holydaye, before Evening prayer,
by the space of one whole hour, and if they be not, whether the fault be in
the Parents and Masters of the Children, or in the Curate neglecting his
duty.

19 Ite^ whether there be admitted to the receiving of the Communion, any
notorious sinners within your parish, without open reconciliation and
declaration of repentance for the same offense.

20 Item whether the Queens Majesty's Injunctions be read quarterly, by the
Person, Vicar or Curate.

21 Item whether any of your Paryshiones walk, talk, or otherwise
irreverently beehaue themselves in the Church, or use any gaming abroad, or
in any house, or sit in the streates, or Churchyardes, or any Tavern or
Alehouse upon the Sundays or Holidays, in time of Common prayer, service,
Preaching, or reading of the Homelies: or whether any Inkeepers, Alewiues,
Victualers, or Typlers do suffer them.

22 Item whether any Butchers, Bruers, Shomakers, or others, use to bring,
carry, or sell any such things upon Sundays or Holydays, in the time of Common
prayer, Sermon or reading of Homelies, and whether any other artificer does
utter any wares or Merchandise in the like times.

23 Item whether the Churchwardens, do see the names of all Preachers that
preach in their parysh Churches, to be noted in a book for that purpose, and
whether every Preacher do subscribe his name, and of whom he had his License.

24 Item whether any man trouble or moleste the Churchwardens for doing their
duties.

25 Ite^ whether the Churchwardens be chosen by the consent of the Person,
Vicar, or Curat, without whose consent they may not be chosen.

26 Item whether the Churchwardens have provided these books following, that
is to say, the English Bible in a great volume, the book of service, the books
of Homelies, with the Homely against rebellion, books of Psalms, the book of
holy Articles, with Canons and rules of discipline in English, the book of
the Queens Majesty's Injunctions, the book of aduertisements, the table of
degrees of Matrimony, the ten Commandments, and the Bishops Injunctions,
the books of peculiar prayer set forth at any time, at the costs and charges
of the Parishioners.

27 Item whether the Paraphrases of Erasmus, or else the exposition of Master
Musculus upon the Gospel of Saint Mathewe, be had and provided, at the
charges of the Parish and Parson, or Proprietarie, equally borne between them.

28 Ite^ whether the Quire be cumly and orderly kept* whether they have a fair
and cumly Table, of two yeardes and a half (if the Quire will serve) for the
Communion, with a fair linen cloth to lay upon the same, and some covering of
Silk, Buckram, or such like, for the clean keeping thereof.

29 Item whether there be any within your Parish that does administer upon
the goods of any deceased, without authority from the Ordinary, whereby the
Infantes and Creditors, commonly be defrauded of their duties.

30 Item whether the Person, Vicar, or Curate, does use any other service, than
by public authority is set forth, or alter or change the service of the
book of Common prayer, or any part thereof otherwise than it is set forth.

31 Item whether the Person or Vicar has made a terrey of their glebe Lands,
Pastures, Meadows, Closes, or Gardens, belonging unto their benefice, by the
chief of their Parish, and whether they have presented the said terrey,
accordingly unto their Ordiuarie.

32 Item whether the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, has yearly before the.xx. day
after Easter, exhibited to the Bishop, or his officers, the names and surnames
of such persons in their Parish, being.xiiij. years of age, and upward,
which receive not the holy Communion. And such also as refuse to be examined
by the Minister of the Church, in the Cathechisme.

33 Item, whether any be admitted by his person, vicar, or Curate, to be
godfathers, and godmothers, unless they have received the communion, or can
say the Cathechisme.

34 Item whether you know any person by preaching, or in word by talk,
maynteyning any doctrine against the word of God, or against the godly
articles, or against the book of service confirmed by full authority of the
Church of England, and of the whole Realm.

35 Item whether any thing which has been complained of, is not yet redressed.

36 Item whether any in your Paryshe do deprave or disprayse the book of Common
prayer, in any part (set forth by authritie of Parliament) or speak against
the Homelies, or do mayntaine or hold any erroneous opinions, contrary to the
word of God, and the Laws of the Realm.

37 Item whether there has been any fraye made in your Churches, or
Churchyards, to the disturbance of Gods service, or to the evil example of the
rest of the Paryshe, and if there has been, the^ you shall present by whom it
was made, when, and after what sort.

38 Item whether there be any Scholemaster within your paryshe that does teach
any Grammar schole, either privately, or openly, whether they be licenced so to
teach, how long they have taught, and what their names be.

39 Item whether there be any Legacies withholden, given to the Church or
poor people, or mending of high ways, or otherwise by the Testators. In whose
hands it is, by whom it is given, and by whom it is withholden.

40 Item whether your Churchwardens do truly Administer the goods of the
Church, and in the presence of the Minister, make a true account of their
office yearly, and at the end of their accounte deliver up the money, and
choose new Churchwardens once every year.

41 Item whether any man have put away his wife, or any wife absente hirselfe
from her husband without just cause or without authority from their
Ordinary, or any that has married within the degrees prohibited by the
Leuiticall and other Laws within this Realm, set forth in that behalf.

42 Item whether there be any convenient and strong Chest, for the poor man's
Box.

43 Ite^ whether your Person or Vicar, or Curate, do minister the holy
communion to any foreiner, or stranger, coming out of any other Diocese,
without the special License of the Bishop, or his officers, or the minister of
that place from whence the said Foreiner or stranger does come.

44 Item whether every Month your Person, Vicar, or Curate, do read openly
in the Churcht, the Proclamation set out of late by the Queens Majesty, for
the calling in of seditious Books, as Hardings, Saunders, and such like, to
be delivered to the Ordinary, according to the tenor and meaning of the said
Proclamation, which Proclamation is to be had at the costs and charges of
the paryshe.

45 Item whether they do exercise themselves in godly study of holy
Scriptures, and in virtuous bringing up of youth, as in teaching of them their
Cathechisme, and other Godly exercises from time to time.

46 Item whether decently, and orderly they go in their apparel, according to
the Book of Aduertisements, lately set forth in that behalf.

47 Item whether they be resident upon their Benefices, and maintain
Hospitality to their ability. And whether their Personage houses, and
Vicarage houses with other the edifices, and houses of easements thereunto
belonging and appertayning, be in good and sufficient reparations, and if they
be not resident, whether they let their Benefices to ferme to their Curates
according to the Statute.

48 Item whether they use to pray for the Queen her Majesty in their
Churches, and exhort the people to obedience of her grace, and other
Magistrates being in authority under her.

49 Item whether your Persons, Vicars, or Curates be married or no, and if they
be not, whether they keep in their houses any suspected women, under the name
and color of their Butlers, kinswomen, or otherwise.

50 Item whether they observe and keep the order for the bringing of the Corse
to the burial, according to the Book.

51 Item whether they do visit the sick and impotent persons, to comfort
them in the time of their sickness with necessary doctrine out of holy
Scriptures, necessary for that purpose, in exhorting them also to consider the
poor, and other charitable deeds.

52 Item whether your Person or Vicar bought his benefice, or else came to the
same, and obtained it by fraud, guile, Simonie, or by any other unlawful
means.

53 Item whether your Person, Vicar, or Curate, do expound the Scriptures, as
the Lessons, Epistle and Gospel, after they have read them in the Church, or
Homelies in reading of them, without especial License.

54 Item whether the book, or Register wherein the Day, Month, and Year, of
every wedding, Christening, and Burying is, or ought to be written and noted,
be well and diligently kept.

55 Item whether you have at the common charge of the Paryshioners, a cumly and
convenient Pulpit, set and placed in a fit place within your Church, and the
same cleanly and semely kept for the preaching of Gods word.

56 Item whether your Person, Vicar or Curate, were made Priests in the Reign
of King Henry the eight, or Queen Marie. And if he were, then whether he
has read openly in your Paryshe Church, the Articles of Religion, accordying
too the Statute in that behalf lately made.

57 Item to inquire of what value the Vicarage is, if there be any Vicarage in
your Parish, and who is the Patron and giver thereof. And if there be a
Curate, what wages he has, and who does pay it.

FINIS.

