Articles to be enquired of, within the Province of Canterbury, in the
Metropoliticall visitation of the most reverend father in God, Edmond
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan.

In the xxii. year of the reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc.



Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

1580.

Articles to be enquired of, within the Province of Canterbury, etc.
WHether Common prayer be sung or said, by your Person, Uicar, or Curate in
your several Churches or Chapels, distinctly and reverently, and in such
order as it is set forth by the laws of this Realm, without any kind of
alteration, and at due and convenient hours? and whether your Minister so
turn himself, and stand in such place of your Church or Chauncel, as the
people may best hear the same? And whether the holy Sacraments be likewise
ministered reverently in such manner, as by the Laws of this Realm is
appointed? and whether upon Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, not being holidays, the
Letanie and other prayers appointed for the day, be said accordingly?

2 Whether you have in your parish Churches and Chapels, all things necessary
and requisite for common prayer, and administration of the Sacraments,
specially the Book of Common prayer with the new Calendar, a Psalter, the
English Bible in the largest volume, the two Tomes of the Homilies, the
Paraphrases of Erasmus translated into English, the table of the ten
commandments, a convenient Pulpit well placed, a comely and decent table,
standing on a frame, for the holy Communion, with a fair linen cloth to lay
upon the same, and some covering of Silk, Buckram, or other such like, for the
clean keeping thereof, a fair and comely Communion cup of silver, and a cover
of silver for the same, which may serve also for the ministration of the
communion bread, a decent large surplesse with sleeves, a sure Cofer with two
locks and keys for the keeping of the Register book, and a strong chest or
box for the almose of the poor, with three locks and keys to the same, and
all other things necessary in and to the premises?

3 Whether the form of commination against sinners, with certain prayers
following the same, set forth in the latter end of the book of common prayer,
to be used at diverse times in ye year, be by your Minister plainly and
distinctly read in your Church or Chapel unto the people, between the
Letany, and the commemoration or ministration of the holy communion, three
times at the least in the year, that is to say for order sake, yearly upon one
of the three Sundays next before Easter, for the first time: upon one of the
two Sundays next before the feast of Pentecost for the second time: And for ye
third time, upon one of the two Sundays next before the feast of the birth of
our Lord, over and besides the accustomed reading thereof upon the first day
of Lent?

4 Whether in your Churches and Chapels, all Altars be utterly taken down and
clean removed, even unto the foundation, and the place where they stood,
paued, and the wall whereunto they joined, whited over, and made uniform with
the rest, so as no breach or rupture appear? And whether your Roodlofts be
taken down, and altered so, that the upper parts thereof with the soller or
loft be quite taken down unto the cross beam, and that the said beam have
some convenient creast put upon the same?

5 Whether your Churches and Chapels with the Chauncels thereof be well and
sufficiently repaired, and kept without abuse of any thing? And whether your
Churchyardes be well fenced, and clenly kept? And if any part thereof be in
decay, through whose default it is so?

6 Whether all and every Antiphoners, Mass books, Grailes, Portesses,
Processionals, Manualles, Legendaries, and all other books of late belonging
to your Church or Chapel, which served for the superstitious Latin service,
be utterly defaced, rent, and abolished? And if they be not, through whose
default that is, and in whose keeping they remain? And whether all Uestments,
Albes, Tunicles, Stoles, Phanons, Pixes, Paxes, Handbelles, Sacringbelles,
Censers, Chrismatories, Crosses, Ca^dlestickes, Holy water stocks, Images, and
such other relics and monuments of superstition and Idolatry be utterly
defaced, broken, and destroyed? And if not, where, and in whose custody they
remain?

7 Whether your Person, Uicar, Curat, or minister, do we are any cope in your
Parish Church or Chapel, or minister the holy Communion in any Chalice
heretofore used at Mass, or in any profane Cup or glass, or use at the
ministration thereof any gestures, rites, or ceremonies, not appointed by ye
book of Common prayer, as crossing or breathing over the sacramental bread,
and wine, or showing the same to the people to be worshipped and adored, or any
such like, or use any Oil and Chrisme, Tapers, spattle, or any other Popish
ceremony in the ministration of the Sacrament of Baptism?

8 Whether any holidays or fasting days heretofore abrogated, or not
appointed to be used as holy days, or fasting days, by the new Calendar of
the book of Common prayer, be either proclaimed and bidden by your Person,
Uicar, or Curate, or be supersticiously observed by any of your parish, and
what be their names that so do observe the same? and whether there be any
ringing or tolling of Belles to call the people together used in any of those
days, more or otherwise, than commonly is used upon other days that be kept
as workedayes?

9 Whether, when any man or woman is in passing out of this life, the Bell be
tolled, to move the people to pray for the sick person, especially in all
places, where the sick person dwells near unto the Church? and whether
after the time of his or her passing out of this world, there be any more
ringing but one short peale before the burial, and another short peale after ye
burial, without any other superfluous or supersticious ringing? And whether on
all Saints day after Evening prayer, there be any ringing at all, or any other
supersticious ceremony used, tending to the maintenance of Popish purgatory,
or of prayer for the dead, and who they be that use the same? And whether there
be any ringing or knolling of belles on Sundays or holidays, between morning
prayer and the Letanie, or in any time of the common prayer, reading of the
Homilies, or of preaching, except one bell in convenient time to be rung or
tolled before the Sermon, or any other ringing used upon Saints eeues or
festival days, saving to common prayer, and that without excess, and who
does ring or knoll otherwise?

10 Whether your Person or Uicar, have preached, or cause to be duly preached
in your Church, his quarterly or monthly Sermons, as by the Queens
Injunctions he is bound, and what be the names of such as have preached for
him? and whether he has admitted any man to preach, not having sufficient
license, or has inhibited or let any from preaching, having sufficient
license?

11 Whether any person or persons, not being ordered at the least for a Deacon,
or licenced by the ordinary, do say common prayer openly in your Church or
Chapel, or any not being at the least a Deacon, do solemnize matrimony, or
administer the Sacrament of Baptism, or deliver unto the Communicants the
Lords Cup, at the celebration of the holy Communion, and what he, or they be,
that so do? And whether the Person, Uicar, or Fermer of your benefice, do
cause, or suffer any Curate or Minister to serve your Church, before he be
examined and admitted by the Ordinary, or his Deputy in writing, and do show
his license to the Churchwardens? and whether any Curate do serve two Cures at
one time, without the special license of the Ordinary, or his Deputy in that
behalf, in writing first had?

12 Whether your Person, Uicar, or Curate, do every Sunday when there is no
sermon, read distinctly and plainly some part of the Homilies prescribed and
set forth by the Queens authority to be read, and every holyday, when there
is no sermon, immediately after the Gospel, openly, plainly, and distinctly
recite to his parishioners, the Lords prayer, the Articles of the faith, and
the ten Commandementes in English? and whether any Minister not admitted by the
Ordinary, or by other lawful authority, do expound any Scripture, or matter
of doctrine, by the way of exhortation, or otherwise, and thereby omit and
leave of the reading of the Homilies?

13 Whether your Person, Uicar, or Curate do every Sunday and holiday openly in
the Church, call for, hear, and instruct all the Children, Apprentices, and
servants of both sexes, that be of convenient age within your parish, or at
the least so many of them by course, as the tune will serve, and as he may well
hear and instruct for half an hour at the least, before or at the evening
prayer, in the ten Commandments, the Articles of the belief, and the Lords
prayer, and diligently examine and teach them the Catechism, as it is now
allowed, and set forth? And whether for that purpose, he does take the names of
them al, and by course call certain of them by name every Sunday and holiday,
to come to the teaching of the same Catechism?

14 Whether all fathers and mothers, masters, and dames of your parish, cause
their children, servants, and apprentices, both mankind and womankinde being
above seven years of age, and under twenty, which have not learned the
Catechism, to come to the Church on Sundays and holidayes, at the times
appointed, or at the least such and so many of them, as your Minister shall
appoint, and there diligently and obediently to hear and to be ordered by the
Minister, until such time as they have learned the same Catechism, and what
be the names of those that do not cause their children, servants, and
apprentices, so to come to the Church, to be instructed and examined, and how
many of the said children, servants, and apprentices be in your parish, which
being above seven years old, and under twenty years of age, can not say by
heart the said Catechism, and what be their names and age, and with whom they
dwell?

15 Whether your Person, Uicar, Curate, or other Minister in your Church or
Chapel, has admitted to the receiving of the holy Communion, any open and
notorious fornicatour, adulterer, or evil liver, by whom the congregation is
offended, without due penance first done, to the satisfaction of the
congregation, or any malicious person yt is notoriously known to be out of
charity, or that has done any open wrong to his neighbor by word or deed,
without due reconciliation first made to the party that is wronged?

16 Whether your Person, Uicar, Curate, or Minister, has admitted to the holy
Communion any of his Parish, being above twenty years of age, either mankind
or womankinde, that cannot say by heart the ten Commandments, the Articles
of the faith, and the Lords prayer in English, and what be the names of such as
can not say the same, or being above fourteen years, and under twenty years
of age, that cannot say the Catechism, allowed and set forth in the said book
of Common prayer? And whether he marry any persons which were single before
that cannot say the Catechism? And whether he uses to examine his
parishioners at convenient times before he administer unto them, and namely
before Easter yearly, to the intent he may know whether they can say by heart
the same, which is required in this behalf, or no?

17 Whether your Priests and Ministers be peacemakers, and no brawlers, or
sowers of discord, and exhort their parishioners to obedience toward their
Prince, and all other, that be in authority, and to charity and mutual love
among themselves? whether they be diligent in visiting the sick, and comforting
them, and do move them earnestly, especially when they make their Testaments,
to consider the necessity of the poor, and to give to their box or chest
their charitable devotion and almose?

18 Whether they neglect the study of the holy Scriptures and of the word of
God? and whether such of them as be under the degree of a Master of Art, have
of their own, at the least the new Testament both in English and Latin? and
whether they do every day with good aduisement confer one Chapter of the
Latin and English together at the least? And whether they have given due
account thereof, and to whom?

19 Whether any of your persons, vicars, curates, or ministers be favorers of
the Romish or forreyne power, letters of true religion, preachers of corrupt
and Popish doctrine, or mainteiners of secraries, or do set forth and extol
vain and supersticious religion, or be maintainers of the unlearned people in
ignorance and error, encouraging or moving them rather to pray in an unknown
tongue, then in English, or to put their trust in a certain number of prayers,
as in saying over a number of beads, Lady Psalters, or other like?

20 Whether any do preach, declare, or speak any thing in derogation of the
book of common prayer, which is set forth by the laws of this Realm,
dispraysing the same, or any thing therein contained?

21 Whether your Person, Uicar, or Curate, has or does maintain any doctrine
contrary or repugnant to any of the Articles agreed upon by the Clergy in the
Connocation holde^ at London Anno domini. 1562. for the avoiding of diversities
of opinions, and for establishme^t of consent touching true religion, set forth
by the Queens authority? and whether any having bin admitted to his benefice
since the thirtenth year of the Queens reign, has not within two months
after his induction, publicly read the said Articles in your Church in the
time of Common prayer there, with declaration of his unfeigned assent thereunto?

22 Whether your person, vicar, curate, minister, or reader, do church any
unmarried woman, which has been gotten with child out of lawful marriage, and
say for her the form of thanksgiving of women after childbirth, except such an
unmarried woman have either before her childbirth, done due penance for her
fault to the satisfaction of the congregation* or at her coming to give
thanks, do openly acknowledge her fault before the congregation, at ye
appointment of the Minister, according to order prescribed to the said
Minister, by the Ordinary or his Deputy, the same churching to be had always
on some Sunday or holyday, and upon none other day?

23 Whether any of your Persons, Uicars, Curates, or Ministers, or any other
Priest, or any lay man or woman, do wilfully maintain, or defend any
heresies, false opinions, or popish errors, contrary to the laws of
almighty God, and true doctrine, by public authority in this realm now set
forth, and what be their names? And whether any keep any secret
conuenticles, preachings, lectures, or readings contrary to the law? and what
be their names?

24 Whether there be any in your parish that openly or privately say Mass,
or hear Mass, or any other kind of service or prayer, then is set forth by
the laws of this Realm?

25 Whether any popish Priests, either going as Priests, or disguised in other
apparel, or altering their names for any cause, or any other, or runnagate
persons, mistikers, or deprauers of true religion, that do not minister or
frequent common prayer now used, nor communicate at times appointed by the
Law, do resort secretly or openly into your parish, and to whom, and of whom
be they received, harbored, and relieved, and what be their names and surnames,
or by what names are they called?

26 Whether your Persons and Uicars, be resident and dwell continually upon
their benefices, doing their duties in preaching, reading, and ministering the
Sacraments? and whether they keep Hospitality* according as their livings
will extend? And whether their houses and Chauncelles be well repaired and
vpholden?

27 Whether they or any of them have mo benefices then one, how many, and in
what countries they be, and what be ye names thereof?

28 Whether they, when they be absent from their benefices, do leave their
cures to a rude and unlearned person, and not to an honest, and well learned
expert Curate, which can and will teach the people wholesome doctrine? and
whether in their absence they do procure learned men to preach in their
Churches and cures, at least one sermon every quarter of a year?

29 Whether such persons and vicars as be not resident, neither keep
hospitality, do relieve their poor parishioners, and what give they yearly
to them? And if they be not resident, and may dispende yearly twenty pounds
or above, either in this diocese, or elsewhere: whether do they distribute
every year among their poor parishioners, at the least the fortieth part of
the fruits of their benefices, where they be not resident?

30 Whether your Persons, Uicars, Curates, and Ministers, keep well their
registers of all Weddings, Buryings, and Christenings within your parish, and
do present a copy of them once every year, by Indenture to the Ordinary, or
his officers? and whether they read the Queens Majesty's Injunctions every
quarter of a year once, or no?

31 Whether they, or any of them, keep any suspected women in their houses, or
be incontinent persons, given to drunkenness, idleness, or be haunters of
Tauernes, Alehouses, or suspected places: or be hunters, haukers, dicers,
carders, tablers, swearers, or otherwise suspected of any notorious crime, or
give any evil example of life? and whether they (as they ought to do) occupy
themselves in the reading, or hearing of some part of the holy Scripture, or
other good Author, or in some other godly or laudable exercise, meet for their
vocation?

32 Whether they, or any of them, do keep, or suffer to be kept in their
personage or vicarage houses, any alehouses, tippling houses, or tauernes, or
do sell Ale, Beer, Wine, or any victual?

33 Whether your Persons or Uicars have bought their benefices, or come to them
by Simonie, fraud, or deceyte, or by any colorable pact, or other unlawful
mean whatsoever, or be vehemently suspected or defamed thereof? And whether
they keep in their own hands, or have dimised, and let to ferme their
personages, and vicarages, or their glebe land, or tyches, or any part
thereof? and whether any such lease be made for the perfourmance of any
Simonicall pact, made directly or indirectly, between the Incumbent and the
Patron, or between the Incumbent and any other person, for the presenting of
the same Incumbent to that benefice?

34 Whether any Minister or Priest presented to any benefice in this diocese
has couenanted, promised or practiced to or with the Patron thereof, or any
other person or persons that had the aduousion or gift of the same benefice, or
with any other person or persons on his or their behalf, to give to him or his
friend, any sum of ready money, for presenting him to the same, or have
offered by promise or bond any lease, either of the whole benefice, limiting
the rent far under ye just value, or of the mansion house, Glebe lands, or
any portion of the tithes, and fruits of the same benefice, receiving little or
nothing therefore, or suffering the patron or any other person that presented
him, to have his own tithes within the benefice free unto himself, or else
have granted some yearly pension or other yearly commodity, to him, his
child, servant, or friend for preferring him to the same benefice, or
otherwise have suffered him to make a gain by any color, deceyte, or
Simoniacall pact in bestowing the said benefice?

35 Whether the Church of your parish be now vacant or destitute of an
Incumbent, or no, and if it be, how long it has been so, and who is the
Patron? and whether he suffers the benefice to lie vacant, and occupies the
glebe land, and takes the tithes and other fruits to himself, during the
time of the vacation: or who else occupies and takes the same?

36 Whether there be any lay or temporal man, not being within orders, or any
child that has, or enjoys any benefice or spiritual promotion?

37 Whether any Priest or Minister be come into this Dioces, out of any other
Dioces, to serve any cure here, without letters testimonial of the Ordinary,
from whence he came, under his autenticke seal and hand, to testify the cause
of his departing from thence, and of his behavior there?

38 Whether for the retaining of the perambulation of the circuit of your
parish, the person, vicar, or curate, churchwardens and certain of the
substantial men of the parish, in the days of the Rogations, commonly called
the gang days, walk the accustomed bounds of your parish, and whether in the
same perambulation and going about, the Curate do use any other rite or
ceremony, then to say or sing in English, the two Psalms beginning Benedic
anima mea domino, that is to say, the Ciii. Psalm, and the Ciiii. Psalm, and
such sentences of Scripture, as be appointed by the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions, with the Letanie, and Suffrages following the same, and reading
one Homily already devised and set forth for that purpose, without wearing any
surplesses, carrying of banners, or handbelles, or staying at Crosses, or any
such like popish ceremonies?

39 Whether the Parish clarke be appointed according to the ancient custom of
the parish? and whether he be not obedient to the Person, Uicar, or Curate,
especially in the time of celebration of divine service, or of the Sacraments,
or in any preparation thereunto? And whether he be able and ready to read ye
first Lesson, the Epistle, and the Psalms, with answer to the Suffrages as is
used? and whether he keep not the books, and ornaments of the Church fair
and clean, and cause the Church and Queere, the Communion Table, the Pulpit
and the Font to be made decent and clean, against service time, the Communion,
Sermon, and Baptism?

40 Whether there be any man or woman in your Parish that resorteth to any
popish priest for shrift or auricular confession, or any that within three
years now last past, has been reconciled unto the Pope, or to the Church of
Rome, or any that is reputed or suspected so to be? and whether there be any
that refuse to come to the Church to hear divine service, or to communicate
according to the order now established by public authority, and what be
their names?

41 Whether there be any person or persons, ecclesiastical or temporal within
your Parish, or elsewhere, within this Dioces, that of late have retained, or
kept in their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or deliver
to others any English books, set forth of late years at Louaine, or in any
other place beyond ye seas, by Harding, Dorman, Allen, Saunders, Stapleton,
Marshall, Bristow, or any of them, or by any other English papist, either
against the Queens Majesty's supremacy in matters ecclesiastical, or against
true religion, and catholic doctrine now received, and established by common
authority within this Realm, and what their names and surnames are?

42 Whether there be any in your parish, that uses to pray in English, or in
Latin upon Beads, or other such like thing, or upon any supersticious popish
primer, or other like book, and what be their names?

43 Whether the people of your parish, especially householders, having no
lawful excuse to be absent, do faithfully and diligently endeavor
themselves, to resort with their children, and servants, to their parish
Church or Chapel, on the holy days, and chiefly upon the Sundays to Morning
and Evening prayer, and upon reasonable let thereof to some usual place, where
common prayer is used, and then and there abide orderly and soberly, during the
time of common prayer, Homilies, Sermons, and other service of God there used,
reverently and devoutly giving themselves to the hearing thereof, and occupying
themselves at times convenient in private prayer? and who they be that either
negligently or wilfully absent themselves, or come very late to the Church upon
the Sundays especially, or that walk, talk, or otherwise irreverently behave
themselves in the Church, or use any gaming or pastime abroad, or in any
house, or sit in the Streets, or Churchyard, or in any Tavern or Alehouse,
upon the Sunday, or other holyday, in the time of common prayer, Sermons, or
reading of the Homilies, either before noone, or after noone?

44 Whether the forfeiture of twelve pence, for every such offense, appointed
by a statute made in ye first year of the Queens Majesty's reign, beleuied
and taken according to the same statute by the Churchwardens, of every person
that so offends, and by them be put to ye use of the poor of the parish, and
if it be not, by whose default it is not levied. And what particular sums of
money have been forfeyted that way, and by whom since the feast of Easter in
the year of our Lord 1575. until the day of giving up the presentment
concerning these Articles. And so from time to time, as the said Churchwardens
and swornemen shall be appointed to present in this behalf, and how much of such
forfeitures have been delivered to the use of the poor of the parish, and to
whom the same has been delivered?

45 Whether ye know any, that in the time of the reading of the Letanie, or of
any other part of the common prayer, or in the time of the Sermon, or of
reading the Homilies, or any part of the Scriptures to the parishioners, any
person have departed out of the Church without just and necessary cause, or
that disturbeth the Minister, or preacher any manner of ways in the time of
divine service or sermon? and whether any in contempt of their parish Church or
Minister, do resort to any other Church or no?

46 Whether there be any Inkeepers, Alewiues, Uittaylers, or Tiplers, that
suffer, or do admit any person or persons in their houses, to eat, drink, or
play at Cards, Tables, or such like games in the time of common prayer or
sermon, on the sundaies or holidayes? and whether there be any shoppes set open
on sundays or holidayes, or any Butchers or others, that commonly use to sell
meat, or other things, in the time of common prayer, preaching, or reading of
the Homilies? and whether in any Fayres or common Markets falling upon the
sunday, there be any showing of any wares before the Morning prayer be done?
and whether any Markets or selling of any wares be used or suffered in any
churchyardes?

47 Whether for the putting of the Churchwardens and Swornemen the better in
remembrance of their duty in observing and noting such as offend, in not
coming to divine service, your Minister or reader do openly every Sunday,
after he have read the second Lesson at morning and evening prayer, monish and
warn the Churchwardens and swornemen to look to their charge in this behalf,
and to observe who contrary to the said Statute offend in absenting
themselves negligently, or wilfully from their parish Church or Chapel, or
irreverently (as is aforesaid) use themselves in the time of divine service?

48 Whether the Churchwardens of the last year have given to the parish a
just account of the Church goods and rentes that were committed to their
charge, according unto the custom that has been aforetime used, and what
Church goods they or any other have sold, and to whom? and whether to the
profit of your Church or no? and what has been done with the money thereof
coming?

49 Whether the Churchwardens and sworn men of the last year, have of any
private corrupt affection concealed any crime, or other disorder in their time
done in your parish, and have not presented the same to the Bishop, Chancelour,
Archdeacon, Commissary, or such other as had authority to reform the same?
and whether they or any of them, at any such time as they should have been at
diume service on sundays or holidayes, and should there have observed others
that were absent, have bin away themselves at home, or in some tavern or
Alehouse, or else about some worldly business, or at Bowls, Cards, Tables, or
other gaming, without regard of their office and duty in that behalf?

50 Whether any man has pulled down or discovered any Church, Chauncell, or
Chapel, or any part of any of them, any church porche, Uestrie, or Steeple,
almosehouse, or such like, or have plucked down ye Belles, or have felled or
spoiled any wood or timber in any churchyard?

51 Whether your Hospitals, Spittles, and Almosehouses be well and godly used
according to the foundation and ancient ordinances of the same? whether there
be any other placed in them, then poor impotent and needy persons, that have
not wherewith, or whereby to live?

52 Whether any of your parish being of convenient age, have not received the
holy communion thrice this last year at the least, and namely at Easter last or
thereabouts for once, and what their names are? or receiving, have not
signified the same before to your person, vicar, or curate, that he might
conveniently examine them, or that have refused to come to him to be examined?

53 Whether there be any in your parish that has or does offend contrary to
the statute made in the xxxvii. year of the reign of King Henry the eight for
reformation of usury, and revived by an Act made in the xiii. year of the
reign of the Queens Majesty, what be the names of such offenders, and what
is the manner of their usury?

54 Whether there be any in your parish, that minister the goods of those that
be dead, without lawful authority, or any that suppress the last will of the
dead, or any executors, that have not fulfilled their testators will, specially
in paying of Legacies given to the Church, or to other good and godly uses, as
to the relief of poverty, to Orphans, poor scholars, poor maids
marriages, high ways, schools, and such like?

55 Whether there be any, which of late have bequeathed in their testaments,
any Jewels, plate, ornaments, cattle, or grain, or other moveable stocks,
annuities, or sums of money for the erection or finding of any obites,
diriges, trentales, torches, lights, tapers, lamps, or any such like use now
by law forbidden, which are not paid out of any lands, and whereunto the
Queens Majesty is not entytled by any Act of Parliament, and if there be any
such Legacy or appointment, what is the names of such testators, and of the
executors of their testaments, what is the quantity and quality of the gift,
and to what godly and lawful use is the same converted and employed?

56 Whether there be any money or stock appertayning to your parish Church or
chapel, or to the poor of your parish, in any man's hands that refuses or
deferreth to pay the same, or that uses fraud, deceit or delay to make any
account in the presence of the honest of the parish for the same? and whether
any such stock be decayed, by whose negligence, and in whose hands? and
whether the store of the poor men's box be openly and indifferently given
where need is, without partial affection?

57 Whether the schoolemasters which teach within your parish, either openly,
or privately in any Noble or Gentleman's house, or in any other place there, be
of good and sincere religion and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of youth? whether they be examined, allowed, and licenced by the
ordinary or his officer in that behalf? whether they teach ye Grammar set
forth by King Henry the eight of Noble memory, and none other? whether they
teach any thing contrary to the order of religion now established by public
authority? and whether they teach not their scholars the Catechism in Latin
lately set forth, and such sentences of Scripture as shall be most expedient and
meet to move them to the love and due reverence of Gods true religion, now
truly set forth by the Queens Majesty's authority, and to induce them to all
godliness and honest conversation, and what be the names and surnames of all
such schoolemasters and teachers of youth within your parish, as well of such
as teach publicly, as those that teach in the houses of Noble men, Gentlemen,
or other private men?

58 Whether there be any among you that use Sorcerie or Witchcraft, or that
be suspected of the same, and whether any use any charms or unlawful prayers,
or inuocations in Latin, or otherwise, and namely Midwiues in the time of
women's travel of child? and whether any do resort to any such for help or
counsel, and what be their names?

59 Whether there be among you any blasphemers of ye name of God, great or
often swearers, adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons, Bawdes or
receivers of naughty and incontinent persons, or harborers of women with
child which be unmarried, conueying or suffering them to go away before they
do any penance, or make satisfaction to the congregation, or any that be
vehemently suspected of such faults, or that be not of good name and fame
touching such crimes and faults, any drunkards, or ribalds, or any that be
malicious, contentious, or uncharitable persons, common slaunderers of their
neighbors, railers, scolders, or sowers of discord between neighbors?

60 Whether there be any in these parts, that have married within the degrees of
affinity or consanguinitie, by the laws of God forbidden, so set out for an
admonition, in a table now appointed to be affyxed in every parish church
within this Dioces, or any that being divorced or separated for the same, do
yet notwithstanding cohabite and keep company still together, or any that
being married without those degrees, have unlawfully forsaken their wives or
husbands, and married others. Any man that has two wives, or any woman that
has two husbands, any that being divorced or separated a sunder, have married
again. Any married, that have made precontracts. Any that have made privy or
secret contracts. Any that have married or contracted themselves without the
consent of their parents, tutors, or governors. Any that have married without
banes thrice solemnly asked. Any couples married, that live not together, but
slanderously live apart. Any that have married out of the parish Church where
they ought to have solemnized their marriage?

61 Whether the Minister and Churchwardens have suffered any lords of
Misserule, or Summer Lords or Ladies, or any disguised persons, or others in
Christmas, or at Maygames, or any Morris dauncers, or at any other times, to
come irreverently into the Church or Churchyard, and there to dance, or play
any unseemly parts, with scoffs, ieastes, wanton gestures, or ribalde talk,
namely in the time of common prayer. And what they be that commit such
disorder, or accompany or maintain them?

62 Whether the Archdeacon, Chauncelour, Commissarie, Official, or any other
using Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this Dioces, their Registrares, or
Arctuaries, Apparitors, or Summoners, have at any time wincked at and suffered
any adulteries, fornications, incests, or other faults and offenses, to pass
and remain unpunished, and uncorrected, for money, rewards, bribes, pleasure,
friendship, or any other partial or affectionate respect, or any of them have
been burdensome to any in this Dioces, by exacting or taking excessive fees,
excessive procurations, any rewards, or commodities, by the way of promotion,
gift, contribution, help, redemption of penance, omission of quarter Sermons,
obtaining of any benefices, or office, or any other like ways or means?

63 How many Adulteries, Incests, and Fornications, are notoriously known to
have been committed in your parish, since Easter 1579. How many offenders in
any such faults have been put to open penance, and openly corrected, and how
many have been winked at, and borne withal, or have fined and paid money to
the Archdeacon, Chauncelour, Commissarie, Official, or their deputies, or to
the Deanes, Registrares, or Summers, or any of them, for to escape open
punishment, and correction: and what their names and surnames be?

64 Whether the Deanes Rurals, and Sumners, or any of them do pay any annual
rent, fee, or pension for their offices, and what they pay, and to whom?

65 Generally whether there be among you, any notorious evil livers, or any
suspected of any notorious sin, fault, or crime, to the offense of Christian
people committed, any that stubburnly refuse to conform themselves to unity
and godly religion, now established by public authority, or any that bruteth
abroad rumors of the alteration of the same, or otherwise that disturbeth good
orders, and the quietness of Christ's Church, and the christian congregation?

The tenor of the oath, ministered to the Churchwardens and swornemen.
YE shall swear by Almighty God, that ye shall diligently consider all and
every the Articles given to you in charge, and make a true answer unto the
same in writing, presenting all and every such person and persons, dwelling
within your Parish, as have committed any offense or fault, or made any
default, mentioned in any of the same Articles, or which are vehemently
suspected or defamed of any such offense, fault or default, wherein ye shall
not present any person or persons, of any evil will, malice, or hatred,
contrary to the truth, nor shall for love, favor, meede, dread, or any
corrupt affection, spare to present any that be offenders, suspected or
defamed in any of these cases, but shall do uprightly, as men having the fear
of God before your eyes, and desirous to maintain virtue, and suppress vice.
So God help you.


