Articles to be enquired of within the Diocese of Chester, in the visitation
of the reverend father in GOD, William Bishop of Chester.

In the xxij year of the reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady
Elizabeth. etc.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

decorative border royal blazon with angel holding book and quill on one side
and eagle on the other side HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
depiction of woman with shield and flaming sword FIDES
depiction of woman holding sheep HVMILITAS
depiction of lion with wings and bull with wings

Articles.
Church and Churchyards.
FIrst, whether your Church, Chapel, or Chauncell be well and sufficiently
repaired, and clenly, kept, and the mansion house of your Parson or Vicar, with
the buildings thereunto belonging, likewise well and sufficiently repaired, and
your Churchyard well fensed, and clenly kept? And if any default be made in the
premises: or your said Church, Chapel, or Churchyard be abused or
profaned by any unlawful, or unseemly act, game, or exercise, as by Lords
of misrule, Summer lords, or ladies, Pipers, Rushebearers, Moricedancers,
Pedlers, Bearewardes, and such like. Then through whose default, and what be
the names of the offenders in that behalf.

Wax,
2 Whether any man has pulled down, or discovered any Church, Chauncell, or
Chapel, or any part of any of them, any church Porche, Vestry, or Steeple,
Almeshouse, Churchhouse, or such like, or have pulled down any belles, or have
felled or spoiled any wood, or timber in any churchyardes?

The benefice.
3 Whether your parish church be now vacant, or destitute of an incumbent, or
no? Whether any Chapel where divine service has accustomed to be said
usually, be without a Curate or no? And if they be, how long have they been so,
and who is the Patron, and who occupies the parsonage, or vicarage house with
the glebe land, and takes other the tithes and commodities belonging to the
same?

The parsonage
4 Whether any vitailing, tippling, or ale selling be kept, or used within the
mansion house of any parson or vicar.

Necessary ornaments.
5 Whether you have in your church or chapel all things necessary, and
requisite for common prayer and administration of the holy sacraments,
specially the book of common prayer with the new calendar, the Psalter, the
Bible of the largest volume, the Homilies, both first and second tome, Erasmus
Paraphrasis translated into English, or for want thereof, Marlorates exposition
upon S. Matthewes Gospel, A comely and decent table standing on a frame for
the Communion table, with a fair linen cloth to lay upon the same, and some
covering of silk, buckram or other such like for the clean keeping thereof; a
fair and comely communion cup of silver, and a cover of silver for the same,
a comely large surples with wide sleeves, A sure coffer with two locks and
keys for keeping of the Register book and all other things necessary for the
premises, with a comely pulpit conveniently placed, and also a chest or box
for the poor?

Altars defaced.
6 Whether in your churches and chapels all altars be utterly taken down and
clean removed even unto the foundation, and the place where they stood paued,
and the wall whereunto they joined whyted over, and made uniform with the
rest, so as no breach or rupture appear, And whether your Roode loftes be
taken down and altered, so that the upper parts thereof with the soller or
lofte be quite taken down unto the cross beam, and that the said beam have
some convenient creast put upon the same?

Implements unlawful.
7 Whether all and every Antiphoners, Mass books, Grailes, portesses,
processionals, manuals, legendaries, and all other books of late belonging to
your church or chapel, which served for the supersticious Latin service, be
utterly defaced, rent, and abolished, and if they be not, through whose default
that is, and in whose keeping they remain? And whether all vestimentes, albes,
tunicles, stoles, phanons, pixes, paxes, handbels, sacringbelles, censers,
chrismatories, crosses, candlestickes, holy waterstickes, Images, and such
other relics, and monuments of superstition and idolatry be utterly
defaced, broken and destroyed: And if not, where, and in whose custody they
remain?

Service.
8 Whether common prayer be used in your church or chapel upon Sondayes and
holy days at convenient hours, reverently, distinctly, and in such order
without any kind of alteration as is appointed by the book of common prayer,
and the laws of this Realm? And whether your Minister so turn him self and
stand in such place of your church or chauncell, as the people may best hear
the same? And whether your Parson or Vicar do once every quarter, at the least,
in his own proper person, say divine service, and administer the Sacraments,
wearing a surplesse according unto the Queens Injunctions and the laws of
this Realm? And whether the holy Sacraments be duly and reverently ministered
in such manner as is set forth by the same book? And whether your Minister at
al times upon Sundays and holy days, do we are in time of divine service and
administration of the Sacraments, the surplisse yea or no, or do suffer any
other to say the common prayer, or minister either of the Sacraments in your
Church, not wearing the same?

Preaching,
9 Whether your Parson or Vicar be a preacher allowed, and has preached, or
caused to be preached four sermons at the least every year in your church,
and what be the names of him or those that so did preach, and whether they
were lawfully licensed so to preach, if any other then your Parson or Vicar
did preach the same? And whether if there be no Sermon, your Minister do read
for the most part every sunday distinctly and plainly, some part of the
Homilies appointed to be read, and the Queens Injunctions every quarter of a
year or no?

Catechism
10 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do every Sundaye and holy day
openly in the Church, call for, hear, and instruct, all the children,
apprentises, and servants of both sexes that be of convenient age within your
parish, or at the least so many of them by course as the time will serve, and
as he may well hear and instruct for half an hour at the least, before or
at the evening prayer, in the ten Commandments, the Articles of the belief,
and the Lords prayer, and diligently examine and teach them the Catechism,
as it is now last allowed and set forth? And whether for that purpose does he
take the names of them all, and by course call certain of them by name every
sunday and holy day, to come to learn the same Catechism?

Superstition and innovation,
11 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or any other within your Parish, be
a favorer of the Romish church or religion, or has or does maintain or
teach and doctrine contrary or repugnant to any of the Articles agreed upon
by the Clergy in ye convocation holden at London, An. Dom. 1562. And whether
they have publicly or secretly taught and doctrine tending to the discredit
and dispraise either of the book of Common prayer, or of the Preachers and
Ministers of the word and sacraments, or of the received order for government
in the Church of England, or make any other Innovation? And whether they have
permitted any man so teaching or making such innouatio^? And whether any keep
and secret conuenticles, preachings, lectures, or readings, or private
Communions, contrary to the law, and what be their names?

Curate.
12 Whether any person or persons not being ordered at the least for a Deacon,
or licensed by the Ordinary, do say Common prayer openly in your Church or
Chapel, or any not being at the least a Deacon, do solemnize Matrimony or
administer the Sacraments, and what he or they be that so do? And whether the
Parson, Vicar, or Farmer of your benefice, do cause or suffer any Curate to
serve your Church before he be examined and admitted by the Ordinary or his
deputy in writing, and show the same to the Churchwardens.

Communion.
13 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate has admitted any to the receiving of
the holy Communion above xx. years of age that cannot say by heart the
Catechism, the Lords prayer, the Articles of the faith, and the ten
Commandments in English, or any above xiiii. years of age and under xx.
that cannot say the Catechism set forth in the book of common prayer, or
has admitted any of any other parish to receive the holy Communion without
reasonable cause or special license of their own minister? or whether has he
admitted to receive the holy Communion and open and notorious blasphemer,
fornicatour, adulterer, drunkard, or evil liver, by whom the Congregation is
offended, without dew penance first done to the satisfaction of the
congregation, or any malicious person yt is notoriously known to be out of
charity, or that has done any open wrong to his neighbor by word or deed,
without dew reconciliation first made to the party that is wronged?

Baptism.
14 Whether your Font be sweetly kept and renewed from time to time with clean
and fresh water, and whether any Minister leaving the use of the Font, do
Christen or Baptize in any basins or other profane vessels not customablie
used in the Church before time? Or whether your Minister do Baptize or Christen
any out of the face of the Church and Congregation, and at any other time then
upon Sundays or holy days without special cause, or without Godfathers and
Godmothers, and whether any person or persons be admitted to answer as
Godfathers or Godmothers at the Christening of any child, except he or she
have before received the holy Communion, and can say by heart the Articles of
the Christian faith, the ten Commandments of God, and the Lords prayer, and
will recite the same before the Minister if he or she be thereunto required?

Register of Christenings*
15 Whether the Register book of all Christenings, Marriages and Burials that
happen in your parish from time to time, be duly kept: and the same
Christeninges, Marriages, and Burials, entered into the same book by your
Minister according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions?

Marriage.
16 Whether your minister has married any persons privately in any house or
corner out of the Church or face of the Congregation, or the Banes not being
thrice solemnly on three Sundaies or holy days asked in the parish Church
where such persons dwelled, or any such person or persons married at any other
parish church or chapel? And whether your minister has married any Infantes,
or children under age, or any within the degrees prohibited by Gods laws and
the laws of this Realm, or any that has a husband or wife living, and if he
have done so, then who be the parties, and who were present at any such
marriage, and in what place was the same solemnized?

Churching (...) women.
17 Whether your Minister do Church any unmarried women, after they have been
delivered of their children begotten unlawfully, before they have acknowledged
their faults openly, according to the order prescribed by ye Ordinary or his
deputy?

Visitation of the sick and Burial.
18 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate be diligent in visiting the sick,
and comforting them, and do move them earnestly, especially when they make
their testaments, to consider the need of the poor, and to give to their box
or chest their charitable devotion? And whether they bury the dead without any
popish ceremonies or superstition in such Christian and comely manner as is
prescribed by the book of Common prayer?

Perambulation.
19 Whether for the reteining of the perambulation of the circuit of your
parish, the Minister and Clarke with the Churchwardens and certain of the
substanciall men of the parish, in the days of Rogacions, walk about your
parish according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions? And whether do they use
in such perambulation any banners, crosses, handbelles, or any such like popish
ceremonies, other then is prescribed and permitted by the book of common
prayer and the laws of this Realm?

Admonition to the Churchwardens.
20 Whether for ye putting of the churchwarde^s and sworneme^ the better in
remembrance of their duty in observing and noting such as offend in not
coming to divine service, your Minister or Reader do openly every Sunday,
after he have read the second lesson at morning and evening prayer, monish and
warn the Churchwardens and sworn men, to look to their charge in this
behalf, and to observe who contrary to the said statute offend in absenting
them selves negligently or wilfully from their parish Church or Chapel, or
irreverently as is aforesaid, use the^ selves in time of divine service?

Pluralities.
21 Whether has your Parson or Vicar any more benefices or spiritual promotions
then one, how many, and in what country be they, what are their names, and who
is the Patron of every of them?

Residence.
22 Whether is your Parson or Vicar resident, and dwelling upon his benefice or
no? if he be reside^t, whether does he keep the parsonage or vicarage with the
glebe and other his tithes and commodities in his own hands, or does he
demise the same or any part thereof to his Patron or any other person or
persons? what parcels are so demised, to whom, and for what rent? if he be not
resident, or absent above lxxx. days in the year, then whether does he demise
his benefice to his Curate? and if he be able to dispend xx. pound by year,
does he distribute the fourtieth part thereof yearly to the poor of the
parish or no?

Symonie.
23 Whether you Parsons or Vicars have come to their benefices by any Symonie,
fraud or deceipte, or by any conference or agreement of friends, or by any
other bond, compositio^ or agreement, or by any other colorable pact, or
unlawful mean whatsoever, or be vehemently suspected or defamed thereof? And
whether in performance of any such pact, covenant or promise, there has been
any bond or lease made between the Patron and Incumbent directly or
indirectly?

Suspected women.
24 Whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate, do keep any suspected woman in his
house, or be an incontinent person, given to drunkenness or idleness, or be a
haunter of Tauernes, Alehouses, or suspected places, a Hunter, Hauker, Dicer,
carder, Tabler, Swearer, or otherwise give any evil example of life? And
whether his apparel be comely and grave as becomes his calling and function?

Parish Clarke
25 Whether the Parish Clarke be appointed according to the ancient custom of
the parish? And whether he be not obedient to the Parson, Vicar, or Curate,
especially in the time of celebration of divine service, or of the Sacraments,
or in any preparation thereunto? And whether he be able and ready to read the
first Lesson, the Epistle, and the Psalms with answer to the suffragies as is
used, and whether he keep not the books and ornaments of the Church fair
and clean, and cause the church and quier, the Communion table, the Pulpit and
the Font, to be made decent and clean against the feruice time, the
Communion, Sermon, and Baptism?

Churchwardens.
26 Whether have your Churchwardens assisted your Minister in his office and
function from time to time, and whether have they done their diligence to bring
such into the Church as stand gazing and talking in the Churchyard, or frequent
and lurk in Alehouses or tippling houses in ye time of divine service, and
whether have they been careful and diligent to see good order and silence kept
in the Church during the time of Sermons and Service, and whether have they
diligently noted the names of all such parties every Sunday and holy day, as
have been absent from divine service at any time, and levied the forfaiture of
xii. pe^ce for every absence from common prayer, according to the statute, and
put the same to the use of the poor of the parish? And if they have offended
^n any of the premises, then how often have they so offended, and what be
their names, and what particular sums of money have been forfeited that way,
and by whom, since the last visitation, and how much of such forfeitures have
been levied by the Churchwarde^s, and by them delivered to the use of the poor
of the parish, and to whom has the same been delivered?

Churchwardens account.
27 Whether your Churchwardens have yearly given an account of the Church
goods committed to their charge, and of other their receipts and expenses? And
whether have they sold any bells or other church goods without consent of the
Ordinary fist had in writing? And whether have they employed all such goods,
receiptes, and sums of money, to the use of the church or no? and what be the
names of the offenders?

Churchwardens, concealers.
28 Whether the Churchwardens and sworn men in former years, have of any
private corrupt affection concealed any crime or other disorder done in their
times, and have not presented the same, and if so, then what faults have they
so concealed, and what were the names of such Churchwardens and sworn men, so
concealing the same?

Collectors for the poor.
29 Whether have ye Collectors for the poor of the Parish, and whether do they
their duty in gathering and distributing the Alms of the Parishioners, and
whether have any Collectors any money in their hands not accounted for, or not
bestowed upon the poor? And whether be there any of ability within your
parish, that wilfully or obstinatly refuse to give reasonably to the relief of
the poor?

Ringing and tolling of bells.
30 Whether when any Christian body is in passing, the bell be tolled to move
the people to pray for the sick person, especially in the greater towns
where the sick person dwells nere unto the Church, and whether after the
time of his or their passing out of this world, there be any more ringing but
one short peale before the burial, and another short peale after the burial?
And whether on all Saints day after Evening prayer, there be any ringing at
all in your Church or Chapel, or any other supersticious ceremonies used,
tending to the maintenance of the Popish purgatory or prayer for the dead, and
who they be that use or do the same? And whether there be any ringing on
Sondaies or holy days in the service time, or between Morning prayer and the
Letanie, or at any other times, contrary to good order or Law?

Scholemasters.
31 What Scholemasters have you within your Parish or Chappelrie, that teach
either openly or privately in any school, gentleman's house or else where, and
whether be they of good and sincere religion, and licensed by the Bishop of the
Diocese to teach, in writing under his seal, and whether be they diligent in
teaching and bringing up youth, and to instruct them in godliness and virtue,
and especially in Master Nowels Catechism lately set forth? And whether teach
they any thing contrary to the religion now godlily established, or do not
cause their children to resort unto the Church to hear divine service and
Sermons?

Deanes Rural and Sumners
32 Whether the Archdeacon, Chancellor, Commissarie, Official, or any other
using Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this Diocese, their registers or
actuaries, Apparitors or Sumners, have at any time winked at, and suffered any
adulteries, fornications, incestes, or other faults or offenses, to pass and
remain unpunished and uncorrected, for money, rewards, bribes, pleasure,
friendship, or any other parciall or affectionate respect? or have permitted
any penance without special license of his Ordinary?

Masters and Dames.
33 Whether all fathers, mothers, masters and dames of your parish, cause their
children, servants, and apprentices, both mankind and womankinde, being above
six years of age, and under twenty, which have not learned the Cathechisme, to
come to the church on the Sundays and holy days, at ye times to the^
appointed, or at the least such or so many of them as your Minister shall
appoint, and there diligently and obediently to hear, and to be ordered by
the minister, until such time as they have learned the same Catechism, and
what be the names of those that do not cause their children, servants and
apprentices, so to come to the Church to be instructed and examined?

Absents from the Church.
34 Whether ye people of your parish, especially householders, having no lawful
excuse to be absent, do faithfully and diligently endeavor them selves to
resort with their children, and servants, to their parish Church or Chapel,
on the holidays, and chiefly upon Sundays, to Morning and Evening prayer, and
then and there abide orderly and soberly during the time of Common prayer,
Homilies, Preachings, and other service of God there used, reverently and
devoutly giving them selves to the hearing thereof, and who they be that either
negligently or wilfully absent themselves, or come very late to the Church upon
Sundays especially, and how long has any of your parish absented him self
from his parish Church, or who be they that walk, talk, or otherwise
irreverently behave them selves in the Church, or use any gaming abroad, or
pastime in any house, or sit in the streets or Churchyard, or in any Tavern
or Alehouse upon the Sunday or holy day in the time of Common prayer, Sermon,
or reading of the Homilies, either before noone or after noone?

Not Communicating.
35 Whether there be any in your parish, man or woman, being of convenient age,
that has not received the holy Communion thrice at the least this last year,
and namely at Easter last (or thereabout) for once, and what be their names,
and for what cause in your judgment they do abstain from the holy Communion?
and whether any have received the holy Communion in any other parish Church or
Chapel then their own, and for what causes in your opinion?

Christnings out of the parish.
36 Whether do you know any such parents, having children borne that were not
Christened at their own parish Church, and for what cause they have not been so
Christened there, or do you know, have heard, or vehemently suspect any such
pare^tes, whose children have been Christened by any Popish priest, or
otherwise then is now lawfully allowed by her Majesty's Laws and Injunctions?

Suppressors of Testaments.
37 Whether there be any within your parish that minister the goods of those
which be dead without lawful authority, or any that suppress the testamentes
or last will of the dead, or any executor that has not fulfilled the Testators
will, especially such as have not discharged such legacies as are bequeathed to
the Church, or to Orphans, poor maids marriages, highwayes, schools, or
other godly uses, and what be their names?

Testaments not proved.
38 Whether do you know any householder or other person whatsoever, within your
Parish or Chappelrie, that is deceased, that have made their last wills and
Testament and the same not hitherto proved nor administration taken, from the
Ordinary or other Judge competent, of the goods, debtes, and cattals of the
said decedent? if any such be, express their names, and of them who unlawfully
do deteyne any the said goods, debts, or cattals.

The oath for an Inue^tarie.
39 Whether does your Deane Rural, usually swear al such executors and
administrators that prove Testaments, or take administrations before him, to
exhibit a true and perfect Inuentarie of all such goods, debts, and cattalles,
as every such person died possessed of, or for any private respects forbeareth
to minister such oath unto them, and whether do you know or have heard your
Deane has done so at any time?

Leases not prised in Inuentaries.
40 Whether do you know any the Executors or Administrators of any person or
persons deceased, that dwelled in your Parish or Chappelrie, that have not
inserted all such lease or leases, or other demise for term of one or more
years, in the Inuentarie of the goods, debtes, and cattals of the said
deceased, at such time as they procured the said Testamentes to be proved, or
administration of the said goods to be to them orderly committed? or have not
procured the same leases to be prised and valued among other the goods and
cattals of the said decedent, for the benefit of the wife, children, or of
others to whom the benefit of them ought to appertain, and whether do you
know, have heard or believe, your Deane has borne, winked at, or willingly
suffered such lease or leases for his private commodity, to be left out of the
said Inuentarie?

Hospitals and Spittlehouses
41 Whether your Hospitalles, Spittles, and Alms houses be well and godly
used, according to the foundations and ancient ordinances of the same? whether
there be any placed in them other the poor, impotent, and needy persons, that
have not wherewith or whereby to live?

Incest. etc.
42 Whether there be any that be married in degrees forbidden, or that have
married two wives, or two husbands, both living, or that live not together with
their wives, and what be their names? any married that have made precontractes,
any that have married without banes thrice solemnly asked, or that have married
forth of their parish Church, where they ought to have solemnized marriage?

Usurers.
43 Whether any person or persons within your parish, have committed usury
contrary to an Act against usury, made in the xxxvii. year of the reign of
the late King Henry the eight, and lately revived, and what are the names of
such Usurers? and what is the manner of their usury?

Sorcerie.
44 Whether there be any man or woman in your parish, that uses witchcraft,
sorcerie, charms, or unlawful prayer, or inuocations in Latin or English, or
upon any Christian body or beast, or any that resorteth to the same for
council or help, and what be their names?

Alehouses, Markets and Fayres.
45 Whether be there any Inkeepers, Alewiues, Vitailers, or Tipplers, yt suffer
or do admit any person or persons in their houses, to eat, drink, or play at
Cards, Tables, or such like games in time of Common prayer, or Sermon on the
Sundays and holy days, and whether there be any shops open on Sundays or
holidays, or be there any Butchers, Pedlars, or others that use to sell meat
and other things, in the time of Common prayer, Preaching, or reading of the
Homilies? And whether in any Fayres or common Markets, falling on the Sunday,
there be any showing of any wares before the divine service be done in the
forenoone?

Contention and Drunkenness.
46 Whether there be in your Parish any that be malicious, contentious, or
uncharitable persons, seeking the unjust vexation of their neighbors, scoldes,
common swearers, or blasphemers of the name of God, any fornicatours,
adulterers, incestuous persons, bawdes, or receuiours of such incontinent
persons, or harborers of women with child which be unmarried, conueying or
suffering them to go away before they have done any penance, or make
satisfaction to the congregation, or any persons that are vehemently suspected
of such faults, or that be not of good name and fame touching such crimes and
faults, any common drunkerds, ribaudes, or other notorious evil livers?

Papistrie, Mass and Priests.
47 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, openly or privately say mass or
other service forbidden, or hear the same? And whether do you know any popish
priests or runnagate persons, that do preach or minister the Sacraments
otherwise then they are now used, or that does use shrift and auricular
confession, or make haliwater, or halybread, or bless palms, or practice any
such like Romish ceremonies, or do not frequent common prayer, or else do resort
secretly or openly into your Parish. And whose house do they so resort unto,
and of whom are they harbored, and what be the names of such popish priests or
runnagates, and such as so harbor them? and whether know you any that keep
any secret conuenticles, readings, preachings, or lectures, contrary to the
Law?

Rebellious books.
48 Whether be there any person or persons, Ecclesiastical or Temporal within
your parish, or else where within this Diocese, that of late has retained or
kept in their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or deliver
to others, any English books, set forth of late years at Louaine, or in any
other place beyond the seas, by Harding, Dorman, Allen, Sanders, Stapleton,
Marshall, Bristow, or any of them, or by any other English Papiste, either
against the Queens Majesty's supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical, or against
true Religion, and Catholic doctrine now received and established by common
authority within this Realm, and what their names and surnames are?

Beads and Primers.
49 Whether be there any in our Parish that uses to pray in English or in
Latin, upon beads, or other such like things, or upon any superstitious popish
Primer or other like book, and what be their names?

Adulterers.
50 How many Adulteries, Incestes, and Fornications have been committed within
your Parish or Chappelrie, since the last visitation, and how many offenders in
those faults have been put to penance and openly corrected?

W. Cestren.


