LIBER WILLIELMI MASKELL CLERICI
bookplate of William Maskell bearing the monogram W M

Articles to be enquired in the visitation, in the first year of the reign of
our most dread Sovereign Lady, Elizabeth by the grace of GOD, of England,
France, and Irelande, Queen, defendour of the faith. etc.

Anno. 1559.

ARTICLES.
First, 1 Residencie.
whether any Parson, Vicar, or Curate, be reside^t continually upon his
Benefice, doing his duty in preaching, redyng and duelye ministryng the holy
Sacraments.

Item, 2 False miracles.
whether in their Churches and Chappelles, all Images, Shrynes, all Tables,
Candelstickes, Trindelles, or rolls of war, pictures, payntynges, and all
other monumentes of feigned and false miracles, pylgrymages, Idolatrye, and
superstition, be removed, abolyshed, and destroyed.

Item, 3 Lords prayer.
whether they do not every Holydaye when they have no Sermon, immediately after
the Gospel, openly, plainly, and distinctly, resyte to their paryshioners in
the Pulpitte, the Lords prayer, the belief, and the ten Commandments in
English.

Item, 4 To bring up youth.
whether they do charge fathers and mothers, masters, and governors of youth,
to bring them up in some virtuous study and occupation.

Item, 5 Curates.
whether such beneficed men as be lawfully absent from their benefices, do
leave their cures to a rude and unlearned Parson, and not to an honest well
learned and expert Curate which can and will teach you wholesome doctrine.

Item, 6 Reatyng the Scriptures.
whether they do discourage any person from readyng of any part of the Bible,
either in Latin or English, and do not rather comfort and exhort every person
to read the same at convenient times, as the very lively word of God, and the
special food of man's soul.

Item, 7 Tauernes and games.
whether Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and other Ministers, be common haunters and
resorters to Tauernes or Alehouses, geuyng them selves to drynkyng, ryotyng,
and playing at unlawful games, and do not occupy them selves in the reading or
hearing of some part of holy scripture, or in some other godly exercise.

Item, 8 Preachers.
whether they have admitted any man to preach in their cures, not being
lawefullye licenced thereunto, or have been licenced accordyngly.

Item, 9 Superstition
whether they use to declare to their paryshioners any thing to the extollyng
or setting forth of vain and superstitious religion, pylgrimages, relics, or
images, or lyghtyng of candelles, kyssyng, kneelyng, or deckyng of the same
images.

Item, 10 Register.
whether they have one book or Register kept, wherein they write the day of
every weddyng, christenyng, and burying.

Item, 11 Obedience.
whether they have exhorted the people to obedience to the Queens Majesty,
and ministers, and to charity and love one to another.

Item, 12 The Sacrament.
whether they have admonyshed their paryshioners, that they ought not to
presume to receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, before they
can say perfectly the Lords prayer, the articles of the faith, and the ten
commandments in English.

Item, 13 Hospitality
whether they be resident upon their benefices, and keep hospitality, or no.
And if they be absent and keep no hospitality, whether they do relieve their
parishioners, and what they give them.

Item, 14 Reparations.
whether Proprietaries. Parsons, Vicars, and Clerks, having Churches,
Chapels, and Mansions, do keep their Chauncels, Rectories, Vicarages, and all
other houses appertaynyng to them, in due reparations.

Item, 15 Prayer in English.
whether they do counsel or move their parishioners rather to pray in a
tongue not known, then in English, or put their trust in any certain number
of prayers, as in saying over a number of Beads, Beads.
or other like.

Item, 16 Diffamed persons.
whether they have received any persons to the Communion, being openly known
to be out of charity with their neighbors, or diffamed with any notorious
crime, and not reformed.

Item, 17 Pooremens box.
whether they have provided and have a strong Chest for the poor men's box,
and set and fastened the same in a place of the Church most convenient.

Item, 18 Testamentes.
whether they have diligently called upon, exhorted, and moved their
parissioners, and especially when they make their testamentes, to give to the
said poor men's box, and to bestow that upon the poor, Pooremens box.
which they were wont to bestow upon pylgrimages, pardons, trentalles, and
upon other like blind devotions.

Item, 19 Sick. Burial.
whether they have denied to visit the sick, or burye the dead, being brought
to the Church.

Item, 20 Symonie.
whether they have bought their benefices, or come to them by fraud, guyle,
deceit, or simonie.

Item, whether they have given open monition to their parishioners, 21
Adulterers.
to detect and present to their Ordinary, all adulterers, and fornicatours,
and such men as have two wives lyuying, within their paryshes.

Item, whether they have monished their parishioners openly, that they should
not sell, give, 22 Church goods.
nor otherwise alienate any of their Church goods.

Item, 23 Many benefices.
whether they or any of them do keep mo benefices and other Ecclesiastical
promotions, then they ought to do, not having sufficient licenses and
dispensations thereunto, and how many they be, and their names.

Item, 24 Communion
whether they minister the holy Communion any otherwise, then only after
such form and manner as it is set forth by the common authority of the
Queens Majesty and the Parliament.

Item, 25 Letters of the word or preaching.
whether you know any person within your paryshe, or else where, that is a
letter of the word of God to be read in English, or sincerely preached in
place and times convenient.

Item, 26 Goers out of the Church.
whether in the time of the Letanye, or any other common prayer, in the time of
the Sermon or Homylye, and when the Priest reads the Scriptures to the
paryshioners, any person have departed out of the Church, without just and
necessary cause, or disturb the Minister otherwise.

Item, 27 Church money.
whether the money coming and rysyng of any cattle or other moveable stocks
of the Church, and money given and bequeathed to the fyndyng of torches,
lyghtes, tapers, or lamps, not paid out of any lands, have not ben employed
to the poor men's cheste.

Item, 28 Kepers of the Church money.
who has the said stocks and money in their hands, and what be their names.

Item, 29 Contempt of Priests.
whether any indiscrete persons do uncharitably comtemne and abuse Priests and
Miministers of the Church.

Item, 30 The kings Grammar.
whether there be any other Grammar taught in any scoole within this Diocese,
then that which is set forth by the authority of king Henry the eight.

Item, 31 The time of service.
whether the service of the Church be done at due and convenient hours.

Item, 32 Talkers in the Church
whether any have used to common, iangle, and talk in the Church, in the time
of the prayer, readyng of the Homylye, preaching, readyng, or declaring of the
Scripture.

Item, 33 Heresies.
whether any have wylfully maynteyned and defended any heresies, errors, or
false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ and holy Scripture.

Item, whether any he common dronkardes, 34 Dronkards
swearers, or blasphemers of the name of God.

Item, 35 Adulterers.
whether any have committed adulterye, fornication, or incest, or be common
bawdes, or receyuers of such evil persons, or vehemently suspected of any of
the premises.

Item, 36 Brawlers.
whether any be brawlers, slaunderers, chyders, scolders, and sowers of
discord between one person and another.

Item, 37 Sorcerers.
whether you know any that do use charms, sorcerye, enchauntmentes,
inuocations, circles, witchcraftes, southsaying, or any like crafts or
imaginations invented by the devil, and specially in the time of women's
travail.

Item, whether the Churches, Pulpittes, 38 Pulpittes.
and other necessaryes apperteynyng to the same, be sufficiently repaired, and
if they be not, in whose default the same is.

Item, whether you know any, 39 Resorters to other Churches.
that in contempt of their own parish Church, do resort to any other Church.

Item, whether any Inholders, 40 Inholders.
or Alehouse kepers, do use commonly to sell meat and drink in the time of
common prayer, preaching, readyng of the Homylyes or Scripture.

Item, 41 Divorce.
whether you know any to be married within the degrees prohibited by the laws
of God, or that be separated or divorced without the degrees prohibited by the
law of God, and whether any such have married again.

Item, 42 Privy contractes.
whether you know any to have made privy contractes of Matrimony, not
calling two or mo witnesses thereunto, nor having thereto the consent of their
parents.

Item, 43 Banes.
whether they have married solempnly, the banes not first lawfully asked.

Item, 44 Executou^s
whether you know any Executours or administratours of dead men's goods, which
do not duly bestow such of the said goods as were given and bequeathed, or
appointed to be distributed among the poor people, repayryng of high ways,
fyndyng of poor scollers, or marying of poor maidens, or such other like
charitable deeds.

Item, 45 Images.
whether you know any that keep in their houses undefaced, and Images, Cables,
Pictures, payntynges, or other monumentes of feigned and false miracles,
pilgrimages, ydolatry and superstition, and do adore them, and specially such
as have been set up in Churches, Chappelles, or Oratories.

Item, 46 Books.
what books of Gods Scripture you have delivered to be burnt, or otherwise
destroyed, and to whom ye have delivered the same.

Item, what brybes the accusers, promoters, 47 Brybes.
persecuters, Ecclesiastical judges, and other the Commissioners appointed
within the several Diocese of this Realm, have received by them selves or
other, of those persons which were in trouble, apprehended, or imprisoned for
Religion.

Item, what goods, moveable lands, fees, 48 Loss of goods.
offices, or promotions, has been wrongfully taken away in the time of Queen
Mary's reign, ^^om any person which favored the Religion ^^we set forth.

Item, 49 How many burnt
how many persons for Religion have dyed by fire, famine, or otherwise, or
have been imprisoned for the same.

Item, 50 Certificat of the dear
that you make a true presentment of the number of all the persons which dyed
with^n your parishes, sithen the feast of Saint John ^^e Baptist, which was in
the year of our Lord God a thousand five hundredth fifty and eight, unto the
same feast last past. Making therein a plain distinct declaration, how many
men, women, and men children the same were. And the names of the men.

Item, 51 Secret Masses.
whether ye know any man in your paryshe, secretelye or in unlawful
conuenticles, say or hear Mass, or any other service prohibited by the law.

Item, 52 False rumors.
whether you know any person in your paryshe, to be a flaunderer of his
neighbors, or a sower of discord between party and party, man and wife,
parents and their children, or that has invented, bruted, or set forth any
rumors, Unlawful books.
false and sedicions tales, slanders, or makers, bryngers, buyers, sellers,
kepers, or conueyers of any unlawful books, which might stir or provoke
sedition, or maintain superstitious service within this Realm, or an,
aydours, counsaylours, procurers, or may^^^ners thereunto.

Item, whether the Church of your paryshe be now vacant or no, 53 Patron.
Tithes. Vacation.
who is the Patron thereof, how long it has been vacant, who does receive the
tithes, oblations, and other commodities during the time of the vacation, and
by what authority, and in what estate the said Church is at this time, and
how long the Parson or Vicar has had that Benefice.

Item, 54 Minstrelles.
whether any Minstrelles, or any other persons do use to sing or say any songs
or ditties that be vile or unclean, and especially in derision of any Godly
order now set forth and establyshed.

Item, 55 Letanie in English.
whether the Letany in English with the Epistle and Gospel which was by the
Queenes-highnesse proclamation willed to be read to the people, were put in use
in your Churches and if not, - who were the letters thereof.

Item, 56 Distinct reading.
whether the Curates and ministers do leisurelie, plainly, and distinctly
read the public prayers, Chapters and Homilies, as they ought to do.

God save the Queen.

