The right plesaunt and goodly History of the four sons of Aimon the which
for the excellent endytyng of it, and for the notable Prowes and great virtues
that were in them: is no les pleasant to read, then worthy to be known of all
estates both high and low.

depiction of four knights in armor, the four sons of Aymon, with swords
drawn, riding a single large horse or Bayard

The Prologue.
AS the Philosopher in the first book of his methafysyque says yt every man
naturally desires to know and to con new things* And therefore have the
Clerks and people of great understanding desired and coueite to learned
sciences and to know virtues of things. Some by Philosophy, other by Poetrye,
and other by Historyes and cronyckes of things passed. And upon these three
they have greatly labored in such yt thanked be God, by their good dylygence
and labors: they have had great knowledge by innumerable volumes of books,
which have be made and compyled by great study and pain unto this day. And
because that above all things the princes and lords of hie estate and
entendement desire to see thy stories of the right noble and hye virtues of the
prodecessours which ben digne, and worthy of remembrance of perpetual
recommendacion. Therefore lace at ye request and commandment of the right
noble and vertus Earl John Earl of Oxeforde my good synguler and especial lord
I reduced and translated out of French into our maternall and English tongue
the life of one of his predecessoures named Robert Earl of Oxeforde tofore said
wc diverse and many great miracles which God showed for him as well in his life
as after his death, as it is showed all a long in his said book. And also
that my said Lord desires to have other Hystories of old time passed of
virtues chyualry reduced in likewise into our English tongue: he late sent to
me a book in French conteynyng thactes and faytes of war do one and made
against ye great Emperor and king of France Charlemayne by ye.iiii. sons of
Aymon, other wise named in French, Les quatre sylz Aymon. which book
according to his request I have endeuorde me to accomplish and to reduce it
into our english, to my great cost and charges as in the translatinge as in
enprynting of the same, hopyng and not doubtyng but that his good grace shall
reward me in such wise that I shall have cause to pray for his good and
prosperus welfare, And besechynge his said noble good grace to pardon me of ye
rude and this simple work For according to the copy which he sent to me I
have followed as nigh as I can, and where as any defaute shall be found I
submyt me to the correccion of them that understand the cronycle and hystory
besethyng the^ to correct it and amend there as they shall find fault. And I
shall pray almighty God for them that so do to reward them in such wise
that after this short and transytory life we all may come to everlasting life
in heaven. Amen.

Thus ends the prologue.
Here follows the Table of this present book.
WHo that will know the history of the four noble and worthy knights, named
the four sons of Aymon, whereof the first was called Reynawde, the second
Alarde, the third Guychard and the fourth Richard: let him first read this
present table following, In which men shall find that this present book
conteyneth.xxviii. chapytres, which speaken of many fair and diverse matters,
which they that shall read this said chapytres shall mow see the history
all alonge. And ye shall see in this first chapter, how that after king
Charlemayne was come again from the parties of Lombardy where he had had great
and merueyllouse battaylles ayenste the sarasyns: he held upon whitso^daye
open court at Paris where was a fair felawshyp of Princes and Barons, as ye
shall hear after alonge. And in the same chapitre ye shall also see how the
same day the duke Aymon of Ardeyne brought to the court his four sons,
that is to wit Reynawde, Alarde, Guichard and Richard, and how king
Charlemayne made them knights with his own hands, also how the duke Benes
of Aigremounte slew Lohier the eldest son of king Charlemain. the duke benes
was uncle to the four sons of Aimon, and after how the duke Benes of
aygremount was slain coming to Parts by the commandment of king
Charlemayne after that he had appointed for the death of his son. And also in
this first chapitre men shall now see many other fair matters, which were to
long for to be reherced in this preambule of this present book. fol. i.

THe second Chapyter shows how Grysson of hauitefelle and Guenes after that
they had slain the Duke Benes of Aygremount-retourned to Paris and recounted
to king Charlemayn the mortal treason that they had put to execucyon, whereof
the king was right glad and syn after he was right sorye for it. For after
that the two brethren of the Duke Benes made great war against him, and so
did Gerarde of Rousillon, and Dron, and Mawgys the son of the duke Benes, and
after they made peace and accorded together. But the king Charlemain accorded
not with the four sons of aimon nor to their cousin Mawgys. Item how
Reynawde slew the neuew of king Charlemayne with a chesse boorde as they played
together at the chesse, whereof the war began the which was so mortal and
lasted so long: that it bare a great domm^ge to the realm of france. fol.
xiii.

THe third chapitre speaks, how after that king Charlemayne had made all
his barons to forsake the four sons of aymon. He went and besyeged them at
mou^tenforde where he was discomfyted two times but the castelle of
Mou^tenforde was taken after that, by treason. And after how Reynawde and his
brethren avenged them of the traytoures that betrayed them. And after saved
them self within the forest of Ardeyne where their father found the^ as he
went from the syege toward his land of Dordon. And how for to keep his oath
that he had made to king Charlemayne: He did assail his sons, so that of
five hundred men that they were there abod on live with his sons but xvii.
persons. But Reynawd and his brethern had none evil, but slew many of their
fathers men. fol. xvi:

THe fourth chapter shows how after that the old Aimon had discomfyted his
chyldern: they went and dwelled in the depest of the forest of Ardeyne and
abode there till that they were al counterfayte black and roughe as wild
beasts for the great hungre that they had suffered, and after they went to
Dordon for to see their father that made them good chere, and feasted them
greatly. And gave them of hauoyre so much that they might well make war with
against the king, and how Mawgis their cosyn arrived when that they should have
departed, which went with them in to the realm of Gascoygne with five
hundred knights. And when their mother saw them depart: she was for it full
sorye. fol. xxxi

THe fyfthe chaptre shows how after that Reynawde and his brethern with their
cosyn mawgys were departed from their mother for to seek their adventure: they
went so long till they came to the realm of Gascoygne. And how going thither
ward they made many euylles in France. And how the king of Gascoign wha^
they were come there* did receive them in his seruise right sweetly in
bourdeux upon Gyrond, by cause that than this king of Gascoigne that was called
Yon had war against a king sarasin that was entered in to Gascoygne, that had
to name Porrus that held Toulouse and all the land about. fol. xxxvi.

THe.vi. chapter speaks how Reinawde and his brethren dystressed bourgons a
sarasyn that had distroyed the realm of Gascoign, and had chased the king yon
to bourdeux upon Gyronde that durst not depart from thence, for fear of the
sarasyns. And how king you gave his sister Clare unto Reinawde to be his wife,
for the great seruyse that he had done to him. And did do make for him the
castle of Mountawban. fol. xxxviii.

THe seventh chapitre speaks how Charlemayne for a voyage that he made to
saint James in Galyce he knew in his coming again how Reynawde and his
brethren that were his mortalle enmies were in Gascoygne with in a strong
castle called Mountawban. And how he sent word to king yon that he should
deliver to him Reynawd and his brethren. And if he refused to do this: he
sholude come and besyege him in his loud before.x. or xii. months were passed,
whereof king yon answered that he should not do it. And how after that king
Charlemayne was returned to Paris, Rowlande his neuewes arrived at Paris,
which the king made knight. And after sent him for to reyse a siege before
Coloyne that a sarasyn had besyeged, that was called Estorfawde the which was
overcome by Rowla^d And how Reynawde wan the crown of Charlemayne for his
well renuynge upon his baye horse at Paris. fol. xliii.

THe.viii. chapitre speaks how Charlemayne went into Gascoygne with his host
and besieged Reynawd and his brethren within Mountawhan, and how Reynawde wan
the first batail of the king, which Rowlande conduyted with Olyuer, and the
bishop Turpin whereof Charlemayne was so sore wroth: that he wend to have
wexed mad for it of the great shame that he had of it. fol. li.

THe.ix. chapitre shows how Reynawde and his brethren were betrayed and
sold to king Charlemayne by king you, that sent them in to the plain of
Valcoloures all unarmed, but only of their swerdes, rydinge upon mulectes
clothed with mantelles of scarlace furred with ermynes. From the which wall
they escaped worthylye, by the will of our lord. But they were sore wounded.
Of Charlemaines parrye abode there dead Foulques of Morillon, and many other
barons for whom the king was right sorye. folio. lvi.

THe.x. chapitre speaks, how after that Goodard the secretarye of king you
had be wrayed all the treason to Mawgys that the king yon had done to his
cosyns which he knew well. For he had seen king Charlemaynes lettres. And
had written answer thereupon from king yon, Mawgis brought to reynawde and
his, such a succoures that by his wit they were kept from death. fol, lxxii.

THe.xi. chapitre speaks how by the succors that Mawgis brought to reynawd
and to his brethren into the plain of Valcoloures, they discomfited king
charlemaynes folk, whereof Ogier had many reproaches of rowlande for some
goodness and favor that he had showed to reynawde and his brethren at roche
mountbron, and was therefore called traitoure, whereof a great inconvenience came
thereof afterward a fore king Charlemayne. foli. lxxxi.

THe.xii. chapitre shows how that after reynawde and his brethern were whole
of their wou^des that they had had in the playnes of Valcoloures: they
returned to Mountawban. But when king yon knew of their coming again: he
fled away, and made him self to be shorn a monk in a monastery that was
within the wood of the serpente, where rowlande and Ogyer the Dane found him
and would have made him be hanged, for the treason that he had done to reynawde
and to his brethren, if Reynawde had not succored him. fol. lxxviii.

THe xiii. chapter shows, how ^h^^ after Reynawd had succou^e^ ^yng yon, was
the same hour a m^rueyl^ou^e battaylle between Reynawde and the frenshe men.
For Rowlande was there sore beten and many other, whereof Ogyer was glad by
cause that Rowland had called him traytoure. And also he knew that the four
sons of Aymon, were not for to be so lyghtelye ouercomen, as men had said
before. And for this cause there had been a sore meddle between Rowland and
Ogyer, if it had not be the other barons that departed them, and in this
recountre Richard the brother of Reynawde abode for prisoner of Rowlande. fol.
lxxxviii.

THe xiiii. chapitre shows how after that Reynawde, Alarde, and Guycharde
were gone toward Mountawban after the battle, and that they had made full
great sorrow for Rychard their brother which was in king Charlemaines hands,
The said Rychard was delivered by mawgys great wisdom. fol. xc.

THe.xv. chapitre speaks how after that Reynawde and his brethern and Mawgys
had discomfyted Charlemayn: they came and ouerthrewe down his pauilyon, and
bare away with them the Egle of gold, that was there upon the pauilion
whereof king Charlemayne was sore an angered, in so much that he would yield
up his crown unto his barons, saying that he would be no more king, for they
had failed him and habandonned for the four sons of Aymon, and said to the^
that they should crown Reinawd that he might be their king, for they loved him
much more than they did him. Than Olyuer said to king Charlemayne, that he
should take again the crown, and that he should bring to him Mawgys that he
had taken, when he was about to pylle the pauyllyon, for he abode alone when
king Charlemaine heard the same: he took again his crown, and was right
glad of the prise of mawgys. fol. cii.

THe.xvi. chapitre speaks how the king Charlemayne would do hang Mawgys
Incontynente that Olyuer had take him to him. But by the mean of the
Douseperes of France that at the requests of Mawgys pledgyd him, for one night
only: He made so much that he escaped to the honor and acquytaunce of his
sureties and of him, and bare away with him to Mountawban the crown and the
sword of king Charlemayne the same night. Whereof king Charlemayne was full
sorry. And therefore he send word to Reynawde that he should send to him
again his crown and his sword, and all that Mawgys had borne away with him,
and he should grant him his truce for two years. To the which thing Reynawd
accorded him, whereof happed to him after that many great euylles. fol. cv.

THe.xvii. Chapter shows, how Reynawde faught with Rowland. Which he
overcame, by the will of god. And brought him to mou^tawban, whereof king
Charlemayne was greatly wroth. And also shows how mawgis brought king
Charlemayne in to the castle of Mountawban upon bayarde all a sleep. And after
took him to Reinawd within his bed. And after went and arrayed him self in
manner of an Hermyte poorly clothed. And left all his kinnesmen and friends,
because that he would not let the peace of Reynawde toward the king
Charlemayne. For the war had lasted to long. fol. cxiii.

THe.xviii. chapter shows how after that Mawgys had taken Charlemaine in to
the hands of Reinawde his good cousin: he went with out leave in to a wood
nyghe the river of Dordon, in to a hermitage where he did dwell as an Hermyte,
lyuinge poorly for to save his soul. fol. cxvi.

THe.xix. chapitre shows how the barons of France that were at Mountawban
made great sorrow by cause that they might not awake the king Charlemayne
that Mawgys by his craft had made to sleep, and brought unto Mountawban. But
when the hour of the enchauntmente of Mawgys was passed: king Charlemayn
awaked. And when he saw himself in Mountawban: he swear that he should never
make peace with Reynawde as long as that he were prisoner. And so Reynawde did
send him again upon his horse bayard free and quite, whereof he repented him
sore afterward. For soon after this, king Charlemayn made Mountawban to be
besyeged of so nyghe: that he famyshed Reynawd and his brethren, his wife and
his children, and all the people, so that they dyed for hungre and thirst, the
most part. fol. cxvii.

THe.xx. chapitre speaks how after that Charlemaine had besyeged Mountawban
of so nyghe that he did famysh all them that were within, knew how Reynawd
was gone, and had habandonned Mountawban, and was gone his way he and his
brethren, his wife and his chylderne by under the earth, and were gone to
Ardeyne, where king Charlemayne went and besyeged the^ again. But before that
he did set his syege: Reynawde and his brethren issued out against him,
whereby many one lost their life of the one party and of the other. And the
duke Richard of Normandye was taken there, which was one of the Douse peers of
France, and a right noble and a worthy knight, preu and hardy, wherefore king
Charlemaine was right sorye. fol. cxxix.

THe.xxi. chapitre shows, how Mawgys being in his hermytage, came in his
mind a vysyon that he had by night in his sleep, for to go see Reynawde
and his brethren. Than in the morning he took his way, and found two
merchants the which had be robbed by seven thieves in a wood. Of the which
seven thieves: Mawgys slew five of them with his palster, and took again to
the merchants their marchaundyses, and all their hauoyre. And than he went
forth his way toward Mountawban for to see his cosyns and his brethern. fol.
cxxxiiii.

THe.xxii. Chapter shows, how Reynawde would have done hang Richard the
duke of Normandye by cause he might not have peace with the king Charlemayne.
And how when the Douse peers of France knew this: they came to king
Charlemayne and prayed him to make peace with Reynawde, for to have again
their felawe the duke Richard of Normandye, to the which thing king
Charlemayne answered that he would not do it, whereof they were so sore an
angered that they left him, but king Charlemain did send after them and sent
them word that they should return again to him, and that he should make
peace with Reynawde under this condicyon that Reinawd should go beyond the
sea, beggynge his bread. fol. cxxxvii.

THe.xxiii. Chapter shows, how after that Reynawde was departed from
Ardeyne for to make his vyage beyond the sea, poorly clothed as a pilgrim
seekynge his bread for gods sake: Richard of Normandye took Bayarde and
brought with him Alard, Guychard, and Richard brethren to Reynawd and
presented them to Charlemayne^ the which he received right honorably by
good love, and after brake his syege and departed for to go to Paris. But when
he was in the city of Lyege upon the bridge over the river of Mewse: he made
Bayard to be cast into the water with a mill stone at the neck of him, but
bayarde the horse escaped and is yet a live in the forest of Ardeyne, as men
sayen. Fol. Cxiiiii.

THe.xxiiii. Chapter shows how that after Reynawde was departed from
Ardeyne from his brethren, from his wise and fro his children for to go
beyond the sea, for to accomplish his voyage (...) to the holy grave: he
found in Consta^tynople his cosyn Mawgis and went both together unto before
Iherusalem, that a king sarasyn which was admyral of percie had taken by
treason, but Reynawde and Mawgis did so much with the folk of the land, that
the cyrye was take again of the christen. fol. cxivi.

THe.xxv. Chapter shows, how that after Reynawde was come again from the
holy land where he had done merueyles: he sent Aimonet and Yo^net his two
sons to king Charlemaine much honorably for to be made knights of his
hand. For he taught them well in arms in all good manners, and took to them
five hundred good men well horsed for to conduyte them toward the king at
Paris. fol. Civii.

THe.xxvi. Chhapytre shows how after that king Charlemayne had much swetely
received the chylden of Reynawde and made them knights: they fought with ye
sons of Foulques of Moryllon, and discomfited them in the feeld at Paris,
which is called the ysle of our ladi. Because that they had charged their
father of treason, because he had slain their father Foulques of moryllon in
the playnes of Valcolours. Fol. Clviii.

THe.xxvii. chapitre contains how yt after Reynawde was gone fro Mountawban
in manner of a pilgrim never to have returned again after that he had dealed
his goods to his children, his brethern and his son Aymoner made great
sorrow, when they wist that he was gone without their knowledge all barefote
with a palster in his hand. Folio. Clxviii.

THe.xxviii. chapitre shows how after that Reynawde was departed fro
Mountawba^ for to save his soul: he went to Colcin^ upon the Rine, and found
that men builded the church of saint Peter.

And there came to him a will and a devotion for to serve the masons that
wrought there, for the love that he had to our lord. But at the last the
other laborers had so great envy at him of that he was more loved than they
were of all the masters for the good service that he did that they slew him,
and after they put him in a sack and cast him into the water of the Ryue, but
by the will of our lord his corpse appeared above ye water making so many fair
miracles healyng of all sykenesses, so that he was named a saint the day of
his buryenge. Fol. Clxix

Here finyssheth the table and consequentely follows the book here after.
How duke Aimon of Ardein brought to the court his four sons, that is to
wit Reynawde, Alarde, Guichard, and Richard, and how king Charlemayne made
them knights with his own hands, also how the duke Benes of Aigremounte
slew Lohier the eldest son of king Charlemain. the duke benes was uncle to
the four sons of Aimon, and after how the duke Benes of aygremount was
slain coming to Paris by the commandment of king Charlemayn after that he
had appointed for the death of his son. And also in this first chapitre men
shall now see many other fair matters, which were to long for to be reherced
in the preamble of this present. book.
Truly we find in the gestes and faites of the good king Charlemayne that
upon a time at a feast of Penthecoste the said king Charlemayne kept a right
great and solemn court at Paris, after that he was come again fro the
parties of Lombardy where he had had a right great and meruaylous battle
against the Sarasyns, and such folk as were out of the believe, whereof the
cheef of the said Sarasins was named Guithelym the sesne. The which the said
king Charlemayne by his prowess and valyauntnes had dyscomfyted and
ouercomen. At the which battaylle and dyscomfyture dyed great noblenesses of
kings, princes, Dukes, Earls, barons, knights and squyers. As Salamon of
bretayne. Huon earl of Mauns, sir yues, sir yuoyre berenger, and Haton, sir
Arnaulde of Beaulande, sir walleraunte of Bollon and many valyaunte knights.
The House peers of France were come there and many Almaynes and Englyshemenne.
Normans Poeteuyns. Lombardes and Barnyers. And among other Dukes and princes
was come thither. The good and worthy duke Aims of Ardeyne. And in his
felawshyp his four fair sons, that is to wit Re^nawde, Alarde, Guycharde,
and Richard, that were wonderful fair, wytty, great, mighty, and valyaunte,
specially Reynawde which was the greatest and the tallest manne that was
found at that time in all the world. For he had xvi. feet of length and more.
Than at this assemble and feast: stood the said king Charlemayne on his feet
among his princes and barons, saying in this wise, barons my brethren and
friends, ye know how I have conquested and gotten so many great lands by
your help and succors. So many of the Sarasins and misbeleuers brought to
death, and in my subieccion, how but late ago ye have seen by ye paynni
Guerelym which I have dyscomfyted and ouercomen, and reduced to the christen
faith. Notwithstanding we have lost there right great cheualry and
nobleness. And for fault of many of our vassaylles and subjects that to us
dayneth not to come, how be it that we had sent for them, as the Duke
Richard of Roussellon, the duke Dron of Nantuell, and the duke Benes of
Aygremounte, that been all three brethren Germayne. Whereof unto you I
complain me, and tell you that if it were not sir Salamon that worthylye came
to succoure us with.xxx. thousand fygheynge men, and sir Lambreyght bernyer
and sir Geffraye of Bourdelle with walleraunce of Bullon that bare our baner:
we were all dyscomfyted and lost as ye all know well, and this by the defaut
of the said three bretherene that dayned never to come to our sendynge, nor
obey, and above all the duke Benes of Aygremounte. All be it that they be all
our lyege men that ever owen to me service and fydelytie. Now I shall send
him word that he come to serve me at this next somer with all his power. And
in case that he shall be refusing to obey our commandments: by saint
denis of france I shall send for all my friends and subjects and I shall go
besyege him at Aygremounte. And if we can have him: I shall make him to be
shamefully hanged and his son Mawgis to be slain all quycke, and shall do
brenne his discourteous wife. And I shall sert all his lands in fire. Than the
good Duke Naymes of Bauyere rose up dyligently and said to king Charlemayne in
this wise. Sir me seems that ye ought not to anger your self so sore. And if
ye will believe my counsel: ye shall send a messanger to the duke of Aygremount
which messanger shall be well and honorably accompanied. And he must be sage
and prudent, for to show well to the Duke of Aygremounte all that ye shall
charge him. And after when ye shall know his answer and his will: ye shall
than advise you what ye ought for to do. In good faith said the king, ye
counseylle me right well and wiselye. Than thought Charlemayne what message he
might send to him. And than he said all high before them all, complayninge
himself who shall be he that shall do this message. And for doubt of death
shall not leave nothing vnsayd of his message to the duke benes, but there was
none of them all that ought answered. For many of them were of Sybbe to him.
As the duke Aymon of Ardeyne that was his brother Germayne.

Thus were the four brethern of one father and of one mother. Than was king
Charlemayne right wroth and angrye. And swear by saint denis that the Duke
benes should be wasted and destroyed. And no man should be in the world
that should keep him therfro. Than he called high his eldest son Lohier
saying in this manner, ye must do this message my dear son, and led with you
for your conduyt and suretye an hundred knights armed and honorably arrayed,
And ye shall say to the Duke benes of Aygremounte that if he come not for to
serve us this somer about saint Iohans day next coming as I have said
before: that I shall besyege Aygremounte and shall dystroye all his land and he
and his I shall do hang or slay al quycke, and his wife to be burnt. Sir said
Lohier al at your pleasure. I shall do. And wit yt it shall not be tarried, for
fear of death, but that I shall tell him al a long all that ye have charged me
of. And I shall depart to morrow in the morning by the grace of God.

Than should you have seen ye king weep of pity for his son Lohier For he
repented him yt he had charged him for to do this message, but syn yt he had
so said: he must do it. And the morn was come Lohier and his noble company
made them ready and after lept on horsbacke, and came before ye king. Than said
Lohier to the king his father. Sir here I am redye and all my folk for to
fulfill your will. Fair son said Charlemayne I reco^mend thee unto god that
on ye cross suffered death and passion, and him I beseech to keep and waraunt
thee and al thy felawshyp from evil and from any combraunce, than departed
Lohier and his company, whereof after ward the king made great lamentacyon for
his son Lohier, and not with out a cause. For he shall never see hi^ quick
again as ye shall understand if ye will kerken it. Now go the ge^till
messangers straight to ward Aygremount, sore thretenynge the duke Benes of
Aygremou^t, saying that they should take the head from the body of him if he
do ought to them against his deuoyre. But it shall go all other wise with them.
For it haped all contrary to their minds and purpose whereof afterward many
ladies abode widows without husbands, and many gentil women with out a lover.
And so many churches destroyed, and so many lands bre^te and wasted; whereof it
is yet pity for to see. And thus ridinge and thretynge Benes of Aygremount, a
spy heard all that they said, and came hastelye to Aygremo sit to ward Benes
that was in his Palace and told him how messa^gers were coming unto him from
king Charlemayne that sore thretened him, and that the son of king
Charlemayne was there in person. Than said the Duke to his folk whereof he had
at that hour for son with him in his Palace because of the feast of
Penthecoste. Lords said he, the king Charlemayne sets little by me, that
will that I shall go serve him with all my power and my puyssance, and that wors
is, he sends to me his eldest son for to tell me some message ye threteneth
me greatly, what counsel ye me thereto my brethren and friends. Than sp^ke a
good knight that was called sir Simon, and said. My lord I shall counsel you
truly if ye will harken and believe me. Receive honorably the messangers of the
king Charlemayne. For well ye wot that he is your right wise lord, and wit
that who yt warreth against his souerayn Lord: he does against god and rayson
and have no regard to your kynne nor to this that your brethren Gyrarde of
Roussyllon and the duke of Nantuell would not obey him. For I advise you well
that Charlemayn is mighty, and he shall distroye you of body and of goods, but
if that ye obey him. And if ye amiablie go to him, he shall have mercy of you.
Than answered the duke that thus he would not do, and that the said knight
gave him evil counsel. For yet said he I am not so low brought but that I
have three brythren that shall help to sustain and bear out my war against
Charlemayne, and also my four neuewes the sons of my brother Aims of Dordon
yt ben full fair knights, worthy and well taught in faytes of war. Alas said
than ye duchess. My good lord believe your good counsel. For no men shall
praise you that ye make war against your right wise lord, and wit it well
that it is against the commandments of God, and against all equity.
Wherefore if ye have misdoone any thing against him, do so much yt ye be
accorded with him. And take none heed to your brethern, as sir Simon does
counsel you. For never good may come thereof for to be evil in favor with his
sovereign Lord. Than beheld the duke the duchess in great wrath and had her
that she should hold her peace in ye deuilles name, and that she should never
more speak to him of this matter. For in certain he should not do for the king
Charlemayne the mou^tenaunce of a penny. So held her peace ye duchess and said
that she should speak no more to him thereof.

GReat was the noise and the bruyte within the palayce of Aygremount, for some
counseled the duke, that thus as the duchess said: he should do, and many
other said nay. Than said the duke unto them that counseled him nay and that
he should not accord nor make peace with the king Charlemayne, that he could
them thank, much long they spoke of this matter. And the messangers of the
King Charlemayne during the same have riden so much that they ben come to
Aygremount. And the castle was see upon a roche right hye and well enuyroned
with strong walls thycke high and well garnyshed with great towers, so that
for the strength and sytuacyon of the castle, it was imprenable, but only by
famyshynge.

Than said Lohier to ye lords that were with him. Lords now see what a
fortress is there, what walls what a river te^neth at the foot of it? I
believe verily that in all christendom is not her like. It can never betake by
force, but if it is by famysshyng. Tha^ spoke a knight that was called Sauary
and said to Lohier his lord, sir said he it seems me (speaking under
correccion) that my lord the king Charlemayne your father has enterprised a
great folly, when he troweth to come to at an end of this duke of Aygremou^t
for in good sothe he is right puissau^t And I believe that he shall make as mani
men for to make the war, as shall my lord your father if it came there to
that he would make him war. It were a fair thing if they might be accorded
together, and of my part I should counsel the same if it might be done.

But well I wot that if your father had him, al ye gold in Paris should not
keep him, but that he should do hang him or else slay him quycke. So beseech I
you right dear sir yt ye speak humbly unto the duke benes of Aygremou^t. For
in certain he is right fyers and outragyous and incontinent might have there a
sore meddle between you and him, where of the loss should turn upon us. For
we ben to lew folk. Than answered Lohier and said to him that he said well and
wisely, but always said he we doubt him not of any thing. We be here al ready
an ho^dred knights well appointed, and for sothe if he say unto us any thing
unto our dyspleasure: he shall be the first that shall repent and be sorry for it.
Than said the knight Sauare al softly to himself, that this were not wisely
done. For well I swear said he upon my faith that if it hap you to say any
thing to him that by any manner shall displease him: he shall make you sorye and
shall wreke it upon you body. And happelye we shall all be in a way for to
die. Sir advise your self well and will to proceed prudently in your message.

For well I say unto you that he is right cruel, and of great worthynesse
accomplysshed.

THus spekyng of one thing and of other rode so long the messangers, that they
ben come to the gate of the castle which was sone shet by the porter, then
knocked the said knights, and the porter answered to them. Lords what be you?

Freende answered Lohier open to us this gate presently. For we will speak to
the Duke Benes of Aigremount from the king Charlemayn Now abide you a little
and have you not said the porter. And I will go speak redely to my lord the
Duke. So went the said porter into the halle where he saw the Duke his lord.
He kneeled incontinent before him and told him how down at the gate was a
right great company of men of arms. And that they were well an hundred men or
more right well horsed and well armed, and with them is the eldest son of
king charlemayne yt strongly threteneth you, and also your folk. My lord
said the porter shall I open the gates unto the^, yea said ye duke For I doubt
them nothing, and we ben enough for them. And many worthy knights and
esquyers ben no where able for to defend us all, were Charlemayne himself with
them with his puissau^ce. So ran incontine^t the porter down again for to
open unto them the gate. Lohier and his fellows entered wtin and mounted up unto
the dongeon of the castle where the duke was that said to his barons. Lords
here comes the eldest son of the king Charlemayne for to tell me his
message. But (di yt god yt suffered death and passion) If he speak wisely to us
he shall do as sage. And if he says any thing that shall dysplease us, we shall
soon and without delay take vengeance thereof. So was the duke Benes well
accompanied and nobly of well two hundred knights and more. This was in the
month of May that all creatures humain ought well for to rejoice the^ and that
folk preu and worthy in arms taken heart and hardiness for to defend them
self well, and war against their enemies. And this during: Lohier the son of
King charlemayne entered into the halle of the Palace of Aygremount right nobly
armed and his folk also, and saw the halle right well garnyshed of fair folk
rychelye arrayed. And the duke sittynge right proudlye among his barons, and
the duchess his wife next by him, and before him his son Mawgys that was a
great master of the science of Nigromancy that played before his father of his
art of nigromancy, wherein the Lords that were there took great pleasure. And
wit it well that in all the world was not a worthyer christen, nor more able,
than was the said Mawgys. Except only his cosyn Reynawde one of the Sons of
Aymon, whereof specially treats now this History. Than marched forth Lohier
and went in the first of all, and after him his folk by good conduyte. And
salued the duke B^nes of Agremount in this wise, whereby much great evil happed
unto him at last. That God that created ye firmament and made all thing of
naught for the people to sustain. And on the cross suffered death and passion
for all souls to be redeemed out of the pains of hell: keep and save the king
Charlemayne Emperor of Aimayne and king of France and all his noble line and
confound thee Duke Benes of Aygremounte. My father the king by me expressly
se^deth to thee word thou come incontinent to Paris with five hundred knights
for to do to him right and reason of this that thou were not with him in arms
in the parties of Lumbardy for to fight against the enemies of the christen
faith. Where by thy fault were dead there Bawdoyne lord of Melanke. Gesfroi of
Bourdel, and many other great Dukes Princes knights and barons. And if thou
wylt not do it: I tell thee (duke benes) that the king shall come upon thee
with an hundred thousand men of arms. So shall thou be take and brought into
France. And there you shall be judged as a thief and a false traitor unto thy
Sovereign Lord, for to be slain and hanged all quick, thy wife burnt and
thy children destroyed and banysshed.

Do therefore this that I commau^d thee in the kings behalf, for thou know
well that thou art his man vassayle and subject.

When the Duke Benes of aygremount had heard Lohyer thus speak: Than if ye had
seen him changed his color pouffe and blow, as a man cruel, proud and
outrageouse, and said to Lohier in this manner. I shall not go to king
Charlemayne nor nothing of his will I shall not fulfill. For I hold another
Castle ne Fortress of him, but I shall go upon him with all my puyssaunce,
and shall destroy all the land of France unto Paris. Than said Lohier unto
Duke Benes of Aygremount. Vassayle said he how dare thou answer thus?

And it the king knew now that thou thretenest him thus as thou do: he
should come incontinent upon thee, and should vtterli destroy thee, well thou
know that thou art his liege man, and that thou can not say against it,
come than redely and serve thy sovereign lord king Charlemyan, and believe me
if thou will save thine own life. For if you do it not: I make thee sure and
certain yt if he can have thee by force that he shall make thee to be hanged
there as the air and the wyndes with their great blastes shall dry up the bones
of thee. When the duke heard Lohier speak to him in this manner he stood up
anon upon his feet, and said, yt to his euel chere he came there for to make to
hi^ his message. Tha^ came forth a knight named sir water that was a man of
the Duke of Aygremount and said to the Duke My lord keep for gods love that ye
do no folly. Let Lohier say all his will, for ye be never the worse for his
saying, and as ye well know king Charlemayne is right puyssau^t and so much
that there is another castle, City, nor town never so strong that can hold
against hi^, Go than to him by my counsel, for ye be his man his vassayle and
his subject, and of him you hold your castle of Aygremount and all your
lands, and if ye so do: ye shall do as sage, and it shall be your prouffyte,
and also of al your land, and for to war against your right wise Lord,
nothing but evil can come to you thereof. When the Duke had heard the wise
knight to speak: he could to him right good thank therefore, but always all
angry he said to him, hold your peace. For I shall hold nothing of him
aslonge that I shall may bear arms, and mou^te a horse back. I shall send
for my dear brethren Gerrade of Roussyllon, and Dron of Natuell, and Garnyer
his son, and than we shall gone upon king Charlemayne, and if I can mete
with him in any place: we shall destroy him, and shall do of him that he
troweth to do of me. Wene he yt I am a cowarde? nay by my faith, for I should
not take all the gold in Paris but that I should slay ye messanger. Evil was
to him when he durst so threten me. And than said Lohier, I nether praise you
nor doubt you not. When the Duke benes of Agremount understood Lohyer: he wexed
for great wrath as red as any fire in his face, and began to rise up and to
call. Now Barons upon him, bring him to me, for he shall never be wraunted
but that I shall make him to dye shamefullye. And the barons durst not say
against their lord, but drew al their swerdes. And incontinent did ren upon
Charlemaynes folk. And Lohier called his baner, and than began he and his
folk to defend them self sharply. And god knows how many heads and
arms were there cut of yt day. For at the same hour: began a thing, whereof
afterward so many ladies and damoyselles were with out husbands and without
lovers, so many of children fatherless, and so many chirches wasted and
distroyed that never sithe were repaired. What shall I tell you more? wit it that
they fought there so long within the halle of the Palace: that the noys went
through all the town. Tha^ should ye have seen the bourgeys, Merchants, and
men of craft with axes swerdes and other wepyns, and came to the Castle ward
about seven thousand men and more. But the enter of the Palace of Aygremount
was narow, and ye French men were within that kept them well that they entered
not in at their case. Alas what terryble and unhappy a slaughter was there that
day. For the folk of king Charlemayne were but a few to the regard of them of
the other part. And as ye may know such assemble was right evil. So
defended them self much noblye and valyauntlye the folk of king Charlemayne
and so much that Lohier seeing that, that he and his folk had the worse: he
smote a knight by fore ye duke Benes of Aygremount by such a wise that he
overthrew him down dead forth said he gods curse have thou, and afterward he
said pyteously in waylyng himself. Lord God that within the holy womb of the
blessed vyrgyn Marye took thy herbowrynge and suffered death and passion for to
redeem mankind, wilt defend me this day from shameful death and from
tourment, for I wot well, but yt it be that your high diuynitie socoure me this
day: I shall not see ye king Charlemayne my father no more. Than the Duke
called high upon him saying, Lohier so help me God this day shall be your
last. It shall not be so said Lohyer. And with this he smote the Duke upon
the head, but his helm saved him. And the stroke descended to the heel of him
so that the blood ran out. By God said Lohier ye shall not escape. Than came
the duke Benes of Aigremount to him as wood and sore an angered, saying I
should praise my self full little it I might not avenge me upon thee. So heaued
up the Duke his brande of steel and smote Lohyer so hard upon his bright
helm that he cleued him to the teeth. And Lohyer fell dead before him. upon the
pauement of the Halle. Ha God what great damage has done the Duke Benes of
Aygremou^t to have thus slain Lohier the eldest son of the great king
Charlemayne. Forafterwarde all the oste of France was in much great and
innumerable tourmente therefore and in right great pain continual, and the
Duke himself dyed therefore, full soryly. That was the payment that he had for
it, as ye here after shall hear if peasybly ye will hear me.

NOw is outrageouslye slain the good Lohyer the eldest son of king
Charlemayne And ye duke Benes of Aygremount full of cruelnes took the head from
the body of him. And after that the folk of the said Lohyer the son of the
great king Charlemayne saw they. Lord dead: think ye they made no great
defense. Always of a hundred that they were entered within the palace with
their Lord Lohyer abode there on live but.xx. whereof ye duke incontynente
made.x. of them to be slain, and the other.x. he retained a live, and to them
said, if ye will promise and swear to me upon your oath and faith of
knighthode that ye shall bear your Lord Lohyer to his father the King
Charlemayne, and say to him that I send to him his son Lohyer in good array,
and that in an evil hour he did send him to me for to tell me such words,
I shall let you go quyte and saute, and to him ye shall say that for him I
shall not do the mountenaunce of a Penny, and that I shall go upon him in this
Summer next coming with fourtye thousand men, and that I shall destroy him
and all his land. They answered, Sir we shall do that, that shall please you
to command us. Tha^ the Duke did do make redyly a byere, and made the corpse
of Lohyer to be put within the said byere. And after he delivered it to his.x.
knights that were left on live and put it in a carte to draw with two horses.
And the Duke conveyed them thorough the Town. And when they were in the
feeldes: the.x. knights began to weep and to make great moan for their
Lord Lohier saying, alas my lord Lohier what shall we no we say for you to
the King your father that so great sorrow shall have, when he shall know your
cruel death. We may well be incertayne that, that he shall make us all dye.
Thus weepynge and making their moan for the love of their Lord Lohyer, the
rode on their way straight to Paris.

But now we shall here leave to speak of the messangers and shall tell you
of the King Charlemayne that was at Paris.

CHarlemayne that was at Paris with a great multitude of Lords that were there
assembled.

And there upon a day king Charlemayne said unto his Lords and barons. Lords
I am much wroch and sorry of my son Lohyer that I have sent to Aygremounte,
and I fear me sore that they have take debate with the duke Benes of
Agremounte, which is fell, and cruel, and I doubt me lest, he has slain
my son Lohier. But by my crown if he have so done, or any thing that
turns to dyspleasure or dommage to my said son: I shall go upon him with a
hundred thousand men and shall make him to be hanged at agybet. Sir said the
good Duke Aims of Dordonne, I shall come^ you right sore, if he has offended
against you that ye make punyssyon thereof and wreke on him great vengeance.
He is your liege man, and ought to serve, praise and honor you. Always if he
has trespassed against you in any manner I am right sorye for it, and if ye
have a cause to be wroth with him, I have hear my four sons, That is to
wit Reynawde Alarde Guycharde and Richard, that been right valiant as ye sir
well know which shall be trusty and true to you. Aymon said the king Charlemayn
I conne you great thank of the offer that now ye have done to me.

And it is my will that ye make the^ to come hither presently to the end that
I make them knights, and I shall give to them Castelles, towers and Towns,
and Cities enough. Than sent the duke Aims Incontinent for his children, and
made them to come before king Charlemayne. And when the king Charlemayne saw
them: they pleased him much, and Reynawde was the first that spoke and said.
Sir if it please yon for to make us knights, we shall be ever ready for to serve
you and your noble Lordshyp. Tha^ the king Charlemayne called his steward and
said to him. Bring to me the arms that were the king Cedres which I have
with my hands slain in battle before Pampelune and shall give them to the
gentle Reynawde as to him that is as I wene the most valiant of all, and of
other good arms I shall give to the other three brethren. So brought there
the steward ye arms that were full fair and rich, and than were armed the
four gentyl brethren children to the good Aims of dordo^ne, and Ogyer of
Denmark that was of their kynne did on their spurs to the new knight
Reynawde, and the king Charlemayne gyrde him his swearde, and than doubed him
to a Knighte saying God encreace in thee goodness, honor, and worthiness. And
than mounted Reinawde on horsbacke upon Bayard that was such a horse, that
never was his like in all the world nor never shall be except Busifal the horse
of the great King Alexander. For as for to have run.xxx. mile together he
would never have sweted.

The said Bayard this horse was grown in the Isle of Borusca^, and Mawgys the
son of the duke Benes of Aygremount had given to his cousin Reynawde, that
after made the King Charlemayne full wroth and sorry, as ye shall now hear
here after.

REynawde was a horse back with a Sheelde painted hangyng at his neck, and
thwerled his sword by great fyersnesse. And wit well that he was a fair knight
wounderful great and well founded, and of him was a fair sight, for well he
seemed one of the most valiant Knights that men could find in all the
world. And the Barons that were there said. Ha god what a fair Knight is he?
Never was nor shall be seen so fair a man of arms as Reynawde, god increase
to him honor and worthynesse, goodness and pryse. And after were much
honorably and worthily arrayed and armed the other three brethren of Reynawde,
and since light all on horseback under Saint Victor nyghe Paris. Than made the
king Charlemayne to set up in the ground a post against which he made the
new knights for to assaye them self. They Iusted much worthily, but Reynawde
Iusted best upon his horse bayarde, and right well lyked and were a greable
unto charlemayne the faytes of the valiant knight Reynawde, unto whom the
king said, Reynawde from hens forth ye shall come with us in battle and
Reynawde answered him in this manner. Sir god yield it you an hundred thousand
times, and I promit you in good faith to obey and serve you truly. Nor never ye
shall find my self in no forfayte, but if it com of you.

THe Emperor Charlemaine after the Iustynge was done: he returned to his
Palace in Paris. Than he resoned with his princes and Barons, and there were
the duke Naymes of bauyres Oger the dane and the A^chebysshop Turpin, and said
to them in this wise. barons said he I cannot maruayle me to much of Lohier my
eldest son that ^a^ieth so long in his message I have great fear that some
incontinent be happed unto him. I dremed this night in my sleep that the
thonder bolte fell upon my Son Lohier, and then came the Duke benes of
Aygremount upon him and smote his head of, but by my bearde if he have done
so: whiles he lives he shall never accord with me. Nor I shall never have
Joy at my heart. For it is he that I love best in this world. Sir said ye
duke Naymes I believe not such things, nor unto such dremes ye shall not give
no credence, always said the king if he have done so: I shall never leave him
the value of a penny, for I shall send for the Normans, the Bernyge^s, the
Fleminges, the cha^penoys, the Almaynes, the Bauiers and for Englishemen, and
so shall I go upon him and shall utterly destroy him, and Naymes said ever
unto him that he should not fraye him self of nothing till that he knew the
certentye. And as they spoke thus: there came rydi^g a messenger upon a horse
fauell sore sick and werye, and also sore wounded unto the death. He came unto
Paris before the Palace where King Charlemayne was at the wyndowes. And when he
saw come the Messanger: he came down lightlye from the Palace halle unto the
gate and with him Naymes of Bauyer and Ogyer the Dane. And when the Messanger
saw the king: he salued him fall soft as he that was right sorye and sore
wounded, and that with pain might speak, and said in this manner wise. Great
folly ye did, when ye did send my Lord your son for to ask trybute and
obeyssaunce of the Duke Benes of Aygremounte, the which trybute your son
asked him sha^fully, but the duke which is sore fell and cruel when he heard
speak my said lord your son: he commanded to a mayny of knights yt were
there yt he should betake and yt he should never return again to you for to
recou^t his message nor what answer he had found to ye which taki^g: ye meddle
was great and cruel, so that your dear son Lohier was dead there. And the
Duke Benes of Aygremount killed him and all your folk except me and.ix other
that conduyte and bring your son in a byere. And I my self am sore hurt as
ye may se. And than the messa^ger could speak no more. But fell down in a
swoune of the great grief and sore that he felt because of his wounds. And
when the king had heard these words: he fell down upon the ground for the great
sorrow that he took thereof and wrange his hands, and pulled his beard. And
tare all his here is saying. Ha good lord that made heaven and earth, ye have
brought me in great sorrow and tourment Irrecouerable that never shall cease
with me. So require I unto you the death humbly. For never more desire I not to
live. The good duke of Bauyre began to recomfort him, saying. For gods love
sir tourment not your self, but have good heart and hope in god and recomfort
your folk. And this would say the duke Naymes for the^ that he saw weep there
for their ki^smen and friends that were dead with Lohier. And do (said he to ye
king) let your son be worshypfully buried at saint Germayne of the meadows.
And than ye shall go upon the Duke Benes of Aygremount with all your noble
power, and great puyssaunce, and shall destroy him and all his lands at your
pleasure.

Than the king Charlemayne recomforted him self, and well he knew that Naymes
cou^selled him truly and lawfully. Than said the king, Barons make ready, and
we shall go against my dear son Lohier. And incontinent all the princes and
Barons made them self redye for to do the commandment of the king. And
when they were gone two mile out of Paris: they met with the corpse. And were
there with the King Naymes Ogyer. Sampson of bourgoyne, and many other great
Lords. Than said the king Charlemayne when he saw the body of his dear
son Lohier: Alas how shamefully am I created? he descended from his horse a
foot, and took up the cloth that was upon the biere and beheld his son
Lohier. Than saw he the head yt was smytte^ of from the body and the face that
was all to Hewn. Ha good Lord said he, how well may I be made now al quick,
well I ought for to hate ye duke Benes of Aygremou^te that thus has murdered
my son, he than kissed his child al bloudiful often and said unto him in
this wise. Ha fair son ye were a talle man and a gentil knight. Now pray I
the puyssant God of glory that he take your soul this if it be his pleasure
into his Realm of Paradyse. Great sorrow made the king Charlemayne for the
death of his son Lohier. But always recomforted him the good Duke Naymes And
the^ Ogyer the Dane and Sampson of Bourgoyne took him under the arms of him
and led him unto saint Germayne of the meadows. And there the body of Lohier
was buried and enoynted with balm as it apperteyneth unto all the sons of
kings. Thus was he put into his grave God have of his Soul mercy.

WE shall been here to speak of the good king Charlemayne yt was much sori of
his son Lohier as ye have heard, and shall tell you of the good Duke Aymon of
Reynawde, his son, and of his three brethren that were at Paris. My children
said Aymon, ye know how the King Charlemayne is much wroth and not without a
cause, by cause yt my brother your uncle has slain Lohier his son. And I
wot well that he shall go upon him with all his puyssaunce, but verelye we
shall not go with him. But rather shall we go to Dordon, and if the King make
war against him we shall help him with all our power. So lyghted anon on
horseback the good duke Aymon and the four knights his children, and bayted
no where till they came to Laon and from the^s they rode so long till they came
to Dordon. And when the Lady saw her Lord and her four children: she was
right glad and went against them for to welcome them, and asked after tydinges,
and if Raynawde and his other childeren were made knights? Than the good duke
answered yea, and after she asked why they were departed fro the kings court?
And than he rehearsed unto her word by word, how his brother the duke Benes had
slain Lohier the son of the King Charlemayne. Whereof the good Lady Margery
was wonde^full wroth and sorye. For well she knew that this death of Lohier
was the totalle dystruccion of the Duke Aymon her housbande of her self and of
her childerne and of their land. She heard Renawde her eldest Son that
thretened Charlemayne the great King, then said to him the Lady his Mother.
My Son Reynawde I pray thee understand me alytle. Love thy sovereign and thy
natural Lord, and dread him above all thing, and bear him honor and
reverence. And God shall reward thee for it, and ye my Lord Aymon I am much
marvelled of you that are departed from Charlemayne without leave of him ye
has done to you so much good and so great worship, and has given to your
sons so noble and so rich arms and has made them knights with his own
hands, more great honor he might not do to you nor to your children. Lady
said ye Duke we be thus departed from King Charlemayne because that my brother
has slain his son as I have told you before. A God said ye Lady that of the
virgin was borne in bethlehem, how has that evil this day surmounted the
good? For gods love my Lord said the Lady meddle not withal. For ye shall
see this next so^mer that the king shall go upon your brother, and by my
counsel serve the king your rightwyse Lord, nor fail him for nothing. For
and ye do otherwise: ye shall be untrue and false toward your Sovereign and
natural Lord.

Lady said the duke by god omnipotente I would lever have lost my castle and
the half of my land, than that my brother should have slain Lohier. Now the
will of god be done therein, and none other wise.

TO speak of the good Duke Aymon of Dordo^ and of his wife the duchess and of
their sons: we shall here leave, and shall return to speak of king
Charlemayne that was come again to paris, maki^g great sorrow for his son
Lohier. There had you seen many a gown torn and broken, many a hand
wrongen, and many hears of the head pulled so that it was piti and wonder for
to se. Alas mi dear son said king Charlemayne, he yt has slain thee so
cruelly loved me but little. I shall never be in quiet nor in rest till that I
have take vengeance of thy death. Sir said the duke Bauyere have mercy of your
self. For it behooves not so great a prince as ye be for to make so great
sorrow as ye do. And in ye mean while came a messenger before ye king, which
showed to him how Aymon Duke of Dordon and his four sons were gone into
their country, whereof the king was sore an angered and wroth.

And swear god and saint Denis ye before he should dye: that Aymon and his
chylderen should abye full sore for it and that ye duke Benes of Aygremou^te
should not keep them therfro The dinner was ready and they washed their hands
and were set at dinner but wit it that the king did eat but little, as he yt
was in great melancolye, and the fair Salamon served that day before him the
cup, and great people was there. After diner the Emperor Charlemayne did
reason with his barons and said to the^ (lord said he) ye duke Benes of
Aygremount has done to me great outrage yt so shamefully has slain my
son Lohier. But and it please God I shall go wreke it upon him this next
somer and I shall destroy all his land, and if I may take him I shall not
leave him for the duke Aymon ye shamefullye is gone from me, nor for his four
sons that I have made knights whereof I me repent sore, but that I shall
make them to be hanged. Sir said than ye duke Naymes now hear what I shall say
to you, your son is dead by great unhap and well in an evil hour was he put
to death, for never death was so sore sold ne so dear bought as this shall be.
So send now for your folk through all your lands, and than from hens toward
Aygremounte take your way. And if ye may take the Duke Benes, let the death of
your son Lohier be to him full dear soulde.

NAymes said the king ye be a good man, sage curtoyse and valiant, even thus
shall I do, for well wisely ye have counseled me. Than gave he leave to many
of his barons and gentil men that were in his court at that time and told
them that each of them should go into his country for to make them self ready,
and that they should come again to him the next summer. So was it done as ye
king had commanded And thus went the barons and the gentil men from ye
court into their country, and by them were tydinges brought through all the
lands unto Rome, that king Charlemayne made a great assemble of men of arms,
so that the renome thereof floughe unto the duke Benes of Aygremountes court,
which of that other part did send for his kynsmen and friends, and in
especial for his brethern Gerarde of Roussylon, and Dron of Nantuel, so that
they were wha^ they came together well four score thousand fighting men and
mo, and as fair folk as ever were seen, which than said I believe if the
king besyege the Castle: that the worse shall return unto him. Than said the
Duke Benes of Aygremount to Gerarde of Roussilon. Brother said he be not
dysmayed, for I hope to hurt the king so sore if he come upon us: that he shall
be weary of his bargayn, but let us go forth toward Troy in cha^paygne and
there we shall fight with the king vygorously. For well I wot that God shall
help us against hi^. This was at the beginning of the month of May, and
Charlemayn was at Paris, that abode after his men that should come, for to go
with a great puyssaunce upon the Duke Benes of Aygremount. And bode not long
that Rychard of Normandy came to the king with.xxx. thousand fyghtyng men.
And of a another side came to him the Earl Guy that had with him a right noble
and a great company of good men, and after him came Salamon of Bertayne and the
Earl Huon. And of al sides ye should have seen come to the King Charlemayne
Poeteui^s Gascoyns, Normans, Flemynges, Bernyers, and Bourgoynes, and so many
other great Lords that it was great wonder for to see, which came all and
Lodged themself in ye meadows of saint Germayne.

THan when the king Charlemayne knew that this folk was all arrived: he had of
it great Joy, and incontinent made his batayles to depart, for to go to his
enterprise, and made of Rychard of Normandy, of Valleran of Buyllon, of
Guydellon of bauyere, of yzacar of Nemours, of Oger the bane. and of Escouf the
son of Oedon with them.xl. thousand men his forewarde. There should ye have
se^ a right noble company, and many hardi men, they departed from nigh Paris.
And put them self to ye way straight to Aygremounte, and they (thus rydyng
after many days Iurney which I can not tell) came there straight to Ogyer the
Dane that was in the forewarde a messanger sore hastyly riding. That asked to
whom was this noble company, and he answered to him that they were king
Charlemaynes folk. Than said sir the messanger that he would well speak with
him, than went Oger the Dane and showed him the king. And as soon as the
messanger saw him: he made him due reverence, and the king gave him again his
salute, and him demanded what he was and fro whens he came? and ye messanger
told him that he was of Troy and yt unto him he was sent fro Aubery the lord
of Troy that was his liege man, which besought him humbly for socoures. For
the Duke Benes of Aygremount, and his two brethren Gerarde of Roussyllon, and
Dron of Nantuel and with them an hundred thousand fighting men had besyeged
him within Troy. And that if ye came not to help hi^, he must yield up the
town, also the fair tower that Julius Caesar did build there.

When Charlemayne the Emperor understood that Troi was besyeged by the duke
Benes and his brethren, he was full sorry of it and he swore by Saint Denis of
France, that he should go there with his army, and that if he might hold the
duke of Aygremounte he should make him dye a shameful death, so called he the
Duke Naymes of bauyere, Goodebew of fryse, and the Duke Walleran and said to
them. Barons ye understand what this messa^ger says, let us ride hastelye
toward Troy or it be take, and they answered to him right gladly that they
would do it so. So did they ride a good pace till that they came nyghe Troy.
And first of all came the forewarde with the Oryflame. Of the which were
governors Ogyer the Dane, Richard of Normandy, and the duke Walleran, and wc
them forty thousand men. And the Messanger of Troy that conduyted them. And
when they were come so nyghe yt they saw Troy before the^: a messanger came to
Gerard of roussyllon that was before Troy, saying to him that the king
Charlemayne came upon them for to socoure Aubery with a right great and
puissaunt company. Than laid Gerarde to his brethren, that is to wit Duke
Benes of Aygremount, and ye Earl Dron of Nantuell that it were good that they
should go against king Charlemayne with all their puissau^ce and that each of
them should prove himself a good man. They did so as they had devised, and
Gerarde of Roussillon was the first in the forewarde, and they rode so long
till yt the one party saw the other. Than said Ogier the Dane to Richard of
Normandy when he saw come Gerarde of Roussillon se: said he how Gerard of
Roussyllon weneth for to fare foul with us. But now let us think for to
defend us well, so much that the worship abide to the King Charlemayne and to
us. And than they let run their horses fro one part and fro the other, and
Gerarde of Roussyllon went and smote an Almayne with his spear so much, that
he made it to enter through the body of him. Which fell anon dead to the
ground, and Gerard took his baner and cried with an high voice Roussyllon
Roussyllon.

THan began the battle sore strong fell and cruel. And when Ogyer the dane
saw thus his folk dye; he was wood and mad with it. So went he and smote a
knight named Pouson by such a wise that he put his spear thorough the body of
him which fell down dead before him. And when Gerarde had seen the same: he
went and smote one of Ogyers men, so that all dead he cast him before him. And
then he said ye have this for your masters sake Ogyer. Much great and
meruayllous was the stoure and the battle so fires. For there should ye have
seen so many of sheeldes perced and cloven, and so mani a habergeon broken, and
salettes and helmes vnbokled and sore beten, and so many me^ lying upon the
other dead, that all the earth was covered with ye blood of the dead men (and
of them that were hurt there) so ye it was a great pity to for to see. And
than came the duke Benes of Aygremounte that spurred his horse terrtblie, and
went and smote Enguerran lord of Peroune and of saint Quintine so hard that
he overthrew him dead before hi^ and than said. Now go gods curse have thou,
and cried with an high voice Aygremounte, and than came to him his brother the
Duke of Nantuell with all his folk, and they went al together upon
Charlemaynes folk, and of the other part came with great puissaunce. Almaynes
poeteuins and Lumbardes also yt were of the part of king Charlemayne. So
meddled them self the one party among the other. And there was much hard and
horrible assemble. For there were slain many mighty and worthy knights of
both sides, and Richard of Normandye showed well there his great prowess and
worthiness. For he went and smote a knight yt Gerarde of Roussillon loved much
by such a strength that he ouerthrewe him dead from his horse to the earth
before the said Gerarde. Which than said.

Now am I well sorry and wroth for him that now is dead that I loved so sore,
certes I shall never have Joy at my heart but yt I be avenged thereof shortly.
Than took Gerarde of Roussillon his baner in his fist. But his brother
Nantuell came anon to him and said, brother I counsel you that ye turn
again. For here comes Charlemayne with his folk, and well I tell you that if
we abide him: the loss shall turn upon us. And while they were speaking
thus: Walleran of Bollon smote ye neuew of Gerarde of Roussillon so that he
foyned at him, with his sword through the body of him and fell down dead to
ye earth. Than trowed Gerarde to have gone out of his wit, and sent anon for
the duke Benes his brother yt he should come soon to succoure him, and he did
so as pren and valiant that he was. And of the other side assembled there the
king and his folk.

So shall you now hear of a thing meruaylous of so great a nobles ye at the
same feeld were cruelly slain. This was in the month of May upon a morning
that king Charlemayne did assemble his folk with the folk of the duke of
Aygremou^te and of his brethren. To the which assemble ye should have seen
many fair harnayses shynynge for the Sun that fair and clear was ye day,
the which assemble was wunderfull strong. For there were so many feet and
heads smytten of and so many good horses slain, and the other ran thorough
the meadows whereof the masters lay dead upon the grass. And wit it for
truth yt there were dead that same day of the one side and of the other: more
than xl. thousand men. A God what slaughter, there was much great nobles dead.
The duke Benes sore angered went and smote sir Walter Lord of Pierrele in his
shield so yt his spear went through the body of him and fell down dead before
him. Than cried he with an hye voice his baner Aygremounte.

GReat was the preas, and ye battle fyers and meruaylous. And there showed
Rychard of Normandy much worthili his great hardynes. For he Iusted against ye
duke of Aygremou^t so that he perced his sheelde and did hurt him right sore
and said to him by God ye shall not this day escape death. It was an evil
day for you when ye did slay my Lord Lohier, and with that he did draw out
his sword, and smote the duke again upon his helm in such a wise that if it
had not ben a coyfe of steel that made his stroke to slide the said Benes had
be dead ye hour And the stroke fell down upon the horse, and cut ye horse in
two as though it had be nothing. And thus fell the horse dead under his
master. Tha^ was ye Duke Benes sore abashed when he thus found him self a
ground But he stood upon his feet redely as he that was preu and valyaunte
holdyng his sword in his hand, and went and smote a knight named sir Simon so
that he killed him sterke dead in the place. And than he called with an high
voice. Aygremount his baner. Than came to him his two brethren, the Duke of
Roussillon and of Nantuell, and of the side of king Charlemayne came Ogyer
Naymes, Wallera^ of Bollon, Huo^ lord of Mauns the Earl Salamon Leon of Frise
the archebisshop Turpyn and Escoufe the son of Oedo^ And than should ye have
seen there at that assemble much great and meruayllous noblesse of knights
that lay dead upon ye earth, the one upon ye other that it was a pyteous sight
for to behold.

TO this inhumayne occysion was come the emperor Charlemayne cryinge barons if
they escape us we shall never have honor, and than he bare up his spear to
the rest and went and smote into the sheelde of Gerarde of Roussyllon so yt he
overthrew both horse and man to the ground, and there had be his last day if
it had not ben the Duke Benes and Dron his brethern, yt much worthily and with
great dylyge^ce succored him. Of that other party came Ogyer the Dane upon his
good horse Broyforte that smote a knight of the folk of Gerard duke of
Roussyllon called Sir Foulquer so that he cloue him to the teeth and fell down
dead unto the earth. And when Gerarde of Roussyllon saw thus his knight slain
he called to god and to our lady saying. Well have I this day lost my fair
and good knight. And the duke of Aygremou^t was sore abashed and prayed God
also full pyteously yt it would please him to keep him from death, and from
falling in to the hands of Charlemayne. Nyghe was the son under and it was
well about co^plyn time and the fyghters of the one part and of the other
were voery and sore chauffed, And so wythdrewe the three brethren abacke unto
their Tents with much wrath, and in especyal Gerarde of Roussyllon that had
lost that day Aymanoy his cosyn and a hundred other of the best Knights of his
company. And he said in this wise. An evil hour it was when the son of
Charlemain was slain. Than came to him the duke Benes of Aygremou^t bledyng as
he yt was horribly wounded. And when Gerarde saw him: he began to sygh
te^derly saying. Fair brother are ye wounded to death? Nay said he I shall
soon be whole. Than swore Gerarde the duke of Roussyllon that to morrow at ye
son rising: He should begin again ye battle against king Charlemayne and his
folk wherefore thyrty thousand shall lose their lives. Alas for god nay said
his brother the Duke Nantuell. But if ye will do my counsel we shall send
xxx. of the wysest knights that we have unto king Charlemayne, and by our
said knights we shall do him to wit and show hu^bli yt he have pity and
mercy of us, and that the Duke Benes our brother shall amend him the death of
his son Lohier even so as it shall be aduysed by the princes and barons of his
felawshyp and of ours, and ye know well all ready yt we ben his lyege men, and yt
for to war against him we do cruel falshed, and yet more it is, that if he
had lost all his folk that he has here with him, or ever yt it were a month
passed he should have recovered twyse as many, so may we nothing do against
him. And therefore may we nothing do against him, and therefore I pray you my
brethern, that ye will do thus, and to him answered his two brethren that
they would do it, syn that he counseled the^ so, and concluded together yt
they should send thither as soon as it were day. They made that night good
watch unto the morning, and than they made redi their messangers for to send
to the king Charlemayne, And when they were ready: Gerarde of Roussyllon said to
them. Lords say well to king Charlemayne that we be sore dyspleased of the
death of his son Lohier. and yt our brother the duke Benes repents him
self of it full sore, and that if it please him to have mercy of us that we
shall go and serve him where it shall please him to send us with.x. thousand
fighting men. And also ye shall say to Naymes of Bauyere that we pray him yt
he will enploy himself toward the king Charlemayne that this accord may be
had.

AFter that the messa^gers had well all alonge understand what they should say
to the King Charlemaine from ye three brethern dukes: They lyghted on
horsbacke each of them, berynge branches of Olyue tree in their hands, in
token of peace. And ceased not to ride till that they were come before ye tente
of the king charlemayne. Than spoke one of them which was named steven, that
salued the king in this manner. Sir I pray our lord that of his grace give you
good life and long. And wit sir that the duke Gerarde of Roussyllon and the
Duke Benes of Aygremount and Dron of Nantuell ben come hither the which cry
you mercy, and beseech you right humbly that it please you to pardon them the
death of your son Lohier. Of the which they are wroth and sorry. And ye duke
of Aygremount let you wit by us, that if it be your pleasure to do so: that
he and his brethren shall be your lyege men, and shall come to serve you with.x.
thou sand fyghting men in all that shall be your pleasur to enploy them, sir for
gods sake have remembrance that god forgave his death to Longes ye cruelly
sticked him to the heart. wherefore sir please it you to pardon the^, and take
them to your good grace. And of this right humbly they beseech you.

When the king Charlemayne had thus heard speak ye messangers of the three
brethern: He from peled his forehead, and knitted his brows, and looked full
angrely, and at that hour he answered to them nothing, and than soon after
he began to speak in this manner. By my faith sir Steven said he well had the
duke Benes lost his wits when he so shamfully slew my dear son Lohier,
which I loved so tenderly. Now is he my man will he or not. Sir said Steue^ I
am certain that he shall do to you all reason to the direction of your good
counsel.

Than said the king of this we shall counseyll us, and withdrewe him a little a
side, and called to him duke Naymes. Ogyer the Dane, sir Salamon. Huon of
Mauns. Walleran of Bollon. Odet of Langres, and Leon of Fryse, and said to
them. Lords here ben the messangers of the duke Benes and of his brethren yt
send me word yt they will come for to serve me where my will shall be with.x.
thousand good fyghting me^ if we will pardon them the death of my son
Lohyer. And they shall be our vassayle and true liege men, and of us they shall
hold their lands and their lordeships. Sir answered the duke Naimes in this
is nothing but well. So counsel I you that ye pardon them. For they be much
valyaunte, and of great renome.

Wherefore pardon them if it please you.

THan by the Counsel of the Duke Naymys of Bauyere the king did pardon the
three brethren and called to him the.iii. knights, and said to them, how he
pardoned the three dukes the death of his son Lohier, by such a condition
that the duke Benes of Aygremou^t should come for to serve him at the feast of
Saint John next coming with.x. thousand fyghtyng men well arrayed, and ye shall
tell to them that they surely come now to me for to take of them their oath
and faith that they shall fro hens forth, obey and serve truly. And that of me
they shall hold all their lands. Then departed the knights from before the
king Charlemayne and came again unto the Dukes and showed unto them how they
had sped of their message with the king Charlemayn whereof the three brethern
thanked much humbly our lord God. Then said the duke Richard of Roussyllo^ it
is reason that we take of our good gowns and go to the king Charlemayne naked
and cry him mercy of this that we have thus offended against his high
puyssaunce and lord ship, and the other two brethern answered that well they
ought to do so. So took ye noble knights their clothes of, and al naked bare
foot and in poor estate departed from their lodges, and well four thousand
knights with them all bare foot and in their shertes, and in such estate as
were their masters. In this wise they came tofore the king Charlemayne. And
wit well that in right great humility were set the three brethren for to have
peace and accord with the king Charlemain that was wroth to them specially to
the Duke of Aygremount as more plainly ye shall hear here after.

When the king Charlemayn saw thus come ye three brethren with their barons
and knights: he called to him the duke Naymes and many other barons, and said
to the^, can ye not tell me what folk ye see yonder coming? Sir said the dukes
Naymes it is the Duke Benes of Aygremount with his folk, that come for to
require you of mercy. (This hanging) ye Duke Benes of Aygremount came before
the king and cast himself upon his knee, and said unto him in this wise. Sir
for god I cry God mercy we ben here comen by your commandment, if I have
slain your dear Son by my folly: I now as your man yield me and my brethren
also Gerarde of Roussyllon and Dron of Nantuell and will be your lyege men and
serve you with all our puyssaunce where your pleasure shall be to set unto, and
never days of our lives we shall fail you but if it belong in you.

Than when the king saw them thus come humbly toward his presence in their
shertes and barefoote and had heard this that the Duke of Aygremount had said
to him: he had of them right great pity, and pardoned them the death of his
Son Lohier and all his evil will. Than should ye have seen from one part and
from the other kiss and colle each other their kynnesmen, and some wept for
Joy and the other for pity.

When were peased ye barons with the king Charlemayne by the counsel of the good
duke Raymos: than swear and promised the three brethern good fydelitie to the
king Charlemayne, and that they should serve him at all times yt he should call
for the^. So took they a glad leave from the king, but the king charged the
Duke of Aygremount that she should come to serve him at the feast of saint John
next coming. And than returned king Charlemayne toward Paris, and the
brethren went again right glad each of them toward his place, for well
they trowed for to have accord the Duke Benes of Aygremount their brother
toward Charlemayne, but otherwise it went and full little was worth their
accord for soon after dyed thereof the Duke Benes of Aygremount by treason and
under the saufe conduyte of the king Charlemayne, as ye shall understand if ye
will hear me. Ye shall wit that a little before the feast of saint John baptyst
that the king Charlemayne held a great court in Paris and the Duke Benes
forgot not to go thither as he had promised, so departed he fro Aygremou^te
with two hundred knights and took his way to Paris toward ye king for to
serve hi^ where he would put him unto. Now shall ye hear how the king being
in paris, came toward him the earl Guenes his neuewe. A^ry foulquet of
Moryllo^ Hardres and Berenger, which told hi^ how ye duke Benes came for to
serve him with two hundred knights, sayi^g by this manner. Sir how may ye love or
well be served of him that so cruelly has slain your son our cousin, if
your pleasure were we should well aue^ge you of him. For in good soth we should
slay him. Guenes said the king it were treason, for we have given to him
trewes, always do with it your will, so that the sin turn not upon me,
and keep you. for in certain the duke of Aygremou^t is right mighty and of
great kynred, and well ye might hap to have a do if ye fulfill in this your
own intent. Sir answered Guenes care ye not therefore, for therein is so rich a
man in all the world ye durst undertake any thing against me and my lineage.
Sir said Guenelon to morrow erly we shall depart with four thousand fyghting
me^, and take no care for it. For we shall deliver this world of him. Certes
said the king it were treason. care not therefore said Guenes he slew well your
son Lohyer by treason which was my kynsma^ and therefore I will be avenged
and I can. Now do you there in said the king protestynge always that I am
not thereto consentyng.

When the morning came: departed well erly fro Paris the said Guenelon and his
felawes and with them well four thousand fighting men, and never they tarried
till that they came in the valey of Soyssons, and there they recountred the
Duke Benes with his puyssaunce and when the Duke Benes saw them come: he said to
his folk. lords I trow that yonder be some folk of the kings that return
again from the court. It is no force said one of his knights. I wot not what
it may be said the duke. For the king Charlemayne is sore vengeable for to
avenge him self, and also he has with him a lynage of folk the which be fell
and cruel. It is Guenes Foulquet of Moryllon and certain other of his court,
and in troth to night in my sleep I dreamed that a Gryffon came out of the
Heavens that perced my sheelde and all mine arms, so that his nails stacke
into my Liver and my mylte, and all my men were thereof in great tourme^t, and
they all were eaten with bores and of Lions, and none of them escaped, but one
alone. And also me seemed that out of my mouth issued a white Dove. Than said
one of his knights that it was all but well, and that for cause of this dreme
he ought not to dismay himself. I wot not said the duke what god shall send
me, but of this my heart dredeth. So commanded the duke Benes that every man
should arm hi^ self, and his knights answered that right gladly they would
so do. So began eueryche of them to seek his arms and habylyme^res. Here
shall you hear of the hard hewynge and of a thing heavy to be recounted of the
great slaughter that made ye tray tour Guenellon of the good Duke Benes of
Aygremount.

THe Earl Guenes rode with great force that was wonderful strong and fyers
and well accompanied. Than went and met with the Duke Benes first Foulquet of
Moryllon the which said to him that he had done il for to slay Lohyer ye
eldest son of king Charlemayne, but or ever the even came: he should have a
sorry reward for it. When the duke understood him: he meruayled him self much
and said Ha god how might one keep him from traitors. Alas I held the king
Charlemayne for a true prince and I se now the contrary but a fore yt I dye I
shall sell my death full dear. Than went they and fought ye one party against
the other much angry in so much yt Guenes smote by force the duke his cosyn
Reyner so that he overthrew him down dead to the earth before his fete and
after he cried with an hye voice, smite on knights for he slew my good cousin
Lohier the duke Benes of Aygremou^t dayned not accord with me, but now I
shall sell it him full dear. So ranguenes and his folk upon the duke of
Aygremount, and the Duke right worthyly defended himself and smote a knight
named sir Fawcon so that he shoued his sword into the body of him, and he
fell dead before him. And after this the Duke Benes of Aygremount took himself
for to weep strongly, and wisshed much after his two brethern and also after
his neuewes. Alas said he dear Son Mawgys where be you now that ye be not
here for well I wot if ye wyste this enterprise ye should well succor me. Ha
my dear brother ye duke of dordon and of na^tuel and Gerard of roussyllon well
I know ye ye shall never se me a live. Alas yt ye know not ye false enterprise
of charlemayn and of ye earl Guenellon, yt so cruelly and by great treason shall
this dai make me in humainli for to dye, well I wot that right worthily ye
should come help me. Ha my dear neuewes reynawde, Alarde Rychard and Guichard
so much need I have this day of you. Ha my dear neuew Reynawde worthy knight,
as you art, if it please unto god of his benign grace, that thou might know the
grievous turment and the sorrowful matter unto the which by treason I am this
day lyuered. Well I wot that by thee I should have succors. For in all ye world
is not thy peer of beauty of goodness of prowess and of worthynes Now may not
this day succoure me al my noble and worthy lineage, but that cruelly and under
the saufconduyte of Charlemayne I shall dye pyteously.

HYers was the bataile and right hard to endure, but well ye may wit yt the
duke of Aygremou^t might not resyste against so many folk. For he had not
with him but two hundred knights, and the other were more than four thousand
thus were they evil matched. Tha^ should ye have seen that dai so much brains
in the feelde, so many feet and heads smyten of, that it was a pytious thing
to behold. After came yet again Guenes that smote Ioyusselyne of Bloy so that
he casted hi^ dead to the earth, and he made soon to go back the Duke Benes
folk of Aygremounte. Than was sore a basshed the duke of Aygremou^t, the
which knew well that without death he might not escape. So went he and smote
one of Guenes folk so great a stroke that he overthrew him dead. For none
other wise he could do, but defend him self as well as he could for to
length his life wythall. Ha god what a great dommage it was to have thus
shamfully betrayed him. For after many chyrches many towns and Castelles were
therefore set in a fire, and so many great nobles full pyteouslye brought to
death. So much sped the traitor Guenes against the good duke of Aygremount
that the folk of the duke were weke and almost go^. For of two hundred yt he
had brought he had no more with him, but forty Barons: said ye duke Benes of
aygremount ye se that we ben almost all dead if we defend us not with great
heart and worthynes. And for gods love let every of us be worth three as
long as we shall now be alive. For ye se that here pyteously we must depart
and break fellowship. Than went the duke again and smote a knight named sir
Helye, so that he made him to fall dead to the earth. And than cried with an
high voice Smite well barons. The valey was fair and sou^ded of ye noise that
was made there, and at that hour one named Gryffon of Hautefell, went and
smote the dukes horse into the breast with his spear so that he overthrew him
under the horse, and the duke anon arose upon his feet, and took his sword
wenyng to smite the said Gryffon, but the stroke fell upon the horse so that he
cut him a sonder as it had been nothing.

When the duke of Aygremou^t saw himself thus on foot he knew well that it was
done of him but well he swear that his death he should sell right dear, but
suddenly came there upon him the earl Guenes that sat upon a good courser ye
which smote the duke Benes of Aygremounte with his spear such a stroke, that
he shoued him through and through his body, and thus fell down dead the duke
Benes of Aygremou^t and than ye duke Griffon ye father of the said Guenes came
to the Duke Benes of Aygremou^t that lay dead upon the sand and shoued his
sword in to his foundement. Than said ye duke Gryffon, no whast thou thy
reward for mi lord Lohiers death yt thou let slew shamefullye with in thy
palace. Now is the good and worthy duke Benes of Aygremount deceassed, god of
his soul have mercy, and the treatour Genellon and the Lord of Hautefell yt
lighted upon a good horse went after the duke of Aigremountes folk yt fled,
which were but.x. a live of two hundred and yet these.x. were soon overtaken,
and than the traitors made them to swear and promyt that the body of ye late
duke their master they should bear to Aygremount, like ye he had do bring the
body of Lohier to paris in a byere, and the said knights promised them for to
do so. So took they the corpse from the other bodies dead, whereof was there
great number, and put him in a byere. And than went on their way with all and
when they were gone a little fercher: God knows what sorrow and lamentacion
that they made for the death of their master, saying. Ha god good duke that
so worthy was how now we are sorry for ye, certainly full evil has done king
Charlemayne that under this saufco^duyte has made thee to be slain in
treason. These sorrowful knights went thus making their moan bearyng the body
of the Duke Benes their master upon a byere that two horses bare, which corpse
never staunched of bledyng by the spare of.viii. miles, and how many days
Journey that these knights were with ye body of their master by ye way: I
cannot tell you. But they went so long that they came nygh Agygremount, and
approached so much that the tidings came to ye town and to ye duchess yt her
lord had be thus traytoruslye slain. So ought not be asked of the great
sororow yt the duchess and her son Mawgis made. They issued after out of the
town with them of the church and went against the corpse. Nor also ought not to
be asked if there were made that day great wepynges and lamentacions. For when
the duchess saw her lord, and the wou^des yt he had in his body more than
three times: she fell down in a swone upon him. And in this wise they bare the
corpse to the chief church and the bishop of the town did the seruyse. And
tha^ he was put in his grave and was right reverently buried. Tha^ said his
son mawgis. Good lord what a damage is this of such a worthy lord to have
be thus slain cruelly by treason, but and if I live long Charlemayne and the
traitors yt thus have done: shall abye for it full dearly. His lady mother he
recomforted and said to her. My dear mother have a little patience. For mine
uncles Gerarde of Roussyllon Dro^ of nantuel, and my cosyns Reynawde Alarde,
Guicharde and Richard shall help me well for to avenge the death of my lord
my father. Now shall we leave hear to speak of them of Aygremount yt ben in
great lame^tacion and weepinges for the death of their lord: and shall return
to tell of the traitors Griffon and of Guenes his son that with their folk
were gone again to Paris.

How Gryffon of Haultefell and Guenellon after that they had slain the Duke
Benes of Aygremounte they returned to Paris, and recounted to the king
Charlemayne the mortal treason that they had commysed and done. Whereof the
king Charlemayne was glad, But afterward he was full wroth and sorry for it.
For after ye Duke of Aygremou^tes death: his two brethren Gerard of Roussyllon
and Dron of Nantuel warred sore against him with their neuew Mawgys, and than
they made peace and accorded together, but the king Charlemayne appointed not
with the four sons of Aymon, nor to Mawgys their cosyn. Item shows also
the same chapter how Reynawde slew the neuew of king Charlemayne with a chesse
board, as they were playng together at the chesses. Whereof the war began. The
which was sore and mortal, as ye shall now hear here after and lasted so
long that it did great dommage to the Realm of France. Campitulum.ii. Fo.
xiii.
depiction of a group of figures, some on horseback, approaching a walled city

depiction of three armoured men

YE shall mow hear and understand from hensforthon a terryble and a piteous
song, if ye thereafter list to harken. This was at the feast of Penthecoste
after the holy thursdaye, that the king Charlemayne held a great court at
Paris, after that he had accorded with the brethren of the said duke Benes
of Aygremou^t. And to ye said feast came William the English, Walleran of
Bullon.xv. kings, and.xxx. dukes, and well.lx. earls were there at yt day for
to crown Charlemain. And also was come there the duke Aymon, of Dordon with his
four sons, that is to wit Reinawd, Alard, Richard, and Guichard, to the
which Aimon: the king said. Aimo^ said he I love you and your children well.
and wit that I voyl make of the fair Reinawd my stuard, and the other shall
serve me for to bear my faucons and go with me. Sir said the good Aymon I
thank you much of the great worship that ye do to me and to my children. And
wit that they shall serve you truly as your lieg me^, but well I tol you good
king that ye mysprised sore when my brother the duke Benes of Aygremount under
your saufconduit, and in treason ye made thus shamefullye die, and believe that
it greueth me full sore at the heart and if we doubted not you so much, certes
vengeance we should take thereof. But since that my brother Gerard has pardoned
it to you: I forgive it you also. Aimo^ said ye king ye know better than that
ye say. For ye know well the offense that your brother had done to me for to
have slain so crue^ly. Loihere my eldest son yt I loved so much. Now set the
one against the other. and let be spoken no more thereof. No more we shall said
duke Aimon, but well I pray god to have mercy of his soul, for he was a right
worthy knight. The^ came forth Reinawde, Alard, Guychard, and Richard, which
reasoned with the king, saying in this manner. Sir said Reinawde the fairest of
al knights and most expert in faites of knighthode, ye have made me and my
brethern that been now before you knights, but wit it for very certain that we
love you not and that we have toward you a great and a mortal hate for the
death of our uncle the duke Benes of Aygremount, of the which death ye have
not accorded with us. When the king understood Reinawde: he looked grymly and
fyerssly in his visage for great wrath and became black as a cole, and smote
his forhed for anger and after said, Reinawd thou young boy void out of my
presence. For I swear by saint Simon, and if it were not the company of the
barons that be here: I should make thee to be put in such prison that thou
should not see another hand nor foot that thou haste. Sir said Reinawd it
were not reason. But since that it is so far come that ye will not here us: we
shall keep our peace.

THus left the four sons of Aimon the debate and spoke no more to the king
Charlemayn for that time of this matter. Fair was the court, and the day was
full fair and bryghte, and fair was ye company as of.xv. kings.xxx. dukes,
and.lx. earls. They went to the chirch for to hear ye fair mass that was
song, and much rych was the offering. And when they had heard the mass:
they came again to the palace, and asked after water for to wash their hands,
and the dinner was ready, so they washed and set them down to dinner. And
the.xv. kings were all set, except the king Salamon that served that day with
the Duke Godfraye. But Reynawde at this dynner might not eat by cause that the
king Charlemayne had rebuked him so shamefully. Ha said Reynawde to himself
Alas, how shall I conne do so much that I may avenge my self of Charlemayne
for the death of my uncle, yt so much was beloved, which traitorusly and
shamefully has be slain? and if I take not vengeance of it. I shall wexe mad.
In this wise sorowed the good Reinawd, and his brethern recomforted him. The
barons came out after diner for to play and sport them self, and Berthelot
the neuewe of Charlemayn called Reynawd for to play with him, whereof grew a
great mischeef for afterward many a good knight died therefore and many a fair
child fatherles as here after ye shall harken well.

Now was set Berthelot and the worthy Reynawde for to play at the ches which
were of yuory, whereof the board was of gold massy, and so long they played
that debate fell between them two, by such manner that berthelot called Reinawde
horsonne, and took up his hand, and smote Reynawde in the vysage so that the
blood fell to the ground, and when Reynawde saw himself thus shamefully
outeraged: he was right wroth and sore angered and swear by god him should ill
betyde therefore. Tha^ took Reinawd the ches board and smote Berthelot upon his
head so hard that he cloued him to the teeth, and thus Berthelot fell down
dead to the ground before him, so began the cry at that hour sore strong in
the Palace that Reynawde ye son of Aimon had slain Berthelot the neuewe of
king Charlemayn. When the king understood this: he went nyghe out of his
wit, and called of heyghte. Barons keep well that Reinawd escape not. For by
saint Denis of France: he shall not escape quick if we may hold him, for he
has slain our neuew Berthelor. Than ran soon the knights upon Reinawde. And
his kynnesmen defended him nobly. And thus was there great strife and many
here is pulled, and many gowns toren. For such a fray was there never seen as
that day was in the palace of Paris. Many strokes gave there Mawgys the cousin
of Reinawd, and son to the duke Benes of Aygremount. And while that this
fraye was in the palace: Reinawde and his three brethren, and their cosyn
Mawgys escaped redyly out of the palace and came unto their horses that soon
were made redye. So lyghted they on horseback and tode soon out of Paris,
and fled straight unto Dordo^ toward their lady mother.

ANd when the emperor Charlemaine wist that Reinawd and his brethren were gone
out of Paris: he made for to be ready well two thousand knights for to follow
them. Now keep them our lord that on the cross suffered passion. For if the
king hold them: they shall dye without remyssyon, but Reinawde upon him is
no care. For he was upon his horse bayard that goes as the wind. So tarried
not the four brethern and their cosyn till that they came unto Sawmore, and
they bayred their horses of Alarde, Richard and of Guycharde. Thanne began
Reynawde to make sorrow saying. Fair god that suffered death and passion,
keep this day my brethern and my cosyn from the death, and from combraunce,
and from fallinge in the hands of Charlemayne the cruel, and of the other
part chased them the frenchemen brochyng with the spurs as fast as their
horses might run, so much that a knight that was better horsed then the
other were: ouertooke Reynawde and said to him, ye shall abide ye untrue
knight and I shall bring you to king Charlemayne. And when Reinawde heard
him: he turned bayarde against him and smot the knight with his spear in his
sheeld, and rought him with so great a might that ste^ke dead he ouerthrewe
him. So seized Reinawde the knights horse and took him to his brother Alarde
that lyghted anon upon the back of him. And after that he was on this good
horse: he went and smote a another knight with his swerd so that he made him
fall dead before him, and so betook this knights horse to his brother
Guicharde that thanked him much for it. And a another knighte of the king
Charlemayne came to them. Glotons said the knighte ye shall come to the king
that shall make you al for to be hanged. Ha by my faith said Reynawd thou shall
lie, and with this Reinawd took up his swerd and gave him such a stroke that
he overthrew him dead at the ground, than took Reinawd the horse by the reyne
and gave him to his brother Richard that great need had of it. Now be the
three brethern new horsed and Reinawd is upon bayarde and his cousin Mawgis that
he loved so well behind him, now they go god will lead them and keep them
from evil, and Charlemayne pursued after them, but for naught he trauayled,
for they were never the rather taken for him. Than was the son gone under,
and the night began to come, and the four brethern and their cosyn were come
into the town of Soisso^.

SO much rode Reynawd by night and by day upon bayarde that bare him and
Mawgis his cosyn: that they came to Dordon there they met with the duchess
their mother, that ran for to kiss them and colle them. And syn asked what
they had done of their father and if they were departed from the court with
wrath? Lady said Reinawd, for I have slain Berthelot the neuewe of the king
Charlemayn, the reason why I did so: was because he called me horeson and gave
me with his fyst upon my vissage so that the blood came out of it. And when the
lady understood him: she fell down all in a swoune, and Reynawd took her
up redely. And when the good lady was come again to her self she said to
Reynawde. Fair son and how durst you do this that ye have done? For I
promit you ye shall once repent for it. And your father shall be destroyed
therefore and cast out of his lo^des. And if he escape on live it shall be great
meruayl. So pray I you all my children that ye flee away, but take before all
my treasour. For if your father come again from the court: he shall will
yee^d you to the king Charlemayn. Lady said Reynawd ween ye yt our father is
so cruel and so wroth with us that he would take and deliver us in to the
hands of the king Charlemaine, that is our great enemy mortal?

REynawd, his three brethren and Mawgys would make none other soiournynge: but
took so much of the hauoyre and treasoure of their father and mother: that
they had enough of it. And then took their leave of their lady mother, whereof
there was great pytie at the departinge. For the children wept tenderly and the
mother also of the other side when she saw that her children that thus went fro
her and wist not if she should ever see them again: so departed the new
knights with their cousin Mawgis and issued out of the town and entered in to
the great forest of Ardeyne straight through the valeye of Feyry, and rode so
much that they came upon the river of Muse, and there they chose a fair
ground where they made to be builded a fair castle upon a fair roche much
strong, and at the foot of it: passed the said river of Muse. And when that
the castle was made up: they called it Mountaynford, and as I trow there was
not such another of strength fro the said place unto Mountpeller. For it was
closed with great walls and enuyronned round about with dyches sore deep, and
well garnished with all manner of vittailles and of all things be nedeful to be
had in a fortres, now doubt the new knights nothing Charlemayn if he
wrought not by treason. Charlemayn was at paris much angry for ye death of his
neuew Berthelot, the which Reinawd had slain playing at the chesse as it is
said, so made he to come before him the duke Aymon of dordonne the father of
the four knights, and made him to swear that he should never give no help to
his children and that they should never be the better of a penny by him, and in
what place that he should them find he should take the^ and should bring
them to him, the which Aymon durst not say against him, but swear that he
should do so whereof afterward he was sore repreued. And after that he had
sworn thus he departed out of Paris all wroth and angrye of this that he must
chase thus his children: and came to Dordon. And when the duches saw him she
began to weep full sore: and the duke knew well what she yield Lady said the
duke where be my sons gone. Sir said the lady I can not tell whether they
are drawn, but why suffered you that our son Reynawde slew Berthelot the
neuewe of king Charlemaine, lady said he I could not do thereto, and wit
that our son Reynawde is of so great a strength that never sith the
incarnacion of our lord was not seen so strong a knight as he is. Nor all
the assemble that than was in the pallays at Paris might not keep him, but
that he slew berthelot before all the lords that were there. And before this
our said son Reynawde demanded of king Charlemayne right and reason to be
done to him of the death of my brother his uncle the duke Benes of
Aygremount, whereupon the king fulshamfullye and outerageouslye answered to our
said son, wherefore Reinawd was wroth and sore angered and ye cause why
Reynawde slew Berth^lot was for to aueng him of the king Charlemaine. Not
withstanding that Berthelot had Iniuryed our said son full sore at the
play of the chesse. And also he smote him first outrageously that the blood
came out of his face, so Reinawd for his great and hardy courage might not
suffer this by no wise. And therefore the king has made me swear that if I can
take my children that I shall bring them to him at Paris, and that no help
they shall never have of me nor succors, nor that they shall not be the better
a penny of all my hauoure. Whereof I am wroth and full sorye. We shall leave
here to speak of the duke Aymon and of the duchelle that been right sorry for
their children And shall show you how the worthy king Charlemain made to seek
after the four sons of Aymon thoroughe all his realm, but he might not know
nor understand no tidinges of them, till that at last came to him a messenger
that recounted to him how he had found them in the forest of Ardeyne. In
which they had edyfyed a fair castle and sore strong. And when the king
understood these tydinges he sent word incontinente to all his folk of arms
that they should make ready themself, the which did so without delay.

How after that king Charlemaine had made the duke Aymon to forsake his
sons: he went and besyeged them at Mountaynforde, where he was discomfited
two times. But the castle of Mountaynforde was taken by treason: And how
Reynawde and his brethren avenged themself of the traytoures that had
betrayed them, and how they saved them self after that with in the forest of
Ardeyne, where their father found them as he went from the siege toward his
country, and how for to keep his oath that he had made to king Charlemaine,
he did assail to his sons, so that of.v. hundred men that they were, abode a
live with his sons but.xvii. persons but Reynawde and his brethern had no
hurt of their bodies, how be it that they slew many of their fathers men.
Capitulum.iii.
depiction of a king with crown and scepter sitting in a throne, with a group
of figures

Now says the hystorye that since the time of the king Alexander: was none
such heard as this same, and therefore fair lords please you hear and
understand how it befell of the four sons of Aymon that were enmyes of the
emperor Charlemayne king of france, for the same time king Charlemain had
banyshed them our of the realm of france and made all his barons both young
and old to seek after them, and also made the^ swear that they should never
help ne confort them by no manner of wise. And the same oath had made with many
other the old duke Aimon their father as ye have heard before, whereof he was
full sorry afterward. It happed than that the king Charlemayne, held a great
court in Paris. And as this court was assembled where all the barons of
france were together: a messenger came there before the king Charlemayne and
kneeled before him and said Sir I bring you tidings of that ye did send me
for, wit sir that I came from the great forest of Ardeyne, where I have found
the four sons of Aimon that dwell there with in a strong castle well set
upon a roche, and if ye will find them and be avenged of them: wit that ye
may well enough do so as I believe for certain. Wha^ Charlemayne understood
this messenger: he began to marvel himself sore and called his barons and
said to them. Fair lords when it is so that ye be here: it apperteyneth not
that I should send for you at your places. So I pray you and require as to my
lyege men that ye help me to be avenged of the four sons of Aimo^ that so
great damage have done to me as ye know well.

When the barons understood the prayer that the emperor Charlemaine made to
them: they answered withone voice. Sir we shall do your commandment without
doubt, give us leave if it please you that we may go to our countries for to
make us ready to harueys and of horses, the which thing the king granted them.
And so departed all the barons fro the court and went in to their countries, the
which abode not long that they came again to Paris all a rayed and ready for
to war with their army. And when the king Charlemayne saw them: he received
them gladly, and in continent without any taryinge he departed out of Paris,
and went with all his host to Mountiyon a town of his, and there he lay that
night. And at the morrow as soon as the day appeared: the king Charlemaine
departed from Mountlyon and went on his wai with his host, and ordained ye
foreward to the earl Guy of mou^tpeller that would much great harm to Reynawd,
and when they had set the^ self in the way: the emperor Charlemaine called to
him his good vasseylles Renyer, Guyon of aubeford, the earl Garner, Gefray,
Langon, Ogier the dane, Richard of Normandy, and the duke Naymes of bauiere,
and said unto them all. Lords ye know well what ye have to do, I pray you
that ye keep well your self from Reynawde and go not to nyghe, but abide all
together in such a strong place that we may have no damage, and let good
watch be made every night, for my heart gives me that we shall dwell there
long.

THan said the duke Naimes of bauyere. Sir we shall do so. Than made they the
trompettes to be blown, and all the host they made to come together. And thus
they rode so much that they came to Mileyne otherwise called Aspes, and wha^
they were come there they saw the castle of Mountaynforde, that Reinawde and
his brethren and their cosyn Mawgis had do make, even at that hour that
king Charlemayne and his host were com to Aspes, ye three brethren of
Reynawd were coming fro the chase out of the wood of Ardeyn and Richard the
youngest bare a right rich horn both fair and good: the which Reinawd loved
full dear. And in their felawshyp might well be.xx. knights and no mo. And as
they returned to Mountainforde Richard beheld and saw over the River of Muse
thoste of the king Charlemayn whereof he began to be sore merueylled, and called
Guycharde his brother and said to him. Fair brother what folk may be they
that I see yonder I heard say the other day of a messenger that told it our
brother Reynawd: that the emperor came for to besyege us within our castle.

ANd after when Guycharde understood his brother he beheld over the river and
saw the forewarde that Guyon conduyted, and when Guychard saw them he smot
his horse with his spurs, he and his folk went against Guyon, and said to
him. Fair sir what are these folk: sir said Guyon these been the folk of
the emperor Charlemaine that goes to Ardeyn for to besyege a castle that
the four sons of Aymon have do make there, for their strength they
travail us much, god give them evil rest. Certes said Guycharde I am a
soldier with Reynawde, and con you another thank nor grace of that that ye
say, for I am holden to defend them at my power and with this he spurred his
horse, and smote the said Guion through his sheelde so hard, that he
ouerthrewe him dead to the ground, and than he took the horse of the said
Guion and took him to one of his squyers and assembled all the knights
together of one part and of the other, they of France cried Mounridye saint
Denis, and the brethren of Reinawd cried mountaynforde. Than should ye have
seen a fell battle and right cruel the one aienst the other sheeldes broken
and helmes broken, some dead and some sore wounded so much that it was great
pitre to see. What shall I tell you more all the folk of Guyo^ that made the
forewarde were there slain. This hangyng came a squiet to the king and showed
him how his foreward was utterly dystroyed, and that Guycharde the brother of
Reynawd had slain the earl Guyon.

O God said than the emperor Charlemaine have I now lost Guyon, of him it is
great damage, Now wot I not from hens forth on how I should wyn, since that I
have lost the foreward, and than he called Ogyer the dane and said to him.
Ogier go to the succors you and Naymes, for Guichardbereth with him al my
hauoyre and have slain all my folk, than Ogier the dane abode not but lighted
on horsbacke he and the duke Naymes with three hundred knights well armed and
well araied and went after Guycharde, but their labor was naught worth to
them, for Guichard and his men were all ready with in Mountaynford with all the
hauoire that they had won. Wha^ Reinawd saw his brother come with so great
hauoyre: he went against him and kissed them al, and than he said to Guychard,
fair brother where have ye taken so great hauoyre that ye bring here? sir
said Guycharde I shall tell you tidings whereof ye shall be greatly
meruaylled. Now wit that king Charlemain comes for to besyege you with all
his host and has so great chiualry with him that it is wonder for to see, my
brethren and I come fro the chase out of the wode of Ardeyn and we have
recountted the forewarde of Charlemain that the earl Guy conduyted, there
fought we together with them, but god be thanked and my men: mine enemies were
discomsited and overthrown, one part we have slain: and the other fled away,
so have we brought their hauoyre yt ye see here. And there is dead the earl
Guy and many other great lords and all their men. Than said Reynawd I ought
to love you dearly wha^ ye can war so well that ye have overthrown your
enemies at the first coming on, and than he called all his brethren and his
folk and said to them, fair lords now is the time come that eueryche of us
must preue himself a good man, wherefore I pray you that every man force
himself to do worthily his deuoire that your worship and ours be kept, and
that men may not wit us no toward, and let us do know our prowesses to
king Charlemayne so that he hold us not for feeble and myschaunte, when
Reinawde had spoke to his brethren and to his folk: they answered to him in
this manner, my lord have no doubt of none of us, but be sure that we shall
never fail you for the hewynge of our limbs as long as we shall live, and when
Reinawde understood the good will of his folk and namely of his brethren: he
began again to speak to the^ and said let the gate be sherre and draw up
the bridge, and so go we to the windows for to se this folk that come against
us. And than they went there as Reinawd said, and when they looked out of the
wyndowes: they saw Ogyer the dane coming with a thousand men with him, which
wha^ he saw that Guychard was entered into the castle: he returned again and
said to the king how it was, and than he said. Sir I let you wit that the
castle of Mountainford is the fairest and the strongest that ever ye saw for it
is set upon a hye roche of hard stone, and well I tell you for certain that it
shall not be so taken so lightly as men ween. For such folk do keep it that
well and worthily shall defend it.

When the Emperor Charlemayne heard speak Ogyer the dane: he was of it so
wroth that he went nyghe out of his wit, and swear god that he should never
return into France but that Reinawde were take, and that if he may have him:
all the world shall not save him but that he shall make him to be hanged and
his brother Guychard to be drawn at horses tailles. sir said Ogier well ye
ought to do so, for they have trauaylled you full often and have given you
great labor and pain. Sir said Foulques of Morillon, have no doubt for
shortly we shall avenge you of them, make to be cried incontinent that your
host go lodge lightly about Mountenford, Certes said the king ye say well
and than he made trompettes to be blown of a heyghte for to assemble together
al his men of arms and commanded that all the castle of Mountenforde should
be enuyronned round about with folk, and that every baron should do pyghte
there his pauillion, and they did so as the king had commanded. Now will I
show to you how noble the castle was set. The said castle was closed and set
upon a hie roche, and of the one side of it was beting a great river called
Muse, and of the other side it had even at hand a great woodful pleasant, of a
another side it has a fair plain, and of that othersyde a full fair medowe
great and pleasant to behold. When the folk of the king Charlemaine were
allodged: the emperor lighted on horseback with a few felawship for to see the
strength of the castle, and when he had well beholden it and seen at his case:
he began to say in him self, ha god how is this castle closed and set in a
strong place god how these knights know well ye craft of war, not
withstandinge yt they be but young folk, fair lords think to war well, for
we have somewhat more to do tha^ I wend, wha^ ye pauillions and tents of ye
kings were dressed up: he made to be set a charbonkle right rich all hye on
his tente which stone full precious was shining as a torche yt bre^neth, and
with the same a great appell of fine gold of great value, and when the said
tents were al spread and hanged: themperoure entered within and made the duke
Naymes to be armed, and charged him that no man of war so hardy for to light
on horsbacke of eyghte days, but it were for to sport himself. For I will do
know through all the realm that men bring to us vitayles in great habundaunce
before that ye castle of mou^tenforde be by us assailed, and make my chapel to
be apparailed to thend that we pray god yt he will help us to be avenged of yt
four sons of Aimon the which we shall famish or ever it be a month. For they
shall not can have no vitailes fro without by no way, thas said yt duke Naimes to
the king, sit you may do better if it be your pleasure, send a messager to
Reinawde to tell him that he yield to you guichard his brother, and ye shall
quite him al his land, and if he yield him to you: make him to be beheaded
anon, and if yt Reinawd refuse for to do this he may well be sure yt war shall
not leave him as long as he shall be alive, than answered Charlemain, ye say
well and right wisely, but certainlye I wot not where to find a messenger, to
whom I might well trust. Sir said the duke Naymes, if it please you, Ogier and
I shall do this message. It please me well said the king, and right great
thank I shall conne you for it, for ye never failed me at a need. Than went
Naymes, and Ogyer and made them ready, and when they were ready: they took in
their hands branches of Olyue tree for to show that they were messengers, and
so went they both together without any other company, and when Alays that kept
watch saw that two knights come: he went and asked them what knights they
were that came there. Sir said the duke Naymes, we been messengers of the
king Charlemaine that has sent us hither for to speak with Reynawd the
son of Aymon, and inco^tynent the said Alays went to his lord and told him
how at the gate were two messengers of the king Charlemayn that would speak
with him, Reinawde commanded forthwith that the gate should be opened to them
and that the drawbrydge should be let down for he would see the messengers and
speak with them. Than were the two batons let in and brought before Reynawde,
and when Reynawd saw them: he salued them curtously, and after that they had
saluted each other: they set them al there upon a benche. And than began the
duke Naymes to speak and said thus. Reynawde said he, the emperor
Charlemaine of France let you wit by us, that ye sent to him Guicharde your
brother to make of him his pleasure and his will, and if ye will not do so:
Charlemayne defyeth you, and says that never he shall leave you unto the time
that he shall have you all, and when he shall have you: he shall make you al to
be drawn and hanged, and dye an evil death with great shame.

When Reynawde understood these words: he wexed all red for anger, and than
he said to the duke Naymes. By the faith that I owe to al my free^des, if it
were not that I love you: I should make you both to be hewn al to pieces, and
ye have well deserved it. For you Naymes are my nigh kinsman, and as me seems
ye ought well to help and defend me ayenste all men, and ye now counseyl me
to my great dyshonoure and against mine honesty. Tell to Charlemaine that he
shall not have Guichard my brother, and that he leave his thretenyng and do the
worst that he can, for we shall not do for him nor for his thretnynges the
mountenaunce of a penny, and go you to tell him in my behalf that before that he
take us: he shall have a greater need of help than he weneth, Now void from
our sight lyghtely out of our palace, for to see you thus here greueth me to
sore. When the duke Naimes and ogier understood Reinawd: they made no longer
dwelling, but departed incontinent with out any more speaking, and are come to
Charlemaine and recounted to him all this that Reinawd had said.

When the emperor Charlemaine understood this answer: he was so sore an
angered that he went almost out of his wit, and tha^ he commanded that the
castle should be assailed to the which they saw but three gates. Whereof was
set before the masters gate, their Reiner, and Folques of Morylion, the earl
of Neuers, and Ogier the dane. And before the second gate: was the duke of
Bourgoin and the earl of Alphinors, and before the third gate: was yt old
Aymon the father of Reinawd that was come to Charlemayn for to war against his
sons as the other. Now weneth the emperor to have besieged well Reinawde and
his brethren, but and god keep Reinawde in good health: Coarlemayne shall lose
there more than he shall win. Reynawde and his brethern were such knights
and so sage that they defended well their castle against Charlemayn, always it
was besieged with so great number of folk as I have said before that it was
merueyll to see for there were bretons fleminges maunsealx, origners, english
bourgoines, the bauyers and the frensheman, but Reynawd made one thing that
turned him to a great worship. For he said to his folk fairelordes I pray you
that ye mount not upon your horse till that ye hear the trompettes blow. For
I see well that Charlemaines folk ben right sore travailed, and now while they
been thus weary: it were no worship to us for to ten them upon, but wha^ they
shall be a litill cased of their wyrenes: we shall thanne make dyligentlye and
worthily our first issue upon them, and I pray you and require you all in
general, that every man show than his prowess and strength, and wit it that in
the castle of Mountenford was a faucebray upon a roche, thorough the which
Reinawd and his brethern went out under couerte at all times that they would
without danger.

When Reynawd saw that it was time fo to go out upon their enmies: he called
to him Sampson of bourdelloys, this was a knight a trusty man that was come
there for to help Reynawde and his brethren, and had with him an hundred
knights, Reynawd said to him, sit it is now time that our cumies know what we
been, for if we tarry longer: the king Charlemain might wit us of cowardnes,
And when he had said these words: he came to his brother Guicharde, and said
to him. Fair brother Guicharde, leave not for to be always bold and hardy as
long that I am a man on live, for I love you as much as I do mine own body,
and it is reason that I do so, for ye and I are brethren both of father and
mother and also I believe ye be the best knighte of my lygnage. And than he
takes him between his arms and kyssed him by great love, and when he had
done thus: he said. Brother make the Trompettes to blow up of heyght, and
let us make ready our self for to issue out for to showed Charlemayne what
folk that we be^ if god will that we might take the earl of Estampes I should
be thereof right glad. For it is the man, among all our enemies yt worste does
to us, yt more has hurted us, happily he shall not escape us, for he is always
in the forward, when these words were fynysshed: all the four brethren and
al them of their company arrayed them self and issued out of the castle at the
fawcebray, with out to make any noise nor cry, and so gone they upon the host
of Charlemayne by so great wrath? yt it was marueyle, and began to make so
great destruction of folk and to cast both tents and pauyllions a ground:
that it was wonder and pity for to see. And who had seen than Reynawd the
worthy knight upon his horse bayarde, and the faytes of arms yt he made upon
his enemies: should have great merueyl, for to look upon him, for that man yt
he recou^tred might well say that he was borne in an evil hour, for to say
the troth Reinawde smote no knight so that his stroke came right but that he
cleued him as lightly as thy had not ben armed. When the folk of Charlemayne
saw their enemies: they ra^ incontinent to their harneyes and when they were
armed they ran upon Reynawde and his folk, and than began the batyle so
cruel: yt it was pytie for to see. For ye should have seen many speres broken,
and seeldes broken and cloven a fondre, and many a good haubergen vnmayled
corsettes and flancardes all to broken and sore beaten, and so many a goodly
man and noble knights beyenge full myserably upon the earth. Wha^ yt old
Aymon heard ye cry: he mounted on horsbacke also sone as he might he and his
folk and came to ye battle ayenste his sons, and wha^ Reynawde apperceyued
there his father: he was right sorry for it, and said to his brethern. See here
is a great marvel, for her is our father and by my counsel we shall make
him run. For I would not for nothing that none of us should set upon him And
than they turned at another side of the battle: but Aymon their father came
there against them and began to set sore hard upon them and their folk. And
when Renawde saw that his father leyd sore upon them and bare them great
damage of their men: he said to him al an angered. Ha father what do you?
certaynely ye do great si^ne. For ye should help defend and keep us, and ye
do to us worse tha^ the other do. Now I see well that ye love us so little,
and that ye be dyspleased that we be^ so pru and so good men of arms against
Charlemayne, for if ye have forbanysshed us: well we know it, and that we shall
never have nothing of your heritage and we have made this little castle for to
keep our self therein, and yet ye come hither for to help it to be destroyed.
It is no Fathers work, but it is operacion of the devil, if ye will do us no
good: at least do us no harm, For I swear you upon all Saints that if ye
come any ferther against us I shall forbere you no longer, but I shall give you
with my sword such a struck that ye shall have no leyser for to repent you
of the folly that ye do. When Aymon understood the words of his son
Reynawde. he took thereof so great anger an his heart that it lacked little but
that he fell down in a swoune to the earth, for he knew well yt Reynawde told
him troth. But he could do none otherwise for fear of Charlemayn but always
he with drew himself a back, and suffered his sons to pass by him harmles at
that time. The wyche went and dommaged right sore the folk of king Charlemayne.

DVrynge the time that Reynawde spoke thus to his father Aymon: came
Charlemayne and Aulbery, Ogyer, and the earl Henry and Foulques of Morillon.
And when Reynawde saw them come: he made his trompettes to be blowe^ for to
bring his folk together again, and when they were assembled of one part and
of the other: a knight of charlemayne yt was called Thiery made his horse to
run against the folk of Reynawde, and when Alarde saw him come: he spurred
his horse and came against him and smote him so hard in his sheeld: that he
shoued a great hauberke that he bare through the body of him, so yt the said
Thyery fell dead down to the earth. And when king Charlemayne saw fall dead
his knight Thieri: he was therefore so sore angered that almost he lost his wit
and his understanding. Than began he to cry with a hye voice, saying in this
manner. Lords and barons deliver you for to avenge me of these gluttons that
leden our folk so cursedly. See that they ben well punysshed and sharpelye,
when the old Aymon heard Charlemayne speak thus: for doubt to be blamed he
spurred his horse and went and smote one of his sons knights that was named
amaney so cruelly with his brand of steel, that he smote his head clean of
fro ye shoulders of him, father (cried Reynawde to him) ye do ill when so
cruelly ye slay my men, but by the faith that I owe to god if I trowed not to
hurt therbi my honor: I should take thereof cruel vengeance. And than said
again the valiant Reynawde, Ha lady mother how should ye be sorye if ye knew
the great works and ye great harm that our father does to us this day.

depiction of an unseated knight or king with crown beside a horse, with two
armed knights on horseback standing over him; and of two groups of knights in
armor on horseback charging each other, with heads and body parts on the
ground

When Foulques of Morillonsaw that the folk of Reynawde mai^teined the^ self
so worthily against them: he began to cry. Sir Emperor and king what means
this? I believe that ye beforgotte^, send for many of your tolke and cu^maunde
them that they take incontinent the traitors that now feign themself against
your enemies, and without delay make the^ to be hanged and slain all quick.
when the French men understood this that Foulques said to Charlemayne: they
made nnoe other abydi^g but spurred their horses and smote upon the folk of
Reinawde so hard, that they made them to recule back would they or not, when
Alarde saw his folk go back: he was right sorye for it, and took his sword
and began with his folk to make so great effors of arms: that the french me^
were all abashed of it. what shall I tell you more of this batayles wit it
that it was so meruaylous and cruel, that it was pity for to see, for every
one made the worste that he could, ye one against the other. And wit that the
four sons of Aymon made so great occision of men and of horses: ye none
durst come before the^, but none might compare with Reynawde for to do well. For
he made there so great marvel of arms: that the french men durst not come
forth for fear of him, for to say the troth Reynawde smote no stroke a right,
but that he slew him where upon it lighted. What will ye yt I tell you more?
Wit yt in this battle kynsmen nor parents spared not each other for they slew
ye one yt other as do^be beasts. There should ye have seen coming through the
battle the king yon of sayncte Omars that rode upon a good horse that ran
well, and against him came a knight called Guyon, and yon smote Guyon such a
stroke: that he overthrew both horse and man to ye earth, and when Reynawde saw
this he was right wroth for it. And tha^ he took his baner and said to his
folk do so much that I have that good horse, for if he goth away: I shall
never have Joy at my heart. for I will that he keep felawshyp to Bayarde. And
when Richard his brother that was so worthy a knight and so gentle understood
his brother that so spoke: he made no taryeng but spurred his horse and smote
yon of saint omars so hard yt his sheelde nor his harneys might not keep, but
that he shoued his glaue through the breast and overthrew him dead to the earth
and than Richard took the horse by the brydell and led him to Reynawde and
said to him, sir we have the horse yt ye have called after so sore. Now may
you light upon him when it please you, brother said Reynawde gramercy of this
present, for well ye have served me thereof. Now have we two good horses to
whom we may trust well upon now light at once upon him said Reynawde, and when
Richard understood the commandment of his brother: he lighted lightly upon
the horse and took his own for to keep to a good knight.

ANd when Reynawde came again to the bataile: he saw yet his father, and when
he saw him he was right sori for it so that he lost almost his wit for the same
and came and said to hi^ by a manner of reproach, by my faith father ye are
greatly to blame: ye might well keep your self that ye come not so often to se
us, and for to do us harm. We will show to you yt ye be our father. Not good
but evil. For ye show to us hard freendshyp and a sour love at christ mass
and at Easter men ought to go vysyte and se his good friend for to feast him
and to do him good and eat with him when the dinner was redi, but this ye do
not. For ye com to see us in a hot war, and with the point of the swerdeye
there us, it is no love of a natural father, but it is rygour of a stepfather,
tha^ answered the duke Aymon I will that ye keep your self well. For it
Charlemayne can take you all ye world shall not keep you, but that he will
flea and ha^g you or otherwise make you to die a shameful death, father said
Reynawde let ye alone and come and help us so shall the king be dyscomfyted,
go forth gloton gods curse have yt said Aymon to his son Reynawde, for I am
to old for to do treason. Father said Reynawde little ye love us I se it well,
but keep your self well, for I shall show you whether yt I can do any thing
with the spear and of the sword and when he had yt said: he spurred Bayarde
and went and smote a squire yt was called Gniuer so that he overthrew him dead
from his horse to the ground. When Charlemayne saw his squier dead: he spurred
his courser with an angry there and had in his hand a staff of iron, for he
would part the battle a sonder, by cause he saw well that his folk had that
worse and that they might resyste against ye great strokes of Reynawde in no
wise, for it was meruaylous for to see the great faytes of arms that he made
there, for he overthrew down dead both horses and men by great strength.

CHarlemayne is commen to the French me^, and commanded them for to withdraw
them self, for it was time for to depart fro ye battle, and as they would
have gone a way: came therethrough battle Berarde the bourgoyner and smote
Simon of Bremoys so fyersly: that he fell down dead to the ground, wha^ the
four sons of Aymon saw Simon dead: they were right sorye for him, and
spurred their horses with the spurs and came at that side and brake the prese
for to venge Simo^s death, and wit it wha^ Reynawde was come there it was
known right well for he with his swerd brought to death well three hundred
knights of the best men that king Charlemayne had in his company. Whereof ye
king was right sori and sore an angered, this hanging: Alarde went through ye
prese so came he and Iousted against the earl Esta^pes, and his sheelde he
let not but he shoued his spear through the body of him, and thus was by him
slain the said earl, when that Reynawde saw that stroke: he came to Alarde his
brother and kissed him upon his helm and bowed himself toward him and said
fair brother blessed be the womb that bare thee, for ye have avenged us of ye
greatest foe that we had. And when he had said this word he made his trompettes
to be blowe^ for to call his men together.

When the Emperor Charlemayne saw this great damage that the four sons of
Aymon did to him: he cried with a hye voice. Lords and barons withdraw our
self a back, for our enemies be to good knights for us, now is this to us
great dishonor and great myshappe let us return again to our pauilions I
pray you. For I swear upon all Saints that their castle shall never be taken
but by famisshing, for they ben over good knights preu and wise and well
advised of ye war. When the barons of Charlemayne heard this commandment
they said, sir we shall do your will, and as they would have departed: came
Reynawde spurring his horse, and his brethern, etc went and smote upon the
folk of ye Emperor so sharply: that he departed them so well, yt they must
needs flee and take their pauylions, and so bode with them prisoners Anthony
Guyemaulte the earl of Neners, and Theirri of Normandi for no man might endure
against Reynawde and his brethern. And when Reynawde saw the dyscomfiture and
the folk of the Emperor that fled: he made his trompettes to be blown for to
wtdraw his folk. And when they were assembled: Reynawde and his brethren
returned gladly into their castle. And was always the hindermoste man for to
keep his folk the better that led prisoners before, Then came Aymon their
father afresshe upon them and began to make the^ great comprau^ce and when
Reynawde saw his father: he we^d for to have waxed mad for anger, so returned
he bayarde and smote the horse of his father so hard that he fell down dead to
the earth. For as of his father he would not touch, and when Aymon saw him
self a ground: he rose up quickelye upon his feet and took his sword in
his hand, and began right well to defend himself. But his defense should
have been full little worth to him, for his children should have take him for
their prisoner if it had not ben Ogier the Dane that came and succored him. And
than said to him the said Ogyer. Sir what seems you of your children, they be
right cheualrous and hardy as ye may see and know.

When Aymon was horsed again: he pursued his children as a man wroth and out
of his wit, and said to his folk Now go we after the glotons, for if they
live long: they shall do us harm and damage so great that with pain it
shall be recovered. Wha^ Reynawde saw his father that followed them so sharply: he
turned Bayarde and went and smote among the thickest of his fathers folk and
began to hurt them so sore with the help of his brethren, yt he put them to
flight maugre their teeth. For they might no longer endure ye great maugre you
Reynawde bare to them, for to say the troth: no harneys was naught worth
against the sword of Reynawde. For he cleued all that he rought.

ANd when the emperor Charlemayne saw this hye prowess that Reynawde made: he
blessed himself of the great marvel that he had thereof, and so strong he
spurred his horse that he went against Reynawde, and than he said to him
Reynawde I forbyde you that ye go no ferther. When Reynawde saw the king: he
made to him reverence and than withdrew himself abacke. And said to his men,
let us go fourth, for here comes the king. I would not for nothing in this
world that any of you should lay hand upon him. When the folk of Reynawde
understood these words: they put their swerdes in their shethes and went
again unto their castle right glad of their fair adventure yt was happend to
them that day. And wha^ that they were within their Castle of Mountaynforde:
they made the draw bridge for to be drawn up, and went and unarmed them and
found the supper ready, and so they set them self at the table. And there was
a great mainy of prisoners. And wha^ they had eaten and dronken their fill
Reynawde came to his brother and thanked him much with all his heart of that he
had slain the earl of Estampes.

ANd when the emperor Charlemayne saw that Renawde was with in his Castle: he
lighted down from his horse into his tente and swear by god yt he should never
depart from thence unto the time yt he should have the four sons of Aymon
or that the castle were take. What shall I tell more? the emperor Charlemayne
lay well.xiiii. months at syege before yt castle of Mountaynforde, and there
was no weke, but they had a battle or a scarmyshe, and I tell you that
Reynawde was not so sore besyeged, but that he went to chase in woods and in
ryuers as often as him pleased. And diverse times it happed that Reynawde spoke
with the French me^ of trayte the one to the other, saying thus to them.
Fair Lords I pray you that ye speak to the Emperor Charlemayne and tell him
that he shall never take us by no force, for our castle is right strong and
well garnished. But know the king one thing that which he may have by
goodness, he need not make by force. He may have the castle and us also if it
please him in such manner as I shall tell you. When I shall put in his hand the
castle of Mountaynforde my brethren and my self, our goods and bagage saufe,
and that the war take an end that has lasted so long? he may be well
content. Reynawde said Ogier the Dane ye say well and wisely, and I promyt you I
shall show the same to the king as ye have said, and if ye will believe my
counsel: I ensure you I shall tell him that ye do so for ye are not folk for
to be set little by thus, nor for to be for the court, for if the king had you
nyghe him, he soulde be the better for it.

ALl thus as Reynawde and Ogier spoke together, there came Forques of Morillon
that cried to Reynawde vassayle ye be but a tool, for certes I have heard
your words well, ye shall leave us Mou^taynforde for it is not your heritage
and your heads in likewise, Foulques said Reynawde ye have repreued me full
often. I know well all ye harm yt the Emperor Charlemain will to me, is
because I have slain Berthelot his neuew with a Chesse board of whom god have
mercy.

Certes I could not do thereto, but I was full sorry for it god wot it, It is
troth when we played together we had some words, by which without any words
he gave me such a stroke upon my face that the blood ran down at the
ground. And wha^ I saw my self so armed. I might not be so soft that I could
endure ye great ontrage that he had done to me with out a cause. So defended I
my self to my power. For who lets him self to be slain his soul shall
never have pardon. And thou know well Foulques ye I did was in my defe^dyng.
But to this must be made short words, and if it please you, ye shall tell to ye
king charlemain that he takes us to mercy, and that we may be friends. And if
ye do this: ye shall do your honor.

For as soon may ye be slain there as a another. Than said Foulques by god
all this is naught worth unto you, for ye shall die therefore ye and your
brethern. Foulques said Reynawde ye threten to much, it apperteineth not to
you for to threten knights so much that been better than you, and if ye have
any thing upon your heart: do it without any more words, for I tell you well
that ye purchase your death. And when Reynawde had said these words: they
went again to their pauylyons. And thus abode the host unto than without any
fyghtyng, but the frechemen came again would they or not, wherefore the king
Charlemayne was wroth.

THan the Emperor Charlemayne sent for men through all his land, and when
they were all come: he said to them. Syres I complain me to you of the four
sons of Aymon that has my la^d destroyed and wasted. And Mountaynforde is so
strong: yt by strength it can never be taken, but by famysshyng. Now tell me
what I ought to do? for I shall do therein your counsel, when the barons
heard the complaynt that the king made to them of the four sons of Aymo^:
there was none so hardy ye durst say a word, but ye duke Naymes of Bauiere
that said to the king. Sir emperor if ye will have good counsel: I shall give
you good, if ye will believe me. Let us return nto high France, for we be to
nighe the winter for to make war. And when yt new time shall be come: ye shall
mow come again to lay your syege before Mountaynforde. For I do you to
understand yt Reynawde is not sore presed, but that he goes in wodes and in
rivers at all times that he will. And a man that may go out and in at his will:
is not over sore besieged. And of the other part Reynawde and his brethren
are such knights that they shall not be lightly overcome. This is my counsel
sir who knows a better: let him tell.

THen spoke Hornier of Saueyne, and to him said, sir I shall give you a better
counsel if ye will believe me, give me the castle and all the hauoyre that is
with in and the Lordshyp five miles about it: and I shall yield to you
Reynawde and al his brethern for prisoners before a month cum to an end. And
tha^ shall we go into France for to see our wives and children. Hernyer said
ye king, ye have said well and wisely if ye may do this that ye have said, I
grant to you the castle and all yt ye have asked with ye same. Sir said
Hernyer I thank you for it an hundred thousand times. And I promys you I shall
deliver unto you Reynawde and his brethren as your prisoners or ever yt a
month be passed. But know you that Hernyer did mysse of his enterprise, for
he kept not covenant to the king as he had promised him: for Reinawde took
him and made him to be hewn all in pieces, and made all they that were with him
when he made the treason to be hanged and slain, as more plainly ye shall
understand here after, if that ye list to harken.

HErnier of Saueyn made none other taryenge, but he said to king Charlemayne in
this manner.

Sir command ye Guyon of Bourgone that he do put in array a thousand
knights well armed, and that to morrow before the day he go upon the mountain
fair and softly with out noise, and I shall put him within the castle
shortly. When he had said this: he went to his tente, and made himself to be
armed. And when he was armed: he lyghted a horsbacke, and rode to the gate of
the castle, and said to them that kept ward. Alas for god fair lords have
mercy of me if it please you let me in, or else I am but dead, for the Emperor
Charlemayne makes to follow and seek me all about, for to make me dye because
I have said to him much good of Reynawde, and also I tell you well yt I shall
show to Reynawde a thing whereof he shall he right glad if his pleasure is to
hear me.

When they yt were above upon ye gate heard hi^ speak thus they without long
taryeng let go down the draw bridge and made him come in, and dysaimed him
and did to him great honor. But the false traitor rewarded the^ full ill for
it after that. This hangyng: Charlemayne commanded Guion to make him ready, and
a thousand knights with him, and sent them upon the hylle, without making of
any bruyte till that the day were come.

And wit that Guyon had with him of the best Knights of Charlemayne.

NOw is Harnyer ye traitor within the castle of Mountaynforde, unto whom men
made good cheer. And when Reynawde wyste that a knight of Charlemayn was come:
He said that he would speak with him. And so he was brought before him. And when
he saw him: he said to hi^. What be you fair knighte that are come hither?
And he answered, sir my name is Hernier of Saueyne, and I have angered king
Charlemayne for the love of you and for this cause I am com hither praying that
ye have me for recommau^ded, for I wot not whether to go now. Good friend
said Renawde, sith that ye say yt ye be our friend: ye be right welcome to me.

For of such goods that God has sent me ye shall not fail. Now tell me I
pray you how does the host of the Emperor? Have they any great plenty fo
vytayles. Sir said Hernyer they ben scarce with them. But I tell for very
certain yt they shall go their wayts within these forty days, for none of
the barons will no longer abide there. Wherefore the king Charlemayne is sore
an angered with them. And I promit you if the host went away ye might hurt
them right very sore, and get very much good, if ye will set then upon
the tail of them. Freende said Reynawde to him, ye have comforted me right
well, if it is so as ye say, For if the king Charlemayne be once overthrown:
he shall not come a another time upon us with so good a will as he does now.
And then Reynawde had him with him to his brethern, that made unto him good
cheer. And when the supper was ready: Reynawde and his brethren set the^ down
unto their meat and supped gladly. And in their company was the traitor
Hernier, unto whom they made good cheer. After supper all the knights went
to sleep. For they were weary of beari^g of their Harneys, and they had not
ceased to fight all that day. And wit that Hernier was well and honestly
brought to bed. For Reynawde had so commanded. And when all the knights were
fast a sleep: Hernier as the false Judas slepte not.

But he rose and took his harneys and armed him self. And when he was well
armed at his ease: he came to the draw bridge, and cut the cords that kept it
up, and let the draw bridge go down, and than he went upon the walls where he
found him that made the watch and slew him. And wha^ he had done this: he
came to the gate and opened it. For he had taken the keys from him that he had
slain, which had them in his keeping.

THan when Guyon of Bourgoyne saw the gate open: he made no tarying, but came
and entered into the castle, and al his folk with him. And began to kylle and
flea all the^ that they found. Now shall ye hear of the fair adventure how
that Reynawde and his brethern were saved from this mortal slawghter. Wit that
when the yemen of the stable had supped: they were dronke and went to their
bed, and when they were a sleep: the horse of Alarde yt was so^what proud
began to make noise against the other. And Alarde and Richard heard the noise
of the horses, they rose up and saw ye door of the halle open, and perceived
out of it the harneys yt glystered against the moon that shone full bright.

Than went they to the bed where they had brought the false Hernyer, which
they found not there. Whereof they were right sore abashed. And than was
Reynawde awaked, and asked who was there that makes this noise. Let our
knights take their rest, that have so sore trauayled all the day it is evil
done for to go thus stampyng at this hour, tha^ cried Alarde to Reinawde and
said. Fair brother we ben betrayed, for Hernyer that false knight has put the
folk of Charlemayne within this castle, the which kill and slay your folk
and put them to a great matter, when Reynawde vndestode this: he made no
taryi^g, but he arose and armed himself quickly, and cried unto his brethern
and to his men, Now my friends let us bear our self worthy, we had never so
great need, any wit that Reynawde had with him but.xxx. Knights within the
dongeon of that fortress, for all the other were within ye base court which
was as it had been a little town well peopled, where as Guyon of Bourgoyne and
his folk slew them.

This hanging: Reynawde and his brethern had armed themself right well hoping
for to defend theymselfe well.

THan came Hernyer the traitor steryng about through the maystres street and
with him well an hundred knights. Tha^ said Reinawde to his brethern, fair
Lords come forth, for if god help us not: we are all lost, and than Reynawde
and his brethern came to the gate, and defended so well ye none durst pass but
he was slain, what shall I tell you more? the base court began to be sore
moved, and the erye was so great, for all them of the dongeon defended themself
valyantlye. When the folk of the Emperor Charlemayne saw that they that were
wtin the dongeon defended themself so well: they set ye base court in a fire
and began to brenne, and pull down the houses and all that they found. And ye
fire was soon so great that it took the dongeon of the castle.

When Reynawde saw that he was so taken with fire: he was sore angered and said
to his brethern what shall we do here? for if we tarry any longer we shall all
be brent or taken and if it were not the fire that thus warreth against us: I
make mine a uowe to god that we should yet cast this folk out of this
castle, but syn that the fire is in it: we cannot keep it no longer. And than
he said to his brethren, come all after me and they went to the fausebray that
was all ways open, and issued out he and his brethern and his folk with them,
and when they were out: than were they more abashed than they were before for
they wist not whether to go.

Now hear how they did as worthy knights. For wha^ they saw the castle
brenne: they entered within a pyt that was there under the earth, for fear of
the fire and set the door upon them, and there they began to defend themself
so strongly: that none entered therein but he lost anon his head. And when
Hernyer the traitor was aware of ye same: he took his folk with him and came
to ye pyt and began to assail Reynawde sharply and his brethern, and al they
that were therein with them, and wit it that there at thentre of the said pyt
were made great faytes of arms for they of within defended themself so well: yt
none might come in but he were dead anon. While that the four sons of Aymon
were in yt pyt under therthe: they heard the cry that his men made, the
which Hernyer made to be slain. Than began Reynawde to sai to his brethern.
Lords let us go succor our folk, for and they should thus dye: it were to us
a great blame. Sir said his brethren go in gods name when it please you,
and when they were come out of the pit: the battle began to be there full
terryble, for ye should have seen Reynawde and his brethern give there great
strokes and many. For Reynawde smote so merueyllouse strokes with his swerd
Flamberge the which did cut all that he rought. For Reynawde was all wroth,
and for great anger he habandoned and Ieoparded both life and gooddes.

And therefore he bare great hurt and harm to his enemies, For he had cast
his Sheelde over his back, and held his sword Flamberge with both his hands
and made so great destruction of the folk of Charlemaine: that the place was
al full of blood. And when Reynawde saw that their enemies were sore abashed,
and that they durst not abide him: he said to his brethern. It was to us great
cowardnes to hyde us so. Sir said Alarde ye say truth. Than said Reynawde. My
Lords my brethern let us to do well. For traitors ben good to ouercom they
shall not now endure long against us. And when he had said these words: he
came to yt gate of ye castle, and the fire was a little quenched, and maugre al
his enemies he she the gate of that doungeon, and had up the draw bridge of
the said castle. And wha^ he had done this: he came again to the battle,
and found his brethern that slew and beat down so many knights, and bare
themself so worthelye: that it was maruayle for to see. For they smote no
stroke, but they slew a man.

THan was Hernyer the traitor in the meddle within the doungeon, whereof
Reynawde had locked the gate, and drawn the bridge, and the good Reynawde saw
that he was safe of the host of Charlemayne, and began to put himself in the
meddle so sharply that he did so much he and his brethern: that of ye folk of
Charlemayne that were within the dou^geon abode of the^ alive but Hernier
and.xii. other, and when Reynawde saw that they were all dead: he and his
brethren and his folk took Hernyer and the.xii other. And than Reynawde did
do make agybet upon one of the highest towers, and there he made to be hanged
the.xii. men. And made Hernier to be bound his four members that is to wit,
feet and hands to four horse tails. And so he was drawn all quick and
quartered in four pieces, as a traitor ought to be done unto. And when
Hernier was dead: Reynawde did make a great fire, and made him to be cast
therein, and as he was al together brent: he made the ashes of him to be cast
in the air to the wind.

And here ye may see how the traitors that would betraye Reynawde were dead
and slain. For they were punysshed as they had deserved.

THan when king Charlemayne wist that his folk were thus dead, and yt he
should not have Reynawde nor his brethern: he was sore angry therefore, and said
to him self. Ha good God lord how am I evil dealed wythall by this four
knights brethren, I did my self great harm, when ever I made the^ knights.
And it is often said, that men make often a rod for them self. And that I may
well now take to me. For their uncle slew my son Lohyer, and Reynawde my
neuewe Berthelot that I loved so deerelye, and yet now he has hanged my men
and many of them slain. Well I might call my self unhappy, when I that am
the most puyssau^t of the world, cannot avenge me of the four simple
knights. I shall never depart from hens till that I be avenged, or else they
shall ouercomme, and all mine army. Sir said Folques of Morillo^ ye have a
good cause why, and Reynawde is a fool that he fereth you not. For if he had
doubted you: he should not have hanged your men, but he has done so in
dispyte of you. Tha^ said ye Duke Naymes of banyer, had ye believed me: ye
should not have lost your men ye would believe Hernier, it is happed of it as ye
see. Now behold your folk ye ben shaking with the wind.

ANd when the emperor Charlemayne understood this yt the duke Naymes said to
him: He knew that he said troth, and wyste not what he should say to it, but
looked down all ashamed. This hanging: Reynawde and his brethern are gone upon
the walls, and looked about them and saw that the base court of the castle
brenned there as their vitailes were. Then began reynawde to say to his
brethren, fair lords the thing goes well, sith yt we ben escape thanked be
god from so perilous and hard adventure. It lacked little but that we were al
dead by false treason, but the worste that I see: is that we have lost our
store of vitayles so that we have nothing to live upon, and me seems that if
we dwell any longer here within: we done not wisely. But if it seem you
good, it is time that we depart hence. Brother said Alarde, ye speak well and
wisely, and we shall do as ye have said. For as long as the life is in our
bodies: we shall not leave you. When ye four brethern were together accorded
for to depart thens: they trussed al their harneys, and tarried till that it was
night, and than they armed themself, and lyghted on horseback, And when they
were ready: Reynawde said to them, Lords how many men ben we? We ben answered
Alard well.v. hundred, It is enough said Reynawde. But wot ye what we shall do?
let us keep ourselfes always together without making of any affraye and so
go thorough the land of Almayne, and if the folk of Charlemayne hap to
assail us: think to defend ourself well and smite hard upon them so that we
have to our worship the better of them, when it was time to light on
horseback: Reynawde mounted upon Gayarde, and the other also lyghted upon
their horses. And when they were all horsed: they opened the gate, and went
out at their leyser without making any noise. And when they were all issued
out: Reynawde beheld and saw the castle ye burnt, whereof he took great
pity, and said. Ha god good castle it is great damage that ye be thus
distroied and wasted, gods curse have he that betrayed this good castle. It
is a go seven year that ye were made first. Alas we have had there in so
much good and so mykyl worship: and now we leave you mawgre us. Certes ye were
my trust after my brethern. And when I must leese you: there is none so sorry
for it as I am. And as he spoke these words: the teres fell down from his
eyes, and he was so taken with great heaviness that almost he fell down in a
swoune so much of sorrow he had in his heart.

ANd when Alarde saw Reynawde so full of sorrow: he came to him and said. By
my faith brother ye be to blame to say so, ye be not the man that shall come to
mischief. For all the knights that been a live are not worth you, and
therefore I pray you that ye will confort yourselfe, for I swear you upon all
halowes that before two year be passed: ye shall have a Castle that shall be
worth such four as this is, but now let us put our self to the way for we
have no need to tari. Brother said Reynawde I have found ever in you good
counsel. Now go we than our way, and take you and Guycharde the forewarde,
and I and Richard shall come behind. Sir said Alarde all shall be done as ye
say. And than took Alarde his brother Guycharde with him and went before with
a. C. knights with them and had forth their caryage in the mids of them.
And Reynawde and Richard came after with the resydue of their folk, but they
could never make nor pass so softli, but that the folk of the host of ye
emperor ouertooke them.

depiction of two groups of knights in armor on horseback charging each other,
with heads and body parts on the ground

THan when Charlemayne knew we that Reynawde came: he was much wroth, and
made his co^mau^demente that every man should be armed, and than the host
began to move and went incontinent and armed themself. when Alarde and
Guycharde that went before saw that they might not pass, but that they must
meddle: they spurred their horses and ran upon Charlemayns folk so sharply
that they were all an angered with it, for they overthrew two knights to the
ground and in continent was there great a do.

And when Reynawde saw that the host moved: he called to him twenty knights
and bad them take and led forth the caryage before out of the host, and he
should go help his brethren, sir said they we shall do your commandment.
And than Reynawde spurred Bayarde and entered among ye thickest, and began
there to make so great meruayles of arms that all the folk of Charlemaine
wondered upon, for he and his brethren overthrew there dead so many knights
that none durst com before them, but he was slain.

What shall I tell you? wit it that the folk of king Charlemayne was so
disco^fited for because that it was night, and might not well see what nombre
of folk the four brethren were, that Reynawde and his company passed mawgre
them of ye host And also I tell you for certain that Reynawde and his brethern
did so great harm to the folk of Charlemayne: that he was sorry for it mani
days after. when Reynawde was passed: he found his summers and his caryage,
and his Knights that conduyte them, whereof he was glad.

Tha^ he said to his brethern. Syrs go on your way, and they did his
commandment, and Reynawde with his brother Richard abode behind, and when
Charlemayne wyste that Reynawde went a way: he was glad by cause he had left
the Castle of Mountaynforde, and incontinent he made him to be followed, and
also the host was redelye armed, and when they were well arrayed: they took
their way after the four sons of Aymon.

NOw ben the four knights brethren right sorry of that they have thus left
their fair castle of Mountaynforde, and wit it that Charlemayne followed them
well of nyghe, and said that it should hurt him sore, but if he might take
them. But Reynawde the worthy knight is not abashed, but he takes all his
folk and sets them before him, and said to his brother Alarde, Good brother
Alarde, take keep of this folk between you and Guicharde, and if the folk of
Charlemayne assail us: we shall defend us well. Sir said Alarde as ye have said:
so shall it be done. And than they saw come Charlemayne and Ogyer the Dane the
duke Naymes of bauiere, Foulques of Moryllon, and many other and when
Charlemayne that came before well horsed saw Reynawde and his folk: he cried to
them and said So help me god glotons ye be now dead, this is the day yt I
shall make you all four to be all hanged. Sir answered Reynawde it shall not
be so as ye wene, and it please God, for if god give me life and health, and to
my horse Bayarde, the pursucte shall sore dear be bought yt ye now do. And
when he had said the same he turned Bayarde against Charlemayne for to smite
him. For he we^de well to have slain him without any fault. The king
Charlemayne was in danger to dye if Reynawde had raught him, but Dampe hughe
went between the king and Reynawde that came with his spear in ye rest
wylling for to do great harm And at this coming: he smote Dampe hughe
thorough the sheelde so hard that he perced his heart with the Iron of his
spear, and so he fell down dead before the king. And when Reynawde had given
that stroke he went his way after his brethern.

When Charlemaine saw hughe fall dead: he cried with an high voice: Now after
lords after, for if these glotons escape us: I shall never be merry, and Reynawde
came again to his folk and said to the^. Lords doubt you not as long as I
am a live, but be al assured and so ride on hardly and in good array. What
shall I tell you more? Wit it yt.xxiiii mile lasted the chase, and there was
never a mile: but that they iusted together, and many knights were there
overthrown and slain. But Reynawde and his folk bare themself so ma^ly that
they lost, but three of their felawship at that time, but they rode so long
till that they came to the river. The king called to him his barons and said
to them: Lords let a love the chase, it were folly from he^s forth on for to
follow them, for I see in all our horses may no more let the^ go to a hundred
thousand deuyls, for if Reynawde wrought with witch craft he could do no more,
tha^ he does. Let us think for to lodge us here nyghe ye river. For the
country is good and pleasau^nt as me seems Sir said the barons, let it be
done as ye have commanded. Than they vnladed their summers, and pyght there
their pauyllions. And when they were set up: the king made him to be dysarmed.
And in the mean while the supper was made redye lyghtlye, for all the day the
king had another eaten nor dro^ke^, nor none of his fellowship. And Reynawde was
passed over the river he and his brethren, and his folk safe and sound where
as they would be by the grace of our Lord, and when Reynawde and his brethern
saw that the chase was ceased and left: they went all softly, and when they
had gone far from the oste of king Charlemayne: they found a fountain fair
and clear, and about that fountain was much fair grass and thick. Wha^
Reynawde saw ye place was so pleasant: he said to his folk. Here is a fair
ground for to lodge us and for our hores, Sir said Alarde, ye say troth. And
tha^ they vnladed their so^mers and their carts, and wit it the horse were
weary, but the poor knights were evil lodged, for they had there no meat nor
drink but clear water. But wit it that Reynawde nor none of his knights
disarmed them not, but made good watch all the night one after another. And
when they saw the day come: Reynawde made his harneys to be trussed, and they
lyghted horseback, and took their way through the great forest of Ardeyne,
and wha^ they had riden long they lyghted down before another fountain that
they that had watched the night before should rest themself there.

NOw might well say Charlemayne yt he can never hurt the four sons of
Aymon. And wit that he was lodged upon the river where he abode, when he would
no more follow after Reynawde, and when the day was clear: he said to the duke
Naymes. What think ye what we ought to do? Sir said the duke Naymes if ye
will believe me: we shall turn back again. For to go any ferther this
way: it were but a folly, for this wood is to thick and the river over much
perilous and also Reynawde and his brethern are such knights that they be
not for to belyghtly overthrown, and while the king and the duke spoke
together there came many knights to him, and when Charlemayne saw them: he
called Vydelon, Reynier, Ogier ye dane and said to them. Lords I will that ye
come again to paris with me. And when they understood this: they were glad and
said to the King, Sir it is the best counsel that ye ca^ do, and after that
they were so accorded: Charlemayne made to be cried that every man should
return again into his country, and that they should keep it well, and that he
prayed them so to do. Sir said the barons we shall do your commaudement,
and when all was said: they made the host to descend and take their way, and
the king went straight to paris and the barons in their countries, and when
Charlemayne was come to Paris: he called before him his barons and to them said,
fair lords I am ye most unhappy king of the world, when I have no power to
avenge my self of the four sons of Aymon, and they led me as ye know. I
wene they shall return into their country or to their castle, and it be so:
I will yt we go there again for to ley syege there. Sir said the duke Naymes,
that shall they not do, for they are in Ardeyne, And ye know yt the forest is
so great that they shall find some cheuysau^ce. That might well be said the
king Charlemayne. But where some ever they go: evil way might they find. And
when he had said this: he turned toward Ogyer, and said to him. Take Gerarde,
Foulques the Almayne, and Dron of Moudidier, and give leave to the french men
and to the other. Sir said Ogyer well shall be done your commandment. And
then went Ogier to Foulques, to Gerard and unto Dron, and told them that yt
Charlemayne had commanded. And after came to the french men, and told to the
other knights, and gave them leave. And when the kings folk have had leave:
eueri man went to his country, not the right way: But trauersynge the
mountains. And thus as Aymon went trauersynge the land toward his country:
It happed to him so that he came by the fountain where his sons dwelled.
When Aymon saw his children: he was abashed and right sorry for it. And then he
said to his barons. Lords counsel me I pray you what I ought to do against
mi children. For and I assail them, and that they ben slain or taken: I shall
never have Joy. And I I let them go: I shall be forsworn to Charlemayne. When
his barons heard him speak so: there was never one that answered any word.
And wha^ Aymon saw that he was counseled of no man: he said again to them.
Sith it is so that ye will give me no counsel: I shall do after mine own
will. For god forbid yt it be laid to me, that I have found the^ here. And
have not fought with them. But well I tell you that it is for my sin that I
have found them here. But from hens forth it shall be done therein as it
pleases God and fortune. Sir said Esmenfraye if ye assail your children ye
do not amysse for ye swear it to the king Charlemayne, keep sir Aimon yt ye
be not forsworn. For a man of your age should rather dye than he should do
any treason. Good friend ye say well said Aymon, and I shall so do that I shall
not be blamed, and than he called two of his knights, and said to them. Go
toward Reinawde and his brethern and defye them in my behalf. Sir said the
knights it is a hard thing for to be done, but sithe it please you: we
shall do as ye have commanded, and than they went toward Reynawde that was
sore abashed, for he knew well that they were of his fathers folk, whereof he
was full sorry for it. And after he said unto his brethren. Lords now arm
your self. For a man yt is well garnysshed is not of light overthrown, and
of the other side I know so much the hardynes of my father: that he shall not
feyne to be fight us. Brother said Richard ye saw truth. This hangyng: came
the two knights before him, and when Reynawde saw them come nyghe him: he went
against them and said to them. Lords what be ye? and what wind drives you
hither? tha^ spoke one of the knights, and said to Reynawde. Sir we ben
knights of my lord your father that sends to you by us a defiaunce. Lords
said Reynawde I wyste it well as soon as I did see you of far. But go again
and tell to our father that it will please him to give us trewce for he shall
not do well for to be fight us yt are his natural children. Sir said the
knight of the folly ye speak, but think to defend your selves well, for he
shall assail you without doubt.

ANd when they had said these words: hey returned again for to rehearse to
Aymon their message, and how they had defied his children. When the old Aymon
understood them: he made none other tarying but spurred his horse with the
spurs, and ran the formaste upon his son. And when Reynawde saw his
father come: he came against him and said. Ha father what do you? we have none
so great a foe as ye be to us, and I have great marvel that ye come always
upon us, ye do ill and great sin for to do so. At the least if ye will by
no wise help us: be not to us contrary ne enemy if it please you. Thou thief
said Aymon, ye shall never do good sith that ye begin to preche. Go to the
wood so shall ye become wild beasts, evil day give you god. For ye ben not
worth an handful of straw Now think to defend your self.

For if ye ben taken: ye shall be put to a great tourmente. Sir said Reynawde
ye do us wrong. I shall defend me sith that I may none other wise do. For if
I should let mi self to be slain: mi soul should be put to pain and
tourmente. When Aymon saw that: he brought his spear in the rest, and put
himself among his children, like as they had been strangers And when Reynawde
saw that: he cried to his men, and said, here is none other but do well now.
Lords think to smite well, for need co^pelleth us thereto. And when he had said
ye word: he spurred his horse with his spurs, and put himself in the
thickest. And began to make so great effortes of arms, that all the folk of
his father meruayled of it greatly. What shall I say? the battle began so
fell and so cruel: that pytie it was to see. For ye should have seen give and
receive great and horrible strokes of the one part, and of the other, and many
knights and horses dye, many sheeldes broken and mani white harneys broken. So
many heads smittes of and so many legs and arms broken and sore hurt. And
think that this battle was sore strong and well holden of the one side and
of the other. But to say the troth: Reynawde must lose at yt time. For his
Father had three times as many folk as he had. For of five hundred me^ that
abode with Reynawde after his castle was take which were with him at this
bataile: were left on live, what hurt and sound but fyfty persons. But I tell
you well for very certain that Reynawde and his brethren did so great harm
to the folk of their father: that they slew well half of the men that he had.
But at ye last Reynawde must lose and flee away toward the mountains, and
Aymon chased him as well as he could, for he we^d well for to have taken them.
and when Reinawde saw them self upon the top of the mountain: he said unto
his brethern. Let us not depart from hence. For this is a good place for to
defend. Wit that there was great scarmysshi^g and iustyng made and many a
knight dead and very sore wounded. And there was slain under Alarde his good
horse. And when that Alarde saw himself a ground: he lept upon his feet
right quickli. And took his sword in his hand and began for to defend well
his bones. And when that Rychard saw his brother Alarde a foot: he turned
toward him for to help and succor him, and Aymon and his folk came there
for to take him.

So began the battle yet again more cruel then it had be before. And wit that
Alarde should have been taken there, if it had not be the noble and worthy
knight Renawde that came for to help him. And when that he was come there: he
smote Bayarde with his Spurs, and went into the greatest pr^se. So that he
overthrew the Duke Aymon his father down unto the ground, and after he said
unto him. Father ye have pledged my brother Alarde For ye be now set a foot as
he is.

Than was Aymon very sore angry that he lost almost his wits. And Reynawde
set his hand to his sword and began for to depart the prese in such a wise
that he brought his brother Alarde out of the prese, and after said to him.
Fair brother lepe behind me upon Bayarde. For to abide here any longer: it
were folly. Wha^ Alarde understood his brother Reynawde: he was right glad for
he was so weary yt he might no more and so he mounted upon Bayarde behind his
brother Reynawde. And when Bayarde wyste him self lade with two knights: he
strengthed himself so strongly: that it seemed to Reynawde that he was more
Ioyouse and more merry than he had be of all the day. Now wit it that Reynawde
made four Ioustes upon his horse Bayarde with his brother Alarde behind him.
Whereof he slew four knights of the folk of Charlemayne that were come with
his father Aymon. And all thus Reynawde took Alarde out of his enemies hands
Mawgre their teeth and bare himself right worthily ye same day, as here after
ye shall mow more plainly understand.

NOw ben the four sons of Aymon recreaunt and almost weary, but only Renawde
that never was the weker for nothing that he did in arms. For as he went: he
turned himself at every pass that he made, and rebuked and kept his enemies
a back with his hard strokes that he gave to them, so that his folk went
before him all at their ease and leyser. And when he saw that his folk were
well far from their enemies: he spurred Bayarde and came to his folk (his
brother Alarde behind him) as lightly as bayarde had be without any brydell
and no sadle upon him. For this horse was such that he was never werye, and
thus as Reynawde went away: than came and followed after him Esmenfray yt was one
of the most worthy knights of Charlemayne and was upon a horse right good and
black, that Charlemayne had given to him.

And when he was nighe Reynawde he cried to them. So help me God glottons ye
ben dead or taken sureli I shall bring you to Charlemayne. And anon went and
smote Reynawde in his sheelde, whereof Reynawde was much angry, and Reynawde
smote him again in such a wise and with so great a strength: yt neither for
his sheelde nor for his good armures of steel he was not kept, but that
Reynawde overthrew him sterke dead to the ground. And wha^ this knight was
dead: Reynawde took his horse by ye bridell and said to Alard his brother
hold fair brother, light upon this Black Horse which is good. For I give
him to you.

ANd when that Alarde saw the fair present that his brother Reynawde had
done to him: he was as glad of the same, as though he had won Paris. And
tha^ he made none other rarienge: but yt he lighted down from Bayard and
mounted upon Esmenfrays black horse that his brother had given him and smote
him with the spurs and went and Iusted against a knight of his fathers folk
that was called anfrai so hard that he overthrew him dead to therthe. And
shortly to speak after that Alarde was in this wise set again on horse back:
began the battle of a fresh sore hard and fell, in so much that at that
hour were slain.xx. of the best knights that Aymon had with him. When Aymo^
saw this: he was sore angry for it, and cried to his folk. Halordes if they
escape you I shall never have joy, for they have slain Esmenfray ye good knight
that king Charlemayne had given to me. When the folk of Aymon understood these
words, and the will their Lord: than they did ren upon Alarde so much that
they made him to leave the place by force, and if it had not be the passage of a
little river that eased and holy them greatly: Reinawde and his brethern had
much to do, but I tell you without fault that Reynawde and his brethern made
so great occisyon of that folk of their father: that it was pity for to
behold, for there dyed well of them.xxv. at the passage of the river and if
Reynawde had had with him a fyfty knights more the^ he had at ye passage: he
should have dyscomfyted his father and all his folk but for fault of me^:
Reynawde must for sake the place and might not save with him but.xiiii.
knights of his own. Now see how sorrowful was the battle, for of five
hundred knights that Reynawde had with him there abode with him alive
but.xiii. and ye may well wit that the old Aymon had dommaged his children
right sore, but that they passed over the River, for as it is said they had
lost all their men whereof they were full sorye and wroth.

Now has Reynawde so few folk that he wot no more what to do, but he might
not do thereto, whereof the teres fell down continually from his eyes, and in
likewise wept Aymon his father at the other side as the historye does tell,
and when he had wept enough: he said in this manner. Ha fair Son pane and
worthy how sorye am I? for I am the occasyon of your harm and damage, now
shall ye all go as exiled, for ye have naught to live upon and I cannot help
you by any wise, whereof I ensure you I am greatly displeased and sorry for it.
The devil take his soul that first began yt strife and so shall he. When he had
made his moan and lame^tacions long enough: he made incontinent all the dead
bodies to be taken for to be buried.

And they that were hurt: he made to be brought with him as well as he could,
And made the bodi of Esmenfray to be put upon a litter, and took on his way
toward Ardeyne where he bode but a night, and in ye morning he made the litter
to be borne upon two horses and went again to Paris and came before Charlemayne
and said to him. Sir when I went now last toward my country, wit that as I
was on my way, I found my children, and five hundred knights with them in the
forest of Ardeyne, and for thacquitaunce of mine oath: I did send to them mi
diffiaunce, and would have taken them for to have brought them to you as
prisoners, but I might not, for they be^ sore doubted. And yt I assailed the^
it has cost me sore dear, for they have borne unto me so great harm and
damage that it can not be esteemed, and I slew al their folk except.xii
persons that been escaped with them but they have slain your knight Esmenfray,
but at the last they went away discomfited and overthrown. And they should
have been taken if it had not be a river that they passed over, whereby they were
saved. When Charlemayne understood these words: he was right sore an angered,
so much yt he lost almost his wit. And than he said to old Aymon in anger,
by God Aymo^ ye excuse your self falsely, for never Raven eat his young
birds, to a another ye shall make this to believe but not to me. When you old
Aymon understood the king that he spoke thus: he said to him. Sir Emperor wit
that I do tell you is troth, and I do show it to the end that my truth
be known, and for none other cause, do bring before me your relics and
halowes that I shall swear upon the saints that been in heaven, that it was as
I have recountred and said to you, and if it please you ye shall believe me, and
if ye will not: ye may choose thereof. Aymon said Charlemayne I know well your
heart, for if it went all at your will, your sons should be lords of all
France, and of all my empire. Sir said Aymon ye be wroth of some other
thing, whereof I may not do thereto, and if ye have any knight in your court
ye will make good this that it please you for to say: I shall prove it on him
with my body that he lies falsely. But evermore ye have be such that ye never
loved a true knight, but flateres and liers whereof mani euilles ben happed and
shall hap. And than Aymon came down from the Palace, and lyghted upon his
horse and went again to his country without any leave that he took of the
king, and he rode so long a day after another that he came to Ardeine, and
there he found the Duchess his wife, that came against him, and received him
with a glad chere, and asked him how he had done.

THan said the duke Aymon, full evil have I done. For I found my four sons
in the wood of Ardeyne, and so I assailed them cruelly wenyng to me for to have
taken them, which I could not do, but I stewe and discomfited all their
folk, and they have done me so great harm of my folk, and so many they have
slain of them: that I know not the nombre. And I tell you for very certain,
but if it had been the prowes and great worthynes of our son Reynawde: I had
taken Alarde, for my men had slain his horse, and had brought him so low that
he might no more go, but Reynawde his brother came upon us and brake us so
sore that he brought Alarde out of ye prese, mawgre us and our folk, and made
him sit behind him upon Bayarde. And I tell you that Reynawde fought so sore
that never lion nor no bore fought so strongly against any other beast, as he
did fight against our men, at eueri pace that he made forward: he turned
himself against us with Alarde behind him that made us so greatly abashed ye
we might not bear nor abide his great strokes, and at this turnyng that he
thus made: he slew Esmenfraye a knight of Charlemaynes, which he loved much,
and when he had slain him: he took his horse and gave him to Alarde, and made
him to go down fro Bayarde, and lighted anon upon the horse of Esmenfray. And
thus they went from us would we or not And I went again to Paris to
Charlemayne, and showed to him how the thing was come, and how Esmenfray was
slain, whereof I trowed not to have had blame, but he b^amed me right greatly
for it, but sixh yt he is my heavy lord with out a lawful cause: I shall make
hi^ wroth and sorry before syx months come at an end.

YE have done evil said ye lady, that ye have thus sore dommaged our
children, ye should defend them against all men, and ye do to them the worste
that ye can, be they not your sons naturell comen of your own flesh? For
soothe my lord, ye ought well to bear your self better toward them than ye
do, for never so rich a bourdeyne was bore in the womb of a lady, blessed be
ye hour that they were be^otten and nourisshed, and so help me go^ my Lord:
as I would that you children and mine had taken you prisoner, to the end that
ye should yield to them again all that they have lost by you, and I thank
god right hyghly that Charlemayne is wroth with you, For evil to do may no
good come of, ye assailed your children against god, and against ryghtwysenes,
and if harm is come to you therefore: thanked be God. Than said Aymon Lady ye
say me right, for I have done great wrong, and I promytte you that I never
did thing whereof I repent me so sore as I do of this. But trust I shall keep
me another time to do them any harm. But here leaves the history to speak
of Charlemayne and of ye duke Aymo^ and of ye duchess his wife: and returns
to speak of reynawd and of his brethern yt are in the woddes of Ardeyn.

How after that the old Aymon had disco^fited his children they went and
dwelled in the ^epeste of the forest of Ardeyne so long that they were all
cou^trefayte black and rough as beasts, for the great hungre that they had
endured. After they went to Ardeyne to see their mother that feasted and
chered them greatly, and gave to them so great good that they might well
enterteyne theymselfe and their estate thereupon against Charlemayne. And how
Mawgys their cousin arrived when they would depart, which went with them into
the Realm of Eascoyn with five hundred knights. And of the sorrow that their
lady mother made at their departinge. Capitulum.iiii.
depiction of an armoured man kneeling before a female figure; and of three
other armoured men

IN this party the tale says, yt after that Reynawde had slain Esmenfray and
given his horse to his brother Alarde: they passed over the river and went into
the forest of Ardeyn sore deep in it, by cause they would not be aperceyued.
And when they had been there a little while: they began to keep the ways, and
all they that came for by them and that bare any vytayles they were distressed
by them and there of they lived, for they durst not go to no town nor to no
Castelles for to bye any vytaylles, and therefore they suffered great need and
great disease, for they had another meat nor drink, but water. For the most
part they eat flesh without any bread. And know that for cause of this
great suffrau^ce yt they endured thus, and also of the great cold yt they had,
for by cause of the snowes that were there: their folk began to die. And abode
nomo live but Reynawd and his brethern. And this was because of the great
strength that was in their bodies. For no travail might not hinder them. And
wit yt they had but each of them four an horse that is to wit Bayarde and the
three other, but they have another Otes nor other Corn for to give them, but
they eat only such as they might find in the forest of roots and leaves. And
for this cause: their horses were so lean that with pain might they stand,
save Bayarde that was fat and in good plight, for he could better feed and
live with roots, than the other should have done with hey andotes. And wit it
well that the four sons of Aymon lived there this life so long that every
man that passed there as they were and kept them self, escaped not, but he
was other slain or distressed of such vycailles as he had, so that all the
country about them was sore wasted by them that it was meruaille. And at the
last the four knights were so sore apayred, that they that had seen them
before: should not have known them, for their harnays was all rusty and their
sa^lles and brydelles all rotten, so that they had made their reins with
cords. And them self were become all black. And it was no marvel, for they
weared always their cote of mayle all roustye upon their doublettes, and had
another sherte nor Iacket but they were all rotten. What shall I tell you more?
and wit that Reynawd was douted and feared sore that it was meruail. For nigh
there as Reinawd hau^ted: was no man that durst abide there, but only within
the fortresses. For when Reynawd was mounted upon Bayarde, and his three
brethern upon their other three horses: all their richesse and power was with
them, and yet they wasted and destroyed all the country all about them. And
so the four poor knights were so sore disfigured, that who someuer had seen
them, should not have known them. For they were as roughe as beres that been
famyshed and were right sore lene that every body had of it pytie.

ANd when Reynawde saw himself so porely arrayed: he called to him his
brethern and said, Lords I marvel my self much that we take not some good
counsel what we have to do, and me seems that we ben become ill, and that
slouthe is among us. For if we were such as I crowed: We should not suffer
the martyrdom that we endure and that we have endured so long a go, no we
know I that we ben but little worth to have let rest our enemies as we have.
But one thing I consider, we have but few horses and litell harneis, and no
money at a land yet we ben in such a plight that we ben more like beasts th^n
folk. So pray I you all in general that ye will tell me what we ought to do
for the best, for I tell you for very certain that I had much lever die as a
knight than for to die here for hungre and for disease.

ANd when Alarde heard Reynawde speak thus: he said, brother so help me
god. It is long since I did take heed to that ye say now, but I feared me
full sore to tell you thereof lest ye would have be dyspleased with me for it,
but since that ye have opened the words, if ye will believe me: I shall give you
good cou^seyl as we seems. Sir we have suffered here great poverty a long
time and we may not go into no cou^rtie but we shall be take, for as ye know
all the barons of france, and namely our father, and al our kinnesmen hates
us deadlye, and if ye will believe me: we shall go straight to A^^eine toward
out mother, for she shall not fail us and there we shall soiourne a little.
And when we shall have soiourned: we shall take with us some company and shall
go serve some great lord, where we shall get some good, for ye be not such a
man but that ye shall yet ones have great plenti of goods, for I know no man in
earth that of worthynes and of strength may compare to you. Brother said
Reynawde ye say well and wisely, and I promyt you I shall do so. Wha^ the two
other knights heard the couseil yt Alarde their brother had give to Reinawde:
they began to say. Brother Alarde we know well that ye give good counsel to
our brother Reinawd. Than said Reynawd. Since that this counsel seems to you
good: we shall do it to night, so much abode the four sons of Aymon that
the night came, and when it was come: they lighted on horseback and put
theimselfe to the way so well clothed and araied as I have told you above and
in such wise that their flesh was seen naked in many places of their bodies.
And so long they rode by night and by day that they came there as they were
borne that was nigh the city of Ardeyn, and when they were so nigh the city
that they might well see it: they looked upon it, and they remembered the
great riches wherfro they were cast and banysshed, and of the great pouertye
that they had suffered long. And as they aproched nyghe the city. Reynawde
said to his brethern we have done evil that we have not taken surety of our
father, for ye know well that he is so cruel that if he may take us: he shall
yield us prisoners to Charlemain. Brother said Rychard, ye say well but my
heart gives me not that our father would do as ye have said, and he so did:
yet have I lever die before Ardeyne: than for great disease and hungre in the
forest, let us ride surely, for I tell you that no body shall know us. And of
the other part if we can set our feet within Ardeyne: we shall be safe enough,
for we be well beloved, and my laid our mother should never suffer that men
should do to us any harm ne dyspleasure.

CErtes fair brother said Reynawde, ye have said tyght well and wisely, and
much ye have recomfort me. Now let us ride in a good hour. And when he had
said these words: they entered soon after with in Ardeyne, and they tode
thorough the maystres streate that they were not known of no body, and they
went straight to the castle without any taryinge. And wit that when they passed
thoroughe the streets: the folk that beheld them, merueylled much of them,
for they wyste not what folk they were, and said the one to the other, see
what folk ben these. I trow that they ben not of our law nor of our believe.
Than they asked them, what ben ye lords that are so countrefaite, are ye
Paynemes, or of what country ben ye? Syrs answered Reynawde ye enquere over
much see ye not what folk we been. And when they were come to the palace they
lyghted down a foot, and took their horses to keep to their knights that
were come of late in their felawship, and tha^ the four brethern went up to
the halle, and met with no body. For the old Aymon their father was a hawkyng
upon the river, and the duchess their mother was in her chamber, where she was
contynually pencyful and sorry because yt she might not hear no tidinges of her
children. When you four brethern were entered within the hail: they found no
man to whom they should speak, whereof they were sore meruayled and they set
themself down, the one here, and the other there, and abode thus a long
while that no body came there. And when they had carried long enough: than
came the duchess their mother out of her chamber, and she looked a long the
hall, where she saw her sons thus counterfayte which she knew not but
meruayled herself greatly what folk they were. And when Alarde saw his lady
mother come, he said to his brother Reynawde and to his other brethern, yo^der
is our mother that we sore desired for to see, let us go against her if it
please you, and tell her our great penurye and our need. Brother said Reynawde
we shall do so, but we shall tarry till she speak to us or not, and thus
tarried the four brethern till that their mother was come to them. And when she
saw them so black and so hidous, and principally Reynawde yt was so great and
so rough: she took so great fear of them that she would have gone again into
her chamber, but anon she assured herself and said to the^, God save you
Lords. What be you or of what nacyon? are ye christen or paynimes, or folk yt
does penau^re will ye not have some alms or some clothyng for to cover
your bodi with? for I see ye have great need of it, and if ye will have it for
gods sake I shall give it you gladlye, to the end he have mercy on my
children, and that he will keep them from ylle combraunce and fro peril, for it
is well seven years that I did not see them. And when the Duchess had said
this: she took so great pytie to remember her children that she began to weep
sore tenderlye. And when she had wept a long while: she said so high that her
children understood it. Ha good god when shall the day come that I shall see
my children? Alas good lord how feign would I see them. Was there ever Lady
that bare so rich a bourden as I have, and that were of it so discomforted as
I am?

ANd when Reynawde saw his lady mother so sorrowful and sorry: he had of it
great pity, and the teres began to come at his eyes, and would dyscouer
himself. But wha^ the duchess beheld well his visage and his behauour, and
manner: her blood ran up to her face, and heuered within her body, and began
to shake full fast, so that almost she fell down in a swoune to the earth and
was a great while that she might not speak her heart was so close and so sore
pressed, and all her color lost and gone, and when she was come again to her
self: she did cast her sight again upon Reynawde, and knew him right well by
a wound that he had in his face, which was done to him of a fall, when he
was in his tender age. Tha^ she said to hi^ as glad as any mother may be,
Reynnawde my son, whose peer is not among all the knights of the world.
How see I you so sore appayred and changed? Where is gone your great beaultie?
why my son do ye hide you toward me, yt loved you more than my self? And
while that she said these words: she looked about her, and knew her children,
and anon she went toward them with her arms spread abroad, for to coile and
kiss them sore weepynge for great pity that they were so sore apayred of
their beaultie, and so long she kissed one and than another: that at last she
fell down in a swoune. And Reynawde took her up in his arms, where she abode
a good while and Reynawde and his brethern ceased not from weeping, for great
pity that they had of their mother.

ANd when the duchess was come again to herself: she took her children and
made them sit down by her, and said to them how is it that I see you thus
poor and dysfygured? why is it that ye have with you no knights nor none
other company? where have ye ben that have endured so great poverty, and so
great disease? when ye duchess spoke thus to her children she did weep still
sore tenderly, and foundred all in teres, holding her son Reynawd between
her arms, and kissed him sweetly. Lady said Reynawde we have with us but three
knights that keep our horses yo^der without. For our father has slain all
our knights, and all our folk. And also he should have slain us if it had
not be our lord yt kept us therfro through his pity and mercy. Sore hard
parentage did he show to us our natural father. When the Duchess understood
these words: she was right sorry for it. And called to her one of her
servants and said to him. Go and make my sons horses to be had into a
good stable, and that they ben well tended. And bring hither yt three
knights, that keep the horses without, for I will see them. Madame said her
squire it shall be done incontinent. And then he went to the three knights and
said to them, that the duchess would see them. Which incontinent did as the
lady had commanded, and came to the Palace where as Reynawde tarried for them.
Lords said the duchess to them, ye be right welcome. Madame said the knights
God give you good life and long and Joy of your children, For they ben the
best and the most worthy knights of all the world. This hangyng: came there
a yeman, that said to the duchess. Madame, if it please you to sit at ye
table: ye meat is ready. Tha^ the lady took Reynawde and the other with her,
and led them to dinner and made them sit down all before her, and their three
knights at the left side of her. There made good chere the four sons of
Aimon, and ete at their case and at their own will. For it was long sith yt
they had any good mele, where they might take their natural food at their
ease. And as they were at the table: Then came their father Aimon from
hawkynge and hunting which had taken four hearts and two wild bores, and
diverse pertryches and Fesauntes. When Aymon saw them: he knew them not and
he said unto the duchess. Lady what are these folk that been thus cou^trefer?
when the duchess understood her husband she was sore a gaste, and began for
to weep and said. Sir these ben your children and mine, that ye have
trauaylled so much, and sore hunted as wild beasts. The which have dwelled
long time in the foreste of Ardeyne where as they have been sore turned as ye
now may see. Now are they come unto me by cause I am right glad when I see
them. For to you they ben not come. For they know well that ye love them not,
But I pray you for god that for the love of me ye will lodge them this night.
For they shall depart to morrow erlye, and I wot not if euere I shall see them.
Wherefore of this I beseech you right humbly,

Than when Aymon understood these words: he shook al for anger, and turned
him self toward his sons, and made to them evil there and said to them,
Gloto^s gods curse have you, For ye ben not worth a straw. For ye have
another folk nor money, nor no prisoner yt might pay to you a great hauoyre.
Father said Reynawde by the faith that I owe to you, if your land is in peace,
the other ben not so. For ye might go six score miles that ye should not
find another rich man nor poor, but that they keep them selves within
fortresses and in Castelles. But ye do great wrong for to do us the worst
that ye can, ye took first from us our good Castle of Mountaynforde. And
after yt ye had assailed us in ye wood of ardeyne, and slew all our folk so
that of five hundred knights that I had ye left a live with me but enleuyn,
whereof.viii. ben dead, and these.iii. that ye see here ar abide a live, now
behold well father, and think how ye bare your self toward us. But sith it
is thus that ye ought to us no good will, and that ye may not see us: Make us
the heads to be smyten of, and so shall you be beloved of Charlemayne, and
hated of god, and of all men.

ANd when ye old Aymon understood Reynawde thus speak he knew well he said
troth, and began to fight sore at his heart, and then he said to his children.
Myschaunt your lidernes, and sloth has overcome you. Ye were never my
childerne: For if ye were such as me^ wene: ye should not have suffered the
great poverty that ye have endured so long. But ye should have gone win upon
your enemies, for to maintein your self honestly, and make good war to
Charlemayne through all his land. But ye are become myschaunt, and therefore I
tell you that ye get nothing of me. Now the^ void out soon of my Palayce, and
go beg where ye will at a another place Sir said Reynawde ye say that an evil
and an unkind father ought to say. For I tell you for very certain that we
have slain so many thieves and brygauntes: that I can not number them, whereof
I feel my self in great sin. But for god we require you that ye will help
us to recover our lands of Charlemayn and if ye will not do so: give to us of
your gods, and we shall go far from you. I will not said Aymon. Father said
Reynawde here I se well your evil will. I and my brethern have done so much,
yt we ben comen into your place, that we should fare the better for it, but I
see well ye will cast us therfro with great afraye. And I swear to you by the
faith that I owe to my Lady mother that if I must needs depart from you in
such a manner: ye shall abye it full dear, if ye cast us thus out of your
land, for I have lever die here by you, tha^ to die for hu^gre. Since that it
may be none otherwise.

THan when Reynawde fawe that his father was so hard herted against him and his
brethern: he wexed red for anger, and began to change color, and drew his
sword half out of his shethe. And w^an Alarde saw his brother Reynawde
change color: he knew well that he was wroth, so ran he and called him
saying. Ha fair brother, for gods love anger not your self so sore to our
father for he is our lord and therefore whether it is right or wrong he may
say to us as it pleases him, and we ought to do his commandment. And if he
is cruel toward us: we ought to be humbly and pleasant toward him. So keep
your self for gods love that ye set not hand upon him. For it were against
the commandment of god brother said Renawde it lacks but little that I wexe
mad al quick wha^ I see before me him that should help us, defend and love us
as his children and give us his good counsel to us, and toward all men: And
he does all contrary the same. He has made peace with Charlemayne for to
dystroye and undo us. I saw never so cruel a man against his sons, for he
chaseth us a way from him full shamfulli, as though we were strangers or
sarasyns. I should not can tell the harm and great hurt that he has done to
us, nor the great pouerti that we have suffered for him. I would never have
done so to him for rather I would have let me ben flayne all quycke. But and
if I ca^ ever go from hens: I certify you that I shall anger him, and shall so
wast his land that it shall do him but little profit so that it shall be
spoken of perpetually.

ANd when Aymon herad Reynawde speak thus: his heart wexed soft, and began to
weep full sore and said. Ha god how I am sorry yt I may not enjoy the good yt
god has given to me largely, there should be no man in the world so happy as
I were, yt my children had their peace with king Charlemayne. For I am sure
that the king Priamus of troy had never better m^n to his children nor more
valyau^r ne pru, tha^ I have Ha evil heart thou should not take heed to none
other against thy children, but should help them and keep the^ against al
me^, wherefore I ought well to hate thee: evil heart thou have made me hate yt I
ought to love as mine own self, and when he had thus spoken to him self: he
said to Reynawde. Fair son ye are right worthy and sage: for never Hector of
Troy was worth you, nor in all the world is not found your match. And therefore
I ought well to do your will. When the duke Aymo^ had said this word: he
spoke to his wife the duchess and said, lady I go yonder with out, for I will
not be forsworn against the king Charlemayne: ye have within gold and silver
enough, and many horses and much harnes, palfrayes and summers. Now give to my
children all that they will take. And when he said thus: he took his me^ with
him, and went his way.

THan said Reynawde we ought to tanke you much of that ye have now said, and
we shall go hence to morrow erly with gods grace: to the end you ye be not
evil at ease, and if it please you we shall abide for this night for to
comfort our mother, yt has be so ill at ease for the love of us. And I promyt
you father we should not have come^ yet, but it had be for her sake, Reynawde
fair son said ye duke ye are full of great wit. Wit that when Berthelot
was dead I durst not show me before the king Charlemayne: because he said he
had lever have lost the half of his Realm, and thretened me for to hang or
brenne and distroye all my land, and I did so much by the counsel of my
friends that I made mine apoyntment and that I was out of al blame. And ye
have not considered the oaths yt Charlemayne made me do against you, as
against all other yt held with you, and I am sore dyspleased of yt I found you
in you woods of Ardeyne as I did. But I was forced of mine honor to do as I
did for to be in peace with king Charlemayne, your mother has not forsworn
you, and therefore she may give you of our goods at your will. And when ye duke
had said these words: he issued out of his palace, and went to the wood.

AFter when the free duchess heard that, that the duke Aymon gave her leave for
to do with his goods at her will: she called her children and said to them.
Fair children now be you sure that sithe your father is not within ye shall be
well tended upon, and shall have all the chere that I can do to you. And tha^
she did do make ye baynes ready and made them all to bayne honestly, and wit yt
in their vain were many a sweet herb, and when they were well clean: the
good lady made bring ^y^^en and other clothes for to change, and to each of
them a mantel of fine scarlet furred with hermyns, and wha^ she had them well
aparelled: she led them in a chamber where their fathers treasour was and
showed it to her children, when Reynawde saw so rich a treasour: he began to
laughe and said lady mother gramercy of so fair a gift as here is. For it
mistreth me well, and tha^ he took of that treasoure at his will. And
incontinent he sent messangers through all the country for to get him
souldyours of the best men of war, whereof many one came gladly to him, the
which reynawde paid for an whole year. What shall I tell you more? Reynawde
and his brethern lay that night within the Castle of their said father. And the
next morning after or it was day they departed and had with them five hundred
men well horsed and well arrayed. And when Reynawde and his brethern had take
leave of their lady mother ye duchess she said to them fair sons I will that
ye draw toward Spain, for it is a plentious country. And as they would have
departed: than came Mawgys their cosyn, that came out of France, where he had been long time,

AFter when Mawgys was lighted from his horse: he ra^ to Reinawde, his arms
spread abroad, and began to kiss him, and when he had so done: he kissed his
other three brethern, and than he said to them. Ha fair cosyns I am right glad
to see you, and thanked be our Lord that he has brought me into this cost.
Cosyn said Reynawde where have you ben so long yt we had never tidings of
you. Cosyn said Mawgys I come from the great City of Paris where I have stolen
three horses laden with gold, and here they ben, the which Charlemayne wend
for to have hid well, and I give you the half of it for I might not bestow
the^ better than to you. Cousin said Reynawde god thank you. And wha^ he had
said: so he went out of Ardeyne with his brethren and his folk, and found his
father yt came fro the wood, and when Reynawde saw his father: he made him
reverence and bowed himself to him, and Aymon said to them, fair sons no
when ye well garnysshed and honestly arrayed. I pray you that ye do so in
France, that men speak of your prowes, and ye my other children. I commau^de
you that ye obey Reynawde and keep him above all thing, for as long as he shall
live ye ought not to be aferde of no harm.

THan said Alarde, sir we shall do your commandment, and we pray you for gods
love, yt ye will be evermore our good father. I will be so my children said
Aymon, and tha^ Reynawde took leave of his father and of his mother yt conveyed
them out of the town. But the good lady fell down in a swoune wha^ she saw
depart her children. And all the town began to make such a sorrow that it was
great pirie, and Reynawde and his brethren went on their way. And wha^ ye
duchess came to her self and saw her children depart: She began to say. Ha
poor heart mine, why breakest not thou, alas if I had dyed long a go my
soul were the better at ease, I am not a mother but a stepmother. Alas I se my
rich burden go to exile, and yet I cannot witholde them nor help them that
they abide with me, thus as the Duchess made her move to her women: Aymon came
and took her between his arms and recomforted her and said unto her. Lady
dyscomfort not yourself so much, for my heart gives me that we shall yet see
them in great prosperiti and honor and great Joy and gladness ye shall once
have of them in short time. Shortly to speak: the good Aymon recomforted so
much the Duchess that she left her sorrow and went again to the palace with
the duke Aymon. I leave hear to speak of the duke Aymon and of ye duches his
wife: and return to speak of Reynawde and of his brethern.

How after that Reynawd his brethern and his cosyn Mawgys were departed out of
Dordone fro their mother for to seek their adventure: they rode so long that
they came into the Realm of Gascoyne. And how by the way they made great
harm to the Realm of France. And how the king of Gascoyne retained them in
his seruyse. Capitulum.v.
depiction of four armoured men, a king with crown, and a group of unarmed men

NOw says the tale that after that Reinawde, Alarde, Guicharde and Richard,
and Mawgys their cosyn were issued out of Ardei^ with all their felawshyp, that
was well of.vi. hundred men, well mounted and arrayed: they passed thoroughe
Byhense and wasted all France, and passed through the country of Gastynoys,
and so forth to Orleaunce where they went over the river of Loyre, and wasted
all the land unto Poyters. And when they were come to Poyters: they heard
tidinges that the king Yon of Gascoyn that was a puissau^t prince was assailed
of the Sarasyns. And when Mawgys heard these words: he ca^ to Reynawde and
said to him. Cousin the King Yon of Gascoyne is a prince of great renome and of
great power go we to him and serve him and such service we shall mow do to
him: that Charlemayne shall not mow hinder us by no ways. Cousin said Reynawde
let us than go there syn that it seems to you good, and wha^ they were here to
accorded they took their way toward Gascoyn and rode so long by their
iourneys that they came to Burdews a fair citi, where they found king Yon with
a great company of knights, and when they were down from their horses:
Reynawde said to his folk, go we lodge us. Cosyn said Mawgys we shall not do
so, but we shall speak straight with king Yon, and if he reteyneth us: in a
good hour be it and if he not do so: we shall serve borgoyns the sarasyn,
which is right prue and sage, and has al ready co^quested almost all the
land of king Yon, as Toulouse, Montpeller, Lietary and saint Gyle, Tarascon,
and Arles, and if we fail here: we shall not fail there. Cosyn said Reynawde
ye speak well and wisely, and we shall do as ye have said. And tha^ Reynawde
took with him. L. knights and his three brethern and Mawgis, and took of his
arms and clothed himself honestly and rychelye, and when he was well arrayed:
he went to ye king Yons court upon a little nagge, and when he rode thorough
Bordews: all the people ran for to see him, because he was so great and so well
made and so fair with all, and also his three brethern, but they were not al
euin so great. And when they were come to the gate of the kings place Reynawde
light on foot, and went up to ye Palace, and found ye king at ye counsel.
And when the steward saw Reynawde so fair a man and so goodly, and so many
folk with him: he came him against and said to him. My lord ye be right
welco^. And Reynawde answered to him god give you good adventure Now tell and
please you where is ye king? My lord said the steward, the king holds now
his counsel, for Bourgons the sarasin is entered in his la^d and has done to
him great harm and dommage. For he has burnt towns and castelles abbeyes,
hospytalles, Churches, and al other monasteries, and now he is parforce within
Toulouse with a great puissaunce. Certes said Reynawde. This Borgons is of
great power as me seems and after that men sayen. Thus as Reinawd and the
stuard spoke together: came king yo^ out of the cou^seil chamber, and when
Reynawd saw him: he took his brethern and his cousin mawgis with him and went
against the king, which Reynawd salued right humbly and said to him. Sir I am
come to you fro a far land with me three brethern and my cosyn that ye see
here for to do you seruise and our folk if it please you, and we shall serve
you in such a manner, yt we will have nothing of you, but and our seruise be
agreeable unto you: ye shall promise me as a king if it be your pleasure, that ye
shall be my warraunt and help against al other, good friend said ye king yon ye
be right welcome to me, and where ye say ye be come for to serve me: I thank
you for it with all my heart, but I will first know what folk ye ben, for ye
might be such that I should defend you, or that I should be your enmy. Sir
said Reinawd since that it please you to know what we ben: I shall tell it to
you, wit that my name is Reynawd and am son eldest to the duke Aimon of
Ardeyn, and these three knights ben my brethern, here is Alard, Guichard, and
Richard, and here is Mawgis our cosyn one of ye best knights of the world
and most wise. Charlemayne has cast us out of France, and has disheryted
us, and our father has disauowed us for the love of him and for this cause sir
we go seek a bout after a lord that is good and true that should help us
to defend against Charlemayne, and we shall serve him well and truly.

When king yon heard this that Reynawde said: he was right glad of it that
they were the four sons of Aymon the best knights of all the world and
most doubted, and Mawgis that was the most subtle of the world that were
come for to serve him, he would not have been so glad if men had given to him al
paris. For he wist well that if ever he should fynishe his war: it should
be by their mean. Than he looked up toward heaven, and thanked our lord of
the coming of these worthy knights, and than he said to them. Lords ye are
retained of me for ye ben not the men that ought to be refused. I promyt you
truly and in feith of a king, that I shall defend you with all my power
against all men, ye are dysheryted and I also, therefore it is well reason that
we be together, and that the one help the other of all his power. Sir said
Reinawd we thank you a thousand times and I promise you that we shall die in
your seruise or else your land shall be recovered again. The king called his
stuarde and said to him and commanded that Reinawd and his felawshyp should
be well lodged. Incontinent the stuarde took Reynawd by the hand, and
fulfilled the commandment of the king. Now are the four sons of Aymon
acqueynted with the king yon of Gascoyn, which went to have do well but he
repented him soon after. But here we leave to speak of king yon, and of the
four sons of Aymon: and return to speak of bourgoyns that were at Toulouse,
the which he had take by force of arms.

How Reynawd, and his brethern and Mawgys destroyed Bourgons the sarasins, that
had dystroyed the realm of Gascoygne and chased the king you unto Bordews upon
Gyronde that durst not go thence for fear of the Sarasyns. And after how
king you gave my lady Clare his sister to Reynawde for to be his wife, for the
great seruyse that he had done to him. And how he made for him the castle
of Mounta when. Capitulum.vi.
depiction of an unseated knight or king with crown beside a horse, with two
armed knights on horseback standing over him; and of two groups of knights in
armor on horseback charging each other, with heads and body parts on the
ground

IN this party shows the hystorye that after bourgons had taken toulouse: he
made a great parlyamente to his folk. And said to them. Lords ye know well,
that when the iron is well hot: it werketh the better. This word I have said
before your lordshyppes for to give you to know what we ought to do. And
therefore me seems that we ought to ride now toward bourdewes while the corn
is in the ere. For our horses shall have meat enough, sir said his folk, ye
speak well and wisely, let it be done as ye have devised, and when the morrow
came: Bourgons departed out of Toulouse with well.xx. thousand knights well
armed, and ceased not for to ride till that they came before Bourdews in.ix.
days. And he set all his folk in a bushement within a great wood that was
nygh, and abode there with them, except four hundred men that went to the
city w^sting and brennynge all the country unto the city of Bourdews, and
when the day watch that was upon the gate of the city saw the sarasins
come: he cried with an high voice, arm you knights for here ben the
Paynymes that come for to hurt you. when the City understood this: she began
to before moved.

THan when Reynawde saw that it was time to take his harneys on: he said to
his brethern Go make you all redye, and make our trompettes to be blown that
al our folk put them self in arms. In contynent made his brethern his
commandment. And when they were al armed: Reynawde mounted upon Bayarde, and
came to king You and said to him. Sir be not abashed of nothing: but be sure
that god help us this day. My self, my brethern and all our folk we go
before, and make your folk to be redi inco^tinet for my heart gives me that
this cursed Sarasyn shall be this day dysco^fited, and ouercome^ with the help
of god. Freende said the king, god be with you, and I shall do that ye t^l me.
And thus Reynawde went out of Bordews the formest of all his folk against the
Sarasyns upon his horse Bayarde, the sheeld at his neck, and his sword in his
hand and ran fiersly upon his enemies and incontinent smote a Paynym
through his sheelde so that he overthrew him dead to the ground, and forth
with he cast a mother, god wot he held well his sword, for he hew the
Sarasyns as they had been without Harneys. And shortly to speak after that
Reynawde and his folk were assembled: the Paynymes might not endure. For
Reynawde and his brethern slew them as beasts, so that they must needs flee
toward their busshement. And when bourgons saw his folk come thus: he issued
out of the wood with his company, and made bussynes and horns to be blown,
and came for to succoure his men. And when Reinawde saw so great number of
folk coming out of ye wood: he was sore meruayled, and turned him self toward
his brethren and said to them. Lords keep that ye be not dismayed, for we
shall get a great worship this day, and I pray you that every man parforce
himself to do well, brother said Richard we shall never be dysmayed as long
as ye be upon Bayarde. Brother said Reynawde do as good men, for if ye will
parforce your self a little: These Paynems shall not hold before us. Thus as
Reinawde spoke to his brethren they saw Bourgo^s come the spear in his rest
and smote a man of Reynawde by such a strength that he shoued his spear through
and through his body, so that h^ f^ll down dead to the earth. When Alarde saw
that: he was wroth, and sparred his horse and ran upon a Paynym so hard
that he felled him sterke dead before him. And shortly to speak there was never
seen such a distress of folk, as Reynawde, his brethern and mawgys his
cosyn made with so few folk as they were against Bourgons the Sarasyn.

THan when the king you that came to the succors of Reynawde saw ye great
faytes of arms that he and his brethren made, and how hardlye they did set
upon and overthrew all that they recountred before them the blessed himself of
the marvel that he had of them. And than he said to his folk, go we succor
these worthy knights, for it is time long a go, and when the king You had
said these words: he spurred his horse and put himself among the thickest and
began to do well, and did so much that he brake the great preses, and came
where Reynawde was. And when Reynawde saw the king Yon he said to him. Sir be
sure and certain that the Sarasins are discomfited, than said the king.
Reynawde I am well assured yt god shall do me grace through your high prowess,
blessed be the hour that ye were borne, and came into these marches. To speak
shortly the batayles were assembled of one part and of the other, but when
Borgons saw the great harm that Reynawde bare to him of his folk: he said
to his men, we ben ouercomen by the prowess of these five knights. Let us go
back again, for it is time. And when he had said these words: he and his
folk began to flee. And wha^ Reynawde saw Borgons that fled: he smote Bayarde
with the spurs and ran after him and said to him self that Borgo^s should
abide there or else it should cost him his life.

Within a short while Reynawde was far from his brethern, and far from his
felawship so that they wist not which way he drew. When yt Alarde saw that,
he wist not where Reynawde was drawn: he said to himself. Ha god which way
is my brother drawn to yt I am not with him? and than came there king Yon yt
said to them. Lords and knights well ye know (gramercy God) that it is not
wisdom for to chase ouermoche his enemies for often times comes there a great
dommage, let us withdraw us I pray you, sir said Alarde what say ye? we have
lost Reynawde our brother and wot not where he is, nor if he is dead or taken,
wha^ king Yon understood this word: he was full sorry and wroth, and they
went and sought among the dead men that lay upon the feelde. And when Alarde
saw he could not be found: he made great sorrow with Guycharde, Richard and
Mawgis also. And when ye folk of Reynawde saw that he was not found: they
began to make so great sorrow that it was pity for to see.

ALas said Alarde what shall I do? I departed fro my land poor and exyled,
but I did not care for it, for I went with the best knight of the world and
trowed by the prowess of him to have recovered honor and hauoyre my self and
my brethren, and now I have lost him thorough my defaute. Alas my chance what
shall we do fro hens forthou? for ye earth shall not mow sustain us no more. But
that it shall fou^dre under our fete, and when the king Yon saw the great sorrow
that the poor knights made for their brother: he said to them. Lords and
knights what is this that ye do? since yt he is not dead it ought to suffyse
you, for if he be take ye shall have him again and it should cost me al yt I
have in the world. And also we have so mani of them prisoners, that Borgons
shall not do to him no harm for nothing Sir said Alarde let us go after for
gods sake, let us wit where he is become. Freende said the king I will do so
gladly. And tha^ they spurred their horses and went as fast as their horses
might run, and wit yt Alarde Guycharde Richard and Mawgys rode a good pase
so much that it seemed that the earth should have cloven a sondre under them.

No ^owill I tell you of Reynawde that went after Borgons so fast as if the
tempest had chased him, and he was gone so far in a short while yt it is
wonder for to hear tell, for there was no beast that went before Bayarde his
horse. And when Reynawde had overtaken Bargons he cried upon him as hye as he
might do.

Certes Borgons thy horse may no more I see it well, and therefore flee no
ferther, but turn thy self toward me, for if thou dyed flyeng: you should
be shamed. wha^ Borgons heard Reynawde speak thus to him, he returned
incontinente, and when he saw Reynawde: he knew well that it was the good
knight that had dyscomfyted al his folk and said to him. Sir knight, go back
again and mar not your horse about naught, for it ye lose him: ye shall
never recover such a another, and this he said for to abasshe the good knight
Reynawde, for he durst not Ioust with him because of the great prowes that he
had seen in him but Reinawde was not the man that should be made aferde, with
words and than Reynawd said again to him Borgons this word needs not to
you for to say: for ye must needs defend your self. And than he spurred
incontinent bayarde, and when Borgons saw that he might not be delivered of
Reynawde but by Iustyng: he spurred his horse and ran upon Reynawde as hard
as he might, and smote Reynawde so sharply yt the spear went in pieces.
Reynawde fell not, but smote Borgons such a stroke that he overthrew both
horse and man to the ground and wounded borgons in his breast full sore.

And when Borgon saw himself at the ground: he rose up lyghtlye and took his
sword in his hand, and cast his sheelde upon his head. And when Reynawde
perceived ye stroke that he had given him in his breast: he cried to him and
said. Certes it shall not be reproched to me that ye fight with me a foot and I
on horse back, and with this he lighted down fro bayarde and drew out his
sword and went against Borgons, and Borgo^s against him, and there began a
sharp battle and when the horse of the payne^ felt him self fro his master:
he began to re^ne away over ye feeldes and when Bayard saw him run away, he
went after and ouertooke him soon enough, and tha^ he took him by the mane
with his teeth and drew him with so great might that he brought him again to
his master in the same place where the two worthy knights fought to gether,
and Reynawde gave a stroke to borgons with his sword upon his shield and all
that the sword roughte he cut through to the flesh, and well an hundred
mayles of his flancardes and made him a great wound into the haunce.

THan wha^ borgons the sarasyn saw that wonderful stre^gthe of Reynawde, and
the great strokes that he gave to him: he was sore afraid and fered least he
should die, and so he withdrew himself a back and said to Reynawde. Ha
gentle knight I pray thee for the love that thou have to thy God that thou
give me truce, and I shall make the lord and sire of all ye I have in this
world. Certes said Reynawde I will not do so, for I have promised to king Yon
that I shall help him against all men, and he in likewise has promised me,
but and if ye will make your self christen: I shall do it gladly. Sir said
Borgons I will yield me to you, for to no better knight than ye be I cannot
yield my self, if ye will save my life and my members. Borgons said Reynawde
if ye will yield you to me ye shall have no more harm tha^ I shall, will ye
promise me this said Borgons? yea said Reynawde. Now hold my swerd said Borgons
and I put my self al together in your hand. And Reynawde took his sword and
assured him that he should not dye and they two went together for to take their
horses, and when they had them they lyghted upon, and took their way toward
Bordews, and as they came again: they met with king Yon that came and his folk
renning against him as fast as they might. When Reynawde saw ye king: he
thanked him much that he was coming after him, and presented to him Borgons
that he had thus taken and co^quested as I have rehearsed to you, and said to
him. Noble king of Gascoyn I beseech you that Borgons have no harm, for I have
assured him. Good friend said king yon, no more he shall, but all honor for
the love of you, and I pray to God that I may do nothing that is against
your will. And when Alarde Guycharde, Richard, and Mawgys saw Reynawde that
brought Borgons prisoner: they were never so glad, for they wend to have lost
him, so ran they and kyssed him full sweetly and made him great feast and
great honor. For they had been in great sorrow for the love of him.

BRother said Alarde into a great sorrow and heuines ye had brought us this day,
for we wend that ye had betake, but since that ye have taken Borgons the war
is done and blessed be the hour that ye were borne and the pappes that ye
sucked, and when they were well feasted: they took on their way toward
Bordews, where they led Borgons as a prisoner. And when the king yon was at
Bordews: he lighted down and took with him Reynawde and his brethern by the
hand and Mawgys also and went up to the palace, and found his folk that made
great feast and he called them to him and said Lords bear honor and worship
more to this knight than to me, for I am king of Gascoyn by their worthynes and
great prowes. For if they had not ben I had been dead and over thrown, blessed
be that good lord yt did put in their minds for to come into this cost, for
they have quyted my land and have set all my realm in peace. To speak
shortly the king made the buty to be dealed. Whereof the most party he made
to be given to Reynawde and his brethren. And Reynawde would take nothing of
it but gave it all to his folk, and wha^ the king saw the great largenes of
Reynawde: he loved him more than he did before, and than he said that he would
make Reynawde lord over him, and of all his land.

THe king yon had a sister the which was a right fair damoysell. When she
heard speak so much good by Reynawde: she called to her a knight that was
called water, and said to him, tell me by your faith who has the price of the
battle. Madame said water I shall tell it you with a good will. Now wit yt
Reynawde is the best knight of all his brethern and of all the world for he
took Borgons the sarasyn by force, whereby he has brought the war at an
end, wha^ the pucell understood this word: she was right glad and did thank
our lord for it with al her heart. And ye king and his knights ceased not to
make joy for the victory ye god had sent to them thorouh ye great pro^esse of
the valiau^t Reynawde. When borgons saw him self in prison: he sent word to
king Yon yt he should come speak with him. And as soon ye king Yon wist of it
he went to him. And when borgons saw him, he salued him and after said to him.
Sir I am your prisoner and also ye most party of my folk if it please you ye
shall put me to rau^sone and my men also, and I shall give you.x. horses laden
with gold for me and for my folk. Borgons said the king I shall do with a
good will, if Reynawde counsel me so and no otherwise I will not do, and tha^
the king Yon sent for Reynawde and for his brethren and all his other barons.
And when they were come he held his counsel how he should do for the
delyuerance of borgons, Reynawde and his barons counseled the king that he
should put borgons to rau^son, and wha^ the king saw yt his barons counseled
him the same: he made borgons to be called, and made his delyuerau^ce to be
sygnyfyed unto him. And thus was borgons delivered and went with his folk into
his country, and yielded Toulouse again to king Yon and sent to him. x.
summers all laden with five gold as he had promised to him. And incontinent
that the king Yon had received them: he gave them to Reynawde and to his
brethern, but Reynawde did as a worthy knight. For not a penye he would take of
it nor his brethren also.

IT happed upon a day ye Reynawde and his brethren went in a forest that was
not far thens, and took four wild beasts, and as they were coming
homwarde they found themself upon the river of Gironde, and as they went,
Alarde looked over the river and saw a high mountain and all high on the
top of it was a fair roche. And when Alarde saw so fair a ground and so
strong: he turned himself toward Reynawde and said to him, Brother yonder
upon that high Mountain is a fair ground and a strong, I believe that there
has be sometime a castle. And if we might do so much to build there a
strong place for our self: Charlemayne should never take us there. And ye
will believe me ye shall ask it of king Yon, and if he gives it to you: let us
do make there a strong castle. Cosyn said Mawgys (to Reynawde) Alarde
gives you good counsel. And I pray you that ye will do so as he has said.
Cosyn said Reynawde I shall do it sith that ye counsel me so.

And wha^ they were accorded to the same, they entered into a barge and went
over Gyrounde, and when they came a land: they ceased never till that they
came before the king, and presented him the beasts that they had taken. And
when the king saw them: he received them curtoysly, for he loved them much.
And than the king enbraced Reynawde in his arms.

THe morrow next after that the king had heard mass: Reynawde took the
king and drew him a little at a side, and said to him Sir we have served you
long well and truly. Certes said the king ye say troth, and therefore I am
hold toward you well for it, now look if I have in all my land cities towns
or castelles, or other thing that ye will have, for ye shall have it inco^tine^t.
Sir said Reynawde I thank you much of your good will. But hear my words if
it please you, say on hardly said the king. Sir said Reynawde I and my
brethern were the other day coming fro the chase, and as we came alonge by the
sides of Gyronde and of Dordone and namely between these two ryuers: I saw a
Mountain sore high, and if it please you I would well build thereupon a
castle after my pleasure. Wherefore sir and it please you ye shall grant to
me this gift for all the service that ever I did to you. When the king
understood this word: he was right glad of it, and said to Reynawde I right
gadlye grant this to you. And with the same ye shall have of me.x. thousand
mark every year for to maynteyne your estate. Sir said Reynawde gramercie, and
cast himself to his feet. And the king Yon took him up anon curtoysly and
kyssed him for great love and after he said unto him.

Noble knight I promise you I shall make you a rich man and if God spare me
life. Sir said Reynawde god yield you, and we shall serve you truly, and thus
they departed each fro other. The next day after when the king was risen out
of his bed: he made Reynawde to come before him. And after he took.xx. knights
with him and no more and took his barge upon gyrond and passed over the river
Reynawde and his brethren with him, and they did so much that they came upon
the roche, and wha^ they saw the place so fair and so pleasant: the king
was meruayled of it and Reynawde was right glad, for the great strength that
the place had, for if he might do so much to build there a castelli he
should not doubt Charlemayne of a penye nor none other person of the world
wha^ vitayles were in it. For upon the highest of the mountain sprung out a
fair fountain and plenteouse enough for.x. thousand persons.

When the knights that were with the king saw the place so fair and so
pleasant and so strong with all: they were greatly abashed, a knight than
took the king and had him a little a side and told him. Sir what is this that
ye will do? Will ye have a lord above you? Will ye do make here a Fortress?
I tell you upon my faith that if Reynawde set here a Castle, he shall fear
you little another you nor all other barons of Gascoyn, for Reynawde is such a
knight as ye know, and also his brethern and their cosyn Mawgys, and also they
be strangers, and soon they shall bear you great harm if they will do to
hi^ some other good if ye will believe me, and let this alone, for over great
harm might come to you thereof.

THan when king Yon understood such words: he became all abashed of it, for
he wyste well that the knight said troth, and little it lacked that the work
of ye Castle came not forth, he began to think a little and after he said,
that he had promised it to Reynawde, and thus he said to the knight that thee
Castle should be made, so called he Reynawde and said to him. My good freende
where will ye that the castle be made? Sir said Reynawde, I will if it please
you that it be set here in the same place upon this roche. Certes said the
king I give it to you. Now have you to see that it be made and builded up as
ye think best, and than ye shall doubt another me nor my folk. Sir said
Reinawde let be these words, for it is no need to speak thereof. For I
certyfye you as a true knight that I had much lever to dye an evil death
among the Turks, than that I should think treason upon you nor upon no
other. Sir I am and have betake hitherto and hold for a true knight, god give
me grace that I do not fro hens forthou whereby I should otherwise be taken.
Sir think you because I am enemy to Charlemayne my Sovereign lord, that I
should be therefore a traitor and that I have done against him some treason.
Wit that when I slew Berthelot his nenew, alas I did it in my defense, for he
drew first blood upon me without reason or cause why. But I swear to you upon
my faith that if any man do any wrong unto you: I shall avenge you thereof
after my power, but and if ye have any suspection upon me: give me it not.
Good freende Reynawd said the king I did but iape with you. For I know well
your troth and well ye have showed it unto me, god thank you, And therefore I
have granted it unto you, and yet I do And I will ye ye be lord above me and
of my land.

ANd when Reynawde understood the curtesye and the goodness of the king: he
thanked him right much, and he sent thorough all the la^d and made come all
the masters masons and carpe^ters and many other crafty men in such work, so
much that they were well two hundred beside the laborers, and when al his
stuff was redye: he made them to build there a strong castle, whereof the
great hall was first made and after many chambres and than the great tower. And
wha^ the doungeo^ was well closed: Reynawde made after all the castle to be
closed round about with double walls hie and thick of hard stones, and many
toures upon that it fered no sawtyng of no side of it, and made to this castle
four gates and no mo, and also he made the portcolysse fawsebrayes and
barbacanes well defensable so that it might be no better. When the castle was
accomplysshed: Reynawde and his brethern were thereof right glad, for it seemed
them that they were assured from their enemies. And wha^ king Yon knew that the
castle was accomplysshed and full made: he went to see it. And when Reynawde
wist that ye king came: he went against him and welcomed him full honestly and
made him go up to ye great toure of the fortres, because he should see the
compass of the Castle round about at his ease, for the great toure men might
se all. The king beheld well the fair work yt was so pleasant and so
strong with all and the fair fountain that was in the mids of it. And tha^
he called Reynawde and said to him. Good freende Reynawde how shall this
castle be called? for me seems it ought well to have a noble name, for ye
great beauty whereof it is garnysshed, sir said Reynawde it has no name yet,
and if it please you ye shall give it a name as it shall like you best. Certes
said the king the place is pretty and fair and I will that it be called
Mountawban, and than the king made to be known through all his land, that
who would come dwell and enhabite in the said castle, which was as great as a
town, he should be free of all manner of duytes the space of ten years.

THan when the folk of ye country knew the freedom of the castle, ye should
have see come there knights, gentylmen, burgeys young and old, yeomen and
folk of all manner of crafts so that this castle was so peopled of all manner
of folk that in all the country was no town so well peopled, for there
dwelled.v. hundred burgeys al rich men and there were well. L. tauerners, and
xv.c. men of craft beside all other folk, and shortly to speak Mountawban
was so well garnysshed and so rich wtin a little while yt it was great marvel
for to see, and wit it that the king Yon loved Reynawde with so good a love,
for because of the great worthynes of him that he gave to him valerey and all
the Lordeshyp that was worth a thousand mark of good rent, much well set,
and when the barons saw them that the king loved Reynawde so well: they were
wroth for it and had envy upon him, and they came to the king and said to
him, sir take well good heed what ye do, for mou^tawban is right strong and so
is Reynawde such a knight that none better is not in all the remenau^t of the
world, and if it hap by any wise that he be an angered upon you: he shall mow
lightly bear to you and to all your folk over great dommage. Lords said the
king ye say troth, but Reynawde is so gentyl and so curtoys of himself that
he shall never think upon no trayson nor to no shame in no manner of wise.

Sir said than an old knight that stood before the king, if ye will believe me:
I shall tell you how ye shall always be lord and master above Reynawde all the time of your life. Friend said the king tell me this I pray you. Sir said
the knight give him your sister to his wife, so shall she be well married, for
Reynawde is well a noble gentylma^ of al four sides: and thereby ye shall be
assured that he shall never be angry ne wroth with you. Friend said king you ye
give me good counsel, and I shall do it as ye have counseled me, but I pray
you that ye purchase this matter. Sir said the old knight sith yt I know your
will in this behalf: I shall do my best for to bring the matter to a
conclusyon effectuel. After these words thus said: the king returned again to
Bordews with joy deuysyng with the old knight of the matter whereof they had
spoken together.

THe first dai of the month of May, Reynawde went from his castle of
Mountawban to Bordews for to see king yon and took Alarde his bother with him.
And wha^ the king yon wyste of it: he came to him against, and received
Reynawde with great joy and kyssed him full sweecely. And after the king
took him by the hand and went up together to the hall of the palace and so
forth to the chamber of parements which was hanged right rychelye. And than
the king called for ye cheffe for to play at it with Reynawde, And as they
were playing together there came in the old knight that had charge of the
king for to make the marriage of Reynawde, and of the kings Sister, which
knight was called Godefray of Molins, and wha^ he was come before the king: he
said. Hear lords what I will tell you, to night as I was in my bed a sleep me
seemed that I saw Reynawde the son of Aymon yt was set high in a chair and
all the people of this Realm enclyned theymselfe before him. And ye king gave
to him a sperhawke mewed full fair and good, and me seemed also that than came
a great bore out of the woods yt made an horrible noise, so that no body
durst not aproche nyghe him three men assailed him, but they could not hurt
him and passed by them. And when Reynawde saw that: he lighted upon Bayarde
and came against him and faught with him and hurted him sore, and than I woke
out of my sleep, and when the old knight had said so: then rose a doctor
that was called bernarde the which was right wise and a great clerk and said,
fair Lords if ye list to harken: I shall expowne and declare unto you the
sygnyfycacion of this dreme. Wit it that the chayer where Reynawde sat
betokens the castle that he has builded, and the people that bowed hemself
toward him signifies ye folk yt are come to dwell there. And the gift that
the king gave to him: betokens that you king Yon shall give him his sister to
wife, ye wild bore sygnyfyeth some great prince christian or Paynym that shall
come to assail king yon, and Reynawde shall defend him by force of arms, and
the same is the sygnyfication of the dream of Godfray and I indygne for to
speak should counsel that the marriage should be done of Reynawde and of the
sister of king yon. For they shall be thus both right well and richely wedded,
and than ye king answered thou haste spoken well and wisely. When the clerk
had declared the betokenyng of the dream of tholde knight Godfray ye king yon
said that touching this marriage the thing was well agreeable unto him. And
when Reynawde understood this ward: he said to ye king, Sir gramercy of the
fair gift that ye do to me, but and if it please you ye shall have a little
pacyence unto the time that I have counseled with my brethern and my cosyn
mawgys. Brother said Alarde ye have said ill. What refuse you of the king so
great a gift as he gives you now if ye will believe me ye shall fulfill the
kings will incontinent for to me and to my brethren it shall please well. And
when the king gave you not his sister but a simple Damoysell yet ought you to
believe him and do after his will. Brother said Reynawde, it is not the first
time that ye have given to me good counsel and true, and I promise you I shall
do it sith that ye do counsel me so. And than Reynawde turned himself to
ward the king and said to him. Sir I am all together redye to do all that ye
will, and than Reynawde rose up and the king took him by the hand and made his
sister to be affyaunced unto him.

THan wha^ the marriage was made accorded, and made sure of the one part and of
the other: ye king yon came to the chamber of his sister, and found her besy
about a penouncel of a spear, that she made full fair for ye knight Reynawde
but she durst not tell it. The king salued her as soon as he saw her, and
the noble maid rose up anon against her brother and made him due reverence
right manerly. Fair sister said the king I have do marye you well and
hyghlye. When the pucell understood him: she began to change her color and
bowed her body to him, and said no word of a long while. And when she had the
power for to speak: she said to the king her brother, sir to whom have you
given me. Fair Sister said the king I have given you unto the best knight of
the world, it is Reynawde the son of Aymon the noble knight and valiant.
When the noble Damoysell understood that it was to Reynawde to whom her
brother had married her she was right glad of it, for she loved Reynawde of a
great love and said to the king. Sir I will do withal my heart your
commandment and your will. Tha^ the king took her by the hand and brought
her to the palace, and said to Reynawde before al his baco^s. Hold here worthy
knight Reynawde I give you my sister to your wife and spouse.

Sir said Reynawde a thousand gramercyes of so fair a gift that ye give to me
presentlye, for it apperteyneth not so great a gift to so poor a knight as I
am, than took Reynawde the pucell and fyaunced her, and swear. And the king
would make no taryeng thereat, but took ye pucel by the hand, and brought her
to the church well honorably, and the bishop of Bordews wedded the^. And when
Reynawde had his wife espoused: he sent for his brethren and for his cosyn
Mawgys that were at Mountawban, the which made great Joy, and made all
Mountaban for to be hanged with rich tapissery. And than they mounted their
horses all covered with sendall and went to Bordews, and met with Reynawde and
his wife by the way where as great Iustinge was made before the ladies. And
after the Iustyng was done: they came all to Mountawban, and when they were
come there: the Joy began for to be great in the castle as god had descended
there. For to say troth.viii. days lasted the feast, and many great gifts
were presented and given to the lady. And when the feast had endured as long
as I tell you: The king Yon went again to Bordews right glad of the marriage,
that he had made of Reynawde and of his sister. For he thought well that
Reynawde should help him against al men, and he said troth. For after yt the
Marriage was ones made there was no baron in all Gascoygne yt durst look up,
and yet there were some that would not do their deuoyre to the king, but
Reynawde made them well come forth for to do the kings commandment
according to their lygeaunce would they or not. For reynawde was both loved
and doubted through all the land of Gascoygne. But now leueth here the
history to speak of Reinawde and of his brethren and of Mawgys. And retourneth
to speak of the king Charlemayne that went to saint James in Galyce for to do
penance for his sins.

How the king Charlemayne may a vyage to saint James of Galyce. And how at his
coming again he knew how Reynawde and his brethren were in the Realm of
Gascoygne in a right strong eastell called Mountawban. And how ye king
Charlemayne sent word to the king Yon of Gascoygne yt he should yield to him
his enemies, that is for to understand. Reynawde Alarde Guycharde and Richard,
which be the sons of Aymon and in case that he would not: he should com
besyege him in his land before.x. months came at an end. Whereof the king
Yon answered that he would do nothing for him in this behalf And how after
that king Charlemayne was returned to Paris with his fellowship. Roulande his
neuew arrived at Paris the which ye king made knight, and after he sent him
to reyse a syege before Coleyne that a Sarasyn had besyeged that was called
Escoufrawde the which Rouland conquered. And after shows how Reynawde wanne
the Crown of king Charlemayne, for the good re^nyng that his horse Bayarde
made at Paris. Capi. vii. Fol.
depiction of four un-armoured men on horseback, one holding a crown and
scepter

NOw shows the History that Charlemayne was at Paris and came to him a
devotion for to go in pilgrimage to saint James in Galice. And so he departed
out of Paris and took in his company Ogyer the dane and the duke Naymes of
Bauyere and many other barons and great lords. When they were upon their way:
they did so much by their Iurneys yt they came to saint James in Galice. And
wha^ they were arrived there: The king went straight to the church and offered
before the auter.x. mark of fine Gold. And when he had offered and done his
devotion: he took on his way again and came with his felawship to Bordews.
And in his cominge thither: he looked over the river of girond not far
thence, and saw the castle of Mountawban that was upon a roche so fair and so
well made and so well shette with fair walls and thycke in the form as I have
told you before. And wha^ that Charlemayne saw it, he beheld it well a long
while and than said. A good lord yonder is a fair castle strong and well set.
I see well that the king Yon has made it of late, for it seems yet to be all
new, and it can be none otherwise sith that he has builded it in such a
strong place, but that he thinks to make war to some body. And than he
called to him a knight of the land and said to him tell me how ye call that
castle. Sir said the knight the name is Mountawban. He had great lust to
speak, for if he had keped his peace: there had been none other thing of it,
but he had such words that afterward bare great harm to him self, and to
many other. For he told The Emperor that Reynawde and his brethren the sons
of Aymon had do make the castle, and was called Mountawban. And how that the
king Yon had given to Reynawde his sister to his wife.

When Charlemayne understood these words: he was right angry for it and
wroth. And wist not what he should say, and held himself a great while that
he spoke not, and when he had mused a little, he said to his folk, fair
lords I shall tell you a wonder. For I have found mine enemies in this land,
that been the four sons of Aymon. Now up Ogyer and you duke Naymes, light on
horsbacke incontinent, and seek so much king Yon that ye find him, and tell
him in my behalf that he yield to me again the four sons of Aymon that be
mine enemies them which he has wythdrawen and borne out against me. And that
he find me knights for to bring them only in to my land for I am delyvered
sith that I have found them: for to hang them or fley them: quycke. And if he
will not do so: defye you him on my behalf. And tell him that within this
three or four months I shall be with in his land of Gascoygne with all my
Host, and I shall distroy and overthrow all his towns and castelles, and if
I may take him: I shall punysshe him without any mercy. Sir said Ogyer we
shall do your commandment, but we shall take with us Sauces and hosts the
which been prue and sage, and Charlemaine said that he was content and
incontinent they went on their way. And went about to understand where king
Yon was. And so long they asked after him that they found him at Mountawban
even at the foot of the roche. For the king yon went again to Bourdews and
Reynawde conveyed him. When Ogyer saw Reynawde and the king Yon: he knew them
well. And incontynente he salued the king, and said to him. Sir god give you
good life and long. And the king rendered to him his salute, and after said
to him. Of whence be you? sir said Ogyer. We been of the sweet France. And
also we be sent unto you. And we are of Charlemaynes folk, now hear us if it
please you. Sir said the king ye be right welcome. Now tell on what ye will
say. Sir said Ogyer, The Emperor Charlemayne sends to you word by us that ye
yield again unto him his enemies the which ye have withdrawn into your
lands and ye send to him an hundrede of your men for to conduyte and bring
them with him unto France. And if ye refuse to do this: We by his
commandment defye you of his be half. And within these iii. months he
shall be in Gascoigne and shall take all your lands and shall be syege you
with in the city of Bordews. And if he take you: he shall punyshe you in your
body. Now have we said our message, and if it please you ye shall give us an
answer.

OGyer said the king, it is well truth that I have retained the four
sons of Aymon, which been worthy knights, and so have I retained them
because they been prue and valiant in arms, and also that they have helped
and socoured me at my great need. For I was disherited and undone for ever, if
they had not been. And for the great good that they have done to me: I have
given my sister Germayne to Reynawde for his wife. And therefore I should be to
cruel and eke well mischaunt if I should now take them into the hands of
their enemies mortal since, that they have done to me so good seruyse I have
lever to be disheryted and dye an evil death than to yield them or suffer that
they have any harm nor shame to my power. For namely the king Charlemayne
should than hold me for a fool and well nyce. And therefore Ogyer if it please
you ye shall tell the Emperor from my behalf that I shall for sake first all
my land and my realm than I should deliver them in his hands. And this is my
answer.

THan when the king had said thus: Reynawde spoke after and said. Ogier I
meruayll greatly of the king Charlemaine that will not leave us in peace. He
cast us out of France poor and disherited whereof I am ashamed, and as ye
know I would be reformed with reason to the saying of his barons, but it
pleases him not. And so he casted us out of Mountainforde shamefully, so that
we wist not where we should go. And yet it suffyseth him not, but he will
cast us out of ye land of Gascoigne whereof he does great sin. For yet am I
ready for to do his will in reason and right. And I tell you well that if he
refuse this by his pride: I will well that he know that I and mi brethren are
not such that shall be taken as lightly as he weeneth. And I promise you that
or ever he has us: I shall make him more than.x. times angry and wroth. For
this that he does, he does it but of pride. Ogyer I will well that king
Charlmayne know yt the king yon of Gascoigne has given to us leave to build a
Castle that has to name. Mountawban, the which is strong and imprenable, and
yet I have knights with me that shall not fail me at my need, and tell to
king Charlemaine that since I cannot have no peace nor accord with hi^: yt I
shall do to him all the do^mage and harm that shall be to me possible for to
do.

REinawde (said Ogier) ye speak not wisely, ween ye to abashe us with words?
ye shall not so, but wha^ ye shall see the Host and the great power of
Charlemayne to gether ye shall be sore abashed, and at the end ye shall be full
wroth and sorye, ye know well that the Emperor Charlemayne made you knight,
and ye slew his Neuewe Berthelot, and therefore think not to find peace toward
him, and ye ween to be assured because the king yon has made you to close a
Castle, but well I will that he know that he shall repent for it full sore.
For before two months be past: we shall be in the mids of his land, and
shall destroy all his Realm, and we shall brenne both Castelles and towns.
Ogier said Reynawde I swear to you upon my faith that when king Charlemaine
shall be with his host in to this land: he shall wisshe him self soon again
in France with his folk. And when he shall see the hard Iustyng and sharp
war that I and my brethren shall make against him: he and ye shall be sore
abashed of it, and some of you speaks now hye, that when the deed shall
come to proof: he shall be full low. Reynawde (said than Ogyer) I will hyde
nothing from you. The king Charlemayne has so great a power and is delibered
for to besiege Bordews, and if he may take you he shall punysshe you cruellye,
now do as ye will. I have told you al my message, and I goo again to king
Charlemayne. When he had said these words: he returned toward king
Charlemaine and showed unto him what king you and Reynawde had said. And when
the king understood the same: he shook all for anger and said, now shall it
be seen how king yon and Reinawde shall defend. Gascoigne against me, and than
went forth Charlemaine and passed the river of Gyronde, and rode so long that
he came to Paris, and the day after he called al his barons that they should
come to him. And when they were all come: the king held his counsel and
said to them. Lords I have sent for you to tell you the great shame that the
king yon of Gascoigne does to me. For he holds the four sons of Aymon my
mortal enemies in dispi^e of me, and ye know what damage they have done to
me. For they slew my neuew Berthelo^. I did banisshe them out of Faunce, than
made they the castle of Mountaynforde within my land, and I chased them out of
it. Now been they in Gascoigne with the king Yon that says he shall defend
them against me, and he has given his Sister to Reynawde, wherefore I pray
you all that ye will help me that I be avenged.

ANd wha^ Charlemaine had said this: there was none of the barons that answered
to him any word, for they were werye of the war that they had made so long
against Reynawde. And Charlemaine saw that no body anwered to him no thing:
he called to him the Duke Naimes and Ogier the Dane and the Earl Guydellon, and
said to them. Lords what counsel do you give give to me in this matter. Sir
said the Duke Naymes, if ye will believe me I shall give you good counseyl.
Suffer your host to rest this five years, because that your folk is weary of
the war, so shall they rest them self a little. And when they shall be
fresshe: than shall ye mow make war at your will, for every manne shall than
come to it with good will. And when themperoure understood this counseyll: he
was sore an angered for it that he went almost out of his wit, and as he
would have said against the duke Naymes: there came a young gentylman of great
beautye, and brought in his company xxx. fair squiers well arrayed, this
yongelynge came to the palace and went up, and when he came before the Emperor
he made his obeysaunce to him full curtessye, friend said the king ye be
right welcome, what wind brought you hither and what be you? sir said the
squier. I am called Rowlande of bretayne and I am the son of your sister and
of the duke of Myllon.

THan when Charlemayne understood Rowlande speak thus: he was right glad of
him and took him by the hand and kissed him many times, and said to him, ye be
right welcome. I will that ye be made a knight to morrow in the morning and
ye shall assaye your self upon Reinawde the son of Aymon. Sir said Rowland
I shall do your commandment and I promise you Reynawde shall not be spared of
me, and he shall not bear away nothing of yours. He slew my cosyn Berthelot
whereof I am right sorry, and therefore I shall avenge his death if I may by any
manner, or else Reynawde shall slay me. And in the morning the king
Charlemayne dowbed his neuewe Rowlande to a knight with much Joy and with
great honor, and as the feast was a doing: there came a messanger that said
to the Emperor. Most hye and most puyssaunte prince, your men of Coloyne
recommende them right humbly to your good grace, and they do you to wit that
the sarasyns have besyeged them, and have hurt them right sore. For they have
brent and destroyed all the country. Wherefore they beseech you right humblye
that ye come for to help and socoure them if it be your pleasure, or else
they are but dead, and utterly destroyed.

ANd when the Emperor understood these tidings: he bowed his head toward the
earth, and began to think a litell. And when Rowlande saw his uncle that
mused th^s in him self: he said to him, whereof be ye so dismayed. Give me some
part of your men. And I shall go reyse the syege of Coleyne. And when the
Emperor heard Rowland speak so: he was right glad of it, and enbraced and
kyssed him full sweetlye and said to him, fair neuewe blessed be the hour
that ever ye were borne. For I know for sertayne that ye shall keep me from
pain and travail, and in you shall be my rest and my comfort. And I will
that ye go there. And than he gave him twenty thousand men of arms well
horsed and well arrayed. And when they were well apparelled, Rowla^d lyghted upon
his horse and said to his uncle the king. Sir I commend you to god. Fair
neuew said Charlemaine I have taken to you my me^ in your keeping, I pray you
that ye will keep them well, and do so much that ye get worship, and god be
with you. Sir said Rowlande be not dismayed, for at my return (if it please
god) ye shall know how that we have do. And when he had said this word: he
took leave of his uncle and went on his way with his folk, and they rode so
long by their iourneys that they came to Coloine all by night, and put their
busshement nyghe their host, and as they were nighe the host: they met with
certain sarasins that came again with a great pray of oxen and sheep and of
men and women that were their prisoners, and made them suffer great martyrdom

When the frensheme^ saw their enmies: they said in this manner, lords our
lord has sent us hither. Here been the traitors sarasyns, that so sore we
have desired for to fight with them. Now shall it be seen what we shall do
with the^: put us among the^, for at this hour they shall be overthrown,
when they had spoken enough: they made none other taryinge, but spurred their
horses and ran upon the sarasyns by great strength, so that in a little while
they had them dyscomfited so sharpelye that they slew them all, and recovered
all the prisoners and the bestes. And shortly to speak when the host of the
painimes heard the noise of the frenshemen: they moved them self, and
lyghted upon their horses, and upon the frensshemen And when the frensshemen
saw the^ come: they went again to their busshement as well as they could, and
began to chase them.

ANd when Rowlande saw that it was time to set upon: he issued out of his
embusshmente with his folk, and went and smote upon the sarasyns so hard that
he casted to the earth a great part of them. And to speak shortly: the
battle began so cruel and so fell that it was pity to see. For ye should
have seen so many spears broken, and so many sheldes in two, and so many
sarasins lying dead on the ground: so that with pain men might go by for the
dead men that lay so thick one upon the other, and Rowlande spurred his horse
with the spurs and went and smote a sarasin that was a king and the chief
of the sarasins host with so great might that he ouerthrewe him to the earth,
but he slew him not of that stroke, but tarried upon him and gave to him such a
stroke with his swearde upon his helm that he made him all astonyed. And when
Rowlande saw him also evil araied: he bowed himself and took him for his
prisoner, and did set him again upon his horse and brought him with him. And
when the sarasyns saw their lord taken and saw the wundres of arms that
Rowland made and of the frenshemenne: they put theimselfe to flyghte full
shamefully. And when Rowlande saw the sarasins flee thus: he cried with a high
voice. Lords go after them for they flee al, and if they escape us: it shall be
to us a great blame toward mine uncle the king Charlemaine, and we shall be
holden for cowardes, wherefore I pray you let not one escape, for ye shall
have them lyghtlye sith that I hold in my hand their king. When the
frenshemenne heard Rowla^d speak thus: they said free knight be not dysmaied of
nothing, for we make no doubt that none of them shall escape, but they shall be
taken or slain. Lords said than the king sarasin that Rowland had taken that
had to name Escorfawde. They been all mine, I pray you that ye kylle them
not, for they ben all enough discomfited, since that ye have taken me, but give
them truce, and have me to king Charlemayne if it please you. And if ye may
do so much that Charlemaine pardone me the great offense that I have done to
him: I shall boide fro hence forth all mine heritage of him and yet all my
lygnage shall be obeysaunte unto his will, and of this ye may believe me. By my
head said Rowlande ye speak courteously, and by my faith said Naimes
Escorfawde says well, and we shall do so, they gave truce to the sarasins and
took their way again to Charlemayne and brought Escorfawde with them and so
long they rode that they came to Paris. And wha^ the king Charlemayne knew
that his neuewe Rowlande was come again to Paris, and that he had dyscomfyted
the sarasins and brought prisoner with him king Escorfawde: he was right glad
of it, and anon he mounted on horseback, and came against his neuewe Rowlande.
And when Rowland saw him: he lighted down from his horse, and went and kest him
self to the feet of king Charlemayne his uncle. And anon he made him to rise
up, and kyssed him sweetly: And than Rowlande said to him. Sir here I deliver
unto you the king Escorfawde, that we have taken. He has told us that he shall
make himself a christen man and that he and his lignage shall hold their
lands of you, if ye will pardone him your ylle will. Neuewe said the king
Charlemayne there is no trust in him, and therefore I will kee^ me from him. Than
commanded the emperor that Escorfaude should be brought to prison, and that
he should be well kept and that he should have all his will of meat and
drink. And after when Escorfawde was put in prison: the king Charlemayne did
call to him the Duke Naymes and said to him what think you by my neuew
Rowlande, what did he when the batayl was assembled. Sir said the duke Naymes,
of Rowlande needs not to speak, for never since that god was borne, of the
vyrgin Marie: such a knight was not seen. For he alone has overcome the
sarasins by his great prowes. And if he had a horse that might bear him when
he were armed: I swear by my faith that ye should never have enmye, but that he
should bring him to your mercy by force of arms. So much he is prue and
valyaunte. The king Charlemayn swore by his head that he was right glad thereof.
But tell me said he to the duke Naymes: where might men find such a good
horse as ye speak of? Sir said the duke Naymes if ye will believe me: I shall
give you good counseyll. Make to be cried with a trompet upon Mount martyr
that ye will see run all the horses of your host, And he that shall run
best: shall win your crown of gold, and five hundred mark of fine silver,
and a hundred rolls of sylke. And all thus ye shall mow know the best horse
of your realm. And when ye shall have seen him: by him, and give him to your
neuewe Rowlande, and after give leave to all your barons unto the feast of
saint John the baptyst next coming. Duke Naymes (said the Emperor
Charlemaine) ye give me good counseyll, and I shall do thus as ye have devised.
Than the king Charlemayne made to be cried upon Mount martyr even thus as the
duke Naymes had devised, and did make the listes for the horses to run in.
And when this was done: he made his crown to be set at the end of the
lystes, and also the five hundred mark of silver and the hundred rolls of
sylke, and this hanging: a yeman went to his country in Gascoine, and as he
passed thorough Mou^tawba^: he recounted to Reynawde and to Mawgys all the
thing that men would do at Paris. And how Rowlande was come to the court.
And how he had dyscomfited Escorfawde the king sarasyn, and how the king
Charlemayne would have the best horse of all his realm, for to give him to
Rowlande, and showed the said yoman the price that the King had ^et. And also
how the Emperor Charlemayne gathered his host for to come to Mountawban. And
how the course of ye horses should be made at saint John's time next coming.

THan when Reinawd understood this word: he began to laugh and after he said
to Mawgis, Cosyn by all halowes of god, Charlemaine shall see the best turn of
the world, but he shall not know that I shall have his crown. For I will go
there upon Bayarde to see how he shall prove himself at this time. Sir said
Mawgis ye shall not do so yet, but and if ye will go there suffer that I here
you company, so shall you be more sure, and have with us knights well armed.
Gladly said Reynawde since that ye will do so when it was time for to m^ue
toward Paris: Reinawde called to him Alarde Guycharde, and Richard his
brethren and Mawgis his Cosyn and said unto them. It is time that we go to
Paris. Take knights chosen and put our self in the way. Sir said his
brethren your commandment shall be done. And when they were all
appareylled: Reynawd came to his wife and said to her. Lady I pray you that
ye do keep well my castle, and I shall come sone again. Sir said she command
your knights that they ben not out of the way, and I promise you if the king
yon my brother came himself: he should nor come in nor none other unto the time
that ye be come again. Now go god be with you. Than took Reinawde leave of his
wife, and set himself toward the way and his folk and went to Paris And
when they were come to Orleau^ce, and had passed the river of Loire men asked
them of whens they were? And Mawgis that spoke for them all answered. Lords
we been Bournoys that go to Paris for to assaye our horses for to win the
price that the king has set upon. If god will so consent. Than by fair
words they passed forth and so long they rode that they came to Melym but
they entered not within the town but lodged them self in a great valey, and
there they soiourned them self and their horses four days.

THan when came the even of saint Johan: Reynawde called Mawgis and said to
him. What shall we do? to morrow shall be the courses of the horses wherefore I
say that it is couenable that we go lie to night at paris, cousin said Mawgis
ye say well and wisely. Now let me do a litil^ and please you. Than took
Mawgis an herb and stamped it upon a stone with the pomel of his sword, and
tempered it with water and rubbed bayarde therewith so that anon he became all
white in such wise that they that had seen him before: knew him not, and after
he enointed Reynawde with an oyntymente that he bare always with him and in
continente he became to the age of xx. years. And wha^ he had thus aturned
Reynawde and his horse: he took him and brought him before his brethren and
before the other knights and said to them. Lords tell me how think you have I
not well tra^sfigured him? shall not they may come again and not be known?
Behold bayard how he is wexen white he shall lose the price for age.

THan when the barons saw Reynawde and bayarde so turned: they began to laugh
and were greatly merueylled how Mawgys had thus disfigured them. When Mawgys
had transfigured Reynawde and bayarde and himself also: Reynawd mounted upon
bayarde and Mawgys upon morel, and took leave of their folk. But Reynawde at
his departing said to his brethren, have no fere for me. For I shall not be
known if god will. Than went Reynawde on his way, and his folk wept for him,
for Reinawde went in such a place where he had many enmyes. For if
Charlemayne had co^ne take him: all the gold of the world had not saved him,
but he should have caused him to be hanged. And when they departed: Alarde said
to Mawgis I pray you for god that ye have my brother Reynawde for recomme^ded,
for if it were not for the trust that I have to you, I should not suffer that
he should go to paris for all the gold of spain. And than Reynawde and Mawgys
went on their way. Now shall I leave a litil to speak of them. And shall
return to the king Charlemayne that was at the Paris with his folk.

CHarlemaine saw his barons that were all come, and than he called the Duke
Naymes, Ogyer the Dane, and Foulques of Moryllon and said to them. Lords I
pray you that ye take an hundred knights well armed and go toward the way
of Orleaunce and beware that none go by but ye know their names and that they
been well advised, for I doubt me sore of Reynawde, that he shall come, for he
weneth well him self to be over subtle, and if it came in his head: he should
come sone hytherward Sir said the barons we shall do gladly your
commandment, and if Reynawde be so folisshe that he come hytherwarde: he
shall not escape us, but he shall be dead or taken and brought before you. And
tha^ they took leave of Charlemayne and went to make them ready nere their
horses, and after mounted on horseback with an hundred knights well armed and
rode the way toward Orleaunce, and arested themself in the mids of the
way, four miles out of Paris (and there they were a long while that no
body passed by) and endured great hungre and thirst. And when the duke Naymes
saw that they were there for naught: he said to Ogyer. Sir Ogyer by my faith
the King Charlemayne makes us like fools and holds us for nice and
musardes that he makes us to tarry here about naught. Sir said Ogyer ye say
troth, and God confound me if I tarry any longer. And when they would have
comen again abacke: the duke Naymes saw come a far Reynawd and Mawgys. Tha^
said Naymes to foulques of Moryllon, yonder I see coming two men on
horseback. And when that Foulques saw them: he cried with an high voice, by
my faith here comes Reynawd Now can he not escape by no manner, but he shall
be hanged. By my faith said the Duke Naymes ye say troth, For the horse yt
comes before: is much like Baiarde the horse of Reinawde, if he were of a
another color. When that Foulques understood these words: he set hands to
his sword and came against Reynawde right nere, and when he was well nyghe
them: he beheld them. And when he saw that it was not Reynawde: he was a l
abashed and drew him self abacke, and Reynawde and Mawgys rode furthe their
ways. And when the Duke Naymes saw that they came furthe be went ayenste them
and called Mawgys and said to him, what ben ye? and whether go ye? Sir said
Mawgys I am borne of Pe^on and my name is Iousser. Friend said the duke Naymes
can not ye ^ell me nothing of Reinawde the son of Aymon the worthy knight?
yea said Mawgis by my faith, he has ridden with us two days, and he is not
passed two miles behind us. At that horre Reinawde spoke not, tha^ said Naimes
what is he that is with you that holds him so still and that says no
word? I believe that he has some evil thought, sir said Mawgis it is my
son, and he can not speak no frensh. For he has been nourisshed in the
great Bretaine. When the duke Naymes understood this: he said to Reynawde
tell me vassell know thou no tidings of Reynawde the son of Aymon? and
Reinawde answered to him in this wise. By my faith no point french grant
Bretaine horse a Paris cloyth ganera my. And counterfetted thus his longuage,
because the duke Naymes should not know him.

THan when the duke Naymes heard Reinawde speak thus evil: he began to laugh.
And after said to him again, a hundred deuylles have well taught thee to
speak so good french, vassell I wot not what thou say thou art more like
a fool than a bishop. And so Naymes let him in peace. And than Reynawde and
Mawgys tode so long that they came to Paris time enough for to do their
enterprise. And at the enter of the town: they met with an evil rybaude,
unto whom GOD give ill adventure. For he knew Reinawde. And as soon as he
saw him: he began to cry with an high voice, here comes Reinawde the
son of Aymon. When the folk understood the cry: they went that way. And
when the ill rybawde saw com so many folk: he was yet more hardye than he was
before, and went before the other, and took Reinawde by the bridle of Baiarde.
And when Baiarde saw that: he lifted his forefoote and smote the ribaude upon
the breast, that he brast the heart in his belie, and casted him all dead to the
earth And wha^ the people saw the stroke: they began all to laugh, and Bayard
went forth, and Maugis after that they were not known: and passed through the
town to the market. And when they were comen there before the lodges: they
found all the Innes full. Whereof Reynawde was maruailed. And so they lighted
at a cordeners house, that was of the deuilles side. For by him was almost
Reinawde and Mawgys taken, and delyuerd to Charlemaine that his brethren
should not have helped him of no thing. when they were lyghted and lodged
where it is said, and that their horses were well dressed: Mawgys did do make
a bed for Reynawde and took a thread of sylke, and sered it well and came to
Bayarde, and bound him the mowes of the feet there withal well streyte. And
the host beheld well this, and after said to him. Why have you thus bound
this horse? he shall not conne well go. But tell me what knighte is he that
owes the horse? For if he had of age more than he has? I should wene to know
him For he is much like Reynawde the son of Aymon. Sir said Mawgis I have
bound this horse thus because he will fight, and the yeman that rydeth upon
him is my son.

Now have I telled you that, that ye have asked me. Certes answered the host
your son is a fair felawe, but I believe ye mock me. Now shall ye hear a
great misaduenture that happed to Reynawde and also unto Mawgys. For thus as
Mawgys spoke with his host: he named Reynawde. Ha sir said the host ye have
said enough, ye need not for to hyde it any more. For it is Reynawde without
any doubt that slew Bertheloc the neuewe of the king with a chesse boorde. I
shall tell it to ye king before that I sleep.

ANd when Reynawde understood this: he shook al for anger. And rose from his
place and took his sword and said, host ye have missaide. For I never saw
Reynawde, nor I worcester not what he is, hold your peace said the host I know
you well By my head ye are Reynawde the son of Aymon. And when he had said
these words: he went out of his house. And when Reynawde saw yt: he went a
good pace after his host and smote him so great a stroke with his sword upon
his head that he cloue him unto the teeth. And when Mawgis saw this, he was
right sorry for it, and said to Reynawde.

What have you done? have you lost your wit? but if God think upon us we
been lost and shamed. I can not do thereto said Reynawde. But how someuer it
gothe he has his reward. And than Mawgis came forthwith to the stable and
sadled Bayarde. And made Reinawde to mount upon him, and after himself
lyghted upon Morell, and went out of the lodges. And when the wife and the
children of the host saw this that Reynawde had done: they began to cry,
But Reynawde and Mawgys were soon out of their way, so that none wyste where
that they were become and went and put them self among the other in the
prese, and they were never known. But Baiarde went haltinge, and went to the
gate of saint Martyne, and there they abode all the night. And when it was
day: they went with the other to the church where the king heard his mass.
And when the seruyse was done: the king came out of the church, and mounted
upon his horse, and all the other barons with him and came upon the river of
Said in to the medowe, and Renawde and Mawgys went with them, but Bayarde
went ryghhte sore halting. And when the King was come there: he commanded
that his crown should be set at the end of the lystes, and the five
houndred mark of silver, and also the houndred clothes of sylke, and
incontinente the Duke Naymes and Ogier did as the Kings had commanded. And
when all was apparailled: Then should ye have seen knights leap on
horseback. For every man trowed to have gotten the price, and the king
commanded to the duke Naymes and to Ogyer, unto Guydellon of Burgoyne and to
Richard of Normandy, that they should take a hundred knights well armed and
that they should keep well the feast, that no noise nor no strife were there
made, and that none should wrong the other, and they did his commandment.
And then the knights that should run: begane for to behold Reynawde that
was mounted upon haltinge Bayarde, and so they began for to laughe and scorn
with him. And said in Iape the one unto the other, this felawe shall win the
price. And the crown of fine gold, and said beware that his foot smite you
not, and than the other said he shall win the devil, and an other knight
said to Reynawde, ye have well done sweet knight for to have brought your
horse here, and if god destineth him: ye shall win the pryse this day.
Reynawde understood full well the great words that men said to him whereof
his here swelled high, that if it had not be for doubt to have lost the price:
be would have begone the strife, and therefore he held his peace, and made
another noise nor word against it.

THan when themperoure understood the great words yt the knights said to
Reynawde: he was wroth for it, and he said so high that it was well heard of
all. I command you upon pain of my grace that ye say no shame nor ill word
to no manner of knight. For if ye do ye shall anger me sore. But Reynawde cared
not much of that it was said to him. When the Duke Naymes and Ogyer saw that
it was time for to run: they made to sown the trompettes. Then every man
putted him self for to run, And when Mawgis saw that every man ran: he
lighted on foot and unbound the foot of Bayarde. But or ever he was unbound:
the other were well far, and when Reynawde saw that it was time for to run
after the other: he spurred his horse, and said to bayarde, we been far
behind ye might well abide. For if ye be not soon before: ye shall be blamed,
when Bayarde heard his master speak thus: he understood him as well as
though he had been a man. Than he grylled his nosethrels and bare his head up
and made a long neck, and took his course so fast that it seemed the earth
should have sonken under him, and within a while he was passed all the other
horses a far way so that men could not see him for dust that he reised. And
when they that took heed to the courses saw Baiarde ren thus: they were
greatly abashed with all, and said the one to the other behold that white horse
renneth fast and light, and but late he halted sore, he is the best of all
the other that been here.

ANd when the emperor saw this: he called to him Richard of Normandye, and
said to him, saw ye ever so many good horses together as here ben now? but
ye white passes them all, God how is he well like baiarde the horse of
Reynawde? if he had the hears of Bayarde: I should say that it were he him
self, and he that sytteth upon him is also light and prue. Thus wit it that
Reynawde has do so much that Bayarde has overcome all the other horses. And
when he was at the end of the lystes: he took the crown and put it on his
arm, and the silver and the clothe he left alone, for he dayned not to take
them. And when he had taken the crown: he returned again toward the king
Charlemaine all fair and a soft pace, when the king saw him come toward
him, he said to him all laughyng. Friend abide a little I pray you, for if ye
will have my crown ye shall have it, and I shall give you for your horse so
great hauoyre: that ye shall have never be poor. By God said Reynawde these
words shall naught avail you, now have I well begyled you, for I go do
marchaundise else where and I hold you for a child. I have so often angered you
and of your men I have so many slain. I am Reynawde that bears away your
crown, seek else where for a another horse that ye shall give to Rowland for to
overcome Baiard, for ye shall not have bayarde nor also your crown. And as
soon yt he had said this he spurred bayarde with his spurs and went so fast
a way that it seemed that the tempest had chased hi^. And when the king
Charlemayne understood this yt Reynawde had said to him: he was wode angry for
it that he wyste not what he should do so that he might not of a great while
speak a word. And when he had recovered his speech: he began to cry with a
hye voice, now after lords after, for it is mine enemy Reynawde the son of
Aymon.

And when the knights heard thus cry the king Charlemayne: they spurred
their horses with ye spurs and went after Reynawde, but their going auayled
them naught. For Bayard was far from them with in a while so yt they wist
not where he was become, and Reynawde came to Said and passed over it al at his
ease with swymynge, for Bayarde was well wont thereto, and also he had passed
it before with more great haste. And wha^ that Reynawde was thus passed the
river of Said: he lyghted from Bayarde at the bank of it. Thus hanging: the
king Charlemayne and his knights that followed after him, came to the ryuers
side, and began to call Reynawde and said to him. Ha true man, soon yield me
my crown again and I shall give thee.x. times as much as it is worth, and I
shall give thee truce two years, so that thy self and thy brethern shall mow
go in ardeyne to see your mother the which desires sore to see you, and there
is no knight in my land that shall say contrary to it, by god said Reynawde as
for these words avail you nothing, for ye shall never have again your
crown. I shall sell it and shall pay my knights withal, and the charboncle
that thus shyneth shall be set hye upon my pauylyon to the end that they yt
shall go to saint James in Galyee may see it the better, and ye shall be blamed
of your knights that ye have lost your crown by the horse Bayarde, when
Charlemayn heard him speak thus: he wist not what he should say for anger,
and kept himself still like as he had been dead. And when Reynawde had said so:
he mounted again upon Bayarde and put himself to the way, but not the right
way: but rode through a little pathe which he had passed before time.

NOw shall I tell you of Mawgys how he did for to come out of Paris yt was
mounted upon his horse morell. When he wist that Reynawde was passed Said he
issued out of Paris and passed the river over the bridge as soon as he might.
And when he was without: he began to look after Reynawde and as he rode he
looked a trauerse and saw Reynawde, so called he after him as hie as he could,
cosyn think to ride fast, for to tarry here no good shall come to us, cosyn
said Reynawde ye say well and we shall do so. And so they took their way
toward Myllon. And when Alarde saw his brother come and Mawgis: he said to his
folk. Lords we may well come out of our busshemente, for I se come my brother
Reynawde and Mawgys. Alas said Richard I see them come with great haste. I
fere me much that men chase them. Now light we al on horse back and if they
have mystre of us: let us go help and succor them. And they answered all we
ben all ready, and when they came out of their busshement: there came Reynawde
and Mawgis that said to them lords think to make haste. For the long
taryenge might do to us harm because that I bring with me the crown of
Charlemayne, the which Bayarde has made me win by his prowess. And when
Alarde understood his brother speak thus: he was so greatly in Joy that he
wyste not what he should say but colled and kyssed his brother Reynawde with
great Joy. And than incontine^t they put themself to the way and so long
they rode yt they came to Orleaunce and passed the river of Loyre with all
dylygence, and after they made so much by their Iourneys: yt they came to
Mountawban whole and glad, thanked be god.

THan when they were at mou^tawban: the lady came them against and received
them right gladly, and made them right great there and all the folk of the
Castle were right glad of the coming of Reynawde and of his brethren, and
asked him how he had done in his viage, lords said Reynawde well god gramercy.
I was known of mine host ye which would have betrayed and accused me, but I
sold it to him full dear, I cloue his head to ye teeth and went out of his
house by night and put us in the prese of the other, but ye wist never folk so
well scorned as we were, for the folk of charlemayne mocked me and Bayarde,
whereof the king was angry, and thus they left me in peace. And when the
trompettes began to blow for to begin ye course: they that should run
departed incontinent, and I bode be hind well the shot of a bow, and I tell
you well for certain, there were well twenty thousand horses. And when I saw
me behind: I said to Bayarde that it should be great shame to him if he abode
behind, but god gramercy and Bayarde I over ran them al. And bare away the
price, and of it I have brought with me the crown of ye king charlemayne
whereof he is full sorry. Wha^ they of Mou^tawban vndestode these words: they
were right glad. But here I leave for to speak of Reynawde and of his
brethren and return to speak of the king Charlemayne that was at paris right
sorye for his crown that he had lost.

How the king Charlemayne went into Gascoyn with his host. And how he besieged
Reynawde and his brethren within ye Castle of Mou^tawban. And how Reynawde
wan the first battle of the king, the which Rowland conduyted and Olyuer and
the bishop Turpyn. Capitulum. viii.
depiction of a siege camp with a king or Charlemagne with crown and scepter,
surrounded by a group of men, some armed with pikes; in the background a
castle; in the foreground three canons

IN this party shows ye hystory that when Reynawde had won the crown of
king Charlemayne: The king abode all wroth and sore an angered and he called
all his barons and said to them Lords I pray you that ye counsel me how I
shall may avenge me of Reynawde ye son of Aymon. For ye know how he has
angered me. I promise you but that I may have my crown again: I shall wex mad
al quick. For my courage tells me that he shall do break it and he shall put
the carbor^tle yt is thereon upon his pauyll^on, because ye folk that go to
saint James shall see it to my great vytupere and shame. Sir said Rowland if ye
will avenge you well of Reynawde: go we upon him and we shall exyle and destroy
him and his land, and if the king You of Gascoyn may be taken: so make
justice of him in such wise that it may be remembered perpetuallye. Neuew said
the king ye say well and wisely and it shall be done as ye have aduysed me,
and I promise you that I shall never have Joy till yt I be avenged at my will.
Sir said ye duke Naimes leave this anger in peace, ye know how Reynawde is your
enmye and prayseth you nothing, but and ye will I shall give you such
counsel that Reynawde shall be brought to distruccion and his brethern and
Mawgys also. Sir do that your barons be ready at candelmas next coming and
that every one of them make good prouysyon of vitayle for vii. year, and than
abide so long before mountawban till that ye take them and after ye shall
avenge your self at your will upon them.

THan when the king Charlemayne understood the good counsel that the duke
Naymes had given unto him: he lift up his head and said. Naymes it is no^ ye
first good counsel yt ye have given to me and I will it be done as ye say.
And than the king Charlemayne did do make his letters and sent them through
all his empire. In the which letters was contained that every man that was
accustomed to bear arms and to go to war should come to him at the feast of
Candelmasse next following well garnisshed of vitayle for the space of.vii.
years, for to abide at syege before mountawban. When ye barons knew ye kings
will: eueri man made him self ready as well as he could and came to Paris, and
presented them to king Charlemayne and to his neue with Rowlande, and by cause of
the great number of folk that were com there, they might not lodge al within
Paris: but they lodged without the town upon the river of Saine. When the
king saw that all his barons were come: he made them al to come before him and
said to them, lords ye all know right well (at the lest the most party of
you) how I have overcome and subdued.xl. kings in my days, the which are
all to me obeyssaunt, except ye king Yon of Gascoyn that has withdrawe^ in
his land my enemies mortal, that been the four sons of Aymon, ye know well
the great dishonor they have done to me, whereof I me compain unto you and
pray you and command you that ye come with me into Gascoyn for to help me
that I be avenged of the great harm and shame that these four sons of
Aimon do to me, for by your oath ye ben all beholden thereunto.

THan said the earl of Nantuel, Sir we shall not go there at this time. Ye
know well that that we ben come out of Spain but late, whereof we ben yet all
werye. And also in this felawshyp ben many princes and barons that have not ben
yet in their country nor seen their wives and children, and ye will yt, that we
go into Gascoyn upon the king Yon, and upon the four sons of Aymon: And I
tell you that the two wou^des yt I received in Spain be not yet whole, and
therefore we may not go into Gascoyn at this time. But if it please you ye
shall do as a good king and a sage, and shall show that ye love your folk,
For ye ought to keep them as your self. Wythdrawe your host unto whytsonday
next coming and give leave to all your barons to go to their places for to
rest them a while, And when the time shall be come and that your pleasure is to
call them: they shall than be all fresshe and redye to fulfill your
commandment with all diligence. When the king understood these words: he
was wroth and swear by saint Denis of France, saying in this manner, if I
should be dyssheryted I shall go now into Gascoyn, and I shall take with me
all the young folk of my host: the which I shall put in good straye
honestly, and I shall give the^ all that they shall need, though ye should
abide behind as weke men and feynte. Sir said the duke Naymes ye say well, for
this young men shall be right glad for to assaye them self. Therefore will I do
it said king Charlemayne and so shall the king Yon be destroyed, and when I
shall have Reynawde and his brethern, and Mawgys the theete taken: I shall
depart ye land of Gascoyne to these young knights for their heritage. This
hangyng that the king Charlemayne said these words: a spy that longed to
Reynawde was in this company that understood all that said is. And when the
spy had heard all together well: he put himself to the way, and did so much
by his Iourneys, yt he came to mou^tawban, where he found Reynawde his
brethern, and Mawgys. And in contynent that Reynawde saw him he demanded of
his what tidings bring you fro Paris and from the court of king Charlemayne?

My Lord said the spy, wit it that king Charlemayne is greatly wroth with
king yon and against you and against your brethern, and against Mawgys. He
has sent for all his subjects in his Empire, but none would have comen with
him into Gascoygne. And then he swear Saint Denis yt he should come into th^se
parties, and should bring with him none other but al young knights. To the
which he shall give all Gascoygne, And says that he shall besyege Mou^tawban,
and shall do to be cast down the great tower, and shall set al Gascoygne in attire and flame. Than said Reynawde to his folk, be not discouraged of nothing
For I shall see how Rowlande and Oliver shall bear themself against me and mi
brethern. And than went Reynawde into the halle. And found his brethern and
Mawgys with his knights, and said to them. Lords I bring you tidings. Now
wit that the king Charlemayne comes to besyge us, and brings with him all
the puyssaunce of France.

Now let us think to receive him well, for he shall have more to do than he
weneth, brother said Alarde have no doubt, for they shall be well received, for
as long that we shall live and shall see you ride upon bayarde: we shall not
fail you, nor we shall not be a ferde to be taken nor ill handled. For no man
alive is worth you, another of goodness nor of prowes.

This hangyng: Charlemayn was aduysed and thought upon the counsel that the
Duke of Nantuel had given to him. And after he called his folk and said to
the^. Lords I give you leave, and let you wit that at Easter I shall hold my
counsel general, and it please you. Now keep that ye fail not to come than
well apparelled and ready, for I would not leave for nothing, but yt I should
go see the king Yon. And if he yield me not the four sons of Aymon: I shall
do to him with out doubt so much shame that I shall make his berde to be cut of
hard by the chynne. And also I shall take the crown of Gascoygne from his head
and I shall make him come a foot after me begginge his bread. And when he had
said these words: The barons took leave of Charlemayne, and went into their
countries, but at their departing: Charlemaine said to them. Lords remember
well your self that ye come at ye term yt I have set. For I swear unto you
that those that shall not come, and if I euercome again from Gascoigne: they
shall repent it full sore. Shortly to speak: Richard went into his duchy of
Normandye salamon into Bretayne. Godfray into auinion, Hughe the old and
Dyssyers into spain, and Bretons into Almayne. And all the other eueriche into
his own country.

When it was time for to come again to the court at the term that the king
Charlemayne had set: every man made him self ready as well as he could for to
come to the court as they were expresselye charged they should do, first came
there Richard of Normandye and brought with him many a noble knight, and
presented him self tofore the king Charlemayne even at saint Denis. After
came Salamon of Bretayne, and brought with him of his barons a fair company and
presented himself to the king at saint Denis. After came Dyssyers of Spain
which brought with him well.x. thousand knights well armed, and well garnysshed
of vytayles. For in all the host of Charlemayne was none so well arrayed as
they were of all things. And presented him self in this manner at saint Denis
unto the king Charlemayne. Than came Godfray the Ecle of Auynyon and brought
with him all his power and a fair company and foyson of vytayle. And presented
him and his folk to the king Charlemayne. And after came Ponthus out of
Almayne, and brought with him afayre company of men of arms. For he had with
him the^ of Islande and of Armony, and well three thousand archers, the which
for no doubt of death would never flee from battle. And presented him self
and his felawship to the king charlemayne, the which he received right
honorably. Than after came the good bishop Turpin, and brought with him a
fair company and well enewred to the war, and presented himself to the king
Charlemayne, that was right glad of his coming, for the bishop was a good true
man. And ye king Charlemaine trusted much to him for his great fydelitie, and
also for the great prowes that was in him.

ALL the great Lords that held their lands of the king Charlemayne came to
Paris and presented themself and their men to ye king Charlemayne that
received them with great Joy and was glad to see about him so fair a
company of good men of war, but I tell you that when the host was assembled
at Paris: there was so great a derth that it was great pity, for the rasour of
where was sold for forty shelynges and twenty pence and if the king had
tarried there any le^ger. there should have been so great a derth that all the
small people had been all dead for hu^gre. But the king Charlemayne began for to
make his mustres, for to know how much people that he had. And when the the
mustres were made: they found that they were well.xxx. thousand knights that
had their first berdes besyoe the old knights that were well an hundred
thousand. And wha^ that this was done: the Emperor Charlemayne called Rowland
his neuew before him and said to him. Fair neuew I recomende to you mine
host, and I pray you that ye will conduyte it by good manner. Sir said Rouland
I shall do therein my deuoyre after my power. Tha^ made to be take to him the
oryflambe, and departed out of Paris, and they did so much by small Iourneis
that they came to Bloye, and than Charlemayne made to be cried that all the
vytaylers of the land should go with vitayle after the host. And if that they
brought that were worth a penny: they should have two for it. And when that this
great army was come to Bloy they passed over Gyronde and went before the
great castle of Mountawban. And they lodged themself there round about the
place. And then the French me^ began to say the one to the other, by mine oath
there is a fair castle and a stornge and but if we get some other part,
here shall we win but a little.

ANd when the batayles were ordained round about mou^tawban: Rowland began for
to say to the king Charlemayne. Sir me seems that we should now give a
sawte to Mountawban. And the King answered, I will not that my folk have any
dommage, but first I will know if the castle will hold or yield up. For if he
will be given up: I would not that any battle should be done to it. And than
incontinent he sent a knight mounted upon a mewle all unarmed, the which came
unto the gate of the castle, and when they yt kept the gate saw that it was a
messanger: they opened to him the gate, and the Knight entered into the castle.
And as he was come in, he found the steward with an hundred men that went
about visitynge the watches and the wards. Incotinente the knight salued him,
and the steward rendered him again his salute and said to him. What be ye
Gentylman, and what seek you here within? I pray you tell me what folk are
yonder without so fair a company. Sir said the knight they ben the folk of
the Emperor Charlemaine that is come for to besyege the Castle of Mountawban,
and I am one of his knights that am come here for to speak with Reynawde
from ye king Charlemayne. Than the steward took the knight by the hand and
led him before Reynawde the son of Aymon. And when ye knight saw Reynawde: he
made reverence to him and after said to him, Reynawde ye Emperor Charlemayne
sends to you word by me, that if you will yield your self to his mercy, and
give to him your brother Richard to do his will of him: he shall have mercy
of you. And if ye will not do so: he shall do sawte your Castle, and if he
may take you by force: he shall make you for to be hanged, or dye a cruel
death.

THan wha^ Reynawde understood these tidings yt Charlemayne sent to him: he
began for to sm^le and said. Freende go tell the king that I am not the man yt
shall do any treason. For if I should do it, he him self should blame me for
it. But and if it please him, my brethren. Mawgys and my self ben at his
commandment, and we shall give our se^f^ to him as to our sovereign Lord,
our l^ues save and our members, and we shall yield to him the Castle al at his
will. And tell the king that he shall do well and wisely to take such five
knights as we ben. And if Charlemayn refuses this: I have mine hope so fast
to our Lord god that we shall not set much by the king, nor of his great
host. The messanger understood well the answer that Reynawde had done to
him: and incontinent he returned to Charlemain and showed to him all yt
Reynawde had said word by word. When the Emperor understood the words of
Reynawde: he began for to think a good while, for he knew that Reynawde said
but well, And than he sent for the Duke Naymes and Ogier the Dane and said unto
them. Lords, Reynawde se^deth me word that he shall do nothing after my
will. And for this cause I will that the castle be assailed forthwith. Sir said
the duke Naymes me seems as I have understand ye Reynawde offreth to you
fair, and if ye will belyue me: ye shall take him to mercy with his brethern.
For ye know well that they be^ folk that may do to you good service. And if
Reynawde be once in peace with you: ye shall be the better beloved and more
dred therefore. But since that your will cannot accord to the same: we may not
do thereto. To assail the castle I counsel it not. For ye see that the Castle
is fair and right strong, and Reynawde has whym a good company of good men,
and he and his brethern, and Mawgys ben such knights as ye know, if ye do
assail the castle: they shall issue out at the fauce posternes, and shall do
to you so great a dommage of your folk yt ye shall be wroth for it, but and
if ye will believe my counsel: ye shall besyege the Castle so nyghe that no
man shall not come out nor cutre in but he shall be take, and thus ye shall mow
have the Castle by famisshynge. For by no sawte ye shall not have it.

CHarlemayne understood well these words and knew well that the duke Naymes
spoke well and wisely and said to him. I will that it be done thus as ye have
devised it. And tha^ he made cry through his host yt every man should lodge
himself even nighe by the Castle, and he himself commanded that his
pauyllion should be pight as nighe the gate as could be done. After this was
cried ye should have seen with in a little while more than ten thousand
pauillions round about the Castle of Mountawban. When the host was al
lodged: Rowlande departed out of the host well with two thousand knights well
armed and well horsed and all young men of pryme berde, which were very frenshe
born of the douce france, and went at ye other side of Mou^tawban, in a place
which is called Balancon where was a river great and deape, in the which was
fisshe enough, and there he did pytche his pauillion. And so full he was of
great pride: that he bad set the dragon above upon his pauillion, and did do
make the lodgis of his felawes round about him And they were in such a
ground where as they might see from thens the woods and the Ryuers and all
the country, and Mountawban that was upon the great roche well closed, and
beheld the two great ryuers, that is to wit Gyround and Dordone, that
enuyronned Mountawban.

ROwlande saw the place so strong that he meruaylled greatly, and said to his
folk. Lords I marvel me sore of this castle, and I marvel not if the
four sons of Aymo^ make war against mine uncle Charlemayne sithe that they
have so good and so strong a place, for to withdraw them self. For I promise
you that Mou^tawban shall never be taken of us, ye say not well said Olyuer. For
we took well by force Lezonne, and also we overthrew down the great tower and
the doungeon of Sernoble, whereof I say yt we shall well have Mountawban, And
if Reynawde and his brethren come not and yield them self: they shall be in
danger of death. I promise you said Rowlande that they shall do nothing of
that ye say. For I promise you that the gentle Reynawde shall make us so sore
aferde that the most hardy would be at Paris. Reynawde is prue and coragious,
and his brethern in likewise, and also they have within ye castle many noble
and worthy knights. Wherefore I say and I am of opinion, that as long as they
have vytayle they shall never be taken. Wha^ ye pauillion of Rowlande was
dressed and pight up: Rowlande beheld the river and saw that it was full of
birds, than he said to the Bishop Turpyn and to the other Barons, See how
we are lodged in a good place. Let us go in these Ryuers to let flee our
Fawcons. Sir said the Bisshoppe Turpin, go in the name of God. Then lyghted
Rowlande on horseback and took with him well.xxx. knights, and no mo. And
they took their hawks, and rode the most part of them upon mules all
unarmed save their swerdes and came and sported them alonge the river side, and
took many birds upon the water, in so great quantity that they laded a horse
wythall, the bishop Turpyn and Ogyer, went not there but abode behind for to
keep the host, and they were before ye tents where they made two ancient
knights to recou^te and tell how the great Troy was taken and dystroyed, this
hangyng: was a spy in the host of king Charlemaine, that longed unto renawde,
the which he had sent there for to know what they wrought, and how they did
and all the fayte of Rowlande, and incontinent the spy departed out of the
host and went to Reynawde, and showed to him how Rowlande and Olyuer were
gone to sporting with their Hawks upon the river, and with them thyrtye of the
best of the host.

When the spy had recounted these tidings to Reynawde: he was of it right
glad. Than he called his brethern and Mawgys his cosyn, and told them how
Roulande and Olyuer and.xxx of the best barons of Charlemayne were gone to
hawking upon the ryuers in the plain of Balanco^. What ought we to do said
Reynawde? Cosyn said Mawgys we may well kill the^ if we will, for they ben well
proud and folyshe, remember ye not well that a messa^ger told you a month a
go that Charlemayne had left all old knights of his Realm, and had taken of
the young, and that he had departed all Gascoyne to the young bachelors of
France? And by this boban Rowland and Olyuer ben mounted into so great pride
that they trow in all the world is no man that dare assail them nor look upon
them an grely. But and if ye will believe me: I shall tell you such a thing,
that shall make them wroth and sorry. And tha^ reinawde made sown his horn ye
which me^ never herd sowned but yt it was need, for when men heard it: every
man ran to his arms for to arm him. And incontinent Reynawde and his
brethren, and Mawgys made themself to be armed.

And when they were al armed and well apparelled: Reynawde lyghted upon Bayarde
his good horse, and spurred him with his spurs, so that he made him to lepe
well thyrty foot of length. Ha good horse said Reynawde: how ye make your self
to be beloved. And how well I mistre you this dai. Let us go assail these
unhappy folk of the king Charlemayne of France, and make we by such a manner
that we need not return twyse, and thereof I pray you all.

ANd when Reynawde saw that his folk was well apparelled, he went out with
his men at a false posterne, that they of the host could not see them. And
they were well in his company about four thousand well horsed and well armed,
And a foster conduyted them through the thyckest of the forest, and Reynawde
said to the foster, bring me thou into the host of Rowland without fail, the
Foster answered to him that he would do it gladly. Than brought he them
straight to Balancon. And when Reynawde saw the pauylions: he showed them to
his folk, to whom he said, be hold what fair gain we have found here
if we dare set upon them. Sir said his men, let us go to it hardelye, for we
durst well assail the devil, when ye be with us. Now shall I tell you of the
bishop Turpin that was a bid to keep the host, whereof he had great fear
because he wist well against whom he had a do, and had a great suspeccion and
heaued up his head, and saw the Ravens and the Dawes flee about upon the
fortress. And from thens they took their flight over Rowla^des pauilion. And
made great noise And so was he aferde, for he wend that it had be some evil
token, and he beheld toward the woods that were great, and saw anon his
enemies, whereof he was sore afraid yt almost he was beside himself.

Than he called Ogyer the Dane and said to him, free knight for gods love go
arm your self, and let our folk be armed, for here comen our enemies. Now
ben well Rowlande and Olyuer gone for naught that are gone to the chase and have
left their host thus in great danger. I believe that they shall not fail but
they shall repent it sore. When Ogyer heard Turpyn speak in this manner: he
was very sore an angered, so went he in his pauylion and made him to be armed
incontinent for to move the host. And when that the Frenchemen heard the
trumpettes blow: they put themself in ordenau^ce nobly. This hanging: Ogyer
was armed and mounted upon his horse Brayforde, and found that a great part
of them was armed and al redye. Than Ogier said to them Lords think to
defend you well, for we ben assailed.

REynawde was abashed when he saw the host that moved so: and said unto his
folk, Lords we ben dyscouered, but yet nevertheless let us go to it and
assail them they answered that they were all ready for to do so. And when that
Reinawde understood these words: he said unto Mawgys. Fair Cosyn take a
thousand knights, and abide here within this wood. And if ye see that we
need of more help: come than and succoure us. Gladly said Mawgys your
commandment shall be do one. And wha^ that Reynawde had said so: he spurred
Bayarde with his spurs, and went into the host, and passed the plain of
Balancon, and the first that he recou^tred it was Emery the earl of Nicol, and
smote him so that he shoued his spear thoroughe the body of him and fell dead
to the earth. Then said Reynawde ye shall abye ye bargayne. false Glotton, ye did
a great folly when ye came ever into Gascoygne And when that he had said
thus: he set his hand to his sword. And began for to make so great occysyon
of knights that none can tell it. And when Reynawde saw his enemies so
strongelye abashed: He began for to say, where is Rowlande and Olyuer that so
sore has thretened me and my folk, and saying that we be^ traitors? But and
they say so before me: I should show to them that they say not well nor troth.
When the bishop Turpyn understood this that Reynawde said: He said to
Reynawde, ye another say well nor troth, and tha^ he spurred his horse with
the spurs, and went against Reynawde, and gave each other so great strokes
through their sheeldes that they brake both their speres al in pieces. But
neither of them fell down. And when Reynawde had broken his spear: he set his
hand to his swerd and gave so great a stroke with it to the Bishop Turpyn
upon his helm that he made both the man and the horse to rele sore. And when
Reynawde saw ye bishop in ye plight he said to him, father be ye the same
Turpyn that prayseth your self so sore? By my faith me seems it were better
for you to be in some church to sing some mass then for to be here, wening
to grieve me.

THan when the bishop Turpyn understood the reproach that Reynawde made to
him: he trowed well to have gone out of his mind for it. And set hands to
his sword, and went upon Reynawde. And then was the host moved of one party
and of the other. Shortly to speak: there were so many speres broken, so many a
knight overthrown and so mani horses dead: that it was great pity for to see.
There was Ogyer the Dane that had his sheeld before his breast, and his sword in
his hand and sat upon Brayforde the which smote Richard the brother of
Reynawde so great a stroke: that his horse fell down to therth. Wha^ Richard
saw him self a ground: he rose up again quickly as a knight prue and
valiant. And took his sword in his hand, and Ogier passed beyond for to
follow his course and began to cry the baner saint Denis. Wha^ Reynawde saw his
brother Richard cast on ground: he was wroth for it. So spurred he his horse
Bayarde, and went against Ogyer the dane, and Ogier against hi^. and gave each
other great strokes upon their sheeldes. Reynawde smote Ogyer by so great force
that the horses gyrth nor ye peytrell might not help But that Ogier must fall
down sadle and all to the ground.

When Reynawde saw Ogier at the earth: he took Brayforde by the bridle, and
said to Ogier, ye have done evil for to have cast down my brother before
me, ye know that ye be of my lignage and my cosyn nyghe, ye should help and
defend us against all men. And ye do worse than the other, whereof I say it is
no deed of a cosyn but of an enemi, nevertheless take your horse again upon
such condition that ye shall do to me a pleasure at a another time if I have
need, the which thing God forbede, cosyn said Ogyer ye speak as a good man,
and promise you that if I fail of this, that ye say: god punysshe me for it,
Reynawde yielded him again his horse, and held the styrop to Ogyer when he
lyghted again upon his horse brayforde. And wit it that Ogyer sich did much
for Reynawd and yielded him again upon his reward at the roche mountbron,
whereof he was rebuked of Charlemaine shamefully. When Ogier was set on his
horse again: he set hand to his sword and entered among the thickest of the
gascoines, and began to hew the^ so sore that he made them all to slay before
him. When Mawgis saw that all the battaylles were thus meddled together: he came
out of the wood, and came to Balancon and put himself and his folk among the
greatest prece and began to cleave and hew so hard heads legs and arms,
that none durst abide long before him. And than the frenshmen were so sore and
werye that they might no more and were all dyscomfited at the passage of the
river, than they did put them self to flight, and the gascoines chased them
all beating a long mile, and after returned to the host, and took all the
hauoyr that they found there, and Mawgis came to the pauillion of Rowland and
took the dragon of gold that was set upon the said pauillion, and they passed
through Balancon, and so returned to Mou^tawban with great joy. And wha^ they
were come: there they disarmed them self and eat right well. For they had well
mister thereof. When they had caten at their ease: Reinawde made bring the
boty before him. And after dealed it among his folk. And keep to him no^ one
penny. When Reinawd had thus departed all this goods: Mawgis went upon the
great tower of Mountawban. And did set the dragon of Rowland upon the same, so
that the folk of choste of both sides of the castle might see it. And when
Charlemaine saw the dragon upon the tower of ^ountawban: he wend that Rowland
his neuew had taken Mountawban by force, but the thing went well otherwise. For
Reinawde and his brethren had discomfited all the folk of Rowland and had
brought with them al their hauoyre and the dragon of the said Rowland they had
set upon the tower of Mountawban.

How Reynawd and his brethern were betrayed and sold to the king Charlemayn
by the king yon of gascoyn that sent them in the plain of Valcoloures all
without arms but their swerdes, and were mounted upon mules, and were clothed
with mantelles of scarlet furred with ermine. Fro the which they escaped by
the will of god, but they suffered much pain and great travail, for they
were greatly hurt and sore wounded, but of ye king Charlemains party abode
there dead Folques of Moryllon and many other barons and worthy knights,
whereof the king Charlemayn was wroth and sorry. Capitulum.ix.
depiction of a group of un-armoured men on horseback

NOw must we tell of Rowland and of Oliver, that came again fro hawking upon
the rivers with their fellows, and beseming they were right glad that they
had so well chased and taken a great quantity of birds, and thus as they
came again: they met with damp Rambault the free knight that told them by a
great anger, ye have taken many birds see that ye be good merchants and
selle your proy well. For I promise you ye shall never selle your chase and
hawking so dear as it has cost you. And if ye have taken birds: I let you
wit that Reinawde and his brethern have taken knights, and horses, and when ye
see your dragon upon the great tower of Mountawban, ye ought well to be than
glad and thank much thereof the four sons of Aimon. For all tho that seen
it set there of an heyght: they ween that ye have gotten the castle by force.
When Rowland understood these words: it lacked lityll that he went out of his
mind, he lyghted down from his mule, and set himself upon a stone, and
began to think and muse sore, and so did Oliver in like wise, and when
Rowlande had thought enough: he called to him the bishop Turpyn, Ogier the
dane, and Richard of Normandye and said to them. For god fair lords what
counseyll give you me upon this deed? For I dare never mote find my self
before my uncle the king Charlemayne, for I fear me to sore of evil report
and that men tell of me otherwise than the troth. And he said to the bishop
Turpyn. For gods love good father in god give me leave to depart, for I
would go into the holy land to see the sepulture of our lord for to war
there against the sarasins For since this my shappe is thus come to me: I will no
more bear arms against christen men. Sir said the bishop Turpyn, be not
dysmayed for nothing, for this is but an use of war, such a thing befalls
often to many one, I promise you that ye shall have or three days been past:
as many of the folk of Reynawde as he has of yours. Sir said Rowlande ye
give me good courage and I promise you that to your prudence I shall arrest my
self. When Rowland had said these words: the bishop Turpyn and Ogier did so
much that they made him ^ight a horseback and they went together all toward
Charlemayn, and wit that after Rowlande came mo than a hundred young gentilmen
all a foot by cause they had lost their horses, and when they were come to
thoste of Charlemain: they went streyghte to the pauyllion of the duke Naimes,
and when Rowland entered within he was ashamed and abode there two days that he
came not out, and durst not go to the court nor look no man in the face but
held himself in the said pauillyon as a man all abashed of the great sorrow
that he had at his heart. When Rowland and Olyuer was thus abide^ in the duke
Naymes tent, this hangyng: Turpyn came toward king Charlemayne in his rent.
Where he entered within and saluted the king right honorably, and the emperor
rendered to him his sau^e, and after said to him. Damp bishop ye be welcome. Sir
said Turpyn god be your keeper, and I beseech you to pardon me, if I tell you
any thing that shall displease you. Now tell har^^^y said the king what ye will.
For nothing that ye can tell, can not dysplease me. Sir said the bishop
Turpyn, wit that the four sons of Aymon have discomfyted us. And have take
with them all that we had in our tents, both horses and harneys and al our
pauyllyons and namely the dragon of Rowland beside a great m^iny prisoners,
and they have slain the most party of our folk.

THan wha^ the emperor understood this that Turpyn had told him: he was a
long while as a man all forcened. And than he swear saint Denis by great
anger, and said. Now have ye found that ye went telling and the great pride
that ye had ye have well found. At this hour he did send through al his host
by express words: that every lord and baron should come incontinent before
him in his tente for he would keep parlyament with them. When the princes knew
that commandment of the king: ye should have seen them come with great haste
toward the king, and when they were all assembled within the kings pauillion:
he stood upon his feet and said to them in this manner. Lords I have sent
for you for to show unto you tha^ to us is happed of new. Now wi^ that the
four sons of Aimon have discomfited all your knights that Rowlande my neuew
had with him at Balancon, whereof I am right wroth and sorye, for I would I had
lost a greater thing, and that this were not happed, but a thing that can not
be amended: must be suffered and borne as well as men may, I require and beseech
you all my lords and friends upon the oath that ye have made to me: that ye
will counseyll me truly how I shall be ruled in this matter, and how I
might have this Castle of Mountawban, when the king had thus spoken: there
was none so hardye that ever durst say one word but only the Duke Naymes of
Bauier the pr^e and wise knight. Sir said the Duke Naymes, ye ask counsel for
to besyege Mountawban, but no man that has any reason in his head: ought
not to counseyll you the same, for why the danger is there great because
that Guynard the lord of Berne knows of it, and so does Godfray the Lord
of Poycy that are good knights and sore dread for their worthynes, and also
the king yon that is at toulouse, the which shall come all to help and
succor Reinawd: by cause they be of his aliau^ce, and also they know that he
is one of the best knights of the world. And they know well also that
Reynawd gives to us much to done, and so I tell you if they see themself
together: they shall give you enough to do, and shall may bear to you a
great dommage. But and ye will have good counseyll, and believe me: I shall give
it to you truly. Sir send word to king yon, that he withdraw not nor keep
your enmyes within his land, but that he yield them in to your hands for to
do with them your pleasure and your commandment. And if he will not do
so: ye shall destroy all his land and no mercy ye shall have upon him. Naymes
said the king, now give you me good counseyll, and I will that ye have
said: be done incontynente. Than the king made come an Heraude of his, and
said to him. Now go lyghtlye to Toulouse, and tell king yon on my behaulfe
that I am entered in to Gascoyne accompanied of the twelve peers of France
with an hundred thousand fyghting men, and with Rowlande, and Olyuer, and
tell him that by saint Denis of france if he yield me not my enmyes, that
been the four sons of Aymon: that I shall waste and destroy all his land,
nor to him shall abide another city nor Castle, but it shall be over thrown to
the earth. And if I can take him: I shall take from him his crown, so shall
he be called king overthrown. Sir said the Heraude your commandment I
shall do without varying of one word, even as your good grace pleases to
command me, and thus departed the Heraude from the host of Charlemayne, and
took his way toward Toulouse, there he found the king yon of Gascoyn in his
pallays with a right fair company, and as soon that he saw the king: he knew
him well, so made he than to him the reverence, and said to him in the
Emperors behalf the thing word by word whereof he was sent there.

ANd when the king yon understood the Heraude that spoke so: he bowed his head
toward the earth, and began to think a long while, and said not a word. And
wha^ he had thus long mused enough: he said to the messa^ger. Good friend ye
must carry here a seven night I pray you, and than I shall tell you my will,
and what I purpose to do. Sir said the Heraude I shall abide with a good will
since that it please you. Than went the king yon in to his chamber and eight
earls with him, and commanded that the doors should be well sheet, and than
they set them all upon a benche. And when they were al set: the king yon took
the word and said in this manner. Lords I beseech and require upon the faith
that ye owe to me that ye give me good counseyll to the honor of me, not at
my will: but by reason. Now wit it that the king Charlemain is entered within
my lo^d with the tuelue peers of France, and Rowlande and Oliver, with an
hundred thousand men. And he sends to me word, but if I deliver unto him the
four sons of Aimon: he shall not leave me another city nor town, but he shall
cast all to chearth and shall take the crown fro my head, and so shall I becalled
a king overthrown. My father held never nothing of him and no more shall I,
it is better to die with great worship: than to live in great shame.

THan when the king you had thus spoken: there rose up a knight named Godfraye
that was neuew to king yon and said to him, sir I merueyll me that ye ask
counseyll for to betray such knights as ben the four sons of Aimon,
Reinawde is your man and your carnal friend, ye know what good he hath^ done
to you and to your land. It is not long a go that he dyscomfited Marcyl the
puysaunt Sarasin and chased him well four mile, and smot of his head and
presented it to you, and ye have promised and sworn to him that ye shall defend
and keep him him against all men. Mine uncle if ye think to faylle him and
will not hold that ye have promised to him: let him and his brethren go out
of your land in to some other country to seek their adventure. And hapely
they shall serve some lord that shall do to them more good then ye will do,
and also I pray you my dear lord and uncle as much as I ca^: that ye will do
nothing that turns you to blame, nor to dishonor, nor that can be cast by
manner of reproach toward your friends. Than spoke the old earl of Ansom and
said. Sir ye will that we give you counseill, if ye will do that we shall
counseil you: ye shall do well for your self. Now say on hardely said the king
that seems you best to be do, for I will do as ye shall counseyll me. Sir
said the earl ye have well heard say, and so it was troth, that Benes slew
the earl Lohier, wherefore Charlemaine sent for him and made his head to be
smyten of at Paris, and at that time Reinawd and his brethern were very young,
and of them was none mencyon made. And afterward when they were great: the
king would amend it to them. For the thing touches them, but they had the
heart so fell that they would take none amends, and lasted their hate long,
whereof ever sith has come great harms and euylles. For Reynawde slew
Berthelot the neuewe of the king with a chesse board, sir I know not why I
should hyde any thing fro your knowledge, ye know well that Charlemaine is
so mighty a king that he never undertook wan^ but he came to his above of it.
Wherefore I do give you counseyll that ye yield Reinawde and his brethern and
Mawgis to the king Charlemayne, and thus shall ye be delivered of a great
thought, and of a great danger. And after this: spoke the earl of Mobandes
and said, sir if ye will do this that the earl of Ansom counseilleth you: ye
and we shall be traitors. For Reynawd is your man, and so much ye have loved
him that ye have given him your sister to his wife. And when he came in these
marches, he came not like a knave: but he came to you as a noble knighte prue
and worthy. For he brought in his felawship four thousand men well armed and
well horsed, and said to you before us all oreuer he took of his spurs, that
he had war with the king Charlemain. Nevertheless ye received him with good
heart, and after made of him at your will. And for you he conquested mani
batailles, and did so much that he delivered you from the hands of your
enemies. And therefore sir I tell you that ye be not worthy to call your self,
ne to bear the crown upon your head: if for fear of death ye betray such
knights as are the four sons of Aymon. For ye have not yet lost another
Castle nor town, and if ye do it otherwise: ye shall be taken and holden for a
traytoure. After spoke Anthony the old earl and said to the king. Sir
believe not this counseyll, for such counseyll he gives you now whereof ye
shall be betrayed at the last. For I know better then tent of Reinawde than
any man that is here, ye must understood sir that Reynawd was son to a man
that had but one town, and was so proud that he dayned to serve nor obey his
lord the king of France but slew Berthelot by his great pride and outrage.
Wherefore the king Charlemaine chased him out of the realm of France. Now it
is happed so that he is in Gascoygne, and ye have given to him great lands,
and because he has your sister to wife: he is become so proud that none
may dure before him. And he sets not a penny another by you nor by your
court. Wherefore I swear to you by ye head that I bear, if he may by any wise
he shall take the life from you for to have all the realm to him self.
Wherefore I advise to you by rightwise counsel: that ye yield him and his
brethren to Charlemayne. And ye shall do as a wise king, and so shall you
pease the great wrath of the king Charlemayne of France. After spoke the duke
Guymarde of Bayon and said to the king. Sir I tell you that the earl Anthony
lies falsely, and gives you evil counseyll, for Reynawde as son to the duke
Aimon of Ardeine, which is of right great lygnage. And Charlemayne made to slay
the duke Benes of Aygremount their uncle by great wrong, and Reynawd took
thereof vengeance upon Berthelot by good reason, and that more is: it was his
body defendinge. Whereof I tell you that no king is not worthy to bear any
crown nor to have honor that will do treason for thretening of a another lord.
And after spoke Humarb an old knighte and said. By god Guymard I believe that
ye have los^ your wit, to counseill the king you for to bear out Reinawd,
against the great king Charlemain, for to make all the land of Gascoyne for to be
destroyed, whereof ye should care but litell, if the realm were wasted and the
king brroughte to shame, so that ye had laud and praising. Than said Guimard
thou lie falsely, and if we two were in an other place than here: I should
show thee that thou were an old doterd and a fool. For I would not cou^seyl
the king yon, but al thing that concerns his honor, and profit also of his
realm.

AFter spoke one named sir hector, an ancient earl and said to the king. Sir
ye ask counseyl of such that can not counsel them self. For it is all
otherwise then Guymarde says. And I ensure you that if ye lose in this
matter: he shall lose thereby nothing. Sir ye know that Reynawde is a knight
good enough. But by his great pryd^: he has made war with Charlemain For
he slew Berthelot his neuewe by his outrage. Now he is come in Gascoygne, and
ye have given him your sister in marriage, whereof ye did great folly, and ye made
him the castle of Mountawban upon the stro^gest ground that is within your
realm. Now is come the king Charlemain that has besieged him, wherefore I
counseyll you that ye accord with the king Charlemain, and deliver your self
of Reynawd as son as ye may. For it is better that ye lose four knights,
than al your realm, take from him your sister and give her to another that is
a greater gentilman than is Reinawde, and that have no such enemies as is
Charlemaine, and find some means to yield Reynawde and his brethren to the
king Charlemain. And this ye shall well may do without blame if ye will do
that I shall counsel you. Friend said the king yon. I am ready to do that
which ye shall cou^seil me above al other yt ben here

THan when the king yon of Gascoigne saw that ye most party of his counseil
accorded to that he should yield Reinawde and his brethern to king
Charlemyane he began to weep right tenderly, and said in him self that no body
could here it, by god Reinawd I am sore charged for you, now shall depart my
love for you, for ye shall lose the body, and I shall lose thereby ye love of god
and of his mother, for I shall never find mercy in him, for to be tray such a
knight as ye be. But I tell you that GOD showed that day for Reinawde a fair
miracle, for the chamber where the counsel was kept that was al white:
changed color and became al black as a cole. Lords said the king yon, I
see well that I must yield the four sons of Aimon, sith that the most
part of you accords thereto, and I shall do it, since that that ye counseyl
me so. But I wot well that my soul shall never have thereof no pardon. And shall
be therefore taken all my life as a Judas, and than they left the counseyll, and
went out of the chamber. And when the king was come out of the chamber: he
set him down upon a benche, and began to think sore. And as he was in this
thought: he began for to weep sore for great pity that he had. And when he
had thought and wept enough: he called his secretary, and said to him.
Come forth sir Peter and write a letter from me to the king Charlemaine, as I
shall tell you. It is that I send him salutacion with good love. And if he
will leave me my land in peace: I promise him that before ten days been
passed. I shall deliver unto him the four sons of Aymon and he shall find
them in the plain of Valcolours, clothed with scarlet, futred with ermynes,
and riding upon mules, betynge in their hands flowers, and Roses for a token,
for because that men shall better know them. And I shall make them for to be
accompanied of eyghte earls of my realm, and if they escape from him: that he
blame me not for it. Than said the secretory, sir your commandment shall be
done, the which took anon pen and ynke and wrote the letters word for word
as the king had devised to him. And when they were written and sealed: the king
called his stuarde and said to him. Now make you ready on horseback, and go
to the syege of Mountawban, and recomende me unto the king Charlemayne, and
give him these letters. And tell him if he will quite my land: I shall do this
that is of reason, and none otherwise. Sir said the stuarde I shall gladly do
your commandment, doubt not for it, than went the stuarde in his house, and
made him ready on horseback, and rode out of Toulouse, and took the Heraude
of the king Charlemaine with him. And when they were com unto Mountawban: they
found the Emperor Charlemaine in his pauyllion, where the stuarde lyghted
down, and went within and saluted the king Charlemayne fro the king yon of
Gascoygn, and presented him the letters fro his behalf, and said unto him.
Right mighty Emperor the king yon sends you word by me that if ye will
ensure his land: he shall fulfill the tenor of this lettre, and otherwise he
will not.

When Charlemayne understood these tidings: he was right glad, he took the
lettre of the messanger, and called Rowlande to him and Olyuer, the bishop
Turpyn, the duke Naymes. Ogier the dane, and the.xii. peers of France, and
said to them. Fair lords be not displeased, go out of this pauillyon, for I
will talk with this messanger privily. Sir said they al with a good will. And
than they went all out of the pauillion, and when they were al gone:
Charlemayne opened the lettres and red them all alonge. And he found therein
that which he most desired in this world, that was the treason as it was
ordained, when Charlemaine had red the lettre: he might be no gladder than he
was. And of the great Joy that he had of it he began to smyle. Sir said the
stuarde if ye see ought in the lettre that pleases you not: blame not me for
it. For I know not yet what it is. Than said Charlemaine to the stuarde. Your
lord the king yon speaks full courteously, and if he do that he does me to
wit: he shall be well my good friend. And so shall I do to him great worship,
and shall make him a great man, and also I shall defend him against all men. Sir
said the stuarde of this that ye say: ye shall give me sureties if it please
you. Than said Charlemayne, I will do so gladlye. This I swear upon the son
of the vyrgyn Mary and also upon saint Denis of France whose man I am. Sir ye
have said all enough answered the messanger of king yon, and none other surety
I ask of you.

THan Charlemain called his chamberlayne and said to him make a lettre to king
yon of gascoyne in my behalf, as I shall deuyse it unto you. Wryt that I send
him salutacion and good love, and that it he does for me as he says I shall
increase his realm with fourtene good castelles and thereof I give him for
surety our lord and saint denis of France, and that I send him four manteles
of scarlette furred with ermines, for to clothe withal the traytoures, when
they shall go to the plain of Valcoloures, and there they shall be hanged if
god will, and I will not that any other have harm, but only the four sons of
Aimon. Sir said the chambrelain, your commandment shall be well done, and than
he made the lettres, as themperoure had devised him. And when he had made them:
the emperor Charlemayn sealed them, and after he called the messager before his
presence, and said to him. Hold these lettres and take them to king yon from
me, and recommend me to him. And than he did give him.x. mark of gold and a
King that he took of his finger. Whereof the messanger thanked him much humbly,
and incontinente lighted on horseback, and when he was aryued: he salued the
king yon of Gascoyn from king Charlemaines behalf and took him the letters
and the mantelles as Charlemayne had commanded him.

THan when the messanger of the king yon was gone Charlemaine made come before
him Foulques of Moryllon, and Ogier the dane, and said to them. Lords I have
sent for you. For I will that ye two know a litill of my secrets. But I tell
you upon your faith that none other shall know the same but only we us three
unto the time that the deed be accomplyshed. Sir said Ogier if ye think that
we should discover your secret: tell it us not And if ye trust us: declare
hardelye your pleasure. Certes said the emperor to Ogier, ye be well worthy
to know al, for I know you for a good and a trusty knight. Sir said Ogier
your good gcamercy. But I tell you that I will not know nothing thereof, but
that ye take first mine oath thereupon. Lords said Charlemaine I take it. Now
shall ye go to the plain of Valcolours with three hundred knights well armed,
and when ye shall come there: ye shall find the four sons of Aimon. And
thus I command you that ye bring them to me other dead or quick, Sir said
Ogier I saw them never but armed, how shall we know them? Ogier said
Charlemaine ye shall well may know them. For each of them shall be clothed
with a mantell of scarlette furred with ermynes and shall bear roses in their
hands.

Sir said Ogier that is a good token, and we shall do your commau^demente.
They made none other taryinge but departed from the host of the king
Charlemaine as pryuelye as they might do. And rode to the plain of
Valcolours, and put them self in a busshemente within a wood all of serpyn
trees, unto the time that the four sons of Aimon came to the plain of
Valcoloures. Ha god why knew not Reynawde and his brethren this mortal
treason? for they would not have come there upon mules: But they should have
come there upon good horses, and well armed, as prue and worthy knights that
they were. But and god had not remedied it: this Reynawde and his brethren
should have been so one taken in a litill space, for they were in danger of
death. When Ogyer ye dane and Foulques of Moryllo^ were in their bushement:
Foulques called his folk and said to them. Fair lords I ought well to
hate Reynawde, for he slew mine uncle by great wrong. Now am I come to the
point that I shall be avenged on him, and I shall tell you how. Now wit it
that the king you of Gascoyn has betrayed the^ and they shall come hither
anon all unarmed sauf their swerdes. And therefore I pray you all that ye
think to smite well upon them, then shall I know who loves me best. Do so
that none of them escape, and ye shall be well my good friends, and I shall
love you well.

NOw shall we tell you of the king yon that was at Toulouse. When he had
received the lettres of the king Charlemayne: he called to him his secretary
Godras and said to him. Look what this lettre says. And the clerk brake in
continent the seal, and beheld the tenoure of the lettre, and found how
Reynawde and his brethern should be betrayed and liuered to the death, and when
the clerk had read the lettre: he began to weep sore tenderlye, and if it had
not be for doubt of the king: he would gladly have uttered it, and when king
yon saw his secretarye weep: he said thus to him, keep well upon your life that
ye hide nothing fro me, but tell me all that the lettre contains and what
the king Charlemayne writes to me. By my faith said Godras. It is a sore
thing for to reherce. Now lightely said the king yon, tell me what the king
Charlemayne sends me, sir said Godras, I shall tell it you gladlye. And than
he began to show to king yon how Charlemayne sent him word, that if he
would do as he had written unto him: he should encreace his power of fourtene
good castelles more than he had. For the surety whereof: he swereth it unto you
upon our lord god, and saint denis of France his patron. And he sends you
four mantelles of scarlete furred with ermines, that ye shall give to the
four sons of Aymon, for to were them, and thus they shall be known. For
Charlemaine will not that none take any harm, but only the four sons of
Aimon. And he does you wit that his folk are with in a bushement within a
wood by the plain of Valcolours, that is to wit Foulques of Moryllon and
Ogier the dane, with three hundredth men well horsed and well armed that abiden
there four sons of Aimon, the which ye should deliver in to their hands.
When the king yon understood the tenoure of the lettre: he made haste for to
fulfill his promise. And incontinent he lyghted on horseback, and took in his
company a hundred men well arraied, and took his way toward Mountawban. And
as soon as he might: he came and entered with in at the gate fletcher.

And when he was within: he made his folk to lodge them in the borow And he
went up to the palace as he was wont to do wha^ he came there. The^ when his
sister the wife of Reinawd wist of the coming of the king yon her brother: she
came against him and took him by the hand, and would have kissed him as she was
accustomed to do when he came there, but the king full of evil treason turned
his face a side, and said he had the tooth ache, and would not speak with her
but litill. But he said that men should make him a bed ready. For he would
rest him self a little And when he was laid: he began sore to think, and
said to him self. Ha good lord, what have I wrought against the best knights
of the world that I have betrayed so falsely. Now shall they be hanged to morrow
without fault. I pray god to have mercy and pity upon them? Now may I well
say that I shall be lykened to Judas from hence forth, and I shall have lost
the love of god and of his mother, and also mine honor. But I must needs do
it since I have promised it so, and the will of my barons is such, for thus they
have cou^celled and have made me do it. Whereof I am full sore displeased.

AL thus as the king yon thought in the great treason that was thus machyned
upon the four sons of Aymon: there came in Reinawde from hunting, and al his
brethren with him, and had taken four wild bores sore great, and when Reinawde
was within Mountawban: he heard the noise of the horses and wend that it had
been strange knights that were come unto him to take wagis. And than he asked
of a yema^ what folk were these strau^geres that were come in withou leave? Sir
said the yeman they ben the folk of king yon that is come within for to speak
with you of some matters. But me seems by his folk yt he is not well at ease
of his person.

THan said the good Reinawd. Ha God why has my lord traueylled himself so
much for to come hither? For I would with a good will have gone to him. And
after when he had that said: he called to him a servant of his and said to
him, go fet me my horn Boudiere. For I will make feast and Joy for the
coming of my souerain lord, and incontinent it was brought to him, and
Reynawde took it and said to his brethren, Now take each of you his own
and let us make feast for the love of king yon. Than they took each of them
his horn and began to sown all four at ones right high, and made so great
noise that the castle sowned of it. For they made so great Joy for the love of
king yon that it was merueyll. When the king yon heard the trumpettes that
thus sowned so sore that the chamber where as he lay shook of it: he arose up
from the bed and came to the wyndowe, and said to him self. Ha what evil have
I wrought against these knights? Alas how make ye Joy against so great a
combraunce the which I have purchased to you? I have betrayed you right
falsely, as a wicked and untrue king that I am. For a man that betrayed his
friend: ought never to have honor another in this world nor in the other but
ought to be lost both body and soul. For he has forsaken god: and has
given himself to the devil. And when he had said that: he returned again
upon his bed sore vexed at the heart and evil at ease more than any man might
be. Than Reynawde and his brethren came up to the palace, where they found the
king yon, and when he saw them come: he rose against them, and took them by
the hand and said to Reinawd. Be not merueylled that I have not enbraced nor
kyssed you: for I am sore laden with great evil. And it is well fourtene days
gone that I could another eat nor drink any thyng^ that did me good. Than
said Reynawd sir ye be in a good place where ye shall be tended upon right
well with gods grace. And I and my brethren shall serve you to our powere,
gramercy said the king yon. Than called he his stuarde and said to him. Go
and bring me the mantelles of scarlet furred with ermynes that I have done
make for my dear friends. Incontinente the stuarde did the commandment of
king yon. And as sone that he was come again: the king made the four
brethern to put the four mantelles upon them, and prayed them to were them
for his love. Sir said Alarde this is a glad present and we shall were them
for the love of you with very good will. Alas if they had known how the
thing was brought about, they should not have borne them, but they should
have done al otherwise. Alas and what sorrowful harm they had of this, that
they were thus clothed. For that were the tokens and recognyssaunce whereof they
were in danger of death, if god had not helped them of his pity and mercy.
And when the four sons of Aimo^ had their mautelles on: the king yon beheld
them, and had of them great pity, and began to weep There was his steward
that the ^rayson well wist, that said not one word for ^ere of king yon. And
wha^ the mete was ready: Reynawde prayed much the king that he would eat. For
he made him to be served right well. When they had eaten: the king yon rose upon
his feet, and took Reynawde by the hand, and said to him. My fair brother and
my friend. I will tell a counseyll that ye know not. Now wit that I have be at
Mountbenden, and I have spoken with king Charlemayne the which charged me of
treason, by cause that I keep you in my realm, whereof I have presented my gage
before all his company, and no man was there so hardy that durst speak ayenste
that, that I said. After this we had many words together, among which we
spoke of good accord and of peace, whereof at the last the king Charlemayne
was content for my love for to make peace with you, in the manner that
follows. That is to were that to morrow erly ye shall go to the plain of
Valcoloures ye and your brethren al unarmed but of your swerdes mounted upon
your mules, and clothed with the mantelles that I have given to you, and that
ye shall bear in your hands Roses and flowers, and I shall send with you
eight of mine earls for to go more honorably, the which ben al of my
lygnage. And there ye shall find the king Charlemaine, and the duke Naymes of
hauyere, and Ogyer the Dane, and all the twelve Peers of France, and there
Charlemayne shall give you suertie. And ye shall do to him reverence in such
manner that ye shall cast your self to his feet and there he shall pardone, you,
and he shall give you again all your lands entierly.

THan said Reinawde, sir for gods mercy. For I have great doubt of the king
Charlemaine by cause he hates us to death as ye know. And I promise you it he
holdethe us he shall make us to die a shameful death. Good friend said the
traytoure king yon, have ye no doubt at al. For he has sworn unto me upon
his faith before al his baronye. Sir answered Reynawde we shall do your
commandments. Ha God said Alarde. What say you my brother? ye know well
that king Charlemayne has made his oath many times that if he may take us ones
by any manner of mean: he shall bring us to a shameful death. Now I marvel
me greatly of you fair brother, how ye will accord for to go put your self
and us in to his hands, al unarmed as a poor mischaunte. Never have god mercy
upon my soul, if I go there without mine arms, nor without to be as it
apperteyneth, brother said Reinawd ye say not well. God forbed that I should
mistrust my lord the king yon of any thing that he tells me. And than he
turned him toward the king yon and said to him. Sir without any fault we
shall be there to morrow earlye in the morning, whatsoever happeth of it. Fair
lords said Reynawde god has helped us well that we have peace with the king
Charlemayne to whom we have made so long time so mortal a war, but since
that my Lord the king you has made this peace: I am content to do to him as
much reverence as to me is possible. For I am delybered to go naked in my
small lynen clothes to the Mountesaynt Michael. And wha^ Reinawd had said this
word: he took leave of king yon and went in to the chamber of the fair lady
his wife, and found there his other two brethren that were with her, and wha^
the lady saw her husbonde come: she came against him and took him between both
her arms by great love and kissed him Lady said Reynawde I ought well to love
you by great reason. For your brother the king you has travailed hm self
right sore for me, and has be sore blamed at the court of Charlemaine for
me, but he has done so much blessed be god that he has made my peace with
the king Charlemaine. And that Rowland and Oliver. Nor all the twelve Peers of
france might never make: he has granted us again all our lands. And all
thus we shall be rich, and shall live al our life in rest and peace, and so
shall we mow help, and give the hauoyre that we have unto the poor knights
that have served all their life truly and well.

THan said the lady. I thank god greatly thereof with all my heart. But tell me
where the concordaunce shall be made, and hyde it not from me if it please you.
Lady said Reynawde I shall tell it you without any fault. Wit that to morrow we
must ride to the plain of Valcolours, and there the peace shall be made but I
and my brethren must go thither without arms but only our swerdes, and upon
mules, berynge roses in our hands. And there we shall find the duke Naymes of
bauyere and Ogyer the Dane and all the.xii Peers of France, that shall receive
oaths, wha^ the lady understood these words: she was so sore an angered thereof
that almost she had lost her wit, and said to Reynawde. Sir if ye will believe
me. ye shall not go one foot there. For the plain of Valcolours are so
dangerous, for there is a roch right high, and there ben four great woods
round about, if ye will believe me ye shall take a day for to speak with
Charlemaine here in the meadows of Mountawban, and ye shall go there mounted
upon bayarde and your brethren with you, and there ye may conferme your
peace, or else continue your war and take two thousand knights and give
them to Mawgis your cosyn which shall keep them in a busshemente upon the
ryuage, if it hap you to have need, for I doubt me sore of treason, wherefore
I pray you that ye keep your self well sure. For I did dream to night a
dream that was fereful and merueilous, for me seemed that I was at the windows
of the great palace, and saw come out of the great wood of Ardeyn well a
thousand wild bores, that had great and hortyble reeth, the which flewe
you and rented your body al in pieces, and also I saw that the great tower of
Mountawban fell down to ye ground, and moreover I saw a shot of adventure,
that smot your brother Alarde so hard that it perced his body through and
through, and that the chapel of Saint Nycolas which is within this castle fell
down to the earth, and all the images that been in it wept for great pit.
And the two au^gelles came down from heaven that hanged your brother Richard
at an apple tree, and then the said Richard cried with an high voice. Fair
brother Reynawd come and help me, and Incontinente ye went there upon your
horse bayarde, but he fell down by the way under you, wherefore ye mightht not
come time enough, whereof ye were full sorry. and therefore good sir I counseyle
you that ye go not there.

Lady said Reynawde hold your peace, for who that believes over much in
dreams: he does against the commandment of God. Than said Alarde by the
faith that I owe to god. I shall never set foot there, nor I another said
Richard, Alas said than Guycharde, if we must go there: let us not depart
thitherwarde as men of counceylle: but let us go there like as prue and worthy
knights, having each of us his arms upon him and well and horseback and not
upon mules: on that our brother Reinawde he well mounted upon baiarde, which
shall may bear us al four at a need, by god said Reynawd ye shall say what ye
will, but I shall go there as I have said what so ever happeth, and than he went
out of his chamber and came to king yon, and said to him. By god I merueill me
much of my brethren, that will not go with me, because they have no horses with
them, and if it please you ye shall give us leave to take each of us a horse
and ye shall keep still your eight earls with you, and we shall go there as ye
have commanded us, I will not do it said the king you, for the king
Charlemaine douteth you to sore and your brethren and your horses, and also I
have given hostages and suretes that ye shall bear no manner of harneys with
you, but only your swerdes as I have told you before, and that ye shall ride
upon mules, and not upon horses. And if ye go there otherwise arrayed:
Charlemayne shall think that I will betraye him, and so shall he destroy al my
land, that shall be the paymente that I shall have for you, I have trauailled
my self full sore for to bring you and your brethren at one with
Charlemaine, and therefore go there if ye will, and if ye will not: leave it.

Than said Reinawd, sir sith that it is so: we shall go there. And than he went
from king yon in to his chamber again, and found his wife that noble lady,
Alard and Richard that asked him how he had done, and if they should have his
good horse bayarde with them? By God said Reinawde I can not have leave to do
so, but my brethren doubt you not, for the king yon is a true prince, and if
he should betray us: he should be sore blamed for it, for he shall make us to
be conduyted by eight of the most great earls of his realm, and god confound
me if I saw ever any evil done by him. Sir said his brethren we shall go
gladly with you, since that ye will have us needs to do so. When they were thus
accorded herto: they went to bed and slept unto the day appeared, and when
Reynawde saw the day: he rose up and said to his brethren. Arise sits and
make us ready for to go there as we should go, For if Charlemayne be sooner to
ye plains of valcolours than we: he shall hapely be angry for it. Sir said his
brethren, we shall soon be ready, and when they were all ready, they went to
the church of saint Nycolas for to hear mass, and when it came to the
offryng: Reynawde and his brethren offered many rich gifts. And after the
mass was done: they asked after their mules and incontinent they mounted upon,
and in their fellowship were eight earls, ye which knew all the manner of
treason. and when they were all mounted they took on their way but the four
sons of Aymon were good to know by the other, for they had on great
mantelles of scarlet turred with ermynes, and bare in their hands roses in
toke^ of peace and also their swerdes for they would not gyrde them. Now god be
with them, for if he keep them not: they been in way of perdycyon and never to
come again to Mou^tawban. when the king yon saw them thus go: he fell down
in a swount more then four times, for the great sorrow that he had at his
heart, for how be it that he had betrayed them so: yet had he great pity of
them, but this that he had done. evil counseyl had made him do it. And than
he be: began to make the greatest sorrow in the world, and said, ha good lord
what have I done? did ever man so great treason as I have done? nay verily
for I have betrayed the best knyghts of the world, and the most worthy and
true.

THan said his folk. Sir ye do not well to make such a sorrow, for Reynawde
is very wise and he shall it perceive right soon. Ha god said the king yon,
were it as ye say, for I should be more glad than if I had won ten of
the best cities of France, for Reynawde is my friend and my brother. Ha Mawgys
how shall ye be sorry wha^ ye shall know this matter. Reynawde did great folly,
when he took not your advise in this thing, for if he had known of it: ye
should not have suffered him to go there. Lords said the king yon I poor
wretch, whether shall I become, if the four sons of Aymon di^? for Mawgis
shall slay me without mercy, and also it is well reason, for who that betrayeth
a another and princypally his friend carnal: ought not to live nor have ever
any worship, but his folk took him up incontinente and began to recomforte
him by many great reasons that they laid before him.

NOw begins the piteous hystory of the four sons of Aimon that went to
their death by the means of the traitor king yon. And because of the treason
that he co^mited against the four sons of Aymon: he lost the realm of
gascoygne the name and the dygnyte thereof, for never since that time was no king
crowned in Gascoygne. Now shall I tell you of Reynawde and of his brethren,
than tode Reynawde and his brethren toward the plain of Valcolours, and as
they toode thitherwardi Alarde began to sing right sweetly and Joyful a new
song, and Guycharde and Rychard did in likewise, but I tell you that no
instrument of music sowned never so melodyouslye as the three brethren did
syngyng to gither, alas what pyty was it of so noble and so worthy knights
that went singing and making Joy to their death, they were as the swanne that
syngeth that year that she shall die, Reynawd went behind them sore thynkyng,
his head bowed down toward the earth, and beheide his brethern that rode forth
making great Joy, and he said, o god what knights be my brethrene that there
been none such in all the world, another so gracyous? And when he had said
this: he set his hands together and heued them up toward heaven all weping,
and said in this manner, good lord by thy glorious and blessed name that
did cast daniell out fro the lions, and delivered Jonas fro the fyshes belly
and saved saint Peter when he cast himself from the sea for to come to the and
pardoned Mary magdalene, and and made the blind to see, and suffered passion
and death upon the cross for our sins, and pardoned Longyus yt smot thee
with a spear in to thy blessed side, wherfro thy blessed blood fell in to his
eyes, and incontinent he recovered his sight thereby, and by thy resurreccion,
keep this day my body if it please the fro death and from prison, and also my
brethren for I wot not where that we go, but me seems that we go in great
peril. And when he had fynyshed his oryson: his eyne wexed were again for
pity that he had, least his brethren should have any harm for love of him.
For it plesed him not well, that they were so bare of their arms.

THan when Alarde saw his brother Reynawde that had his eyne full of teres, he
said to him Ha brother what ayleth you I have sen you in right great peril and
about a hard work, but I saw you never make so ill cheer as ye do now, for
I have seen you weep at this hour. where of I meruail me greatly, for I wot well
for certain yt ye weep not without some great occasion. Than said Reynawde.
Fair brother me ayleth nothing. By ye faith that I owe to you said Alarde ye
weep not for nothing. This is the day yt we should be at one with king
Charlemayne, so pray I you for god my dear brother that ye leave this sorrow,
and let us go forth mereli and bear out a good face as long as we ben alive,
for after that a man is ones deceassed it is no more spoken of him. And this I
pray you brethren that ye sing with us. For ye have so fair a voice that it
is a great pleasure for to hear you sing, when ye be wyllinge to it. Brother
said Reinawde with a good will, sith that it pleases you. And than began
Reynawde for to sing so melodiousli: yt it was a great pleasure for to here
him. So long rode the four sons of Aymon the little pace of their mules,
syngyng and deuisnge among theymselfe: that they came to the plain of
Valcolours. Now will I tell you of the facion of the valey, for wit that if I
telled you not: ye should not may know it. There is a roch right hie and
noyous to go up, and it is enuironned round about with four great forestes
right great and thycke, for the least is there a days Journey to ride through
it, and there be^ four great rivers all about it sore deep, wereof ye gretest
is named Gyronde, the other is called Dordon, the third is named Nore, and the
other Balancon, and there is nothet castle nor town by.xx. mile nighe about
it. And therefore the treason was there devised, for this plain of Valcolours
was far fro all folk, and there was a way crossed in four, the one way was
toward France, the other in to Spain, the other in to Galyce, and the fourth
in to Gascoygne. And at every one of these four ways: was laid a busshement
os.v. hundred men well horsed and armed for to take Reinawde and his brethren
quick or dead, for thus had they sworn it, and promised to king Charlemayne.
Than come there Reinawd and his brethren with their felawshyp of eight earls,
that the king yon of Gascoyne had take to them, the which wist well all the
mystery of this treason. And incontinent Ogier the dane saw them first of
all, the which was all abashed, and said to his folk, fair lords ye ben my
men my subiectts and my friends, ye know that Reynawd is my cosyn, and I ought
not to see his death nor his damage. Wherefore I pray you all that ye will do
him no harm at all, nor to none of his brethren my cosyns. They answered al,
that they should do his commandment with a good will. This ha^gyng: Reynawde
and his brethrene passed by and went in to the mids of the plain.

THan wha^ Reinawd and his brethren were come there, and found no body: they
were of it sore a bashed. And after when Alarde saw this: he called his brother
Rychard and said to him. what is this fair brother I se well that we ben
berraied, for I se you change your color, how think ye? Brother said Richard
I doubt me sore for Reynawd, have no doubt said Alarde. For we shall have
nothing but good. My brother said Rychard I promise you all my heart shakes,
nor never in my days I had not so great fear, for all my here is rise up, whereof
I doubt me sore that we ben betrayed, and that more is: I should not be aferde
if Reynawde were armed and set upon bayarde, and we also, for thus as ben now
we be^ half discomfired. And when he had said thus: he spoke to Reynawde and
said, Brother why do we tarry here since that we have found no body with whom
we should speak? for if.xx. knights were here armed: they should have us where
they would maugre our teeth as bestes, seeing yt we have so many enemies in
France, ye would not believe this that we told you, and also your wife at
Mountawban, whereof I fear me sore that ye shall have no leiser for to repent
you of it. For if our cousin Mawgis had be here with us and that ye had your
good horse baiard: we should not doubt Charlemaine with all his puissaunce of a
straw. I pray you let us go hence, for I promise you it is folly for to abide
here long, for I know well yt Charlemaine has made us to come here as bestes
clothed with scarlet, nor I can not believe none other, but that ye king you
has falsely betrayed us.

CErtes fair brother ye say troth said Reynawde, and I perceive me well of
it now let us go back again all fair and soft, and as they would have
returned: Reynawde beheld a side and saw well a thousand knights armed
com^ng a great pace against them, and Foulques of Morylion came before at the
other, well horsed his shield before his breast and his spear allow in the rest
the great wallop against Reynawd for he was the man in the world that he most
hated. when Reynawde saw com Foulques of Morillon: he knew him well at his
shield, and was so angered for it yt he wist not what to do. A god what shall we
poor siners do I se well yt we must die this day with out doubt. Brother said
Alard what say ye? by my faith said Reinawde I se here great sorrow. Here
come^h Foulques of Morillo^ for to slay us, and when Alard had sen them coming:
it lacked litell that he wexed mad and fell down almost for great anger
that he had of the same, and when Guy charde and Richard saw this: they began
to make great sorrow. For they scratched their visages and pulled their hears.
And when Alarde was a litell assured: he said. Ha fair brethren Guycharde and
Richard, now is the day come that we shall die al through mortal treason, for
I know well tha^ Reynawde has betrayed us: and certes I would never have
thought that any treason should have entered within so noble a man as he is, he
made us come here a yenst our wills and maugre us, because he knows well the
treason. Ha Reynawde the Son of Aimon of Ardeine, and who shall ever trust
any man, when ye that are our brother, and that we take for our lord, have
brought us hither maugre us to our death, and have betrayed us so falsely O
Rychard said Alarde draw out your sword, by god the traytoure shall die
with us. For well ought the traytoure to die that has procured so mortal a
treason, when Alarde had said this: they all three did set hand to their
swerdes and came to Reinawde, for to slay him yrefullye and sore an angered as
lions, for they trowed for very certain that Reynawde had betrayed them,
when Reynawde saw them come thus: he made semblaunte to defend him self, but
lough at them by great love, alas said richard what had I thought. I would
not slay my brother for all the good in the world, and so said Alarde and
Guychard, for they were sore repented of this that they had enterprysed for to
do, and they began all for to weep for pity and cast their swerdes down to
the earth and kissed Reynawd sore weeping. And Alard said. Ha good Reynawd why
have you betrayed us so? we be another normanes nor English nor almaines, but
we be brethren of one rather and of one mother, and we hold you for our lord.
For god brother Reynawde tell us of whence comes this treason, we ben com of so
noble kin of Gerarde of Roussyllon and of Dron of Nantuell and of the duke
Benes of Aygremou^t, and never none of our lignage thought no treason, and how
have ye done so that have procured i^ now against your natural brethern, certes
it is a great fault to you

BRother said Reinawd I have more great pity of you than I have of mine own
self, for I have brought you here against your will and if I had believed you
this misehappe had not come to us. I have brought you here, and I promise you
I shall bring you again from hens with gods grace. Recommende our self to
our lord, and think for to defend us well, and fear not the death for our
worship. For ones we must die without fail. But it is good to get worship.
Brother said richard, shall ye help us? yea said Reinawd doubt not thereof. And
when he had that said, he turned toward the earls and said to them, fair
lords the king you has sent you with us: for to conduyte us, and under the
suertie of you we be com here to lose our lives. And therefore I pray you yt ye
will help us. Reinawde (said the earl of Ansom) It is not for us to bargain
here long, but let us all flee for to save ourselfe and we may, than said
Reinawde by my head ye be all traitors, and I shall smite of all your heads.
Brother said Alard what tarry ye so long, for they been well worthy for to die,
since that they ben traitors. And wha^ Rainawde understood that word of his
brother: he set hand to his sword and smote the earl of Ansom so great a
stroke upon the head that he cloued him to the hard teeth, and it was well
reason, for it was he that cou^seyled this treason to the king you, that was
the reward that he had for the first, when the earl of Ansom was thus slain:
the other seven began to flee, and Reinawd tan after, but he could not run
fast: for his mule was to sore lade of the weyghte of his body, so that the
beast fell doown under him For Reinawd to say the troth was so bygge made and
so great that no horse might bear him but only baiarde. For as it is said
Reinawd had xvi. feet of length and was well shape of body after the greatness.

THan when Reynawde saw him self a ground: he stood up lightlye with his mule
and said, ha Baiard my good horse that I am not on your back armed of al
pieces, for or ever that I should be overcome: I should sell my death full dear.
Alas none ought not to complain my death since that I have purchased it myself.
Brother said Guychard what shall we do? here be our enemies even by us, if ye
think it good: let us adventure to pass over this river and go upon that
high roch, and so we shall may save our self. Go fool go said Reinawde what
say ye? ye wot well that our mules might not run before the horses, what
should avail us for to flee since that we might not save our self? Certes I
should not flee for all the world. I have lever die with my worship: than I
should live with great shame, for he that dies in fleeing: his soul shall
never be saved. Thus as Reynawde spoke to his brother Richard: Alard said to
him brother Reynawde let us light from our mules a foot and shryue our
self the one to the other to the end that we be not overcome by the devil.
Friend said Reynawd ye say well and wisely, and they did as Alarde had devised.
And when they were confessed the one to the other: Reinawde said to his brethern.
Lords let us do such a thing, whereof we shall get worship, since it is so
that we may not escape: let us kylle the^ that come first upon us, and we shall
have advantage upon the other, and gods curse have him that shall feyne
himself.

THan when Alard heard Reinawde speak thus: he colled him with his arms and
kissed him al wepi^g and said to him. Brother we be^ two and two, I pray you yt
the one fail not to help ye other as long that life is in our bodies. Brother
said the other we shall help you with all our might and than they went and kissed
Reinawd by great love, and after wha^ they had kissed each other: they took of
their mantelles and wrapped them about their left arms, and took their
swerdes in their hands and began to cry and called their badges and tokens.
Reynawde cried mou^tawba^. alard saint nycolas. guychard, bala^con. and you
ge^til Rychard, Ardeyn, which was ye badge or toke^ of their father aymo^. wha^
Foulques of morillon saw the four sons of Aymo^ coming toward hi^ al
unarmed and upon mules so boldly: he was all abashed of it. Than he began to
cry and said Reynawde Reynawd ye are come to your death, and I promise you he
yt most loves you has betrayed you, that is the king you, but have
pacye^ce, for I shall set to your neck an halter. Now have you not your horse
Bayard, the which ye have ryden upon wrongfully, now shall you be avenged the
death of Berthelot that ye slew. Reinawd what shall ye do? will ye defend or
yield you? but your defense shall be not worth to you. And if ye make any
semblaunt to defend your self: I shall slay you incontinent.

FOulques said Reinawd ye speak well like a beast, and trow you that I shall
yield me quick to Charlemayne or to you? I shall first smite of your head and
the helm withal if I can rech to you, ye know well how my sword cutteth. By
god Foulques said Reynawd ye are greatly to be blamed for to have given the
counseyll for to make us to be betrayed by the king you, for it is the foulest
craft that a knight may for to do treason. But do as a gentilman ought to
do, to the end that men say not that it is treason, if ye will let us go:
we shall be all four ready to become liegemen of ye king Charlemayne, and I
shall give you my horse Bayarde, the which I gave not for all the gold in the
world, and also I shall give you the strong castle Mou^tawban, and if the king
Charlemayne makes war against you for love of us: we shall serve you with
five hundred knights well armed and well horsed ever more, and if it please
you ye shall save us our lives. And if ye will not do this: do another thing
that I shall tell you for to keep you to be not called a traytoure. Chese.xx.
knights of the best that ye have, and put them in a feeld well armed, upon
good horses, and we four shall fight with them unarmed as we ben upon our
mules, and if your.xx. knights well armed and well horsed may overcome me and
my brethren though we have no harneis upon us: we pardone them our death, and
if god will that we should overcome them: that ye should than let us go free
where we would, it is that I require you for gods love and for your
worship and no more, and if ye do not so: ye shall be taken for an ill knight
all days of your life. By god Reynawd. said Foulques your preaching shall not
avail you nothing, for I have lever to have found you now in this array, than
that I had won an hundred thousand mark of fine gold. Now is your cosyn
the wise Mawgis far from you, he can not give you no couseyle at this hour,
and also all your folk be well far fro you, they shall not give you
socoures, and also I know the goodness of my me^ and that they have promised the
king Charlemain that they shall not fail to assail you worthily, by my faith
said Reinawde and we shall defend our self also to our power. Than said
Alarde to Reynawde, brother what ordenaunce shall we keep? brother (said
Rainawd) we shall kep foot troo and two: ye and Guycharde shall be behind, and
I and Richard shall make the forewarde, and let us smite well hard I pray
you, for the time is now com that we must needs do so, and make we that thing
that shall be left in perpetual memory to them that shall be after us, since that
by no wise we may not escape. Fair brother said Alarde to Guycharde, ye were
well deceived for that ye trowed that Reinawd had betrayed us. I promise you he
would not do it for all the gold of the world. By my faith said than
Guycharde to Alard I am now well whole, since that our dear brother Reynawde
shall be to our help, for as long as he shall be a live: we shall defend our
self, but not after, for though I might chose I would not live after he were
dead. And when he had said this: they meddled themself among their enemies.
Shortly to speak of the four sons of Aimon assembled well against three
hundred good knights, but their courage were nevertheless therefore as long
as they had life in the body: but that they showed unto their enemies a
knights face, when Foulques of Morylion saw Reynawde come: he spurred his
horse with the spurs and bare his spear a low, and went and smot Reynawd by
the mantell of scarlet that was about his arm so great a stroke that his
spear entered through his thygh and ouerthrewe both him and his mule to the
earth. When Alarde saw the stroke: he cried sore and said. Alas we have lost
Reynawde our brother that was al our hope and our secour now may we not escape,
but that we shall be dead or taken, and it is better that we yield us prisoners
at this time: than to defend us any more. For since it is so: our defense
shall help us nothing against so many folk. And when Reynawde understood the
words of his brother, he cried to him with a loud voice and said. Fie upon
you glutto^ what is that ye say? I have no harm yet, but I am al whole as ye
be, thanked be god, and yet shall I tell me full dear or I die. And when
Reynawde had said this: he rose up quickelye and took the spear with both his
hands, and pulled it out of his thyghe with great greef, and after set hand
to his sword. And said to Foulques of Moryllon, knight if ye will do like a
good man: light a foot as I am. And ye shall know what I can do. When
Foulques of Morillon understood him: he turned upon him sore an angered, and
thought for to have smitten him on his head, but Reynawde drew a litell
aside, and went and gave unto Foulques such a stroke upon his helm: that
another iron nor stele might not save him, but that Renawde cloue him in to the
hard teeth and felled him dead to the catthe. And when he saw him fall: he
said unto him. Now unhappy Traytoure that thy soul may have no pardone, but
go to the pyt of hell. And when he had said that: he took the horse of
Foulques of Moryllon the which was right good, and light upon it incontinent
and took his sheeld and his spear that Foulques of Moryllon had shoued through
and through his thyghe and than he said to his brethren. Be ye al sure that as
long as I am a live: ye shall have no harm, but the frenshemen shall say that
they have an ylle neighbor of me. And wit it when he was an horsbacke: he was
not well at ease, because that the styroppes were to short for him. But he had
other things to do, than for to make them longer. And when he was thus set on
horsbacke: he made his horse to run and held his spear allow, and went and
met with the earl Angenon by such manner that he put both iron and wood
through the breast of him so that he must fall down dead fro the horse to the
ground before his foot. And after Reinawd set hand to his sword, and smote a
knighte such a stroke that his helm might not save him, but cleued him to the
teeth. What shall I tell you more? Now wit it that at that time Renawde slew
with his own hands four earls, three dukes and six knights, and after he
began to cry Mountawban with a hye voice. And after his cry: he went and
smote Roberte the lord of Dygeon that was son to the duke of Burgoine so
that the head with the helm he made it lepe to the ground, and after he slew
a another sterke dead, that came to rescue the said lord.

ANd when Rainawde had done this noble prowess: he beheld about him, and
trowed to have seen his brethren than, but he saw none of them, whereof he was
sore abashed. O god said he where are my brethren gone? now be they well
far from me, we shall never come together again. And than came there Alarde
that in likewise had won a horse, the sheeld and the spear, for he had slain
a knight, and had taken his horse, but he was sore hurt. Nevertheless he came
and held side with his brother, and Richard and Guycharde came soon at the
other side. Than Alarde said to Reinawde. Brother be al sure that we shall
never fail you to the death. And when the four brethren were assembled
together again: they began to make so great distruccion of frenshemen, that
none durst abide them. For all they that they hytte: escaped not the death.
when the frenshemen saw this: they were meruailled, and said the one to the
other. By my soul this passes all other wunder. I trow that they ben no
knights: but that they be^ devils, now let us make to the^a sawte both behind
and before, for if they live long: they shall do us great hurt. And when they
were hereto, accorded: they ran all upon the four sons of Aymon so hard
that they parted them would they or not. But Reynawde passed through them al
and brought himself out of the prese, and Alarde after him. And Richard
returned fleeing toward the roche Mountbro^, and Guychard abode there on
foo^e, for the frenshemen had slain his mule under him, and had wounded him
with two speres well deep into the flesh and was taken for prisoner and they
bound him both hand and foot, and laid him upon a litel horse ouerthwarte,
like as a sack of corn so wounded as he was, and I promise you men might well
follow him by the trase, because of the blood that came out of his body, and
so leed him so shamefullye as that it may had be a thief and went all betynge
upon him, saying to him that they led him to Charlemayne, the which should make
him to be hanged for to avenge the death of his dear neuew Berthelot that he
loved so much, ye which Reynawde slew so shamefully playinge at the Chesse.

ANd when Reynawde saw yt his enemies led his brother Guycharde so shamefully:
he wexed almost mad for anger, and called his brother Alarde to him and
said, Fair brother what shall we do? see how shamefully they fare with our
brother Guycharde, if we suffer the^ to bring him forth of this facyon: we
shall never have worship in our days. Brother said Alarde I wot not what we
may best do for to abide or for to go to them. For I tell you that we be no
mo but two, and they be so great nombre of folk that we can do nothing
against them. O god (said Reynawde) what shall I do if the king Charlemaine
make my brother to be hanged? I shall never be at my hertes case, nor I shall
never come to no court, but men shall point me with the finger, and shall say
see yonder is the son of Aymon that let his brother to be hanged to the pyn
tree of Mou^tfaucon, and he durst not succor him. Certes said Reynawde to
Alarde, brother I had lever die first, but if I should rescue our brother fro
death. Brother said Alarde now set your self before and I shall follow you and
after my power I will help you to rescue him. And when Reynawde heard yt: he
cast his sheeld behind him, and habandonned his body all boldly as a Lion,
and cared not how the game should go, for ye saw never wood men hew in a
forest, nor make so great noise as Reynawde made with his sword among his
enemies for he cutted and hewed legs and arms by such wise that no man
should believe it, but they that see it. Thus made Reynawde at that time yt the
Frencheme^ must needs make him way to pass whether they would or no. And mani
made him way for the love of O^ier for they knew well that the four sons of
Aymon were his cosyns. And when Reynawde was passed: he said to them that led
his brother Guycharde. Let go the knight ye ill folks, for ye be not worthy
to touch him, and when they that led Guycharde saw come Reynawde: they were
sore afraid that they put them self to flight and left Guycharde free and
said the one to the other. here comes the end of the world. And wha^
Reynawde saw that they fled: the said to Alarde. Go ye fair brother and
unbind Guicharde our brother and set him upon this horse and give him a spear
in his hand, and come after me, for the traitors ben dyscomfyted. Brother
said Alarde. I shall go where it please you, but I tell you if we part one
from the other: we shall never come together again seeing that we be so few and
so ill armed, but let us keep together, and help the one the other. Brother said
Reynawde ye say well and wisely, and we shall do it. And than they went both
together to Guycharde, and unbound him, and made him mount on horseback ye
sheelde at the neck, and the spear in the hand. Now go there the three
brethern together, and the fourth fights against a great nombre of folk,
that was the valiant Richard, that was the most worthy of all after his
brother Reinawde. But men had slain his mule under him, and was wounded right
sore. But he had slain five earls, and well.xiiii. knights, whereof he was so
sore trauayled and so weary, that he might not all most defend himself no
more, but went round about the roche. And than came gerarde of valcome that
was cosyn to Foulques of Moryllon the which he had found dead, whereof he made
great sorrow, and said. Ha gentyl knight it is great damage of your death.
Certes he that has brought you to this death he is not my friend. Now shall I
avenge me if I may, and than he came to the roche. And when he saw Reynawde in
so great grief: he spurred his horse with his spurs and bare his spear allow
and smote Richard through the mantell of scarlet, that he wrapped about his
lift arm so hard that the spear entered far in his body so much that he
brought him to the earth, and as he drew his spear again: the guts of
Richard came out of ye body into his lap, and the wound was so great that
the liver and the lounges appeared. Than began Gerarde to cry. No ware
dyscoupled ye four sons of Aymo^, for I have slain Richard the hardy
fighter, all the other shall soon be slain or taken, if god give me health.
And I shall bring them unto the king Charlemayne, that shall make the^ to be
hanged at Mou^tfawcon as soon as he has them.

THan when Richard was come a little to his ese: he rose up quyckely upon his
feet, and took his bowelles with both his hands and put them again into
his belie and after set hand to his sword, and came to Gerarde and said to
him in great anger. Thou cursed man thou shall have thy reward anon for that
ye have done to me, for certes it shall not be vmbrayed to Reynawde that ye have
slain his brother, and wha^ he had said thus: he smote Gerarde through the
quyras, and through ye sheelde so great a struck, that he hewed the shouldre
and the arm with all from the body and felled him down dead to the earth before
his feet, and than said to him. Certes Gerarde it had be better for you that
ye had not come hytherwarde, for to the king Charlemayne now shall ye not bear
your boste that ye have slain one of the four Sons of Aymon. And when he
had said that: he fell down in a swonne, and when he was come again to
himself: he began for to wisshe after his brethern, and complained them sore,
saying. O Reynawde fair brother this day shall depart our company. For I
shall never see you, another ye me. O Castle of Mountawban I commend thee to
god that he will by his mercy and pity bring again your lord saufe and
sound of his body. Ha king yon of Gascoygne, why have ye betrayed us? and
taken us to the king Charlemayne: certes ye did therein great syn, and
ashamfull fault, and after he said all weeping. O father king of glory, and
lord of all the world, succoure this day my poor brethren. For I wot not
where they ben, nor of me they may neither have help nor succors, for I am all
ready for to dye.

Now shall I tell you of Reynawde of Alarde, and of Guicharde that faught
strongly against their enemies, as worthy knights that they were. But all
their great faytes of arms should auayled the^ nothing if they had not come
to a narowe way of the Roche, where men might not come to them but a fore. And
when they had be long there: Reynawde began to say to his brother Alarde,
Brother where is become our brother Richard that we saw not of a good while a
go? now think none other but that we shall never see him, for I left him
here by this sapyn tree, when ye and I had so much to do. I pray god if he
be dead that he have his soul. Now I will wit tidinges of him if it be
possible. Brother said Alarde if ye will believe me ye shall abide here, God
pardon him if he be dead, for we may not help him the peril is to great and
I believe that we should die before that eue^ were come. Ha brother said Reynawde
shall we fail to our brother Richard the good knight and worthy? Than said
Alarde, what will ye that we shall do thereto? for as to me I know no remedy
to it. Alas said Reynawde ye speak folyshly, for I should not doubt for fere
of death to wit where he is become And if I should go alone, yet shall I
understand some tidinges of him. Brother said Alarde I promise you if we depart
the one from the other: We shall never see us again together. Brother said
Reynawde other dead or all quick, I shall find him where so ever he be it
may none other be, and when Reynawde had said these words: he spurred his
horse with his spurs, and came at the other side of the roche. And wha^ they
that had chased Richard there for to slay him saw Reinawde come: they smote
hemselfe to flight, and than Reynawde went a little more upward upon the
roche, and found there his brother Richard that lay nyghe dead upon the
ground, and held his bowelles between his hands, and about him were a great
number of folk which he had slain. When Reynawde saw him dead and so sore
wounded: he had of it so great sorrow at his heart that almost he fell down dead
to the ground but he took courage and came nighe his brother and lyghted down
from his horse and kissed him sore weeping and said. Ha fair brother it is
great pity and dommage of you and of your death for certes never man was
worth you, for if ye had come to man's age never Rowlande nor Olyuer were so
prue in knighthode, as ye should have be. Alas now is lost our beauty and our
youth thorough great sin. O good lord who should ever have thought ye onye
treason should have entered into the heart of the king yon? Alas my brother
Richard woe is me for your death, for I am cause of it. Alas this day in the
morning when we departed out of Mountawban we were four brethren al good
knights, now are we but.iii. that been perillousli wounded and al unarmed. Now
God forbed that I should escape sithe that ye be dead upon the traitors. But I
pray god that I may venge your death upon them or ever I deceasse. For I shall
set thereto my good will, and if god will it shall be so. Even thus as Reinawde
made moan over his brother: he beheld behind him and saw come his brethern
Alarde and Guycharde all discomfyted, that cried upon Reynawde. Brother what
do you? com anon and help us for we have great need. And when Richard heard
the voice of Alarde: he opened his eyes, and when he saw his brother Reynawde
before him: he said to him. O brother Reinawde and what do you here? see ye
yonder that roche which is so high and so strong, where as ben many small
stones above, if we might do so much that we climed up there: I believe that
we should be safe from our enemies, for it cannot be but our cosyn Mawgys
knows our disease by this: and he shall come to succor us. Brother said
Reynawde would god we were there now tell me my fair brother how feel ye
your self? think ye that ye may recover health? yea said Richard if ye
escape and else not, for with the sore that I have, I might well dye for sorrow.

ANd when Reynawde heard Richard speak thus: he was right glad of it. So
called he Alard to him and said. Brother take Richard upon your sheelde, and
led him upon the roche, and Guicharde and I shall rowme the way a fore you,
brother said Alarde, doubt not I shall do my power. And than he lighted down
and took up Richard and laid him upon his sheeld, and after he lighted again
on horsbacke and Reynawde and Guycharde leyd him with his brother upon the
horse neck, and after put them self before to break the prece of the
Frencheme^. And they did so much that they came to the roche. But wit it well
that Reynawde made there so great faytes arms, that all his enemies were
meruaylled with all. For he slew at that time well thyrty knights, that never
wild Bore, nor tygre, nor Lion, nor Bear did yt Reynawde made there of his
body. But for to say the truth: Reynawde setted naught by his life, and
ieoparde himself al together, for he was as a man desperate. And when they were
come to the roche, Alarde set down his brother Rychard to the earth. And began
to defend quyckly, but I wot not how they might endure, for they had another
Castle nor fortress, but only the roche.

ALl thus as the three brethern defended theymselfe with great woe. Than came
there Ogier the dane and his folk, and had in his company Magon of Frise with
well a thousand knights, and cried upon Reynawde. Certes knight ye shall be
dead we have sworn your death. This day is the departing yt ye and your
brethern shall suffer death Ye did as fools when ye believed the king You, for
he has put you all to death. When Alarde saw so great folk come: he was sore
an angered, and said to Guycharde. See how great a sorrow is here before us, and
the great nombre of folk that be ready for to slay us four knights. certes if
we were five hundred well armed yet should not we escape, for they ben well armed
and a great quantiti of knights. Surely said Guichard here is a meruaylouse
company, but if God help us now: we ben com to ye end of our days. It is
no great dommage of me another of Richard, but the great dommage is of Reynawde
that is the best knight of the world. And when Alarde and Guycharde had
spoken together: they went to Reynawde and kyssed him full sore weeping, and
said unto him O brother Reynawde give us a gift if it please you for the love
of our lord God. Lords said Reynawde what thing ask you of me? ye know
well enough that I can not help you of no thing, and this day must I needs
see you dye before min eyes.

BRother said Alarde, Herke what we will tell you, and if it please you ye
shall do it. Say on hardely said Reynawde. Brother said Alarde men sayen
comenly that it is better to done one harm: than two I say this because yt if
ye dye here: it shall be great dommage, and the loss shall never be recovered
again, for none shall avenge your death, but though we dye here and not you:
it shall be no great damage, for ye shall avenge us well, and therefore we pray you
sweet brother for all the pleasures that ye would do ever to us, yt ye will go
your ways, and we shall abide here. And when ye death shall come; we shall
take it a worth. This that we say ye may well do: for ye be well horsed, and
ye shall well save your self maugre the French men, if they go to Mountawban,
and when ye be at Mountawban: light upon Bayarde well armed, and bring anon
with you our cosyn Mawgys for to succor us. Brother said Reinawde, ye speak
to folyshlye. Certes I would not do so for all the gold of the world. I
should be sore bad and full unkind if I did so, for I could not spyll my
self souer than for to leave you in so great peril. Other we shall all escape:
or else we shall all dye together, for the one shall not fail the other as long
as we may live, now God that suffered death and passion save us. Thus as
Reynawde spoke to his brethren: came the earl Guymarde to whom God give evil
adventure, and said to Reynawde, knight ye be take and ye must dye with shame
upon this roche. When ye believed the king You ye did great folly. He wrought
great treason when he did sell you to the king Charlemayne that hates you so
much, for ye loved him more, than ye did your cousin Mawgys. He has well
rewarded you for the great love that ye ought to him, tell me Reynawde whether
ye will yield you or defend you? Certes said Reynawde now speak ye for naught,
I shall never yield me as long as I am a live. Reynawde said than, Ogyer what
will ye do? we cannot help you of nothing, other give your self up: or
defend your self, Ogyer said Reynawde, by him that made the world I shall
never yield me. I was never no thief and therefore will I not be hanged, I have
lever dye like a knight than to hang like a thief. Lords said Guimard let us
sawte them, for they shall not may keep long against us. Lords said Ogyer ye
may well sawte the^ if ye will, but by my soul I shall do the^ nothing, for
they ben my cosins nor I shall not help them. For ye shall take them well
without me. Certes said ye French men, we shall than assail them worthily.
Than Ogyer drew himself and all his folk a side, well the length of a bow
shot, and began to make so great sorrow as though all the world had finisshed
before his eyes, and all his sorrow was for Reynawde his cosyn and for his
brethern, and thus as he made his moan: he began for to say. Ha fair cousin
Reynawde it is great pity of your death. And I unhappy man that am of your
kynne suffer you to dye before mine eyes, and yet I cannot help you, for I have
it promised to Charlemayne, nor I ought not for to break mine oath. But the
historye tells that Ogyer duaange himself greatly that day, And through his
purchase the four sons of Aymon escaped. For if he would have put pain to
it: they should not have escaped by no manner but as men said. True blood may
not lie.

BEfore the roche were four Earls, for to sawte the four Sons of Aymon, and
made them much a do. For their folk sawted the^ in four parties. Whereof
Reynawde kept the two parts: and Alarde and Guycharde kept the other tweyne.
For Richard lay down upon the earth sore wounded, as I told you before. And
yet was Guicharde wounded sore through the thye whereof he had bled so long yt
ye was feynt and fell down to the earth. And wha^ he saw that he might no more
defend: he began to call upon Reynawde and said. Ha Reynawde fair brother, let
us yield us I pray you, for I nor Richard may no more help you. Brother said
Reynawde what say you? now show ye well that ye be ferdfull, but I let you wit
that if I trowed to escape other for Gold, or for Silver or for City or for
Castelles, or my horse Bayarde that I love so much: I should have yield me
prisoner to day in ye morning. For ye wot well that if we ben take that all
the gold that is in all the world save us not fro hanging, or some other
shameful death, and therefore I will not yield me by no manner of wise. A man
that wylbe valyaunte ought to defend himself for to be whole. Ha Richard
succor us for the love of Jesus, for we have well mistre: we ben another
Norma^s nor Bretons, but we ben all of one father and of one mother. Now ought
we well to help each other with all our power for our worship, for other wise
men should say that we ben bastardes, and of an ill father. ye say truth
said Guicharde. But ye would not believe how feeble I am, for I am wounded to
the death.

Certes said Reynawde, I am sorry for it, but I shall defend you as long as
life is in my bodi, who had seen than the noble knight Reinawd take up the
great stones, and cast the^ upon his enemies: ye would not have said that he
had not be wounded nor trauayled of nothing. When Richard (that lay a ground
thus wounded as I have told you above) saw and heard the great noise that they
that sawted the roche made: he took up his head and said to Reynawde. Brother
I shall help you. But cut me some of my sherte, and I shall bind my side and
wound so that my bowelles may not issue out of my beli and than I shall set me
to mi defense and shall help you with all my heart. Than said Reynawde, now art
you well worth a true man. And when Guycharde understood him: he was a shamed
and took again strength in him beyond his power and came to the defense and
said with a high voice Ogier fair cousin what do you to your lynage? Certes it
shall be a great shame to you if ye succor us not, for the fault that ye do to
us: shall be laid unto you in every place where ye go, to let us dye thus we
that been your kynnesmen, the best of all the world, save Reynawde and ye shall
do like a true man, and as for us other: it makes another less another more.
When Ogier understood these words: he was sorry for it, that no man might more,
and would have give a great thing for to have delivered them. And said that he
would do with all his heart all that he might do for them. And tha^ Ogyer
spurred Brayforde with his spurs and came to the roche with a staff in his
hand, and said to the^ that sawted the roche: wythdraw your self a little
till I have spoken with them a little, for to wit whether they will give them
self up or no. For it is better that we have the^ quick than dead. Sir said
the French men we shall do your commandment. But we leave them with you to
keep in the name of the king Charlemayne. Ha god said Ogier I never thought
treason, nor I shall not begin yet. And than he came more nighe the roche than
he had be, and called to him the four Sons of Aymon, and said to them.
Fair cosyn rest you, and take again your brethe, and if ye be hurt: wrappe up
your wounds, and make good garnisshinge of stones, and so defend your self
nobly of al your power, for if ye king Charlemayne may have you: ye shall never
have pardonne, but he shall make you to be hanged and strangled, and therefore ye
must needs keep your self well. For I promise you if Mawgis know of it: he
shall come to soccoure you, thus shall ye escape. and other wise not. Cosen said
Alarde, ye shall have of it a good reward if ever we may escape, ye say true
said Reynawde. For if I may escape by god that suffered death and passion for us
upon the Cross, all the gold of the world shall not save him but I shall slay
him with mine own hands, for I hate him much more than I do a stranger. For
he that should help and defend me against all men it is he that does me harm
Cosyn said Ogyer I may not do thereto, so help god my soul. For ye king
Charlemayne made me swear before all his barons that I should not help you in
no manner of wise. And of this that I do, I am sure ye the king Charlemayne
shall conne me no thank. Brother said Alarde Ogyer tells you troth. And
also it was well troth that Ogyer was repreued thereof for treason, for
charlemaine called him traitor before al his barons. Than Reynawde bou^^e the
wou^des of his brethren as well as he could. But the wound of richard was so
greefully to see that it was pity to behold, for all the entrayles appeared
out of his body. And when he had lapped them al: Alarde wrapped the wound
that Reynawde had in the thyghe, and when they had rested themself a little
Reynawde stood up and went upon the roche for to gather stones to defend them
self. And garnysshed there with their defense where his brethren should stand.
When the Frencheme^ saw ye Ogyer the Dane made there to long a soiournynge:
they began all to call and cry. Ogyer ye make there to long a Sermon, tell us
if they will yield them or no, or if they shall defend themself. Nay said
Ogyer as long as they have life in their bodies. By my soul said the French
men than go we sawte them efte again. Than said Ogier I promise you I shall
help them with all my power. When the Earl Guymarde heard Ogyer speak so: he
went to him and said. We commau^de you in the kings name of France that ye
come to the battle with us against the four sons of Aymon as ye have
promised and sworn, and for doubt of you many a lord is here in your company
that will not fight. Lords said Ogyer for god mercy, ye know well al ready they
ben my cosyns germanye. I pray you let us withdraw our self a back, and let
them be in peace, and I shall give each of you large goods, Ogier said the
french men we shall not do so, but we shall bring them prisoners to the
king Charlemayne that shall do with them his pleasure, and also we shall tell
him what ye have done. Whereof he shall conne you little thank all his life.
And after when Ogier understood these words: he was sore an angered and said
by great wrath. By the faith that I owe to al my friends if there be any of
you so hardy that take Reynawde or any of this brethern for to deliver them to
king Charlemayne I: shall smite of his head, what some ever come after it.
Ogier said ye Earl Gu^ymarde we shall not leave therefore for to take them right
shortly. And when we have them: we shall see who shall take them from us, for we
shall well can show this to the king Charlemain. And than they began to sawt
the roche again. Wit it that Reynawde and his brethern defended themfelf full
nobly. But when Reynawde saw this great multitude of folk that came for to
sawte them: he began to say. Ha Mawgis my fair cosyn where are ye now that ye
know not this myshap? for ye would come anon to help us: but ye know it not,
whereof I am evil content. For I was a fool and over hasty that I spoke not
to you of this matter before that I came here. Ha Bayarde if I were upon your
back I should never enter wtin this roche for fear of the frenchemen, but ye
king Charlemayne should lose here of the best knights of his company, and
when he had said this: he began to weep full tenderly for the love of his
brethern, yt he saw so sore wounded and and so werye. Than the Frenchemen
sawted them efte as strong again and I promise you if it had not be the
great prowes of Reynawde: they should have been taken at that time by fine
force. When the sawtinge was finisshed: Reynawde set himself upon his defense,
for he was so weary that if he had gone he should have fallen down to the
earth, so weke he was and that was no marvel: for they had so sore trauayled
him, and had suffered so many torments and terrible sawtes that it was wunder
yt they could endure so long.

ANd when Ogyer the Dane saw his Cousin so sore tormented: he took himself to
weep tenderly. And thus as he wept: he bethought him self of a great wisdom
and called to him a knight of his that was named Gerarde and said to him, have
for god mercy of me. and but if ye do that I shall tell you: I am dishonored
for ever more. Sir said Gerade tell me what it please you for it shall be do
though I should lose my life. Gramercy said Ogier, now shall I tell you what I
will that ye do, take with you.xl. knights of the best of my felawship, and
go lightly to ye mo sit Hosy, and keep your self thereupon, and behold toward
Mountawban all ye right way that no body come but ye see him, for if Mawgys may
wit by any way the misfortune of his cosyns: I promise you yt he will come to
succoure them, and shall give us much a do, so that ye most hardy shall be
sore afraid, sir said gerarde this yt ye have said: shall be well done, and
than he took.xl. of ye best knights of his company and went to the mount
Hosye, where they made not well their watch for the profit of the frenchemen.
Ye ought here to wit ye Ogier found this manner to send his me^ forth, but only
ye Reynawde and his brethern should not have a do with so many folk, and
thought not of that that happed.

But now leueth here the hystory to speak of the four sons of Aymon that
were in the roche mou^tbro^ And also leueth to speak of Ogier the Dane, and of
the other folk that Charlemayne had sent, and returns to speak of Godarde the
secretary of the king Yon that had red the letters where the treason was
contained al plainly.

How after that Godarde the secretory of the king Yon had rehearsed all the
treason of Mawgis, that the king Yon had done to his cosins. Mawgis brought
such a succoures to Reynawde and to his brethern, yt he saved them from death
by his great wisdom. Capitulum.x.
depiction of an armoured figure with sword and shield, two knights on
horseback, two other male figures, and a decapitated body

NOw shows the hystory that when Godarde saw Reynawde and his brethern go to
their death thorough so false a treason: he had of it great sorrow and pity,
and he was right sorry for it, for two pryncipal causes, whereof the one was for
his master the king Yon, that had wrought that shameful treason: and the
other was for the great pity and damage yt it was for to make die so pitiously
such worthy knights as the four sons of Aimon were. So began he to weep
pitiously, and thus as he wept, came there Mawgys the cosyn of the four sons
of Aymon that went to the kechyn for to haste the meat, for the king Yon
would eat, to the which men made good cheer, because they knew not the
treason that he had done. When the clerk saw Mawgys: he called him, and said
to him. Ha Mawgys how it is ill with you? for if god put no remedy in you ye
have lost that thing yt ye most love in this world that is Reynawde and his
brethern for the king Yon has betrayed the^ shamefully. And than he showed to
him all the treason, when Mawgys understood these words: he was all out of his
wits and said to the clerk Godarde for god go away fro me, for all my
limbs shaken for anger nor I cannot stand upon my feet, for mi heart tells
me that Reinawde and his brethern ben dead. Certes said Godarde ye sai troth.
For the lettre shows that Ogyer the dane and Foulques of Morillon are set in
a bussheme^t with a great number of folk in the plain of Valcolours and
Reynawde and his brethern are gone thither al unarmed by the counsel of king
Yon, and thus they cannot defend, but they must be dead or taken. Wha^ Mawgis
understood this: he was sorye for it that he fell down in a swoune to therth,
and at the falling that he made he brake all his brows. And when he was com
again to himself, he was so sorry yt he wist not what he should do. So took
he a knife and would have shoued it in his breast, but he might not for Godarde
took him by the hand and said to him. Ha gentle knight have mercy upon you,
kill not your self, for your soul shall be dampened for it, but light a
horsbacke and take with you all the men of arms that been within and the good
horse bayarde that renneth so fast, and go there as your cosyns ben gone as
soon as ye may. And when ye com there, ye shall see anon if ye can help them
or not, for if they ben alive: ye shall succor them right well. Godarde said
Mawgys your counsel is right good, and tha^ he began to weep and said. Ha noble
knight Reynawd it is great dommage if ye be dead, but I make my vow to God
that if ye and your brethern be dead: I shall never live two days after you.
And than Mawgys without any noise or onye word to be made of this to king Yon
nor to his sister the wife of Reynawde: command all the soldiers of the
castle to be ready in arms lightly, and when the knights understood him: they
took their harneys on in contynent as they were wo^t to do. And when they
were all armed they came al to the lowest part of the palace and presented
themself, and when Mawgys saw them: he showed to them all the treason that the
king you had done to Reynawde and to his brethern.

THen when the Knights of Reynawde understood this: they began to make such
sorrow that it was pity for to see, and wisshed after the noble knights that
were gone to their death, and were sore desperate that they would almost have
killed them self. For the one wysshed after Reynawde and the other after
Alarde the other after Guycharde and the other after Richard, and said. Ha
valiant and prue knights it is great damage of your death, for certainly al
ye world shall be ye worse therefore. Alas and who shall give us now the fair
arms and the good horses yt ye were wont to give us, thus as they were making
this great sorrow: mawgis said to ye palfrainier yt kept Bayarde, freende go
and set the sadle upon Bayarde and I shall bring him to Reynawd, sir said the
palfraynier. I may not do it, for Reynawde my master commanded me when he
went that I should not suffer no body to light upon it till he were come
again, wha^ Mawgys understood the answer of the palfraynyer: he was wroth,
and smote him with his fyste so great a stroke that he cast him at his foot
before him and after went himself to the stable where Bayarde was. When Bayarde
saw Mawgis: he began to shrink his ears and smote with his forfeete so
strong that no body durst go nighe him, but the palfraynyer that tended upon
him, and when Mawgys saw that Bayarde played so he took a staff and smote
bayarde upon the head so yt he made him kneel to ye earth. And when bayarde
saw he was so curstly dealed with all: he was aferde least he should be yet more
shrewdely handled and so he held himself still, and Mawgys cast the sadle
upon him and bridled him. And wit it that when Mawgys was upon bayardes back:
he was well like a valiant man and a hardy knight, for he was one of ye fairest
knights of the world and one of the best, and the most subtle of the
world. And when Mawgys and al his folk were al ready a horse back well armed:
they went out at the gate fawcon. And they might well be about five thousand
men well horsed and well armed, and.vii hundred good archers yt never would go
back for no doubt of death by any manner, and they set themself to the way,
not by the right way: but went through ye wood al a couerte with great
diligence, and always Mawgys went wisshyng after reynawde and after his
brethren, for he wyste not if they were dead or a live, and said to himself.
Ha Reynawde God be this day with you, and keep you and your brethren fro death
and fro prison. But now if the french men keep not themself well: they shall
have such a neighbor and so cruel that they shall be soon weary of it and
shall sore repent. Now shall we leave to speak of Mawgis yt brought succors
to Reinawde to the plain of Valcolours: and we shall show of Reynawde and of
his brethern yt were at roche Mou^tbron full of woe and sorry, for they saw
themself in great peril. Al thus as Reynawde did rest himself upon the
defense of the roche and thought in himself what he might do: he turned his
sight toward the wood and saw come Mawgis with his folk the sheelde at the
neck the sword in the hand and mounted upon Bayarde, wit it that bayarde
went not the little pase but went like a swalowe, for at every lepe that he
made he lept thirty foot of ground. And when Reynawde saw Mawgys come with
so great folk and so fair a company: all his body sheuered all sodeynlye for
great joy, and forgot all the great sorrow and torment that he had suffered all
the day and said to his brethern. Brethern be merye and be not dysmayed of
nothing, for here comes Mawgis to succor us with great nombre of folk, now
he shows well that he is our kynsman and a good friend, blessed be he of god
that has told him the danger that we were in. Brother said Alarde is it
troth that we shall have help anon? yea s^id Reinawde by the faith that I
owe to you. Certes said Alarde now complain I not. And when Richard that
lay with his bowelles between his hands under stood this word: him seemed that
he dreamed this that he heard which his brethern said, for he was al ready
brought as one that had lost his brain, by cause of the great sore that he
felt and forced himself so that he ryghted himself upon his buttocke bu^ it
was with great pain, and said to his brother Reinawde me seems that I have
heard named Mawgis or else it is come to me by a visyon, brother said
Reinawde by my faith we have socours of Mawgis that brings to us all the
power of Mou^tawban. Brother said Richard for god show me him. And than
Reynawd took him between his arms and showed him Mawgis that came riding
upon Bayarde as fast as tempest, when Richard saw mawgys: he was so glad
that he fell in a swoune between his brothers arms. And when he was come
again to himself: he said. Now am I whole for I feel another ill another sore,
brother Reinawd said Alard, what shall we do? for if the frenshme^ perceive
the coming of Mawgis: they shall flee, and I would for no good that they should
do so, for I would that we were first avenged upon them for the great hurt
that they have done to us, but let us do one thing that I shall tell you. Let
us go down to the foot of the roche and begyne the battle, and while that
they shall fight with us: Mawgis shall be come, and by all thus they shall not
escape us, brother said Reinawde ye say well and we shall do so, and than
Reinawd, Alard and Guicharde went down to the foot of the roche, and the
litell Richard bod above upon the roche for he could not move another help
himself.

REinawde came down from the roche with his two brethren, And when the
frenshemen saw them: they began to say the one to the other. Here comes the
sons of Aimo^ that will yield themself prisoners, now let us not kylle them
but take we them for to bring them alive to the emperor Charlemayne. And when
they had said this: they began to cry. Reynawde but if ye will die shortly:
yield your self and if ye do it with good will: we shall all pray Charlemain
that he have mercy upon you. When Ogier heard them speak thus: he wend it had
be troth that Reinawde and his breth^^n would have given themself up as
prisoners. So was he full sorry for it, and spurred brayforde with the spurs
and came against Reinawd and his brethren and said to them: knights I hold
you now for fools that ye have left your roche that was the saving of your
life, this day shall ye be hanged with great shame, and yet I can not help you,
for I should be blamed of Charlemain. Ogier said Reinawde we ben not such
fools as ye wene, but I will that ye flee. For by the faith that I owe to the
old Aymon my father if ye tarry any while here ye shall not be wise, for if I
can reche unto you. I shall show what I can do.

THis hanging: that Reinawd spoke to Ogyer: Ogier be held toward the right
way that came to the wood and saw folk come to Reinawd that Maugis brought,
and was all before mounted upon Bayard that came fast. And when Ogier saw come
thus the folk of Reinawd in great number: he knew them well, and was right
glad of it, and his heart rored in his belly for Joy, and righted himself up
in his sadle well half a foot and said to his folk. Fair lords what shall we
do? the devil has told Mawgis that we be here, he comes ryding upon
baiarde and brings with him a fair company, certes if we were.xx. thousand
yet were we not able to fight with them, and ye shall see this day that the
sorrow shall return upon us. This hangyng came Mawgis with all his fellowship,
and there where he saw Ogier: he came to him and said. Ogier I hold you for a
fool because that ye came here to work treason. I challenge of you Reinawd
and his brethren, and am come here to be their surety. By god Ogier it
longs not to you for to betray thus Reynawd and his brethren, for ye be of
his lignage but ye have ill showed it to him, your father wrought never treason,
and I meruayll me sore how ye would grant to it, your father left you in
France for a pledge at saint Omers to Charlemain, whose man ye are, paying to
him every year four penny weight of gold. Ogyer ye be desended of damp
Richard, of Rousillon, of Dron of Nantuel, of the duke Benes of Aygremounte,
al these were brethren and good true men and faithful knights, and Aimo^ of
dordon was their brother and is father to Reinawd, this know ye well and ye
will be other than was your lygnage whereof I defy you to the death for I hate
you utterly. When Mawgis had said this word: he spurred bayard with his
spurs and smot Ogier in the shield so hard that the sheld nor his harneys
could not save him but that he made him a great wou^d in his breast, and of
that stroke flough the spear in pieces, when Ogier saw that he was so sore an
angered for it that: he wexed almost mad, and would have gone upon Mawgys but he
might not. For wha^ baiard smelled his lord: he ran mightily toward him, would
he or no, and when he was come before Reinawd: he kneeled before him, and
Maugis lighted from him and came to Reinawde and kissed him full swetly, and
after he kissed Alarde, and Guicharde, and than said, where is the little
Richard? For men held him for one of the most hardy of the world Cosyn said
Reinawde he is there above sore wounded that I wot not whether he be dead or
alive, cosyn said Mawgys can not he move him self? it is not time to speak so
long said Reinawd, but let us se who shall do best, and give me mine arms,
with a good will said Maugys, and than Reinawde armed him and lyghted upon
bayarde the shield at the neck and the spear in the hand, and wha^ he had
said this: he spurred Baiard with his spur, and lept at every tym me.xxx.
foot of length. When Reynawde saw himself upon bayrad: he was right glad,
for he trowed never to have set upon his back again, and when he saw
himself thus horsed and armed with his own armures: so held himself more
sure, than that he had be in the master tower of Mountawban, and than he
made a course and ran upon Ogier and smote him so heard that he made him
light fro the sadle, and bare him fyerslye to the ground. And when Reynawde
saw Ogyer a ground: he lyghted a foot and took the horse of Ogyer and
brought it to him again, and held the styroppe and made Ogier to light upon
braiford again, and than Reinawd said to him, Cosyne Ogyer now have ye the
reward of the goodness that ye did unto us, but certes this that ye have don ye
did it as a traytoure and an ill kynsmanne, therefore keep you from me for I
defy you, and by him that made the world I shall spare you no more, for ye
are slaundred.

COsyn Reinawde said Ogyer and we shall keep us fro you doubt ye not. Who
than had be in that place: he should have seen how Reynawde had meddled him
self vygoriously among the frenshemenne, and might well say that he was a
knight prue and valiant. And tha^ came Mawgys upon a another horse that he had
recovered and spurred him with his spurs, and came to ye earl Guymard and
smote him thorughe the sheeld so that he shoued his spear through and through
his body, and feld him down dead to the earth. And when he had given that
stroke: he cried Mountawban clear mount, and after he said in this manner, free
knights smite upon this frenshemen that would slay the best knights of the
world, they have well showed great worthiness when they be com hither in great
number for to fight against four knights unarmed, but they shall repent
them of their bargane right sore or that two hours been a go, and therefore
leye strongly upon them and as hard as ye can, for if Ogyer escape us: we be
dishonored, and than began the strife fell and cruel and many a frensh man
was cast down to the earth. For they might not endure the great merueylles of
arms that Reinawd and his brethren made. And when the frenshmen saw that they
could not withstand no longer: and saw the great dommage and hurt that
Reynawd, his brethren and Mawgys bare to them: they put theymselfe to flighte
and Ogier with them toward the river of Dordonne, and Ogyer passed it over
upon his horse braiford, and when he was come at the other side of the river:
be lyghted a foot, and Reinawd called in a scorn and said to him. Ogyer I
trow ye be become a fyssher, have ye eeles or sawmons? I give you leave to
choose whether ye will come again at this side: or that I go to you at that
side, and if ye come again at this side: I shall keep you safe from all men
but of me only, or else make me sure fcom Charlemaynes folk and I shall
just with you, and after said to him. Ye whoreson false knave ye have falsed
your faith to Charlemayne, for ye be my cosyn german And how had ye the
heart for to see us be murdered in your presence and that ye defended us not
ayenste all men, and ye come your self for to slay us by treason. Certes Ogyer
ye have done amys greatly. But thanked be god ye leave with us behind you a
good pledge. For here abides with us Foulques of moryllon, and the earl
Guimard, the which shall never make us no war and more tha^ vi. hundred of
your frensh knights, evil tidinges ye shall bear of them to Charlemaine and
to Rowlande, and ye shall give them an ill reconing of your men. And gods
curse have they if they make not you to be hanged as a thief by the neck.

Then were the frenshemen sore abashed when they heard Reynawde repreue Ogier
so, whereof they were glad and said together well find ye now the reward of
your goodness, if ye would have done your devour: the four sons of Aymon had
be taken. And when Ogyer saw himself thus repreued of the one part and of the
other: he was right sorry for it. And than they left him upon the river side
of Dordon, and abode with him but.x. men. And when Ogier saw that all his
company had left him: he knew well that they did so for dispite, than said
he all by himself. Fair God of heaven I am well worthy to be served thus. And
the proverb maye-well be rehearsed for a truth, that says. Often happed evil
for a good turn. When Ogier had said this: he cried and said to Reynawde. O
mad best ye blame me wrongefully and without a cause, for ye and your brethern
should have be hanged by this without any pardonne, nor Mawgys had never come
here time enough, whereof ye have called me traytoure, but ye lie falslye. For
I never did treason nor never shall if God will, ye have also called me
fissher, now ought I well to wexe mad all quick when such a glutton does to
me so great outerage, but by the faith that I owe to all my friends, but if I
feared other than you: I should go give you such a stroke thoroughe the
sheeld that ye should say it is a stroke of a master. Than said Reynawde,
Ogier ye speak well at your ease, for ye shall do nothing at all of that ye
say least your lymmes should be hurt, by my berde said Ogier I shall. And
than he broched brayforde with the spurs and put himself to swyme over the
river. And when he was come to the plain ground: he made him ready for to
iouste as were as he was. And when Reynawd saw Ogier so ill arrayed for to
fight: he had pity thereof, and said to him. Cousin I have at this hour no will
for to fight, and therefore go your ways again, for this day ye shall not be
defoyled by me, now know I well yt ye have helped me. Reynawd (said Ogier)
mock not with me, ye have called me traitor before mani knights, if I went
my way again: men might say to Charlemain that I had betrayed him falslye. My
spear is yet al whole, it were a great shame to me but I brake it upon you or
upon one of your brethern. For Foulques and the earl Guimard should complain
in hell upon me, and of the other part I should have none excuse toward the
king Charlemain if I went thus away, for ye have well slain four hundred
knights of ours, wherefore I say cor a conclusion that I shall not go my way,
but that I meddle first with you, for ye wot well that if I went thus my way:
the king Charlemaine should bear me some dishonor for it, and he should
have reasone and also he should make me to be headed, and therefore I will fight
with you, for certes I have lever die than to return thus to him, and if God
has ordained that ye shall smite of my head: I pardone you my death. for if
I can overcome you: I shall bring you to the king Charlemaine what someuer
come of it.

ANd when Reynawde heard Ogyer speak so: he wexed all mad for anger and said
by wrath, Ogier I defy you to the death and keep you fro me, and you of me
said Ogyer. And when they had defied each other so Reynawde spurred Bayarde and
Ogyer brayforde their good horses and ran the one upon the other so strongly
that the earth trembled under their feet. And when came for to lay the speres
allow: they hytte each other so hard that they brake their speres, and after
their speres were broken: they recou^ted each other with their sheeldes and
gave each other so great strokes that they both fell down to the earth over
their croper of their horses and were sore wounded. And when the two good
knights saw theimselfe at the ground: they rose up quickly and set hand
to their swerdes and began to make so hard meddling that it was marvel. But
herke of their horses. Wit that what^ Bayarde and brayforde saw their masters
at the ground: incontinent they went the one to the other, and began to byte
each other and cast their feet the one upon the other. When Ogyer saw that: he
was full sorry for it. for he knew well that bayard was the stronger, so ran
Ogyer thither the sheelde at his neck and his sword in his hand, for he would
help his good horse Braiford, for he was afearde that bayarde should have
killed him. When Reynawde saw this: he cried and said, what is it Ogyer that
ye will do? it is not the work of a knighte to smite a beast, and well me
seems that ye have enough to do of me without ye beat not my horse: Than
Reinawde smot Ogyer so great a stroke upon his helm: that he feld him down
unto the ground, but the stroke slyded a side and kut asunder all that it
^ought well an hundred maylles of his flankarde, and wounded him sore upon his
hyppe, and if the sword had not turned within Reinawdes hand: Ogier should
never have eaten bread, and when Reinawd had given to him that stroke: he
said to him. Ogier le^ alone Bayarde: for ye have enough a do with me. I
believe that I have appaired your helm, for I se your visage that is sore
pale. And when Ogier felt himself hurt: he wexed almost wood for anger, and
returned to Reinawd with his sword Cortyne and said. A cortine that so much
I have loved thee and certes it is well reason, for ye be a good sword and in
many places ye have well helped me and many a proud man overthrown. And when
I went with ye king Charlemaine at Estbroughe in Almayne, Rowlande, and Oliver
did assaye their swerdes at Petro^, and I smot after for to assaye you. And ye
kutted thereof well half a foot and there I brake you whereof I was right sorye.
But for the goodness that I know in you, for to amend again and therefore ye be
ca^^^d corten, and but if ye avenge me now of this glutton: I shall never have
no trust to you. And tha^ he smot Reynawd upon his helm so hard that he made
him reele. And when Ogier saw Reinawd thus arrayed: he said to him, by god
Reinawde I have yield you again that ye had given me, we be now quite, will
ye begin a fresh? by my faith said Reynawd yea, for I desire more to fight
than I do any other thing. And than they went and ran the one upon the other
and began an another medlynge, but than came there, Alarde, Mawgys, and
Guycharde and all their folk. And when Ogier saw them come: he was wroth
and sorye for it, and so want he again unto braiforde his good horse and
lighted upon him, swymmed again over Dordon and when he was over: he abode
still at the ri^er side and lyghted down to the earth, but he had no sadle
upon his horse, for the girthes brake wha^ he Iousted with Reinawde. When
Reynawde saw Brayforde saddellesse: he called to Ogyer, and said Ogier come
fetch your sadle, for it shall be to you a great shame if ye ride thus, and
thank our lord that ye be thus departed fro me without any more harm, for
if we had tarried a litell longer together. I would have brought you into such
a place where ye were never, for the king Charlemaine your lord should never
have rescued you in time. Reinawde said Ogier, ye threten me of fear, it
longs not to a good knighte to threaten one so, but I wot well that if it had
not be your folk that have succored you: I would have brought you to king
Charlemaine or even. Ogier said reinawde ye have well showed that ye be a good
knight that passed the river of Dordon, for to come fight with me: but shall
ye tarry there for me till I pass over at the other side upon my horse bayarde,
yea upon my soul said Ogier, and if ye do it: I shall say that ye be the
best knight of the world. when Reinawde understood that word: he spurred
bayarde with the spurs and would have passed over dordon, but Mawgis, Alard,
and Guicharde let him, and would not suffer him to go, but took him by the
brydell, and Alarde said to him Ha fair brother and what is this that ye will
do? ye be over hastye, for who that does you good: he leseth well his time,
ye know well and Ogyer had not be: we should have been dead this day, and the
succors of Mawgys had helped us but litell. Let Ogier be in peace I pray
you, for there is not a better knighte in the world than he is one, and than
cried Alarde to Ogier. Fair cosyn go to god, for ye have well helped us, when
Alarde had spoken to Ogyer: he returned him to his brother Reynawde and said
to him. Fair brother me seems it were good that we should turn back again
for to wit how our brother Richard doothe that abides upon the roche
Mountbron so wounded as ye know. Let go our enemies with shame enough for we
have domaged them right sore. Than called Ogier to Reinawde, and said, ye
have discomfited us, but by my fathers soul, we shall com again so great
folk upon you that we shall bear to you great harm and so shall we take the
proye, the which ye shall not dare defend.

Now threten al fair said Reinawde, for we have such a castle where we dare
well abide the king Charlemaine, and you at any hour that ye come, and also
I tell you for certain that or ever three days be passed ye shall never take
us for all that ye can do. And how someuer the game goes, the loss has
ever be upon you unto this time. And also ye shall bear no good tidinges to
the king Charlemaine. And when Ogier had spoken enough unto Reinawde: he
spurred braiford and went after his folk that had left him and he rode so
long that he came to Mountbandell and lighted down before the tente of the
king Charlemaine. And when Rowland and Oliver saw come Ogier thus wounded and
making so evil chere: they trowed that there had be a battle and that
Ogier had taken Reynawd and his brethrene, and so they did call the Duke
N^imes, Solomon of Breten, Richard of Normandye and the earl Guidellon. And
when they were all assembled: they said the one to the other. Poor unhappy
and what shall we do? this day shall we see hanged the four sons of Aymon,
they be cosins to us al, and if the king Charlemain makes the^ to be hanged:
we be dishonored for ever. And when the king Charlemayne saw come Ogier: he
said to him, Ogier where ben the four sons of Aymon? have ye taken them, or
slain them, or remysed them for prisoners? Sir said Ogier all fair and
foftlye, wit it that they been no children: but they are the best knights of
the world, and they be alive. I tell you sir that we found them in the plain
of Valcolours, all four clothed in scarlet furred with ermines and upon mules,
and bare in their hands flowers, and roses, well has the king of Gascoygne
kept his covenant to you, for he has sent them forth in such manner as he
promised to you, but the worthynes and the prowes was such: that they changed
their mules to good horses and recovered both sheelde and spear. And when
Reinawde had gotten a horse: he slew Foulques of Moryllon first of all, and
mounted upon his horse, but at the last they found a roche coruen after the
manner of a cave that is a strong place, where they defended themsele a long
while, and Richard one of their brethren had been slain, and the other three
should have be^ other taken or slain, and if Mawgis had not come there to
succoure them mounted upon bayard and brought with him.v. thousand knights
which have discomfited us and have slain the Earl Guymarde.

HA said themperaur Charlemaine is it true that they been so escaped? sir said
Ogier, yea verelye, when the king understood that Reinawd and his brethern
were escaped: he was right wroth and full angry for it and said. A good lord of
glory, how am I shamed for four glutto^s? certes this weries me sore, but no
force let them do the worst that they can for if they have escaped me now: they
shall not escape me another time, sir said Ogier wit it, but if Mawgis had not
be: they could not have escaped, Gods curse have he for it said Charlemaine
and an evil year, for often has he helped them against me, and so I wot well
that if I held Reinawde and his brethren within my prison. Mawgis should
deliver them out, and therefore I hate him to death, whereof I pray out lord
that I die not till I be first avenged of it, sir said Ogier by the faith that
I owe to you. Reinawde gave me so great a stroke that the corner of my helm
fell down wythall to the earth, and I promise you I was well glad wha^ I was
escaped from his hands, for of three thousand that we brought with us: there
are come again but three hundred, and the surples is all slain other taken.
When Rowland understood theyse words: he shook al for anger and said by
great wrath. By god sir Ogyer, ye were sore hardy ye had not fellows that did
so well as ye did, but by saint Peter the apostle I saw never so strong a
cowarde as ye be, nor never came out of Denmark a good knight. Ha whoreson
coward kaytif how have ye any eyes that dare behold upon a man? but another
thing there is, for ye have spared them, for they ben your cosins and your
friends. Now be the king blamed, but if he makes you to be hewn al to
pieces, for they should have been take if ye had not be.

THan when Ogyer saw him self so repreued: he wexed al mad of the great
injury that Rowla^d had said to him so, and answered boldlye and said. Damp
Rowlande ye lie falsely of that ye say. For I am not such as ye tell. And here
is my pledge for to defend me this quarrel against body to body, for I nor
none of my kin did never amys against Charlemaine, but of all France I am one
of the best and truest knights that be in it, and of a better kin I am come
than ye be Rowlande, Gerarde of roussyllon was mine uncle he kept me of a
litell child, and Dron of Nantuell and the duke Benes of Aygremont these three
were brethern the which were all mine uncles. And Myneus of aygremount was my
father, and also the bishop Turpyn and Richard of normandye ben my kinsmen,
and thus are they four sons of Aimon of my lignage, now good sir Rowland
tell me your lygnage for I know your hyghnes. For by saint Denis of France,
I shall defend me against you with my sword, and so shall I show to you if I
be true or no. Rowlande was than wonderful wroth wha^ he heard Ogier speak so:
and vaunced him self against him and would have smitten him. And when Ogier saw
him come: he set hand to his sword cortyne, and said to Rowland. Beware ye be
not so hardy for to set hand upon me, for by the faith that I ow to him that,
begat me I shall make thy head to flee fro thy body, if ye come any nerer.
When Charlemayne saw these two barons move themself so sore the one against the
other: he was right sorry for it. And than rose the duke Naymes of bauiere and
the earl Aymerye, and said. Sir Rowland what will ye do? by my head the
thing shall not go as ye trow, for Ogyer is not such as ye make him, and if
the king were not: the thing should go otherwise than ye ween, Ogyer is
such a knight as all the world knows, nor in his lignage was never no man
borne that made treason, but he is the best knighte in all France of all
sides. But we merueile how Charlemayne suffers you to take so great a pride
upon you, and if he suffers it: we will not do so for no thing that can
come of it. When Charlemaine saw this great noise between his barons: he was
right wroth and said to Rowland. Fair neuewe let this alone, for it longs
not to you to say so, and between this and to morrow I shall enquere of this
matere. And if Ogyer has do amys in any thing against me I shall make him abide
it full dear, for all they in the world shall not keep him but shall make him
be headed for it. Sir said Ogyer I will well, but there is in France no man so
prue ne so hardy, that shall say that I have done treason against you nor
ayenste any other, but that I shall fight ayenste him in the quarrel, and
shall show to him that he lies falsely, but and it please you to hear me: I
shall tell you the truth of the matter, wit it sir that when I came to the
roche Mount bron where the four sons of Aymon were, and saw that we were so
great number of folk against four knights all unarmed: I promise you that I
holp them not, nor I was not against them, but wythdrewe me a side and let
the other shyfte with them, and I stood still and beheld upon the great
sorrow. For I saw dye my flesh and my blood, and I might not help them of
no thing, now have I told you all the truth and all that I did. And if ye
find otherwise than that I tell you before all this noble barons: I will be
sore punyshed. But by the faith that I owe to god, if ever I find me in any
place where I may help them: I shall help them with all my power, if I should
lose my head for it. For all the world ought to hate me because I failed them
at their need, for they ben my cosyns, and ye sir have done so much to them
that it should suffice you, for they be not so much gyltye of that they be
charged of, as men make semblaunt: but by the virgin Marye as long as I shall
live I shall not fail them of that I may do, over hasti was Rowland for to
have smitten me wrongfull^, and without any cause, but I will well that he
know that if he, saw Reynawde mounted upon his horse bayard: he should not
take him for a rybawd, nor he should not dare abide him body to body for all
the gold of spain. When Rowlande heard Ogier speak thus: he said to him, by
god Ogier ye have praised him much, and ye make him wunderfull hardye, but I
pray god that I may once find him upon bayard h^s good horse all armed fro
head to toe, for to know if he be so valiant as ye make him. Wit that god
heard the prayer of Rowlande, for Rowland not long after that: found Reynawde
upon bayarde, and I tell you that Rowlande held him not since for no rybawd nor
for knave but took him for the best knight of the world. But the history
leueth now to tell of the king Charlemayne af France, of Rowland and of
Ogyer the dane, and of the.xii. peers of France that been at the siege before
Mountawban, and returns to speak of Reinawde, that was ill at ease forth
love of Richard his brother that was wounded to death in the roche Mou^tbron.

NOw shows the history that after Reinawde had discomfyted the frenshemen: he
returned again toward roche Montbron where he had left his brother Richard thus
wounded as ye have heard. And wha^ he was come there and saw his brother so
horrible wounded: he could not keep him from weping, and said Alas what shall I
do when I have lost my dear brother the best friend that I have in the
world? And after he had said that word: he fell to the ground from Bayarde
in a swoun. And when Alarde, and Guicharde, saw their brother that was fall:
they began to make their moan of Richard pitteously. And when Reinawde was
come again to himself: he made great sorrow with his two brethren Alarde, and
Guichard, upon Richard their brother that lay upon the earth with his
bowelles between his hands. And this hangyng: came Mawgis upon broykarre his
good horse the best that men wyste after bayarde, and held a piece of a spear
in his hand. And when he saw Reinawde make such a sorrow: he was right sorye
for it. And when he saw Richard thus sore wounded: he was wroth and had
great pytie for to see the wound that was so great, for men saw the liver
within his body. Then said he to Reynawde, fair Cosyn take heed what I shall
say and leave this sorrow, ye know well that ye be all my cosyns and therefore
we ought to perforce our self for to socoure the one the other when it is
need. I have socoured you many times, and wit it that all the harm that
Charlemaine bears to me, it is al through your occasion, he slew my father but
late, whereof I bear yet at my heart great heauynes, that was your uncle that
died for your love that know ye well. But if ye will promise me before all your
barons for to come with me into the tente of the king Charlemayne and help me
to saw him for to avenge upon him the death of my said father if we can: I
shall deliver to you Richard even now whole and sound without any sore. And
when Reynawde understood these words: he came unto Mawgis, and kissed him in
the breast all weeping and said to him. Right sweet and fair cosyn for god
mercy Deliver to me again my brother Rychard whole if it please you. And if ye
will that I do any thing for you: command me, and I shall do it with right
good heart. For ye wot well that I did never any thing that was against your will,
nor there is no man in the world, for whom I would, do so much as I would
do for you. when Mawgys saw Reynawde weep so tenderly: he had great pity of
it and said to him. Now be not dysmayed of no thing fair cosyne, for ye
shall have Richard whole and sound incontynente. And than lyghted down from
his horse, and took a bottell with white wine and washed ye wound of Richard
therwithall right well, and had away all the blood that was about. And be not
meruaylled where he gatte all such things as apperteyned unto this cute: For
he was the subtelleste nygromancyer that ever was in the world. And when he
had done so: he took his bowelles and put them again in to his body, and
than he took a nedell and a threde, and sewed up the wound full maysterly and
hurted not Richard, and after he took a salve. Whereof he anointed all the
wound, and as soon as the wound was thus anointed: it was as whole as though
he had never be hurt in that place of his body. And when he had done all this:
he took a drink and gave it to Richard for to drink. and when Richard had
dronken it he rose lightly upon his feet al delivered and quyte fro his
disease, and said to his brethren, where is Ogier gone and his folk, are
they escaped fro us? brother answered Reynawde we have dyscomfyted them, God
gramercye and Mawgis that came for to succoure us, for otherwise we should have been al dead, and so he has saved us and our lives at this time now ought we
well to love him more than our self, brother said Richard ye say troth,
and after Alarde said to Mawgys, fair cosyn heal me I pray you, for I have a
great wound in the thie. And I also said Reynawde for I am hurt right sore,
and I also said Guychard, for gods love give us health unto al us, than
said Mawgys unto them, be not dismayed my fair cosynes, for I shall help you
all anon. Than took Mawgis of the white wine, whereof he had washed the wound
of Richard, and washed their wounds of them all and after anointed them
sweetly and anon they were all whole. And when they were al garnyshed: they
made Richard to light upon a horse, and put them self to the way for to
return again to Mountawban. And thus they went on their way: a spy departed
fro the fellowship of Reinawd and came to Mou^tawban, to the king yon and said
to him. Sir I bring you tidings. Now wit that Reinawde and his brethren been
escaped fro the plain of Valcolours where that ye had sent them, and they have
dyscomfited Ogyer the dane and all the folk of Charlemaine, and also they have
slain Foulques of Morillon and the earl Guimard, and so many of other
knights that I ca^ not tell you the nombre.

ANd when the king yon understood these tidinges: he was sore abashed of it
that he wist not what he should say, and after he said. Alas how goes this?
here ben evil tidings, how may this be? did they find the busshemente of the
king Charlemayne? Sir said the spy, yea certainly and should have been
cursedly handled if their cosyne Mawgys had not socoured them, and for ye
socours that Maugis brought with him: Ogier was discomfited and all his folk
of Charlemaine, so that few of them escaped. For Mawgys brought to Reinawde
Bayarde his good horse, that was cause of all the harm that was done there of
the other part. Alas unhappy myschau^t said than the king yon and what shall I
do? if I abide Reinawd, Mawgis Alard, Guycharde and Richard: I am dead
without doubt, for all the world can not defend me therfro. And also it
were well right, nor Reynawde should do but well if he slew me cruelly. For I
have well deserved death, for never Judas ne the Emperor Neron of Rome made so
great a treason as I have done that would have brought to a cruel death the
best knights of the world, that been the four sons of Aimon for the
thretning of a prince. And when he had said these words: he began for to make
great sorrow, and said. Ha fair sister Clare, this day shall depart our
love, ye shall never seem more. This day shall I forsake Gascoygne, for I shall
never come again therein. And than he cried with an high voice. Now go hence
fair lords for gods sake, be lightly ready For the need of it is now come,
and let us go bring with us the best knights that I and ye have and if we
may do so much to get the wood of ye serpent which is a great forest: we
shall be safe enough, and we shall may escape at our ease. For we shall lodge our
self within an abbay of saint Lazare, and we shall take such habyte as the
monks there have. And by all thus shall we may be saved. For I know so much
goodness in Reinawd that when he shall find us shorn as Monks: he shall do
us no harm. Than was there a spy that was called Pygwade that was so great
that he had well.xv. foot of le^gthe, and went as fast as any horse could
trot. This Pygwade had well heard all that the king yon had said, and wrote it
in a skin of Parchement, and went lightlye ought of Mountawban at the gate
called the gate fawcon, and passed through the wood of the serpent in a little
while and met with Reynawde, his b^ethern and Mawgis that came again to
Mou^tawban, that brought with them a great multitude of prisoners and Pigwade
that great thief watched upon them. And anon he tanne as fast as he might to
Mou^tbendell and went into the pauilion of Charlemayne and called Rowlande and
said to him. Sir I shall tell you such tidings, whereby ye shall get good
enough, if ye will believe me, and I shall tell you a thing whereof ye shall be
right glad. Good freende said than Rowlande, thou art welcome to me, and what
tidinges bring thou tell me I pray thee? Sir said Pygwade, wit it that the
king Yon flees away all unarmed, he and all his folk and has with them
another Somer nor Mule, but only their best horses, and they go into ye wood of
the serpent into a house of religion, which is named saint Lazare, and he
himself is delibered for to take the habit and to be come a monk. By my
faith said tha^ Rowlande I shall go meet with them anon with four thousand
knights, and I shall avenge Reynawde and his brethren upon them, and I shall
make them to be hanged as traitors.

For I never loved traitors nor never shall and God will. Sir said pigwade
yet is there more, for I have found Reynawde, his brethern and Mawgys that came
over the river of balancon, that brings with the^ many prisoners of your
folk. And if ye will find them: ye must go that way. Freende said Rowlande
ye have deserved a great reward, for ye have brought to us good tidings. Than
Rowlande called to him Olyuer, and said. Olyuer my good and true felaw, light
upon your horse quickly, and bring with you Guidellon and Richard of Normandy
and ye sir Ogyer of Denmark ye shall come with me, if it please you, and ye
shall see the great prowess of Reynawde the son of Aymon, and we shall take
with us but four thousand men, and yet Reynawde is five thousand well horsed
and well arrayed.

And thus we shall mow fight with them without any advantage. Certes said Ogyer
I shall go there to see how ye shall have him. And when ye have taken him: I
promise you to lend you a rope if ye have need of it. And when they had al
devised they mounted on horseback, and took their way. And the great
ribawde guided them straight to the river of Balancon, and the king of Gascoin
rode than through the woods of ye serpent with his folk, and he rode so long
that he arrived at the monastery of saint Lazare. And they prayed the abbot of
the place so much yt he made them monks in the devils name. This hanging:
came there Rowlande and Olyuer with their folk that entered anon into the
abbay. And when the abbot saw them he came them against, and all the covent
singyng Te deum laudamus. And when they had song: ye abbote said to Rowlande.
Sir ye be right welcome, will ye have any thing yt we may do: lord abbot said
Rowlande we thank you with all our heart. But wit that we seek here the
falsest traitor of the world, yt men call the king Yon of Gascoyn the which
is here within, for I will hang him like a thief.

THan answered the abbot, ye shall not sir and please you, for he is become our
monk, and also he has taken the habit, and therefore we shall defend him
against all men. When Rowlande heard the abbot speak so: he took him by the
hood. And Olyuer took the priour that was nyghe and they shoued the^ so
pretely against a pillar of marble stone that their eyes lept out of their
heads. And than Rowland said to ye abbot. Now master monk deliver to me
lightly that devil the king yon which is the brother of Judas, or else I shall
make an end of you, for I have sworn that he shall never do treason more.
Wha^ the abbot understood this that Rowlande said to him: he and all his
monks fled away from him. And when Rowland saw this: he set hand at his good
sword Durandall, and entered into the cloystre, where he found the king Yon
kneeling before an Image of our lady, and was clad with the habit of
religion, and the hode upon his head And when Rowlande saw him: he knew him
well. For he had seen him with his uncle Charlemayne. Than he took him and
said to him, sir monk in the Devils name conne ye well your lesson, arise up
with sorrow and come with me for to see the king Charlemayne. For he shall make
you to be hanged as a traitor proved evil king and a felon. Where be^ the
four sons of Aymon that ye should have delivered unto Charlemaine? ye shall be
paid for the treason that ye have done, and I with mine hands shall avenge
Reinawde and his brethern upon you, and when he had said this: he made the
king Yon to be set upon a horse, and blinded his eyes with a cloute that he
might not see nothing. And than gave him the mokes hode upon his head. And
thus sat in the sadle the face toward the horse tail, and the back forward.
The king yon made none other thing but that he wysshed still after Reynawde
and his brethern and said. Alas and that I did great harm, when that I
conse^ted to this mortal treason, now ought I well to dye ten times if it
might be so. For I have well deserved death. When the king yon had said this:
he said to one of his privy counsel yt he herd nyghe him, how well he saw not.
Friend go to Mountawba^ and tell Reynawde that he come to succoure me, for he
is my man, and that he take no heed to mi trespace and evil deed, but to his
fraunchise, For and he let me dye so: he shall be thereof repreued and blamed
evermore, and his issue shall be dishonored by it. And if he can recover me: I
will that he make my tongue to be cut of whereby I did consent to the treason, or
else my head, if it seems him good for I have well deserved it against him.
Sir said the knight I shall not go there, for I wot well that Reinawd will
not set one foot out to save you, because of the great harm that ye would
have done to him, he shall said the king yon, for I know so much by him that
he shall not say there against. Sir I will than go to him with a good will
sith that it please you, and god give that Reynawd his brethren and Mawgys
will come and help you, for I know well that ye have great need of it but if
god help you. This hangyng: Olyuer said to Rowlande, Rowlande good felaw
mine, what shall we do with this unhappy king? freende said Rowland we shall
led him to mou^tfawcon, and we shall leave Balancon at the right hand. And this
they did for to find Reynawde and his brethren, for Rowlande was sore
willing to find Reynawd, his brethren and Mawgys their cosyn, good lord
said Ogyer the Dane by thy pytie and myserycord grant to Rowlande his prayer
and his will, that is that we may find Reynawd and Mawgys, for to see how
Rowland shall bear himself, and if he should take them or no, for I know
well that none shall put down his pride but only Reynawde. But here I leave
to speak of Rowlande, Oliver, and of Ogier, and of their folk, and of the
king yon of Gascoygne that they brought with them for to be hanged, and
return again to show of the four sons of Aymon.

How after that Reinawde and his brethern were garnished of their wounds that
they had in the plain of Valcoloures: they went again to Mountawban. And how
they rescued the king yon from the hands of Rowlande. Capitulum.xi.
depiction of a group of armed men on horseback, including a king with crown,
entering a doorway

IN this party shows the history, that when Reinawd and his brethern were
well whole of their wounds by the help of Mawgys that had healed them: they
put them self unto the way again toward Mountawba^. And when they were
come there: my lady Clare went against the^, and brought with her two
children, yonnet and Aymonet, that had wept and scratched their sweet vysages
so sore that there appeered of them another eyes nor mouths, always they wist
not wherefore they did so, for they were very young. And she also was all
dysfygured for weepyng, and of great lamentacions that she made, for she wist
well how her brother the king yon had betrayed Reynawde her housbond and his
brethren, and wend that they had been dead. But when she saw them come: she
was never so glad. And the two children ran at their fathers feet, and would
have kyssed them. And when Reinawd saw that: he shoued them away with his
feet so stro^glye that he had almost broste them. And the lady would have
taken him in her arms and kyssed him: but he would not suffer her, and fayde to
her. Lady go out of my syghte to your brother that fellon cruel and false
traytoure, for ye shall never have my love again, for it has not holden in
him, but that we should have be dead by this time if God and our cosyn
Mawgis had not succored us, now go after him all a foot and without
company, for ye shall not take nothing of mine and as an evil woman ye shall
go your ways for ye be the sister of the king yon, the greatest traytoure
and the vntruest king of the world, and I shall anger your children, for I
fear me lest they should be traitors as their uncle. Sir for god mercy said
the ladi, I shall swear to you upon al halowes that I had doubt of your going,
and many times I did tell you of it, through the occasion of the dreme that I
dremed that night, and I told you that ye should not believe the king my
brother. And not withstandyng that he was my brother: I doubted this yt is be
fallen sith. Sir for God I cry you mercy, for in this I am nothing giltye, and
so God have mercy of my soul. For I love much better ye least toe of your
foot, than al king Yon my brother, nor all the land of Gascoin. And when she
had said this: she fell down in a swoune upon the feet of Reynawd. And wha^
Guicharde saw the Lady in a swoune: he took her up and said to her. Madame
discomfort not your self so sort, let Reynawde say his will, for ye be our
own Lady and our sister, now be of good cheer, as long as we be alive we shall
not fail you and though our brother Reynawde fail you we shall not do so,
but we shall serve you with all our heart. Brother said Richard let us do one
thing, go we pray our brother Reynawde that he pardon my lady our sister his
evil will, for she is not gilty in the matter. And if we would have believed
her: we should not have gone one foot out of this place, and now we ought to
show the green and the russet Mantelles of ermynes the good horses and
palfreys that mi lady did give us more oftener than did Reynawde, now let us
reward her for it for she has mystre of it, and at ye end: the freende is
known. By my faith said Alarde ye say well. And than went the three brethern
unto Reynawde and drew him a side, and after Alarde said to him. Fair brother
for gods love be not thus angrye, for ye know yt my Lady has no culpe at
all the treason that her brother yt king yon has done to us. For if ye would
have believed her: we should not have gone thither. Wherefore we pray you that
ye will pardon her.

Than said Reynawde, my brethern for the love of you I grant ye same and I
pardon her mine evil will presently. When the brethern understood him: they
were right glad, and came to the Lady Clare, and said to her. Madame be of good
cheer and make joy, for we have made your peace. And than Alarde and
Guycharde took her by the hands, and brought her to her husband Reynawd and
when Reynawde saw her: he went and took her by the chyn and kissed her. And
than began the joy and the feast right great at Mountawban. And they washed
their hands and went to their meat. And thus as they sat at the table: there
came in ye messanger of the king Yon, that came to Reynawde, and wha^ he was
before Reynawde: he said to him. Sir the king Yon sends you word by me that
ye com to succor him, for other wise he cannot escape the death. For Rowla^d
and Olyuer ledeth him for to be hanged at Mountfawcon, and do this sir if it
please you for god and behold not his evil will, but take heed to your
goodness, for our Lord pardonned Mary Magdalen and longis of their sins. He
knows well yt he has deserved death for the great fault that he has done to
you, and if ye slay him: he pardonneth to you his death.

Gods curse have he said Alarde that shall set his foot thitherwarde, nor
that shall bye him again though he might be had for a straw, but gods curse
have Rowland if he ha^geth him not as a traitor approved. wha^ Reynawde had
heard this that the messanger said: he looked downwarde and studied a good
while that he said no word, and when he had thought long enough: he began to
weep beholding his brethren, for a good heart can not lie wha^ it comes to a
need. Than said he a good reason as a noble knight. Lords said Reynawde to his
brethern and to his knights, Now hear what I will say to you. Ye know how I
was disherited at paris wro^gefully upon a feast of Penthecoste that
Charlemaine held open court and full in his palace, where was a compani of
great lords. For there were.vii. hundred knights all gentilmen both of name
and of arms and a hundred what of Dukes and of Earls, and more than four
score bysshopes, and many barons, and that time was slain the duke Benes of
Aygremount mine uncle that was so good a knight as men knew well. I did ask
right for him to Charlemayne before all his court: whereof the king rebuked me
and called me all to naught, and great iniurye he said to me. And when I saw
that ye king repreued me thus: I was wroth and right angry for it, and I
beheld upon my brethern and knew their stomachs, and saw mine enemies before
me, so neded not that I should have sought them else where. And it suffised
them not of that I had be outraged by Charlemayne: but that Berthelot outraged
me of new, he and I playinge at the Chesse, whereof I took ye chesse boorde
and smote him with it so great a stroke upon his head that I slew him before my
feet. And Jews a another neuew of Charlemayne would have slain my brother
Richard and had hurt him all ready full sore. But I smote him in such wise
with my fyst yt I feld him down dead before me to therth, and when Charlemayne
wist of it: he would have made me to be killed and hewed into pieces, but my
kynseme^ would not suffer it, for there was great medlyng so that many strokes
were given. And when the meddling was ended: I mounted upon Bayarde and my
brethern I made to mount also the one before and the two other behind me, and
thus rode we al four upon my horse bayarde, and so came to Ardeyne, where I
did build a castle. And there Chaylemane came and beseeged me, and made swear
mi good father Aimon yt he should never help us with none of all his goods,
and that he should be utterly ayenste us and in like wise he for closed me fro
all my kynsmen yt none of them was not so hardy for to have showed to us ye
least favor of ye world. Fair brethren ye know well the great poverty that
we have endured so long time. And when I saw that I wist not where to go I
came into this land with such a felawship as ye know, and I spoke to the
king Yon and showed him how I had war against Charlemayne, and he showed me
great love and made me great honor so that he gave me his sister to my wife,
and with her a duchy, and builded Mountawba^ for me. And of the other part my
children are his neuews, whereof the one bears his name, yt is yonnet, and ye
see them here, and I have saved him his Realm and all his land, and all his
rebels I have made come to seek mercy of him, and I found him never in
fault, but Charlemayne is so great and so mighty a king, and also ye know
well that he has overcome and dishonored many good me^, and for fere of him:
the king Yon betrayed us, whereof he is not to be blamed ouermuche, seeing that
against Charlemayne nothing has power. And therefore if the king Yon
delivered me to charlemayne: it was by evil counsel yt some of his barons
gave him. For god made never so good a man, but that, that he misdoeth by evil
counsel sometime. And how can I leave him when I have not mystrusted hi^ before
time? me seems that I ought to show him goodness against felonye. Therefore I
pray you all that ye will make you ready, for I will go succor him. For it
were great reproach to my children that their uncle should be hanged as a
thief, and it were to us a great disshonour, for he is our lord, and if he had
done evil: we ought to do well against it, and also we ought not to forget
the benefaytes that the king yon has done to us, and I promise you that the
fault and the treason that he has done is not come through his malice, but
through evil counsel. For if it had be only by his mocyon: I would see the
heart from the body of him, but I wot well nay, for Charlemayne is of so great
power that every man fears him. And therefore I tell you that I will go rescue
him from Rowlande if I can with all my power. By my faith said Alard ye shall
than go without me, for I shall not put my feet there, for a traitor ought
never to be helped nor succored. Nor I said Guycharde I shall not go there.
^e shall said Richard and it please you, sith yt Reynawde will have us to do
so, for he is our Lord and our welt, and therefore I pray you fair brethren
that ye will obey him. When Reynawde had concluded that he should go for to
rescue the king Yon against the will of Alarde and of Guicharde: all the
Gascoynes that were there began to cry and said, blessed be the hour that
ever Reynawde was borne. For no man erthely is worth him of goodness and of
prowes, and than they said to Reynawde, Sir we shall give up to you all the
land of Gascoyne, and shall make you the Lord of it. For there shall be never
none other lord in Gascoyne but you as long as ye shall live so that for god
right sweet sir that ye suffer not the king yon to be had away to
Charlemayne, for it were a great shame to all them of the reame of Goscoyn that
men had hanged their king. By mi soul said Reinawde ye say troth. And than he
took his horn and blewe it three times so stronglye that he made all
Mountawban to sown with it. And inco^tynent without abydinge they of the town
went and armed them and came before Reinawde, and wha^ they were all ready:
Reynawde lighted upon bayarde, the shield at the neck and the spear in the
hand, and they were well in his felawship syx thousand men on horseback, and
well a thousand a foot. And when they were out of Mountawban: Reinawd spoke
to his folk and said to them, Lords remember you that your lord is in great
danger and in peril of death, and but if we fight strongli: he is dead
without remedy, wherefore I pray you all that ye do this day that, that shall
turn to our worship. And when Reynawde had said these words: he went again
toward his brethern and said to the^, Fair brethern ye know that Rowland
hates me to death and not through my defawte: but only through envy. Wherefore
I pray you that ye attend upon me this day: and ye shall see me do as a good
knight, and this day the pride of Rowlande must be leyde or else mine a down.
When Alarde heard his brother Reynawde speak so: he said to him. And whereof
care you^ be sure and certain that as long that life is in our bodies: we
shall not fail you, and with this word they put them to the way.

And Reynawde took two thousand knights and gave them to Alarde and Guichard
and said to them. Fair brethern ye shall make the forward and keep your men in
good ordenau^ce, and I and my brother Richard shall make the reregarde, sir
said Alarde we shall do it well if god will, and tha^ they rode forth so
long yt they saw the folk of Rowland nygh them, and when Alarde a perceived
them: he made his me^ to tarry and sent word to Reynawde that he should make
haste to come, for they had found their enemies. And when Reynawde wiste of
these tidinges: he made his folk to ride hastily and came anon to Alarde his
brother, and when he saw his enemies: he put his folk in array, and devised
his batayles honestly as a good captain of war.

THan when Rowland saw so great folk: he called to him the bishop Turpin and
Guydellon of bauyer and said to the^. Lords now be hold, I se yonder many
folk armed might yt be Reynawde and his brethren whereof the renome is so
great and of their cousin Mawgys the subtle knight? Sir said the Bishop
Turpyn, yea they be^ tho verily, and also I tell you they make themself to be
well know whersoeuer they go and I tell you that we cannot save us, but that
we must meddle with the^. When Ogier saw Reynawde: he Joined and heued his
hands toward heaven and said. O god blessed thou be that haste suffered
Rowlande to find Reynawde his brethren and Mawgys, certes who that gave me a
thousand mark of gold I should not be so glad, for Rowlande has now all
his besyre, and certain I am right glad that we have found them. Now shall I
see how he shall bear himself against the valliaunte Reynawd his brethren, and
Mawgys, and when he had said this: he turned him self toward Rowland and said
to him. Rowland now have ye that ye have desired so long, and I am glad that
it is come so, for now shall I see how ye shall take the^. For it ye can take
them a live and bring the^ to Charlemain: he shall con you great thank for it,
and so shall bayarde be your own that ye have so sore desired, and the war
shall be thus finyshed. Ogyer Ogier said than Rowlande, these ven reproaches
that ye tell me. But by saint Denis of france ye shall see or even: who shall be
master of us two. Rowland said Ogier, now shall it be seen what ye can do.
When Rowland knew that he must have meddling with his enemies: he ordained all
his battle as he could well do, and after he set his folk in ordenaunce of
battle the best that he might. And when Reynawde saw that Rowlande ordained
his battailles: he called his brethren and said to thrm. Lords here come
the frenshemen, yonder is Rowlande, Olyuer, and the Duke naymes of Bauiere, and
Ogier the dane, ye shall abide here for to make the rerega^de and if we have
mystre of help: come and help us. Sir said Mawgis ye make to long sermon,
deliver you for we tarry to long fro sawtynge upon our enemies. Cosyn said
Reynawd ye say well, and ye speak like a good knight. For yet have I not
better knight than ye be one when I see you armed by me. Now think to do
well, for I go first of all for to overthrow the pride of Rowland that is so
great as every man knows, and I pray you all that every man do his part
with all his power.

ANd when the brethern understood that Reinawd would go prove himself upon
Rowland: they began al three to weep and said. A brother, and will ye that ye
and we be dead all at ones? For ye can slay your self no better than to prove
your self upon Rowlande: For he is ouermuche prue and vallyaunt, and also he
can not be hurt with iron, but we pray you that ye will assay your self upon
the other and let rowland alone. Lords said Reynawde ye have spoken full well,
I know well that Rowlande is hardye and prue, and that his match is not in the
world of knighthode, but I am in the right, and he is in the wrong which shall
now turn him to a great harm, and therefore I will not refuse, but that I
shall go against him but and if he will peace: he shall have it, and if he will
have war, he shall find me redye to receive him thereto. For I have lever dye
than be long sick. Now I pray you speak no more of it, but see yt ye bear
your self well against our enemies, for we have to do against many a noble
knight. Cousin said Mawgis think to assail well. For ye shall be succored
right well. Than the worthy and valliaunte knight Reynawde went before all the
other with his sheeld at the neck, and his spear in his hand syttinge upon
baiarde. When rowlande saw reynawd come with his folk well ordered: he showed
it to Oliver and said. Felawe what think you by that folk? see how they come
toward us in good array. Certes rowlande said Olyuer, reynawde knows more
of war than any other knighte that lives, and the most gracious. For there is
none so poor a knight in the world if he come to him, but he shall be right
welcome to him, and if he come a foot: he shall set him anon on horseback. And
if he be ill appointed: he shall anon array him after his estate. Is not this a
great goodness of him? ye be my soul said rowlande, and he does well, For if
he did otherwise: he might not abide long against mine uncle Charlemayne. And
me seems said again Olyuer, that he has well three times mo folk than we
have, whereof he might well get upon us, but if we take better heed, for they
been well subtle folk. Olyuer said rowlande ye say truth, but ye know
well the G^scoygnes ben cowardes of very kind, and can not abide no stroke of
sword, but that they will flee lyghtlye away, that is true said the bishop
Turpyn, but they have with them a good guide as any is in all the world. And
wit it sir rowlande, that the valyaunte man: causes his folk to abide nyghe
him. For a worthy captain is the myrrour and ensaumple to the other for to
do well, when rowland heard this. he wexed almost mad, because men praised
Reynawde and his folk so much, and with this: he spurred his horse and went
before all his folk well the shot of a bow far, and came against Reinawd.
And when Reinawde saw Rowland come alone: he said to Alarde. Fair brother
beware upon as much as ye love me: that ye move not, nor your folk, but abide
still here till that I have Iousted with Rowland that comes alone, and
therefore I will no man help me against him. When Reinawd had said this: he
spurred bayard with the spurs and came against Rowlande so fast that they that
saw it wend ye Baiard had floughe in the air. For the smallest lepe that he
lept was of xxx. foot far or more. And when he was come nigh Rowlande as for
to have Iousted: Reinawd lighted down a foot, and pyght his spear in the
earth. And bound bayarde thereat, because he should have bide there still. And
vngyrte flamberge his sword and came before Rowland and presented it to him
and kneeled before him and kissed his foot, and said al wepi^g, damp Rowland I
cry you mercy for the pity that our lord had on the cross upon his mother
when he co^me^ded her to saint John that ye will have pity upon me, ye know
well that I am your kinsman and how be it I am poor: yet shall I be and my
brethern your me^. And also I shall give you baiard and shall make you lord of
Mountawban, so yt it will please you to purchase our peace with the king
Charlemaine your uncle, and if it please you for to do so: I shall make al my
brethern to grant the same, and I shall forsake france al my life. And I
promise you that I shall go into the holy land with Mawgys and my brethren,
for to make war against the sarasyns, and if ye think that I say well: bring
it about if ye can. For if ye do it: ye shall have a fellow and a servant
of me.

ROwland had great pity wha^ he heard Reynawde speak in this manner, and began
to weep full tenderly: and after said to him. By god Reynawde I dare not speak
of it, but if so be that ye will deliver unto him Mawgys. Alas said Reynawde, I
should never do yt for to dye for it. For Mawgys is no man for to be given
away for to have peace And tha^ he rose up and took his sword and his sheelde.
And came to Bayarde and mounted upon him without stirope, and than he took his
spear in his hand. And when he was well apparelled: he went again to Rowland
and said to him. Rowland wit that I shall never more cry you mercy for fere that
I have of you, but I have cry you mercy for to bear you worship because that
ye be of my kin, but since that I see yt ye be so proud that ye will do
nothing for me nor for my prayer: I shall mow deal resonably with you, to the
end that ye shall not mow report nor say to the other Barons and knights of
France, that Reynawde the son of Aymon has cried you mercy for fear. The
cause is such, ye have with you a great company of folk, and also I have of
my side men enough thanked be god, and if our folk assemble together: it
cannot be other wise, but that great harm shall fall of (...) the sides. But
and ye will: we shall fight we two together for them all without any help of
other, and if ye overcome me: ye shall bring me ^o Charlemayne, yt shall do
his pleasure of me, and if I can conquer you ye shall come with me to
Mou^tawban under condition yt ye shall have another evil nor shame, no more
tha^ shall my own person.

SHall ye do this that ye have said? said Rowlande: ye without faut said
Reynawde. By my head said Rowlande ye shall make me sure thereof first. Certes
said Reynawde with a good will. And tha^ Reynawde swear it unto him upon his
part of paradyse. Reynawde said Rowlande I will go take leave of my felaw
Oliver, for I have promised him that all the batayles yt I shall undertake: he
shall mow make them himself if it please him. Go tha^ said Reynawde and make
it short. And than Rowlande went again to his felawes. And when he was come
to the^: Hector the son of Ocdon, Oliver and Ogyer the dane asked of him
saying. Sir Rowlande what says Reynawde, have ye spoke with him? yea said
Rowlande, and what think you by him. Certes said Rowland, Reynawde is a sage
knight and well taught, for he has requyted me to fight with him body to
body, and that our folk be still of the one side and of the other. Rowland
said Oliver, ye shall do in this your pleasure, for other ye or I must fight
with him, but I counsel that ye go there, for as long as I shall live I shall
not be enemy to Reynawde only for his worthynes. For Reynawde is a knight of
great honor. When the bishop Turpyn. Hector the son of Oedon and the other
Earls heard this: they began to say, Rowland what is that ye will do? For gods
mercy do it not, for Reynawde is of your lynage and of ours, and if ye bring
him to death: we shall never love you after. Sir leave that offer that Reynawde
gives to you and make your folk to assemble with the folk of Reynawde, for
it is better that they be take of your folk, than that the one of you two
were dead: will ye that it be so said Rowland? yea sir if it please you.

Certes said Rowland it pleases me right well and than he said to al his
folk, Lords think to defend you well, for it is now need thereof. Sir said
the other have no doubt of nothing, for we shall do well your commandment,
and than they put the^ self in ordenaunce. And Rowlande began to cry mount
joy saint Denis, and when came to settinge on with speres: ye should have seen
tha^ many a knight brought to ground and many horse that ran maysterles
thorough the feeldes so much that it was great pity for to see so great a
destruction of knights as was made there. When Reynawde saw the two hosts
must assemble together: he spurred Bayarde with the spurs and put himself
among the thickest of ye French men, and smote a knight so hard in the
breast yt he ouerthrewe both horse and man to the ground. and after smote
another so sore that nether for sheelde nor for quyras of steel he let not but
that he shoued the yren of his spear thorough and thoroughe his bodi, and fell
dead to the earth, and wit at that stroke he brake his spear and Reynawde set
hand lightly to his sword, and began to cry Mountawban as loud as he
could. And than he made so great slaughter of Frenchemen: that none durst
abide before him, but fled from him as fro ye death. Shortli to speak Reynawd
did so much thorough his strength, and thorough the high knight hode of his
brethern: that he brake ye first battle of the French men, would they or no.

depiction of two groups of knights in armor on horseback charging each other,
with heads and body parts on the ground

When the litell Richard, the brother of Reynawde saw yt the frenshemen were
put a back: He began to cry on heighte Ardeyne, as much as he might, and
put him self in to the greatest prese among his enemies, and began to make
so great hewing of folk that it was wunderfull to see. For Reinawde fought
not, for to look the better upon him. And then Richard that thought him
self never weary of geuyng of strokes: began to call upon his brother, and
said. Reynawde fair brother where ben your great strokes gone that ye were
wunt for to give upon your enemies. Alas smite now upon them, for they been
almost overcome, make that the frenshemen full of pride mock not with you, and
so make we such a thing that it be spoken of it unto Paris. When Reynawde
heard Richard speak thus: he began to smile, and after he smote bayard
with the spurs and began to smite better then he bid before. Who that had
seen than his great strokes depart: he might well have said that no carpenter
smot never so well in wood: as Reynawd did upon the helmes of steel, and upon
the sheeldes of the frensshemen. And when the frensshmen saw that the
discomfiture turned upon them: they began to call Rowlande, and said to him.
Ha Rowland what do ye? Why come ye not and help your folk? For they be^
dead, but if ye succoure them. When Rowland understood that word, whereof he was
wroth, and right sorry. And wha^ he saw his folk so sore handled: He began to
cry Mou^tioye saint Denis. And after spurred his horse, and entered in to the
meddle. And went here and there crying Reinawde where be you gon^ see me here
I am all ready for to do the battle of my body against yours that ye ask of
me. When Reynawd heard Rowlande that called thus after him He put flamberge
into his sheth. And took a spear in his hand and came there as Rowland was
and said to him, where are ye Rowlande be ye a fearde of me that ye have tarried
so long? for beware your self from me, and you of me said Rowlande. And
then they spurred their horses and did Iouste the one ayeull the other. And
when the frensshmen and the Gascoignes saw that: they withdrewe themself fro
each other, for to behold the Iousting of the two worthy knights, for to say
the truth: there were not two other such in all the world.

ANd when Salamon of Bretayne, and Hector the son of Oedon saw that the
Iousting of Reinawd and of Rowlande was begone: they set themself to weep full
tenderly, and came to the Duke Naimes, to the bishop Turpyn and to Olyuer, and
said to them, How lords may ye suffer yt one of the best knights of the
world, and him that we ought to love best be slain and dead before you?
Certes said ye duke Naymes that shall be great sorrow to us for to see. And
than he came to Oliver, and said to him. I pray you that ye go to Rowland,
and tell him from us al, that he ought not to fight with Reinawde with the
sword. But let him take a spear and break it upon Reinawde for to acquit
his faith. For if he slay Reinawde: We shall never love him after. Lords said
then Ogier let them alone, ye know not Reynawde so well as I do. Reynawde is
no child to be made a ferd so lyghtlye as ye trow. Let them shyfte hardely
they two together. For by the faith that I owe to you, Rowlande shall be all
werye or ever he return again. And he shall be as feign to leave the battle
as shall Reynawd. And ye shall see that Rowland would he had not gone there for
the best city that themperoure Charlemaine has. Ogier said Ector ye speak
of it as for envy, certes if he should fight with Rowland: ye should well say
otherwise. And than he said to Olyuer. Good sir let this battle be
desterred if ye may by any wise. Lords said Olyuer with a good will sith
that ye will have it so. And than he went to Rowlande and said to him all that
the barons had said. Felaw mine answered Rowland, god confound them, for
they take away this day the desire of my uncle Charlemain. And than he turned
him toward Reynawd, and said to him. Sir Reynawde ye have assaied of my sword:
and not of my spote. Rowlande said Reynawde if ye have your sword I shall
conne you ^o thank nor gramercye for it. For I fear you not of nothing, but
l^e us make an end of our bataylle. And to whom god gives the victory: let
him have it. Rowland would not do (...), but did like a courteous knighte, and
he did as the barons had sent him word. For he took a spear and ran upon
Reinawde as much as he might. And when Reinaude saw he would none otherwise
do: he ran also with a spear upon Rowlande, and rought each other so
wonderful hard that they made their speres to flee all in pieces, and when they
had broken their speres: they recountred each other with their sheeldes so
stronglye that both their horses, that is to wit Bayard and Melantes stakered,
and were all astonished therwithal. But with that stroke Rowland and Melantes
were both felled to the ground on a heap, and Reinawd passed forth by the^
cryinge with an high voice Mountawban. Whereby I tell you for certain that
Rowlande never fell down for no stroke of spear: but only that time. but it
was no marvel. For he could not hold him self by the clouds when his horse
had failled him.

THan when Rowlande saw himself thus overthrown: he was not well content and
rose in continente and took his swerd in his hand, and came to Melantes for to
cut of his head, and began to say evil courser who keeps me that I kille
the not? not since that thou have let fall thy self through the stroke of a
child, I shall never trust thee. So help me god Rowlande said Reynawd ye do
to Melantes great wrong. For it is long since that he eat any meat, and
therefore he can not trauayll like bayarde for he is more strong than is your
horse, and than Reynawde lyghted down fro bayard by cause that Rowlande was a
foot. And when bayarde saw his master a foot: he ran upon Melantis the
horse of Rowland and smot him with his hinder feet so great strokes that he
had almost broken his thy, when Rowlande saw: that he was wroth for it and
came toward bayarde, for to have smite of his head. And when Reinawde saw
that: he said to Rowland. What will ye do? it is no worship to you to smite a
beast, and if ye will do any fayte of arms: come to me and not to my horse for
I shall give you strokes enough so much that ye shall be weary of it or we
depart, but keep well that I slay not you and leave Bayard in peace. For there
is not in all the world an other so good a beast. For he did show it well when
he ^oan the crown of Charlemayne your uncle in your presence, and if he does
help me: he both but his deuoyre that a good horse ought to do, but turn
your sheeld toward me and ye shall see how Flamberge cutteth. Reynawde
Reinawde said Rowlande, threten not so much. For before this day be com at an
end: ye shall see a thing that shall not please you over much.

REynawde was not content when he understood the ylle words of Rowlande, and
shook al for anger, and incontinent ran up on Rowlande and gave him such a
stroke upon his helm: that he all to bruised it, and the stroke slided upon the
sheelde so that he cut of it a great quarter, and of the courset of steel
also, but he cut nothing of the flesh. And when Reynawde had given Rowlande
that stroke: he said in manner of a mock to Rowlande, what say ye by my
sword, do it cut well or no? for I have not missed at that stroke, now keep
you well fro me, for I am not such a child as ye take me for. When Rowlande
felt that great stroke that Reinawde had given to him: he was all meruaylled
of it, and withdrewe himself a back for he would not that Reynawd should have
recovered a another stroke upon him suddenly, and set hand to Durandall his
good sword and ran upon Reinawde, and Reynawd held his sheelde against it.
and Rowlande smot in to the sheelde so great a stroke yt he cloue it by the
mids through and through, and the stroke descended upon the helm and did it
no harm. And when Rowland had made that stroke: he said to Reinawd Vassail ye
be now quite. for I have yielded you again that ye lended me right now. Now
shall I see who shall begin again. By my soul said Reinawde foul fall have
I now if I feyne me now. For I did but play before, nor your fraunchyse shall
never auaylle you against me but that I shall bring your pride all down to
the earth. Reynawde said Rowland if ye do this that ye say: ye shall work
merueilles. And all thus as they would have begone again the bataylle: so came
there Mawgis and al his company, and said to Reinawd Cosyn mount upon bayarde,
for it were to great a loss if you or Rowlande were dead, and there came
Ogier and Olyuer and made Rowland to light again upon his horse. But wit it
well that Ogyer had not be so glad if one had give to him a great city: as
he was be cause that Reynawde had cast down Rowland and his horse. And when
they had recou^tred Rowland: they began a sore battle and a cruel, and so
fell that it was pytie for to see, for the one hew the other without any
mercy. And when Rowland saw that the batail was begone, again his heart did
swell for anger by cause that Reinawde bad overthrown him to the ground, so
began he to call as high as he might. Where are ye gone Reynawde the son of
Aymon, go a side and let us parfornyshe our batayl for men know not yet
which is the best knight of us two. Sir said Reynawde ye have the courage of
a knight that will conquer honor, but and we fight here together our folk
shall not suffer it. But let us do one thing that I shall tell you. ye be
well horsed and I am also, let us both swyme over the river and go to the
wood of serpente. For ye can not wyshe no better place for to fight, and we
shall not be there departed the one fro the other of our folk, but w^ shall may
fight there together till the one of us two be discomfited and overcome. Certes
said Rowlande ye have well spoken and I grant it as ye have said, and tha^
they spurrrd their horses for to go to the wood of the serpent, but Olyuer
took heed to them, and took Rowla^d by the brydell, and withhelde him would
he or no, and Reinawde went for to have passed over the river upon bayarde that
ran as the wind, and walloped so hard that he made all the earth where he
passed to shake under him, and as he ra^ in this manner: he looked before him and
saw the king yon that was auyronned with well four score knights that keept
him for fear of Reinawd, lest he and his brethren should have rescued him,
these knights led him shamefullie as ye have heard before. And wha^ Reynawde
saw the king: he was glad of it and said. Ha good lord blessed be thy name,
when ye have granted me so fair adventure, and with this: he set hand to his
swerd and spu^red bayard with the spurs and cried as high as he could, let
go the king yon evil folk that ye be. For ye be not worthy to ley hand upon
him. And than he entered with in them and smot a knight upon his helm so rudely
that he cloue his head to the hard teeth, and ouerthrewe him dead to the
earth. And when the other saw Reynawd among them: they put themself to
flight, and said the one to the other. The devil has brought this cruel man
here now, let us flee, gods curse have he yt shall abide him, for the
soul of him that wilfully suffers him self to be slain: shall never come to
the mercy of god. And than they put themself into the thyckest of the forest,
and left behind them the king yon that they lodged as a prisoner. And
Reynawd came straight to him and unbound him and unstopped his eyes, and after
said to him Ha evil king, how have ye the heart for to betray us so falslye
as ye have done me and my brethern? did we ever any thing that was in your
displeasure? It is not long on you, but that we should have been all hanged by
this, but I shall smite of your head even anon, and shall avenge me and my
brethren upon your body. Wha^ the king yon saw Reynawde that had delivered
him: he kneeled a down before him and said to him. Certes noble knight it is
well reason that men slay me. Whereof I pray you for god that your self will
take the life fro me, and cut of my head, and let it be done by none other,
and pulle out my tongue wherwyth I spoke that treason. For I have well deserved
greater martyrdom, and all this made me do the earl of Ansom, and the earl
Anthony. Now slay me for god, for such an evil man as I am ought not to live
long. I have much lever that ye kill me with your sword than that cruel
king Charlemayne should make me to be hanged. Now light up said Reynawde,
for ye shall be well paid as ye have deserved. But here leave I to speak of
the king yon of Gascoyne and of Reinawde that been in the wood of the serpente,
where that he tarried after Rowland for to fight with him, as he had promised
unto him: and shall return for to speak of Rowland and of Oliver that spoke
unto their folk for to tell them a part of their besines, and how they had
be dyscomfyted.

IN this part shows the history that after Reinawd was departed from the
bataylle for to go fight body to body against Rowlande the neuewe of the king
Charlemati^ in the wood of the serpente: Rowland, Olyuer and Ogier the Dane,
fought against Alarde, Guycharde, and the litell Rychard, against Mawgys and
against their folk, and the battle was there so sharp and so fell of one
part and of the other, so that great hurt and scathe was there made of both
parts, but at the last the dyscomfyture turned upon Rowlande, and upon his
folk. In so much that Rowlande and Olyuer were constrained by force for to
go back again all dyscomfyted, for the three brethren and Mawgis made
against them so great efforte of arms that they gate the price that day. And
thus as Rowlande went back again all dyscomfyted: he bare his head low, for
he was a shamed that he had be so rebuked. And than Ogier said to him, Lord
Rowlande who has a rayed your sheelde of this facion? I see your horse hur^e
in the thyghe and under the croper, he was felled upon the right side and you
also, it is well seen on your side, I trow that ye have found Reynawde the
son of Aymon, have ye brought him with you? Where have ye put him? When
Rowland understood the reproach that Ogyer made unto him: he wexed almost mad
for anger. So took he his sword and ran upon Ogier for to have smiten him
upon the head. But wha^ that Oliver saw this: he took Rowland by the bridell,
and the earl Guidellon took Ogyer, and thus they were departed, and thus as
they were departed, and that Rowland went on his way, came there after him the
litell Richard the brother of Reinawde, that began to call as hie as he might
damp Rowlande ye go towardely away, return again that I may see your
sheelde, and let us have a course we two together. Knight answered Rowland. I
grant thereto by my faith. And than they spurred their horses with their
spurs, and Rowland came against Richard so hard that he ouerthrewe him and
his horse with all in a hepe to the ground. And when Richard saw himself
thus a ground: he rose up quickly and came to his horse and lighted up again
without any styrop. And when he was on horse back he set hand on his swerd
and defended him self nobly against his enemy Rowland.

When Rowlande saw this, and that he knew that it was one of the brethren of
Reynawde: he had so great joy of it that him seemed that he had been in
Paradyse, and incontinente he began to cry Mountioyc saint Denis. And said,
upon him now my friends, for if he escape us: I shall tell it to the king
Charlemayne. And when that the frenshemen saw that Rowland would have taken
Richard: they set al, upon him, so that they smote him with more then four
swerdes al at once, and it happed so that his horse was killed under him, and
he overthrown to the earth. And when that Richard saw his horse dead a ground:
he was right sorry for it, and rose up quickelye upon his feet, and smote the
earl Anthony so great a stroke with his swerd that he wounded him right sore.
Humall the breton saw that: and he smot Richard, and Richard recovered upon
him with such a stroke that he felled both horse and man to the earth. And with
this: Guidello^ came from behind and ouerthrewe Richard fro the arsons of his
sadle to the ground. And when Rowland saw Richard at the ground: he came to
him and said. Now yield you and abide not that we slay you, for it were great
damage, sir said than Richard the youngest son of Aimon to you Rowlande I
shall yield me and to none other. For I ca^ not yield me to no better man than
ye be one. And with this he took him his sword, and Rowlande received it with
a good will and made the little Richard to light upon a mule. And thus they
had him prisoner. Alas and what a damage shall it be if the prue Richard be
hanged? he is well like to be, but that god and Mawgys deliver him, all this
myshappe saw a servant of Richard. And when he saw that men led thus his
master Richard: he spurred his horse with the spurs and auentured him self
to pass over the river, and came lightelye to Reinawde and said to him. Sir I
bring you evil tidings wit that Rowlande leads with him your brother
Richard for prisoner well shamefully. When Reynawde understood these words:
he was sore angry for it, that he had almost lost his wit, and after he
said to the yemon, come hither tell me my friend, are they that leden my
brother terre hence? Sir said the yeman, yea, it is not possible that ye
should overtake them. And when Reynawde understood this: he was more angry
than he was tofore, and fell from bayarde in a swoune to the earth. And when he
was come again to him self: he beheld before him. And saw his broher Alarde
come with his folk that came after Reynawde by the trase. For they wend that
Richard had be gone to him long before them. And when Alarde saw Reynawd
make such a sorrow: he came than to him and said in this manner. Ha fair
brother, and what eyleth you? It longs nor to such a knight as ye be for to
make so great a sorrow as ye do. Alard said Reinawd, ye have done full ill, for
I have left my brother Richard with you to keep him, and ye have lost him, for
Rowland ledeth him with him as prisoner, and he is all ready so far brought
that we can nor succor him, when Alard, and Guichard understood these
tidings: they began to make such a sorrow that it was marvel for to see
the lamentacion that they made, alas said Reinawde, what is he that has parted
our company? to day in the morning we were four brethren together and now we
been but three. Ha fair brother Richard it is great damage of you, for if ye
had lived your age: ye should have passed all your brethern seeing that ye were
the youngest of us all and yet ye were the most hardye, and through your
hardynes: ye are taken, fair brother said Alarde, all comes by you that
brought us here against our will for to succor the king yon. Now have we lost
Richard, whereof the loss shall never be recovered, for we shall never see him
a live. And when he had said this: he said to Guycharde. Brother draw out your
sword so shall we cut of the head of this traytoure king yon therewith, for
whom we have now lost our brother Richard, brother said than Reynawde. I
pray you for the lou^ that ye have to me that ye touch not the king yon for
to do him any harm, for he has yielded himself unto me, but bring him
unto Mountawban, and see that he be kept sure. And I shall abide here with my
good horse Bayarde and flamberge my good sword without any other company. So
shall I go in to the pauylion of Charlemayne, where I shall recover my brother
Richard or a another prisoner for him: or else I shall die with him. And when
he had said that word: he spurred bayarde with the spurs for to have gone
thither: but Alarde took him by the brydell and Guycharde took him with both
his arms fro behind for to keep him that he should not go, and than Alard
said to him, by saint Peter of rome ye shall not go no foot there, for it is
better that Richard: dye if it must be sothan ye should dye. And thus as the
three brethren made their moan for Richard, came there Mawgys their cousin yt
followed them, and when he saw his cosins make such sorrow: he was sore a gast
and said to them. Wha eyleth you fair cosins? it is no worship nor the manner
of good knights, but of wymen to make such sorrow as ye do. Cosyn cosyn said
Alard, I shall tell you what causes us to do so. Wit that Rowland leads
Richard for his prisoner the best knight of the world afte Reinawd, and
Reinawde will go to the Pauilyon of Charlemayne, and also ye know well if he
go there: he is but lost for evermore. Reynawd (said the^ Mawgis) it were no
wisdom to you if ye went there, for your going thither should not proffyte you
nothing, but go your ways to Mountawban, and I shall go there as ye would
have gone my self, and if Richard be not dead: I shall bring him again with me
unto you al were he shytte up in.x. prysones mawgre Charlemayn. Cosyn said
Reynawd, I shall become your man^e if ye do this that ye say. Cosyn said
Mawgis I shall do it without faut, but leave your sorrow I shall deliver him
again to your hands whole and sou^de if it please god: and when he had said
so: the brethern set themself to the way for to return to Mountawba^, but
so great sorrow was there never made as the three brethren made for their
brother Richard, and thus making their great moan: they did so much that they
came unto Mountawban and lyghted fro their horses in the base court, and after
went up to the dungeon and when the noble lady Clare, ye wife of Reinawd wist
that her husband came: she came against him right glad and Joyful and led at
each hand of her both her young children. Aimon and yon, and either of them
bare a little staff in their hands, and began to cry upon their uncle,
vassaile, but that ye be now prisoner: ye should have died by our hands, and
they came nyghe him and said cursed king and untrue why have you betrayed my
lord our father and his brethren our uncles that have done to you so good
seruyse? sertes ye be well worthy to dye a shameful death. When Alarde heard
his neuewes speak of this manner: he began to weep full tenderly. And thus as he
wept he kissed Aimonet that bare the name of their father, and said. Ha god how
ben we brought low and destroyed. And when that ye lady heard Alard speak
these words, and saw that he wept: she thought well that it was not without a
cause, and she said to Alarde. Fair brother for god tell me the occasion of
your sorrow. Lady said Alarde with a good will. Now wit that we have lost
our brother Richard. Rowlande ledeth him for his prisoner to Charlemaine, but
if our lord save him: We are not like never to see him. Alas I unhappy what
shall we do said the lady, sith that Rychard is lost? For we shall never have
honor. And saying these words: she fell down in a swoune to the earth. And
when that she was come again to herself: she began for to make so great
sorrow, that all they that were there had great pytie of her. But here leueth
the hystorye to speak of Reynawde, of Alarde, and Guycharde, and of the lady
Clare. and of her young Children And retourneth to show of Mawgys the good
knighte that had put himself in adventure and in pain, for to deliver
Richard out of the hands of the king Charlemayne.

How after that Reinawd, Alard, and Guychard were returned to Mou^tawban after
the bataylle that they had by the wood of the serpente they made great sorrow
for the love of Richard their brother, that was in the hands of the king
Charlema^n^. And how he was delivered by the wit of M^wgys.
depiction of two groups of knights in armor on horseback charging each other
with lances

NOw tells the historye, that when Mawgys was come again to Mountawban: he
was so much wroth that he might no more for ye love of Richard that was take.
And because that Reinawde and his brethren made therefore so great sorrow.
Incontinente that he was lyghted from his horse, he went in to his chamber and
made him self to be disarmed and after he took of all his clothes, and put
him self all naked, and this done: he took an herb and eat it, and as
soon that he had it: he swelled like a padde, and than he took an other
herb, and chaufed it and held it between his teeth, and anon he became al
black as a cole in his face os one that is beaten with staves, and his eyes
reeled in his head as he had be other drunk or mad, and disguysed himself
wonderfully, that he that had well know him before, should not than have said
that he had be Mawgys. And when he was thus turned and countrefayt: he took
a great mantell and a hoode and clothed himself therewith and took on his feet
a great pair of boots and the staff of a pilgrim in his hand. And thus
arrayed: he issued out of Mountawban. And wha^ he was out: he set himself for
to go the way so great pase that no horse could not have waloped so fast,
till that he came to mountbendel, before the centes of the emperor Charlemayne
or ever that Rowlande were come there again, and there he held him still and
spoke nothing at all, but looked only upon the king and upon his pauyllion.
And wha^ he went: he halted with the one foot, and lened before the kings
tent upon his staff, and kept the one of his eyes close.

And wha^ he saw the king come out of his pauyllion: he nighed him and said
God of heaven that suffered death and passion on the cross, keep you king
Charlemain fro death and from prison, and from evil treason.

VAssail said the king Charlemayn god confound you for I shall never trust
upon such a beggar as ye be, because of the evil thief Mawgis, the which
has deceived me many times, for when he will, he is a palmer a knight or a
grifon or else a heremyte, by such manner that I can not beware of him And
if it please god and his blessed mother I shall avenge me once upon him how
that the game goes. And wha^ Mawgys heard the Emperor speak of this manner:
he answered nothing, and kept him still a great while, and after he said to
the king. Sir if Mawgys be a thief all other poor folk be not so. I have
more need of health, than I have to do any treason, and it is well seen on me
that I am not the body that might do any great harm. Sir I come from
Iherusale^, where I have worshypped the holy grave, and have done my oblacions
in the temple of Solomon, and yet I must go to rome and to saint James in
galyce and God will. But I did pass yesterdaye over balancon and over Gironde,
with.x. men my servants that I led always by the way with me for to keep
and defend my body. And when I had passed over Gyronde: I came with my men
through a wood nighe Mountawban, where I met with many brygantes and thieves ye
slew all my men and all that I had they took fro me, and let me go, and
glad I was when so fair I was delivered of them. And after I asked of the
folk of the country what men they were that so had slain my men, and
they did tell me that they were the four sons of Aymo^ and a great thief
that was called Mawgis with them. And I asked them why they would set themself
to so foul a craft and unhappy, seen that they were so great gentilmen born?
and the people of the country answerde me that they were constrained for to
do so because they had so great poverty within Mountawban that they wist nor
what to do. But I did never see so cruel a man as the same Mawgys is, for he
bound my hands behind my back when he had robbed me, and tha^ he bet me so
sore: that I weened to have dyed thereof, and has araied me as ye see. Sir ye
be the best king in the world and ye be the lord of all this land, wherefore
I pray you for god that ye will do me right of these four sons of Aymon and
of Mawgis that great thief. And when Charlemain understood these words: he
ryghted his head up, and said. Pilgrim is it true as thou say? yea sir
said Mawgis. Now tell me thy name said Charlemayne. Sir said Mawgys, my name
is Gaidon, and I am borne in Bretayne and I am a great man in my country,
wherefore I require you in the worship of the holy sepulcre that I have
sought: that ye do me right. Pylgrime said Charlemaine I can not have no
right of them my self, for I promise thee if I had them: all the world should
not save them, but that I should make them dye a shameful death. Sir said
then Mawgys, since that ye can do me no right of them: I beseech almightye god
that is in heaven that it pleases him for to do it. Sir said the barons this
pilgrim seems to be a good man and a true as we suppose. For it is well seen
on him, give to him your alms if it please you. And then the king
commanded that men should give him twentye pound of money, and Mawgis took
them and put it in his hoode, and he said in himself, ye have given to me of
your own good but ye have done like a fool. I shall reward you right euel for
it or ever I depart fro you, and when he had the silver: he asked for some
meat for gods sake, and our ladies, for sithe yesterdaye he had not eaten
as he said, by my faith said Charlemaine thou shall have meat and drink
enough. And anon they did bring him meat, and he set him down and took
and eat well of the best. And the king said to him now eat free good pilgrim.
For thou shall be well served, and Mawgys eat still and answered never a word but
beheld only the king in his vysage. And the king said to him tell me
Pilgrim and hide no thing from me, whi have thou looked so on me? sir said
Mawgis I shall tell you with a good will. Wit that I am a well trauaylled man,
but in no place that ever I was, I saw neither christen man ne sarasyn so
goodly a prince, ne so courteous as ye be one, whereof of all the pardones that I
have won in my vyage making. I give you the have freely. Certes pilgrim
said the king and I take it gladlye. And I thank you much thereof. And Mawgys
gave him for a witness of the same his palmers staff for to kiss it, tha^
said the barons every chone certainlye sir the pilgrim has given unto you a
very fair gift, ye ought to reward him well for it. Sir said then Mawgis
I ask none other reward of you for it but that it please you for to take my
poor gift a worth, and that I may rest my self here a while for I am very
sick and weary. And thus as the king spoke to Mawgys: came than Rowlande and
Oliver. and al their folk, that brought Richard for a prisoner.

ANd when Ogier and Estorfawd the son of Oedon, and the duke Naimes saw that
Rowland would go to the pauilio^ of charlemaine with Richard: They came to
Rowlande and said to him. Sir Rowland how can ye hate Richard so sore that ye
will yield him to Charlemaine? Lords said Rowla^d what will ye that I shall
do with him: tell me and I shall do it. Sir said they we will that ye
deliver Richard and ye shall say that it was a no^her prisoner. Lords said
Rowlande if I can do this: I shall do it gladly. And these words heard a
yoman, that incontinent spurred his horse, and came to the kings tent, and
said to Charlemayne. Sir I bring you tidings sore strange, we have foughten
by the river side of Balancon, where that Reinawd the son of Aymon has keept
his own right well against Rowland your neuew, and sets not a straw by him.
And Rowland lost there more than he wan. When the Emperor charlemayne
understood that word: he was abashed greatly, and after he said to the
yoman. Tell me my friend how was yet of my neuewe Rowland? Sir said the yoman,
he fought with the four sons of Aimon, that defended themself well. But
Rowlande has brought with him prisoner one of the four sons of Aimo^ the
which is the most hardy and the most valiant of the^ al in all points.

CHarlemayn began than to lepe for Joy when he understood these tidings, and
came out of his tent, and beheld and saw Rychard that Rowlande brought, and
when Charlemayne saw Richard: he knew him well incontinente, and began to
cry for great Joy that he had. By my soul neuewe it is well seen that ye
have been there. For else Richard should not have been take. Certes sir said
Rowlande, well lied Ogierro you, for if he had not be: the four sons of
Aimon were take as well as one, and than said the king to Rychard. Whoresone by
the faith that I owe to god, ye shall be hanged by the neck, but first ye shall
have of evil and of torments enough sir said Richard I am in prison. I fear
me not to be hanged as long as my brother shall may light upon bayard and that
Mawgys be alive, Alarde, and Guicharde my right dear brethern, for if ye do
to me any outrage: no castle, ne town, ne fortress shall not keep you, but
they shall make you dye an evil death or two days be passed. When Charlemayne
heard Richard speak so proudlye: he was right an angered for it, and took a
staff with both his hands and smote Richard therewith upon his head so hard
that he made the blood run out of it to the earth, and wha^ Richard felt
himself thus wounded: he vaunced him self, and took the emperor Charlemain
with both the his arms by the waste and wrastled together a long while, so
that they fell both down the one here, and the other there. And Richard rose
up quickly and would have run upon Charlemayne but Ogyer, and Salamon
seassed him and kept him therfro, and after they said to Charlemayne. Sir ye
have done ouermuche amys, for to beat a prisoner. Certes my lords said
Richard it is more dyshonoure to the king to smite me, than it is to me for
to defend my body, but he is well wunt to do such outrages, for it is not
the first that he has done, nor it shall not be the last. And when Mawgis
saw that Charlemayn had smytten Rychard: he was sore an angered therefore, that
he had almost laid upon him with his palmers staff, but he thought if he had
do so: both Richard and he should have be dead. And when Charlemaine saw
that Richard spoke so boldly: he said to him. Richard God confound me, if
ye escape me for all your wickedness, for ye shall soon be hanged by the neck.
Sir said Richard speak more courteouslye if it please you. For I shall see you
sooner be flein quick than ye shall see me hang, nor ye shall not be so
hardye to do so, what someuer ye prate, say or crake. Charlemayne said, ye
shall not escape me but ye shall be hanged or night, and would God I held as
fast your brethren, and Mawgys that thief as I hold you now, for they
should be hanged with you to bear you company, because ye should not be
afetde. And thus as Richard strove with Charlemayne: he turned himself and
saw Mawgys behind him that held him self still lenynge upon his staff, and
he knew him well whereof he was well glad for he wist well he should not dye
sith Mawgys was there. And wha^ Richard had seen Mawgis: he was sure of his
life, and said to Charlemayne. Sir where shall I be hanged tell me? certes
said Charlemaine at the gybet of Mountfawcon and there shall your brethern may
see you, and Mawgys your cosyn. Sir it is no reason that such a man as I am
should be hanged, but make peace with us and ye shall do wysly, and if ye do
not so: ye shall sore repent it as I trow. And when Mawgis had hear^e all
that he would hear: he made no longer taryinge, but he went out^ of the
pauyllion and said no word, and when he was out of it: he began to walk so
great a pase that no horse might not have followed him, and passed through
the wood of the serpent and did so much that he came to Mountawba^, where he
found Reinawde and his folk that waited for him. And when Reinawd saw him
come without Richard: he was full sorry so that he fell do ^ne in a swoune. And
Alard and Guycharde took him up and said to him. Fair brother ye do as a
child, ye ought not to make such a sorrow. Hold your peace traitors said
Reynawd for ye have lost the best knight of the world, for I see Mawgis come
alone, wherefore I believe that Richard is dead, for if he were a live: Mawgys
would have brought him with him. For he never myssed of no thing that he took
in hand. And wha^ Alard, and Guychard understood these words: they took
thereof so great a sorrow that they fell both down in a swoune to the earth,
and when they were come again to them self they made so great sorrow that it
was pytie for to see. And this ha^ging: came there Mawgis. And when he saw the
great sorrow that his cosyns made: he was wroth for it, and said to them. What
eyleth you fair cosyns that ye make so evil cheer. Alas Mawgys said Reinawd,
what is done of our brother Richard. Cosyn said Mawgis Richard is yet in
prison, but Charlemaine has said that he shall make him to be hanged at the
gybet of mou^tfawcon, and has said that ye shall not keep him long a live
lest ye and I should rescue him, and here is.xx. li. of money that
Charlemayne has give me in his pauillion and made me have both meat, and
drink, at my pleasure. Now shall it be seen if ye love Richard, and if ye be
a good knight or not, for ye must succor and deliver him by force of arms or
else he shall die, for all the world shall not keep him otherwise therfro.

REinawd was well recomforted when he heard Mawgis speak: and after he said,
since that it is so ye Richard is yet alive: if I had but my self, my
brethern, and Mawgis, yet should I keep Richard fro death mawgre the power of
Charlemayne, and tha^ Mawgis without any long abiding took of his cope and
his hod, and took an herb and eat it, and anon the swellinge went fro him,
and when he was armed: he presented himself to Reinawd, and incontinent all his
brethern put them self in arms, and anon they took their way toward
mountfawco^. And when they were come to a bow shot nyghe fro it: Reynawde
said to his folk. Lords if ye ever loved me: think for to do now so much
that my brother Richard may be rescued from this shameful death. For I promise
you that I shall bring him with me, or else I and my brethren and Mawgys shall
die with him. Sir said his men doubt not of us, for we shall do our deuoyre.
Brother said than Alard, let us light here down, and let us hyde our self
within that bushe that we see yonder, for if we were seen: the frenshmen might
kille our brother Richard, or ever they would come. Brother said Reynawd ye
speak wisely, and than they lyghted down a foot, and put themself in a
busshement within a wood that was nighe mountfawcon. Reinawd at the right side
of it. Alard at the left side and with him Guichard and Mawgis.

HOw they were sent to ye plain of Valcoloures ye have well heard, and the
pain that reynawd and his brethren suffered and than how they went and
succored king yon of Gascoyn that had betrayed them. And how reynawde did
fight with Rowland, whereof he was sore trauaylled, and had been all ready
three days without sleep, and therefore ye ought not to be merueiled if
Reynawde his brethren and mawgis fell a sleep, and to say the trothe as soon
as Reinawd, his brethren and maugys were enbushed under the sarpyn trees they
fell into so hard a sleep, that they forgate Richard. Now god for his pytie,
have pytie upon him, and keep him. For otherwise he must die.

NOw shall we tell you of Charlemaine that was in his pauyllio, he called to him
the duke Naimes and Richard of Normandy and said to them. Lords what counseil
give you me? ye know that Richard the soon of Aymon is of great power, I
fear me that Reynawde shall come to succoure him, when I shall send him for
to be hanged, and therefore I must send company for to with stand Reynawde, his
brethren and Mawgis. And thus as the king and the duke Naymes spoke together:
he looked before him and saw Berenger of valoys, and called him and said to
him. Berenger ye are of my men for ye hold of me scotland and Wales, ye
ought to come serve me in France with all your power every year once when I
have need. I shall now quite you and release unto you all the seruise that ye
owe me, to you and to your heirs for evermore so yt ye will take richard the
son of Aymon and see that he be hanged and strangeled at mountfawcon. And if
reynawd com there for to rescue him: I pray you that ye will take in hand my
quarrel. Sir said Berenger I see well now that ye love me but a little, when ye
send me to do such a deed, it were to me a great shame if I did it, for
nothing that is to my dysworshippe I will not do with my good will, and also
ye ought not to counseyll me to it nor suffer me to do so, yet have I leuet to
serve you as my duty is for to do, than that I should do the same that ye
would put me to. And when Charlemaine saw that Berenger would not do it: he
called to therle Guydellon and said to him. Guidellon ye be my man and holds
Bauyere of me, and ye ought to serve me at any time that I call you with three
thousand men, if ye will go hang Richard the son of Aymon: I shall make you
free, and shall give you the city of Mascon. I will not do it said therle
Guydellon. But I tell you for certain that Richard shall have no harm if I
may help him fro it to my power. Than said Charlemayn go out of my sight
for ye be no good men. And than he said to Richard by god yet shall ye be
hanged in dispyte of them. Than called Charlemayne Ogier the dane, and said
to him Ogier ye be my man, it is showed unto me that ye did the other day
treason against me in the plain of Val-colours for love of Reynawde, now shall
it be seen if it is true or not. If ye will go hang Richard: I shall give
you the cite of Lion, and I shall give you quit of all the seruise that ye owe
me and your heirs also for evermore. By the faith that I owe to you sir I
shall not do it, for ye wot (...) Richard is my cousin germayne, (...) I tell
you that who so ever shall ^^^ge Richard the son of Aymon: I defy him, and I
shall help Reynawde with all my power. Go from me said Charlemayne. Gods
curse have ye, nevertheless by my bearde said he yet shall be hanged. And when
he had said so: he called to him the bishop Turpyn and said to him. Ye
bishop I shall make you Pope of rome if ye will hang Richard, sir said the
bishop Turpyn, what say ye? ye know well that I am a preeste, if I did so: I
should lose my mass and be reguler, and also ye know well that richard is my
cosyn. Would ye that I should commyt treason upon my kynsmen? certes it were
against reason. So help me god said Charlemaine ye leave it neither for kynred
nor for mass, but as a cowarde ye leave it only for fear that your crown
should be beat.

THan called Charlemayne Salamon of breton and said to him, Salamon ye know
well that ye be my man and that ye hold Breten of me, I shall give you the
duchy of Ansom if ye will hang richard the son of Aymon. Sir answered
Salamon, if it please you to command me any other thing I will be ready to
do it with a good will, but this I will not do. And I tell you for certain
that richard shall have no harm if I may. Salamon said the king, ye be a
traytoue since that ye will not do my commandment. And after this: he said
Richard I will that ye know well that ye shall be hanged in dyspite of all thy
kynsmen. Sir said richard perauenture it shall be other wise thanye ween.
and than Charlemayne turned him self toward Rowlande, and said to him Fair
nenewe go and see that he be hanged I pray you. For it is well reason that ye
do thoffice, sith thar all the frenshemen have faylled me, and also ye have
taken him, wherefore ye must needs hang him, and I shall give you Coleyn upon
the ryn and so many other countries that ye shall have enough. Sir answered
rowland if I did this: I should be taken for a traitor. For I have answered
richard before that I took him that he should have no harm of his body, and
if ye make him dye: no man shall never trust me upon my faith. wherefore I
pray the.xii. peers of France that none of them will take the charge upon
him for to see him hanged, for if he were hanged: I should be diffamed. And I
promise you that who shall hang Rychard: I shall go to Reynawde and shall put
my self in his prison, and if he will pardon me his brothers death: I shall
help him under my oath against all men with three thousand fyghtinge men well
atayed on horseback. Neuewe said than Charlemaine the devil speed you, ye
ben al false unto me.

ANd when Charlemaine saw that he might not bring his will about for to hang
Richard: he was so wroth that he shook for anger, and rose upon his feet and
said. Lords ye know well that I am the son of king Pepin and of the Queen
Bethe, my father was norished in France, and I sledde in to Spayn to Alaffre
upon the sea. And there I did so many meruaylles of arms that I was made
knight and did conquer salien my love that forsook.xv. kings bearinge crown
for my sake and she came with me in to france, and than I was crowned king
according to the right of my patrimony, and than I did wedde the said lady
Galyne with right great joy and weend to have had my realm in peace, but the
same day that I was crowned: the.xii. peers of France purposed to have made
me dye at christmasse next followynge, but our lord sent me an angel and
made him to tell me that I should go hyde my self, the which I did so and I
durst not say against it, nor I wist not where I should hyde me, but god would
that I should find Baso^ a great thief, that brought me in to a pytte, and
this hanginge men conspired my death, but Bas^ showed me al together and
through his aid I took mine enmyes, and I punyshed them afterward at my will,
and so shall I do by you, if there be any that will do contrary to my will. And
I am delybered to enquire each of you by this manner for to see who shall be
false or true to me. When Charlemaine had said this: he turned toward the
son of Oedon and said to him. Escoufe come forth I have brought you to
great honor and we have nouryshed you full dearly, ye know that ye hold
langres of me, yet shall I do to you much more good than I have done, for I
shall give to you therldome of mounfertaunt and of cleremount so that ye will
go hang that whoreson Richard, sir said Escoufe ye wot well that more Oedon
holds all the land that ye speak of, and I had never nothing thereof, but I
am felaw with Rowlande in arms. And when I shall be lord of that land that my
father holds in his hand: I shall fulfill your commandment, by saint Denis
of France ye must go see that he be hanged said Charlemain and I shall make
you lord of mo lands. Sir said Estorfawd, is it earnest that ye speak? yea
said Charlemayne. By my head sir said Estorfawde, ye would not be with me for
to see Richard ha^ge for half of your realm. When the king heard that he was
thus repreued: he took a staff and cast it after Estorfawd, but Estorfawd
stert from his place, and the staff brake in pieces against a post. And when
the.xii. peers saw that: they went all out of the pauyllyon of Charlemayne,
and wha^ that Charlemain returned him, and saw that none of all the.xii. peers
would abide there with him:

Than he said to the duke Naymes where be my.xii. peers gone? sir said duke
Naymes, they ben all gone out of your pauillion, and not without a cause, for
it becomes not to such a noble king as ye be to smite his barons, for ye
should be sore blamed.

THan when Charlemayn saw this: he called to him Richard of montrolonde and
said to him, come forth Richard of montrolonde, hear what I shall tell you,
ye know well that ye be one of them that I love best in this world but ye
must do one thing at my request. It is that ye will go hang Richard the
son of Aimon at the gybet of mou^tfawcon. Than Richard of montrolonde
answered. Sir I shall do so with a good will, for I am your man and so I ought
not to refuse your commandment, but by my soul sir Emperor if ye will that
I go hang Richard: ye shall come with me with a thousand knights well
armed, and I shall hang him where soever to please you. And if Reinawd and his
brethren come there for to rescue: I shall ieoparde mine own body for to save
youres. Now see to if ye will do this or no, for none othewise will I not go
there one foot. Go from me glotton said Charlemain, gods curse have thou.

THe king than called to him the duke Naymes, and said to him. What counseill
give you? sir sir said the duke Naimes, good if ye will believe me, sir ye wot
that Reynawde, his brethren, and Mawgis are the best knights of France, as
every man knows well, this war has lasted right long. For it is well xvi.
years that it began first, and many a noble knight has be slain for the
same, if it please you ye shall send word to Reinawde, Alarde, Guychard, and
Mawgys that they will become your men, and ye shall deliver again unto them
their brother Richard alive, and that ye will do make Reinawde and Alarde of
the xii. peers of France. And when Reinawd and his brethern shall se that ye
have done to them so great worship: they shall serve you with good heart, and
so that ye shall con them great thank for it, and I ensure you ye shall be the
more dredde and more redoubted for cause of them, and if ye have once the
four brethren and Mawgis their cosyn to your friends: there shall be no
prince in all christendom so hardy that dare move watre against you, and I
promise you sir that the more that ye keep this war against them: the more
shall ye lose thereby, and moreover they be all of our house by their father
Aymon, this know ye well, and thefore I can not hate them by no wise, Naymes
said Charlemaine. I will not do so for they all have done amys against me and
so shall I do hang Richard by the faith of my body, sir said the duke
Naymes ye shall not do so and god will, for he is of great lygnage and of our
lignage, for we should never may suffer it nor endure, and ye also should be
blamed full sore for it. But and ye will make him dye: I shall give you better
counseyll. Tell me how said Charlemayn, and I shall do it, if it seems me
good, Sir said the duke Naymes sith it please you that Richard shall dye: let
him be cast into a deep prison under the earth, and make him to be kept
surely therein that he escape not away, and command that no meat at all be
brought unto him, and so shall he dye for hungre. And ye shall not be blamed
if ye do so. Naymes said the Emperor Charlemayne, ye do Iape with me. I
know it well when ye do tell me this, ye know well that Mawgis is to great a
nigromancer. For I should never may keep Richard in prison, but that Mawgis
would have him out thorough his craft, and therefore I will not do as ye say.
Than came Ogier the dane, and said to the duke Naymes, ye make to long a
sermon, let ye king do with it, as it pleases him, For the more that ye
pray him: the worse shall he do, but he shall make peace when he see that he
can none otherwise do. But this day shall be seen who loves richard. And wha^
Ogier had said this: he went out of the pauillion, and Escoufe with him and
Richard of Normandy, the bishop Turpin and Guidellon of Bauyere, and made
their folk to be armed, and when they were armed: they were well.xii.
thousand men. And than Ogier began to cry with a hie voice. Now shall it be
seen who shall be so hardy for to lead Richard the son of Aimon to ha^gyng.
For such shall bring him that never shall come again, but he be headles, and
Ogier went in to the pauyllyon where richard was, that was bound both hands
and feet, and was blindfeld. And when Ogyer saw richard that was thus arrayed:
he had of him great pytie, so went he to him to have delivered him, but he
aduysed himself, and said that he should not do it, but he would tarry for to
see an end of it what the king should do thereof. And when richard heard
Ogier speak: he called to him and said in ye presence of the duke Naimes and
of richard of Normandye, of Guydellon of Bauyere, and of the bishop Turpyn,
and of rowlande that than happed to com thete. Fair lords I know well that
if it were at your pleasure: ye would let me go quyce, and all enough ye
have trauaylled your self for me, whereof I thank you right much, but sith
that I must needs be brought unto the galous: it is better that I poor
unhappy die alone, than that ye should have any harm for my sake, wherefore
look that ye lose not the good grace of Charlemayne, and I pray you that ye
will go unto him and tell him that he do his will upon me, for I have lever
die shortly, than to live long in sorrow. When Ogier saw richard speak so:
he was so sorye for it that he fell almost down to the ground for great
sorrow in swoune, and said to richard in anger. What say thou fool
detestable will thou be hanged? for if we said the same that thou say to
Charlemayne: all the gold of the world should not save thee, but that thou
should soon be hanged by ye neck. I care not said Richard, hap as it
hap will. And than he turned himself toward rowlande and said to him. I
pardon you sir rowlande here and before god the faith that ye have promised
me, and that ye gave me when ye took me before Balanco^ And when Ogier heard
this: he wexed almost mad for great anger, and said to rowlande. Sir believe
not richard, for he speaks as a man that is vexed in his spirits, and not
without a very great cause, but keep unto him the faith that ye have promised
to him, for it shall be your great worship, if ye do so. Ogier said
Rowlande, doubt not. I shall keep to Richard all that I have promised him and
more. When rychard heard that word: he called to him Ogier and said. Fair
cosyn for god keep your peace, for I have seen here Mawgis right now, and I wot
well he has not forgotten me. For by the faith that I owe to you such shall led
me to the gybet that shall soon lose their head, and many other mo with him.
Cosyn said Ogier is it troth that ye say that ye have seen Mawgis here? yea
said Richard without any fault, than said Ogyer, blessed be the good lord of
these tydinges, now have I no doubt of Richard since that my cousin knows of
it. And than all the.xii. peers of france lighted a foot, and came to king
Charlemayne and said to him. Sir we ben all your men sworn to you. All that
we have said and done: We did it for to see whether we might have delivered
out cosyn from de^the by your good will, but since that it pleases not to you
that he be saved and yt ye will that he be hanged: We will not speak no more
against it, because that ye anger your self to sore. Now send Richard to be
hanged by who me ye will, for he shall not be let of us therfro.

How the emperor Charlemain sent Rypus for to hang Richard. And how that
Reynawde succored him and hanged Rypus himself. Capitulum.xiiii.
depiction of a bound prisoner in an execution procession, with legs hanging in
the background; and of an unseated knight or king with crown beside a horse,
with two armed knights on horseback standing over him

THan said Charlemayne, by my faith now ye speak well and wyselye, and now I
pardon you al, and than Charlemaine called to him Ripus of ryplemond and said
to him Rypus if ye will do so much for me that ye will go hang Richard: I
shall make thee lord of great lands and ye shall be my chamberleyne all your
life. Sir said rypus I am all ready to fulfill your commandment, for Reynawd
slew my uncle beside balancon, ye speak now well said Ogyer, ye shall be a
cowarde but if ye avenge your self at this time. And when rypus understood
Ogier speak thus: he thought him self the more sure for it, and right humbly
and curteousli he kneeled down tofore the emperor Charlemaine, and kyssed his
feet and after he said to him. Sir I am ordained for to do you service and
your commandment. If it please you ye shall make me sure that when I shall
come again fro the hangyng of Richard: that none of your xii. years shall not
a wait me none evil turn for it afterward. By my faith said Charlemayne I
will do so with a good will. And than he said to Rowlande and to Olyuer, and to
all the twelve peers of france. Lords I will that ye promise him that he
shall not be hurt by none of you, nor in time to come by no manner of wise, by
cause I make him to hang Richard. The which thing all the xii. peers
promised him with a good will. And when typus had taken the oath of the.xii.
peers of france for his suretye: he went to his own tente, and made him to
be armed, And when he was armed: he lyghted on horseback, and came before king
Charlemain. And when the Emperor saw him: he said to him. Rypus take a
thousand knights with you for to keep you, and if Reynawd or Mawgis come
there: take them and hang them with Richard. Sir said rypus I shall do your
commau^demente. And than the king made them deliver Richard. And when rypus
had him: he put him to the way and mounted Richard upon a mule, and put a
halter at his neck and so led him forth like as it had be a strong thief,
and brought him before the pauyllyon of Charlemayne. And when the king saw
him: he was glad of it and said to rypus. would god that all the other sons
of Aymon were in the plyghte that Richard is now in, for I should well avenge
you and my self also upon them.

When the frenshemen saw richard that was led to hanging so vilaynouslye:
they began to make such a sorrow for him that it was meruayl, so that none
so great was never seen. Rypus rode on his way and did so much that he came
to Mountfawcon. And when ripus did see the Galous set up: he said to richard.
By god richard see yonder is your lodging, where ye shall be hanged by mine
own hands, this day shall be avenged the death of Foulques my uncle that
Reynawd slew besides Balancon, ye succoures of Mawgys is now far fro you, for
he can not keep you, but that I shall hang you now in dyspite of Reinawde and
of your other brethren. when richard heard rypus speak so proudly and saw
that he was so nyghe the gybet, and that he saw no succors cominge of no
part: he was sore aghast and a ferde, and thought he would keep rypus with
words and said to him. Ripus for god have pity upon me, for I am no man yt
should be hanged by reason, but I ought to be delivered with you, and if ye
will deliver me: I shall give you two hundred mark weight of fine gold, and I
shall make you a great lord. Certes richard said ripus ye speak for naught,
for I would not leave you but that ye should be hanged for.x. of the best
cities of france. Rypus said Richard since that ye will not have pity upon my
body: have pity upon my soul, and I prai you as much as I can that ye will
make a priest come to me for to shryue me, certes said ripus ye shall have one
with right good will. And thanne he made come a priest, some sayen that it was
a bishop for to shriue richard, the which began to shriue himself and showed
to the priest many moo sins than ever he did in his days, and this he did
for to length the time, and to see if he should have any succors or no. And
when Richard saw that his help came not: he wexed almost mad, and said to
his confessor. Sir I wot not what I should more say, give me absolucion, and
he gave him penance according to the term of his life and the confessor
went from him all weeping. And when rypus saw that richard was confessed: he
came to him and put the halter about his neck, and made him mount upon the
ladder and did shyt the cheyne whereat he should hang. And when richard saw
that his brethren came not for to save him: he wend none other but that he
should have died, and delybered himself for to suffer death at the hour, and
than he said to ripus. My friend I pray thee for God that thou suffer me a
while till I have said an oryson that I did learn in my youth to the end that
god have mercy on my soul. I will not said ripus, thou shall have no longer
respyte. Sir said his men, yes, ye shall if it please you. For if he may do
so much yt his soul be saved: he shall pray for you in the other world, and
for us also. And tha^ rypus gave respit to richard, whereof he did like a fool.
And than Richard turned him self toward the cast, and began to say his prayer
with a good heart and devoutly. For he trowed to have death without remyssion,
and he said in this manner.

GLorious Ihesus by thy blessed name, that made heaven and earth, and all the
elements that been, and went in this world as a poor man. And saved Jonas
from the bellye of the fyshe. And in Bethleem reisedest Lazaron. And delivered
Daniell from the pyt of the Lion. The sins of the thief, ye did pardonne on
the Cross, where the felons Jews had crucyfyed you. Also to Mary Magdalene
her sin ye forgave in the house of Simon. For she weshe there your feet
with her great devotion. Judas the false traytoure murmured through envy
whereof ye did show to him that he did great folly, and Judas kyssed you by
great treason, and delivered you to the Jews, whereof he was rewarded after
his deseruynge. Good Lord ye created and made our father Adam of the slyme of
thearth, and Illumyned him with the grace of the holy ghost, and after ye did
abandon to him the fruits of paradise, but he brake your commandment,
whereby mankind went to dapnacion, and we all were dampened without remyssyon,
but after ye redeemed us by the merit of your blessed passion, ye did suffer
great euylles and great affliccions for us poor sinners without any
devotion. When Longys did shoue the spear in to your dygne side the water ran
out of it and also the blood septe into his eyes, whereof he recovered his
syghte, and ye pardonned him his sins, when he called upon you for mercy.
And also to Noe ye let make by your carpenters an arc for to save himself,
and of every beast a couple. In Iosaphat good lord ye brought your Appostles
where ye did make a fair miracle for with.ii. fyshes and five loves of barley,
ye fed five thousand men all their fylle. O good lord, as I do believe this
that I have said steadfastly: keep this day my bodi fro death that is so nigh
that I be not hanged nor put in prison, but deliver me from the hands of my
enmyes, that I be not vyrupered nor brought to shame by Rypus of ryplemond that
holds me in his gynnes. Ha Reynawde my right dear brother that ye be not
here now with my brethren and with my cosyn Mawgys, ye have now forgoten me
and let me here die, wherefore I recommende me to god of heaven. And than
Richard began to weep full tenderlye and said to Rypus. Rypus do with me
what ye will.

Now shall we speak of bayarde the good horse of Reynawd, of his brethern and
Mawgis. It is truth that Bayarde the horse of Reinawd the son of Aymon that
came of the fery, and thus he understood the word when it was spoken as well
as it had be a man, when Bayarde understood the noise that the folk made
about the galous and faw that his master slept fast, he came to Reinawde and
smot him so hard with his feet in the mids of his sheelde that he made him
awake. So lept Reynawd upon his feet al afraied and beheld what it was and
looked toward Mountfawcon and saw his brother upon the ladder, so made he none
other tarying but lighted upon bayarde that ran as the wind, for at every
time he lepte.xxx. foot in a plain ground. And Alarde, Guycharde, and Mawgis
awoke for love of bayard that made great noise.

And when they were all awaked: Mawgis began to cry as high as he could upon
his horse, the devil speed the evil beast that thou have let me sleep so
long, and than he lyghted quickly upon his back, for there was no better horse
in all the world after bayarde.

When Rypus of riplemo^de that would have strangled Richard saw come his
brethren and Mawgys: he was so sore abashed with it that he wist not what he
should do, and he said than to Richard. richard ye be delivered out of my
hands, for here comen Reynawd and Mawgys, and all their puyssaunce that come
for to succoure you, and if it please you, ye shall have mercy on me. For this
that I did for to have brought you here: it was but for to have a way the
debate that Charlemaine had with the.xii. peers of France, and I knew well
that ye should be rescued without any faut by your brethren and of Mawgys
Ripus said richard mock not with me, for here is to hard a mock for me, and
ye win not much by for to gabbe me of this facion. By my soul said ripus I
mock you not, it is in good ernest that I say, ye may see them here not a
bow shot a far nor I seek not to do you any harm but go down fro the
ladder, and have mercy on me I beseech you for gods love.

Richard was meruelouslye abashed when he heard ripus speak, and he turned
his head a side and saw reynawd that came a good pase, and when he saw him:
he said rypus I shall never claim my brother reynawde for my brother, if he
hang you not by the neck to the same gybet where as ye thought to have hanged
me right now. This hanging that richard spoke to ripus: reynawde was aryued
and heard this that Richard had said to Rypus. And Reynawde began than to
cry with high voice, so help me God Ripus ye be dead, for ye be a cursed
man, and for your cursednes: I shall hang you my own self at this gybet, so
shall you be possessoure of my brother Richardes place, for all the power that
Charlemayne shall make: shall not save you therfro. This hanging: came there
Mawgis sore chaufed and said to Ripus. Ha Ripus thou traitor evil man ye have
always be ready to do some evil against us, but since that I have found you
here I shall not seek you no where else, and than Mawgis bare up his spear
for to have perced his body therewith, but Reinawde cried upon him, Cosyn touch
him not, for I would not for a great thing that a another thanne I should slay
him, for I shall avenge upon him my dear brother richard, and than he drew
out Flamberge and smote ripus with it such a stroke that he felled him dead to
cherch at the foot of the ladder, and after he said to his brethren, keep
well that none of his folk escape but that they be dead or taken. And than
reinawd descended a foot and went upon the ladder, and took richard between
his arms and brought him down, and unbound him hands and after he kyssed his
mouth and said to him. Brother how do ye, feel your self, are ye not ill
at ease?

BRother said richard I have no harm, but let me be armed I pray you. By
saint Johan said reynawde ye shall be armed anon. Brother said Richard let
me have the armours of ripus of Riplemonde, with a good will said Reynawd And
Incontynente he made Rypus to be had from his harnays and made his brther
Richard for to be armed, therewith he made him to light on horseback and took
him his sheeld and his baner. And when richard was well a parelled: Reynawde
took the halter that rypus had put about Richardes neck, and put it about
Ripus neck and after he mounted upon the laddre and drew him al dead, and
hanged him there as he would have hanged Richard, and with him well.xv. mo of
his company such as king Charlemayne loved most. And when he had hanged them:
he said to Richard. Brother thus many shall keep here watch instead of
you. When this was done: Mawgis came to Reynawde and said to him. Cousin tell
me who waked you so well in time as ye were? cousin said Reynawde, by the faith
yt I owe to god I slept as hard as though I had not slepte in.xii. nights
before, but bayarde my gentil horse awoke me, than said Mawgys. O gracyous Lord
of heaven blessed be God that made such a horse, it is not the first good
turn that Baiarde has done to you my cousin nor also it shall not be the
last. And they al went and kissed Bayarde for the goodness that he had showed
unto them.

MY lords said tha^ Reynawde what shall we now do? We have wrought well,
sith yt we have rescued the gentle Richard whole and sound, me seems that
we ought to go to Mountawban, so shall we recomfort Clare my wife and my two
children that been all evil at ease for the love of Reynawde and so shall we
eat and sleep at our ease, for we have well need thereof, and we shall do
Justice of king yon that so falsely has betrayed us. And after to morrow we shall
assail charlemayn that we love not, and we shall leave five hundred men within
Mou^tawban, and as many above Mountba^dell that shall succor us if need be.
And tha^ said Richard, sir if it please you ye shall not do so. For ye know
not the sorrow, and the great lame^tacion yt the french me^ made for love of me
in the host of Charlemayne. And I promise you ye ought well to love Ogier,
Rowland, Estorfawde the son of Oedon, Richard of normandy, the fair
Guydellon. Salamon of bretayne, and eke Oliver of Vie^. For they took great
debate for me with Charlemayn within his pauilion, and all this they did for
the love of you, for they we^de al for certain that Ripus should have hanged
me, and that I should have no succors, but and it please you give me leave that
I may show me to Ogyer the dane and to all other our kinsmen that be in
Charlemaynes court, for they shall have great Joy for to see me escape from
the death.

THan said Reynawde: forsooth Ogyer did like a valiaunte man, for me^ ought for
to love their friends and help them wha^ it is need and Reynawde said. Brother
ye son is almost under al ready. I fear me sore of you if ye will go into ye
host of Charlemayne, but and ye will needs go there: take with you four
hundred knights well horsed and well armed, and put the^ in a bussheme^t nyghe
by where ye go, and I shall be here with mi folk, and ye shall take with you
Bondy my good horn: and if ye need of any help: sou^ne it hye as ye can well
do, and I shall succor you incontinent. Sir said Richard be it as it please
you. And than Reinawde took his horn to Richard and four hundred knights,
and Richard took on his way and bare the baner of Rypus with him, and he did
so much that he came to ye host of Charlemain, and the king stood armed
before his, pauilion, with his folk that kept the way of Mountfawcon, and they
saw come the baner of Rypus, as it had be borne by Ripus himself upon his
horse.

THan when Ogyer saw Richard come out: he wend it had be Ripus of Ryplemonde,
that had hanged Richard, and of the sorrow that he took for it he fell down
to the earth in a swoune. And after wha^ he was come again to himself: he
said, Alas we have lost Richard, we shall never have him a gain.

Now it is well seen Richard that ye had few friends. And with this he
spurred his good horse Brayford and came against Richard, for he trowed verily
that it had be Ripus. And when Charlemayne saw that Ogyer ye dane ra^ toward
Ripus: he said to his folk go after him barons I shall now see which of you
is my friend or my foe here comes Rypus, certainly he has done well his
devour and has done me good service, for he has made me quite of Richard
one of my mortal enemies, and now Ogyer will kill him in treason, but and I
can hold him: I shall do such Justice upon him that it shall be spoken of it
long time here after. And than spurred their horses frenchemen and bourgoyns
after Ogyer, and Charlemayne him self went after him, but Ogier was all ready
far from them, wroth and fyers as a lion, and he cried as hye as he could.
So help me god Rypus ye be dead, and ye shall have a reward of that ye have
done unto my cousin Richard and I promise you Charlemayne shall not come time
enough for to save you from my spear. Wha^ Richard heard Ogier speak thus:
he said, have mercy upon me my fair cosyn, for I am Rychard your cosyn and
not Ripus, for we have hanged Rypus in my place, and I promise you my brother
reinawde has well avenged me upon him and therefore I am come for to show me to
you and to my other kynsmen for I wot well yt ye shall be glad thereof, ye make
lesynge false traitor of riplemonde said Ogyer, but ye shall not escape me so.
When Richard saw Ogier so sore chaufed with wrath: he said unto him. Cousin know
you not me? nay without fawt said Ogier. For ye bear the arms and the baner of
Rypus, I have done so sir said Ri^hard because yt I should not be known. By my
soul said Ogyer. I will see your face naked. For otherwise I will not believe
ye, that ye say. Sir said Richard, and ye shall see me anon. And than he
unbuckled his helm and showed his vysage. And when Ogyer saw him: he was
right glad and went and kissed the mouth of Richard full sweetly, and took
him in his arms many times and said to Richard all laughing. Cosyn what have
ye done of Ripus? by mi faith said Richard, he is now Archebisshop of the
feeldes giuyng the benediccion with his foot. For my brother Reynawde has
hanged him with his own hands, and would not suffer y^ none other should set
hand upon him, but only himself, by my soul said Ogier, he has done right
well. And than he said to Richard, fair Cousin see to your self, for here
comes Charlemayne, and god be with you, and thus returned ogier. And when
Charlemayne saw Ogier: he said to him, why went ye toward Ripus before me? Sir
said Ogier if ye were not so nyghe me: I should smite of his head. But I dare
not do it for love of you, go ye to hi^, for I make you sure, he shall have
none harm by me. Then said Charlemayne, I shall defend him against al men. And
than he spurred ye horse with the spurs and came to Richard weenyng to him
that it had been Ripus and said to him, come nere my special freende Ripus, and
take no fear of nothing. For I shall keep you against all men. Wha^ Richard
heard Charlemayne speak thus: he said to him. I will that ye know now yt I
am not the false traytoure Ripus, but I am Richard the son of Aymon, and I
am the brother of Reynawde the best knight of all the world, and of Alarde
and of Guycharde, and cosyn to the valyaunte Mawgis that ye love so much, ye
smote me to day in ye morning with a staff in the head, whereof ye mysdyd
greatly, and therefore my brother Reynawde has hanged your right well-beloved
rypus there as he would have lodged me, and.xv. of his felawes with him for to
bear him felawshyp, now beware of me for I defye you. When Charlemayne
understood these words: he was so sore an angered of it yt none can be more,
and spurred his horse and ran upon Richard, and Richard against him, and gave
ye one to the other so great strokes in their sheldes yt they brake both their
speres al i^ peers. And with the same they recountred each other with their
bodies so mightly that ye strongest of both habandon ned the stiropes, but it
happed well to Charlemayne that he abode within tharsons of the sadle, but
Richard fell down to the earth. And when Richard saw himself a ground he was
wroth for it and rose up quicklye and set hand unto his sword, and went and
smote Charlemayne upon his helm so great a stroke, that he ma^e him all
astonyed withal, but ye swerd slyded upon ye helm that was good and five down
unto the horse neck so hard that he cut it a sundre, and with this stroke: he
felled the horse sterke dead, and by all thus was Charlemayne brought to ye
ground And when Charlemayne saw him self a ground: he was sore an angered for
it, and lept upon his feet right quyckely and took his sword in his hand,
and smote Richard upon his helm so hard that he made him reele withal, and
than began between Charlemayne and Richard a sore sharp medlyng. And when
they had fought a great while together: charlemayne began to cry Mountioye
saint Denis. And when Richard heard this: he drew him a side, and took his
horn and souned it right hye, so that his brethern heard it well and so did
Mawgys. And than inco^tyne^t they spurred their horses, and came toward
Richard for to succor him. And than said Mawgys, I doubt me that Richard is
taken, but we shall dye al with him, or else we shall have him again.

Great dylygence made Reynawde for to succor Richard And when he was come
where he was: he cried suddenly Mountawban and Alarde pauereyment Guycharde
Bala^con and Richard, ardeyn and Mawgis went and ran upon a knight that was
called magon other wise Sampson Lord of Pierrefrit and rought him such a
stroke: that he felled him dead to the ground, and Reynawd smote upon another
knight by such a wise thar he shoued his sword through and through his
body, and Guycharde smote another with his sword so fyersly that he cleued
his head in two pieces, and Alarde smote the fourth knight upon his helm so
great a stroke yt he cast him dead to fore his feet, and after he ran upon
another knight rychely arrayed and gave each other such strokes that they both
fell down from their horses to the earth, and than came there Reynawde yt did
so much that the said knight was taken prisoner, which was called Hughe of
Almayne and brought him to mou^tawban. what shall I tell you more? ye battle
began to be fell, and so cruel that it was great pity for to se, for ye one
spared not ye other, but slew each other as thick as beasts. And wha^
Reynawde saw al ready yt the Sun was gone under and that the night came fast
on: he was in a doubt for his brethern, and said good lord through thy mercy
and redemption, keep me and my brethern from death and from prison, for the
night yt is at hand makes me to be aferde. And as he spoke these words: came
there king Charlemayne as fast as his horse might walop against Reynawde, and
Reynawde against him, because he knew him not, and smote each other so hard in
their sheeldes yt they made their speres to flee in pieces, and recou^tred
together both with their bodies and sheeldes so meruaylously that they
overthrew each other to the ground, and than they rose quicklye both at ones
and set hand to their swerdes, and than Charlemayne began to cry Mountioye
Saint Denis, and after said, if I be outraged by one knight only: I ought not
for to be a king nor to bear crown. Wha^ Reynawde understood Charlemayne
speak: he knew him well and withdrewe himself a side and said. Alas how am I
dyffamed? it is charlemayn to whom I have lousted, I have misprised to sore for
to have set hand upon him. Ha good lord, it is well.xvi. years a gone that I
spoke not ones with him, but I shall now speak to hi^ if I should dye for it,
for by reason and right: I ought to lose the first, wherefore I will make to him
a mendes presently, and let him do with me what he will, and when he had said
this: he went to Charlemayne and kneeled before him and said to him. Sir for
God I cry you mercy, give me trewes till that I have spoken with you. With a
good will said Charlemayne, but I wot not who ye be: how be it that ye have
iusted with me. I thank you humbly said Reynawd of that it pleases you to say
so by me. Sir wit that I am Reynawde the son of Aymon, and I cry you mercy.
And for that pytie that our lord had upon the cross of his mother when he
recommended her to saint John his disciple, I beseech you that ye will have
pity upon me and upon my brethren, ye know yt I am your man, and ye have
disherited me of my lands and have chased me out of France. It is a go.xvi.
years, and by cause of this are dead so many noble knights and valiant men
and other in so great nu^bre that it can not be said. For God ye see well what
loss that comes of ye war: for a lord yt has no piti in him has a heart
as hard as a stone. And therefore sir I beseech you for god that ye have merci
on me and of my brethern that been such knights as ye know. I speak not these
words for fear of death: ne for couetyse of richesse. For god gramerri we
have goods enough, but I speak it for to have your love only. Sir suffer
that we have peace with you, and we shall become your men for evermore and we
shall swear to you faith and legeaunce, and also I shall give you Mou^talban and
my good horse bayarde, which is the thing that I love best in this world after
my brethern and Mawgis. For there is not in all the world such another horse.
And if this cannot satisfy your mind I shall do yet more, pleseth it to you for
to pardon my brethren, and I shall for swear France for evermore that I shall
never be seen there. And I shall go to the holy sepulcre in Jerusalem bare
foot for the remembrance of you, and I nor Mawgys shall never come again into
France but we shall war still on gods enemies as ben turckes and Sarasyns.

depiction of an unseated knight or king with crown beside a horse, with two
armed knights on horseback standing over him; and of two groups of knights in
armor on horseback charging each other, with heads and body parts on the
ground

THan wha^ Charlemayn hear de Reynawde speak thus he answered him and said.
Reynawde ye speak for naught, ye did an over great folly, when ye took that
hardines upon for to speak with me in my palace as ye did, and yet ye did worse
when ye slew my nenew berthelot that I loved so much, and now ye speak of
peace and ye cry me merci. I promise you for certain that ye shall have no
peace with me, but if ye do that I shall tell you. Sir said Reinawde what shall
that be tell me I pray you? I shall show it to you with a good will said
Charlemayne and if ye do it, ye and your brethern shall accord with me, and I
shall give you again your heritage, and yet I shall give you enough of mine
own. It is that ye give me Mawgis in my hands for to do my pleasure with
him. For I hate him more than any thing in the world. Sir said Reynawde, if I
should deliver him to you, what would ye do to hi^ Reynawde said Charlemayne I
promise you I should make him to be drawn shamefully at four horses tails
through Paris, and after that I should take from the body of him the lymmes one
after another, and than I should make him to be brent and his ashes to be cast
at the wind And when he shall be arrayed as I tell you: let him than do his
inca^tacions and his magyke as he will, and I pardon him all that he can do to
me after y^. Than said Reynawde to the King. Sir would ye do it in deed as ye
say? yea said Charlemayne in good faith. Emperor said Reinawde would you not
take towns ne castelles, gold nor silver for the raunsom of Maugis? certes
nay said Charlemayne. Sir said Reynawde than shall we never be accorded to
gither. For I tell you for certain that if ye had all my brethren in your
prison, and that ye were delibered for to make them to be hanged: yet should I
not give you mawgys for to have them delivered out of your hands. Hold your
peace than said Charlemayne and beware of me for otherwise get ye no peace with
me. Sir said Reynawde I am sorry for it. for we be no men that ought to be
cast from your sexuyse, and since that ye defye me: I shall defend me, and our
lord shall me do that grace if it please him that I shall not betake of you.
And when Charlemaine heard this: he was sore angry and ran upon Reynawde. and
when Reynawde saw him come upon him he said to hi^. Sir for god mercy suffer
not that I set hand upon you, For if I should let my self for to be slain
by you: I wexe well a myschau^t. Vassayl said Charlemayne these words avails
you not for ye must needs defend yourself. And tha^ Charlemayne smote him
with Ioyuse his sword upon his helm. and the stroke slided down upon the
sheelde of Reinawde so that he kytted quyte and clean a great part thereof.
Wha^ Reinawde felt so great a stroke that king Charlemayne had given him: he
was sore an angered for it. He vaunced him self forth and caught the king with
both his arms by the back, and by the waste in manner of wrastelynge. For he
would not smite him with his sword fla^berge, and took and laid him upon ye
neck of his horse baiard, for to have brought him with him to Mountawban
without any other harm.

And when Charlemayne saw that he was ha^deled of this fation: he began to
cry as loud as he might. Mountioye saint Denis, and than he said, ha fair
nenew Rowlande, where be you? Oliver of vyenne and ye duke Naymes, and bishop
Turpyn, shall ye suffer that I be thus taken and brought as a prisoners and if
ye do so, it shall be a great shame to you al, Reynawde began tha^ to cry
Mountawban as high as he could when he heard Charlemayne speak so. And after
he said, ha my brethern and ye cosyn Mawgis come hither, and let us go, for I
have given the king such a check, that if we can now bring him with us,
we shall have peace in France from hens forth on. Than the noble peers of
France as Rowland, Oliver, and the other came to the succors of Charlemayne,
and of that other part came there for to help Reynawde his brethren and
Mawgis, and well four hundred knights well armed. And when ye valiant
knights were assembled together of both parties: ye should than have seen a
merueylous battle.

For they slew each other as beasts and there were so many speres broken, and
so many sheeldes cloven and hewed into pieces, and so man^ helmes unbuckled,
and so many a quiras broken and perced, and so many horses that drew after
their guts a long in ye feeldes, and so many a man slain that it was pytie
for to see. And when Rowland was come to the meddle: he went upon Reynawde and
gave him so great a stroke upon his helm that he was all astonyed therewith,
and after he said to him. Vasell ye have done evil yt ye trowed to have
brought away the king in this manner of wise, ye wot well it is to heavy a
bourden for to lead of this facion, ye shall leave him, and yet ye shall abye
full dear for it or ye escape me. And wha^ Reyn^wde saw that he was thus
repreued, and felt the great struck yt rowlande had given to him upon his
helmet: he was wroth, and took his sword in his hand, holdyng always
Charlemaine before him upon bayardes neck and came to Rowland and said to him.
Damp Rowlande come forth so shall ye wit how fla^berge cutteth, And when
Rowlande understood him: he came upon him, and when Reynawde saw him come: he
let fall down Charlemayne and ran upon Rowland. And there began among them
two afiers medlynge. This hangyng: came Alarde, Guycharde and the little
Richard, and ran upon Rowlande at ones and gave hime so much to do that he
must put himself to flight would he or no. And when Reynawde saw that
Charlemaine and Rowla^d had saved them self: he was right sorye for it, and he
said to his brethren. My brethren ye have wrought ill, for if ye had be still
by me we had done a great fayt, for I had taken Charlemayne that we should
have brought with us to Mou^tawban.

Sir said his brethern, we are sorry for it that we did not so, but we had so
much to do in a another place ye it is well to us yt we be escaped save with
our lives. But let us see that we do well, and sown our horn to the end ye
may gather again together your folk that be so sperkled abroad, for there is
danger because of the night that comes so fast on, and call again your
baner for we have won more than we have lost and let us go to Mou^tawban.
Reynawde that was sage did as his brethern and Mawgis counseled him when
Charlemayne saw that Reinawde had withdraw his baner: he was glad of it, for
he saw well that his folk was at the worste hand, so made he to sown the
retrete and passed Balancon, and did so much that he came again to his host.

And when he was lyghted down a foot: he said to his folk. By my soul it
goes not well with us, for Reinawde has put us from ye feeld Sir said
Rowland, speak no more of it for it is not long on you, but yt we had be
almost shamed; ye did great folly when ye iousted with Reynawde for if he had
slain you or take: the war had be ended yt has lasted so long. I leave now
here to speak of Charlemayne and of Rowlande his neuew, and return to speak
of Reynawde and his brethern and of Mawgis their cousin and of their folk.

How after that Reynawde, his brethern and Mawgys had discomfited Charlemayne,
after yt they had rescued Richard, that Ripus would have hanged at
Mountfawcon, went again upon him, and pulled down his pauyllyon, and bare away
with them the Egle of gold that was there upon, whereof the king was full sorry
for it, so that he would have taken again his crown into the hands of his
barons saying that he would not be no more their king because that they had
faylled him, and had habandonned him for the four sons of Aymon. And said to
them, yt they should crown Reynawde there with, so should he be their king. For
they loved him better than they did him. And how Olyuer said to charlemayne,
that he should take again his crown and that he should yield him Mawgis that
he had taken as he robbed the pauilion. For he abode there alone. And how
Charlemayn took again his crown, and was right glad of the pryse of Mawgys
that he hated so much.
depiction of a male figure holding a crown in front of a tent and a group of
men in armor; in the background a battle with knights on horseback and on foot
fighting with swords

HEre shows the history yt wha^ Reynawde the son of Aimo^ saw yt the king
Charlemayne was gone again to his host: he made his baner to ride before him,
and railed his folk together. And wha^ he had mounted ye mountain of
mou^tfawcon: he called his folk and said to them. Mi fre^des put your self in
ordenaunce and take on your way to Mou^tawban and I, my brethern and Mawgis
shall come behi^de. For I fear me lest ye french men yt be so wroth yt we have
disco^fited them: so shall follow for to hurt us if they can, and if they do:
We shall better suffer the pain tha^ our folk. I would not for no good that
Rowlande and Oliver should mock with us, nor that they should fi^d us in
disaraye. By my soul said Alarde. Brother Reynawde ye speak well and wiselye.
And than their folk put themself in ordenaunce, and they abode behind til
that their folk had passed Bala^con. And wha^ the most part was passed: he
took three thousa^de men of the best of his folk and said to the other, go
your ways to Mountawban. For I will go and assail the king Charlemayn in his
pauilion, what so ever it hap of it. And so shall I show his folk what I can
do, and that I am a man for to seek him and not he me

ANd wha^ Reynawde had said this: he came to the water of Balancon, and passed
over with his three thousand men, And they rode so long that they came to the
host of Charlemayne, that was wroth more than mesure requires because that
he had lost the feelde against Reynawde. And when Reynawde saw the pauilion
of Charlemayne: he said to his brethern, and to al his folk, I pray you yt ye
govern you wisely. Sir said Richard the hardy he that will be enhaunced in
price: he ought not to look so nygh, but he must Ieoparde for to conquer
worship. And when Richard had said so: he set hand to his sword, and spurred
his horse with the spurs and went straight to the pauylyon of Charlemayne,
and cut of the cords and made it fall down to the earth with the Egle of gold
massy that was of great value. When Reynawde saw this: he called Mawgis and
said to him cousin come hither, help me to bring a way this gain, sir said
Mawgis with a good will, and they lighted a foot and took the Egle of gold
that was so rich yt no man will what it was worth, and Reynawde said to his
folk. My lords smite now well and feign not your self, he that begins a
game: he ought to see an end of it to his profit if he can. Who than had
seen the folk of Charlemayne arm them and com out of their tents and ran
upon the sons of Aymon: he would have meruayled, and it was pity for to see
the great slaughter that was done there. When Mawgis had put the egle of gold
in sure hands: he went again to ye pauilion of Charlemayne and he found the
king and said to him. By my head sir Emperor, ye have troubled us sore a long
while, but ye shall bye it full dear at this hour your coming into Gascoyne
and the death of my father the duke benes of Aigremount. for I shall give to you
such a stroke yt ye shall never make war to us nor to none other. And with this:
he bare up his spear for to have shoued it through the breast of charlemayn,
but charlemai^ abode not ye stroke, but he turned himself aside and the spear
entered into the bed of the king well two foot, and when charlemayn saw this he
was aferde, and he began to cry mou^ioye saint denis, and than he said. Ha
fair neuew Rowla^d where are ye now? When Mawgis heard call Rowlande, he
looked about him and saw not Reynawde nor his brethern, for they had put
themself to the way to return home again.

OVer long tarried Mawgis in the host of Charlemayne, for Reynawde was all
ready passed over Balancon, and Rowland and Oliver were all ready come to the
calling of Charlemayne sore afraid, and when Mawgis saw them: he made no
longer taryinge, but gave the spurs to his horse and went after Reynawde as
fast as his horse might run.

And when he would have passed bala^con: he met with a great company of the
folk of Charlemayne, and Mawgis smote one of them so hard in ye sheeld, yt he
overthrew both horse and man to the earth. And after that he smote the son of
Mylen of Puyll so that he cleued his sheelde a sonder and cast him down to the
ground with a wound morta^l, and than he cried Mou^tawban and said. Ha fair
cousin Reynawde where be you, succor me for god. for if ye lose me: ye shall
have harm thereat. And than Mawgys thought well that Reynawde was gone, this
hanging: came Olyuer through the prese and came upon Mawgis and smote him so
hard yt it abode not another for sheelde nor for courset of steel, but he made
him a wound in his breast, and cast him down to the earth.

When Mawgis felt himself thus hurt and overthrown: he was right wroth for
it. So rose he up quickly upon his feet and took his swearde in his hand and
did meruayles of arms, and the night was very dark that almost ye one knew
not the other. And when Oliver saw Mawgys defend himself so well: he said to
him. I know not thee knight whom thou art, but and thou yield not thy self to
me: I shall now smite of thy head from ye shoulders. what is thy name said than
Mawgys? for and thou be a good man I shall yield me to thee and else not,
knight my name is Oliver of Vien. when Mawgys heard him named: he knew him
well, and said to him, Ha gentle knight Oliver I yield me to you upon your
faith and under such a condycion that ye shall not deliver me to Charlemayn,
for if ye deliver me in his hands I am dead without remedy and he shall make
me dye shamefully as a thief. By my faith said Olyuer this will I not do for
I dare not hyde you from Charlemayne, but yield you and I promise you yt I
shall help you to my power for to make your apoyntme^t with the king, sir said
Mawgys, and I yield me to you upon your troth and took his sword to him and
Olyuer took it, and after made him to be lighted upon a little horse, and
brought him to the pauilion of Charlemaine where they found not ye king,
because he was al afraid as ye heard before. And when Oliver saw that he found
not Charlemaine: he was sore aferd ye Mawgys should escape from him through his
incantacions and wytche craft, and said to him, Mawgis ye know how I have
taken you by arms and that ye are my prisoner, I will yt ye give me your faith
truly that ye shall not go out of with in with out my leave. Sir said Mawgis with a
good will, and thus he did swear this Olyuer. And when Oliver had taken the
oath of Mawgys: he made him to be unarmed, and made his wound to be wrapped:
and gave him a mantell upon him and made him to lie upon a bed. Now shall we
leave a little to speak of Charlemayne, of Olyuer and of Mawgys. And shall show
of Reynawde and his brethern what they did when the host of charlemayne was
moved, and how they won the Egle of Gold that was of so great value, and how
Reynawde said to his brethern, lords let us se now for to quyte us well, for it
were not good for us for to tarry here any longer. And than he made to withdraw
his folk, and made them put to the way. And as they went: Rychard said to
Reynawde. Sir we have gotten a rich proy thanked be God. For Charlemayne
shall be many a long day wroth therefore. Certes said Reynawde fair brother
ye say troth and also we have slain a great many of his folk. Ha God said
than Alarde, where is our cousin Mawgis? for I se him not here Brother said
Richard, be not aferde for Mawgys, for I believe that he is gone to Mountawban
before us, god be with him wheresoever he be said Reynawde. For he is right
sage, and a noble knight. I would not for all the Gold in the world that my
cousin Mawgis had any harm. We shall leave a little to speak of Reynawde and his
brethern that are bound to Mountawban glad of their proye: And shall now
speak of Charlemayne that was so sore wroth as I have said before.

When Charlemayne was fro his harneys: he fell in a swoune for the great anger
that he had of that he had be thus distressed. And when he was come again to
him self: he sent for the duke Naymes the bisshoppe Turpyn, Escoufe the son
of Oedon for Salamo^ of bretayne, Richard of Normandy, ye earl Guydellon and
for Ogier the dane. And when they were all gathered together: the king began
to show to them his complayntes in this manner Lords I have kept and
maynteyned you under mi tuicion ye space of.xl. years and more that no man has
not wronged you of a penye, and ye have no neighbor that dare ask you any
thing. Now me seems because that I am now old that I am but half a man and
yet not so good as I would be, and I may not be a king without you: for when
ye fail me I am no king, ye know well yt ye have left me for love of Reynawd
whereof I am right sorry as I may well, for Reynawde has taken me where I was
habandoned of you, and he has chased me out of the feeld, certes I am worse
tha^ mad of this yt ye have forsake me for Reynawde. And sith that it is thus
with me: I seek not to live any longer, nor to be king any more, and now I
take to you the crown to ye end that ye shall give it unto Reynawde when ye
will, and that ye make him king of France. For I will be no more your king.

When the.xii. peers of France, and the other lords heard Charlemayn speak
so sorowfullye: they were sore abashed that there was no man so hardye that
durst say one word. And the one looked upon the other and were abashed. And
when the duke Naimes of bauiere understood the words of Charlemain: he put him
self forth and said. Sir Emperor god forbid that ye should do as ye say, for
it were great shame to us all and also to you, but I wot well that we have
mysprysed against you in that we have supported Reinawde, but ye ought to
consydre that we have done, was by no malice: but for good entencion. For we
wend for to have made the peace of the war that has endured so long, whereby
many good true men are dead, but since that we see, that it pleases not you to
make peace with the four sons of Aimo^: take again your crown and be not
wroth with us, and we shall promise you that we al shall serve you well and
truly, and that we shall take Mountawban or a month be passed, or else we
shall die all, and from hence forth on he that shall spare the four sons of
Aimon, shall be slain of us. Than said the king Charlemayne, let all this
alone I tell you for certain that I shall never be your king, but ye yield to
me Reynawde or Mawgis the cursed thief that has mocked me so often. And when
Charlemaine had said this: he entered within his pauilion sore an angered. And
than came theere Olyuer that was sore abashed of yt he saw the king make so
evil chere, and after he said to Charlemayne. Sir whereof are ye so sore
angry? by my faith said the duke Naymes he has shamed us, for he has
forsaken his crown and his realm. Sir said than Olyuer do not so, but take
again your crown and be our lord and our king. And who does not your
commandment: chastyse him in such a manner that me^ take ensample thereby.
Olyuer said Charlemayn, ye speak for naught, for I will not do it, but I
have Reinawd or Mawgis dead or quick, sir said Olyuer now pardon us than, and
I shall deliver to you Mawgis or even.

DAmp Oliver said Charlemain I am not a child, whereof men ought to mock with.
For I ^oe well that Mawgis doubts you of nothing. Sir said Olyuer, if ye will
promise me that ye shall take again your crown, and that ye shall keep us as
ye have done before time: I shall bring him now before you, by my faith said
Charlemayne if ye do it, and that I may have him at my will (for I hate him
most of all men in the world) I shall do all that ye will desire of me, and
also I shall give you lands enough that ye shall be content of me, for if
Mawgys were not: the sons of Aymon might not endure against me, for if I had
them in prison, and though I had sworn to keep them, yet should that thief
Mawgis stele them away fro me. Sir said Olyuer I shall bring him to you
witout any doubt. And than Olyuer went to his pauylyon and Rowland with him,
and many other knights for to see Mawgis. Oliver said then to Mawgis, Mawgys
ye must come to Charlemayne. Oliver said Mawgys, ye have betrayed me, but I
wot well that Charlemaine shall be more courteous than ye have be, for he shall
do me no harm, and let us go to him in the name of god when ye will. And than
Olyuer led Mawgys to Charlemaine, and when he was within the pauillion: he
went streighte to the king and said to him. Sir ye have promised me that if I
brought Mawgis: that ye should take again your crown. And that ye should
keep us to right as ye have done before time. Certes said Charlemain it is
truth, and if ye keep your covenant: I shall do that I have promised you.
Now hold you sir said Olyuer here Mawgis, that I deliver to you for to do
your pleasure with him the which I have take and conquered by force of arms.
Wha^ the king Charlemaine saw Mawgis: he was so glad that no man might be
more, and after he said, by my faith now have I one part of my desire, thou
false thief Mawgys now I hold thee, now shall thou be rewarded of thy pride
that thou have showed to me when thou barest away mine egle of gold, and for
all the good turns and theftes that thou have done in thy days. For many
times thou have angered me sore, whereof thou shalt be now paid after thy
deseruynge. Sir said then Mawgis ye shall do with me what it please you, for I
am now in your hands, but I counseyll you for the best that ye let me go and
that ye make peace with Reinawde, and with his brethren, for ye shall get no
thing by my death, and my cosins been such that they shall aue^ge it right
well by force of arms, and if ye do as I say: ye shall have with you the
flower of knighthode of all the world. A thief said Charlemain how fearful
thou art now. Certes this that thou say shall auaylle the nothing. Sir
said Mawgis I am no thief. Now can I not do nothing since that I am in your
hands. And when ye shall have put me to death: ye shall do me no more
nothing, and yet ye shall be sorry for me or ever.xiiii. hours comen at an
end. Rybawd said Charlemaine, speak not so boldly, for and I can: thou
shalt have an evil night or ever thou escape me, nor the glutons thy cosyns
shall not help the therfro, but that I shall make the die in dispite of al thy
witch craft that thou cannest do. Now we shall leave a litel to speak of
Charlemain and of Mawgis: and we shall speak of the good knight Reynawde Alard,
of Guichard, and of the litylle Richard his brethern.

When Reynawd was departed from the host of Charlemayn as I said before: he
rode so long that he came to Mountawban and his folk with him. And when that
lady wist that her lord came: she came him against, and said to him.

Sir ye be right welcome, have ye delivered Richard? yea, verily said
Reinawde god gramercy, and blessed be god said the lady. And than she went to
Richard and kyssed him more than ten times, and there was a cheer and a feast
made right amyable. And after they had made great Joy: Reynawd began to
demand after his cousin, and the lady answered, my lord I know no tidings
of him, and when Reinawde heard that: he was sore aghast of it, and turned
himself toward his brethren and said to them. My brethren I pray you
that we may know whether our cosyn mawgis is come or not, and go seek him in
his lodges, for happily he is go for to unarm him self. And incontinent
Guicharde and Richard sought him at this lodges and asked for him to two of his
men, the which said that they had not seen him since he was gone with them.
And when they heard that: they were full sorry and went again to their brother
Reynawde and told him how they could not find him. When Reynawde
understood that they had not found him, he began to make more sorrow than
if all his brethern had be dead, and than who had seen the great moan that
Alarde, Guycharde and the little Richard made for their cosyn: he would have
had great pity for to see them, for they pulled their here is from their
heads and scratched their visages, when the good lady saw the great sorrow
that Reinawde her husband and his brethren made, she fell down in a swoune
to the earth. I promise you he that had seen that sorrow (how heard hearted that
he were could) not have kept him from weepyng.

AFter that Reynawde had thus made great sorrow: he refrained himself a
little and than said. Ha my cosyn Mawgis well ye have stolen your self from
us, and what shall we do fro hence forth since that we have lost you? When they
had made their moan in this manner a long while: Remawde said to his brethren
and to his folk. My Lords I pray you that ye leave your sorrow, for by no
sorrow the matter can not be remedyed, I pray you recomforte yourselfe, for I
will put me again to the way for to go to the wood of the serpent for to
speak with the abbot of saint Lazare to wit if he can tell us any
tydinges, for my heart judges me that before.xxiiii. hours I shall know the
certentie, and fare well my brethren till I come again, ye speak well and
wisely said Alarde, but we shall go with you for to keep you. Certes said
Reinawd, ye shall not come a foot with me: And tha^ Reinawd went in to his
chamber, and made him to be armed, and came and lighted upon bayarde his good
horse, and issued out of mou^tawban, the sheelde at the neck, and the spear in
the hand and came to balancon, and passed over the water, and when he was over
the water he found two laddes that came to water their horses from the host of
Charlemain. when the laddes saw Reynawde that was so great, and was all
alone: they said to him. Sir what be you that are alone, ye seem to be ^ noble
man. Children said Reinawd I am of Rypus folk that did escape when the sons
of Aymon hanged him at mountfawcon. And than he said again to them. What
does the valiant king Charlemaine? so it is supper time with him. Sir said
the laddes the king is well merye and makes good chere, and he has forgoten
all the sorrow that he did make for your master Rypus. For men have brought to
him Mawgys that he hated so much. Now tell me said Reinawde is Mawgis dead?
Sir said the two laddes he is yet a live. When Reynawde understood that
Mawgys was a live: his here lepte all in his belly for great Joy, and than he
said, my fair children blessed more you be sith that Mawgys is not dead. Now
I fear me not that he shall dye this day. All thus as Reinawde spoke this:
the laddes went their ways, and Reynawde abode alone thinking at the river
side, and wha^ he had thought enough: he said to himself fair God what
shall I do? I wot not now what shall I think or say, for if I go assail
Charlemayne at his supper: the night is derke, and he shall wen that I have
great folk with me and he shall be aferde to leese Mawgis and thus he might kill
him anon.

But since that I know so much of him: I shall tarry till to morrow, and if he
brings him than for to be put to death: I shall defend him with mi power, or
else I shall dye with him.

Here leueth the histori to speak of Reinawde that is at the rivers side of
balancon al alone upon Bayarde: and returns to speak of Charlemayne the
emperor king and of France.

How the king Charlemayn would have done hang Mawgys incontinent after that
Oliver had delyuerd him to him, but thorugh the mean of of the.xii. peers of
France that at ye request of Mawgys were his surety for one night only he did
so much that he escaped with his honor and acquitaunce of them that were his
sureties. And he brought with him to mountawban the crown and the sword of
the Charlemayne ye same night, and also the swerdes of all the peers of
France. Whereof the Emperor was right sorry, and how the king Charlemayne
sent word to Reynawde that he should send him again his crown and his
sword and all that Mawgis had borne away with him, and he should give him
truce for two years, to the which thing Reynawde granted whereto happed many
great evil les afterward.
depiction of a male figure presenting a bundle of swords to a knight on
horseback; and of a male figure in armor kneeling beside a line of six suits
of armor in a tent, with a castle in the background

IN this party shows the historye that when Charlemaine saw him seized of
Mawgis: he called Rowland, Olyuer, Ogier the dane, the bishop Turpyn, Richard
of Normandy, Guidellon of Bauier and the Duke Naimes and said to them, My
lords I pray you as much as I can that ye do make a great galous, for I am
delybered that before supper Mawgys the great thief shall be hanged by the neck,
for if all the world had sworn the contrary: yet shall I not keep him to the
day were come. Sir said the duke Naymes sith that it please you that Mawgis
shall dye: ye shall make him dye by a another manner of wise, if ye do after me.
And how than said Charlemayne? Sir I counseyll you that ye hang not Mawgis by
night: for Reinawde and his brethren should mock you, and they shall say
that ye durst not make him dye by day light for fear of them, and therefore
sir abide till the day become, and tha^ may ye do execucion upon him with
worship. And when the time shall become that ye will send him forth: send many
folk with him, that and Reinawde and his brethern come there for to succure
him: that they may be take, and hanged with him, Naymes said the king, ye
mock with me, for if this thief escape me: I am defamed. Sir said Mawgis, if
ye be a feared that I should go away I shall give you suretye that I shall not
go. Who is that said Charlemayn that shall be thy surety? is there nigh man in
the world that is so hardy that dare take this? Sir, said Mawgis I shall find
enough if it please you. Now shall we see said Charlemain how ye shall find
them, and tha^ Mawgis looked about him, and saw the twelve peers: so called he
Olyuer and said to him. Sir Olyuer ye promised me when I yielded me to you that
ye would help me toward Charlemayne. Now I require you that ye will be my
suretye if it please you, with a good will said Oliver upon my life and my
goods I shall be your surery, and ye sir Rowland, said Mawgis shall ye not be
also for god my surety? and ye duke Naymes, and ye Ogier, and ye Escouf, and ye
bishop Turpyn, and ye damp Richard of Normandye, and ye Guydellon of Bauyere,
I pray you all that ye will be my surety for the love of the good knight
Reinawd Mawgys said than the duke Naymes, will ye promise to us upon your
faith that ye shall not go from us without our leave? ye said Mawgis upon my
faith. And than came the duke Naymes, with the other peers of France before
the king Charlemayne, and said to him. Sir we will be surety for Mawgys upon
our lives and upon our lands that we hold of you that he shall not go a way
without your leave, and also of al your company, and we shall deliver him
again to you to morrow in the morning for to do with him what ye will. My
lords said the king since that ye will be his surety: I remyse him in to your
keepynge, by such a condicyo^, but that I have him to morrow in the morning
erly: ye shall leese all your lands. And ye shall never may return in to
douce france again. Sir said Oliver we grant it as ye have said. Lords said
the duke Naymes since that this is done: let us go recomforte Mawgys, for he
is well sorry. Lords said than Mawgis to them again. Since that ye have done me
one good turn: do me a another. I pray you get me some meat, for I am ill a
hungered. When Charlemayne understood Mawgis speak: he looked upon him, and
said all laughinge. And shalt thou eat said Charlemaine? yea, said Mawgis if
I can have any meat. Now hear said Charlemaine, what it is of this devil
here yt asks for meat and so little a term he has to live. For and I were
in his plyght: I should not now have courage for to eat. Sir said the duke
Naymes ye say ill, for who has eaten well: he is the better at his ease
whereof I pray you that ye let him have some meat. And then the king washed
his hands for to go to soupper and said, where shall Mawgis be for to eat?
sir said Rowlande, he shall well be by you. Neuewe said the king ye say right
well, for here shall we be sure of him and I had thought for to do so. For
I should not date trust him to none other man. And than the king was set at
the table, and he made Mawgys to sit next him, and served him at the table,
for as long as the supper lasted: he durst not eat nor drink, least that
Mawgys should work wytche craft upon him, but Mawgis eat right well, for he
had a good appetit to his meat. And when Oliver saw that: he began to lawghe
and showed Rowland and after said to him. Have ye seen how the king durst not
eat all this supper, for fear that mawgys should work wytchecraft upon him.
Surely said Rowlande, it is true. After supper Charlemaine called his stuarde,
and said to him, stuwarde I pray you bring me.xl. torches, and that they
brenne all the night. Sir said the stuarde, I shall do your commandment.
And when Charlemayne had ordained this: he returned him toward Rowlande and
said to him. Fair neuew I pray you that ye and Olyuer and all the twelve peers
of France that ye will watch to night with me, for to keep this thief
Mawgys, and make an hundred men to be armed, that shall watch with us and make
the play at the tables and at the chesses, to the end that none of us fall a
sleep, and also make a thousand knights to make good watch without to the
end that if Mawgys should escape us: they should take him again. And when
Charlemayne had ordained this: he set him down upon his bed, and he made
Mawgis to sit down by him. And of that other part Rowlande, Olyuer, Ogier the
Dane, and all the twelve peers round about the bed. Sir said then Mawgys,
where shall I sleep. What say ye said Charlemain will ye sleep? yea, said
Mawgys full feign, if please you to suffer me. By my soul said Charlemayne ye
shall have evil rest here, for ye shall not sleep as long as ye be a live.
For ye shall be hanged to morow-at the spryngynge of the day. Sir said Mawgis,
ye do me great wrong. Wherefore have I given you surety, but only that I may
have my ease for so long as I have for to live. Other suffer me to take my
rest and that I may sleep: or else hold quite my suretees, certes false
thief said Charlemaine, all this shall not auayl thee. For I will that thy
sureties go quite, and discharged. But therefore ye be not out of my hands.
And than he made to be brought a great pair of yrens, and fetted him with
them both his feet together. And made the cheyn to be fastened hard at a
pillar, and with all he gave him a great coler of iron about his neck,
whereof the king kept the key himself. And when Mawgis was arraied of this
facio^: Charlemaine said to him. By my soul Mawgis ye shall not escape me
now. Sir said Mawis, ye mock well with me. But I tell you now before the.xii.
peers of France that I shall see Mountawban or it be to morrow prime.

When Charlemayne understood this that Mawgys said to him: he trowed to have
wexed mad all quick. So he stood up and set hand to his swerd, and came
unto Mawgys all wroth for to have smiten of his head. But when Rowland saw
that: he auau^sed him and said to the king. Sir for God mercy, for if ye
slew him: we been all shamed for evermore, sir ye ought not to take heed to
that he says to you. For that, that he says he says it like a man that is
in despeyre. And how might that be that he should escape you as ye hold him
now? Verily my neuewe I wot not how, but yt he here before time has so often
mocked me, makes me to doubt of him, but at all adventure I shall leave him in
peace till to morrow that he shall be hanged. Sir said Rowlande, ye say well.
Than all they that were there began to play at the tables and at the chesse,
and many other games. And when it came that they had played long: they began
all to have great lust to sleep. And when Mawgis saw that: he made his
charm. And when he had made it: they began all to fall in a strong sleep,
and Charlemaine him self slepte so hard, that he fell backewarde upon his
bed. And when Mawgys saw that Charlemayne was so fast a sleep: and all the
twelve peers of France and all the company of them: he began to make a
another charm, that was of such virtue that his feters that were on his feet,
and the coler and the cheyne of yren fell all to the ground a sundre. And
then Mawgys rose upon his feet, and saw Charlemaine that slept so well
grouelynge with his head a wrye, and he took then a pelow and righted up his
head with all. And then he vngirded him and took Joyous his sword, and
girded about him, and then after he went to Rowland and took from him durandal
his good sword, and after he took Hauteclere from Oliver and Cortyn from
Ogier. And after this: he went to ye coffres, and took there out all the
treasour of Charlemayne and went with all this straight to Mountawban. And when
Mawgis had taken all this: he took an herb and rubbed Charlemaynes nose and
his lips with it, and vnhosed him and after he shoued him with the finger,
and said to him, awake sir emperor, I promised you yester night that I
should not go without I should take my leave of you, farewell I go now. And
when he had said this: he went out of the pauilion, and set him to the way
toward Mountawban. And when Charlemayne understood that Mawgys had said to
him: he rose upon his feet so wroth that men could be no more, and called
upon his twelve peers that he could not awake. And when he saw that: he
bethought himself an herb that he had brought with him from beyond the
great sea, and took it and rubbed withal the nose the mouth and the eien of
Rowlande, and in like wise to all the other.xii. peers of France, and
incontinent they were awaked, and rose upon their feet sore abashed. and wha^
they were all awaked: they began to look the one upon the other. And the
first that began to speak: was the duke Naymes that said to the king where is
mawgies? By my soul said Charlemayne, ye shall deliver him me again, for ye
have let him go wilfully, For if ye would have suffered me to have hanged him
yesterday: I had be otherwise ryd of him. Rowlande said Olyuer, saw ye him go
hens? Nay by saint Denis said Rowland. I saw him well go said Charlemaine.
Sir said Rowland ye ought then to have told us of it, for he should not
have escaped so. And in saying this: Rowland looks at his side, and he saw
not durandal his sword, whereof he did cast a great sighe. And than Charlemayne
said to him. Neuew where is your swerd? by my head I know well that ye thief
Mawgis has be wytched us. For none of us has his sword, and also he has my
hosen with him. Now has he well mocked us.

ANd when the.xii. peers of france saw that they had lost al their good
swerds: they were right sorry for it more than any man can say. And after
Rowland said, by my faith Mawgis has won a great gain, when he bears
away thus our swerdes, for they ben more worth tha^ is all Paris. And when
Charlemayne perceived that his cofers were open: he went anon and looked in,
and he was sore an angered wha^ he found not his Crown, nor the best part of
his treasoure, whereof he made great sorrow, and after said, Ha false thief
Mawgis full little I have gotten of thee and of thy taking. And who than had
seen the sorrow that the.xii. peers of France made: would have had no lust
to lawghe.

Now shall we tell you a little of Mawgys that went as fast as ever he could
toward Mountawban and he came to pass over the water of Bala^con at that
place where Reinawde was full heavy, and full of sorrow, by cause he knew no
tydinges of Mawgys, but when Mawgys had passed over the water: bayarde smelled
him and begane to cry and came toward Mawgys, would Reinawde or no. And when
Mawgys saw Reinawde: he knew him well, and said to him lawghinge. Knighte
what be ye that rides at this time of night? and Reinawd said to him ye know
well I am your cousin Reinawd the son of Aimon, and th^n he lighted from
bayard, and came to Mawgis and kyssed him by great love many times, and than
said to him. Fair cousin thanked be our lord that I see you delivered from the
hands of Charlemaine. By my faith said Mawgis, ye forgate me well behind.
Cosyn said Reynawd, by my soul I could not do thereto. For I have be here
sith yester day even. And I promise you that I was delibered for to have
succored you or else to have dyed with you. My cousin said Mawgys I thank
you, lig^t upon your horse, and let us go to Mountawban. When Reynawde was
upon his horse again: he said to Mawgis. My cos^n what is that ye have laden.
Cosyn said Mawis it is the crown of Charlemayne and his sword Joyous,
durandall the sword of Rowlande, and the swerdes of all the.xii. peers of
France. Cosyn said Reinawde ye have wroughte well god gramercye, but of the
sword of Ogyer me displeases. Cosyn said Mawgis I have done it all wilfully
to the end that the king should mark thereby none evil, and that he were not a
peched of treason. And than he showed him all the cause and the manner that
Charlemayn had hold him. Cousin said Reynawde ye did right well. And when he
had said this: they went on their way toward Mountawban, and they met in
their way Alarde, Guicharde and the lytil Richard that came ridinge making
great moan for doubt of Reinawde. And when Reinawde saw them come: he said
to them, whether go you my fair brethern? Sir said they we went seekinge
after you, ye have found me said Reinawde, and I have found our cousin Mawgis.
And wha^ they understood this tydinges: they were right glad and thanked
our lord of it. And after Alarde said to Mawgis Fair cousin where became ye
that ye came not with us again. Alard said Mawgys, when Richard was entered
within the pauillion of Charlemain, and had take the egle of gold: I tarried in
the pauillion for to slay Charlemaine, and it lacked but litill that I slew
him, and when I trowed to have comen after you. I found a great rowte of
knights, that arested me, and so I defended me of all my power. And than came
Oliver of Vyenne that ouerthrewe me down, and I yielded me to him for his
prisoner, the which delivered me to Charlemayne that would have made me to be
hanged shamefullye but lord I thank you, I have done so much that I am
escaped. Cousin said Alarde, it is well happed to you, when they had devised
long enough: they went to Mountawban, where they made great feast, when they
were come there: it is not to be asked if the good lady clare was well glad, For
incootinente she did to be made ready diverse meats for the diner, and when
they had eaten: they went to rest, for they were weary and specially Reynawde
and Mawgis, would feign have slept. And the next day they went to hear their
Mass at the church of Mountawban, and when the mass was done: Reinawde
called Mawgis his cousin and his brethren, and said to them. Lords show me
the bothie that ye gate yesterdaie. Sir said Richard gladly since that it
please you. And than he took the egle that was of gold massi, and of precious
stones and gave it to Reinawde. And when Reinawde saw that gift so rich: he
was glad of it by cause of the great valor of it. Reinawd called Mawgis and
said to him Cousin what shall we do with this egle? My cousin said Mawgis me
seems that ye ought to put him above upon the apple of the great tower of
this castle to the end that Charlemayne and all his host may see it. By my
soul said Reinawdeye, say well. And they took the egle and made it to be
borne upon the high tower of Mountawban. And when the son did shine upon
this Egle: it casted so great a light: that it might be seen.x. miles thence.
And when Charlemaine and his folk apperceued it: they were right sorye for it
and an angered.

When Charlemayne the great Emperor saw that the four sons of Aymon
mocked him thus: he called to him Rowland and Olyuer, and all the other Peers
of France and said to them. Lords it is sore mishapped to us since we came in
this land of Gascoygn, for I have lost my crown and Ioious my sword and mine
egle of gold that was of so great value as ye all know, and ye al have lost
your good swerdes, where of we be^ well shamed, and also we have been chased fro
the feeld shamefully. Now have well the four sons of Aimon shamed us al
through that falce thief Mawgis. Wherefore my faite lords I complain me unto
you prayinge that you will help me to avenge me upon them, for they have done
you shame as well as unto me. Than said the.xii. peers of France, sir we be
ready for to do all that ye will. I will said the king that ye Ogier, also
the duke Naymes and ye bishop Turpyn, and ye Escoufe, the son of Oedon, that
are of the kindred of Reinawde: that ye go to Mountawban, and so tell to
Reinawde, to his brethern and Mawgys that they deliver me again my crown.
Joyous my swerd, and also mine Egle of gold, and the swerdes of you al and I
shall give them truce for two years. And I shall do al mine host to return
again in to france, sir answered Ogier. I shall with a good will do your
commandment, but I fear me of Reinawde that he will keep us prisoners. Ha
Ogier, said Charlemayne: ye fear him but litell. when the barons heard the
commandment of the king: they made no tarying but lighted on horsbacke, and
rode to Mountawban. And wha^ they were come together to the draw bridge: the
porter that keept ward upon the gate, said to them lords what be ye? my
friend said Ogyer, we are of the folk of Charlemaine, go your way to
Reinawd, and tell him that the Duke Naymes the bishop Turpin, Escoufe the son
of Oedon, and Ogier the Dane would speak with him. My lords said yt porter, I
shall go to him incontinent, and than he went to Reynawde and showed him how
four knights were at the gate that would speak with him, what be they said
Reinawde? My lord said the porter they told me that the one is called the
duke Naymes, that other the bishop Turpin, and a another Escoufe the son of
Oedon, and the fourth is named Ogyer the dane. When Reynawd heard this: he
stood up and said to his three brethern. My lords here comes four valiant
k^yghtes and wise. I beseech you that we show to them that we been no children
for to be rocked in a sleep. Cousin said Mawgis ye speak well and wisely. Me
seems it were good that we should know, wherefore they come, or they enter, to
the end that we may best answer to them. Than they went unto the gate, and
made the draw bridge to be let down. And when it was done: Richard issued
out first upon the bridge, and went against them and made to them great honor
and said to them. My lords ye be right welcome, this castle is ^t your
commandment. For I hold me so sure of my brother Reinawd that I dare offer
it to you, cosyn said the messangers gramercye. And than Reinawde auaunced him
self, and saluted them honorably, and after took Ogier by the hand, and he
him, and the other three he brought to the Dungeon, where they were received
honestly by the lady Clare the wife of Reinawde. And when Reinawde had received
them: he made them to sit upon a benche, and than he said to them, fair
lords I pray you that ye will tell us wherefore ye become? For ye come not
without a great cause, ye know well sir Reynawd said Ogier, that all we that
been here have ever loved you well. And I promise you if it had been our will:
ye should have had good peace with the king Charlemayne, but many times he
has vnbrayed us thereof, ye must know that your cosyn Mawgis has shamed us
al, for we were his surety to Charlemayne upon our oath to deliver him at his
will. And the said Mawgis is come hither without our leave against his promise,
and that worse is: he has robbed the crown of the king Charlemayne and his
sword, and all the swerdes of us all.xii. peers. Wherefore Charlemain sends
to you word by us that ye see here, that ye deliver him again his crown, the
egle of gold, and all our swerdes. And he shall give you truce for two years,
and he shall do return al his army in to france. After that Ogyer had said
this: Mawgis stood up and spoke by the leave of Reynawde, and said, Lords ye
ben right welcome in this castle of Mountawban. And if it please you, ye shall
not speak no more of this matter now, and ye shall abide this night with us,
and to morrow ye shall have an answer of that ye have said. Reynawde said
than Ogier, will ye keep that Mawgys has said? yea without fault said Reinawde,
since that it pleases you: we shall abide for the love of you. And than Mawgys
went to the stuarde of Mountawban, and advised him the meats. Whereof the
knights of Charlemaine should be feasted with all, and told that they should
be well served, what so ever it cost. And see that the great cup be borne before
the duke Naymes, the which I did conquer at reyns. My lord answered the
stuarde, doubt not, ye shall well be served at my power. And the^^^e Mawgys
came again. And when Reynawde saw him come: he calls him and said to him,
my cosyn I pray you see that we be well served, sir said Mawgis, I have
purueyed for it al ready. Wha^ Reinawd understood him: he was glad of it, and
began to devise with ye folk of Charlemaine right honestly and of many
things. And when he thought that the meat might be well ready: he and his
brethren took the four knights and brought them to the halle to their
meat, and when they were there: Mawgys made them wash, and than he took the
duke Naimes and made him sit down, and my lady Clare next him. And he made sit
down ye bishop Turpyn and Reynawde and than Ogyer and Alarde, and after
Guicharde and Escoufe the son of Oedon, and than the little Rychard. And when
they were all set at the table, the meats of ye first course were brought to
the board, and tha^ the other one after another by good ordenau^ce and fair.
And to say the truth they were well and honorably served, and of many and
diverse seruises of royal meats. And after that they had well eaten at their
ease: the duke Naymes called Reynawd and said to him. Good cousin I pray you
that ye will delyber your self for to give us a good answer of yt ye have
heard of us. Lords said Reynawde I shall do it in so much that the king
shall have a cause to be conte^te of me. For I shall do all that he will for
to have peace and his love withal, and that for the love of the other my
lords yt be here now. And than Reynawde made to bring the sword of
Charlemayne and the swerdes of ye twelve peers, and also the crown and the
Egle of gold. And when Ogyer saw this: he began to laughe and said. By my
soul Reynawde ye had here a fair gain if ye had kept it. And when Richard
saw that his brother would deliver the Egle of gold: he began for to say By
saint poule my fair brother ye shall not do so. Ye shall not deliver again
that I have won well and truly by force of arms, brother Richard said
Reynawde, let me do I pray you. I will not said Richard by my soul, for
Charlemayne himself smote me while that I was prisoner within his pauilion
full sha^efully with a staff. Lords said the duke Naymes, let this a lone.
And take we that Reynawde gives to us in thank, for he has done enough, By
my faith said ye bishop Turpyn he does so. And than they took the crown of
Charlemayne and all their swerdes. And when they had them: Ogyer said to
Reynawde. My cosyn I counsel you that ye come with us, and Alarde and Guycharde
shall abide here to keep your castle, Sir said Reynawde I fear me to sore ye
king would make me for to be killed outrageously. Come on hardely said the
duke Naymes, for we shall led you well surely. For sith that ye shall be with us:
ye ought not to fear nothing. Lords said than Reynawde I shall do your
commandment under your assuring.

When Reynawde was accorded for to go with the Duke Naimes, and with the
bishop Turpyn, with Ogyer the dane and Escoufe the son of Oedon: they
lyghted all upon their horses, and Reynawde mounted upon bayarde and armed him.
And in like wise did Alarde. And when the duchess Clare saw that Reynawde her
Lord would go with the folk of the Emperor Charlemayne: she came before them
and kneeled down before them, and said unto them my lords, I thank you much
of the favor that ye did show to my brother Richard and to Mawgis, now again
I pray you that ye will have Reynawde for reco^mended mi lord and my dear
husband the which ye led with you. Madame said Ogier, have no doubt that
Reynawde shall have any harm. For we should not suffer it for nothing for to
leese both life and gooddes. And than they put them to the way for to go
thens, and Reinawd took ten knights with him for to bear him felawship. when
they were come to the river of Balanco^: they sought after ye passage and
passed over. And when they were all over: Ogier began for to sai. Lords ye wot
well all is of evil courage against Reynawd, wherefore I doubt me of him yt we
have brought here with us. I counsel that we know first the will of
charlemayne or ever he see Reynawd, Ogier said the duke Naymes, ye speak well
and wisely we shall go speak ye and I to Charlemaine, and Reynawde shall abide
here till we come again. Lords said than Reynawde I shall do that ye counsel
me, but I pray you hold me that ye have promised me, that is that ye shall
keep my body and my lymmes from harm. Reynawde said the duke Naymes. we shall
rather dye, than that ye should have any harm. And than he and Ogyer took the
way toward the host of Charlemayne, and Reinawde abode with the bishop
Turpyn and with the son of Oedon. Now harken of Pynabell a spy that longed
unto ye king Charlemayne, wit it that the spy was at the river side of
Balancon with this felawship. when the words before said were spoken, when the
spy had well understand all the conclucion: he stale himself fro the company
and rode a good pace as he might in the world and came to Charlemayne, to
whom he said in this manner, sir I bring you tidinges whereof ye shall be right
glad my freende said Charlemayne thou art well come. I pray you tell me what
tidinges ye bring? wit it sir that I have left Reynawde and Alarde his brother
at the river side of Balancon with the bishop Turpyn and Escouf the Son of
Oedon, and the duke Naymes, and Ogyer are coming toward you for to ask leave
if they shall bring them to you with sureti. Is it troth said Charlemaine?
yea without faut said Pinable. By my soul said the king I shall reward thee
for it right well, but keep well that ye show not this to no man upon thy life,
for I shall put thereto a good remedy. And than he beheld about him and saw
Oliver and said, Olyuer incontinent and without any desaye, take two hundred
knights with horses and well armed, and led them at the river side of
Balancon, where ye shall find Reynawde and Alarde, and see that ye take them
and bring them hither, and if ye do this: ask of me what ye will, and ye
shall have it. And than said Oliver, sir I shall well do your commandment.
And than he took with him two hundred knights as ye king Charlemayne had
ordained hi^, and took his way toward the river of Balancon. Now god through
his pity save the good knight Reynawde and Alarde his dear brother, for they
ben in great peril of their lives. This hangyng that Olyuer was gone toward
the river of Balancon: the duke Naymes and Ogyer came to the host and lighted
a fore the pauilion of the king, and went in. And when they saw the king:
they made him the reverence, but he said no word to them. wha^ Ogier saw the
countenance of the king: he said to him. Sir what se^blaunt is this that ye
show to us? I marvel me greatli that ye make us so evil cheer seen that we
come fro thens where ye have send us, yt was to Mou^tawba^, where we have
spoken with Reynawde the son of Aymon, the which is al together ready for to
do all that your pleasur is, and so he has delivered us again your crown and
al our swerdes, as for your egle: ye shall have it wha^ ye will. Ogyer said than
Charlemain what have ye done of Reynawde for I am sure that ye have brought
him with you? Sir said Ogier it is troth verily we have brought him with us upon
our faith for to take sureties of you of truce yt ye have granted him. By
saint Denis (said charlemayne) I will not thereof, for if I can have him ones in
my hands: all the gold in the world shall not save him but I shall make him die
a shamfull death. Sir said Ogyer what say ye? I meruel me greatly of that ye
have said. Damp emperor said than the duke Naymes, so great a king as ye be:
ought never to have said such words as ye now have vttred with your mouth for
the value of half his realm, ha gods sweet sir give not to your self so
great a blame, and if ye do this that ye say: I promise you that I, Ogier, the
bishop Turpin and the son of Oedon, we shall yield you evil for evil, and
yet we shall save Reynawde at our power so that ye shall not do him harm,
since that we have brought him upon our faith. Now shall we se said Charlemayne
how ye shall conne help him. Sir (said Ogyer) if ye do to us any outrage or
dishonor: I promise you we shall forsake the homage and the faith that we owe
to you, and we shall do the worste that we can against you and against your
realm. we shall now presently speak a little of Oliver yt was gone to Balancon.
It happed as by fortune that the said Oliver ouertooke Reynawde so nigh ye
which was on foot: that he could not have leyser for to mount upon bayard.
And when Reynawde saw that he might not light upon his horse because that
Oliver had overtaken him so sore: he was sore an angered of it that almost he
waxed mad al quick. And than he returned him toward the bishop Turpyn and
toward Escoufe and said to them, Vassailes ye have betrayed me falsli and I
would never believe it, wherein ye have done great sin and great evil. Sir
said the bishop Turpyn, I swear to you upon my faith that hereof we never knew
nothing nor thought it, and I promise you that we shall live and dye with you,
and with this: Reynawde turned toward Oliver and said to him Oliver may ye
yield me again the goodness that I showed to you in the plain of Val-colours,
I know that one curteysie requires another, for when ye were to the ground
cast, I deliuerde you your horse again, and help you to light upon him
again, sir said Oliver it is troth that ye say, and I promise you that I am
right sorye that I have found you now here. For I know no man in the world
that would do to you any harm, but I would be wroth with him, this hanging
that Reynawde and Olyuer spoke together: there came Rowlande that was departed
from thost after Oliver for to help him to take Reynawde, and when he was night
he began to cry. Ha ha Reynawde, by my soul ye be now taken and be trapped.
And when he had said this there was Ogier behind him yt had followed him with
the point of the spear, the which said to him, by my head sir Rowlande ye
shall do no harm to Reynawde, For the Duke Naymes and I have brought him
hither upon our faith, for to take ye sureties of the trewes that we have given
to him in the kings behalf as ye know he had charged us to do And I tell you
Sir Rowland if ye do to him any harm: ye shall do it to us. Ogier said
Rowland ye shall now be an evil surety for him. Rowland said Ogier, I make
mine avowe to you yt if ye saut Reynawd: we four that been here shall help
him against you. Rowlande said than Oliver I pray you that ye let Reynawde in
peace, for I promise you he did ones to me a curteyse turn, and a great
pleasur, and now I will reward him for it, if it please you, and I shall tell
you what we shall do. we shall led Reynawde before Charlemayne. And we
shall pray him that he treat him curteisly, and we shall parforce our self to
make his appointment. Lords said the Duke Names, Oliver has spoken honestly.
I counsel that we lead Reinawde tofore Charlemaine, for to see what he will
do of him. And I swear by god if he will do any outrage to Reinawde: we shall
not suffer it for to dye for it, and we shall help him to save him self to our
power. After all these words: they took them self on their way, for to lead
Reynawde to Charlemayne.

When Rowland and Olyuer had brought Reynawde into the pauylyon of ye king
Charlemaine: wit it that the duke Naymes, ye bishop Turpin, Ogyer the dane,
also Escouf the so^n of Oedon went never one foot from Reynawd. But when
Oliver would have presented Reynawde to Charlemayne: Ogier auaunced himself and
said to the king in this manner. Sir ye know how ye did send us four that been here before you in your message to Mountawban, for to tell unto Reynawde as
ye had charged us, to whom we did show in your behalf, that if he would
deliver to you again your Crown, and all the good sweardes that Mawgys had
borne with him, and the Egle of gold, ye should give him touce for two years,
and that ye should do turn your host into France again. wit that Reynawde
has done all that we have required him of in your behalf, and we have
brought him with us under your saufe conduyte, and so we take him under our
charge that he should have no more harm tha^ we should. Notwithstanding ye
have made him to be taken, the which thing we would never have thought that
ye would have done it, seen that here be^ your crown and your swerdes, and
the Egle of gold is at your pleasure when ye will have it. And moreover we
promised him that if ye did to him any harm: that ye should do it to us as
well as to him, and I promise you if ye do to him any harm, ye shall be
greatly blamed for it of all the world. But and if ye will work honestly here
in and like a true emperor and king for to keep that neither ye nor we be not
blamed for it: send Reynawde again to Mountawba^, with this that he has
taken to us, and when he shall be therein again: do to him the worste that ye
can.

OGyer said Charlemayne, ye speak for naught and all your fellows also. For
I shall not do so but I shall do after mine own will though ye all had sworn
the contrary. And so shall I not do of Reynawde as I did of ye false thief
mawgis. And when Charlemayne had said thus: he turned him toward Reynawde,
and said to him. Reynawd Reynawde I hold you now, certes I shall so keep you
that ye shall not deceive me as did Mawgys, for I shall make you anon to be
smytte^ and cut in small pieces, and than burnt all to powder. Sir said
Reynawde ye shall not do so and god will. Ogyer said Charlemaine, will ye
defend against me my mortal enemy? Sir said Ogier I will not defend your
enemies against you: but I promise you that I shall defend my troth against
all men. Sir said than Reynawde what is your pleasure yt I do? ye have called
me traitor, wit it that I was never such nor no man of my lyuage. nor I know
not in the world that says that I have be a traitor, or yt I have done any
treason against you, out that I should fight in the quarrel against him body
to body. By my faith said Charlemayne, I shall make it to be proved upon you by
force of arms Sir said Reynawde, ye speak now as a king, and here is my
gage that I give, saying that I am as true a man as any that is in all the
world and in like wise all they of my lineage. Than Charlemayne said to him,
if ye give me sureties: wit that I shall take up your gage, and not else. Sir
said reynawde I shall find surety enough. Than he turned him and saw Ogyer,
and said to him. Sir Ogyer come forth, and ye duke Naymes, and also ye bosshop
Turpyn and ye Escouf the son of Oedon, be my surety I I pray you, for ye
ought to be so, ye know that I did never untruth Reynawde said the duke
Naymes we shall be surety for you with a good will.

THan said Reynawde, sir here ben my sureties that I take you, are ye
content of the^? yea said Charlemayne I ask no more. Sir said than Reynawde,
who is he yt shall make the battle? By my faith said Charlemayne, my self
shall it be. Sir said Rowland, ye shall not do so and it please you, for I
shall fight for you my self. Sir said Reynawde ordeyn in your place such as it
shall please you, and when he had said this word: bayard was taken again to
Reinawde, ye which lighted upon and went toward mountawban, and with him went
Ogyer the dane, the duke Naymes and escouf the son of Oedon, and together
alard that had betaken as Reynawd. And wha^ they were come nigh mou^tawban:
Guycharde, Richard and Mawgys saw them come, and came them against, and when
Richard saw Reynawde: he asked of him how he had done? By my faith said
Reynawde we are not welcome for the king knew that we were at Balancon where
Ogyer had left us and he sent anon Olyuer and Rowla^d for to take us, and were
overtaken so suddenly that we could not light upon our horses, and we were
brought to Charlemayne, and I promise you he is a cruel man fulfilled with all
cursednes. And thus recounted Reynawde to his brethern all that ye have now
heard before.

THat night Reinawde and his compani made good cheer at mou^tawban and made
the folk of charlemayne to be well feasted by ye noble lady Clare his wife
right honorably, and after they had supped well: they went to bed for that
night and when the morning was come that every man was up: Reynawde and his
felawship went to hear mass in the chapel of saint Nycolas, and Reynawde
offered.iiii. mark of gold And when the mass was done: reinawde and all his
barons asked after their arms for to arm them. wha^ they were armed: Reynawde
took leave of his wife before all the company, and than he called to him his
brethern and Mawgis and said to them. My lords I leave this castle in your
protection and sauf guard, and I recommende you my wife and my children, for
now I go fight with the best knight of the world, now I know not what shall
betyde of me, wherefore I pray you yt ye will keep well this castle, for I
promise you if I dye: ye shall have need of it here is Ogier that shall come
with me and the Duke Naymes also, for they ben my sureties to the king
Charlemain By my soul said Alarde ye speak for naught, for we shall go
with you, and we shall bear you company where someuer ye go and so shall we
see the battle, and how ye shall be mayntened in your right and if ye have need
of help: ye shall find us ready to your succors. By Saint Paul said Ogier
the dane, Alarde has spoken wisely, and when Reynawde saw this: he called
Mawgis and said to him. My fair cousin I pray you that ye will abide here, and
that ye will keep all well sith that my brethern will come with me. Reynawde
said Mawgis, I shall do as it pleases you, and I promise you ye Mountawban
shall have no harm by my defaute. when Reynawd had ordained all well: he took
on incontinent his way in the felawshyp of his brethern and of the barons before
said. And when they came there as ye battle should be done: Reinawd lighted a
foot and tarried after Rowlande. Here leueth the hystorye to speak of
Reynawde; of his brethern and of the other barons that were in the company of
ye said Reynawde: and returns to speak of Rowland how he and reynawde made
their battle the one against the other.

Here shows how Reynawde faught against Rowland, the which he conquered by
the will of god and brought him to mou^tawba^, whereof Charlemayn was full heavy
and wroth. And also how Mawgys bare ye emperor Charlemayne to Mountawban upon
Bayarde all a sleep, and delivered him to Reynawde in a bed. where Renawde
lay. And how Mawgys after this went away and took thabyte of a heremite and
left his kinsmen and lived poorly, for he would not let the peace of Reynawde
to Charlemayne, for ye war had lasted long enough.
depiction of two groups of knights in armor on horseback charging each other
with lances

NOw shows the tale ye when Rowlande saw ye day he rose fro his bed and went
(after he was ready) to hear mass, and offered a rich gift upon the alter, and
when ye mass was done: Rowlande asked after his harneys for to arm him and
when he was well armed he lighted a horse back quickly. And tha^ Charlemain
said to him. Fair neuewe I come^d you to God yt he led you to a good way and
keep you fro death and fro prison, for ye know that Reynawde has right upon
us, and we do to him wrong, wherefore I would not for half of my realm that
any harm came to you for it. Sir said Rowlande it is to late for you to
repent now, for sith that ye knew yt ye were in the wrong: ye should not have
accepted the battle yt ye have enterprysed, but since it is so that the thing
is come so far forth: I can not leave it, but if it were to me great shame,
now help me god if it please him through his mercy. when Rowla^de had said
these words he: took his way for to go to the pintre of mou^tawban where as
the battle of Reynawde and of him should be made and when he was nighe
mountawbon: he saw Reinawde that awaited after him at the said tree and
incontinent he began to cry upon him.

By God Reynawde this day shall ye have a do with me, and I promise you that
when ye shall go fro the feeld: ye shall never do faytes of arms against me
nor against no other. when Reinawde heard Rowland cry so: he came against him
and said to him, sir Rowla^d it becomes not to such a knight as ye be for to
threte me thus, and I tell you yt I am here redye, and if ye will battle: ye
shall have it incontinent. Reynawd said Rowland I am not come here for peace:
but keep you fro me, and ye shall do as a wise man. Rowland said Reynawde
beware of me, for I am sure that I shall bring down the pride of you that is
so great.

ANd when Reynawde had said that word: he spurred bayard with the spurs and
came against Rowland, and Rowland against Reynawde, and they gave to each other
so great strokes at their breasts yt they brake both their spears al to pieces
and with the re^ning that they made against each other: they recountred the one
the other so hard with their sheeldes that Reynawde must needs fall down to
the earth with his saddle between his thyes, because of the gyrtes that brake a
sunder, and rowla^de lost his stiropes with al. And wha^ Reynawde saw himself a
ground he rose up right quickly, and lighted again upon bayarde without sadle,
and came upon Rowland with his sword in his hand, and gave him so great a
stroke that Rowla^d felt him self sore grieved with all, and when he saw that
Reynawde had stonyed hi^ so sore: he set hand to durandall his good sword,
and ran asprelye upon Reynawde. And when Reynawde saw him come* he went right
fyersly upon Rowlande, and than began the battle to be hard, and fore cruel
between them two, and I promise you they left not one piece of their harnes
whole, nether upon the one nor upon the other, but it were al to brosten and
beaten a sondre, in so much that ye barons that looked upon the^ had great
pity of the one and of the other when ye duke Naymes, had behold a long while of
this wunderfull battle: he began to cry as loud as he could saying in this
manner. Ha king Charlemaine ye are over cruel for thoroughe your cruel malice:
ye put to death two of the best knights of the world, wherefore ye shall ones
aby or long. when Reynawde saw that neither of them two could not overcome
the other: he said to Rowlande. If ye believe me: we shall light down a foot
both to thend that we kill not our horses. For if we slay them we shall never
recover none such nor so good, ye say well said Rowlande, and I am so
content. And than they descended a foot upon the medowe. Rowlande said
Reynawde, now are we per to per, now it shall be seen the which of us two
shall be master of the place. And with this they ran the one upon the other as
proudly as it had been two Lions who that had seen than the great strokes and
that dangerous that they gave to each other he should have said that there had
be never such two knights in all the remenau^t of the world. when Rowlande
saw that he could not win Reynawde: he came to him, and took him with a
full arm, and so did Reynawde him in like wise in manner of wrastelynge together
a great while without that the one could cast down the other by no way. And I
promise you that a man should well have gone a m^^^ or ever they left each other
go wha^ they were coupled ones together, and at the last wha^ they saw that
the one could not cast down the other: they let each other go the one there
and the other here for to take their breath for they were right weary, and sore
trauayled so much that almost they might not stand no longer, and their
helmes sheeldes and their arms were all to cut and brooken and the ground
where they fought thus was all to stamped and beaten with their feet as men
had beaten corn there upon.

When Charlemayne saw that the one could not ouermaister the other, and how
they were both evil arrayed: he was sore aferd^ for his neuew Rowlande, and
than he kneeled down upon his knees and heued his hands together toward
heaven and began to say. Good lord glorious that made the world, sea, heavens
and the earth, and delyuerde the holy virgyn margarete from the belly of the
horyble Dragon, and Jonas from the belly of the fysshe: I beseech you also that
ye will deliver my neuew Rowland from this battle mortal, and send me such
a token whereby I may depart these two knights from each other to the honor
of the one and of the other. when Alarde Guycharde and Rychard saw their
brother so weary they were a ferde of his person, and than they began also to
pray god that he would keep their brother Reynawd fro death and from prison.
And wha^ they had made their prayers: our Lord for ye prayers of Charlemain
showed a fair miracle, for he made rise so great a cloud and so thike, that
they might not see each other. Than Rowland said to Reinawde, where are ye gone
Reinawde, other it is night, or else I cannot see never a whit? No more do I
said Reynawde verily. Reynawde said Rowlande, I pray you do to me a curteys
turn, and a another time I shall do as much for you if ye require me thereof.
Sir Rowland (said Reynawde) I am ready for to do all that ye will require me of,
so that my honor be saved.

Gramercye Reynawde of that ye have granted me. wit that ye thing that I will
desire of you is this, yt ye bring me with you to Mountawban. Sir Rowland said
Reynawde if ye will do this: I shall be right glad thereof. By my faith I shall
go there with you without any fault if it please you. Sir said Reynawde God of
his goodness yield you the worship that ye will now do to me for I have not
deserved it unto you. Sir Reynawde (said Rowlande) wit that I do this because
that I know well that ye be in the right, and that ye fight in a good quarrel,
and I am in the wrong. And wha^ rowlande had said this the received his sight,
and saw as he did before, and than he saw Vylaunche his good horse, and he
lyghted upon him, and in like wise Reynawde upon bayarde And when Charlemayne
saw this: he was sore abashed, and began to call and to cry. Lords Lords
now see, I wot not what I should say, for Reynawde ledeth Rowla^d with him.
Now shall I see if ye shall let him go. when Charlemayn had spoken thus: he
came to his horse and lyghted upon him, and began to cry Now shall I know who
ben my fre^des. when the barons of France heard Charlemaine speak thus: they
spurred their horses and ran after Reynawde.

When Ogier saw Reynawde come with Rowlande that he brought with him: he was
right glad, and he came against Reynawd and said to him. Sir ye have well
wrought this dai, that ye have taken such a proye. Ogier said Reynawde, I
promise you that Rowlande has let himself to be taken with his good will.
Thanked be god of it said the duke Names Reynawde said Ogier go your way to
Mountawban, and the bishop Turpin ye son of Oedo^ and I: shall return
again, and we shall tarry Charlemayne that comes after you and we shall do so
much that ye shall be well at Mountawba^ or they over take you. Ogier said
Rowland ye say well, and I thank you of your curtoysie. wha^ they had thus
shortly spoken together: Reynawde and Rowlande rode so fast that they came to
mou^tawban. It is not to be asked if Rowland was well feasted at mou^tawban. I
promise you it is not possible to feast a prince better nor more honorably
tha^ he was at mou^tawban. This hanging: Ogier was come against king Charlemain
and he did so much by his fair language that he held the king till that he
thought that Reynawde and Rowlande might be well at Mountawba^ by that time.
And wha^ he had done so: he spurred his horse and went to Mountawba^ after the
other. where as he might well go without to be vnbraied for it, for he was one
of the suretyes of Reynawde as ye have heard. And when Charlemaine saw this:
he followed him unto the gates And when he was come to the gate of Mountawban:
he began to cry with an hie voice. By god Reynawde this that ye have done:
shall avail you little, for ye shall never have peace with me as long as I am
man a live. And when that he had said this he returned him from the gate, and
said to Oliver that was there with him. Oliver go lightlye to Mountbendell, and
bring here all my host for I will besiege all this Castle. Than said Oliver
I shall go there with a good will, but and it please you ye shall come with me,
for I promise you if ye comnot there your self: they shall not come hither for
me. Than shall I go there my self, and thus took Charlemayne his way toward
Mountbendel where his host lay, when his folk saw him come: they went
against him and began to say to him, sir what have ye done with Rowla^d?
lords said Charlemayne Rowla^d is gone to Mountawban, but I command you all that incontinent without delay that my siege be transported all round about
Mou^tawban, and ye damp Oliver shall bear the orifla^ and damp Rychard of
Normandye shall led our host. When Charlemayne had comau^ded all this: there
was none that said against it, but set themself to bring down the tents and
pauilion, and to trusse and led their baggages, and carried all to Mountawban.

Richard of Normandy went with.xii. thousand men to Bala^con, to keep the
passage of the river till all the host were over the river. This hanging:
Charlemayne had put himself before for to se where he might best pitche his
tents, and his pauilion, for to keep siege royal before the Castle of
Mountawban.

And when all the host was come a fore Mountawban: the king made incontine^t
his pauilion to be set up before the great gate. And when all the host was
set: the night watch of the great Tower came to Mawgys, and said unto him.
Sir wit ye Charlemaine is come with his host and has put his pauilion before
the master gate. Is it true said Mawgis? yea without any fault said the
watch. Now care not for it said Mawgis, for Charlemayne seeks his damage,
and he shall have it sooner than he weeneth. Than went Mawgys to Reynawde. And
showed him how Charlemayne was come with all his host. And when Reynawde
heard this: he went unto Rowland and said unto him. Sir ye must wit that
Charlemane your uncle has laid siege before us, but I promise you that if it
were not for the love of you: I should show him yt he has not done well.
Reynawde (said Rowlande) I thank you much, but one thing I will tell you,
save your correccion, me seems that I ought to send to mine uncle the duke
Naymes, Ogyer the dane, and also the bishop Turpyn that shall show unto him
in this manner, Sir Emperor wit that Reynawde for the love of you will not give
no Irons to your neuew, nor he will not put him in prison. But he makes him as
good cheer as he does to his own self. And that more is, Reynawde, his
brethern and Mawgys do present themself for to give the^ and their castle
unto your hands, so that their lives be saved. ye speak well and wisely sir
Rowland said Reynawde, and so I am ready to do as ye will have it. Rowland
said the duke Naymes, I dare not go to him, ye may well enough said Rowland.
For ye be not hated of the king duke Naymes said Ogyer, we shall go to
Charlemayne, if ye will do after me. And they accorded that they two should
go together to the king for to show to him as Rowland had devised. And when
that these two princes, the duke Naymes and Ogyer came to the pauilion of
Charlemayne: they saluted him reverently, and the duke Naymes spoke to him in
this manner of wise. Sir Emperor your neuew Rowland recommendeth him humblye to
your good grace, the which Reynawde keeps within Mountawban for his prisoner,
not unkindly: but he makes to him as good there and as great honor he bears
unto him as he were his own brother, and his souerayn lord, and all this he
does for your love. And demands of you peace if it please you to grant it
to him by such manner that he shall give you Mountawban, and the Egle of gold,
and he shall let go Rowlande at his liberty without raunsu^. And also he
shall yield himself to you and his brethern in like wise, and also Mawgys for
to do your will with them, save their lives: and they shall promise you if
their seruyse pleases you, that they shall serve you against all me^ with all
their power and puissaunce, so that ye shall have cause to thank them for it.

WHa^ Charlemayne understood these words: he shook al for great anger. And
began to say to ye duke Naymes, and to the other that were come to him, flee
out of my pauilion evil folk. I marvel me how have ye durst cum here
within and I tell you that Reynawde shall have no peace with me, but if I have
Mawgis for to do my will of him. when the barons understood charlemayne that
spoke thus: they came out of his Pauilion and took no leave at him, but
returned incontinent to Mountawban. when they were come there: Rowland and
Reinawde asked them how they had done with Charlemaine? Lords said the duke
Naimes, it is no force to be asked after it. For Charlemayn will not do it, but
if men take unto him Mawgis for to do his will of him, Lords said Reynawde I
am sorye for it. I marvel how Charlemayn is so hard hearted, and I make mine
a vow unto god, he shall not have Mawgys though I should dye for it. After
these words: they went to their meat, and Mawgis made them to be served
ple^teously and worshipfully, and when they had supped: the beds were heled,
and they went anon to bed. And when Reynawde would go to his bed: he called to
him Mawgis, and said to him, cosyn I pray you that ye do make good watch to
night. For ye know that our lives lies thereupon. Sir said mawgis fear not
for to sleep well and rest your self. For I promise you you this castle shall be
well kept by gods grace, and when all the barons were a bed: Mawgis went to
the stable and sadled Bayarde, and than he lighted upon him and he came to the
gate and said to the porter. My fre^d open the gate for I must go out a little,
and abide me here for I shall come again soon. Sir said the porter. I shall
do so with a good will. Tha^ went out Mawgys straight to the pauilion of
Charlemayne. And wha^ he was come there: he began for to make his charm, and
brought a sleep all they that were in the host. And when he had done so: he
went to the bed of Charlemayne, and took him in his arms and brought him
upon Bayarde. And when he had done so: he went his ways again to Mou^tawban,
and brought Charlemayne with him. And when he was come there again: he took
Charlemayne from Bayarde, and bare him into his chamber and laid him in his
bed. When all this was thus done: He took a torche and fired it, and pytched
it between the straw and the bedsted, so that it held fast euin before the
visage of the king Charlemayne. And after he went to the chamber of Reynawde
and said to him, Cousin what would ye well give that should deliver Charlemayne
into your hands? By my soul said Reynawde I have nothing but that I should
gladly give it so yt I might have him here within this castle of Mou^tawban.
Cosyn said Mawgis will ye promise me that ye shall do to him no harm of his
body, another your brethern nor none of yours? and I shall put him into your
hands even anon. Cosyn said Reynawde, I promise you that upon my faith, now
come with me said Mawgys. And than Mawgys brought Reynawde into his chamber,
and showed him Charlemayne that was in his bed and slepte, and after he said
to him. My cosyn Reynawde. Now ye have here Charlemayne, keep him so well that
he escape not you. And when Mawgis had delivered Charlemayne to Reynawde, he
came unto ye stable where he had put bayarde and took some straw and rubbed
his back with all and his head, and than he kissed him al weeping, and took
leave of him. And after he went and took the palstar and the cloak and came
unto the porter, and gave him all his other raymentes, that he had wered before
and went out of Mountawban. Now leaves the history to speak of Reynawde, and
of Charlemayne a little, and shall show of Mawgys that left all his kindred and
friends and became an Heremite.

How after that Mawgys had delivered Charlemayne into the hands of Reynawde
his cosyn: he went without any leave from Mou^tawba^ into a wood being ye river
of Dordon into an heremitage, whereas he lived like an heremite a poor life to
do penance for his sins.
depiction of a male figure with a pilgrim's hat, staff, and rosary beads
walking away from a castle with a figure in the doorway

NOw shows the history, that when Mawgys had delivered Charlemayne for
prisoner unto Reynawde: he went out of Mountawban without the leave of
Reynawde, and without the knowledge of any of the castle, except of the
porter. And wit it that the said Mawgys went so long that he came to ye river
of Dordon, and passed over the water in a boat. And when he was over. he entered
into a wild forest, and walked within it til it was noone. And when he had
gone enough through the wood, he beheld a side: and saw a little hill, and
upon it a little house in manner of an heremitage, he went to it and found the
place devout and pleasant. For before the gate spra^ge a quick fountain. And
Mawgys went into the chapel, and kneeled a fore an image of our lady that was
there, and prayed our lord yt he would pardon him his sins. And as he was
there making his prayer: a devotion took him so great, that he made his vow
to God yt he should dwell in that place, and that he should serve god there
from that day forth on, and that he should eat none other but such wild
herbs as grew in the wood. And than he prayed unto our lord that Reynawde and
his brethren might have peace with Charlemayne. And when Mawgis had do on his
prayer: he rose up and came out of the chapel, and took ye sadle from his
horse, and the bridel, and so let him go to the grass, and went again to the
Chapel.

But here leaves the hystorye to speak of Mawgis yt was become an heremyte:
and returns to show of Reynawde and of his brethren that had Charlemaine
for their prisoner within their castle of Mou^tawba^.
How the barons of France that were at Mountawban, were sorry yt they could not
awake the emperor Charlemayne that Mawgys had brought a sleep through his
art. But when the time of the charm of Mawgys was passed: the king awoke by
himself, and he found himself at mou^tawban, he swear yt he should never make
peace with Reynawde as long as he was prisoner, and how Reynawde let him go
again to his host upon his horse Bayarde, whereof Reynawde repented him
afterward right sore. For soon after yt: Charlemayne did besyege mountawban
of so nyghe that he famysshed Reynawde and his brethern with in with his wife
and children.
depiction of two male figures asleep in a building, with two horses and two
figures armed with pikes outside

IN this parti shows the history that wha^ Mawgys had delivered Charlemayne
into the hands of Reynawde, and that he was gone as ye have heard: Reynawde
called to him his brethren, and said to the^. Come hither my fair brethren
tell me what we shall do with Charlemayne yt we hold now in our hands, ye
know how long that he has do^maged us, and has do to us great harms without
reason, wherefore me thinks that we ought to aue^ge us upon him, sith that we
have him Sir said Richard I cannot say what ye will do of him, but and ye
will believe me: he shall be hanged forth with. For after he were dead: there is no
man in all France yt we should fear any thing. when Reynawde understood the
counsel that Richard his brother had given him: he looked down toward the
earth, and began to think sore. And when Richard saw him muse so: he asked
him what he thought and if he cared who should do execucion upon the king?
for said Richard ye shall not lack for that: for none other shall hang him
but my self, and that I shall do even anon if ye will deliver him unto me.
After these words: Reynawd ryghted his head up and said. My brethern ye know
well that Charlemaine is our sovereign lord. And of the other part ye see how
Rowland the Duke Naymes, Ogier the dane, the bishop Turpin and also Escouf the
son of Oedon are within for to make our poyntment with Charlemayne, for they
know well that we ben in the right and the king in ye wrong and thus if we kill
him: be it with right or with wrong, all the world should run upon us, nor
never as long as we live: we shall not be without war. And when Reynawde had
said this: Alarde spoke in this manner. Brother ye have spoken wiselye, but ye
see that we cannot have peace with Charlemayne by no wise me seems that we
ought to ask it of him out for all, and if he will not: let us keep him
prisoner, brother said Guycharde ye say well, but my heart tells me that he
shall never make peace with us nor love us, Lords said Richard me seems
that we have a good head of Reynawde our brother, thanked be our Lord, the
which has governed us right well herto, let him shyfte with the king as he
will. And that that he will: shall be done. By my faith said Alarde, Richard
speaks well. And when they were all accorded to that that Reynawde should
do: the four brethern went to the Chamber where Rowlande was, to whom
Reynawde spoke in this wise. Sir Rowlande a rise I pray you that ye will send
for Ogier, the bishop Turpyn and for all the other that be here within of the
folk of Charlemayne. For I will tell you one thing. And wha^ Rowlande saw
Reynawde and his brethern at that time of the night come into his chamber: he
was meruaylled. Nevertheless he sent for all his felawes, as Reynawde had
told him. And when they were al come: Reynawde stood up and said. Lords ye
ben all my friends, god gramercy and you, whereof I will not hyde nothing from
you. Ye must know yt I have here within a prisoner by whom I shall have peace
and all mine herytaunce again. Reynawde said Rowla^d, I pray you tell me what
he his. For here is no man, but that would feign ye should do well. By my
soul said Reynawde it is the great emperor Charlemayn to whom al france
belongs. And when Rowland understood these tidinges: he was sore maruayled of
it and said. Reynawde ye tell me now a wunderfull thing, How have ye taken
mine uncle so lightly? tell me and it please you, how ye had him here within?
have ye taken him by force of arms? nay verily said Reynawd Tell me then how I
pray you said Rowlande? wit it said Reynawde that I wot not how Mawgys my
cosyn did to night, but well I wot yt he has brought the king here within out
of his pauilion, and has laid him in a bed, in a chamber where he is now fast
a sleep.

When Rowland and al his felawes heard these tidinges: they were greatly
abashed, how it might be that mawhis should bring the king there. I marvel
much there of said the duke Naymes, for ye know well that the king made
himself for to be kept both night and day well sure. Lords said than
Ogyer, all this has done our Lord for the love of reynawde, because he
sets him al to mischief against Reynawde and that the war has lasted to
long ye which shall now be left, whereof I thank God for my part. For many
good knights have lost their lives for it. And when Ogier had said thus:
Reynawde took Rowland and the other, and brought them always speakinge unto
the chamber, where Charlemayne lay so fast a sleep, that they could not
awake him, for nothing that they could do to him, For Mawgys had charmed him
so hard. And when the barons saw ye king so hard a sleep: they wundred full
sore upon it, and they were greatly abashed of it. Than spoke Rowla^d first
and said Reynawde where is Mawgis that has wrought so well to night. I pray
you let him come here, and that he awake mine uncle Charlemaine out of this
sleep And when he shall be awaked: we shall all fall at his feet, and shall
cry him mercy. And so I pray you that though if ye hold mine uncle in your
hands, that ye will not be the prouder for it in your words, by my faith sir
Rowland said Reynawde. I will that ye know I should rather dye than I should say
so my sovereign lord a foul word. But I shall put me, my goods, and all my
brethern to his will, to the end that it will please him to grant us peace
with him. And I will go fetch Mawgys to you, thereto do with him what ye will.
And than Reynawde went and sought Mawgys the which he could not find, where
of he was full sorry. And when that the porter wist that Reynawde sought after
Mawgys: he came to him and said. Sir ye seek him for naught, for he went his
ways out right now. And how know thou of it said Reynawde? Sir wit it that
this night he made me open the gate and he went out upon your horse bayarde.
And he had not tarried long: when he brought a great man a big upon the horse
neck before him, and went in I wot not where. And soon after he came again
upon another horse, and he had clothed him self poorly. And than he made me
to open the gate, and he went out, and he came not since again. And all this
is troth that I tell you now.

ANd when Reynawde had understand these words he was so wroth yt he wist not
what to say nor do. For he knew well by himself that Mawgys was gone his ways
because he would no longer abide the wrath of Charlemayne. Than began Reynawde
for to weep full tenderly for his cousin that was thus gone. And all weepynge
he came again unto the barons, and said to them how Mawgys was gone away
without his knowledge where of he was so worth and so sori that he went almost
out of his mind. And wha^ Alarde, Guycharde, and Richard had well understand
this: they began for to make great move, and sorowed full sore. And than
Richard began for to sai, Ha my fair cosyn Mawgys what shall we do from hens
forthon? since that we have lost you: we may well say yt we be discomfited. For
ye were our salvation, our succors, and our hope, our counsel, our refute,
our defense, and also our guide. For it is not yet long ago that I should have
dyed an evil death if I had not be^ succored through your help. Alas all the
heaviness yt ye bear of the wrath yt the king Charlemayne has against you
comes only by us. And when he had said so: he knacked his teeth for anger, and
said. we ben now well all lost sith that we have lost Mawgis. And with this:
he set hand to his swearde, and would have slain the Emperor Charlemayne but
Reynawde drew him a side. And the duke Naymes and Ogyer said than unto him.
Richard Richard refrain your courage. For it were not well done for to kill
a man that slepeth. And also before that we shall depart hence: we shall set all
at one and God will. Shortelye for to speak: Olyuer and the Duke Naymes spoke
so fair unto Richard yt they made him promise them that he should do no
harm to the King Charlemayne. Nevertheless Richard left not to make great
sorrow for his cosyn Mawgys that he had lost. For all them yt saw him make so
great moan had pity for to se him. It was no marvel if Richard made sorrow
for Mawgis: For I promise you he had great need of him not long after. And so
had all his brethern, as ye shall hear here after.

ALl thus as the four sons of Aymon made their move for the love of their
cousin Mawgis: The duke Nymes began to speak and said in this wise. By god,
lords ye do not well for to make so great sorrow. I pray you leave this
heaviness. And let us begin to speak of your peace that must be made with the
Emperor Charlemayn that an end may be had of this war, that has endured
so long. By god said Rowlande ye be passing slow thereupon. And also we must
first have his mercy or ever we move any thing of the peace. For ye wot well yt
I left him because that peace should be made. Sir said ye duke Naymes ye speak
wisely and well, but how shall we speak with him without Mawgys were here? we
cannot awake him. And but if god remedyeth it: we shall never speak with him.
But al thus as the barons spoke in this wise: The charm that Mawgys had set
upon Charlemayne was come at an end, and the strength of it was passed. And
suddenly Charlemaine began to move his body, and arose anon upon his feet, and
right sore abashed looked al about him. And when he saw yt he was at
mou^tawban in ye subieccion of Reynawd the son of Aymon: he was sore an
angered, and made such sorrow for it, so that al they that were there trowed
that he had been mad and from himself. And wha^ his wits were come again: he
knew well yt Mawgys had done it unto him and swear that as long as he were
manne on live: he should make no peace till that he were out of Mountawban, and
that men had brought Mawgys to him. And wha^ Richard understood this that
Charlemayne said: he began to say in this wise. How the devil dare ye thus
speak? sir ye see well that ye be our prisoner. And yet ye threte^ us. I make
to god mine a vow and to Saint Peter, were not that I have promised, that I
shall not do to you no harm at this time: I should strike the head from the
body of you. Hold your pease said Reynawde, let the king Charlemayne say
his will, ye are over besy in your words. And let us all pray him that he will
pardon us. For the war has lasted to long, cursed be he that began it. For
great euyles and harms the which are happed thereby.

REynawde was wise, and well taught for to stylle thus his brethern, to whom he
said. My lords my brethern, if it please you, ye shall come with me, for to cry
mercy unto our sovereign lord the Emperor Charlemayne. Reynawde said Alarde,
we shall do all that ye will. By mi faith said the duke Naimes, My lords ye
do right wisely, and I promise you that all good shall come to you thereof.
Than Reynawd and all his brethren, and Rowland and Oliver, and Ogyer the Dane,
the duke Naymes, the bishop Turpin, and Escoufe the son of Oedo^ began all
for to fall on their knees, before the emperor. And Reinawde spoke first, and
said in this manner of wise. Noble Emperor have mercy of us, for I and my
brethern we yield us to you to do your pleasure of us, and your will be so yt
our lives ben saved: and there is nothing but yt we will do it for the love
of you if it please you to grant us peace with you. And for that piti and pardon
that God gave unto Mary Magdelene when she washed his feet in the house of
Simeon, good sir have pity of us. And if it please you not for to pardon me: at
ye least pardon my brethern. And take them again their lands, and I shall give
you Mountawba^, and Bayarde my good horse And so shall I go into the holy
land I and Mawgis, where we shall serve to the Temple of our Lord. And when
the king Charlemain heard Reynawde speak thus: he blastred all for anger, and
said by that good lord that made me, if all the world speak to me thereof,
yet should I never cose^t me to no peace, but I have Mawgys in my hands for to
do my will upon him. Alas said than Reynawde, now have I heard that word
bytynge, whereof I am al desperate. For I should rather let my self be hanged,
tha^ that I should co^sente to the death of Mawgys my good cosyn. For he has
not deserved toward us, that we should betraye him, but rather he were worthy
by reason for to be lord above us. Reynawde said tha^ Charlemaine, think not
though I am your prisoner yt ye shall make me do any thing against my will,
sir said Reynawd wit it that mine entente is for to meke my self toward you
for I have lever that we suffer wrong of you, than ye of us, now tell me sir
how I shall deliver you Mawgys that is our life, hope, sucours, our comfort,
sheeld, our spear and also our sword our bread, our wine and our flesh, also
our refute, our master our guide, and our defense in all places, whereby sir I
tell you that if ye had all my brethern in your prison, and that ye should make
them to be hanged, and that Mawgys were with in my power and with me: yet would
I not yield him unto you for to quyte wythall my brethern. And also I swear
you upon my faith that I wot not where that he is gone, god wot it. Ha said the
Emperor charlemayne, gods curse have he, for I am sure he is here within
you, he is not said Reynawde I take it upon my baptysme. And than Reynawde
turned himself toward Rowlande and all the other barons and said to them.
Lords I beseech you for God that it will please you for to pray our sovereign
lord ye king that he will have mercy of me and of my brethren, to the end
ye peace may be had in France if it please him. And than Naymes that was
kneelinge upon his knees, and that heard that Reynawde had said and wyste well
that he spoke but well: said to the Emperor in this wise, Sir I pray you that
ye will not be dyspleased of that I shall tell you, ye know sir yt I am surety
for Reynawde, and so is Ogyer ye dane, but me seems that we ought now to be
discharged thereof, since that ye be here present within his castle, but
another thing I will tell you, me thinks that ye ought to take, that the earl
Reynawde proffereth to you or yt any more harm come to you thereof, and so
help me God ye shall do well. And al they of your court shall be glad of it.
And when the barons heard this that Naymes had said to the king Charlemaine:
they spoke all and said. Sir do that the duke Naymes has told you, for he
has given you good counsel and true. And if so be that ye do it not: ye
shall come to late for to repent you of it.

But When Charlemayne understood this that ye duke Naimes had said to him: he
was right wroth of it. For his heart was so hard astonyed with great anger:
that he took no head of good counsel, and he swear by saint Denis of France
that he should not do it for no man but if he had first Mawgys in his hands
for to do his will over him. And when Reynawde heard these words: he
blustered in his face for anger, and rose up from kneelinge his brethren and
all the other barons also. And then Reynawde said to Rowlande and to all the
other Lords that were there. Sir I will well ye Charlemaine know my will and my
entente, ye which I shall show before him unto you. Wit it that sith I ca^
find no mercy in him: I pray you that ye will not blame me from hence for
thou, if I seek my right. For I shall seek it in all the manners that a true
knight ought to do. And wha^ Reynawde had said this: he turned him toward the
king, and said to him. Sir ye may go hens when it please you, for by my
soul ye shall have no harm of me now, for ye be my sovereign lord, and with
good will we shall be in good peace with you.

THe barons of france yt were there: wundred sore of the great kindenes of
Reynawde. Tha^ said ye duke Naymes, have ye heard the great humilite of the
noble knight Reynawde? By soul said rowlande. Reynawde says meruaylously. I
would not have trowed that he should ever have fared so fair with Charlemayne.
And when Rychard understood yt, that his brother Reinawde had said: he spoke
in this wise, brother Reinawde I hold you mad. What will ye do? ye see that
we have in our hands this vengeable king the which we may kill or else suffer
him to live, and yet he is set so sore to pride that he will do nothing that
his good counsel tells him, but he threteneth us always more and more, and
ye will let him go thus a way: surely brother if he scapeth us so: he shall yet
anger us right sore, and I promise you if he had us as we now have him: he
should make us all to dye shamefullye, not all the gold in the world should
not save us therfro. And therefore I tell you that ye do great folly to let
him go thus away. For and ye will, ye shall now make our peace, but me seems,
ye seek none other but your death, whereof I pray god if ye suffer him thus to
go away: that he may make you to dye a shameful death. And wha^ Reynawd
heard his brother speak so: he was wroth and said to hi^ in anger. Hold your
peace brother for he shall go his ways quite will you or no, and the peace
shall be made when he will and no sooner it shall not be, for there unto he shall
not be compelled of me, and go you hens from me, for your great words
displeases me.

When Reynawde had said this: he did call a gentylman of his to whom he said,
go lightly without any taryenge to the yoman of min horses, and bid him bring
me my horse Bayarde. For I will that my sovereign lord ride upon him unto his
host, for he rode never upon no better horse. And when Richard heard this: he
went fro thens al swellinge with anger as a fyersfull lion because he knew that
Charlemayne should go so. And wit it that ye king Charlemayne heard and
understood well all these words, but he durst not say nothing, so sore he
feared ye fiersnes of the young Richard. This hangyng: came there again ye
gentilman that was gone for Bayarde which he brought with him, and than
Reynawde took his good horse baiarde and came to Charlemayne, and said to him,
sir ye may light when it please you, and go at your lybertye, for to comfort
your folk, which I am fure ben full sorry for the taking of you. And when
Charlemayn saw this he lighted anon upon Bayarde and went out of Mountawban for
to go to his host, and Reynawde conveyed him to the gate of Mountawban, and
when the king was gone: he made the gate to be shet anon. And the french men
that saw their king come again: they were right glad and received him
worthily, and after they asked him how it went with him and if he had granted
ye peace lords it is well with me, God gramercy, but of peace I have made none
nor never shall as long as I am man a live for no man yt shall speak to me of
it, but if I have the traitor mawgis for to do with him mi will. Sir said
some of his barons how have ye be delyuerd. By my faith said charlemayn,
Reynawde has delyuerde me against that the will of his brethren all quite at
my liberty. Sir said the barons have ye not seen Rowlande, Olyuer, ye duke
Naimes the bishop Turpin, Ogier the dane nor Escouf the son of oedon? yea
surely said Charlemayne, but they have all forsake me for the love of Reynawde,
whereof by yt god that hynge upon the cross if I can have them again: I shall
show the^ that they have not done well, and when he had said thus: he lyghted
from Bayarde and made him to be brought again to Reynawde.

ANd when Reynawde saw bayarde, that Charlemayne had sent him again: he
called rowland and his felawes and said to the^, fair lords I know well that
ye be not in the grace of the great king Charlemaine for the love of me, but
I will not that ye have mawgre for me nor for my brethern, and therefore fair
lords I quyte you all quarelles that I may lay upon you, and give you leave to
go when it please you. And when the Duke Naymes understood the kindness of the
heart of Reinawde that was so noble: he thanked him hyghly, and kyssed and
enbrased him for great love, and would have kneeled down before him, but
Reynawde would not suffer him.

Than the duke Naymes began to say, let us think to go after the king
Charlemayne your uncle, since it please Reynawde to give us leave Naymes said
Rowlande, how can we do this, shall we leave Reynawde the which ye se mine
uncle will dystroye wrongfully? Sir said ye duke Naymes hear me if it please
you. I counsel that we go hens, and when we shall be before Charlemayne: we shall
ask him how Reynawde did deliver him, for if we speak to him of peace: he
shall be wroth with us; but when he shall remember ye great goodness and curteysy
of Reynawde his heart shall be molified, and it cannot be but he shall do to him
some grace and favor, for he shall know well yt his heart is over great, and
that he has done to Reynawde great wrong. Certes sir Naymes said the barons
ye speak wisely, and ye give right good counsel. And when they were accorded
to the counsel of the Duke Naymes: Rowlande asked after his horse, and each of
the other barons also. And when they were redye for to light on horsbacke:
there came mi lady Clare the wife of Reynawde that kissed Rowlande, Olyuer and
all the other barons, and after she said to them in this manner. Lords that be
here present. I beseech you in the name of god and for his blessed passion yt
it pleases you for to purchase ye peace of my lord Reynawde and semblably of
his brethren toward the great king Charlemayn, ye know my lords that the
king does to my lord great wrong: and also ye know the great curteysy and
the kyndnes that my Lord my husband has showed unto Charlemayn, and well ye
wot that if my Lord had not be: his brother Richard would have striked the
head from ye body of him. Madame said ye duke Naymes doubt not. For and god be
pleased the peace shall be made with in these three days. And than they lighted
al on horsbacke, and the three brethern of Reynawde conveyed the^ to the gate,
and Reynawde tarried after them upon the bridge, and when they were come to the
said bridge Reynawde said to them, My lords I commend you to God. I may no
longer go with you, prayinge that ye will have me in your remembrance. Then all the Peers of France (that were there) began to weep tenderly and took their
leave of Reynawde the noble knight, and after they took their way toward ye
host of Charlemayne. And when the Emperor saw them come: he called to him his
barons and showed them they that were coming. And when the barons saw them:
they meruayled greatly and had great fear, for they wyste not what it was,
but Ydellon the Earl said, by god we have recovered rowlande and his felawes,
yea said Charlemain, gods curse have they. This hangyng: Rowland and his
felawes came tofore Charlemayne and lighted a foot, and incontinent they
kneeled humbly before the king and tha^ the duke Naymes began to speak first
and said. Noble Emperor we are come in your presence for to cry you mercy,
beseching you for God that it will please you to take us unto your good grace,
for we have done nothing against you but yt it was for your well. But since yt
we have known yt your will was not for to have peace: we have forsaken Reynawde
and all his brethern nor never while we ben a live they shall have no succors
of us. Lords said Charlemayne I pardon you, but I tell you if we tarry here
long still: we shall have little gaynes thereby, wherefore I pray you that we go
assaute Mountawban both by day and by night, by such manner that he be taken of
us incontinent, and they all yt ben in it brought to death. Sir said the duke
Naymes ye say well, but and if any mifortune happeth to us as it has done
here before time: I promise you it shall be to you great dommage, and me seems
it were much better to have peace, tha^ for to contynewe the war.

ANd when the Barons of France heard this, that the duke Naymes had said to
the king: they began to cry with a high voice Sir Emperor, we pray you that
ye will do this that Naymes counsels you. For he gives you good counsel.
When Charlemayne heard the cry that his folk made to him: he came to the duke
Naymes yt was kneelyng before him, and took him up, and in like wise his neuewe
Rowlande and all the other, and said to them. My lords ye know that I have
pardoned you with right good will, but I will well that ye know but if ye keep
yourself fro helpinge of my enemies mortal I shall anger you upon your bodies.
For I hate them so much that if I should abide here all my life: I shall
destroy the^. And wit it that Charlemayne was glad that he had recovered his
neuew Rowla^d and his other Peers how be it he made no semblaunte of it. And
he said yet again, yt he should never depart from his syege till yt he had
taken Mountawban and all the four sons of Aimon, whereof he shall do sharp
Justice, and shall do brenne Mawgys ye false traitor. Sir said Rowland I
promise you that Mawgys is not wtin Mou^tawban, for he fears you so much
that he dare not abide you, least ye should make him to be hanged, because he
did steal you so falsely out of your host. Ha god said Charlemayne, when
shall I see that I have him for to do my will of him? For than the Sons of
Aymon should soon be a greed with me.

THan when the king Charlemayne had devised long enough: he gave leave to all
his barons for to go again into their te^tes for to see the^r folk. And when
the morrow came: all the barons ca^e again unto Charlemain. And wha^ the king
saw them together within his pauilion, he was thereof glad, and spoke to them
thus. Lords I have besyeged Mountawban as nere as ye see, and I am not
dysposed for to depart hence another for cold, for hete nor for hungre, unto
ye time yt I have taken him by fine force, the which thing shall be lightly
done, for I am sure that they shall want vytayles within. And worse is for
them: they have lost the traytoure Mawgys which was their hope and comfort.
wherefore I say that they cannot hold it long against my power, when the
barons heard yt Charlemayne thretened Reynawde so soore: there was none of
them but they were sorry for it, for the most part of them loved Reynawde for
the worthynes and the kyndnes that was in him. Then spoke the Duke Naimes and
said to the Emperor, Sir ye say that they of Mountawban be dyspurueyd of
meat, and that ye shall not depart from the syege till that ye have taken the
castle and that is a thing that shall be done lightlye, but I promise you if
ye tarry to their vittailles be do: ye shall lie here longer the^ ye ween of,
wherefore sir I beseech you, that it will please you to believe my counseyll if
it seems you good, first take heed to the curtoysy that Reynawde has done
to you, for ye wot well that if he had not be: his brother Richard should
have slain you, all the gold in the world should not have saved you. Item
think then also in the great mekenes that he has always showed to you,
also for the great trust that he has had in you, he leued you his good horse
bayarde that has no match in all the world, sir if ye ouerthynke well al, ye
shall find that no man did never to none other so great curtoysye as Reynawd
has done to you, and of that other part he and his brethren ben such
knights as every body knows. I swear to you sir by all hallowen that or ever
ye shall take Mountawban: Reynawde and his brethern shall bear to you such
damage, whereof ye shall be wroth. And yet ye ought well to take heed how we
wast and destroy the country and the feeldes and great good ye do dyspende,
which for your honor were better to be employed upon the sarasins: than
upon the four sons of Aymon, for the sarasins been now in rest making great
joy for the cause of this war, and they do well. For war has left them,
and it is come among our self so horrible and so cruel that many noble and
worthy knights ben dead thereof.

THe king Charlemain was sore abashed, when he heard the duke Naymes speak
so: and it moved his blood full sore and became pale as a white cloth for the
great wrath that he had at his heart, and casted a side his sight angrely
upon the duke Naymes and said to him by great wrath. Duke Naymes by the faith
that I owe to that blessed lady that conceived the son of god in her
virginity, that if there be any man so hardy to speak more to me of accord
to be made with the four sons of Aymon: I shall never love him but I shall
anger him on his body. For I am not dysposed to make peace with them for
nothing that can be said, but I shall hang them what soever it cost me or I
depart from this syege. when the barons heard Charlemaine speak thus
proudely: they were sore meruaylled of it, and left to talk of this matter.
But wha^ Ogier saw that all the barons held them stylle: he began to say to
the king Charlemaine. Cursed be the hour that Reynawde suffered not Richard
to smite of your head, for ye had not thretned him so now. And wha^ Charlemayn
heard that Ogier said to him, he bowed his neck and looked downward all
pensifull and syn he said, now lords make you ready and see that every man fall
to his armures, for I will now give assaute to Mountawban. And when ye
frenshemen heard the commandment of the king: they made no tarying but went
and armed themself, and when they were al ready: they came in good ordenaunce,
and brought ladders and other instruments with them for to saute withal the
castle and engynes for to break down the walls, and presented the^ before
Charlemain for to accomplysh his will. And when the king saw them so well
apparelled: he commanded the^ to go saute the castle of Mountawban.

ANd as soon as Reynawde saw his enemies come: he called his brother Alarde,
and said to him. Brother I pray you take bondy my good horn and blow in it
strongly to the end that our folk arm them self when they hear it, for
here come the frenshmen to saute us. when Alard understood the commandment
of Reynawde: he took bondy, and blewe in it with so great a wind three times
that all they of the castle heard it, and were all abashed with all and
without any taryinge they went and armed themself, and lightly gate upon the
walls for to defend the Castle. Nevertheless the frensh men came near and
entered in to the dyches as hogs done in a mire, and dressed up their ladders
to the walls. But wit it that they of within the castle began to defend so
stronglye with castinge of stones: that they domaged sore the frenshemen so
that many of them lay dead within the dyches. For Reynawd and his brethren
did there so great feats of arms that no body might endure their strokes, who
had seen the poor duchess and her young children at that saut bringing stones
to Reynawde and to his brethern upon the walls: he would have had pytie of it.
For the two young sons of Reinawd said to their uncles, hold our uncles
these stones, for they been great yn^ughe. Such defense made they of
Mountawban, that they ouerthrewe them that were upon the ladders to the botome
of the diches, all dead and sore wounded, and when the king Charlemaine saw
this: he was wroth, for he knew than well that he should never take Mountawba^
by force, nor also the noble knights that were within it, as Reinawd and his
brethren. And therefore he made the trompette to be blown, to call his folk a
back with so great anger that he was almost out of his mind, and when the
frenshmenne heard blow the retrete: they were glad, for they were shrewdly
handeled, and I promise you that Charlemain left such a company dead with in
the diches that he long after was full sorry for it.

When Charlemayn and all his folk were wythdrawen again: he began to swear
Saint Denis of france that he should never depart thence til he had famished
Reynawde and his brethren within the castle of Mou^tawban, and than he
commanded that before every gate of the castle should be laid two hundred
knights, for to keep that no body might in nor out, but he should be take.
And when Reinawde saw that: he kneeled down upon his knees and heued up his
hands toward heaven and said. Good lord that suffered death on the cross. I
beseech you that ye will grant us that grace that we may have peace with
Charlemain and save our lives. And when Richard heard the prayer of Reinawd: he
took heed to it and said. Brother I promise you if ye would have believed me:
we should now have be in good rest and peace. For Charlemaine would have be
glad thereof for to save his life, ye know that our cousin mawgis brought him
not here for none other cause to be our prisoner, but to the intent that we
should make our peace, but ye would not take heed to it, when we might have had
our will, and I promise you we shall not do as we would.

THe emperor Charlemain abode so long at the siege before Mountawban, that
they that were within it had great need of vitaylles, for he that had any meat:
he hyd it incontinent, and so great scarstie of vittailles was there within a
while that men could get there no meat for gold nor for silver, and many
other fell down at ground here and there so feynt for hungre that it was
great pity for to see, for ye derth was there so great that the one brother
hid his meat from the other, and the father from the child, and the child
fro the father and fro the mother. And shortly to speak: I promise you that
the poor folk died for hungre by the streets, and with this was so great
stenche in Mountawban of the dead that were there: that no man could endure
it, And when Reynawd saw this he was sorye for it, and than he did do make and
great charnell where in he made all the dead bodies to be buried. And when
Richard saw so great mortality within the castle of Mountawban, through
cause of the great dearth that was there, and saw his brother Reinawd in so
great distress: he could not forbear, but he said to him, by god my brother
now goes it worse then ever it did, it had be much better if ye had
believed me, for if ye would have suffered me to slay the king Charlemayne: we
should now not have be in this myscheef and great poverty that we have now,
nor your folk had not dyed for hungre as they do, and tha^ he began to weep
tenderly and said Alas why do I complain other? I might well complain my
self sith that I must dye and be put in to the charnell as the poorest of us
all. Ha Mawgis my fair cosyn, where be ye now? ye fail us at our need, for
and ye were here within with us: we should not be famyshed for hungre and also
we should not doubt much the king Charlemaine, for I wot well that ye should
get us vitaylles enough to live upon for us and our men, and now we must dye
for hungre as the wulf should upon a sea. for Charlemaine hates us more than
he does the sarasyns. And therefore it is not for us to wait after pity of
him, for he is over cruel a king upon us.

CHarlemayne by the report of some folk knew the great det the and scarslie
of vitailles that was within Mou^tawba^, whereof he was right glad, and called
to him his folk and said to them. Lords now can not Reinawd escape, but he
shall soon be taken and hanged, and the false Richard drawn at an horse tail,
and Alarde, and Guichard also, and their worthiness shall be litill worth to
them. And when the king Charlemaine had said these words: he sent for all
his peers and barons, and when they were al come within his pauillion: he was
glad of it and said to them. Lords thanked be god that I have brought
mountawban so low that Reinawde and his knights have no more vitailles in it,
and now they shall yield them self at my will mawgre their teeth, for ye most
part of their folks ben dead for hungre, and yet dien daily, and ye must wit
I will that Reynawde be hanged and his brethern also, but first I will that
Rychard be drawn at an horse tail. And so I charg you that none of you be so
hardye to move my will to the contrary, for I will that it be done as I say.
when the duke Naimes Rowland, Oliver, Ogier, the bishop Turpin, and escouf, ye
son of Oedon, yt were there heard ye king speak thus they were right sorye
for the love of Reinawd and of his brethern, and looked down and said no word
at all for fear yt they should be shent of the king, and Ogier with great
pain kept his eyes fro weepinge lest Charlemaine should not perceive his
sorrowful heart

Here ye ought to wit that duringe ye time that Charlemain lay at the siege
before Mountawban persecuting the four sons of Aimo^ Reinawd, Alard Guychard,
and Richard: Aymon their father held the party of the king against his
children for he had promised him to do so, as ye have heard about, but wit it
that when he heard how the emperor thretened his children, how be it that he
had forsaken, them he was wroth for it, for he knew we: if his children died
so: he should never have joy after that. for whatsoever war he made against
them, he loved them kindli as the father ought love his child, for nature may
not lie, and therefore he took so great sorrow wha^ he heard of his sons that
they were thretned to be hanged: that he almost fell down dead to the ground,
and of the great sorrow yt he had could not keep himself but he said. Sir
emperor I beseech you that it will please you to bring my children to right, for
though I have forsaken them, yet are they my sons of my body begotten. Hold
your peace Aymon said Charlemain, for I will that it be so done of the^, for
Reinawd did slay my neuew barthelor that I loved so much. And after he turned
him self and saw ye barons that spoke the one to the other and said to them. Lords
love your musing, for I tell you for a truth that I shall not leave to do
herin my will for no man yt speaks ye wot well it is iii. year gone since we
besieged this castle first and ever since have leien here, where we have lost
many of our fo^ke, wherefore I command you that either of you do make engynes
for to bring down this great tower and all the remnaunt also, for with such
manner we shall abash them greatly, and ye my neuew Rowland ye shall do make of
the engines.vii. and Oliver shall do make vi. the duke Naimes iiii. the bishop
Turpin, and Ogier the dane other.iiii. and ye duke Aimon said the king
Charlemain ye shall make three.

How should I now do this good lord said tha^ Aimon? for sir Emperor ye
know well yt they be my children, another truantes nor knaves but be the best
knights of the world, and so I tell you sir that if I saw them die: I should
for go my wits for anger. And when Charlemaine heard Aimon speak thus: he
was wroth and began to gnaw on a stafe that he held in his hand, and after
said. By that god that made me if there be any of you that gainsaith my will: I
shall strike of his head with my sword. Sir said the du^e Naymes anger not
your self. For that, yt ye have commanded: shall be done incontinent. when
the barons understood the commandment of Charlemain: they went their way for
to make ye engines that the king had commanded, the which were anon made
ready and these engines were for to cast great multitude of stones. And as
soon yt they were made: they were set for to cast again mou^tawba^ and in short
time they do^maged it full sore, and so I promise you yt within the castle were
made great crying of women and of children, and for fear of the stones they
went and hid them under the ground and so they of Mountawban endured this
mischef as long as they had any morsel of meat. And I ensure you that there
was so great derth and so great mortality: ye men wist no more where to lay
the dead. For the charnell was al full. Alas who had seen so young bachelors
that for feintnes went leninge upon their staves thorough Mou^tawba^ for lack
of meat: he would have had great pity. For before that the castle was besieged
they were so strong and so mighty that none could have overcome them, but
they were than so feeble that they fell where they went, musselinge in the
ground as hogs.

ANd wha^ Reinawd saw the great pity that was among his folk: he had of it
great sorrow because he might not put no remedy thereto, and than he began to
say in himself. O good lord what may I now do? now I se well my wit
^uailleth me nothing, for I wot not where to seek vitailles. Alas god where
may Mawgis be now that he know not my great need and the outrage yt Charlemaine
does to us. And wha^ the good lady clare saw her lord Reinawd that complained
him self so piteously: she began to say unto him in this wise. For soth my
lord ye do not well for to discomfort your self so sore, for ye discourage us
al within, moreover I promise you that here been yet within mo than a C.
horses, I pray you let one of them be killed, and ye, my self and our poor
children shall eat of it, for it is more than three days ago that they nor I
eat any thing that did us good, and wha^ she had said this: she fell down in a
swoune at the feet of Reynawde her husband, for great feebleness for lack of
meat. And when Reinawde saw her fall: he took her v^ anon in his arms, and
after that she was come again to her self, she said all weeping. Alas dear
lady mary what shall I poor wr^tche do for all my heart failleth me, and
almost will my soul depart? also sore is my body famished alas mi children
who should ever have wend that ye should have died for hungre.

When Reynawd saw the great distress wherein his wife was: he had great pity
of here, and the teeres began to fall over the cheeks of him, and al weepyng
he went to his stable, and there he made a horse to be slain, the which he
made to be dressed for meat to his folk, but I promise you that horse flesh
lasted not long before them for they were men ynowe to eat it up lightly.
And here ye must know that all the horses that were within Mountawban: were in
likewise eaten, one after a another, except four, that is to wit Bayarde and
the horses of the three brethren of Reynawde the which four horses they
would not eat by cause they would not be a foot. And when Reinawd saw that
there was no more thing that they might eat: he called his brethren and said
to them. Fair brethren what shall we do? we have no more food to take us
but only our four horses that are left alive. Let us do kille one of them
that our folk may eat with us. By my head said Rychard that shall not be
mine, and if ye have just to it: let yours be slain, for ye shall not have
m^ne, and if ye have great myscheeftye be well worthy for through your pride:
we are brought in this plyght, because that ye let go the king Charlemayn,
for and if ye had believed me: this great myshappe had not be fall us. This
hanging: came the lityll Aimon the son of Reinawd that said to Richard in
this manner. Hold your peace mine uncle, for that thing that may not be amended,
men ought to let it pass in the best wise. For it is to shamefully to rehearse
that, that is passed but do as my father commands you and ye shall do well.
For ye do nor well to anger him so as ye do, and though he has missed of his
intent, he has boughte it dear enough as well as we, if the king Charlemaine
has domaged you long, it may well hap that god shall help you or ought
long, if it please him, and I believe certenlye that he shall do so, for the
kyndnes that my lord my father did show unto charlemain when he had him here,
can never be lost as I we^.

GReat pytie had Richard of his neuewe when he heard him speak thus wysly
and took him between his arms and kissed him al weeping, and than he said to
Reinawde. Brother command my horse to be slain when it please you, and give
some comfort therwithall to this folk and to my lady your wife and to my young
neuewes your children. For my litel neuew that is here has well deserved to
eat of it for the good ^ounseyll that he has given to me now. Brother said
Alard, let be slain which ye will of three, for it were to great adommage if
bayard should dye, and also I tell you that I had lever dye my self than that
Bayarde should be slain. Brother said Guychard, ye say well, and anon the
horse of Richard was killed and dresed to their meat, and so in like wise was
done with the horses of the two other brethren, and full sauourly it was
eaten. And when Reinawde saw that there was no meat more: he wist not what he
should do, for he was more sorry for his brethren and for his wife, and his
children, than he was for him self, and began to say in this wise. Alas what
shall I do? I am vanquished and overcome with out any stroke. It had be better
for me to have believed my brother Richard, for I had not be now in the
myserye and great need where I am in at this hour. Now I see well that
Charlemaine has chased me so much that he has betrapped me within his
gynnes, wheroute I can not escape, and I know well that I ought not to be
complained, for I have made my self the rod wherewith I am beaten, and if I
should repent me thereof: it should profit nothing, for I come to late for
to do so. when Richard saw his brother Reinawd make such sorrow: he knew
well his mind, and was right sorry for him, so that he shook al for sorrow,
and wist not what he should say. For if Reynawd would have had of his own
flesh: Richard would well have given him of it, if he might have be comforted
therewith. Then spoke Guychard that other brother and said. My good brethern
what shall we do? we shall yield our self or else dye here for rage of
hungre, and we may no more from hence forth on, but only wait after death.
What say you brother Guichard said Reinawd, will we yield our self ^o the
most cruel king of the world for he should make us all t^ ^^anged shamefully,
if any pity (...) found in him: I would yield (...) ^ladlye but there is none
in him, (...) ^herfore I am delybered that we shall not yield us to him, we
shall rather eat my children, and after our bodies. But always if ye will ea^e
bayarde: I am thereof content for to pass the time for thou, for I have often
heard say, that a day ^espite is worth much. But nevertheless what so
ever he said, he had no courage to eat Bayard, for it was al his succors.
Brother said Alarde. I counseyll that we eat Bayarde, rather then we should
yield us in to the hands of Charlemyane, for he is to cruel, nor he shall
never have mercy of us. And when Reinawde saw that they would eat bayarde his
good horse: he took for it such a heresy sorrow that he almost fell in a swoune
to the earth, but he took together his strengthes and stood vpryghte and
began to say. Fair brethren what will ye do? will ye eat bayarde my noble
horse, that so often has kept us from death and from peril mortal? and I pray
you that before ye slay him that ye slay me, for I may not see him die, and
when ye have slain me: slay him hardelye. And if ye will not do so: I forbed
you in as much as ye love me that ye touch not baiard, for he that shall hurt
him: shall hurt me And when the duchess heard Reinawd speak thus? she wist
not what to do, than she said to him in great wrath. Ha gentill duke
debonayre, and what shall now do your poor children? will you that they die
for hunger for fault of your horse? For it is three days passed yt they eat
any meat, shortly shall their lives come at an end and mine also, for my heart
cleaves in my body for fine force of hungre, and so shall ye see me die
presently, but if I have succors. When the children heard the mother speak
thus: they said to Reinawde. Good father for gods love deliver your horse,
for he shall die as well for hungre, and it is better that he dye first than we
before him. And when Alard Guycharde, and Richard heard their nenewes speak
thus: Richard spoke and said to his brother. Ha ge^till duke for god suffer not
that your children nor my lady your wife dye for hungre, and we also. And when
Reinawd heard his brotoer Richard speak so to him: his heart tendered with all
right sore, and fell to wep, and said my fair brethren since that it please you
that bayard shall die: I pray you go and slay him. And when they were al
accorded that baiard should be slain and eaten: they went straight to the
stable, where they found baiard that casted to them a great syghe. And when
Reynawde saw that: he said he should rather flea himself, than that baiard
should die, that many times has saved him fro death. And when the children
had heard this: they returned again to their mother weeping and al dead for
hu^gre.

THan when Reinawde saw that his children were gone: he went to bayarde, and
gave him a litill hey, for he had none other thing to give him. And than he
came to his brethren, and found Alard holdinge Aimon his neuewe that wept,
and Rychard held you, and Guichard, the duches, that in his arms was swoned,
and said to them. Alas for God mercy. I pray you take in you courage till
night, and I promise you yt I shall do so much that we shall have meat, and god
will. Brother said Alarde we must suffer it would we or not. So long abode the
knights yt the night came, and when it was come: Reinawd said to his
brethren. My brethern I will go speak to our father, for to see what he shall
say to me, and if he shall let us dye for hungre. Brother said Richard I will go
with you if it please you, and ye shall be the more fure that I be in your
co^pani. My brother said ye good knight Reinawd, ye shall not so, for I will
go there alone, and if I bring you not meat: I shall than deliver you
bayarde. And when Reynawde had said this: he made himself to be well armed, and
lyghted upon bayarde, and well secretly went out of Mou^tawban, and came to his
fathers pauillion, the which he knew well. For he had aspyed it from above the
great tower while it was day. And it happed so that he found his father Aimo^
out of his pauillion all alone waiting if he might by any way understand
some tidings priuelye of the castle. And when Reynawde saw his father: he said
to him. What art thou that go now at this time of the night all alone? And
when Aymon heard him speak: he knew him anon and was right glad, but he made
of it no semblaunt, and said to him but what art thou thy self that go at
this hour so hie mounted? When Reinawde, heard his father speak: he knew
him well and said to him. Sir for god have mercy upon us, for we die all for
hungre, and al our horses ben al ready dead and eaten, and so we have no more
but bayarde, that shall not die as long as I live, for rather I should let me
be slain, for to me and to my brethren he has often saved our lives. Alas
father if ye will not have mercy on us: have mercy of my young children.

HA fair son said Aimon, I can not help you for nothing, but go your way
again, for I have you forsworn ye wot it well, and therefore I would not do
against min oath, for all the good in the world, and my heart is right sorye
that I may not help nor give you succor. Sir said Reinawd ye speak ill,
saufe your reverence. For I promise you if ye give us no succoures: that my
wife, my children, my brethren and my self shall die for rage of hungre or
euerthree days ben passed. For it is all ready more then three days that none
of us eat any meat, and so I wot not what I shall do. Alas ye be our father so
ought you to comfort us. For I wot well if the king have us: he shall make us
all to be hanged and dye shamefully. Which were not your worship, wherefore
my father ye ought not to faylle us if the law of nature is rightwyse. My
father for god have pity and mercy upon us, and hold not your courage against
your poor children, for it were great cruelty, and also ye know well that
Charlemaine does to us great wrong, for to persecute us as he does. when
Aymon heard Reynawd speak thus: he had great pity of him, and was so sorry
that almost he fell down in a swoun to the earth and after he began to behold
his child Reynawd and sore wepinge he said to him. Fair son ye have said
truth that the king doothe you great wrong, and therefore a light fro your
horse and enter within my pauyllio^ and take what it please you for nothing
shall be said nay to you, but I shall not give you nothing for to save mine
oath. And when Reinawd heard his father speak so: he descended a foot and
kneled before him, and said an hundred gramercyes dear father and than he
entered within the pauillion of his father, and laded bayarde with bread and
with flesh both fair and fresh, and wit it that bayarde did bear more then x.
other horses should have done. And when Reynawde had well laded bayarde with
vitailes: he took leave of his father and went a gain to Mountawban, it is
not to be asked what welcome Reynawde had of his brethern, of his wife, and of
his men, and wit it that when they saw him bring so much vitailes: they swouned
al for joy to the earth, and when Reinawd saw this: he wend they had been dead
for hungre. So began he to make great sorrow and not without a cause, and while
that Reinawde sorowed and made great moan: his brethern began to come again to
theymselfe his wife and also his two children. And when Reinawd saw them al
upon their feet: he was glad and presented to them meat for them and for his
folk, and they tha^ made great Joy and eat their fill at their ease. And when
they had eaten well: they went to sleep except Reynawde that would keep watch
him self. And on the morn when the day was come: they rose and went to hear
mass, and after the mass was done they fell to their meat again, and eat all that was left over even of that Reinawde had brought, and when the next night
was come, Aimon (yt could not forget his children) made his stuarde to come
before him and said to him, ye know how I have forsworn my children, whereof I
am sori that ever I did so. But it is said that are the need the friend is
known, I let you wit that my children been yonder within in great pouertye and
misease, and how be it that I have forsworn the^: I ought nor may not fail
them, we have three engyines that Charlemain has made me do make for to hurt
my children whereof we have domaged them as much as we might, now must we
help them after their damage. And I shall tell you, see that ye put within the
engynes bread and flesh both salt and fresh in great plenty in stead of
stones, and let this be cast in to the castle, for if I should die my self
for hungre I shall not fail them as long as: I have whereof to help them,
and also I repent me full sore of the harm that I have done to them, for all the
world ought to blame me thereof with good right, and we been in the wrong. Sir
said the stuarde ye say well. For ye have done so much ayenste them that all the world blames you thereof, but incontinente I shall do your commandment.
And than ye stuard went and made the three engines to be filled with vittailles,
and after he bad the gouerner to cast the^ in to Mountawban. And ye must wit
that many of the host blamed Aymon sore, that he made his engynes to be cast
against his children for they wend it had be stones, and when the night was
passed and that Reinawd was up: he went here and there within the castle, and
found foison of vittailes that his father had cast, whereof he was right glad
and said Good lord blessed be you, now see I well that they that have their
trust in you can not fare amiss, and than he called his brethern his wife and
his children and said. My brethren ye see how our father has pity of us. And
then he made the vittailles to be gathered up and put in a sure place, and so
they eat thereof at their ease for they had well great need thereof, for they
were so sore an hungered that it was great pity. And wit it that Aymon made
east so much vytayll within Mou^tawban: yt they of within had enough for
three months with good governance.

NOw must we understand yt Charlemain had some knowledge how the old duke
Aimon had given vittailes to his children, whereof he was sore an angered and
made Aimon to come incontinente before him and said to him. Aymon who makes
thee so bold to give any m^at to min enemies mortal? I know well al thy wyles,
thou may not excuse thiself, but by the faith that I owe to God I shall
avenge me so well or night: that if I may ye shall leese your head for it. Sir
said the duke Aimon, I will not deny it, for I tell you truly if ye should
make me dye or be burnt in a fire: I will not fail my children as long as I
may help them. For my children be no thieves traitors nor no murderers, but
they been the most valiant knights of the world and the truest, and ween not
you to slay my children in such manner, ye have to long wrought your folly if
it would suffice you. when Charlemayne heard Aymon speak thus: he was angrye
with it, and for great wrath he looked as fire and Almost he smote Aimon, and
wha^ the duke Naimes saw this: he auau^ced him forth and said. Sir send home
Aimon for ye have kept him here to long, ye ought well to understand that
Aymon will not see his children to be dystroyed, and therefore ye ought not to
blame him nor smite him, after that Charlemayne heard the duke Naimes speak:
he said to him. Naimes sith that ye have judged it: ye shall not be gaynsayd,
and than he turned him toward the duke Aymon and said to him. Now go forth
out of mine host, for ye have done me more damage than profit, sir said the
duke Aimon. I shall gladly do your commandment. And anon he went and lighted
on horseback, and after said to the peers of france. Lords I pray you all that ye will have my children for recomme^ded, for they be^ com of your blood,
and let the king see well to, for if he make my children to dye by such great
vengeance as he has said: if I should become a sarasyn and dwell in Affryque
all the days of my life: I shall stryke of his head, for none other gage I will
not take. And when Aimon had said thus: he went out of thost into france to
his country well heavy because that he left his children in so great poverty,
and Charlemayne that saw Aymon go thus quite, and that he had garnyshed
Mountawban of vitaylles: he was full angrye for it. So studied he upon this a
long while. And when he had studied long enough: he was so sorry that none
might be more sorier, and returned him self toward his Barons, and said
Lords I command you that ye break al our engynes. For by them I have myssed
to have the castle of Mountawban. And incontinente the Barons made break the
engines as the king had commanded. And by all thus Reinawd abode a long while
in good peace, but their vittailles began sore to mynyshe. And when Reinawde
saw that: he was sorry, and began to complain in himself, and said good
lord what shall I do? I know that at long rennynge we shall not mow hold,
and so shall Charlemain have no mercy of us, but he shall make us die. Alas
Mawgis where be you? For if ye were with us we should doubt nothing nor I
should not suffer this great distres that I have. All thus as Reinawde
complained himself: than came Alard that was so feeble that with pain he
might stand upon his feet, and said to Reynawd. Reinawde for the love of
god make bayarde to be slain. For I may no longer live without meat, another
yet my brethren.

THan when Reynawd heard his brother Alard speak thus: he was right sorye for
it and took his swerd and went to bayarde for to slay him. And when bayarde
saw Reynawde he began to make great Joy, and when Reynawde saw the there
that bayard him made: he said to him. Ha bayarde good beast, if I had the
heart to do thee harm I were well cruel. And than yonnet the younger son
heard that: he cried unto his father, sir wherefore tarry ye that ye slay not
bayarde since he must dye, for I wexe mad for hungre, and so I tell you if I
have not shortly some food: ye ye shall seem die before your eyes, and yet my
mother and my brother also, for we may not longer live thus so hard we been
famished. And when Reinawd heard his son speak to him so: he had great pity
of him, and great sorrow in his heart, and so he had of bayarde that cheted him
so much. Than wiste not Reynawde what he should say nor do, and so began to
think alonge while And when he had bethoughte him self long enough: he
aduysed him how Bayarde should not dye. And tha^ he called after a basyn, and
made bayarde be let blood much, and after he had let him blood enough:
Reynawd stopped the vain and gave ye blood to Alard for to be dressed. And
when it was soden they eat all alytell thereof, which gave them great
sustenaunce. And to say the troth: Reinawde and his folk were well four
days without any other food. And when it came to the v. day that they would
have had bayard let blood again: he was so feeble that he cast no blood at
all. And when the duchess saw that she began to weep tenderly and said. Sir
for god since that he gives no more bluod let him be slain, and so shall eat
your poor children of him that dyen for great hungre, and I also. Madame said
thanne Reinawd I will not do so. For bayard has born us good company in our
life's and so shall he do till the hour of our death for we shall dye all
together. And ye ought to know that Reinawde and his company were brought so
low that they waited none other but death the which was them nigh enough, Than
an old man that was among them came and said to Reynawde up Sir what shall it
be? I see that you and Mountawban shall be destroyed, but in you is not the
fault, for it has be well defended as long as ye might as it apeereth, and
since that I see ye may no more do: come after me and I shall show you away,
where through we shall well all go out with out any danger, and I will well
that ye know Mountawban was once made and shytte, before ye did make it, and
the Lord that builded it first: let make a way under the earth that brings
folk to the wood of ye serpent, and I was a young child when that way was
made, and I know well where it lies, do dig where I shall show you: and ye
shall find it without any fail, and thus shall we go free without any danger.
wha^ Reynawde heard these words: he was so glad of it that none might be
more, so that he forgot his hungre with all and said. O fair God yt all made,
blessed be you. Now have I found that I desired, for I shall go to Ardeyne
which I ought to love dear. And tha^ he took the old man by the hand and
made him to bring him to the place where he said and there he made to be
dug in the earth and found the way that ye old man said, whereof he was
right glad and than he went to the stable and put the sadle upon Bayarde and
after brought him to the way, but wit it that Bayarde was so feeble that he
scante could go the pase, and tha^ Reynawde, his wife, his brethern, his
children and the remenaunte of his folk put them self to the way under the
earth, so that no creature a live abode w^thin the castle.

GReat plenty of torches Reynawde made to be fyred yt they might see the
better within the cave as they went, and he ordained his forward of that few
folk that he had, and went forth in good ordeynaunce with his baner
displayed, and he with his brethren made the reregarde. And when they had gone
a long while through the Cave that was wide and large: Reynawde made his folk
to tarry and said to his brethern, my brethern we have done evil. For we have
left behind us king Yon in the prison, certes I should lever dye: than that
I should leave him so, for he should dye there for hungre as a famisshed wolf,
and that were to us great sin. By god said Richard he has well deserved it,
for of a man yt is a traitor: men ought not to have pity, brother said
Reynawde ye say ill. And than he returned again and came to the prison where
the king Yon was, which he took out and brought with him. And wha^ the
duchess saw her brother ye king Yon come: she said to him.

Ha my brother ye are right ill come to me: for all the harm that we have
suffered: comes thoroughe cause of you. I am sorry that ye be not dead and roten
within the prison, for ye have well deserved it. Madame said Reynawde, let that
alone I pray you, for he shall not dye if I may. For I have done to him
homage, wherefore I ought to obey him, and how be it he has wrought full ill
against us: yet shall I never be forsworn against him, wha^ his brethern heard
him speak thus: they said to him, brother ye speak well and wyselye, and ye
do that ye ought to do, nor ye shall never he rebuked of us for it, do
therein as it pleases you, and after these words: they went on their way.

SO long went these knights that they came out of ye cave, and found
themself at the wood of the serpent even at the spryng of the day, and as
soon as they were issued out of the said cave they were so escaped fro
Charlemayne: Yonnet than the little son of Reynawde swouned there for great
hungre. And wha^ Reynawde saw that: he was right sori for it, and took him up
and said Fair son I pray you be a good cheer, for we shall have soon meat
great plenty. And when he had said this: he took his other son Aymo^ in his
arms and recomforted him much. And when Reynawde had done so: he looked
about him and knew well where they were, and he said to his brethern. Lords
me seems that we ben nyghe the hermytage of my good freende Bernarde, sir said
Alarde ye say troth, but what shall we do? Brother said Reinawde. I
counsel for ye most profitable that we go there, and we shall abide there till
the night be come, and than we shall take our way toward Ardeyne, for I
counsel not that we go by day and also it cannot be, but the heremite shall
have some meat, which we shall give unto my wife and unto my children.
Brother said Alarde by my faith ye speak well and wisely. And than they put
them self to the way, and they had gone but a little: that they found the
heremitage, but as they went al thoroughe the wood of the serpent: they
departed the one from the other as wild beasts eating the herbs and grasses
as it had been apples or Peers, so great hungre they had. And when that Reynawde
saw this: he was sorry and called them again and said. Lords ye do not well
for to separe thus the one from the other. For it might lightli turn us to
dommage I pray you that every man call other and gather your self together,
and let us go into the hermytage. For we shall find there Bernarde that shall
make us good cheer I wot it well. And wha^ they were come there: Reynawde
knocked at ye gate. And when Bernarde heard it: he came anon and saw Reynawde
and his folk, whereof he was right glad, and came and kyssed Reynawde. And
after he said unto him, Fair lord ye be right welcome, of whens come you, and
how is it with you? My freende Bernarde said than Reynawde. Wit it that I
have let mine herytaunce by fine force of hungre and so I go unto Ardeyne. For
I can none otherwise do at this time And I pray you that if ye have any meat:
that ye for gods sake will give it to my wife, and to my children. For they
ben so sore famysshed that they dye for hungre, but if they have some meat.

When Bernarde understood these words of Reynawde: he had of him great piti
for the distress wherein he saw Reynawde and his folk. And of the other part
he was glad when he wyste that they were escaped out of the dangers of
Charlemayne, and anon he went to the duchess and said to her, madame ye be
right welcome. I pray you doubt nothing. For ye be aryued in a good place, to
take your rest at your ease. And than he went into the Chamber, and brought
out bread and wine and all such as god had sent him. And after he set hi^
beside Reynawde and said to him Lord take a worth such vitayles as God has
given to me, there they ben. I shall give you meat in dispite of Charlemayne,
Gramercy said Reynawde, here be^ good tidinges for us, but when the night is
come: We shall go to Ardeyne. For I doubt sore that Charlemayne shall
aperceyue that we be^ departed. For if God grant me yt I may bring me and my
company to Ardeyne: I shall not set a roton apple for all the power of
Charlemain for I shall well defend me against him. Sir said the hermyte ye
say well. I pray god that he will fulfill your will. All that day soiourned
Reynawde and his folk with Bernarde the Heremite, the which served, and
comforted them with all his power, and also he gave of the Otes of his ass to
Bayarde as much as he might eat. And when the night was come: Reynawde would
depart and bad fare well to the Heremite, and when the Heremyte saw that they
would go away: he found the means that they had three horses, whereof the
duchess had the one, and the children had the other tweyne. And thus Reynawde
with his felawshyp went on their way so long that they came to Ardeyne. And
wha^ they of the City wyste that their Lord was come yt they had desired so
long: they were well glad and came against him in fair company, and received
him honorably, and conveyed him unto the fortress, and after they went and
made feast through all the town, like as god had descended there, for great
Joy that they had of their Lord Reynawd. And when the Barons of the land
wist that their Lord Reynawde and his brethern were come to Ardeyne: they were
glad, and came soon to se him, and to him they made reverence.

But here leaves the historye to speak of Reynawde and of his brethren, his
wife and his children yt were in ardeyne well at ease, for their great hungre
was ceased, and shall return to speak of Carlemayne and of his.xii. peers for
to show how he entered into Mountawban after that Reynawde was departed.

How Charlemayn after yt he had besyeged Mountawban and had famisshed Reinawde
and his brethern: knew that they were gone, and had habandoned the place, and
were gone to Ardeyn He went there and besieged them a gain, but or ever he
had pyght his syege. Reynawd, and his brethern made an issue upon him and his
folk, and slew many of them. And took prisoner Richard the duke of Normandye.
depiction of a siege camp with a king or Charlemagne with crown and scepter,
surrounded by men in armor; in the background a castle; in the foreground
canons being fired

IN this party showed the history that when the king Charlemaine was at ye
siege before Mou^ntawban sore an angered yt he could not take Reinawd nor his
brethern. Now it happed upon a day yt Charlemayne rode nighe the Castle for to
wit how they bare them self with in Mountawban, And when he was nigh: he looked
up to the walls and saw no body that was there, as they were wont for to be.
And when he saw that: he was abashed of it, and came to the pauilyon, and
sent Incontinent for all his barons. And when they were come: he said to the^
Lords it is well nyghe eight days age yt I saw no body upon the wall^s of
Mountawban, wherefore I believe that all they of it be dead. Sir said the Duke
Naymes, it were good that men wist the truth of it: send thither sir if it
please you. When Carlemayne heard this: he lyghted anon on horsbacke and all
his Barons with him, and went to Mountawban. And when they were come unto the
gate: they made semblaunte to give a sawt to the Castle, but Reynawde was to
far for to defend it. And than Charlemayne wend verelye that Reynawde and
all his had been dead for hungre and great distress, he made to be brought
thither a long ladder and righted it to the walls. And incontinent Rowlande
mounted up first of all, and after him Ogyer, Oliver, and the Duke Naymes. And
when they were upon ye walls: they beheld within, and they saw another man nor
woman, and so they went down from the walls, and yede and opened the gate,
and made Charlemayne to come in and all his folk. But wit it that Charlemayne
went in as angry as any man might be. And when he was within and found no
body: he was so sore merueyled that he wist not what he should say nor do. So
went he up to the dungeon and he found there no body, whereof he was more
meruayled tha^ he was before, and than he began to say. By my soul Lords here
is great meruayles and well the deuylles work. Wit it that Reynawde is gone and
all his brethern, and all his folk also. And all this has done that thief
Mawgys that has been here within, for it can none other wise be.

AFter that Charlemayne had said these words: he began to walk within the
Castle seeking all about to see if he might find Reynawde or any of his
brethren. And so long he went thus here and there that he found the way
there as they went out, and when the king Charlemayne saw the cave: he was
sore abashed with it and called Ogyer the dane and said to him. Ogyer here is
the way where thoroughe ye traitors are gone away, and all this has done me
Mawgis. For he has made this cave in dyspite of me whereof he makes my heart to
break in my belly. Sir said the duke Naymes, ye blame Mawgys, but this Cave
shows not that it had be unmade this hundred years passed, and I tell you for
certain that sarasins made it first. When Charlemayne heard these words: he
began to smile with an angri fare, and cursed them that made the Cave, and
was meruaylousli an angered, for he knew well that Reynawde and all his company
were gone out at the same hole and so he was dismyssed of his purpose, he said
then to his folk. Now go lightly in, and seek where this hole brings men
unto, for I shall not be at mine ease till I know it. And wha^ Rowland understood
Charlemain: he put him self within the Cave, and made light a great many of
torches for to see in it, and after Rowlande went plenty of Frenthe men that
followed him, and they wr^t^ so long til they came at the end of the cave, and
found themself in the wood of the Serpente. And when Rowlande was come out of
the cave: he looked about for to know where they were but he could not
himself know it, and than he said to his folk, Lords me seems that for to
go any forther for to seek after Reinawd it were but folly: for he knows well
the country and we wot not where to go. Sir said his felawes ye say well,
therefore let us return to Charlemayne your uncle for to tell him what we have
found within this Cave.

When Rowlande and his fellows were accorded: they returned that way that they
were come. And when the king saw them come out again: he asked of them what
they had found, and if they had found any issue to go out of the Cave. Sir
said Rowla^d yea without any fail. Wit that Reynawde and his folk are
escaped you and they have Bayarde with them for here ye may see the path. And
when the king Charlemayne knew the troth how Reynawde and his company were
gone: he was so greatly an angered ye none might be more, and the same hour he
sent his messangers in all his lands and countries for to wit if he might
understand any tidinges where Reinawd and his brethern were become. And when
he had done this: he commanded that his host should dyslodge, and that they
should come all to Mountawban. And when ye barons heard the king: they did his
commandment, and came al to Mountawban and lodged them as well as they could,
and abode well there six days making great Joy that Reynawde and his brethren
were thus expelled out of it. And as the barons were devising within Mountawban
there came a messanger to fore Charlemayne, and salued him as to him
apperteyned, and to him he said in this wise. Sir wit it that I have seen
Reynawde Alarde, Guieharde, and Richard lokynge great to ye with great company
of knights, keeping a great court within the city of Ardeyne, where as
Reynawde gives great gifts to every one. And I am sore merueyled where he
has gotten so great treasur. And also is there with him the king Yon of
gascoygne and that more is I tell you for certain that Reynawde has made a
great assemble of folk for to defend him against you if ye go in any wise for
to assail him.

THe king was much angry wha^ he heard his messangere so swear he by saint
denis he should never lie in no bed till he had besyeged Ardeyne. And when he
said so: he commanded to his barons that every man should trusse his baggage
and they should take on their way straight to Ardeyne. And when the barons
heard Charlemayne speak so: they took on their way without any more taryinge
toward Ardein and rode so long till that they came to mountarg weil, yt was
not far from Ardeyne, for men might see from thens the steples of the town
There was lodged the host of charlemayne that night, and I promise he did do
make good watch, for doubt of the four sons of Aymon And wha^ the day was
come Charlemayne did set his folk in good ordenaunce, and with his baner
dysplayed they rode toward Ardeyne. And when Reynawde wist that Charlemaine
was come for to besiege them within Ardeyn: he began to swear yt he should not
let him besieged as he had done within Mountawban. For rather he would fight
with Charlemayne. And if it may so fall that he come in his hands: he shall not
have pity of him as he had to fore time because he had found him so cruel
and without pity. Brother said then Richard now I see you speak like a
knight, and by ye faith that I owe unto you I promise you yt or ever
Charlemayne shall besiege us: I shall slay more than an hundred of his folk,
and but if god fail us we shall do such a thing that shall be to the great
hurt and dyspleasure of him, whereof he shall be sorry all the days of his life.
For he is not manered like a gentilma^. For the more that he is prayed the
less he does. Brother said Alarde ye speak well and honestlye. And I shall
con you thank for it as long as I live.

YE ought to wit yt when Reynawde saw Charlemayne com for to besyege him with a
great puissaunce of folk, he was nothing abashed with it, but he made
incontine^t Bondy his good horn to be blown, and made his folk to be arrived
redely that were in great number and made them issue out of the City. And when
his army was assembled in the feeldes: it was a noble thing for to see, and
than he ordained his batayles by good ordenau^ce as a wise fighter. And after
he had done so: he called his brethern and said to them. My fair brethren
this day is the day that we shall die or else do so much that we shall bring
the war at an end. Wherefore I pray you yt every of us show him self a good
knight, for in you is all my trust, and so I promise you that I have lever di
worthily in battle, than for to be hanged shamfully as thief My brethern I
pray you come all nighe me. For I will that we ben the first that smite upon
our enemies. Brother said Alarde we shall do your commandment doubt ye not
of it, and go forth wha^ ye will, and wha^ they were so agreed Reynawde did
choose an hundred of the best knights of his felawshyp, and said to them.
Syrs I pray you that ye will be with me in the first battle, and ye shall
do me great honor. Sir said the knights, we shall gladlye do your
commandment, and we shall not leave you as long as life is in us, and so we
thank you of the great worship that ye do call us in your company for ye
know well that we can not fare amys as long as we be with you.

When Reynawde had ordained well his batayles he made none other taryenge, but
went the formest of all, ye sheelde at the neck, and the spear in the fyst
and was mounted upon Bayarde, that beheld proudly about him making great
noise. And then Reynawde gave him the spur, and went fair upon the folk of
the King Charlemayne, and when Charlemaayne saw Bayarde remynge that made so
great bruyte, and Reynawde upon his back yt came in so fair ordenaunce: he was
sore abashed of it, and said in him self. O good Lord, and where the Devil
have all ready had the four Sons of Aymo^ so many folk as I se here now come
with them. I believe tha^ it is some deuylles work. For I had not left many
with them late a go. And now Reynawde is so puyssau^t that he fears me
nothing. But I promise god all this shall not avail him nothing, but I shall
do justice upon him and his brethern or ought long. And than he made his
bataile to set in ordenaunce in the best wise that he could, and lighted on
horseback for to come fight with Reynawde, And when the Duke Naymes saw that
Charlemayn was so mad yt he would go fight with Reynawde: he went to him and
said sir, what is that ye will do? I promise you it were great folly for to
fight with these folk, and it were better that ye made peace with Reynawd, For I
am sure that Reynawde shall do all yt ye will command him, and I tell you well
yt if we fight with the^: that ye shall see many knights to trayle their
bowelles thorough the feelde, whereof it shall be great harm to the one party,
and to the other.

And such shall ye loss be that it shall not be recovered again. Naymes said
the king Charlemayne let us alone, for I shall do none other wise for no man
that lives, I should rather let me to be dismembered. And when the duke Naymes
had understand his words: he was full sorry of it and left his speaking thereof,
and from that hour Charlemayne delybered himself for to fight, and always he
rode forth in great wrath.

ANd when Reynawde saw that the two hosts were approached sore nighe the one the
other, as to hand and hand: he said to his brother Rychard that was next him,
I will go speak with the king Charlemayne for to wit of him if he will pardon
and take us unto his grace For if he would do so: I should do entierly all
his will and pleasure as to our sovereign lord. By god brother said then
Richard, ye be not worth a botell of hey, for the heart is all ready failed
in your belly. Go forth mischau^t said then Reynawde thou wot not what thou
say. For I will go there no man shall keep me therfro, and if he refuses
the peace when I shall axe it of him: I shall make mine auowe to God that I
shall neuermore require him thereof. Brother said Alarde ye say well and wisely,
go there hardly and do therein your will. And than Reynawde made none other
delayinge, but he smote Bayarde with the spurs, and went incontinent toward
the king Charlemayne, and said than to him. Sir for gods mercy suffer if it be
your pleasure that we have peace and accorded with you, yt this war that has
lasted so long may: finisshe, and that your wrath be put away from us if it
please you, and I shall be ready to do all that ye will, and also I shall give
you Bayarde my good horse. Than said the king to him, go fro me false gloton,
the devil speed thee, for all the world shall not conne keep thee but I shall
slay thee. Sir said Reynawde ye shall not do so, and god will, for I shall
defend me well. And wit it since that it is com to this: ye shall not be spared
of us, but we shall do the worste yt we can. Smite knights said the king
Charlemaine, I shall never praise you if this evil glotton escape me now. And
wha^ that Reynawde saw this: he said. Sir king of France I defy you, and
forthwith he spurred Baiarde, and ran with his spear upon a knight, which he
smote so hard in the br^st that he overthrew him dead unto the earth. And
after that he went again unto his folk. And when that the king Charlemayn
saw this: he cried wan hye voice smite knights now shall they ben discomfyted.

THan when Rowland heard the king Charlemayne cry thus: he spurred his horse
and went after Reynawde, and also many other knights, but they ou^r took him
not. Wha^ Richard saw his brother come: he came him against and said to him.
Brother what tidinges bring you? shall we have peace or war? B^other said
Reynawde let us do the best that we can do, for peace we shall not have.
Brother said then Rychard god bless you for the tidinges that ye bring, for I
think to do this day such a thing, whereof king Charlemayne shall be angry.
Brother said Reynawde I pray you that ye show yourselfe virtuous and strong
against our enemies. When the king Charlemayne saw that it was time to set
upon him he called hastily the duke Naymes and said to him. Naymes hold my
Oriflam and think for to smite well and valiauntly as a worthy knight ought for
to do at either hand in keeping my worship, and hereof I pray you hertely.
Sir said the duke Naymes ye need not for to pray me, for I am bound for to do
the same, but it greueth me that ye have not done other wise, that is for to
sai that ye should have granted to the peace, for the war has lasted to
long. Naimes I command you that ye speak no more thereof unto me, for while
I li^^^ they shall have no peace with me.

Sir said the Duke Naymes I am sorry for it. Now let see what ye shall do, for
I go to battle first of all, and look that ye follow me if ye will for I
shall put me in such a place whereof ye shall be sore meruayled, and not without
a cause, for there his no man so cold, but he should soon get here there
within a little while, Frow follow that will.

ANd when Reynawde saw ye Oriflam of France come: he broched Bayarde with the
spurs, and ran among the thickest, and smote a knight so hard that he
cast him down unto the earth. And after he turned him toward his folk and
chered the^ honestly, and than went aga^ne upon his enemies, and of them he
overthrew four one after an other, and upon the fyft he brake his spear into
two pieces, and hurted him right sore, and anon he (...) hand to flamberge his
good sword and smote a knight withal upon his helm so great stroke that he
cleued him unto the hard teeth, and forth with he smote another with such
strength that he made flee ye head from the body of him. And after yt he had
done these two strokes (...) cried Ardeyn as hye as he could for to rejoice
his folk, and wha^ he had cried so: he said to them. Now upon them good
knights, for this day we shall avenge the great shame ye Charlemayne has done
to us so long without any reason. And when Alarde, Guycharde and Richard
heard Reynawde speak thus: they ran upon their enemies by such a manner that
each of the^ overthrew.vii. knights at ye enpraynte, who that had be there
than he should have seen great faytes of arms done of the four sons of
Aymon, For after yt they were ones assembled together: the folk of the king
Charlemayne might not endure before them. For Reinawde and his brethern went
smiting at either hand, and felled their enemies down sterke dead as
beasts, so that the most part of the^ were slain or dyscomfited.

When the King Charlemaine saw the great dommage that the four sons of
Aymon bare to him: he was right sore an angered for it. And with great wrath he
went and ran upon the folk of Reynawde and smote a knight so vengeably that
he cast him down dead to the earth, and brake his spear all in pieces. And
after he took his swerd in his hand, whereof he did meruayles of arms, so
much that his folk praised him for it, for he bare himself there valyau^t and
strong. And wit that this meruaylous battle was so cruel that it was great
pytie for to see. It is troth yt Rowland was aferde for his uncle charlemayne
that he should be overthrown wha^ he saw him in ye prese, wherefore he went
anon nyghe him, and so did Oliver, Ogyer and all the.xii. peers for to keep yt
he should have no harm. And when the great batayles were assembled the one
against the other: ye should have seen there a sharp and a heavy battle so
that it was pity for to see, for sith yt Rowlande, Oliver and all the.xii.
peers of France were come in the meddle: they began to make so great slaughter
of the folk of Reynawde yt they made them leave the place. And wha^ Reynawde
and his brethern saw yt: they meddled them so sharply among the French men yt
every man made them way, for they raught no man but they threw him dead to the
earth so much that there was nothing but it trembled before them, ye ought to
wit that from the hour of pryme unto the hour of noone endured this mortal
battle, that none wist who should have the better of it. But when noone was
passed: the folk of Reynawde began to with draw themself, for they might
no more. And for to say the troth if the folk of Reynawde wtdrew them: they
were not to be blamed for it, for Charlemayne had four times more folk than
Reynawde beside ye.xii. peers that were such knights as men well knew. But
this that the folk of Reynawd did: Was for the good ensample that they saw in
Reynawde and in his brethern. And when the noble knight perceived that his
folk withdrewe themself: he came to him that bare his standarde and said to
him. My freende ride toward Ardeine in the wysest wise that ye can, for this
day we have fought right sore, and it is time that we go rest ourselfe. Sir
said the knight I shall well do your commandment, and incontinent he took
his way toward Ardeyn. And than Reinawde called his brethern and said to
them, let us be behind for to keep our folk, for otherwise we are lost.
Brother said Richard doubt not, for as long as god gives life to you and to
Bayard: We need not fear nothing.

When Charlemayne saw that Reynawde and all his company was gone: he cried with
a hye voice, now after Lords after for now ben they dyscomfyted. But this
word of Charlemayne was cause that many a worthy knight lost his life. For
such did follow after Reynawde that paid dearly for it. For Reynawde and his
brethern slew more than an hundred that followed after them. And would
Charlemain or no. Reynawde and his brethren entered again with their folk
with in Ardeyne. And ye must know yt Richard the brother of Reynawde: Iusted
with Richard the Duke of Normandye by the gate of Ardeyne as they would have
entered in. And there the Duke was overthrown, the which was taken prisoner by
Richard the brother of Reynawde, and brought him into the City mawgre the
folk of Charlemayne. And when Reynawde and all the folk were within Ardeyne:
he made the gates to be shet. And after went, and dysarmed the^ for to take
some ease. For they had well need thereof.

YE ought to wit ye when Charlemayne saw that the four sons of Aymon had
saved them self, and that they had taken Richard the Duke of Normandy prisoner
that was one of the.xii. peers: he was s^^ angrye that no man can be more, for
he feared sore lest Reynawde should make to dye Rychard of normandye, and when
he saw that he might do none other: he commanded that the City should be
besieged of all sides, the which thing was incontinent done as he commanded
And than swear Charlemayne that he should never leave his syege unto the time
that he had taken the City and the four sons of Aymon to be hanged
shamfully. Sir said Rowlande ye know that I am he yt most has hurted the
four sons of Aymon, nor never I speak to you of peace bewene you and them,
but from hence forth reason commands me yt I should speak and move there
unto. Sir ye know well that it is a go.xv years and more that ye have warred
with the four sons of Aymon, and we had always ye worse of the war and
not without a cause, for Reynawde and his brethern are valiant knights, nor
they be not to be lightly brought to dyscomfiture. And I promise you if ye had
warred so long upon the sarasyns as ye have done on the four sons of Aymon:
ye should have be lord of ye most part of them, which had be to you more
worship and less dommage, and worse is: ye know how Richard of Normandy one
of the best knights that ye had: is taken, and if otherwise it happeth to him
than well: it shall be to you great dishonor and blame. For thereof ye shall
see all France in a rore and trouble, but if ye put some remedy thereto, and I
tell you if I were in the case that Reynawde is in: I should slay him. Sith
that I might have no peace with you. Wherefore sir if ye will believe me for your
honor and for your profit: ye shall se^d word to Reynawde that he deliver you
again Richard of Normandye all armed upon his horse, and ye shall make peace
with him, and I promise you sir he shall do it gladly with all that ye will
command him and so shall all his brethern also. Rowland said than the king,
will ye say any thing more. Nay sir said Rowlande. And I swear you upon my
faith that the four Sons of Aymon shall never have peace with me, and so I
tell you yt I fear me not for Richard of Normandy, for Reynawde should rather
put out both his own eyes tha^ that he durst do to Richard any harm upon
his body. And when ye barons heard Charlemayne speak so: the tears began to
fall down from their eyes for great fear that Richard of Normandye their
Peer should have any harm. After all these things Reynawde and his brethren
were within Ardeyne making great Joy. And after they were all out of their
harneys: Reynawde ordained good watch upon the walls of the City. And than
he made come the duke Richard of Normandy before him, and said to him in this
manner. Duke richard ye know well that the king does great wrong for to trouble
us so as he has done, and yet does without any reasonable cause. And
therefore I tell you for certain, but if that ye make us to have peace: think
not to live onye longer, for I shall do smite of your head and your body to be
hewed in four quarters. Sir said the duke Richard of Normandye, I am in your
danger, so may ye do of me your pleasure. Ye have taken me by war, and
none otherwise: if ye do to me otherwise than ye ought of right of war, ye
shall have dysshonour for ever more. And so I will well that ye know that as
long as I live: I shall not fail Charlemayne for no fear of death. When
Reynawde heard Richard of Normandye speak thus: he refrayned a little his
wrath, and than he commanded yt he should be put in yrons within his
cha^bres, and yt he should be well kept and curteysly, and that he be well
served of that apperteyneth to his estate. Than was the Duke Richard all thus
in prison: but he was well served of all good meats, and he had good company
for to play to what game that he would. And also the good Duchess clare did
vysite him often, and reco^forted him with her fair langage.

When Charlemaine had beseged the City round about and saw that by no
sawtynge, he might not get it: he did do make many great engynes for to cast
stones in, but what someuer yt he did: Reynawde and his brethern and also his
folk issued out often, as well by night as by day upon the folk of the king
Charlemayne, and did him great damage, for Reynawde took no man but he kept
him prisoner, for to see if he might have peace with Charlemayne, by means of
them.

And while that Charlemayne had laid his siege thus before Ardeyne: the king
Yon of gascoygne fell sike a bed of a great sickness, and shrofe him of al his
sins praying god to have pity and mercy on him, and after he had be long
sick he died. God pardon his soul. And wit that Reynawde made him be buried
worshypfully, as to a king perteyneth, but there was no man that wept for him,
for all they of the City hated him, because of the great treason yt he had
done to the four sons of Aymon. Now leueth the hystorye to speak of this
matter, and returns to speak of Mawgis that was in his hermitage yt served
our lord with good heart, so much that he had forgoten Reynawde, his brethern
and his friends.

How Mawgys he being in his hermytage, came in him a will by a vysyon yt he
had by night in a sleep for to go see Reynawd and his brethern And how he met
with two merchants that.vii. thieves had robbed in a wood, of which thieves
the said Mawgys slew five, and delivered to the Merchants all their good
again. And after this he went to Ardeyne for to see Reynawde, and his brethern.
depiction of a hermitage in the woods with a male figure or hermit with a
pilgrim's hat and staff, handing purses to two male figures

NOw shows the history that when Mawgys was in his hermitage, and had watched
so long about his prayers to God: he fell a sleep, and him seemed in his sleep
that he was at Mountawban and saw Reynawde and his brethern yt came against
him, and made their complaynt to him of Charlemayne that would take fro them
the good horse Bayarde, but Reynawde had him fast by the bridle, and would not
let it go. And wit it that Mawgys had so great sorrow in his dream: that he a
woke withal al wroth, and arose on his feet incontinent. And than he swear
our Lord he should never cease to go till he had seen Reynawde and his
brethern his good cosyns. And when Mawgis had said so: he made none other
tarying, but he shet the door of his chapel, and took his weed and his
staff, and went on his way also soon as he might. And about ye hour of
noone he found himself in a great wood where he found two men making evil
cheer and great sorrow, and wha^ Mawgys saw them: he came to the^ and said? God
be with you. And one of them answered and said, certes god is not with us: but
rather the devil, for unhappy was that hour yt ever we came into this wood,
for we ben undone for ever. Good Syrs said Mawgys what eyleth you yt ye
speak so. Good man said ye one of the two, a little before you: are thieves yt
has robbed us of our clothe and have slain one of our felawes because he
speak to them angrely. When Mawgys heard these poor merchants speak thus:
he had great pity of them and said to them. My friends come with me, I shall
pray the thieves in our Lords behalf yt they will deliver you again your
goods, and if they will not do it: I shall be wroth with the^, and so I shall
fight with the^ well as I can with my staff for to wit if their heads ben soft or
hard. When the merchants heard Mawgis say so: they began to look upon him
if they could know him, but they might not know what he was. Then spoke to him
one of the^ in this manner, and what devil is that ye say? thou art but a man
alone all naked and they ben all armed and also ye can scantlye heave up your
staff. Let this fool alone said that other, see ye not how his eyes go in
his head? And than they said to Mawgys. Brother go thy ways and let us in
peace, or else I shall give thee such a stroke with this same stafe yt thou shall
feel it well. And when Mawgys saw the merchant speak thus to him: he said.
Brother thou dooste not well to speak to me so, for by force thou cannot get
ought of me. And thus departed Mawgys from the merchants, and went his way so
much yt he ouertooke ye thieves and said to them. Lords God save you. I pray
you tell me why ye take a way ye goods from these merchants? ye know well yt
it is not yours, wherefore I pray you let the^ have again their goods and
their marchau^dise, and god shall conne you thank. When ye thieves heard
mawgis speak to them thus: they were angry for it. And beheld upon mawgis
from over the shoulder as he had be a Sarasyn. Then spoke the Master of the
Thieves and said thus to Mawgys. Go away horeson or else I shall give thee
such a stroke with my foot that I shall breast the heart within thy belly. And
when Mawgis heard this and knew that the thieves feared another god nor his
mother: he was right an angered, and heued up his palmers stafe and smote the
master thief with all upon his head so stronglye that he cast him down dead
to the ground. And wha^ the other thieves saw their master dead: they ran
all to Mawgys to have killed him, but Mawgys areched them so with his st^ffe
that he slew five of them within a little while and than the other tweyne began
to flee away through the wood. And when Mawgys saw that they forsook the
place: he followed them not but cried upon them. Ha false thieves turn again
for to deliver your theft where ye took it. And when the Merchants heard
Mawgys cry thus: they came incontinent toward him, and they found that the
thieves that had robbed them were dead. And than they said the one to the
other, here is a good Pilgrim. I ween it is my lord saint Martin

ANd when the merchants saw this that Mawgys had done: they were right glad
of it. So came they toward Mawgys and kneeled before him and cried mercy of
that they had said to him. Lords said Mawgys if ye gave me great words: so
did the thieves much more. For they called me rybaude truant and horeson, but
they have bought it rig^t dear as ye may see. and I am right sorry that two of
them are escaped from me. Stand up tha^ and take with you your goods again and
god be with you, but I pray you tell me or ye go if ye wot not, where is
Charlemayne. Sir said the merchants, we wot well that Charlemaine has taken
Mou^tawban, but we promise you he has not yet taken none of the four sons
of Aymon: for they were gone out with their folk through a cave under the earth,
that they found under the walls of the Castle unto the City of Ardeyn where
as they ben now. And Charlemayne has laid there his syege before them, and
will not make no peace with Reynawde nor with his brethern. Certes said Mawgys
I am sorry for the^, for they ben good knights and true. When Mawgis under
stood that Charlemayne had besyeged Reynawde within Ardeyn: he commended the
merchants to God and took his way toward Ardeyn, and so much he went that
he came into the host of Charlemayne, and went straight toward the City, and
made semblaunt to be sore feeble, for he went lenynge upon his staff. And when
the folk of the king Charlemayne saw Mawgys go thus: they looked sore upon
him and said the one to the other, that pilgrim is like for to go far, he
cannot stand upon his feet. By my oath said another it might well be Mawgis
that is so dysguysed, for to dysceyue us. It is not so said ye other. Mawgis is
not alive. And while yt they devised thus together: Mawgys came near to ye
wicket of the gate, and found the means that he gat in anon. And when he was
within Ardeyn: he went unto the Palace. Where he found Reynawde and the
duchess his wife and both their children Aymonet and Yonnet, and their uncles
his cosins, with a great meyny of noble knights that were all at their meat.
When Mawgis had looked a while upon them, he lened against a pillar that was in
the mids of the halle before Reynawde. Than began he to look again upon his
fair cosyns yt he loved so much above all thing of the world. And when the
Marshall of the halle saw Mawgys, wening to him yt it had be a poor heremite:
he commanded that he should be served of his dinner for Gods sake. And when
Mawgis saw the meat that was brought him, he said my lords I beseech you for
the love of God that it will please you for to bring me some brown bread and
water in a trene disshe, and thus I shall be served as unto me apperteyneth. For
I dare not take none other meat. And when ye steward of Reynawde saw that, he
made him anon to be brought all that he would have. Than took Mawgys the brown
bread and made soppes in water, and eat of it with a good appetite. And when
yt Reynawde saw this poor man before him that lived so poorly and was so lene
and so pale: he had of him great pity. So took he a dishe that was before him
that was full of venyson, and sent it to him by a squier of his that presented
it to him saying thus, hold good man the duke sends you this, god yield him
said Mawgys, and than he took and set the dysshe before him, but he eat nothing
of it. And when Reynawde saw that: he was greatly meruailed, and said to hi^
self. god who is that good man that lives so hard a life, if he were not so
leave: I should say that it were my good cousin mawgys, but a another thing
shows me that it is not he. For he would not hyde himself from me in no wise.

REynawde beheld still Mawgys so much that he left his mete for to look upon
him. And wha^ the tables were taken up, and that every man had eaten at his
ease: they went to their ward for to defend the town as they were wont for
to do, in their harneys. And wha^ Reynawde saw that every man was gone, and
that there was no body with in the halle for whom he would leave for to say his
will: he went to mawgys and said to him, good heremite I pray you for the
reverence of that God that ye serve that ye tell me if ye be Mawgys or no, for
ye are well like him. Wha^ Mawgys heard Reinawd speak thus to him: he could
hide himself no longer, and said al on hye. Cosyn I am Mawgys without doubt. I
am com to see you and I am glad that I see you and also al your brethern in
good plight And when Reynawde understood yt it was his cousin yt he loved most
of all the men in the world, and that had kept him diuese times from peril
and danger, he had not ben so glad if men had given him the half of all the
world. So went he and kissed him more than a hundred times, and after he said
to him in this manner. Fair cosyn I pray you that ye will do of this cope that
ye were upon you. For my eyes cannot see you thus poorly arrayed. Than answered
Mawgis to him and said, My cosyn be not displeased of that I shall tell you, ye
must wit that I have made my vow to god that I shall never eat but alonly
bread and wild herbs and that to my drink I shall take none other but water,
and that I shall never wear the days of my life none other clothes but such
as this is, for I have given my self utterly to serve and love our blessed
savior and his glorious mother, for to bring my soul to salvation in the
bliss that ever shall last.

When Reynawde heard his Cosyn Mawgis speak thus: he was in a thought whether
it was Mawgys or no, for he could not know him well because he was so sore
apayred of his person. And began to look well upon him again, and he should
never have known him if it had not be a little list that he had by his right
eye. And after yt he had very knowledge of him: he made great joy for him.
And he prayde him again saying in this wise. Fair Cousin I pray you for ye
love of the faith that ye owe to me that ye will tell me the troth of that I
shall ask you. Sir said Mawgis I shall tell it you gladly. Cosyn said Reynawde
I would wit where ye have be ever sith that ye went from me, and fro whens ye
come now Sir said Mawgis sithe it please you to wit of my living: I shall
show it you with a good will, ye ought to know my fair cosyn for certain yt
I have made my self an hermit, and I have left the world for to serve him
that made me, and the blessed vyrgyn Marye his mother, for to have pardon of my
sins that I have done in my life, for I have done many great euilles
against my creator, and by me are dead so many folk whereof I know that our
Lord is greatly wroth against me. After yt Reynawde had heard Mawgys speak
thus: he had so great pity on him that the teres fell alonge his chekes fro his
eyes for love of his good cosyn. And than he called his brethern and said to
them, come hither my brethren and ye shall se your cosyn Mawgys. And when
Alarde, Guycharde, and Richard, heard these words: their hertes rose in their
belyes for joy and ra^^ all to Mawgys and kyssed him full sweetly. And when ye
duchess wyste that Mawgys was come: she came anon there as he was and kissed
him weepyng full sore for joy that she had to see him. And tha^ came there
Aymonet and Yonnet that made great Joy, and welcomed him. And through all the
city was anon known the coming of the valiant Mawgis, whereof many folk came
to see him. But he was so changed and so apayred that it was pity for to see.
Thus was Reynawde well glad of ye cominge of his good cosyn and after yt they
had made great Joy a long while: Reynawde called his brother Richard and
said to him, Brother go fet anon a good gown^ for our Cosyn Mawgys, and let him
be brought a pair of shone that been wine enough, for I know well that his
feet ben sore, and than he said to his wife. Lady arise, and fet him such
lennen as he needs. Sir said she he shall have of the best enough anon. And
wha^ Mawgis heard this word he said to Reynawde. Sir I tell you truly that I
have sworn yt I shall never wear shone nor linen clothes about me. But do
to me if it please you to give me a new slop and a large hoode, a palster well
yrende and a male, and therewith ye shall well content me. And than I shall
comende you to god, and I shall go my way, for I am not come^ here but only for
to see you, whereof my desire was sore set unto. Right sorry was Reinawde wha^ he
heard mawgys say so, in so much that almost he was swouning for sorrow.
Reynawde said tha^ Mawgis leave your sorrow, for I have given my self to god
utterly for to bring my soul to bless of heaven, and so will I go to the
holy land for to serve to the temple of Iherusalem, and for to vysite the holy
sepulcre of our lord. And when I have done so I shall come again to se you
and God spare me my life, and than I shall go again to mine hermitage, and shall
live there as a beast with roots and with wild herbs as I did before that I
came here. When Reynawde heard this he was sorry for it, and said to Mawgis in
this wise. Fair cousin for god take with you a good horse and money enough. For
ye shall have all this of me. Hold your peace said Mawgis I will not thereof, for
wha^ I have bread it is to me enough, for all my hope is in God, to whom I
pray that I may come again whole and sound.

AFter all these things thus said Mawgys prayed Reynawde that he would make
haste to make him be delivered, such things as he had desired of him. And
Reynawde did so sith yt he might not make him to take none other thing with
him. And when ye morrow came, and that Mawgis had his new sloppe and his hoode,
he took his palster and his new male yt Reinawde had given him, he went and
heard mass, and after the mass he took his leave of every one, and went on
his way. And Reynawde co^ueied him unto the wieket of the gate of ye City and
kissed him: and in likewise did all his brethren, and also ye duchess Clare
and her children. And when they had all kyssed Mawgys he commended them to God
and went out of the town, and went forth the right way. But he was not far
gone when he was aduyro^ned round about him with the folk of ye king
Charlemayne. And the one said to the other: here is the hermit that we saw
yesterday but he is now better clothed than he was at that time It might be
well Mawgys ye cosyn of Reynawde that has mocked us diverse times, certes
said the other it is he verelye, let us slay him, and we shall do well, we
shall not sai^ some: for this man seems to be an hundred year old. It cannot
be, but that he must be a good man and it were sin to do him harm. All thus
as these folk said these words, Mawgis heard all that they said and held his
peace and went on his way still thoroughe the host without any lettynge of any
man. Here leueth the hystory to speak of Mawgys, that went into the holy
land, and returns to speak of Charlemayne that had besyeged Ardeyn because
that Reynawde and his brethern were within.

How Reynawde would do^ ha^ge Richard of Normandy by cause he might not have
peace with the king Charlemayne. And how the twelve Peers required Charlemayne
to make peace with Reynawde. And how they left Charlemayne because he would not
make peace. And how he sent word to them yt they should come to him again.
And he should make peace with Reynawde.
depiction of a siege camp with a king or Charlemagne with crown and scepter,
surrounded by a group of men, some armed with pikes; in the background a
castle; in the foreground three canons

IN this party shows that the king Charlemayne was at ye syege of Ardeyn sore
an angered that he might not know how Rychard of Normandy did. So sent he for
all his Barons for, to come to him: And when they were come in his pauillion,
he said to them thus Lords I see well that it goes now ill with me, because I
see that Reynawde has not sent me again Richard of Normandy, and he might
well have delyuerd him free and quite and have send him unto me for all the
harms yt he has done to me. Uncle said Rowlande I merueyll greatly of that
ye say, ye show well to us that ye be without counsel. By the faith that I owe
to you, ye shall never see Richard of Normandye, but if ye pardon Reynawde and
his brethern, diverse times he has meked himself unto you, and has be
always ready to fulfill your pleasure, and ye will not take him to your grace,
be not than merueyled if Reinawde show now some dispite against you. For and
ye consider well the great courtesy that he has done unto you: namely when he
had you at his will within mountawban and that he delivered you, and suffered
you go quite and free fro him at your liberti, ye should do for him otherwise
than ye do, but sith that Reynawde sees yt he may not find no mercy in you:
he will not leese his curtesye, but he shall do ye worste that he can, as ye
may well perceive experience of it every day, for he do^mageth us daily, and
keeps his prisoner the best knight that ye had, that is Richard ye duke of
normandy, the which I ween be dead by this time. Neuew said the king
Charlemayne, I promise you that Reynawde has not put hi^ to death but he
keeps him well at his ease and with great honor, sir said than ye duke
Naymes. Sith that the words ben come to this: I must tell you my mind. Sir if
Reynawde bears you dommage: ye cannot blame him for it. For he has prayed
you so many times humbly that ye would have mercy on him and ye would never
hear him, but ye have always showed your self the most proud king of the
world against him, and the most angry, and ye will believe no counsel, and so
I tell you if Reinawd has not made to dye Richard of Normandy: he is the
kyndest man of the world. But I believe better that he is dead than otherwise:
for no man here can tell whether he be dead or a live.

When the king Charlemayne heard ye Duke Naymes speak thus: he knew well that he
told him troth. So began he to syghe sore, and to these words came forth
the Bishop Turpin, and Ogyer the dane that said in this manner. Sir wit it
verily that Naymes tells you troth. For Reynawde has a good cause to be
angrye with you. And when Charlemayne heard his barons speak thus: he was all
abashed of it. And called ye duke Naimes, the bishop Turpyn, Ogier the Dane,
and Escouf the son of Oedon, and said to them. Lords I pray you go to
Ardeine and tell Reynawde in my behalf yt he will send me Richard of Normandy.
And when he has done so: yt he tha^ deliver Mawgys into my hands for to do
my will of him. And then he shall have peace with me all the days of my life.
Dear sir said the duke Naymes, ye send us for naught. For I wot well ye
Mawgis is gone from Reynawde, it is three years passed and more. And if that
Reynawde would deliver him he may not. For he knows not him self where he
is. Naymes said the king Charlemayne, ye shall at least hear what Reynawde
shall say unto you, and ye shall also know how Richard of Norma^di does. Sir
said the duke Naymes, sith that it pleases you that I shall go: I am well
content, but I pray our Lord that we may return again whole and sound of
our persons, without to be dishonored. when the barons saw that king
Charlemayne would that they should go to Ardeyne for to do his messager they
durst not say there against. And so they went thither anon, and each of them
bare in his hand a branch of an olive tree in tooken of peace. And when they
came unto the gate: they found it open for them. For Reynawde had seen the^
come from far. Wherefore he commanded yt the wicket should be open. And when
the barons saw the little gate open: they went into ye town, and came to the
Palace. And when Reynawde wist yt they were come within the palace: he went and
laid himself down upon a bed with his legs crossed and swear God and his
blessed mother that he should not pray the king Charlemayne of nothing. For
he had done him to great harm, for through the king Charlemayn: he had lost
his good cosyn Mawgis and Mou^tawban, that he loved so much.

This hanginge: came there ye messagers of the king Charlemaine, before
Reynawde. When the Duke Naymes that was the formest saw Reynawde: he saluted
him honorably. And after he said to him. Sir Reynawde the king sends you
word by us, that ye send him again Richard the duke of Normandy. And more
over he sends you word yt if ye will deliver him Mawgys: ye shall have peace
with him al ye days of his life. And he shall deliver you again all your
lands. And he shall keep both your children in his court with him, and he
shall make them knights with his own hands.

My Lords said Reynawde, ye be right welcome to me as the knights of ye
world that I ought to love best. But I marvel me greatly of Charlemaine,
that sends me these words, for eueri man knows well that I have not Mawgys.
But by him I have lost him. And would to god that I had here Charlemayn as well
as I have Richard of Norma^dye. And if he would not grant me peace with him.
I promise you he should leave his head for a pledge. So should I be than
avenged of all ye great harms and dommages that he has done to me, sith that
I have be made knight of him. lords I we^d that Charlemayne had be more
curtoys then he is. For if I had will that he would have been so fell upon me
and my brethern: I should well avenged it upon him. But it is to late to
repent me that I did not so, wherefore that ye void out of my Palace, and go
tell your king that I have not Mawgys, but I have lost him for him, and also
if I had him he should not have him. And because I have thus lost my good
cosyn Mawgys for him: I shall make to morrow Richard the duke of Normandy to be
hanged upon the chief gate of this City in ye dispite of him for no longer
respite he shall not have of me, how be it that he is of my lignage, and I tell
you, come no more here, nor no man of Charlemayne. For I promise you I shall
stryke of the heads of as many as shall come fro him to me without any fail.

When Ogyer the Dane saw Reynawde so angry, and that he answered so proudlye:
he meruailed sore, aad drew him self by Reynawde, and said to him. Fair
cousin I pray you that ye will show to us Richard of Normandy, to the end that
we may tell Charlemayne that we have seen him. Ogyer I have well understand
you said Reynawde, but ye shall never see him before that I have hanged him,
And if Charlemayne be angry with me for it: let him avenge it if he can, for I
defy him and all his power, and go you hens anon. For by my soul if ye abide
here any longer, it shall repent you full sore. And when the barons saw that
Reynawde was so fervently wroth, they durst no longer tarry there: but took
leave of him and went out of the City, and went lightly to the host of
Charlemayne that awayted after them. When the king saw the Barons come: he said
unto them. Lords ye be welcome. what tidings bring you? have ye not seen
Richard of Normandye? Sir said the Duke Naymes. Reynawde does you to wit that
as loge as he may ride upon Bayarde: ye shall not have Mawgys, for he has
lost him by you. And for the vengeance to be taken of the same: Reynawde
se^deth you word by us that he shall hang to morrow Richard of Normandye upon
the great gate of his town, and thus shall he do of all your me^ that he
shall take, and yet he says more, if he had you as well as he has Richard of
Norma^die that if ye would not grant him peace: ye should leave with him your
head for a pledge. When Rowland heard the word that the Duke Naymes had
reported unto his uncle Charlemayne: he said. Sir be not displeased of that I
shall tell you, me seems that ye shall never see the duke Richard, and al for
your pride Sir we find in holy scripture that god curses the fruit that
never is ripe, thus shall it be by you yt never will ripe nor condisce^de to no
peace with the four sons of Aymon, the best knights of the world, yt so
many times have prayed for it humbly and full piteously. Wherefore I swear to
you upon all halowes that if the duke Richard of Normandy be hanged: ye shall
lose honor and worship all your life days. When the king Charlemaine heard
his neuew Rowlande speak thus: that said yt Richard of Normandy should be
hanged: he was so myscheuously an angered that he gnewe the nails of his
hands, for great wrath, and ye ought to wit that Charlemayne was so angry at
that time, yt if he had had any manner of staff in his hand: he would have
gladly smitten Rowland, but when he saw that he might not accomplisshe his
will: he called his barons and said to them, Lords ye wene to make me a ferde
with your words, I am no child for to be thus abashed, and also I swear you
by my faith that if Reynawde were so hardy to do any harm unto Richard of
Normandy: I should ha^g him with mine own hands, he and all his lygnage that
none should be left a live.

Right sore wroth was the king Charlemayne, when he heard tell that Reynawde
would make Richard the duke of Norma^die to be hanged. But when Ogyer h^^^de
Charlemayne swear thus yt he should hang all the lineage of reinawde: he could
not absteyne himself but that the tears fell down fro his eyes, and than he
said to the bishop Turpin. Sir what think you by our king that says by his
great pride that he shall hang us all? for all that he does proceeds but of
envy and pride, but god send me death if I care for his wrath, for if
Reynawde has not lied to us: he shall do be hanged to morrow Richard of
Normandy in such a place where as Charlemayne shall mow see him hang with his
eyes. This hanging the Duke Naymes saw that ye king was angry, and he said to
him. Sir wit that we all be sore abashed that ye threre us of one part and
Reynawde of the other. And I marvel me not of Reynawde, for he is so wroth
rox because that ye have make him lose Mawgys that no man might be more. And I
promise you for great anger he shall make Richard of normandy to be hanged,
and as to you namely he would stryke of your head if he had you in ye case that
he has Richard now, and if he hangs Richard: What may we do thereto? that
ye threten us so much therefore wherefore I counsel all my felawes that are of
the lynage of Reynawde: that we go our ways and that we let you shift of the
war of the four sons of Aimon. By god said yt other peers of france
Naimes speaks well, and he gives us good counsel.

THen when Charlemayne saw his barons so sore move he wist not what he should
do, but gave them leave to withdraw them self unto the morrow that they should
return to him, and he himself went to his bed, but al night he could not fall
a sleep: but w^tied in his bed without any rest, and wyste not what to do. And
when ye day came: he a rose from his bed, and sent for all his barons, and
When they were come: he said to them. Lords what shall we do of Reynawde that
will hang ye duke Richard of Normandy before mine eyes? Sir said tha^ ye duke
Naimes for naught seeks one counsel yt will not put it to effect, whi ask ye
counsel sithe that ye will do nothing but after your own head? but and ye
will believe me: I swear you on my faith that al good shall come thereof. Sir make
peace with Reynawde, and ye shall have the Duke Richard, and also ye shall
have the good love of all your men, for there is none but he is weary of the
war, and they have reason. Naymes said the king I will not do it, hold your
peace thereof, for that shall be the last word that ever I shall say. Sir said
Rowland by my soul ye do great wrong if ye suffer ye good duke Richard to
be hanged that so much loved you and done great honor, it shall be to you
great shame, and so I swear to you upon all halowes that if I see hang
Richard of normandy I shall part out of your host fro your service, and I
shall go so far that ye shall never have help of me. Rowland said Olyuer
ween not that I shall abide after that ye are gone, for the king doothe great
wrong to Reinawde our cousin. Full sore an angered was the king to here these
words but he held tha^ his peace and said never a word. And wit it that all the host was moved because they feared sore lest Reinawde should make Richard
of normandy to be hanged, for he was well beloved of the folk of Charlemain,
and also he was of a great kynred and a noble lygnage.

THis morning tha^ Reinawde that was within Ardein after that he had heard his
mass: he called his three brethren and said to them. My brethern it goes
full ill with us that we can have no peace with Charlemaine, but sithe it is
thus come: by the faith that I owe to the old Aymon our father I shall anger
him right sore, for I am sure if he had us in his hands he would utterly
destroy us without pity, and therefore I am disposed for to do the worste that
I can against him. For now before his eyes I shall hang the duke Richard of
Normandy, for I am well sure that Charlemayne shall wexe fire angry for it,
when he shall see him. Brother said Alard, I pray you as much as I can that ye
will not do as ye say, for I shall hang him my self if ye will. Brother
said Reynawde I will well, now command said Alarde that ye gibet be dressed
all hye upon the gate, that Charlemayne and all his host may see him. Shortly
to speak: Reinawde did do make ye gibet in such a place yt Charlemayne might
see it as well as he had be by. And wit it that Rowland was the first man yt
perceived it, and when he saw this: he began to cry as hye as he might. Sir,
now see how they will hang the duke Richard with great shame alas he has
shrewdly enployed his time in your service. And now he is full ill rewarded for
it, and also it is shrewed ensample to all that serve you. Alas said Olyuer now
shall ye good duke Richard be hanged with great shame, for I see the Gibet
righted up. Hold your peace said than Charlemayne, they do all this but for
to make me abashed, and that they might have peace with me, but for all this
they shall not have it, and I promise you they dare do him no harm of his
body. Thus reco^forted Charlemayne him self, weenyng that Reynawde had not
durst hang the duke Richard. This ha^gyng: Rowlande (that had the thing at
heart) beheld always toward the town, and saw that men righted the ladder
to the gybet, than said he to Oliver. Ha Olyuer true felaw and good freende,
yonder I see the ladder that is set up all redye for to hang Richard of
Normandy, full ill he has bestowed his good service with Charlemayne. Sir
Olyuer said Rowlande, ye say well troth, god save Richard.

AFter yt the ladder was ryghted to the gybet above upon the high gate of
Ardeyne: Reynawd called ten of his folk, and said to them. Galantes go fet me
the Duke Richard. For I will that he be hanged incontinent. Sir said they we
shall do your commandment. And they went into the chamber where ye noble
duke of Normandy was, and found him playinge at the Chesse with Yonnet ye
son of Reynawd, and than these me^ took him and said. Sir duke come forth,
for Reinawde has commanded that ye shall be hanged incontinent, when the duke
Richard of Normandy heard these felawes speak thus to him: he looked upon
them over the shoulder, and would not answer to them, but said my fair
Yo^net, have you for to play for it is time that we go to dinner. And when
these galantes saw that Richard of Normandy answered no word unto them: they
began to take him on every side and said to him. Arise up duke Richard, for
in dispite of Charlemayne that loves you so much* ye shall be hanged now. When
the duke Richard saw that these sergeauntes had him thus by the arm, and
held in his hand a lady of Iuery where with he would have given a mate to
yonnet: he withdrew his arm and gave to one of the sergeauntes such a stroke
with it into the forehead that he made him tumble over and over at his feet,
and than he took a rooke and smote another with all upon his head that he all to
brost it to the brain, and after that he smote another of the^ with his fyst
so great a stroke that he brake his neck, and fell dead unto the earth. And
when ye other saw their felawes thus arrayed: they began to run away, and wha^
Richard saw them go: he cried to them. Flee rybaudes G^des curse have you,
come not here again.

And when he had said so: he said to Yonnet yt was all abashed. Play well my
child, for ye shall be mated, I trow these truantes were dronken that thus
would have had me away, but I have well given to them their part. And when
yonnet heard him say so: he durst not speak against it because he saw
himself so sore an angered, but played with his rooke that he should not be
mated, but he might not save the mate. When the duke Richard had mated Yonnet:
he called a yeman yt was there, and said to him. Go take these carles that
lain here dead and cast them out at the windows. The yeman did incontinent
his commandment. For he durst do nothing there against, for doubt he
should have faced as the other that he had seen slain in his presence.

ALarde was ye same time out of the casteil, and awayted that Richard were
brought to him that he might go hang him, and he saw how the dead were cast
down out of the wyndowes of the toure, whereof he was wroth and went to
Reynawde and said to him. Sir I know that the duke Richard will not let him
self so be take, and right dear it shall cost or he be brought to the gibet,
see how he has slain your men, and how he has cast them out at the Tower, at
the windows. Brother said Reinawde, the Duke Richard is to be doubted in his
taking, let us go to the help of our folk for else they ben in danger of their
lives. And thus as they would have gone: they that he had sent for to take
Richard, came there unto him. And when they saw Reynawde: they said unto him.
By god sir the duke Richard shall not be take without great strife For he has
slain three of our felawes. And when we saw that: we fled away, and left him
playi^g with your son Yonnet. Wha^ Reynawde understood this: he was right
ang^i for it, and swear by all halowes yt if he had not peace that day with
Charlemayne: Richard of Norma^dye should not escape hanging, what someuer it
should hap thereof. And when he had said these words: he went toward the
tower where Richard was, and his brethern went with him, for they would not
leave hi^, and also.xl. men well armed for to take the duke Richard if he would
defend himself, when Reynawde was come to the gate of the tower: he made it
to be opened and went in and when he was in: he said to the duke Richard.
Vassayll why have you slain my men? Cousin said he, now hear me if it please
you. It is troth that.x. ribaudes came here right now and laid hand upon me,
and they said that ye had thus commanded them, which thing I could not
believe. For and ye had said so: it should have be spoken outrageouslye: so made
I them to flee out of this chamber in great haste and slew of them I wot not
how many because I might not abstain me, and if it seems you that I have
done amiss: so take ye ame^des upon me. But I will well that ye wit that I would
not have done to you such a shame as ye have done to me* if I had had you
as ye have me, Reynawde if I have done amiss in any manner: I am ready to make
ame^des for it, but ye know it is no reason that no Carle shall Judge such a
man as I am, for that longs to a king, to a duke, or to an earl, the custom
is such ye wot it well, if the earls have harm be it yt have meddled them with
it, none ought to blame me therefore. By god Richard said then Reynawde ye
shall say what ye will, but trust me if I have not this day peace with Charlemayne:
I shall make you to be hanged in such a place where that Charlemain may se you
And wha^ reinawde had said this: he made Richard to be take, and made his
hands to be bound fast and after said to him. I tell you on my faith yt if I
have not this day my peace with Charlemayne: yt for no prechynge yt ye can make
nor for no man of the world, I shall not leave but I shall make you dye a
shamfull death. By my soul Reynawde said Richard, I fere me not, that ye
shall do that ye said, for ye dare not do it as long as Charlemayne is a
live. When Reynawd heard all the duke speak thus: he was so wroth that he
looked all black in the face for anger, and than he said to Richard, by that
god yt made me, ye shall soon know what I dare do and whether I am a cowarde
or hardy, and than he made him to be brought where as the galoes were righted,
and than he said to him. Richard I will that of two things ye chose one if
ye lust, yt is, that ye make me have peace with charlemaine: or else yt ye help
me against him, and but if ye do this: wit that I shall make you be hanged and
stra^gled, and I shall not leave you for all this yt ye be of my lignage, and if
ye will take my part against the king Charlemain: ye shall be delivered forthwt.
By god Reynawde said than Richard, now have I heard you speak like a child,
ween ye yt I shall do ye ye say for fere of death? certes nay, for charlemain
is my sovereign lord, and of him I hold mine heritage, and though he does
wrong to leave me here: I ought not to fail him therefore. But and ye will do
well, leave me a messager, ye which I shall send to Charlemain and to his barons
for to wit if he be disposed for to let me dye here shamefully. By my faith
Richard said reinawde ye speak now wisely, and tha^ he called one of his folk
and said to him. Go and do yt Richard of Normandy shall tell you, my freende
said Richard to ye messager, ye shall go to charlemayn and tell him on my
behalf, yt I prai him as to my souerain lord that if ever he loved me: that he
will pardon Reynawde, and I shall take upon me to make amends for him, if he
has in any thing misdone against him, as the* xii peers of France sh^l Judge
him, and if he will not do for yt he will look hitherwarde, and he shall see me
hang shamefully. Of that other part ye shall say to Rowland and to all my
felawes that if ever they loved me: yt they will show to Charlemayne that it
shall be a great shame to him, if he suffers that I hye thus shamefullye, sir
said the messager doubt not. I shall do your message well. After these
things thus said: the messager went out of the town to the host of
Charlemayne, the which he found full of thought. And when he saw him: he made
him reverence, and after said to him. Sir wit it that Richard of Normandye
reco^mendeth him humbly to you, and prays you as hertlye as he can as to his
sovereign lord yt if ever ye loved him: that ye will show it now for he
mystreth well of it. For if reynawde have not peace this day: turn your sight
upon yonder gate after that I am come home again, and ye shall see him hang
shamefully, and when the messager had said this to the king: he looked about
him, and saw the.xii. peers, and said to them, first to Rowla^d, and after to
the other Lords, the duke Richard prays you Rowland, and all ye in
general, that if ye ever loved him: yt ye will pray Charlemaine that he will
make peace with Reynawde, or otherwise he is dead without mercy. And wha^
Rowland heard this: he spoke first to the king, and said. Sir for God I pray
you, suffer not that ye be blamed, ye know well that how ye duke Richard is
one of the b^st knights of the world, and he has best served you at your
need. For God sir make peace with Reinawde, for to recover such a knight as is
ye duke Rychard of Normandye, for great shame it were to you for to let him
thus die. And when ye duke Naymes and the bishop Turpyn, Ogier, Escouf the
son of Oedon, and Oliver of vien heard Rowland speak so: they began to say
to ye king. By god sit if ye will not make peace with Reynuwde for to recover
our felaw the Duke Richard: ye shall lose much by it. For within short time
ye shall see your land destroyed before you.

When Charlemayne saw that his peers were thus moved for love of Richard of
Normandy, and that they accorded all for to make peace: he wend to have gone
out of his mind, and swear by great wrath as a man mad, yt Reynawde should
never have peace with him but if he had mawgis to do his will with him. And
when he had said so he turned him toward the.xii. peers of France, and said
to them. My freende take no fere for Richard of Normandy. For Reynawde should
sooner let to be drawn one of his eyes out: than he should do him any harm
or shame. Sir said the Bishop Turpin, ye are beside your self For ye see all
ready that Richard is Judged to death. Bishop said charlemayne ye speak well
folisshli, know ye not well that Richard of Normandye is of ye lineage of
Reynawd? I promise you he dare not do him harm by no manner. By god sir said
oliver, ye have well paid us by your saying. Why dare not Reynawde hang ye
duke Richard? for I know so much by him that if he had you as he has
Richard: He durst well hang yourself and al us. Sir Olyuer said the
messanger. I swear you on my faith that Reynawd ceased not all this day to
pray ye duke Richard that he should forsake Charlemayn and he should save his
life, whereof Richard of Normandy would do nothing, but spoke great words to
Reynawde. And when that the Messanger had said thus: he said to the king. Sir
give me leave to go if it please you, and tell me what I shall say to Richard of
Normandye fro you. Freende said Charlemayne ye shall tell him on my behalf, yt
he put no doubt in nothing. For Reynawde shall not be so hardy to do him any
harm. Wha^ the messager that was a wise knight understood Charlemayne: he
could not absteyne him self, but he said to him, sir Emperor ye be over
proud, but I promise you that Reynawde sets little by your pride, and I make
you sure yt Alarde wayteth well for my coming again. For he would not take a
hundred thousand pound for to leave Richard but that he should hang him his
own hands. And as soon as he had said so: he went his ways without any leave
taking of the king straight to Ardeyne.

ANd when the.xii. peers saw the messanger go with an ill answer: they were
full sorry for it. Ha god said Ogyer how the devil the king is fell and hard
of heart, that will another peace nor concord. I am well sure that his pride
shall be cause of a shameful death to Richard. Ogier said Rowlande, ye say
troth but and I see him hang: god never help me at my need if I abide after it
with Charlemayne whiles I live, and wha^ he had said so: he went to the other
peers and said to them. Lords what shall we do? shall we let thus Richard
be hanged our felawe one of the best knights of the world and most hardy?
for thoroughe his prowes he is there as he is, never no foul word issued out
of his mouth alas we shall now see him hang with great shame, certes if we
suffer it: we ben shamed for ever.

ROwland as a man disperate came than to ye king al wroth and said to him in
this manner, Sir by my soul I go now out of your seruise without your leave,
and after he said to Ogier. Ogyer what will ye do, will ye come with me, and
leave this Devil here, for he is all beside him self? By my head Rowland
said Ogyer ye say troth. I shall never in my life abide with him, but I shall
go gladlye with you where ye will. And I shall not leave you for no man in the
world, sith that he suffers that such a valiant man shall dye, as the duke
Richard of Normandy, that he loved so much. He should soon do so by us, for
he is a man that has in him another love nor pity. And when Oliver of vyen
understood these words: he stood up, and said. Lords I will go with you. I
have dwelled here to long, and I also said the duke Naymes. and in likewise
Escoufe the son of Oedon. And when the bishop Turpin saw this: he casted a
great syghe, and said. By my faith Charlemayne, it is evil to serve you for of
good service ye do yield an evil reward, as it is well seen now by the Duke
Richard of Normandye that has served you so well and so truly. And if I dwell
any longer with you I pray god punisshe me for it.

THan wha^ Charlemayn saw his peers that were so sore moved with anger against
him: he said to them. Lords have no doubt of nothing, for the duke Richard
shall have no harm. Sir said the Duke Naymes ye do great wrong for to say
so, for a fool never believes till he feel sore, ween you to make us fools
with your words? We se ye galous made up for to ha^g our felaw, wherefore I tell
you yt a myschiefe take me if I dwell with you any longer. When the duke Naymes
had said so: he went out of the ^^^^lion of Charlemayne and in likewise all the
Peers of France with him and went into his tente the which he made to be
pulled down incontinent. And when they of the host of Charlemayne saw yt:
they were sore afraid. And ye ought to wit that they were so sore moved within
a little while yt there abode in the host of Charlemayne not one baron nor
knight but only the poor simple gentilmen, and comin people. when Rowlande
saw this: he went on his ways with the other peers. And wit it at that hour
ye host of Charlemayne was made less than it was before by.xl. thousand men.

REynawde that was upon the high gate of Ardeyne saw so great number of folk
cominge together: so called he to him the messager that was but comen fro
Charlemayne, and said to him in this manner. Come here messanger, tell me what
Charlemayne has said unto you. Sir said the messager, wit it that ye have
missed of peace, for charlemayne will nothing of it, but he se^deth you word by
me that ye be not so hardy upon the eyes of your head to do any harm to the
Duke Richard of Normandy. And when he had said this: he turned him toward the
duke Richard, and said to him. Sir duke now may ye know how much Charlemayne
loves you.

Wit it for certain that ye get another help nor succors of him, and for ye
love of you Rowlande, and all the other peers of France ben full sore an
angered with him, For ye may perceive it well by their tents that be^ pulled
down. And so I am sure that the most part of the host shall depart for the
love of you. And so shall not abide there but only the earl guanellon and his
lignage. For their tents ben righted and all the other brought down. When
Reynawde wyste that the frenchemen were angry with Charlemayne for the love of ye
duke Richard of Normandy: he changed his courage and could not keep him from
weepynge. And after he turned him toward Richard of Normandy and said to him,
for god my cosyn I pray you for to pardon me the great shame that I have done
to you. Reynawde said Richard I blame you not, for I wot well that ye cannot
do thereto. For the great pride and cruelnes of Charlemayne is causer of all this. Wha^ Reynawde had cried mercy to the duke Richard he unbound him, and
Alarde and Guycharde came to help him for they were all glad that Rychard was
delivered. Notwithstanding before that they were disposed for to make him dye
shamefully. And when they had done so: Reynawde said, cousin Richard lene upon
this wall, and we shall look what Charlemayne will do. Sir said ye duke
Richard ye say well let us see it.

ANd when Charlemayn saw that his barons went away as it is said: he was sori
for it that he wexed almost mad all quick for the great anger that he had,
and held a demylaunce in his hands, the which he began to gnawe with his
teeth so angry he was, and wha^ his wrath was a little gone: he called a knight
and said to him. Now light on horsbacke lightly, and ride after Rowland and
after the other barons and tell them in my behalf that they come speak with
me, and I shall be demened as they will themself, and that I shall pardon
Reynawde if they will come again to me. Sir said the knight blessed be God
that has brought you to this mind. And than this knight took an horse and
rode hastelye after the xii. peers of France. And when Reynawde that was with
the duke Richard of Normandye upon the gate of Ardeyn apperceyued this: he
said to the duke Richard of Normandy, cousin I se rome a knight out of the
pauilion of the king Charlemayne. I believe that he goes unto the twelve
Peers of France for to make them to return again. I ween we shall have
this day peace and god before. Sir said Richard ye shall have peace mawgre
them al yt lets it. I ought for to love deerli my fellows, the which be
cause to keep me from death, and also to have peace. Wit it that the knight
rode so fast that he over took Rowlande, and all the other peers of France,
and said unto them in this manner of wise Lords, the king Charlemayne sends
you word by me that ye will return again to him, and he shall pardon Reinawd
for the love of you and for gods love come lightly. For he never left weepyng
sithe that ye went your way from him. Naymes said Rowland, let us return
again. For I hold the peace made whereof this sorrowful war shall fail yt
has lasted so long a while. When the Duke Naymes heard Rowland speak so: he
was right glad of it, and Joined his hands toward heaven, and said in this
manner wise. Good lord Jesus blessed be the time that it has pleased ye to
turn the courage of the king Charlemayne, and that this unhappy war is
brought to an end. And when the Duke Naymes had said this: they returned
again toward Charlemayne.

ANd when Reynawde apperceiued that the twelve years went again to
Charlemayne: he said to the Duke Richard of Normandy. Cosyn the Barons return
again. I believe that the peace shall be made, and that we shall mow well go
soon at our liberty, now shall Reynawde may say that I and my brethern ben
at his commandment, and shall be as long as we ben men on live. Well glad
were the Barons of the one part, and of the other, because that God had suffered
that the peace should be made. And when Charlemayne saw his barons come again:
he went against the^ and said. By God my lords ye are well full of great pride
yt ye make me to be come peasible with Reynawde against my will, ye know yt I
have hated hi^ so much that I may not see him, but I shall be angry because of
his pride that is so great. Wherefore if ye will yt I make peace with him: I will
that he go into the holy land poorelye clothed on foot. And so I will have
his horse Bayarde. And I shall also return again to his brethern all their
lyuelode out of my hands. Therefore if thus he will do: I shall fall to peace,
and accord with him, and else not, For I make mine a vow to God yt I shall
never do other wise therein tha^ I tell you now. And therefore look well which
of you shall do this message. Sir said ye duke Naymes I shall go to Reynawde
with a good will, if it be your pleasure that I go to him. Naymes said
Charlemayn It pleases me well. And than incontinent the duke Naimes rode to
Ardeyn. And when Reynawde saw him come: he knew him well, and went him
against, and so did the duke Richard, and ye brethern of Reynawde when the
duke Naymes saw ye Noble Barons come against him: he lyghted from the horse
anon and went and kyssed them all, and after he had done so: he said.
Reynawde. Charlemayne sends me to you with his greetynge. God yield him said
Reynawde. Now have I that I have desired so long. Naymes shall I have peace?
yea said the Duke Naymes under a condition, the which I shall tell you. It is
that ye must go poorly clothed, and begging your bread for gods sake in the
holy land, and so shall ye leave bayarde with Charlemayn, and this done: ye
shall have peace. And he shall give again your heritage to your brethren. Duke
Naymes said Reynawde ye be right welcome. And I promise you that I am ready to
do the commandment of the king. And if he will have of me any thing more
by any wise: I shall in every point fulfill his will if it be possible, for me
to do it. Now shall I be a good truau^t, for I can well ^ske bread when me
needs. When the duke Naymes heard Reynawde sp^ake thus: he was well glad of it,
and so was the duke Richard, that they saw the noble Reinawde agreed to the
will of Charlemayne, so much as for to be come a poor beggar for to have
peace. And after yt Reynawde was thus acorded thereto: he went into his stable
and took Bayarde, and delivered him to the duke Naimes, and than he took his
^auer, and bare it on hie upon the high rowre in token of peace. And when
Charlemayne saw the baner of Reynawde: he showed it to Rowland. Ha god said
Rowlande how meke is Reynawde, and good of kind to have made peace in this
manner of wise? Blessed be Ihesus that ^ath given him that will for to go now a
foot, whereof I plain him sore. Rowland said Ogier. Reynawde is a lamb full
of mekenes, and in him are all ye good conditions yt a knight ought to have.
This hanging: came there the duke naymes that brought Bayarde with him and
pre^^^ed him to Charlemayne, and said to ^^n. Sir* Reynawde is ready for to
(...) all yt ye have commanded hi^, and he shall depart to more will ye will
sithe your pleasure is so. I will well said Charlemayne, but tell me where is
the Duke Richard? for I will know it. Sir said the duke Naymes.

wit that the Duke Richard fares well, and is abiden with Reynawde for he
will convey him when he goes. And wit that Reynawde this hangyng: made great
cheer with his folk at his ease, and after said to the^. Lords I beseech you
be not sorry that I go, for I have made this peace more for you than for me. I
pray you that ye hold well together till I come again, and wha^ he had laid
this to them: he went into his chamber and unclothed himself from his good
raymentes, and cast upon him a poor mantell, and a pair of big shoone well
clouted. and made for to be brought to him a palster well yrenned for to bear
in his hand. And ye must wit that ye duke Rychard was still with him, to whom
Reynawde commended his wife and his children, and all his brethern. And yt he
would pray the king that he should have them for recommended. And when he had
arrayed himself so: he came toward ye halle to the duchess his wife.

ANd when the noble duchess Clare saw her husband so arrayed in his beggars
clothing: she took such sorrow for it that she fell down in a swoune to the
earth as she had be dead. And when Reynawde saw her fall: he ran for to take her
up and after said to her. Lady for God take it not so sore at your heart. For I
shall soon come again, and god before. And with you shall my brethren abide
that shall serve you as their lady. And so I tell you that I am so glad of the
peace that me seems that I am come again al ready. Madame my dear wife. I
pray god keep you from all euilles. And with this he kissed her full sweetly.
And than he took on his way, and when the duchess saw him go: she took for
it so great sorrow that she swouned again, and abode thus a long while yt all
her gentil women went she had been dead. And after she was come again to
herself: she man great moan for her lord Reynawde For she scratched her face,
and pulled her here is from her head for great sorrow, and when she had made so
much sorrow: she said. O good husband Reinawde whose like is not in all the
world of goodness, god be with you. For I wot well that I shall never see you. And
when she had said these words. she went into her chamber and took all her
noble raymentes and ^ast them in a fire, and wha^ they were al brent: she took
a poor smock, and cast it about her, and said she should never were none
other clothes till she saw her lord husband again.

AFter that Reynawde had taken leave of his wife: he departed, the duke
Richard, his brethern and his folk conveyed him a great way, always
speaking that it was pity to hear. And when Reynawde thought that they had
gone far enough with him: he turned him toward them and said. Lords I
pray you humbly yt ye return home again, for as long as ye be with me: I am not
at my ease, go your way in the name of God and recomforte my wife the duchess
that weepeth so sore, and to you my brethern I commend her and my children
also. Wit it when Reynawde had said this there was none yt could take leave of
him so full of sorrow they were, except Alarde that said to him. Mi dear
brother I prai you hertely that ye come shortly again, for your departinge is
so heavy to me yt I trow I shall die for sorrow. And when Alarde had said so: he
enbrased his brother and took leave of him making great sorrow, and so did
Richard of Normandye to whom Reynawde said, my cosyn I co^me^de you ones my
wife again and my children and al my brethern for they be of your blood well
ye know it. Reinawde said ye duke Richard. I promise and swear as knight that
I shall help and defend them against all me^ except against the king, and
doubt not for them, for they shall want nothing. Now leueth ye hystory to speak
of Reynawde yt went to the holy land araied as ye have heard: and retourneth
to speak of his brethern how they came to Charlemayne, with the duke Richard
of Normandy.

How after that Reynawde was departed fro Ardeyn to make his viage beyond the
sea, clothed poorly as a pilgrim aski^g his meat for god sake: the duke of
Normandi took alarde, Guycharde and Richard, and brought the^ with him to
Charlemayne, which received them honorably, and took up his siege, and went
to paris. But when he came to the city of lege upon ye river of meuze: he made
bayarde to be cast in it, with a millstone at the neck of him. But me^ sayen ye
bayarde escaped out, and that he is a live yet in the forest of Ardeyne.
depiction of a king or Charlemagne with crown, scepter and fleur-de-lis with a
group of men on a bridge; a headless figure leans over the bridge wall; in the
river below is a horse or Bayard with a millstone tied to its neck; in the
background a castle

IN this party shows the hystory that wha^ Reynawde had put himself to the
way as ye have heard: Richard of Normandy and his brethern came again to
Ardein full sorry for Reynawde, where as they found the good duchess Clare, yt
made great sorrow for her lords departing. And when they were come again
there: the duke Richard took the duchess by the hand, and began to
recomforte her, and so many fair words he laid unto her that she slaked a
little her sorrow, and after this the duke Richard said to the brethern of
Reynawde, in this manner. Lords go make you ready, and we shall go unto
Charlemayn. Sir said the three brethern, let us when it please you. And then
they went and took on the best clothing that they had. And I promise you they
were three fair knights, and after they were well apparayled, they mounted
each of them upon a palfraye of hye price right fair without any arms. And
for to speak shortly: they issued out of Ardeyn and came to ye pauilion of
Charlemayne. And wha^ the king saw the^, he was right glad So he commanded al
his barons that they should go again them. Ha god said Rowland, now comen the
three brethren well sorye, certain they have a cause, for they have lost
their help succoure and hope. Now I see that the duke Richard comes with
them, whereof he does well, for he is their kynsman.

NOw ye ought to wit that ye three brethern of Reynawde came to the pauilion of
Charlemain well honestly arrayed. And wha^ they were before the king: they
kneeled humbly at his feet, and Alarde spoke first and said. Sir Reynawde our
brother reco^mendeth him humbly to your good grace, and salueth you as his
sovereign lord, and he sends you Richard the duke of Normandy, which ye se
here, and so he prays you yt ye will have us for recommended, for he has
taken his way toward ye holy land for to accomplisshe your commau^deme^t.
Freende said Charlemayne ye be right welcome. Sith that it please our lord
that we shall be friends. I shall do for you, and shall bring you al to honor,
as it apperteyneth to such knights as ye ben. And if god will bring Reynawd
saufe again from his viage: I shall hold him as dear as I do mine own neuew
Rowland, for he is replenysshed with great worthiness. Sir said Richard god bring
him again, when the king had thus spoken with the brethern of Reynawde: he came
to the duke Richard of Normandy and kissed him more than.x. times, and when he
had feasted him enough: he said to him, duke Richard I pray you yt ye will tell
me what prison gave you Reynawde and what meats for to eat. Sir said the duke
of Normandy by the faith that I owe to god and to you I had better prison, and
was more at mine ease than ever knight was, for I was served of the same ye
Reynawde was, and sometime etter, and so I promise you sir that the gentle
duchess his wife made me great cheer, and good company with her two fair
children. Sir I beseech you if that ever ye loved me: that ye will worship
Alarde and his brethren if it please you, for they have done to me great
honor, and they have given me great gifts. And if it please you ye shall have
the good duchess and her children for recommended, for she is the humblest
lady of the world, and the most wysest. Richard said Charlemayne, wit it
that I shall not fail them as long as life shall be in my body. And wha^ the
children of Reynawde shall be in age for to be made knights: I shall doube them
to it mine own hands with great worship, and god spare me life, and so shall
I give them lands enough for to maynten their astate. Gramercy sir said ye
duke Richard of Normandye, and god yield you.

When they had devised all enough of the things before said: the king
Charlemayne commanded that he should be dyslodged, and anon his commandment
was done, and than every man put himself toward the way toward his
country. And when that ye king saw that it was time: he mounted on horseback,
and took on his way toward the city of lege. And when he was come in lege*
he lodged him up on the bride of the river of meuze.

And when the morning was come, he made be brought before him the good horse of
Reynawde Bayarde. And when he saw him: he began for to lay in ^his wise. Ha
Bayarde, bayarde, thou have often angered me, but I am come to ye point, god
gramercy for to avenge me, and I promise thee thou shall now abye it full dear
the tourment and felony that I have often times had by thee. And when the king
had said so: he made a great millstone to be fastened at the neck of bayard,
and than made him to be cast from the bridge down into the water, and when
Bayarde was thus tombled in the river: he sanke unto the botome of it. And when
the king saw that: he made great Joy and so said. Ha bayarde now have I that
I desired and wysshed so long For ye be now dead, but if ye drink out all the
water. And when the french men saw the great cruelnes of Charlemayne that
avenged himself upon a poor beast: they were ill content. And than spoke the
bishop turpyn, and said Ogyer of Denmark, what think you by Charlemayne? he
has well showed at this a great part of his great felony, sir said Ogier ye
say troth, he has done to great folly for to make dye such a good beast as
this horse was. Sir said Oliver to Rowlande. Charlemayne is now waxen all
folyshe, ye say full troth said Rowlande. I perceive it full well and for to
say ye troth: there was none of the.xii. peers but he wept for love of the
good horse Bayarde. But who someuer was sorye for it. Charlemayne was glad of
it.

NOw ye ought to know that after that bayarde was cast in the river of meuze:
he went unto the botom as ye have herd, and might not come up for because of
the great stone that was at his neck which was horrible heuye, and when
bayarde saw he might none otherwise escape: he smote so long and so hard
with his feet upon the mylle stone: that he brast it, and came again above
the water and began to swym; so that he passed it all over at the other side,
and when he was come to land: he shaked himself for to make fall the water
fro him and began to cry hie, and made a merueyllous noise, and after began
to run so swyftlye as the tempest had borne him away, and entered in to the
great forest of Ardeyn. And when the king Charlemayne saw that bayard was
escaped: he took so great sorrow for it that almost he lost his wit for
anger. But all the barons were glad of it. Thus as ye have heard: escaped
bayarde out of the hands of Charlemayne, and wit it for very certain that the
folk of the country saien, that he is yet a live within the wood of Ardeyn.
But wit it when he seeeth man or woman: he renneth anon away, so that no body
may come near him. And after all these things: the king Charlemaine as
angrye as he was departed fro Meuse and went in to a chapel that was nigh, and
called to him al his barons and gave them leave to go into their countries,
whereof they were right glad, for they were sore desyringe for to see their
wives their children and their ^^ndes.

How reynawde found Mawgis his cosyn as he went by the way for to accomplish
his voyage to the holy sepulcher in the country of Constantynople. And how
they went to gither to Iherusalem, which the admyral of persie had taken by
treason upon the Christen, but Reynawde and his cousin Mawgis did so much with
the folk of the country: that the city of Iherus^lem was gotten again by the
christen people.
Now tells the history that after that Reynawde was departed from Ardeyn for
to go in to the holy land: he went so much by the iourneys that he came to
constantinople, and lodged him in an holy womans house, which served him as
well as she could, and gave him such meat as go^ had given to her, and after
she wash^d his feet as she was wunt to do to other Pilgrims. And wha^ this
good woman had done so much: she took Reynawde by the hand, and brought him
in to her own chamber, and said to him, Good man ye shall lie here, for in
my other chamber ye may not be, for there is a poor pilgrim that is sore
sick. Dame said Reinawde let me see that pilgrim that ye speak of which is
so sick, with a good will said the poor wom^n ye shall see him, for I promise
you there is great pity in him. And than she took Reynawde by the hand, and
brought him to the pilgrim that was in his bed. And when Reynawd saw him: he
knew well that it was his cosyn Mawgis whereof he was right glad, so began he
to speak to him and said. Friend how is it with your perso^e. And wha^ Mawgis
heard Reynawd speak to him: he lept out of his bed as he never had be sycks
and enbrased Reynawde more than twentye times and after said to him. Cousin how
is it with you? and what adventure brings you here in this poor clothing
that ye have on? tell me if it please you, have ye peace with the king
Charlemayne Cousin said Reynawd, yea by such a manner as I shall tell you. And
then he rehearsed him all the manner as ye have heard above, and all the treatye
that he had had with Charlemayne.

When Mawgis understood the words of Reinawde: he was right glad of it. And
than he embraced again Reynawde and said to him I am now whole for the good
tydinges that ye have brought to me. And therefore I am dysposed to go with
you, and doubt not we shall not dye for hungre, for I am master for to beg
bread. And when the good woman saw that these two pilgrims made so great
feast the one to the other: she thought it might none otherwise be but they
were of great lygnage, and that they had had some great a do together, and
she said to them. Fair lords I see that ye kowe well each other, wherefore I
pray you tell me what ye be, and from whence ye come? Good woman said Mawgis
sith that ye will know of our being: I shall tell you a part of it. Wit it
than that we been two poor gentylmen that are banyshed out of france. So
must we go in such habyte as ye see in to the holy land, and we been
cosins germain and we shall do our voyage together if it please god. And when
the lady that good woman understood these words: she had great Joy.

Then made she to bring them meat enough and wine. Mawgis that sith so
long had drunken no wine: drank some wine that night for the love of
Reynawde. Shortly to speak: none might say nor think how great feast made
the two cosins to each other. And when the day was come: Reinawde and Mawgis
arose and took leave of the holy lady, and put theimselfe to the way. And wit
that so much went the two pilgrims by their iourneies that they came nighe the
city of Jerusalem, and were but a litell mile from it, so that they might
see well the temple and the tower of David, and the most part of Jerusalem.
And whein mawgis and Reinawde saw that: they were right glad of it, and
yielded graces unto god that he had suffered them to come so nyghe the holy
city. When they had done thus their prayers: they went on their way for to
have gonne within Jerusalem. But they were gone but a lytil^: when they saw a
great host about the city even a fore the torwe of David where were many
yauillions of the christen that were there for to fight with the admiral of
Percie that by force held the city of Iherusalem, Reinawd did tarry when he
saw the host that was before the city: and said to his cousin Mawgis. Cousin
what folk is yonder as ye think, for it seems a great host before
Iherusalem, are they Sarasyns or christen, what say you? Surely said Mawgys I
can not tell, and I am sore meruayled what it may be. Thus as Reinawde and
Mawgys spoke together: there came an old man rydyng that way that came from
the host. And when Reynawde saw him: he went him ayenste and said to him.
God save you good man, tell me and it please you, what be they before the holy
city, are they christen or Sarasins? Pilgryme said the old man they ben
christen that have besieged Iherusalem, and can not take it, but ye may well
go without peril. Now tell me said Reinawde who is within Iherusalem? wit it
said the old man, that the admyral of Percie has taken it by treason. And
how has he taken it by treason said Reinawd? wit said the old man that the
admyrall arrayed him as a Pilgrim and many of his folk with him, and went
into the city one after another and when they were all within: they blewe an
horn right high, and set hand to their swerdes, and fought strongly, so that
they were masters of the city or ever the king Thomas could be armed nor his
folk, ye which could not save them self with such few folk as was left
him alive, but he was taken prisoner, and anon all the country rose up, and
have besyeged the city as ye see, and I trust with the grace of God: that the
city shall be take shortly. Now tell me said Reynawd if they of the city
come out often upon the christen. yea said the old man, for they ben much
folk within, and the thing that most greueth us: is that our folk have no
head nor no Lord. And ye wo^ well that folk that have no head nor no Lord:
can do but little good. And when Reinawde heard this word: he began to
smile, and after be said. Fare well good man, we will go there for to see what
shall hap of it. And when he had said so: he took on his way with his cosyn
Mawgys, and ceased not till they were comine within the host. And when they
were come there: every man looked upon Reynawd that was so fair a pilgryme and
so call a man. And Reinawd looked here and there, and wist not where to put
himself, than he advised him and said to Mawgis. My cousin we must see that we
have a litelle reed or some other thing, for to make us a lodges there at one
corner of the wall, and when Reinawd had said so: Mawgis ceased not till he
had made a litill lodge. This hanginge that they made their lodge, the admyrall
of Percie issued out of Iherusalem with well three thousand fyghtinge men, and
entered into the christen host toward saint steuyns church.

ANd when the good earl of Raines, and wallerauen of fayete and Geffray of
Nasareth sawa that: they came anon to their harneys. And I tell you that there
Iaffas of Rames was soon armed sooner tha^ the other and incontynente he ran
upon the turks and began to cry Iaffa as hie as he could, and smote upon
the Persians, and dommaged them sore, for he was a valiant man in arms. And
when all they of the host were armed: than began there a bataylle of the one
part, and of the other right cruel. Than came there geffraye of Nasareth,
which entered among the thickest of the Sarasins and began fast to smite them
dead to the earth. Shortly to speak: this battayll was right great and mortal
for there were many speres broken, and many sheeldes cloven, and of the one
part and also of the other were many men overthrown to the ground. And ye
ought to wit that wallerauen of fay^e smot the^e dead many a painym, so that
it was wonder to see his faires of arms for no persayn durst abide before him.
And when the admyrall saw this: he said to himself, that he should never set
nothing by himself, but he should avenge upon Geffraye that so tourmented
his folk. And anon he took a spear in his hand, and went against Geffray. And
when Geffraye saw that: he ran asprely upon him and they gave each other
such strokes in their sheeldes that both their speres flewe in many pieces,
and with this course was the admyralle overthrown from his horse to the earth,
but Geffray of Nasareth abode in ye arsons of his sadle. And when the admyrall
saw him on the ground: he was angry for it, so rose he up lyghtelye and set
hand to his sword and made great semblaunt for to defend him self. And when
Geffraye of Nasareth saw this: he turned him toward the admyrall and smot him
so great a stroke with his sword upon his helm that he astonyed him. And when
Geffray saw that he made no defense: he bowed his body toward him, and took
the admyrall by the helm and would have brought him away. And when the
admyrall saw that he was take: he cried Percy as loud as he might, so that
his folk heard him and ran there as he was, and delivered him from the
hands of Geffraye and set him upon a horse and brought him with them, when
than Reinawd saw that the battle was so cruel: he said to Mawgis. Alas cosyn
if I had my harneys I should go gladly succor our folk, for it is that
thing that I have most desired as that I might bear arms against the
sarasins, tha^ said Mawgis to him, ye are not wise to say so, ye woe how we
been traueylled of our pilgrimage, and that it is time that we rest us a lytill
and also the war shall not be ended so soon, but that ye may prove
youreselfe in arms before the holy city of Iherusalem be won, wherefore I
pray you rest your self this night, and to morrow and god before we shall be
fight our enmyes, for I have delybered that I shall be no hermyt as long as
we ben together, but I shall help you with all my power, but one thing I tell
you that never while I live I shall cast no charm more, for I have promised it
God and all the saynctes to whom I pray to keep me therfro, but I tell you
that I love you so hertelye that if I should be dampened, yet should I come
out of my hermytage for to succoure you if ye had need. My cosyn said Reinawde
I thank you for your good will and I know well ye say troth that we have
mystre of rest, but I can not keep my self, but I must go to battayll.
Alas that I have not Bayarde and slamberge my good sword, for I should do
this day that god should conne me thank of it.

Right sorry was Reynawd that he had another horse nor harneys for to help
the christen folk.

THis hanging that Reynawd and Mawgis spoke together: the erie of Rames,
Geffraye of Nasareth and wallerauen made great slaughter of the turks and of
ye percians. And when the admyrall saw this: he with drew his folk again in
to the city of Iherusalem. For he might no longer suffer the great harm and
hurt that the christen made him. And when the christian saw that the Sarasins
were discom^t^ed they chased them sharpelye, and stewe so many of them that
none can tell the number. And than the earl I^ffas that was a worthy knight
and a wise, he went to the gate of saint ^teue^, and kept him there with his
folk. And when the Turks came for to save theimself within Iherusalem: the
earl Iaffas went against them and kept the passage that they might not enter
at their ease within the city, and there again were many of them slain. And
the admyrall saw that he was an angered for it, and took an other way to the
city toward the gate fore, and it happed than that the turks passed before
the lodge of Reynawde and by the great prece and stampynge of their horses the
lodge of Reynawd was broken and marred, whereof Reynawde was angrye. Than
Reynawde looked about him, and found nothing for to fight wythall but a
forke that sustained up their lodge, that was great and strong. And he took
it anon with both his hands and mounted upon a wall that was by the way^ And
as the turks passed there by: he laid upon them with a great staff and
smote them down, two and two at once as swynes, and to say the truth:
Reinawde being thus upon the broken wall slew mo than a hundred of them as
they passed by him. And when Mawgys saw that Reinawd did so well, he rooke his
palstet and came upon the wall by him, and began to smite with both his hands
so great strokes, that they that he taught fell dead to the ground. While
that Reinawd and Mawgis did these faytes of arms: came there the earl of Rames
and Geffray of Nasareth that followed after the Sarasins with all dylygence.
Which saw the great quantite of dead Sarasyns, that Reynawde and Mawgys had
slain upon the way by their prowes in so much that all most men could
ride no more that way, for ye great heap of ^urkes that lay dead there,
whereof the Sarasyns were sore abashed.

Than the earl of Rames showed to Geffray of Nasareth the great slaughter that
the two pilgrims had done and merueylled of him that held the forke that he
was so great and so valliaunt a man, and in likewise that other that held the
palster that was not so great. See said he how ye way is covered about them
with this cursed folk, I believe that they be felawes. Ha goddis said Geffray I
meruayill what folk they are, I believe that god has sent them to us for
our saving, or else they ben over hardye fools seeing that they ben al naked,
and fere not the death. Sir said the earl of Rames, what so ever they ben: they
do like worthy men. God al mighty keep them from hurt, danger and from euel
combraunce. For they have well grieved our enmies and I shall never be at mine
ease till that I have spoken with them, for to wit what folk they be and fro
whence they come.

GReat was the chase that the earl of rames, Geffray of Nasareth and wallerauen
made after the Turks and persia^s. For right great slaughter they made of
them or they were withdrawn within Iherusalem. For they left not the chase
till they were within the gate fore. When Reynawde saw that all the Sarasins
were passed he cast after them his great staff for he could do no more to
the^. And after he be thought him and descended fro the wall, and said he
would not lose his forke and fet it again, for it should serve for to make
his lodge as it did before. This hangyng: the earl of Rames came from the
chasyng again, and sought the two Pilgrims for to speak with them, and he
found them where they were making of their lodge. Than he beheld them well
and said nothing. And when he saw that they were so great and so well
shapen pryncypally Reynawde, for he wanted nothing, he lighted from his horse
and took them by the hand, and made them to sytte beside him. When they
were set: the earl said to Reynawde. My freende, I pray you tell me truth
of that I shall afke you. By the faith that ye owe to the temple where ye
purpose to go. Tell me your names and what ye be, and of whence ye come, and
why you go so poorlye arrayed. Sir said Reynawd since that it please you to wit
of our being, and of our name: I shall tell it you with a good will. Now
wit it that I am called Reynawd of Mountawban, but Charlemayne has casted me
therfrom wrongefully, the Duke Aimon is my father, and I am now come in to the
holy land for to serve our lord against his enmies. For thus has commanded
me to do Charlemayne my sovereign lord, when I made peace with him. And that
worse is: I must needs come thus poorly arrayed as ye see beggyng my bread
where so ever I go or come, where against I would never go for to have peace.
When the earl of rames understood Reynawd: he was glad of him, and heaued up
his hands toward heaven and thanked God and after said. O noble knight
Reinawde of Mountawban the best knight of the world, take here my homage.
For I give my self unto you and al my goods. And when Reynawde saw this: he
said to the earl of Rames. Stand up for ye profer me outrage. By god said the
earl I shall never arise till ye have granted me a thing. Sir said Reynawde,
I grant it you with a good will, and with good heart. Gramercye said the earl,
and than he stood up and said to Reynawde. Is it truth that ye have peace
with the great king Charlemaine? Alas where been your brethren the worthy
knights and Mawgys your cosyn, in whom ye have so great trust, and your good
horse bayard: Sir said Reynawd wit that I had peace with the king Charlemaine
of the war that so long has lasted by such manner as I shall tell you, that
it is that I must come here in such clothyng as ye see upon me, and here is
Mawgis my cosyn that is comen here with his free will, for he is not
constrained thereto, for the king Charlemayn weneth he be dead long a go and
my brethren been abyden with my wife and my children. For the king has
returned all our lyuelode unto them again. And when the earl understood the
truth of all, he was right glad of it, so that he began to cry with a
high voice. Ha duke Reynawde of Mountawban, how greatly be you welcome here
to us, as the most valyaunte knight of the world blissed be the good lord that
has conduyte you hither. And I pray you for god: that ye receive mine homage
so shall ye save the worship of the king thomas that is now prisoner there
within the city, for and ye be our captain and our head: I put no doubt
but we shall well soon take Iherusalem. And thus shall the king Thomas be
belyuered out of the hands of the false sarasyns.

THere came all the barons of Surrye that were full glad of the coming of
Reynawd of mountawban, to whom they made great reverence, and feasted him
right hyghly. And shortly to speak: they al prayed him to be their lord and
head captain, and that he would guide them as the earl of Rames had done
before. And when Reynawde saw that all the barons of Surrye desired and prayed
him so sore for to receive their homages: he said unto them. Lords since that
it pleases you for to do me this great honor: I take it, saufe always the
right of king Thomas which is your sovereign lord. Sir said the barons we
will have it thus. And then he received their homagis, and when he had
received them: the earl of Rames kneeled before him and said Sir I will that ye
give me now that thing that ye have granted me. Sir said Reynawde say what
it is and ye shall have it. Sir said the earl of Rames it is that ye will
vouchesaufe to be lodged in my pauyllion and that ye spend none other good but
mine. And if ye will give any thing: I shall deliver it to you, and I shall give
you six of my knights for to serve you, Good earl of Rames gramercye of the
worship that ye do to me* than the earl took Reynawd by the hand and
brought so him in to his pauyllion, and made him to be served as his sovereign
lord, and when all the barons had conveyed Reynawde to the pauyllion of the
earl of Rames: they took leave of him and went again in to their pauyllio^s
and thanked God that he had sent them such a knight and so vallyaunte a man to be their captain, and their Lord. And than when the earl of Rames
saw that all the barons were gone to their pauillio^s: he made to be brought
there many good horses and fair paifrays, and rich raymentes of diverse
colors furred with rich furs and all manner of good harneys for the war,
curaces and rich helmes, and noble swerdes, and great plentye of plate both
of fine gold and of silver and all this he presented to Reynawde. But he would
take nothing but only a complete harneys for his body, and a sword that he
chose there among all, and an horse. And all the remenaunt: he made to be
dealed to the poor knights that had mystre and need of it. And when the earl
of Rames saw that Reynawde had taken but one horse, one harneys and one
sword: he said unto him. Sir for God take on you a another raymente, for ye
wot well it apperteyneth not to such a man as ye be for to go clothed as ye
do. Sir said Reynawd pardonne me and it please you, for I shall never were
none other raymente but this that I have now on, till that I have kyssed the
holy sepulcre wherein God was put after that he was brought down fro the
cross. Sir said then the earl, do as ye will, and than he went to Mawgys and
said to him. I pray you put away this capye and this hood and take other
raimentes, sir said Mawgis than I pray you be not dyspleased, if I full fill
not your desire at this time, for I tell you that I have promised that I shall
were no other cloth as long as I live but such as the same is. Then when
the earl saw that Reynawde nor Mawgys would not take none other raymentes for
no thing that he could say unto them: he was sorry for it. And than he made
the tables redye for to go to supper. And when they had supped the earl of
rames called wallerauen of fayer and Geffray of Nazareth and said to them. Now
think for to do well sith that god has sent to us such succor. And when
the barons heard the earl speak thus: they answered we shall do our best by
the grace of God. And than every man went to his pauillion, and made great
plenty of torches to be fyred so that it was merueylles of the light that was
in the host, and every man began to dance and disporte theymselfe about
their tents and pauyllions a long while for Joy of the coming of Reinawde.
And when turks that kept the tower of Dauyd saw the great light that was in
the host of the christen: they were all merueylled of it. Than some of them
went and showed it to their master and lord. And when the admyralle heard
the tidings: he began to cry hie and said. O Machomet what ^illeth now that
vnhappi folk that make so great feast. I believe that they ben as the swanne
is when she shall die, for I am sure they shall one of these days be al slain,
and therefore they make so great joy. And when barbas the admiral had said
this, he swear by machomet before all his barons that he should make an issue on
the morrow for to hew all the christen in pieces. Sir said an old paynym
Beware your flesh well of a great kerle thae is there new come among them,
the which bears a great forke in his hand, for if he hit you: ye are but
dead. I am well sure that all they of thoste make this Joy for that lurden. I
know him not said thadmyral to the paynym, but and: I can hye him with my
branke of steel I shall make him leave his great head behind him for a pledge
till he comes again, for he is naked, and therefore he may not endure against
me.

When the king Thomas that was there prisoner saw the great feast and joy
that the christen made: Wist not what he should think, but sait to himself. Ha
gods what have now my folk^ that they make such a noise and such a sport,
alas do they not remember me? I believe better ye than nay, for the feast
that they make now is for somewhat. Wit it that they of rames, and of Iaffes
and of all the country about Iherusalem when they saw the great light: they
wend that the city had be set a fire, and some were sore aferde lest thoste
had a do. Thus was all the country abashed, but they that were in thoste
cared but litell for it. And when they had sported themself enough: they
ordained the watch and after went to rest. And when the day was come: the
barons rose and went to the pauillyon of Reinawde, which was up and ready, and
they salued him reverently, and after said unto him thus, sir what think ye
that we must do? shall we assaille the city or no? Lords said the duke
Reinawde, me seems that it were good for to give to it a sawte. For we have
great advantage before hand, for he that shall dyein the sawtinge of the holy
city: he shall be saved without doubt. whiles that the barons devised thus
together for to give a sawte to the city: the admyrall of Percie made to open
the gate a force, and issued out of the town with ten thousand fightinge men
well armed. And when Reinawde and the barons of surry knew it: they ran to
their harneys. Reinawd was armed incontinent, and took his helm and his
sword, and lighted upon his horse that the earl of Rames had given him. And
when reinawde was on horseback: Mawgis armed him also, and mounted on
horseback, and began to cry. Barons of Surrye, be not dysmayed in no wise,
for I promise god I shall never return to be hermyt: if the turks be not
dyscomfyted and overthrown. And after he had said so: he went to Geffraye of
Nasareth and said to him. Baron keep you by Reynawde, for if all the other
knights in the felawshyp were such as ye be: Barbas should be discomfited or
noone, and when all the barons were well armed and well on horseback: they
ordained their battailles as well as they could. And than came the admyrall
barbas that smot in to thoste of the christen. The first barrailie of the
sarasins was conduited by a king that had to name Margarys that was lord of the
tower of Tails, which was right cruel, and dare in his arms a dragon
pyctured with an horrible figure.

When the king Margaris saw it was time to smite upon the christen: he spurred
his horse with his spurs and ran against Reinawd. And when Reinawde saw him
come: he said to therle of rames, Here comes one to seek his death with
great haste, ye have done me great honor, but this king shall have dyshonoure
for your love at the first. And when Reinawd had said this: he spurred his
horse and ran against Margarys so hard that another sheelde nor quyras could
not save him, but he shoued his spear thorough the breast and overthrew sterke
dead to the ground. And when Reinawde had given that great stroke: he said.
Go thy way to hell the devil speed thee and bear felawship to thy
predecessors that went there before thee. And after he put hand to the sword
and smot another sarasin so hard through the helm that he cloue him to the
teethe, and forth withal he taught another under the bauere so that he made
his head to flee from the shoulders, and when he had slain these three: he
cried Mountawban upon these panyms. And when Mawgis heard him: he put himself
among the Turks so couragyously, that the first that he recou^tred he sent
him down in to hell, and than took his swerd in his hand and did merueylles
of arms so that he slew so many turks that reinawde and the barons
meruaylled greatly. Than said Reinawde to the earl of Rames. What say you by
my cousin Mawgis, saw you ever so good an hermyte? By my soul said therle he is
to be commended, blessed be the womb that bare him, and thoure ye ye ben come
in to this land, for now I am well sure that Iherusalem shall be recovered, and
the king Thomas delivered out of prison with the grace of God. When therle of
Rames had said this to Reynawde: he spurred his horse with the spurs and
smote a turk such a stroke that he made the yren of his spear to apeece at the
back of him that he fell dead to therth, and after he took his sword in his
hand and began to cry Rames as hie as he could, saying barons smite now a
good, for the persians shall be now utterly dyscomfyted, if god keep the
valliaunt Reynawd of Mountawba^ and his valiau^t cousin Mawgis. Now is the hour
come that the traytoure Barbas shall finish his life, that thus betrayed the
holy city of Iherusalem by his false wit. Than did set on the barons of the
land, which began to make merueiles of arms against the sarasins. Who had
seen that time Reynawde and Mawgis how they made way to them that came after
the^: he would have meruailled greatly, for I promise you none durst abide
before them were he never so hardy or valliaunt, but he was slain of them.
After Reinawde and Mawgys, was therle of Rames, Geffray of Nasareth, and
wallerauen of fayete, with their folk, and they made merueilles of arms
against their enemies, and when the sarasins saw that they could not abide the
great damage of that the christian bare to them: they put them self to flight
taward the city.

When thadmirall Barbas saw that his folk were dyscomfited: he was angry for
it and said whoreso^nes, whi do ye slay thus away know you not thus I am your
lord, that shall defend you against this unhappy christe^s? Where is Margaris
become that I see him not? Sir said one of the sarasins he is dead at the first
Ioustinge that he made, and when thadmiral heard this: he wend to have gone out
of his wit and said who is ye has borne me so great harm as to slay the noble
king margarys, is it not the great earl with the forke? yea sir said the
folk, for he is called the best knight of the world and also he has brought
this day to death many of your men with his hands. Much sorry was thadmiral
for the death of Margaris, and swore the god mahoune that he should perse the
heart in his belly. And when he had made this oath: he gave ye spurs to the
horse and put him self to the meddle, and the first that he recountred: was
wallerauen of fayete to whom he gave such a stroke thorough the sheeld that he
made his spear head to apere out at the back of him and slew him dead to the
earth. And wha^ the admyrall had given that stroke: he put hand to his sword
and shoued him among the thickest, crying percie as hie as he could, and
said barons smite upon this unhappy christens, for now shall they be
discomfyted. And when therle Iaffas and Geffray of nasareth saw that thadmyrall
fared so foul with the christens: they put them in to the p^ece among the
Sarasyns, and there was grea^^ slaughter made of both parties, but at the last
the christen had been shrewdely handled if Reinawd and mawnys had not come
lightly there, Reinawde that saw this hard battle shoued him self among
the thickest as a wolf among a flock of sheep and smot a persian that was
cousin to thadmyrall that had to name Orrende, and gave him such a stroke with his
sword: that he made his head to slay well a spear length from his body with
helm and all. And after he smote a another that was neuewe to Malbon, so that
he slew both horse and man with one stroke. To say the troth Reinawd made
there so great merueylles of arms: that all the painymes were fore abashed, for
he had his sheelde cast behind his back, and held the ^eyne of his horse
about his arm, and held his sword in both his hands and habandonned his
body smytyng merueyllous strokes on either side upon the sarasyns so that he
smot no stroke but he slew a turk or paynim. And when thadmyr^^ saw the great
greef that Reinawd bare to his folk: he swear his god appo^lyn he should
never eat meat till he had slain the great villain. Sir said than the king
Alebro^dye to him. I pray you leave this entrepryse, for I t^ll you for very
certain that if ye go before him: he shall kylle you with one stroke. Than
said thadmyrall ^o him, if I had now a good guysarn in my hand he should as
lytil endure mine efforce as should a boy* for and I bring him not down^: I
shall never require to bear any arms more, nor to ride upon any horse more.

MVche cruel and hard was the medlyng. Mawgis was there that made great
occysyon fro the one side and fro the other. And when reinawde saw Mangis that
did so well: he was glad, and so smot he a turk upon his helm such a stroke
that he cleued his head in two pieces, and so he smot a another at the sides so
yt he cleued all his ribs, and cut al to gyther a sundre his body, and after
this he smot a another so that he hewed his head clean of, and one of his
arms, and when he had slain these.iii. with one enpraint: he cried mou^tawban
saying, smite barons, for the sarasins both turks and persians been dead and
overthrown, and th^nke to avenge your lord Thomas, which is so excellent a
king. And wha^ thadmiral barbas heard cry mountawban: this word abashed him
more than any other thing, for he anewe well than that he that his men called
the great carry with ye forke: Was ye valiant Reynawd of mountawban, of whom
he had heard speak of many times before that, and that he was ye best knight of
all the world, and wha^ he knew this: he would full feign have be again in
percie, and than he took his way anon to ward the city as a man discomfited
and overthrown, and drew to the gate fore for to have gone in to it, but the
vallyaunte earl of Rames pursued him so nyghe that he suffered him not to go
at his will. And than the admyrall saw that he was so sore pursued: he was
aferde to be take, and so he smote his horse with his spurs and gat in to the
city with great pain, and left all his folk behind and saved him self,
but the most part of his men were there slain. And when Reynawde wyste that
the admiral of percie was so escaped: he was right sorry for it, and than he
looked about him and saw there a great piece of ti^bre that had.xv. foot of
length, he lyghted down a foot and took the balke and trussed it up before
him upon his horse neck as lightly as it had be some piece of welow. Tha^ he
said to them that had victori as well as he. Lords follow me if it please you,
with a good will said the barons for we shall never leave you, another for death
nor for life.

NOw will I tell you why Reinawde did take yt balke before said. Ye ought to wit
yt Reynawde bethought well that the admiral barbas should not make the gate to
be shet after him, for love his folk should come in that were out, and
therefore bare Reynawde ye great balke or beme, to the end that if he found the
gate open: he should put it under the port colisse that it should not be shit
lightly again. And after he had be thought himself thereof: he went on his way
with the christens as fast as they could run toward the gate of
Iherusalem, where the admyrall had saved hymseflfe, and when he came there: he
saw the gate open whereof he was glad, so took he tha^ his beme and put it
under the port colisfe, so that it might not be let down, nor ye gate could
not be shyt another, but ye may well know that Reynawde did not this without great
travail, for there was so many bodies both quycke and dead in his wai that he
might not well help him self, but one thing helped him well, for when the
Sarasyns saw him: they were so fearde of him that they made him way, and fled
all before him.

When the noble knight Reynawde saw that ye port colisse was well fast upon
the beme that he had brought there: without any tarying he put hand to his
swerd and put himself within Iherusale^. And when he was in: he began to cry
as hye as he might Mountawban, Mou^tawban, the city is wo^ne and made there so
much of arms ye Mawgys the Earl of Rames, and many other barons gate in by
fine force. And when the Sarasyns saw that the christens were within the city:
they put themself so to flight, and hyd them within the houses, where as they
might for to save their lives and always Reynawde was at the gate for to keep
the enter. They that were upon the great tower of David: cried fast to the
other sarasyns that they should shet the gate, sa^^g that if ye great lurden
entered within they should be all lost. And wha^ Reinawde saw that a great part
of the christens were within Iherusalem: he said to Mawgis, Cosyn keep well this
passage, and I shall go at another gate for to make it open. Cosyn said Mawgis
go your way hardelye and doubt nothing, I shall well keep this path. Than
departed Reinawde accompanied with many valiant Christians and went unto a
another gate which he found well garnysshed with paynyms but Reynawde
thoroughe his prowes put them anon to flight and gat ye gate open. Thus as ye
hear was done for all the sarasyns lost their lives and was recovered again
the City of Iherusalem, through the great prowes of the noble Reynawde of
Mountawban. And when the admyrall saw this: he wend to have wexe mad all
quick and fared as he had be out of his wit and cursed his gods mahowmet
and Appolyn, and pulled his here is of his berde, and rent all his raymentes, and
after he said. By Apollo the souerayn God, if Thomas help me not to save my
life: I shall make him to be slain incontinent, and than he sent for the king
Thomas and said unto him. King Thomas ye must choose of two things the one,
that is that ye must save my life yt I may goo to percie again with two of my
men in my felawship: or else ye to be now cast out of these wyndowes down.
Than said the king Thomas, and please you, ye shall have paciente that I may
speak with my folk. Go on said the admyral to the^ at this wyndow, For no
ferther ye shall not go, and deliver you lightly. Than went the king Thomas to
the windows, and saw Reynawde of Mountawban and Mawgys come that came all the
formest for to sawte the tower of Dauyd, where he was prisoner to the admiral.
And wha^ he saw Reynawde and Mawgys ye formest of all: he knew them not, and
looked ferther, and saw the earl of Rames behind them which he knew not well,
and tha^ he aspied Geffray of Nazareth, whereof he was glad when he saw him, and
than he began to cry. Lord of Nazareth look up to your king that is here
prisoner, the admyrall Barbas sends you word that if ye let him not go sauf
into his country and realm of pertie with two of his men with him: he shall
cast me now down out of this window. Than answered to him therle of Rames,
ha good king god save you, ye wot well yt a good man ought not to make any
lie, it is troth that yesterdaye we made our gouerner, and master of that
lord that ye see here before us, which is the best knight of the world and
to him ye must show your need, for without him we may do nothing. And when the
king Thomas understood this tidinge: he wexed almost out of his wit for
sorrow, because he we^d none other, but he should die an evil death. Than said
he to ye earl of Rames in great anger. Ha earl of Rames, have ye betrayed me
so, that ye have made a another Lord than me? Sir said the Earl to him again
doubt nothing, for we have done so, your right and honor is always saved in
this behalf, nor ye shall not lose nothing of your own, for the good knight
has enough in france and ye must know that he has taken this city, he and
his fellow, and take no suspecciyon of him nor of us, for I am sure he shall do
even as ye will yourself, for he is here for none other cause but for to
deliver you, for as soon as he shall have vysit the holy sepulcre of our
lord: he shall go again to France. Than said the king Thomas, lords how is
the knight named? Sir said therle of Rames, he is called Reynawde of
Mountawban, the son of ye Duke Aymon, and the best knight of the world, For
he is such a knight yt the great king Charlemayne might never grieve him, and
yet have they mayntened the war.xv. years and more the one against the other,
and so has he done so many noble and great faytes of arms during the war:
yt the reno^me thereof is flowen over all the world. Earl of Lames said the
king, I pray you that ye will tell him in my behalf this that I have said to
Geffray of nazareth, sir said therle with a good will I shall do so. And than
he went to Reynawde and showed to him all that the king had said. Lords said
Reinawd we shall not do so, but let us sawte ye tower for at worst fall, we
shall always well have that apoyntement yt thadmyral asks, and so I tell you
if we sawte well: the tower shall be lightly won by force of arms, and we shall
deliver the king Thomas at our own will, and so shall we slay barbas that
thorough treason took ye city. Sir said therle of Rames, we shall do your
commandment doubt not of it, Tha^ commanded Reynawd yt the tower should be
sawted of al sides and made great ple^tie of ladders to be ryghted against it,
and he himself began first to clime up with his sheeld for to cover him with,
and after him went Mawgis and than therle of Rames, and after them Geffray of
Nazareth and well thyrty knights mo, and men with crosbowes and other archers
abode byneth for to shoot upward, where they saw sarasins look out and when
thadmirall saw Reynawde yt would have come into ye tower: he was sore aferde,
so wist he not what he should do, but ran to the king Thomas and caught him
by the neck and said to hi^, by apollo thou and I shall lepe both at once out
of this window. Sir said the king kill not your self nor me also, for I shall
make ye sawte to cesse. I will well yt ye do so said thadmiral, but ye shall
come with me. So took him by the neck and had him to the wyndowe and said al
hye Reynawde of Mountawban I shall anger you, for I shall cast the king Thomas
down if ye pardon me not, and I shall slay my self whim, for I may well die
after such a king. And when the duke Riynawde saw that the king Thomas hynge
thus the head downewarde all ready for to fall: he had great pity of him and
said Ha good lord what shall I do? for if I leave the sawte: it shall be great
shame, for ye tower is almost taken, and of the other part it shall be great
mysshape if ye good king Thomas take death for it. Thus as Reynawde was upon
ye ladder thynkyng what he might best do: all the barons of ye land began to
cry to Reynawde, sweet sir suffer not that our king lose his life, so it
were great shame to us and to you also. Lords said Reynawde by the faith that
I owe to my brethren and to my Cosyn Mawgys, I would not yt the king should
take death for me, and when he had said so: he came down fro the ladder, and
after cried to the admiral. Leave the king Thomas and do him no harm, for ye
shall be delivered by such a covenant that ye and your two men shall go on
foot into percie and ye shall leave here al your goods. By mahou^e said
thadmiral I will not do so but shall ride on horseback I and my two men, and
so shall ye give me saufconduyt upon your faith, and if ye will not do thus: I
shall let fall down ye king Thomas. Admyrall said Reynawde, ye ye ask I
grant it to you upon my faith, For ye have with you such a pledge that ye
shall not be touched at this time for me. Thadmirall was right glad wha^ he
heard Reynawde speak thus, so drew he up the king Thomas again and said to
him, king Thomas ye shall go quite from me, and than he went down with the
king and opened the gate, and went our he and his two men. There was made great
joy between the king Thomas and Reynawde. And after of all the other barons
of surre, and the great thanks that the king did to Reynawde and to Mawgis:
are not for to be named, and the langage ye was between them are to long to be
recounted. After this thadmyral took his saufconduyt and went his way toward
percie. Here of him is made none other mention, and after he was gone: ye king
Thomas, reynawde and with all the other barons went together into ye tower, and
wha^ they were come up: the king Thomas kneeld before Reynawde. Sir said
Reyaawde ye ought not to do so. Yes verily said the king, and when Reynawde
saw that he wexed red for shame and took up the king and tha^ the king colled
him and said. Blessed be our lord that brought you in this land, for ye have
succored Iherusalem the holy city and brought miself out of the sarasins
hands.

Now tell me and it please you if ye have made peace with Charlemayn ye great
king of France yt has done you so great hinderaunce. Sir said Reynawde yea,
and because of ye peace I am come here, begging my bread and poorly arrayed,
and wha^ the king Thomas heard him speak: he had great pity of him, and swore
by the holy Sepulcre that he should array him honorably as to him apperteineth
for to return into France. After that the king had said this word: they
came down fro ye tower of dauyd for to go to the holy sepulcre. And ye ought
to wit yt they made great feast through out the City of that was so befall.
Tha^ went they al to the holy sepulcre, for to yield thanks to our lord of
the city that was recovered fro the hands of ye sarasyns. And when all this
was done the barons of surre took leave of the king of Reynawde and of mawgis,
and after went every man into his place in their country, and the king took
Reynawde and Mawgis and brought them to his palace where he feasted them a
hundred days honorably. And this hanging: he showed them all the crountrey
about Iherusale^, and wha^ Reynawde had sported him enough with the king
Thomas: he would depart for to go again into ye marches of france. And when
the king saw that: he gave to Reynawd many rich gifts, as horses, silks gold
and silver and many other things in great plenti. And ye ought to wit that
Mawgis would take nothing nor change his hermites array in no wise, but arrayed
him again as a pylgrime and bare foot, whereof Reynawde was sorry. The king
made a ship be ready honourabli at ye haven of Iaphes, Reynawde full te^derly
weepyng took leave of ye king and of his barons, and entered into the ship. And
wit it yt by fortune of wedryng, they were well eight months upon ye sea, and
at last they took land at a town called Palerne, and when they had taken
land: Reinawde commanded that the ship should be unlade, and al thus as they
vnladed ye ship: the king of Palerne which was called Simon af puill loking out
at a wyndow of his castle, than he said to them that were about him, I see
yonder in the haven a ship sets her good a land, and it cannot be but there
must be some great man in it, for I see horses that be^ had out and great
riches, I cannot say what it may be, but it were pilgrims, tha^ he commanded
an horse for to be made ready: for he would sport himself to the haven side.

THe valyau^t king Simon of Puill without any more taryeng: came to the sea side
with many a noble knight in his company. And when he was come to ye haven: he
found Reynawde yt was come a land, and as soon as the king saw him: he knew
him well, whereof he was right glad, and also Reynawde knew well the good king
Simon. So tha^ enbraced they each with other, and made great cheer the one to
the other Reynawde said ye king, ye be right welcome, I pray you come lodge in my
castle, for thadmyral barbas is entered in my land and wastes it daily. I
fought yesterday with him, but he drove me out of the feelde shamefully and did
great harm to my folk and I am sure he shall come to besyege me to morrow, and
I had thought to have send for succors toward Charlemayn, but since that god
has brought you here: I fear not the king another his admiral of Percie.

Sir said Reynawd I make you sure I shall help you withal my power, and if
thadmyrall come to morrow ^he shall not mysse of battle, for I shall never eat
bread till I have discomfited him. Than the king Simon brought Reynawde to his
palace, where he made him good cheer, and thus as Simon feasted Reynawde came
there a knight that was called Ymes that said to the king Simon Sir thadmyrall
of Percie is come before Palerne with so great folk that all therth is covered
withal. When the king understood these tidinges: he was sorry for it and
Reynawde glad. Than said Reynawde to the king. Sir I pray you be not abashed
of nothing, for this day shall ye be aue^ged and god before, and the holy
sepulcre fro whens I came but late, and when the king heard Reynawde speak
so: he made be cried that every man should arm hi^ self, and when Reynawde saw
that: he sent for his herneys and armed him, and swear the body of God he
should do greet to thadmyral yt dai since that he had found him again. And
when Mawgys saw that Reynawde would arm him for to fight: he said to him. My
cosyn I am yet dysposed for your love to bear arms, for I could not suffer
you in danger. And when the king Simon heard Mawgis speak so: he said him
great thank, and went and enbraced him and after said, by my soul here is a
good Hermit for when it was need he put well hand to the sword. Sir said
Reynawde ye say well troth, and I promise you men, should find in the world
but few such knights as he is one After all these things said: every man
took his harneys and ye king all armed went to Mawgys and said al laughyng.
My friend Mawgis I pray you that ye will bear my standarde this day. Sir
answerde mawgys if ye take me it: I promise you I shall have it in such a
place that ye shall sweet or ever ye shall come to me. And when the king
heard Mawgys speak so: he was right glad thereof, and than he took him his
baner. And when Mawgis had it in his hand: he said to the king sir now follow
me that will, for this day shall thadmyral be discomfited if it please God, and
when Mawgys had said so: he gave the spurs to his horse and put himself
among the sarasyns as a lion. Reynawde followed him nighe and recountred a
persian, whom he smote with his spear so great a stroke that he made him
tumble dead to the ground, whereof the other were sore abashed and after he put
hand to his swearde and shoued himself into ye greatest prece and smote on
either side of him upon the persians so meruailouse strokes, yt they were
greatly meruayled with it, for all they that he hit: he brought them to thyr
ending, and when thadmyrall saw the great efforce of arms ye Reinawde made
against his folk: he said to a neuew of his that was by him. By mahoune I saw
not yesterday that great man of arms, another he that bears now the baner of
Simon, from whens the devil are they come that so greatly greueth us? I see well
they be some strange knights. I am all ready so feared of them that all the
blood in my body trembles. This hangyng: the king Simon and Reynawde made
great slaughter of the sarasyns. But wha^ the admiral saw that his folk bare
themself so ill: he wist not whether he would flee or abide. Than came
reynawde brekyng the prece that cried as loud as he could, mountawban. And
when thadmiral heard that cry he was sore a ferde yt he wist not whether to go
but said by mahoune I believe yt this devil helps himself with some deuilry, for
I left him in Iherusalem, and now he is here.

THan when thadmyral Barbas knew that he yt made so great greef to his folk
was Reynawde of mou^tawba^: he shook al for fear and said to his neuew. by
machomet my god, we have done ill to come here for to make war against the
king Simon, sith that he has this devil Reynawde of mountawban, for his like
is there not in all the world of knighthoode, now would I be well in my ship in
the mids of the sea, for if I abide him: he shall make an end of me. Sir
said his folk have no doubt of ye great vilayn, for and he come ones in our
hands: he shall not lightly escape us lords said thadmyral, ye wot not what ye
say, ye know not the great prowes of Reynawde, for and we were ten times mo
folk than we ben: yet should not we endure against him, and therefore by ye
faith that I owe to mahoune I will abide here no longer. And wha^ he had said
these words: he turned ye brydel, and as soon as he might fled toward his
galays, and al his folk after him. And when Reynawde saw yt the paynems were
discomfited: he began to cry, after Mawgis after for the truau^tes are
discomfited. And when he had said so: he put himself to the chase, and the
king Simon after him, and went castyng down Sarasyns as beasts. And wit yt
they slew so many of the^ that men should not believe the number, but they
could not take thadmirall: for he was the formest.

BArbas the admyrall of Persie, when he found himself saved in his ship: he
began to look a land and saw the great damage that Reinawde and Mawgys made
of his folk, for all the shores of the sea were full of sarasi^s slain, whereof
he had great sorrow, so began he to pull his here is of his berde, and cursed
thoure yt ever he was borne. Reynawde came to the shores and saw that
thadmyrall was saved, whereof he was full sorry and wist not what he should do
more to him, but he made to be cast boltes of wild fire into the galley of
thadmyrall, so that he brent ye most part of it, and Barbas was feign to enter
into another ship. And ye ought to wit that all ye sarasins that bode a land:
lost their lives. when ye ^ing Simo^ saw that he was to his above of his
enemies: he was right glad of it, so ran he and enbraced Reynawde and after
said to him. Reynawde I know well that I am king by your prowes, for and ye had
not be the admiral Barbas had distroyed me, and had made an end of me,
wherefore it is reason that ye be rewarded for it, and therefore (Reynawd) I make
you lord of all my goods and of all my land. Than said Reynawde, sir I
thank you much of your good will, for we be not they yt have discomfyted the
sarasyns. It was god and none other, for we be not so puyssaunt, I and Mawgys
for to do it without him. And wha^ they had thus spoken together a long while
at the sea side: the king took Reynawde with the one hand, and Mawgys with
the other hand, and went to ward the City. And when they were come there:
the king made the gain to be brought, and presented it to Reynawde and to
Mawgys, whereof Reinawde and Mawgis would take nothing, but gave it to the
poor knights, and incontinent Mawgis took again his hermites werd Than began
ye feast to be there great for the victory that god had given them. The cheer
that ye king made to Reynawde in his paleys is not for to say, for it was
great, and for to make short tale: Reynawde was honorably feasted ye space of
four days. And than he would depart, and asked leave of the king, whereof
the king was full sorry because he would bide no longer, and when he saw yt he
would go: he gave him mani fair gifts, and made his ship to be garnisshed with
much good vitayles. And when this was done: Reynawde took leave of the king
Simon and of his barons, and the king conveyed Reynawde to the ship. And when
he came to the patting: the king Simo^ kissed Reynawde sore weepyng, and after
went again to Palerne, and Reynawde did do hale up sail and took sea, and
ceased never till he came to Rome, and there they took land and he and Mawgys
went and confessed them to the Pope, and when they were confessed: they
returned again into the ship and took their way toward France. Shortly to
speak they did so much by their iourneys yt they came to Ardeyne about noone,
and when ye pleople of Adeyne wist ye Reynawde and Mawgis were coming? they
were never so glad, and went to alarde and said, wit yt your brother Reynawde
our lord is come and also Mawgis your cousin whole and sound thanked be god.

ANd than when Alarde and his brethern heard these tidings of their brother
Reynawde yt was come? they had almost swouned for great joy that they had, and
anon went to the gate of the town against their brother, but they found him yt
he was all ready in the town, and when they saw him: they ran him against and
Alarde enbraced him first weepyng. and after kyssed him by great love and in
likewise did Guicharde and Richard, and tha^ kissed mawgis their good cousin.
And wha^ they had thus welcomed him: they went together in ye palace, and wha^
they were therr, Alarde said to Reynawd fair brother tell, us how ye have
found out cosyn mawgis. Brother said Reynawde I found him in constantinople
by fortune, and than he began to rehearse unto them all his adventures that he
had since he became pilgrim. And when he had told al he looked on his brother
Alarde in his face and saw he was pale, which gave him suspeccion and said.
Fair brother now is it with my wife and mi children? I marvel me much yt I
see them not here. Brother said Alarde have no doubt for them, for they ben
whole and sound at Mountawban, and wit it that since your departing: we have do
repair again the town, and have done garnisshe ye castle with vitayle
enough, for fear of war if any thing had happed us amys. And than wha^
Reynawde heard good tidings of his wife and of his children: he was right
glad of it, and so he kneeled down and thanked God of it.

When Reynawde knew that his wife and his children were well: it reco^forted him
much and began to make good cheer, but wha^ he saw that his brethern made no
great joy he meruayled much: so turned him self toward Alarde ye syghed sore
and said to him. Brother I awayte for to hear some heuye tidinges I trow
that, that ye have told me is not troth, and if ye tell me not how is it of
al: I shall go fro my self, and therefore I pray you tell it me, for I will know
it. Wha^ alarde saw that Reynawde held him so short: he began to weep full
tenderly and than said unto him. Sir since that it please you that I tell you
the troth: I shall do so. Wit it that my lady your wife is deceassed out of
this world unto god. For ever sith yt ye departed she ceased not her sorrow
for nothing that we could do or show unto her. And than she cast all her
clothing into a fire and would never were upon her but a sorry ma^tel and a
smock, and so long she wept and sorowed dai and night that she died at last,
whereof I am sorry for it, for she was the goodliest and the fairest of all the
world. Wha^ Reynawde understood these words: he swouned down to the earth for
great sorrow yt he took at his heart of the death of the good duchess Clare
his wife, and when he was come again to himself: he began to weep and said,
Ha king Charlemayne, how well may I hate you? by you have I lost my wife, for
she is dead because she se that ye chased me out of France with so great shame
to make me go a foot, begging my bread like a truaunt, but I knew well that
my sins ben cause of all this. And wha^ Reynawde had made his moan: he said to
Alarde his brother, fair brother I pray you come and show me the tomb where
my wife is begrauen. Brother said Alarde with a good will, I shall do so, and
tha^ he brought him to ye church where his good wife the Duchess was buried.
And wha^ Reynawde came there he swouned three times upon her tomb, and wha^ he
was come again to himself: began to make great sorrow, for he rented his
clothes and pulled his hea^es. And when he had sorowed long: he said as a man
replenysshed with sorrow. Ha god what a pilgrim I am. I believe that there is
none in the world more vnhappi than I am: Now see I well that I have lost all
my joy and my comfort sith that I have lost the fairest lady of the world
and the goodliest. And as he was speaking these words: came there his children
Aymonet and yonnet that kneeled before their father. And when Reynawde saw the
kneelyng before him: he we^d his heart should have breast. So took he them up and
kissed them by great love all weepynge, and after said to them. Mi fair
children see rhat ye be good men, for I fere me that ye shall miss me soon.
And when Reynawde had said this to his children: he began to make more sorrow
than he had done before and so did Mawgis. Tha^ began the sorrow through all the
town right great, and lasted.x. days without cease, and when came to
the.xiii. day: Reynawde took his way toward Mountawban that was almost as
well peopled as it was or the war began. And Mawgys haba^donned never
reynawde where someuer he went but went always on foot in his hermites array,
and as they went thus to Mountawba^: the brethern of Reynawd and his children
went on foot for to bear company to Mawgys their cousin. And when they of
Mountawban knew ye coming of their lord: they were right glad of it, and made
al ye streets for to be hanged with fair clothes, and they came against him
al together making great joy, and made him great reverence, and welcomed him
honorably. And Reynawde received them gladly and made the^ good cheer, for at
that time he dyssimuled his sorrow yt he had at his heart, because he should not
dyscomfort his folk yt so great joy made for his coming And also they of
Mou^tawban welcomed mawgis honorably, because they loved him of old very
well, and the^ they brought Reinawde making great joy unto the castle, and
wha^ Reynawde found himself within his castle of Mountawban: he was glad of
it, and came to a window and looked down into the town, and saw that it was
as well peopled as ever it was, and had marvel of whens so much people was
come there for to dwell and he was right glad of it, for he we^de never to have
seen mou^tawban in that plyght as it was before the war began. After that the
feast was ended: ^eynawde called his brethern and said unto them. Lords I
hold me destroyed for love of ye good duchess, which I have lost whereof I am
right heavy for it, for love of ye great goodness that I have known in her, I
make my vow to god that never while I live I shall never mary again. Cousin
said mawgys ye do well, but I pray you recomforte yourselfe, for ye know well
that a thing that may not be amended must be left alone. Cosyn said Reynawde
ye say well and I shall do so. When Reynawde, his brethern and Mawgys had
done great cheer yt day at Mountawban: Mawgys on the morrow next took leave of
his cosyns and went again to his hermytage and when he would depart: he said
to Reynawde, Cousin remember you well that for you are dead so many folk for
whom ye beholden to pray god yt he will have mercy on their souls. And wha^
Mawgis had said so he took his way and would not suffer no body to convey him,
and he did so much by his iourneys that he came to his hermitage, where he
lived a holy life. For after he was come again to his hermitage: he ete never
but herbs and roots of the wood, and in this manner wise lived Mawgis the
space of.vii. years yt he saw another man nor woman. And when it came to
the.viii. year: the good mawgys deceassed fro this world about Easter. Jesus
for his pity pardon his soul. Here leueth the history to speak of mawgis
whom god pardon and tourneth to speak again of Reynawde, of his brethern and
of his children how they were made knights.

How Reynawde sent his two sons to ye king Charlemayne much honorably. for
to be made knights at Paris.
depiction of a group of un-armoured men on horseback

IN this party shows thistory that after that Mawgys was erturned again to
his hermitage, Reynawde was ever after sorry for him and also for his wife. But
he recomforted himself as well as he might with his brethern. A long while.
abode Reynawde with his brethern making as good cheer as he could, and wit it
that about that time died the old duke Aymon which left great goods to his
children, but shortly to speket Reinawde departed and gave all his goods as
well that, he had of his own, as yt was fallen by the death of his father
Aymo^ unto his brethern except only yt he retained for himself the castle and
town of Mountawban, and found the ways that they were al married noble and
rychely. Who yt should speak of the brethern of Reynawde and of their deeds: it
were to long to be recou^ted. Reynawde tha^ dwelled long at Mountawban with
his children which he endoctrined and taught in all good and virtuous manners as
well as he could, and nouryshed them till yt they were men, and could bear
both sheelde and spear. And upon a day he had them to the feelde on
horseback, and made to be brought there speres and sheeldes for to assay
themself, and took with him twenty knights, whom when they were comen in
the feeld: he made his children to just with. And ye ought to wit that ye two
sons of Reynawd Iusted as well as though they had be hauntynge the war ten
years and more. And when Reynawde saw that they did so well: he called them
before him and before the knights and said to them. My fair children thanked be
our lord, ye be rail men and well made of body. It is now time that ye were
made knights, wherefore I will that ye go serve the king Charlemayne your
souereyne lord which shall make you knyghts, for or more noble hand ye can
not be dowbed to the noble order of knight hode. Sir said Aymonet, we are ready
to fulfill your will in every thing yt ye command us. Father said Yonnet ye
say well to us, for it is time that we follow the wars, but since it is your
pleasure to send us to Charlemayne: We must go there honourabli, but it cannot
be without great cost. My son said Reynawde, care not for the cost, for we have
good enough, gramercy our lord, for to bring you there according to your
^state, and I promise you, I shall send you there or I be.vii. night elder as
honorably as any went thither sin my time. Father said the children we are
ready to go when it please you.

Wha^ Reynawde had said this to his children: he went home again to
Mountawba^ well joyful of his two sons that proved so well, and when he was
within his castle: he called his steward and said to him. Steward I
command you that ye a^ay my children honorably and richelye of diverse manners
of clothing and of things that longs of them, for I will send them to ye
court of the king Charlemayne, for to be made knights of him, and s^e that
they go as honestly as any went thither this.xx. years. My lord said the
steward, I shall well do your commandment since yt it pleases you, for ye
have enough clothes full rich of your own of diverse colors.

When the steward heard ye commandment of his master without any taryeng
he did right well all that was commanded him by Reynawde, for he made to be
ready many palfreis and coursers well barbed and covered with rich cloth of
gold with belles of silver and gylte in great plentye, and purueyed for two
good harneyses al complete, for speres and swerdes and for all such other
things as a perteyneth for the two young bachelors. Shortli to speak: it was
not possible to ataye better two young squiers than ye two young sons of
Reynawde were by ye purueyaunce of his steward, and wha^ all things were
ready: he brought the^ before his masters. And when Reinawde saw this: he was
glad and said by god steward I conne you thank that ye have purueyed so well
for my children, and Reynawde made.v. C knights well ready to bear co^pani to
his sons. And when they were al redi: Reynawde called to his sons and said
to the^. Mi fair sons ye be well appointed thanked be god, and here is a fair
bend of noble me^ to bear you felawship, and therefore ye shall now go to ye
court of Charlemayn our great king, which shall make you great cheer and
honor for my love, my children ye be of hie lynage and right noble, and
therefore beware yt ye do nothing against your noblenes ne that might return
to any shame to me nor to your lygnage, and I comaund you upon the faith that
ye owe to me that the money that I deliver to you now, ye dyspende it honestly,
and spare not to do good therewith to poor gentilmen and young bachelors that
would feign come to worship, and when ye have all spended it honestly: send to
me for more, and ye shall have enough and above this I charge you that ye serve
god always before any thing that ye have a do, and that ye speak no word
foul out of your mouth to no lady nor damsel, worship your better and love
your neighbor, and so shall you be praised of every man. Moreover I charge you
that ye live freendly together as two brethren ought to boo, and to you yonnet
my fair son. I command you ye ye bear honor and reverence to your
brother, for he is your elder, yt know ye well.

THan said yonnet, father be you sure I shall serve my dear brother as I would
do you, that are my lord and my dear father. By my faith fair son said
reinawde, if ye do so ye shall be praised for it whersomeuer ye come or go. But
yet one thing I forbid you that ye speak not to much, for if ye do the
contrary: the frensshemen shall say, that ye be not like inconditions to your
parentage. Father said the childrene, we have such a trust in our Lord god
yt he shall keep us from al thing that is contrary to his will, and that we
shall so govern us, that ye shall gladly auowe us for your children, all they
of the court of Charlemayne shall love us but if they will do wrong, and when
Reynawd heard his children speak so the was ^ight glad thereof and drew them
aside and said to them. My fair children ye go now into france, remember
well here after al which I shall tell you now, ye must know ye there be in the
court of Charlemaine a great lygnage of folk that never loved us but litel,
the which are of the great power they be of mau^t. I charge you that ye ne go
nor come with them, for nothing yt they can tell you, and if they hurt you by
any wise: see yt ye revenge your self wisely, and show them yt ye be the
sons of Reinawde of mountawban. Father said the children, doubt not we shall
not suffer yt any outrage be do to us if we may. Fair children said
reinawde, kneel before me, and they kneeled anon before their father and reinawd
gave the^ his blessyng, and after kissed them weeping many times and gave them
leave and after turned him to his knights, and said. My lords I commend you
to god, and pray you yt ye rend well my children and suffer not yt any wrong be
don to them to your power, for ye know well yt we ben hated in france, and I
pray you give the^ always good cou^seil, and that they be always courteous
gentil and liberal of their goods, for a prince covetous was never praised,
and when reinawd had said this: he withdrew him sore weeping. Thus leueth
thistorie to speak of reinawd and of his brethren, and returns to show of
his children, that were gone to the court of Charlem^ine.

How after that the king Charlemayne had received full sweetly the sons of
Reynawde: they fought with the su^nes of Foulques of Moryllon, and discomfited
them in the ysle of our lady, within Paris, because they had laid treason
upon reynawde their father, for cause that he had slain Foulques: in the
plain of Valcoloures.
depiction of two knights in armor and on horseback, jousting with lances

Now shows the tale, that after that Aimonet and yonnet were departed fro
their father: they rode so much by their Iourneys, that they came to paris,
and lodged them by the palace, and when they were lodged: the two children
clothed themself honestly and all their folk, and than they went with their
felawshyp, holdyng each other by the hands to the palace. And when the barons
of Charlemaine saw come the.ii. brethern so rychely arrayed and so goodly a
felawshyp of knights after them, they meruayled greatly what they might be,
so said the one to the other, here be two fair children and by lykelyhod they
should be brethren and they must be of some hie lignage. The barons the^
followed them, wha^ they mounted to the palace, and they entered within the great
hall. where they found the king Charlemayne, that devised with some of his
barons, and there was the duke naimes. Richard of Normandy, Salamon of breteyn,
Ogyer the dane, therle Guaneilo^, and also Constans and rohats, which.ii hated
reynawde of Mountawban right sore, for they were the sons of Foulques of
morillon yt reinawd had slain in ye plain of valcoloures when he and his
brethren defended them so well at the roch of Mou^tbron These two brethren
Constans and rohars had great name in the court, but their hertes were full
false, and the king Charlemayne loved them well for their prowes and great
knighthode. With Charlemain were also many other great princes and barons
whereof the book makes no mention. For it were to long a thing for to be
recounted.

THan when the two brethern the sons of Reinawde of Mountawban were come in
to the hall: they saw the king among his barons so went they unto him, and
kneeled down before him, and kissed his feet. And than Aymonet spoke first and
said. Sir god give you good life and long, and keep from evil all your
noble company. Sir we are come to you for to have the order of knighthod, if
it plese your good grace to give it to us, for of no better hand than is
youres: We can not have it, wherefore sir we beseech you humbly for god and for
the love of our father that it will please you to receive us in your seruise
unto the time ye give the said order of knightehode, who be^ you said ye king
that speak thus? Sir said Aymonet, we are the sons of Reynawde of
Mountawban. And when ye king Charlemayn understood that they were the sons
of Reynawde: he rose upon his feet lightly and received them honorably, and
after said unto them. My children, ye be right welcome and how fares your
father? sir said the chylderne, he doothe well thanked be god, and he
recommendeth him right humbly to your good grace, beseeching you that ye will
have us for recommended, and we have left him at Mountawban, but he draws
now sore to age. Thus goes the world my children (said the king) every man
must take in it an end. Much glad was the king Charlemayne of the coming of
the two sons of Reynawde, and right gladly he looked upon them for the love
of their father, for the more he beheld them: and the more fayrer he found
th^im and better lyked them, and well he loved them, because they were like
the father. And wha^ that he had looked upon them enough: he said to his
barons. Lords if the children would forsake the father: they could not, for
never children were more like to him, than they, and when he had said so: he
turned roward the children and said to them. Fair childrene ye shall be made
knights at al times when ye will, for the love of your father my good friend,
and I shall give you more lands than your father has, and for love of you: I
shall make an hundred knights more with you, for ye ben of such a stock come
that ye be worthy for to be honored pr^ised and holden dear. And than when the
duke Naimes, Rowland and O^iuer that came there and all the other Peers of
France saw that they were the two sons of Reinawd of mountawba^: they were
right glad of it, and than every man kissed them by great love, and asked them
how Reinawde and his brethren b^d, lords said Aymonet, what are you that be
so glad of our coming, Children said the duke Naymes, we ben all your
kinnesmen. And than the duke Naimes told them all their names. And when the
children knew what that they were: they meeked themsele before them honestlye
and after yonnet said to them. Lords our father greteth you well, and prays
you that ye will have us for recommended as your kynsmen. And than when the
barons heard the two children speak so wisely: they were glad of it and also
of their coming. But the two sons of Foulques of Moryllon were full sorry and
wroth for it, by my soul said Constans to his brother Rahars the father of
these two children slew our father, whereof the heart in my body swells
high for anger that I see them here another min eyes can not look upon them,
brother said Rohars, nor I another by my truth, but I counseyll not that we
fight with them not here, for it were folly. But let us await a time and place
couenable, for sith that they shall dwell here: We shall avenge us upon them.
Brother said Constans, let us do one thing, that I shall tell you, which
is easy for to do, that ye shall call the one of treason: and I the other,
saying that their father slew our father by treason. And also we shall prove
that their father wroughte treason against the king Charlemayn, brother said
Rohars, ye speak well, but we must suffer a while till we see how they shall
bear themself in court, for and they do any otherwise than they ought to do:
We shall mow kylle them and be not blamed for it. After this done: ye ought to
know that the children of Reinawde of Mountawban, bare themself full
honestlye in court, for all the barons loved them dear, save only the two
sons of Foulques of moryllon, whereof Aimonet and yonnet perceived it right
well, and spoke not with them, nor haunted them not. It was great meruayll of
the great gifts yt the sons of Reynawd gave to the Barons and gentilmen of
the court of Charlemain, as were fair horses and harnays and many clothes of
sylke of diverse colors, and in like wise they gave to the ladies and gentil
women fair gounes of clothe of gold and of silver. And of the other part
they kept a great estate and good house to al poor gentylmen and squiets, and
did so much good that they were greatly praised of every manne. What should
I tell you more? the childrene of Reynawde did so much in the court of the
king Charlemayne: that of all the world they were loved, and princypallye of
the king Charlemayne. when the king saw that they behaved them so well and
so wisely in his court: he was right glad of it so loved he them most of any
young knight of his court, and made them his keruers a fore him. And then
when the two sons of Foulques of Moryllon saw that the king loved them so
much: they were full angrye, in so much that they wexed mad all quick for
anger of it, and so swate by great anger that they should slay the^, or ever
theishould go to from the court. It happed so that upon whyt sunday even as
the king was at Paris, and would keep open court, and there was Aymonet and
yonnet with the other barons in the halle. This hanging: aryued there a knight
of Almayne that presented to the king a fair knyfe after the facyon of the
land, then called the king yonnet and gave it him by great love. And when
yonner had received this gift of the king and as he should have gone to his
place again: he shoued Constans with his elbowe against his will. And when
Constans saw that yonnet had done so: he had great dispite at it, and said.
What is this? must there be so much set by these two boys the sons of a
traitor, which been not worth a roten apple? and this one is all redye become
so proud that he has now shoued me with his elbowe by great envy and
pride, much other langage constans said by Yonnet: Which he ought not for to
say, and when yonnet heard that Constans had called him the son of
traitor: he was sore an angered. So came he to him and said Constans ye have
learned a foul craft, that is that ye can speak shrewdely without a cause
lawful why, for I have heard that ye have called me and my brother the sons
of a traitor, and that the king knows well that our father slew yours by
treason, whereof I will ye wit that ye lie falsely, but your father did assail
ours by treason as a traitor, come of the lignage of traitoures. But God
would not that my father should dye so, nor mine uncles. my father slew your
father, it is true, but it was in his defending of his body, and he did then
as a noble knight, as he is, and if ye be so hardy that ye will maintein that he
did it by treason: here I cast now my gage before this noble company, saying
that ye have lied falsely, save the reverence of the king Charlemayne, and of
his felawshyp.

THan when the king Charlemayne saw that none of the barons said nothing of
the strife of yonnet and of Constans: he was angry for it, and said. Constans
ye do great wrong for to say that I and the twelve peers of france know
well that Reinawde of Mountawban slew your father by treason, hold your peace
said Charlemayne, for if ye knew well how the matter is ye shaulde not speak
of it, wherefore I command you in as much as ye fear to anger me: that ye make
ame^des to yonnet of that ye have said, or else void incontinent my court
and my realm, for ye have troubled all my court, whereof I am not content.
And when Rohars heard this that the king Charlemayne had said to Constans
his brother: he was angry and so rose on his feet, and said. Sir I am ready to
prove upon Aimonet yt his father slew our father by treason and here is my
gage. Rohars said Charlemain, here ye take a wrong way, and it shall be to
you over late, when ye shall repent it. When Aymonet and yonnet understood
these words: they kneeled before the king Charlemayne and said to him. Sir
for god we pray you right humblye that ye take the gages yt Rohars has
cast, for with gods grace we shall well defend our father of the traison, that
they put upon him. Children said the king, since it please you that I take
them: I shall do so, and than the king Charlemayn took the gages, and
Constans auaunced himself and said. Sir we understand that we shall fight
two and two, the one against the other. when the king Charlemayne had take the
gages of bataile of Constans and of Rohars: he asked them who should be their
suretes, than lept forth the traytoure Guanellon, betenger, Escouf of moryllon,
Lion of pygnabel and Gryffon of hautbraunche, the which said to king
Charlemayne, sir we will be suretes for Constans and Rohars, for they be of our
lygnage. Lords said Charlemain I take them you to keep, and I charge you to
bring them again to the court when time shall be. Sir said the sureties we shall
do as ye command us. And when the king had received the sureties of Co^stans
and of Rohars: Aymonet and yonnet came forth, and said in this manner. Sir here
been our gages how that we will defend that our father slew never Foulques of
morillon by treason. Children said the king Charlemaine ye speak well, but I
must have surety of you as I have of the other party, if I will do reason, than
lept forth Rowland Olyuer, the duke Naimes of bauyre, Ogier of denmark,
Richard of Normandy, and Escoufe the son of Oedon, which said to the king.
Sir we been sureties for the sons of Reinawd, and we shall present them to
you at the day of bataill. Sirs said the king Charlemayne it pleases me well,
but the children of Reynawde been not yet knights as ye know, but by the
faith that I owe to god they shall be to morrow, and than we shall send our
letters to Reynawde that he come to see the battayl of his children, for this
day forty days I deuyse it. When the even came: the king Charlemain made be
called his stuarde and said to him. Go and bring me to morrow the sons of
Reynawde, for I will that they ben to morrow named knights, and see that they
been well honored, for I will do this for the love of their father, and
puruey so that they have each of them a good courser and good harnays mete for
their bodies. When the stuarde heard the commandment of the king
Charlemayne: he did well the tenor thereof. And when the morning came: the
stuarde brought Aimonet, and yonnet, well appointed, and in their company all
such other as the king for their love would make knights that day. And when
that they were before the king: Aymonet and Yonnet required the order of
knyghthode, to whom the king gave it with good heart, and in like wise the
other for love of them, and than was a great feast made that day. And when
the feast was finished: Charlemain took a messager, which he sent unto
Reinawd of Mountawban, and sent him word that he should come to the court with
good company, for his chylderne were called of treason, by the sons of
Foulques of Morillon saying that he had slain their father by treason, and
how his children had cast their gages, saying that they had lied falsely.

THan when the duke Reinawde heard these tidings that Charlemayne sent him:
he meruayled of it sore. Than sent he for all his brethren by his letters yt
he should com to him in arms, for it was need. And when the brethren of
Reynawde understood these tidings: without any taryinge they came to the
brother at Mountawban. And when Reinawde saw them: he was glad and kyssed them
the one after the other, and after he told them all that the king Charlemayne had
give him to know, and when the brethern of Reynawde understood it: they
meruaylled of it, brother said Richard doubt not, for the matter shall come
better than ye ween of, by the grace of god. I counseyll that we go to the
court of the king Charlemayne. For when we shall be there we shall soon
understand the kings mind, and what his will is toward you, and I promise
you, if he has done any wrong to our neuewes your children god never have
mercy on my soul, but I shall slay him, what hap thereof Brother said Reinawde
I will well that we go to Paris, and when we shall be there, we shall well
understand how the king Charlemaine bears himself toward my children.
Brother said Alard, ye speak well and wiselye, and me seems after mine advise
that we ought to go thither without any long taryinge. And when they were
there to accorded: they departed fro Mou^tawban with a right noble company, and
so much they rode by their Iourneys that they came to the city of paris. And
when they were come there: all the.xii. peers knew anon of their coming, and
went against them, and brought with them Aymonet and yonnet, and received
Reinawd and his brethren with great joy and honor. And when Reynawd saw his
two fair sons: he said to them in this wise. My children now shall it be seen
if ye be my sons or no. For and ye be my chylderne, ye shall avenge me of
that great shame that these traitoures put upon me without a cause. Father said
the children: doubt not thereof, for and they were.x. against us, yet shall we
overcome them by the grace of god. For every man knows well that ye be as
true a knight as any is in the world. And when the king Charlemaine knew
the coming of Reinawd that was come so well accompanied: he was glad of it,
and sent word to Reynawde that he should come to him, the which thing
Reynawde did, and when the king saw him he made him good chere and with good
heart, and also to his brethern. And when Reinawde had be with the king a
long while: he took leave of him and went to his lodges again, and wha^ he was
there he callede his brethren and his children and said to them. My sons
come hither, tell me how the king Charmayn bears himself toward you, and
what he says of this quarrel that ye have undertake. I must know the troth
of it. Father said the children, wit it that the king Charlemayne loves us
much, and he entreteyneth us above all other honorably, for the love of you
that he loves right much, as he says. And than they told him how he had
made them knights, and how he sustained their quarrel against the traytoures,
and all other.

When Reinawde and his brethern heard the children speak thus: they were glad
of it, for they doubted lest Charlemaine would have faten evil with them. And
when Reynawd of mou^tawban wist that the king had borne himself so well toward
his sons: he said that he should serve him evermore as his sovereign lord.
And on the morrow Reinawde went for to see the king at his risyng from his bed
and thanked him much of the great worship that he had done to his children.
Than said Charlemaine to him. Reinawde ever sith that I saw that ye did my
commandment with good will, and that ye were obeynge to me: I did cast all
mine anger from me, and all the evil will that I had against you, and I will
that ye wit that I am well yours, and shall be as long as I live in this world,
for I take you for one of my best friends. And when Reinawd heard ye
debonairtie and the kind words of the king: he cast himself to the feet of
him, and in likewise did all his brethren, and thanked him much, and wit that
Reinawd and his brethren abode in paris with great Joy and pleasure unto the
day of the battle that should be of his childerne. And this hangyng:
Reynawde had done make good harnays for his children and had pourueyed two good
horses for them.

THan when the day of the battle was come: the children of Foulques of
Moryllon came and presented them before the king ready for to fight. And when
the king saw them: he said to them. Childrene ye have had evil counseyll to
challenge the sons of Reynawde of Mountawb^n, as ye have done. For I am sure,
it shall repent you, but this is not the first faut that your lygnage has
done, nor it shall not be the last. I fear me of it. And when the earl
Guanellon and al they of ye lygnage of Foulques of morillon heard the king
speak so: they were so greatly abashed, yt they wist not what they should
do, but kept al their peace, and aswered no word. And than said Consta^s to
the king. Sir we pray you for god that ye will tell to us the place where we
shall fight against our enemies. Than stood up the duke Naymes of bauyere, and
said, sir Constans speaks well, ye must devise the place, and where they
shall fight two against.ii. or one against a another alone. Naymes said the king,
I will that ye Judge this matter, sir since that it please you so: I shall
bespeake it with a good will. Sir said the duke Naymes, me seems, because that
Constans has called the sons of Reynawd to batayl both for one matter: that
they ought to fight two against nawde to battayl both for one matter that they
ought to fight two against two, and al four together. Sir said Reynawde, the
duke Naymes says right well. By my faith Reinawde said the king Charlemayne,
and I grant it so, but I will that the bataylle be made in the ysle of our
lady within sauoine to morrow in the morning. And when the king Charlemayne
had said thus: the barons took leave of him, and each of the^ went to their
lodges, and Reinawde also the which took his two sons with him, and the two
sons of Foulques of Moryllon went also with their friends. When Reinawde and
his brethren had souped, and had made good there: he made bring harneis
enough, and made Alarde and Richard, and his two children aymonet, and
yonnet, to be armed. And tha^ he made to be showed to Aymonet and to yonnet
how they should defend themself of their enemies, and in what manner they
should assaylle them. And wha^ that this was done: Reynawde did send his
children to saint Vyctoure and the traytoures went to saint Germayne for to
watch that night. And when the day came: a bishop that was of the lygnage of
Constans and of rohars sange mass before his cosins, and the bishop Turpyn
said mass affore the sons of Reinawd, which was with them at saint Victoure,
and also the tuelue peers of France. And when the young knights had heard
the mass: they came al in their harnays to the palace before the king
Charlemayne. And when the king saw them: he called his neuew Rowland and
Olyuer, the duke Naimes of bauyete, and Richard of Normandye, and said to
them. Lords ye ben all my men. I command you upon the truth that ye owe
to me, that ye go keep the feeld by such manner that my honor be saved by it,
and that ye keep to every man his right. For by the faith that I owe to god,
if there be any man so hardy that will do any outrage: I shall anger him right
sore. Wherefore I will that ye pass the water of Said, in to the ylle with the
fyghters and that ye bear with you the halowes, for to make them sweet there
upon, a fore they shall enter in to the feelde, that they go to it all in good
quarrel truly. Sir said the barons, we shall do your commandment, and
also we shall keep therein well your honor, for we ben bound thereto. Lords
said the king Charlemayne, ye speak well, but ye must take good heed well to
all. For there shall be great folk gathered of the one part, and of the
other, wherefore I fear me that some medlynge shall hap among them. For
Rohars is full of great treason, and all his friends I know it well. And of
the other part. Reynawde and his brethren are right puyssaunte and wise, and
they have great power with them, and they will not see themself wronged, and
namely Richard the brother of Reinawd, for and if he be ons angrye: he spares
another king nor earl. And therefore I fear him most of all the other, for he
would once have slain me, I am yet remembered thereof. Of Reynawde I doubt not
for he is in every thing reasonable. Sir said the duke Naymes be not dysmayed
of nothing, for we shall keep well your right and your honor without to do
any wrong to any body. This hanging: the children of Foulques of Moryllon went
to the said ysle, where as the king Charlemain had told them that they should
fight. And when they were passed over the river in to the ysle with their
horses: they bound them and than they set them self down upon the fair
grass, waytinge after their adverse party. Now hear what the traitoures had
ordained, ye ought to wit that while the king Charlemaine had spoken with his
Barons as ye have heard: Berenger, Ardock and Griffon of haute branch did put
themself in a bushe, nygh by the said ysle of our lady, and purposed that if
the sons of Reynawde had the better of the feelde against the two other sons
of Morillon: that than they should issue out upon them, with a right great
number of folk, for to slay them shamefully.

When that Reinawd saw that it was time that his sons should go to the ysle
for to accomplysh their battaille: he called Aymonet, and said to him, com
hither fair son ye be the eldest, and therefore ye ought to be honored before
the younger brother, hold I give you flamberge my good sword, by the which ye
shall take vengeance of these traitors. For ye been in the right, and they
in the wrong, father said Aymonet, ye may be in a surety that ye shall see this
day such a thing that shall be to your hertes joy, for we shall bring the
traitors to their shameful death, and it please god. And when Reinawd heard
his son so valiauntly speak: he was glad, and kissed him. And than he gave
him his benediccion, and in likewise to yonnet. And when he had done this: he
brought his brethren and his children to the ysle of our lady. And wha^ they
were over: he and his brethren came again toward the king. But as they would
have gone: there came a messengat that ascried to Reinawde as loud as he
might. Reynawde have mercy on thy children. For if thou see not well to them:
they be lost. wit that Griffon of haute branch is embusshed with a great
number of folk by the ille for to slay thy children. And when Reynawde
understood these words: he blustred red in his face all for anger, and said.
Ha sweet france, that it is great damage that ye may never be without
traytoures. And when he said this: he called his brother Richard, and said to
him. Fair brother go without tarying, and arm your self, and do arm al
our folk, and than bring them to the ysle and if the false traitoure Griffon
of hautbraunche come for to grieve my childerne: slay him incontinence. And when
ye be there: do that ye may be seen of both parties. And for God keep well
if the sons of Foulques of morillon have the better: that ye help not in no
wise my childerne, but let them dye if it come so. For it were great
dyshonoure for us: if ye did otherwise, Brother said Richard, let me alone
thereof, our worship shall be saved by the grace of god. For I would not help if
it came so for all the good of the world. For all our life days we should be
rebuked of it, and all our lygnage also. And when Richard had said so: he
departed fro his brethern, and went and armed him and all his folk, and then
they lyghted on horseback, and went anon there as Reynawd had said. This
hanging: went Reynawde to the king in his palace, and when the king saw him,
he said to him Reynawd ye be right welcome. Sir said Reinawde, god increase
your honor, and when Charlemayne saw not Richard with his brethren: he
took some susspecion of him and said to Reynawde. Where is your brother
Richard that he is not here with the other. Sir said Reinawde he is gone there
as I have sent him but take no susspeccion at al for him: no more I do said
Charlemayn as long as ye be a live, but we must go upon the tower of saine
for to see the bataille of your children, let us go there, sir said reinawd
when it please you, than went they upon the toure, and with them the bishop
Turpyn salamon of breten, Ogier the dane, Guidellon of bauyere and many other
barons.

THus as the king Charlemayne was gone upon ye toure for to see the battayll:
he looked and saw come the brother of reynawd, and a great company of men
armed. And when Charlemayn saw him: he knew him well, for he bare his own
cote of arms, and Richard had done so for because he should be known. And
when Charlemayne saw this: he was all abashed of it, and then he called
Reynawde and said to him. What will ye do Reynawde, will ye dishonor me? have
ye forgoten all ready your truth? Sir said Reynawd nay, save your reverence,
but I will serve you and worship you as my souerayn lord. why said the king
Charlemayne, is Richard gone in to the ysle of our lady with so great felawship
for to break the feelde of the which thing. I shall be dishonored? Sir said
reynawde have no doubt thereof, for I take god to suretye and waraunte that
knows all things that richard shall do nothing that shall turn to your
dishonor ne to no damage to you, and I shall tell you why my brother richard
has put himself in arms, ye must wit that the traytoure Gryffon of
hautbraunche is enb^shed under Saint Marcell in a gardyn with a great number
of folk armed, that will break your feelde for to slay my chylderne. And
therefore has my brother armed him for to succoure them if need be, and if ye
see that rychard do any thing against your will and commandment: here I
am, that upon me take the vengeance. is It truth said Charlemayne, that
Gryffon has done so as ye say? yea said reynawd verily, for I would not tell
you none otherwise. Right angry was Charlemayne when he heard that Reinawde
had told him. Than he swear god and all his saints, that if he might take
Griffon of hautbraunch: that he should make him be hanged, and all his folk
with him. He called than Salamon, and the earl of poiters and Guidellon of
bauiere, and faid to them. Lords make me anon a thousand knights to be
armed. For I will go in to ye ysle for to see the pride of these traitors. And
I swear you by saint James, if I may they shall do me no more dishonor and if
I cane find them: they shall aby it full dearly. Sir said Reynawde ye speak
like a king. The barons than did that Charlemayne had sent in to the ysle saw
richard with his folk in arms. And when rowland saw that they wear arms:
he was not well content with it, and said to the other Barons that were come
with him for to keep the feelde. what will Rychard do? blame have the king
Charlemayne if he take not vengeance upon Reynawde of that they have done
against his commandment, by my faith said Oliver and the duke Naymes ye say
well. Than said Ogyer, lords I promise you that Reynawde knows nothing of
that, that richard does. Thus as the peers of france were speaking of that:
rychard was come in to the feelde in armed Gryffon issued out of his bushement
with his folk, because he was aferde that richard would grieve the children of
Foulques of Moryllon. And when rowlande saw him: he cried to him with a hie
voice. By god traytoure this shall naught auayl you for before that any stroke
be given of them: they shall make their oath, and ye shall abye it full
derelye that ye have done. Right sorye was Rowlande when he saw the foul
treason that Griffon would have brought about. This hanging: came there
Charlemayne with a great company of folk well armed. And when he saw Rowland:
he said to him. Neuewe why do ye suffer the outerage that the sons of
Foulques of Morillon would do to the children of Reinawde, of mountawban. I
blamed Reynawd, because his brother had armed him: but I know now well that they
had reason, sir said Rowlande none ca^ beware of traitors. Neuew said
Charlemane ye say truth: but by the faith that I owe to god. I shall make
them all to be hanged in dyspyte of all their lygnage only for ye treason
that they have done this day. By god sir said Rowland ye shall do well. And
than came there Reynawd upon a palfrai without swerd And when Rowlande saw
him: he said unto him. Sir Reinawde is it youte will that Richard your
brother is com hither in arms? sir rowlande said Reynawd, yea verily, for
nothing that I have done shall not be hid from you, ye have now seen ye
treason that the traitors would have wrought against my children, and therefore
when I knew their falshode: I commanded my brother Richard yt he should put
himself shortly in arms with my men for to succor them yt the traytoures came
them upon, and if ye think yt richard or I have done amys in any thing: so
let the king make Justice of it. By my soul said Rowlande, another you another
your brother be not to be blamed, but ye have done as good knights should
do. And I promise you that your enemies shall be this day brought to shame and
confusion.

ANd when Richard of mou^tawban saw Charlemayn: he knew well that he was come
for to keep the feeld, and that the traitors should not con do any thing to
his neuews. So said he to his folk let us take of our harneys. For sith that
the king is here himself: we need not to wait here no more. Than went
Richard and his folk and dysarmed them. And when Richard had done so: he
light again upon his horse, and came again over the river of Saint swyminge
unto the foresaid ysle. And when he was on land: he spurred his horse, and
made him to lepe three or four lepes before the company. And than he came
straight before the king, and made to him reuerens honorably. when the king
saw Richard: he said to him, and ye Richard will ye dishonor me, that are
come in arm for to break my feeld? Sir said Richard save your grace, for I
never thought it, but wit it well for certain, that if Gryffron of
hautbrau^che had come for to grieve mine neues: I would have made his forhead
for to sweet. Sir ye be our sovereign lord, so ought ye to maynten and keep
us, and so shall I tell you a thing before al your barons, yt if ye believe the
traitors of Mau^t: ye shall ones repent it. I am well a paid that ye and
your.xii. peers have seen the treason of Griffon of haut-braunche, how he would
have slain mine neuews. Ha by god said charlemayne, ye say troth, he is well
worthy to be blamed, and I tell you they that shall be over come shall be hanged,
nor shall not be saved for none of their lynage. Sir said Richard it pleases
me well, but I tell you yt if I should dye: I should never suffer my neuews to
be wronged. By my head said the king, ye shall see that I shall do reason unto
every party. For I shall bring them together, let god help the right. Than
when Charlemayne had said so: he went to the two children of Foulques of
Moryllon, and said to them now lords hye you of that ye have to do, go and
swear upon the halowes yt justly ye enter in this quarrel. Sir said they we
shall do it with right good will, for the children of Reynawde ben dead, but if
that they confess, that their father slew our father by treason. Then spoke ye
bishop Turpin, and said, Lords come hither, and swear upon the halowes, and
see to that ye forswere not yourself, for he that forswereth him self shall be
over thrown, no doubt thereof, when the bishop Turpin had said this: the two
sons of foulques of moryllon kneeled down before the halowes, and swear that
reinawde of Mountawban had slain their father by treason, and after they had
made their oath: they kyssed the Halowes, and offered two besans of gold. And
than went and lyghted upon their horses. And thus as they lyghted: they were to
nigh each other so that the one hurted the other so hard: that they fell down
almost both to the earth. And when Reynawde saw this: he said to ye other
barons here is an evil token. I believe that they ben forsworn. This hanging:
came the children of Reinawde, that kneeled before the halowes and swore yt the
two sons of Foulques of Moryllon had lied falsely all that they had said. And
then they put their hands upon the halowes, and offered a rich gift, and ye
Bishop Turpyn gave them the benediction, and in likewise the king
Charlemayne, and all the other barons, and than of Reynawde, and of his
brethern and after they went and mounted upon their horses lightly.

When the four Champions were upon their horses: they made none other
taryenge: but gave the spurs to their horses, and ran one against an other
and smote each other in their sheeldes so sore: yt the speres flew in pieces
without yt any of them fell on the ground. And wha^ they had broken their
speres: they set hand unto their swerdes. Than Aymonet that held Flamberge in
his hand said unto Yonnet his brother. I pray you brother think to do well.
For if ye help me, they shall be utterly shamed and discomfited as traitors as
they ben. Brother said Yonnet doubt not, for I shall never fail you to the
death, and also we ought to recomfort us. For we ben in the right, and they be
in ye wrong. When the two brethern had spoke enough: they went both at ones
upon their enemies, with their swerdes in their hands. And than Aymonet
ouertooke Constans with flamberge his swerd, and gave him such a stroke that
the sword slyded upon the viser, and kut it and his nose a sunder. And when
Aymonet saw that the nose of his enemy fall to the earth: he mocked him and
said to him. By god Constans it is worse with you than it was before, for ye
shall never ben without a mock, for that, that this stroke has done unto
you, for Flamberge slew your father, and so shall it do you and it please god.
And when Rohars saw that his brother was so sore wounded: he ran upon Yonnet
and gave him so mighty a stroke upon his helm: so that if it had not ben of
good fine steel: he had slain hi^ without fail. This hangyng: Aymonet ran
again upon Constans and gave hi^ such a stroke upon his helm, that he made
him for to bow his back upon the sadle, and for the great might of the
stroke: the horse must for very need fall down upon his knees, and smote his
mussell into the earth. And when that the horse felt that stroke: he rose
lightly up again all afraid, and began for to run thoroghe ye meadows
maugre of his master as mad, nor Constans had not the might for to rule him:
because he was a mased and a stonied of that stroke, that he had received. And
than Aymonet and Yonnet went both upon Rohars, and began to fare foul with
him, and when Rohars saw himself so sharpelye handled: he began to cry with a
hie voice. Brother where be you, shall ye ler me thus to be slain falsely?
Co^stans that ran through the meadow was comen again to himself and apeased
his horse a little heard his brother cry. So came he again to him: and smote
Aymonet upon his helm a great stroke, but the helm was good, and dommaged him
not. And when that Constans saw that he had not slain Aymonet with his stroke:
he wend to have gone out of his wit, and of ye other part: he saw the place
that was al covered with ye blood of his brother, so wist not co^stans what to
do. For Aymonet gave him so much to do.

This hanging: Yonnet took Rohars by the helm, and would have stra^gled him
by fine force. But when Constans saw that: he spurred his horse with the
spurs, and shoued him between Rohars and Yonnet, so that it was force to
yonnet to let go his prise would he or no. And when Aymonet saw that Consta^s
had delivered Rohars from the hands of yonnet: he went and ra^ne upon Constans
and smote him with flamberge upon the sheelde so hard that he made of it two
pieces. Shortly to speak: the children of Reynawde hasted so much the two
sons of Foulques that they began to lose place, and were so werye, that they
asked none other thing: but for to rest themself. But Aymonet and yonnet had
none other will: but for to fight still, and I tell you for certain yt they
were all four sore wounded yt they lost much blood for they had fought long.
And when Constans had soiourned a little: he came upon Aymonet and gave him
such a stroke: so that he made him a great wound, but no dead wound. And
wha^ Aymonet saw him so wounded: he gave Constans so great a stroke upon ye
ear: that he bare it away withal the iawe bone, when charlemayne saw that
great stroke: he might not forbear, but he said. By god now is he worse arrayed
tha^ he was before, for the two sons of Foulques of morillon be^ shamed and
confused. Sir said Reynawde they have well deserved it, for they have forsworn
the^ self falsely. This hanging: Yonnet went upon Rohars, and gave him so great
a stroke upon his helm: yt he brake it, and made his sword to enter in his
head a finger deep. Wit it that the battle lasted long the one against the
other, and it happed yt by force of fighting, ye one against the other: they
were fyghtyng two and two together, well a bow shot from each other, and so
made they two batayles, for aymonet fought against Constans, and yonnet faught
against Rohars, which was fore grieved, for Yonnet had brought him to the earth
And when yonnet saw that he had brought down rohars: he said that it were
shame to fight with him on horsbacke against him on foot, so lighted he down
for to fight with Rohars. But wha^ he had haba^donned his horse: In contynent
the said horse ran to ye horse of Rohars and would have stra^gled him. And wha^
Charlemayne saw that: he began to laughe with it and said, by my faith we have
three batayles. But I se well that Yonnet has brought Rohars so low that he
may no more. when Rohars saw that he might no more endure the great strokes of
Yonnet: he began to cry and said Ha fair brother Constans, where are ye yt
ye come not and help me yt are so good a knight, and that took first the
quarrel in hand, whereof it goes full evil with us. For if ye succor me not
now: I shall dye incontinent And when Constans heard his brother cry thus: he
left Aymonet, and went toward Yonnet, for to help his brother, but wit it
well that he went not very sound from Aymonet, for he had made him more than
xx. wounds. And when Constans was come to his brother: Incontinent he ran
upon Yonnet with his horse. And when Aymonet saw that: he began to cry after
Consta^s and said. By my soul he baptized you full ill ye named you Constans.
For I saw never more toward tha^ ye be that so renneth away for fear of me,
and when he had said so: he ran after for to succor his brother yonnet. And
when he was come there: he went a fresshe upon Constans, and Constans upon him,
ye which gave him a great stroke upon his helm but the stroke slyded upon the
horse and slew him withal. And when Aymonet haw him a ground: he righted him
quickly and smote Constans upon his helm and it was so hard that flamberge
could not enter in it and the stroke slyded upon the vyser and brast it, and a
great part of his visage, so that the teeth were seen plainly, and with yt fell
ye stroke upon ye horse neck, so that he kit it in two pieces, and so fell the
horse dead to the earth.

SOre abashed was Constans when he saw his horse slain, and than Aymonet said
to him. By god false traitor now shall thou dye, ye did ill when ye called
ever my father of treason, which is as true a knight as is any in all the
world, but now is the day come yt ye shall abye it full dear. And when
Reynawde heard his son speak thus: he was right glad of it, and thanked God
thereof hertlye, and when Aymonet saw Constans upon his feet again: he went him
upon, and hasted him right sore with strokes so yt Constans had no power to
strike one stroke more, but he went abacke here and there for to eschew ye
strokes of Aymonet. And when Constance saw yt he wist no more what to do: he
cast his sheelde to the earth, and took Aimonet by the waste for to wrestle
with him. And when aymonet saw this he was not afearie of it, for he was
strong and light so took he Constans by the helm, and drew it toward him with
such might that he pulled it from the head of him. And when Consta^s saw him so
sore handled: he cried upon his brother Rohars and said. Ha brother succor me,
for I have no power for to defend my self. When Rohars heard his brother call
thus: he was full sorry yt he might not help him for he had lost so much blood yt
he might not well stand upon his feet but always he forced himself so much
that he came unto his brother Constans, and wend to have smitte^ Aymonet from
behind, but he did not because Aymonet saw him come, and went and smote him
such a stroke that he felled him to the earth. And than went again upon
Constans, and gave him such a stroke that he smote almost his left arm of.

Than began Constans to cry and said. Ha fair brother succor me: or else I am
dead. Brother said Rohars I can give you another succoures nor help, for I am
my self nere gone, and when Charlemayn saw this: he said, by god now are dead
ye sons of Foulques or morillon by their false wit. Sir said Ogier ye ought
not to recke, for they maynteyned a false quarrel, ye say troth said
Charlemayn. Now their falshoode apereth well. When Reynawde saw rhat his
children were to their above: he was right glad of it. but so was not
Guanellon, for he was so angry for it: that he became as black as a moore.
Then called the said Guanellon Berenger, Hardock, Henry of Lion and Pignabell
of Moryllon and said to them. Lords now be we all dishonored, for ye sons
of Foulques of Morillon are discomfited, I would feign succor them if I durst
but I fear to sore ye king that is there with great puyssau^ce. Sir said
Hardres or Hardocke, woe is me for it, but we can not do none other thing as
for this time, therefore we must refrain our wrath, and show a good face, to
ye end that no medlyng fall not upon us, and let us abide till time come, y^
we may avenge us thereof.

THis hanging: Aimonet saw that he had smiten Consta^s a dead wound: so was he
right glad of it, by god brother ye have done ill yt ye have slain this false
traitor, for I would have slain him with mine own hands, but sith ye have
brought it so far: make an end of him at ones and I shall go slay Rohars.
Brother said Aymonet ye speak well, now go slay the one and I the other, for
thus ought men to do with traitors. Tha^ ran the two brethern upon their
enemies that lay on the ground, that is to wit upon Constans to whom he said
al on hye, because all they yt looked upon should hear it. Tell me Constans
false traytoure, why did ye call my father of treason? Withstanding that men
know well that he is one of the truest knights of ye world. And that he slew
your father in his body defending. Where as your father had purchased for to
have slain him by treason. Now tell me your falshode and confess your treason
before the king, or else I shall now cut your throat. Aymonet said Constans, for
god have merci on me For I yield me to you, and than he took him his sword.
And wha^ Aymonet had the sword of the said consta^s: he took him up and
brought him before the king Charlemayne, to whom he said, Sir hold this
traitor and do with him as reason requires, and when Charlemayne saw this:
he was glad of it and said to Aymonet, freende ye have done well your deuoyr.
I can no more ask of you. And wit it that when the other is vaynquisshed: I
shall make them both to be hanged,

Sir said Aymonet, do your will with them. And when he had said so: he went
again to his brother Yo^net for to help him holding his swearde in his hand
all bloody with the blood of Constans and said to Rohars, by God false traitor
ye shall dye here anon, and would have smyten him but Yonnet that saw that:
said to his brother. Fair brother slay him not, nor touch hi^, but go your
way and test your self, for I will conquer him by my self as ye have done
yours, brother said Aymonet ye say ill, for it was ordained that we should
each help other, and when Yonnet saw that his brother would needs help
against his will: he said to him. Fair brother I make mine avowe to god, if
ye touch Rohars: I shall never love you, brother said Aymonet, ye say not
well, but I shall forbere me since it please you so, but I promise you if I see
you in danger: I shall help you if ye should slay me, brother said yonnet I
will well, and than Aymonet wtdrew him a little abacke, and than ran yonnet upon
Rohars, yt rose up again for to defend himself, than gave yonnet to him so
great a stroke upon ye shoulder: that ye arm with ye shoulder bone fell clean
of to the ground and his sword withal. when yonnet had given yt stroke: he
put his sword again into ye sheeth and said to Rohars, ye false traitor yt
must now confess with thine own mouth that Reynawde my father is no traitor,
but he is one of ye truest knights of the world, and if thou wylt not do so:
thou shall die incontinent. And when he had said so: he took Rohars by the
helm and pulled him to him ward so hard yt he drew it fro his head, and
began for to smite him with the pomell of his sword upon ye bare head. And
wha^ Rohars saw yt he was so shrewdlye handled: he began for to cry and said
good lord have mercy upon mi soul for I know well yt it is done with my
body. And wha^ Constans heard his brother say so: he began to weep for he
could none other do. And wha^ yonnet saw yt Rohars would not forsake yt he
had said, nor would not cry him mercy: he smote him with his own sword so hard
yt he took away the one leg from the body of him. And than he put his foot
upon him and said. Now anon false traitor confess your falshode, or else ye
ben now dead, to the which thing Rohars answered not. And when yonnet saw yt:
he smote him the head of. When Aymonet saw yt his brother yonnet had slain
Rohars: he was right glad of it, and went to him and said. Brother ye have
done valiau^tly, lord gramercy that ye have slain so this traitor, the two
brethern took each other by the hand and went to charlemayne, to whom
Aymonet said in this wise. Sir like it you yt we have done, for we be redi
for to do much more for you, if ye command us. Fair sons said Charlemayn
ye need not for to do more. For ye have done enough, for Constans is
ouercomen, and Rohars dead. Now go rest your self, and see that ye have good
leches for your wounds. And I promise you that I shall do with the traitors
as it aperteineth, and than Charlemayne commanded yt Constans should be
hanged, and the body of his brother by him, and when the king had given this
commandment: Constans was anon taken and the body of his brother, and were
drawn at horses tails before all their lygnage, and than were hanged as they
had well deserved, wha^ they were hanged: Charlemayne said Lords wit that I
would not for a great thing that it went otherwise. wit it that when Guanellon
saw hang the sons of Foulques that were his neuewes: he was sore an angered
for it that he almost had lost his wit. Than called he Hardres Berenger and
Malger that will more falshode than Lucifer, Henry of Lion, Pygnabell and
Geffray, men that never did good and said to them. Lords ye see how
Charlemayne has done to us great dishonor, for he has done hang our
kinsme^ shamefully, but we shall see yet the day that this shame shall be avenged
he said troth ye traitor. For he be trayed afterward the.xii. Peers of
France, and made them all die at the battle of Rounceuales.

AFter these things above said Reinawde of Mountawba^ saw that his children
had vainequisshed ye children of Foulques: he was right glad of it and thanked
much our lord god thereof, than he and his brethern went to them and asked how
they did? father said the children we do right well lord gramercy. Than
Alarde and Guicharde beheld their wounds whereof they were glad. This ha^ging:
came there charlemayne and the children came him against and kneeled before hi^,
tha^ charmayne asked them, children how is it with you be ye sore wounded? Sir
said the children it is well with us thanked be our lord and you: we shall
soon be whole. Than the king sent for all the leches and said to them that they
should look the wounds of Aymonet and of Yonnet, the which thing they did
without any taryeng, and after they said to the king that they made no doubt of
them and that they should be soon whole. And after yt the Justice was done of
the sons of Foulques of Morillo^: Reynawde abode in Paris til his children
were whole, and when they were whole: they went to the Palace to see the king
Charlemayne, the which made the^ good cheer and gave the^ many fair gifts
as ben castles and fortresses of great name, tha^ Reynawde and his brethern
asked leave of the king, and he gave it the^ against his will, and prayed them
that they would come see him again, sir said Reynawde, we shall do gladly your
commandment. Wha^ Reynawde had taken leave of ye king and also his brethern
and children: they took on their way toward mou^tawban, and they did so much
by their Iourneys yt they came to bourdews And wha^ Reynawde had rest him a
little: he called his chrildren before his brethern and said to them, my
children, hear what I will say to you. I ordeyne at this time that yonnet shall
have ardeyne for his part and Aymonet Mountawban, for it is not long a go
sith I heard say yt god said, that the tree yt bears fruit: shall never dye,
wit it that I have offended god greatli, and me seems that ye time is now come
yt I should amend my self. for I fear sore my poor soul, wherefore I shall
do my devour for to yield it again to ye blessed lord yt made it after his
Image, and when his brethern heard speak this: they know well what he would
do, and therefore they began to make great sorrow. And when reinawde saw that he
said to them, forsothe syrs ye are not wise to make such sorrow, for ye know
not yet, what I will do, see ye not that I am yet with you? Whereof are ye
abashed? be not ye rich enough? there is another of you but may keep a
thousand horses in his stable. Of the other part, though I am now whole of my
body thanked be our lord, yet will I give in my life to my children their
part, to the end yt they fall not in dyscorde after my death, and therefore I
will that each of you know from hens forthon what he shall have. And when
Reynawde had thus ordained for his children: yonnet departed from his father
with his blessing, and went to Ardeyne, where they of the land received him to
be their lord and made to him fewte and homage. And after yt Yonnet was gone:
Reynawde and his brethern with Aymonet went to Mountawban, and when they of
Mountawban saw their lord: they were glad and received him honorably. And
when the feast was passed: Reinawde commanded al his subjects that they
should make their homage unto his son Aymonet, and when all this was done,
and that night was come: every man went to bed, and than Reynawde entered his
chamber and walked in it til it was midnyght passed, than Reynawde uncle theo
himself al naked, and took a cote of sorry russet upon his flesh without any
shert, and thereupon a great mantel of the same. And thus arrayed barefoote and
without any wepyn (but only a staff in his hand to defend him from the dogs)
issued out of his chamber, and went out of the palace and came to the gate of
the town, and made it to be opened, and wha^ ye porter saw his lord so ill
and in so poorly array and barefoote: he said to him. Sir alas whether go ye
thus without felawship, and so ill appointed? I will go awake your brethern and
my lord your son, for ye be in great danger of thieves because ye have
another armor nor wepyn for to defend your self, freende said Reynawde let
alone, go not there. For my trust is in god that he shall keep me from all
danger. But thou shall tell my brethren when thou see them to morrow that
I greet them well, and to my son also, and that they think always to do
well, and yt they love each other as they ought for to do, and so tell them that
they shall never see me more as I well trow. For I go to save my soul if God
give me the grace to do so, and so shall I dye when it please god, for
thorough mi cause are dead many a man, whereof I feel my poor soul grieved
sore, and therefore will I bear pain on my body for it, doing penance all
the remenau^t of my life, and if I may save my soul: I ask none other thing.
And wha^ Reynawde had said this: he looked on his finger and took a ringe with a
precious stone, which was well worth.v. mark and gave it to the porter and said
to him, my freende ye be well rewarded of your service yt ye have done to me.
Sir said ye porter gramercye of this gift, but alas sir ye put now all your
country in great sorrow for your departing, and than he began to weep right
sore.

This hanging: went Reynawde on his way thus arrayed as ye have heard, and as
he went: ye porter looked evermore after him by the light as long as he might
see him, and wha^ he might no more see hi^: he fell down in a swoune to the
earth, and was thus a long while and when he was come again to himself: he
made great moan, and since said. Ha God whether goth now my lord so poorly
arrayed? and after he had made great sorrow a long while: he shet the gate again
and went into his house. And when he was there: he looked upon ye ring that
Reynawde had given him, and knew well that it was a rich gift, whereof he was
glad. We shall leave here to speak a little of the valyau^t Reynawde of
Mountawban, yt goth for to save his soul, and to do penance for his sins
thoroughe the woods lookyng downwarde: and we shall speak of his brethern,
and of his son Aymonet.

How after yt Reynawde was gone from Mountawba^ never to return his brethern
and his son Aymonet made great sorrow, when they knew of it, that he had not
take leave of the^
depiction of a male figure with a pilgrim's hat, staff, and rosary beads
walking away from a castle with a figure in the doorway

NOw shows the hystory that when the morrow came and that Aymonet and his
uncles were up they went to ye church weenyng to have Reynawde there as they
were wont. And when they saw him com not to matyns: they meruayled sore there
was come his chapeleyne for to say matyns there with him, the which when he
found not his master in the church: he was all abashed and spered after him
to his brethern. Sir said Alarde, I ween he be sick for god let us go see how
he does, and than he went to seek him in his chamber, where they found him
not, whereof they wend all to have been desperate. Lords said Alarde now be
we lost, for here ben his gowns his shertes his shone his swearde and all his
armours, now is he gone from us. I see it well in poor arai, god be with him.
And as they were thus making their moan: came in the porter that made great
sorrow for ye love of his master Reynawde. And when he was come in to the
chamber: he began to cry as he had be from himself and said. Fair lords
what shall we do since yt we have lost our lord? For he is gone his ways
wulwarde and barefoote with a sorry staff in his hand, and he sends you
greeti^g by me, and prays you for god that if ever ye loved him: that ye will
worship each other and that every man have his part as he has devised it.
And he does you wit that ye shall never see him, for he is gone to save his
soul, and so has he given me the ringe of his finger, yt ye may see here.

When Alarde, Guicharde and Richard, and Aymonet heard these tidi^ges: they
took so great sorrow at the heart yt they fell down in a swoune to the earth,
and when they were come again to themself: they began to make a right great
sorrow and so meruaylous that he that had seen it: his heart had be full hard,
but he should have wept for pity. Alas said Alarde my fair brother Reynawde,
ye have left us in much great sorrow. Certes it had be much better for us
that ye had slain us all, than for to have left us in this wife. For from
hens forth we be no thing. And when he had said so: he fell again in a
swoune. And when he was come again to himself: he pulled his here is of his
bearde and scratched his visage. Alas my brother said Richard how shall we
now live without you? Alas now have we lost hi^ by whom we have had so great
honor in this world, alas my brother there is not your like under the cope of
heaven that ever bare sword, sheeld or spear, sith yt we have lost you: we
may say farewell the Joy of this world, and when he had said so: his heart
swelled so yt he lost his speech so that he could not speak a good while
after. Of Aymonet and of Guycharde, what shall we say? I promise you none can
tell ne rehearse half of the sorrow that they made, so that it was great pity
to behold. Great sorrow was made of all four for the love of reynawde that
was gone as ye have heard, praying our lord to be with him and for to recomforte
his brethren But presently leueth the historye to speak of Alarde, Guicharde,
Richard and Aymonet that were at Mountawban making their moan and returns to
speak of Reynawde that was gone at his adventure, sekyng his bread for to save
his soul.

How Reynawde went to Coleyn upon the Rine, where he found that men edefied the
church of saint Peter. And there took him a will for to serve there the
masons for ye love of our lord, and did so, but at the last the other
laborers had so great envy because he did better his deuoyre tha^ they and
that he was better loved than they of the masters, for the good service that
he did: that the slew him and put him in a sack and casted him in the water of
ye rine But by the will of god: his body apered above the water making great
miracles, so that he was named a Saint that day that he was buried.
IN this party shows the hystory yt when Reynawde was departed from
mou^tawba^: he took his way through the woods and went a long while that he
eat but Apples and Medlers wild all that day, and when the night was come: he
laid him down under a tree, and as he would sleep: he made the sign of the
cross upon him, and commended to our lord and slept till it was day. And when
the day appeared: Reinawde rose up and went on his ways through the wood, and
went ever more through the trauers of ye wooddes well the space of.viii. days
without any other meat, but wild fruit and so long he went by his iourneis:
that he came out of the woods and incontinent he found a house of religion
where he abode yt night, the monks would have given him meat but he took
nothing but bread and water. And when the day came: he went on his way, and did
so much day by day that he came to Coleyne upon the rine, and when Reynawde
was come to the City: he found the church of saint Peter a making, where
were many masons and mani laborers that served them. And when he saw this: he
went into it, and kneeled before the hie altar and made his prayers by great
devotion And as he was thus kneelynge full busely about his orysons: It came
sodaynlye into his mind that he would abide there and serve the masons for ye
honor of god and of saint Peter. And when he had made his prayer: he rose up
and began to look ye place well and upon the workeme^ that wrought there, and
said to himself that it was better to serve the Masons, than to walk still in
the forest among ye wild beasts. and when reynawde had bethought him well: he
went to the master mason and said to him. Master I am a stranger and have no
gooddes of the world, whereof I may live, if it please you I shall serve the
Masons of such things as them needs for their work as a poor labourer
needs, and when the master mason heard Reynawde speak so: and saw he was a
tall man and well made: he answered to him sweetly in this wise. My freende ye
seem not to be issued of a poor house, for ye are more like a king than a
mason or a labourer.

wherefore I dare not put you in work by no wise. Notwithstanding yt ye be thus
poorly arrayed. Master said Reynawde, care ye not therefore for and it pity
you: I shall serve you truly after my power. My free^d said the master of ye
work, sith it please you to do so: it pleases me right well, but I will not
reteyne you for that prise that I do knaves, for I shall pay you in
conscience, after the work that ye shall do, master said Reynawde I am well
content. Tha^ the master mason said to him, my freende go help these four
that ye see there, that may not bear the stone, for they be but truau^tes,
master laid Reynaw^e, be not angry with the poor folk, for I will go fetch
it to you anon, friend said ye master pain not your self thereto, for it is
not in your puyssau^ce without ye had more help than thylke knaves. For the
stone is of great weight, master let me alone said Reynawde I shall bring it
to you, and when Reynawde had said so: he cast his mantell fro him and came to
the four men that held the stone and said to them Lords and it please you,
go fetch another stone, and I shall bear the same, freende said the four
men ye say well if ye can, and we will let you do with a good will. Than
Reynawde took up ye stone and charged it upon his neck, and bare it upon the
wall where it should be set, and when the other laborers saw that: they were
abashed and meruayled greatly of it, and began to say the one to the other
here is wonder fro whens may this devil become, we shall never win but a
little as long as he is with us here. And when the master masons saw Reynawde
bear so great a stone and so heavy: he was glad of it. And when Reynawde had
brought the stone there as he should be set the master said to him, friend put
not down the stone yet from you. Sir said Reynawd I shall well hold it in my
arms as long as ye will, than the master made the place redi there as ye
stone should be set, and wha^ he was ready: he said to Reynawde, let go the
stone my freende when ye will, and blessed be god and the hour that ever ye
were borne, and when reynawde had set down the stone: the master commanded
him yt he should fet him mortar, with a good will said Reynawde. Than came
Reynawde down and laded of ye mortar more tha^.x. other me^ should have done,
and bare it to ye master mason and said to him. Master care not for nothing
for I shall serve you well of al thing that ye need by the grace of god, and see
that ye work as fast as ye can for I shall bring you more stones and mortar
my self alone than ye shall con occupye; but ye haste you well. And when the
master Mason heard Reynawde speak thus: he was merueyled and said. By my
soul freende if ye do half that ye say: ye shall do enough. Then went
Reynawde again and brought up so many stones that he made with it a great hepe
upon ye walls enough for to occupye at ones all the maso^s that were there,
and than Reynawde said to the^. Fair masters think to work well, for when
these stones ben laid and this mortar occupied I shall bring you more. And
wha^ the masons heard him speak so: they began to say among them that the
church of saint Peter had found a good labourer, and that he ought to be well
rewarded, By my faith master said Reynawde I care not for no money. And when
came at even yt the laborers should leave work and receive their money: the
Master Mason set him down for to pay ye laborers, which took.v. penis a
day. Than the master called Reynawde and said to him, come hither my fair
freende and take here what it plese you, for ye have served better than any of
the other, than put himself forth, and took a penny sore against his will. And
when the master saw that: he said to him, by the bodi of God my fair friend
ye shall have twenty more for else my conscience should be charged with your
labor, and if ye will work: ye shall every day have so much, for there was
never so good a labourer as ye be one, Master said Reynawde if ye will that I
shall work any more: give me but one penny, which shall be for to bye bread for
to sustain with all my body, for this that I do: I do it for the love of God
and for none other. Freende said the Master, I will not trouble you no more,
do as ye will. Than took Reynawde leave of the master Mason and went to the
town for to get himself a lodging and bought a penye worth of bread, and so
had he no more to his supper but bread and a little water.

And when he had eaten: he went and laid him upon a little straw for to take
his rest that night, and wha^ the day was come: Reynawd rose up and went to his
work and found no body there, and than he went to the Church and said his
prayers before an image of our Lady. This hangyng: the Masons came for to go
to their work. And when they were upon the wall: they asked if the strong
man were not com. Master answered Reynawde I am here will ye any thing?
Friend said tha^ the master Mason, bring us stones and mortar. Sir said
Reynawde I shall with a good will and that anon. Than set he stones and mortar
in great plenty, and brought it up unto them. And I promise you that Reynawde
laded more at ones than xv. other did, and thus served Reynawde the masons in
the church of saint Peter at Coleyn many days and every day at even he took
his penny of the master and no more for to by him bread with as ye have heard for
he eat never but bread and drank water. Thus lived Reynawde there a long
while serving there the masons as it is said, for the love of god and of saint
Peter, and did so truly his deuoyr that the other laborers had great envy at
him, for they were all set at naught (for ye love of him) of the maso^s, for
the great service yt he did to them. Sore an angered were the other laborers
when they saw that they were all thus forsaken and all set a side and said to
each other in this wise. By god we be^ diffamed by this great knave that does
so much labor, and therefore we be put a side of the masters, the great
devil brought him well here, for we shall never get nothing as long as he is
here, for he serves all the Masons alone of all that they need for to have
and thus we ben left alone.

Then said one of them, my fellows if ye will believe me: we shall slay him How
say ye that said a another? ye wot well it is impossyble to us to do so, for
he is horrible strong, and if we fet upon him: he shall kill us all. Freende
said he I shall tell you how we shall do so. Se you yonder vawte by the great
house? Yea said the other. Wit it yt the great knave goes and slepeth there
every night when we are gone home. And therefore if ye will believe me: We shall go
this night there where he is a sleep, and we shall take each of us a Pikeaxe, or
else an hamer, and therewith we shall dasshe the brain out of his head, and wha^
we have thus slain him: we shall put him in a great sack and shall cast him
wtin the river, that is there nyghe, and thus shall be no more heard of him. And
when the other laborers heard this traitor speak they accorded all to his
counsel, and they did as they were purposed sooner than they wend they should
have do. For at noone when the Maso^s left work and went to their dinner: the
poor Reynawd went and rested himself under the vawte, where he was wont to
rest himself every night. And when the traitors saw that: they came to him
that first had spoken the treason and took him a great hamer of a mason in his
hand. And when they spyed that Reynawd was fallen a sleep: this traitor with
the hamer went to Reynawde softlye and smote him with the hamer well deep into
the brain. And when Reynawde felt the stroke yt the traitor had given him:
he set his arms in manner of a cross upon his breast and said in this manner. O
good lord Jesus Christ have mercy on my soul, and will pardon them that has
brought me to my death, and when he had said these words: the soul departed
out of the body. And when the traitor had thus slain Reynawde: they put him
in to a great sack that they had ordained therefore, and than they laded the
cart wherein they brought the stones with the body of him, and so carried him
into the river of Ryne, wherein they cast him, and wha^ they had done so: they
laded the carte with stones and brought them to the church work as they were
wont to do, and as they were by the way: they met the master mason, that said
to the^. By my faith galantes I con you now thank for ye mende your self. For
ye have done great diligence sith dinner that ye have laden so many stones, and
that ye ben so far with them to the work ward. Master said the traitors
mock not with us so, but go to your purse and give us some drynkyng money.

SOre meruayled was ye master of that he saw his laborers more dilygent than
they were accustumed. Than the laborers began to say to ye master of the
work by manner of a mock, where is that great lurden that he helps not now I
hold him gone without leave, by cause he might not labor no le^ger, for we
heard say that he should never cease till he had found his wife again. And
when the master mason heard that: he was sorry and said to them again. By my
faith I believe that ye have chased him away, but I promise you if I can wit
that ye have done so: it were better for you that ye were at Iherusale^.
Master said the laborers ye may well say to us what ye will, but we did never
say ought to him that should displease him. And when the noble Reynawde was
thus cast into the river of Ryne by the laborers of the church of saint
Peter: ye must wit that he went not to the botome of the water, but went hard
above the water a long the streme. And at that: our Lord showed for him a
fair miracle. For all the fysshe of the river gathered them about the corpse,
and by the strength of the fisshes it was tarried, and went no ferther with the
streme by the will of our lord. And the great fysshes put theymself under him
and bare him upon the water so that he apered to every man's sight. And there
the fisshes bare him so up unto night. And when the night was come: apered
about the corpse a great quantytie of torches by the virtue of our lord, and
aungelles that song there so melodyously: that they that heard it would never
have gone fro it. And to say troth there was so great light about the corpse
that all they yt saw it wend that all the water of the Ryne had be a fire.
And when the folk of the city saw so great a miracle: they ran all thither
both men and women and children. And also the archebisshop of saint Peter we^
thither with all his college in a fair processyon, syngyng by great devotion,
and tarried upon the Ryne, for they durst not go no ferther, and they saw the
fisshes that bare up the Corpse above the water. And when they that were there
saw that: they were abashed and meruayled greatly what it might be, and began
to say ye one to the other. God what may he be, for whom our lord shows so
fair a miracle? Lords said ye archbysshop. I shall tell you as mine auyse
gives me. Wit it that it is the body of some saint that our Lord will have
worshypped that is come here from some where, which God will not that he be
lost, nor drowned in the water. See ye not how the fisshes hold him above the
water, by the virtue of our lord. Than ye bishop commanded that men should
go see what it was, and anon folk went there with botes, and they found yt it
was the great man that was one of the laborers with the masons in the church
of saint Peter. And wha^ the master of the work saw this: he was greatly
abashed, and went to them that had slain him, and said to them in this manner
of wise. Ye horesons false traitors, ye have slain ye good man, say ye ye
troth, for if ye deny it: I shall prove it upon you. And when ye laborers
heard ye master mason speak thus: they began to cry, and said. By God
master, we have done it without doubt for envy that we had at him. And
therefore let us be drowned, hanged or drawn, or what justice ye will. For we
have well deserved for to be punysshed. And when the archebysshop heard the
traitors speak so: he began for to weep full tenderly, and al his colege
also. And the archebisshop was counseled that he should let go the murderers
at their adventure for to do penance for their sins, the which thing the
archebysshop did with a good will. Than was the body of Reynawde brought to
land, and was put upon a carte for to bear him to the church, where as he was
had worshypfully with fair procession. And when ye corpse was in the church:
the archebysshop made him ready for to sing the mass by great devotion. And
when that ye service was done: the archebysshop would have gone a processyon
with the corpse about the church, and commanded four lords yt were there
that they should bear the corpse. And than the barons would have done his
commandment, but when they came thereto: they could not move the corpse by no
strength that they could put thereto. Sore meruayled were the barons, when they
saw that, and said unto each other. Now may we well know that we be not worthy
for to touch this holy corpse. For we be wicked sinners wherefore let us go for
to shriue us and put our self in good estate. And while that they spoke thus
together: the corpse rose up of him self, and was borne, no man knows how
out of the church into the carte, which anon moved and went his ways
straight out of the city, whereof they were al greatly meruayled, and when the
carte was out of Coleyne: he went a pace all the hye way. And when the people
saw that: they began all to weep because ye corpse would not abide. Than said
the archebysshop unto them. Syrs now may ye well see that this is a holy corpse
by the great miracles that our Lord shows by him now, and all this day before
us all. Wherefore let us go after him for to worship him. For it were not very
well done for to let him go thus alone. My lord said ye people, ye say well,
and than all the clergy and all the common people little and great that might go:
followed ye corpse. And ye ought to wit that in all the city of Coleyn abode
another man nor woman, but went with ye corpse and all the clergy followed after
singyng in great devotion. So much went the carte that he came to a little
town that is called Croyne, and there he abode still. And ye must wit that our
lord did show there many fair miracles for the love of the holy body, for all
sick people of what syckenes it was that came there for to worship the holy
body: Were whole incontinent. This happed of the noble knight Reynawde of
mou^tawban, as ye have heard. And ye ought to wit that the renome of the holy
body was so spread all about, that folk came to Croyne where it abode from
far ways for to seek him, and he made there so fair miracles: that of all
the Realm and of almayne folk drew thither. And so much were worth the
offringes that were done there within a short while: that of a little chapel
there as the body rested, which was of our lady, is now a royal church and
a great. And when the holy body was abyden in this little chapel as it is said,
where god made contynually miracles: the archebysshop of Coleyn and all the
clergi came to the corpse and uncovered his visage that every body should see
him yt came there, if happily ye any man or woman might know him for to have his
name, for none could name him, but the holy corpse. But there came no man that
could know. And when the archebisshop saw yt no body could say what he was: he
was sorry for it, for if he had known his name: he would have put him in a
shrine of gold, because of the great miracles that he made daily, for he made
the defe to hear, ye blind to see, the lame to go and right many that were
dombe he made to speak, and often times apered tapres of wexe brennyng about
the corpse.

NOw shall ye hear how the noble Reynawde was known. Ye ought to wit that
the brethern of Reynawde, that is to wit Alarde, Guicharde and Richard were on
a day upon mountain so sorye that they could hear no tidinges of their
brother Reynawde. Than came a Pylgrime forth by that salued the barons. Pylgrime
said Alarde, fro whe^s come ye? if ye wot any tydinges tell it us I pray you.
Lords said the pilgrim with a good will I shall tell you that I know. Wit it
that I come out of Almaine, from a town that is called Croyne by Coleyne upon
the ryne, where I have seen many great miracles done of god, for the love of a
man that came to the City but late ago, the which was so great that every body
said there that he was a Giaunte. And wit ye that when he came there: yt he
saw men make the church of saint Peter, so did he present there his service
to the master mason, the which retained him gladly. Shortly for to say: this
great man did wonder of bearyng of stones and of mortar. For he bare more at
ones: than.xv. other of the laborers that were there with him, and he was all
day without meat save at even: he took a penny that he gate, for no more he
would have for his labor a day, and therwyth he bought him a penny lose, and
drank none other to it, but water, and tha^ he went to his rest upon a little
straw under a great vaute. And ye must wit, that this great man was well loved
of the masters masons of the said church, which would often have given him
meat and wine, and more money. But he would never take nothing but a penny
only by ye day, for to bye him self a penny lofe as I told you before. He
served so well all the masons there that they were more content of him alone:
then of the other laborers. And when the laborers saw that they were so little
set by for ye love of this great man: they were sore an angered, and took great
envy at him and conspired together for to slay him shamefully.

So did they aspye him where as he slept under the vaute, while that ye master
masons were gone to their dinner: and then one of them came to him with great
hamer in his hand and brayned him, then they put him in a sack and carried him
in a carte to the River of the Ryne, where they cast him. And wit it that wha^
they had done so: our lord showed there a great miracle. For all the fisshes
of the Ryne assembled them about the corpse, and made it abide in one place
above the water. And when that the night was come: aungelles were heard there,
which song melodiously the service of the dead so hye: that all they of the
City might have heard them, and it seemed that al ye water about him had been in
a fire of the great light that was seen there. Than came the archebisshop of
Coleyne with all his colege and made the corpse to be taken and brought in a
Carte to the Church. And when he was there: the Archebysshop song mass, for
this was in the morning, and when that the service was done: the Achebysshop
said to four Lords which were there, that they should take up the corpse for
to have him into his grave with fair prosessyon. But these four barons could
never move hi^ from ye place where as he was. But the corpse incontinent to
every bodies sight, that was there, was brought into the carte again, with the
twynkelyng of an eye, and suddenly the carte departed, and went away alone out
of the town, as good a pace as though ten horses had drawn at it, which was
sore against the will of the people that wept full tenderly, because that it
would not a bide with them. But all they of the City, both little and great
went a processyon after it, unto a little town where the corpse of the great man
abode still which is called Croyne in a little chapel of our lady, where he
does now many a fair miracle, for I ensure you yt all the sick folks yt seek
him there be made whole, and return to their home in good health. And so I have
left there the archebisshop of Coleyne, and all the clergy that has do make
of ye offerynges that been given there unto this holy corpse a fair place and a
roial church, there as the said chapel of our lady was before.

When Alarde, Guicharde and Richard, heard the pilgryme speak so: they began
all three to weep full sore for pity that they had of their brother reynawde,
for well they knew, it was he of whom the Pilgrim spoke of. Alas my brethern
said Richard. Now ben with well destroyed, and undone for ever more. For I know
well that it is out dear brother that we have sought so long. Wit it yt the
three brethern made there so great sorrow, that it cannot be rehearsed. And when
they had made this great sorrow: they took leave of the pilgrim and thanked
him, and went to make them ready, and than took their way toward Croyne, by
Coleyne upon the Ryne. And they did so much by their iourneys: that they came
unto Croyne.

And lyghted before the church they and their folk, where they found so great
flowyng and gatheryng of the people and so great prese of folk: yt with great
pain they might enter within the Church. And when the knights were within:
they went nyghe the holy corpse that was upon a fair bear all uncovered, and
saw so great light about the corpse as there had been an hundred torches Than
went they as nyghe him as they could for to look him in the face and anon
they knew that he was their brother, and with that they looked upon him: they
fell down in a swoune to the earth. And when the archebysshop saw that: he was
sore abashed and said to some of his Colege. Syrs I believe that we shall
soon know that we have desired so long. For I wene that these lords know well
this holy corpse. This hanging: were the three brethern come^ again to
themself, and began to cry and fare as they had been mad, than said Alarde al
weepynge in this manner, Alas what shall we now caytyfes knights do, poor of
honor and of al well, sith that we have lost our brother by whom we were so
sore doubted and dred? Alas dear brother who was so hardy to lay hand on
you? I believe that he knew not your debonayrtie and kindness, for he would not
have slain you so crueltye. And than he turned him toward his two brethern
and said. My fair brethern we ought well to be sorry, sith yt we have lost our
brother Reinawde that was all our hope our trust and comfort. Alas said
Richard, brother Reinawde whi had ye ever that courage for to habandone us as
ye did: seeing that ye loved us so much? Alas ye stale away yourself by night,
for to come among ye hands of the murderers, that have slain you so cruelly.
Alas they wist not ye great damage that is of your death. when the three
brethern had wept enough in great sobbynges and lamentacions, for ye love of
their dear brother Reynawde: they went and kissed the corpse on the mouth, the
one after the other, and with this they fell down again in swoune. And wha^
they were come again to themself: Richard began to cry and say. Alas fair
brethern, now ben we lost for ever. For we shall no more be set by, another
doubted, nor dred more than children, wherefore I say that we should slay our
self, to the end that we may be with you, for we ought not to live after your
death. Wit it yt who had be there he should have had an hard heart but he
should have wept for to see ye three brethern make their moan.

When the archbishop and ye Burgeys that were there saw the great sorrow that
the three knights made: the good Archebysshop came to them and said, Lords be
ye not dyspleased of that I shall say to you. Syrs to my semynge, ye do not
well for to make so great sorrow nor to discomfort your self so much as ye do,
but rather ye should make great joy, and be glad for your brother that is a
saint in heaven, the which had suffered martyrdom in ye service of our lord,
whereof ye may see that he rewards him well for it. For ye see now before your
eyes the great miracles yt he does, wherefore I pray you that ye will
recomforte your self. And tell us if it please you what ye ben, and how is
this holy body named, and what his name was wha^ he lived in this world to the
end that his name be written about his tomb? And when his brethern heard the
archebysshop speak thus: they began a little to leave their sorrow. And than
Alarde that was theldest after Reynawde said to him Lord sithe it please you
to know what we be and how this corpse is called: I shall tell it you without
fault. Ye must wit that this corpse was called (when he was among us alive)
Reynawde of Mountawban the right worthy knight, and we three that been here are
his brethern, and well I wot that ye have heard speak of the four sons of
Aymon, the which Charlemayne the great king of France warred so long. Than
when the archebysshop and the people heard that they were the four sons of
Aymon, of the which all the world spoke, and that the holy corpse was the
goood Reynawde of Mountawba^ the noble and valiant knight: they began all to
weep for pity and for joy, because they saw al before them the most noble
and worthiest knight of the world, that in his life was more to dread than any
man alive, that was dead in the seruyse of our lord, doing penance. After
that these three brethren had thus left a little their sorrow: they made their
brother to be laid in his tomb, that was right rich, that the archebisshop
had done make where the holy corpse rests yet at this day as euydently is
known, and he is called saint Reynawde the martyr. The memory of him was that
time put in writing auctentykly, and eueri year is there kept for him great
sole^pnitie and feast. And after the sepulturyng of the holy corpse: the
brethern went again into their own Country.

MY fair lords who that this present book shall read or hear, we shall pray
our lord god and the glorious Saint Reynawde the marter, that he give us grace
to persevere, and continue our life in good works, by the which we may have at
our endyng the life that ever shall last. AMEN.
Here finissheth the hystory of the noble and valiant knight Reynawde of
Mountawban, and his three brethern. Imprinted at London, by Wynkynde word,
the.viii. day of May, and ye year of our lord. M.CCCCC.iiii. at the request
and commandment of the noble and puissaunt earl, the Earl of Oxenforde, And
now Imprinted in the year of our Lord.M.CCCCC.liiii. the vi. day of May, By
wylliam Copland, dwelling in Fletestrete at the Sign of the Rose Garland. for
John waley.


