A DEFENSE OF NICHOLAS SMITH AGAINST A REPLY TO HIS DISCVSSION OF SOME points
taught by Mr. Doctor Kellison in his Treatise of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.

By A. B.

We dare not match or compare our selves with certain, tha^ commend them
selves. But we measure our selves in our selves, and compare our selves to our
selves. But we will no^ glory above our measure, but according to the measure
(...) the Rule, which God has measured to us; a measure (...) to reach unto
you, do we extend our selves beyond. For w^ are come as far, as to you in
the Gospel of Christ. 2 Corinthians: 10. At Rouen by NICOLAS COVRANT. 1630.

TO THE READER.
GENTLE READER.

MASTER Doctor Kellison wrote a Book entitled, A Treatise of the
Eccesiasticall Hierarchy, wherein among other points, he chiefly intended to
prove, that English Catholics could not in conscience refuse a Bishop,
although, by his coming, their Persecution were to be increased.

This Treatise of M. Doctor was answered by A modest Discussion; against which
was set forth in Print, a little Book with title of An Inquisition etc. of
which some Copies, even in print, have that false slander about the
Pouder-Treason (which Copies were spread abroad both in the North, and South of
England.) Others have it not.

The Inqui^si^on was presently confuted by a Charitable Qualificatio^; to which
was adjoined an Admonition to the Reader; The Author whereof had not, at that
time, seen in Print, any of those Copies, which mentioned the foresaid
slanderous point; which I thought good here to note, for thy knowledge.

After the Inquisition, there is newly come forth a second answer to the
Discussion, called, A Reply to Nicolas Smith his Discussion etc. To this Reply,
I now answer, in defense of Nicolas Smith.

Thou may perhaps wonder, that the Reply (which if we have an eye to the
difference of print, in bulk is greater the^ M. Doctors Hierarchy) should be
answered in so few leaves of paper. And I must confess, I did not at first
hope, to have ended the Defense, in so few, either leaves, or days, which were
but seven, correspo^ding to the seven Questions handled by the Replyer:
within which compass of time, I was confined both to read, and answer the
Reply: and yet in all sincerity I do avouch, not to have omitted the answer of
any one thing, wherein I conceived there might be the least appearance of
difficulty. The reason of this breuity was double.

The one, because many chief obietions made by the Replyer, were aforehand
fully answered by the Qualification before the Reply came out; to which
therefore it will be sufficient to refer thee in such points. Besides, there
is published a learned and elegant book, with Title of An Apology of the holy
Sea Apostoliques proceeding, for the government of the Catholics of England,
during the time of Persecution, which may not only seem to answer the Reply,
but it alone in lieu of al others, were sufficient to show the manifold
deficiency of M. Doctors Treatise, with, I can hardely say whether, thy more
pleasure, or profit.

The other reason was, because the Replyer takes all occasions, to dilate
himself in diverse points, which either are vulgarly known in Schools, or
were never denied by Nicolas Smith, or may be equally spoken by both parts, or
else are answered, by the only perusal of the Discussion it self; which I
earnestly entreat thee to reuiew, if thou find any thing objected by the
Replyer, which may seem to have difficulty; and I am confident, the only
reading will serve for answer. Which to be true, I found by my own
experience; in so much, as for answering the Reply, I did in truth use no
book, besides the Hierarchy, Discussion, and Qualification, although I could
not doubt, but that the examination of diverse Authors cited by the Replyer,
would have administered no small advantage against him.

I verily believe, if thou read the Replyer with indifferency, and attention,
thou will perceive, that he rather defends Nicolas Smith, then M. Doctor,
whose words he is forced to excuse, by the common Rule of Charity, that in
them he had a good meaning; but in the chiefest points of substance, at length
he comes to join with the Discussour.

Diverse things of moment, he wholly omitteth without answering, or mentioning
them. Upon the whole matter, I conceive, this judgment may be given, of the
quantity, and quality of this work in general; That he has taken great
pains, to procure, that few will have patience, to read over his whole Book.

M. Drs. modesty is by him much extolled, and Nicolas Smith sore blamed, for
the contrary. Indeed he that without cause gives the first stroke, as M.
Doctor did, has no great reason to be angry with the party, that bears the
blow. And whatsoever the Replyer says in his Mirror, adjoined by his Reply,
Nicolas Smiths Discussion will be proved to be truly modest, if the passages be
read as they lie in the Discussion, and not as they are lamely cited by the
Replyer, as I could show in every particular, if I had not resolved to be very
brief.

It is ordinary with the Replyer, to blame Nicolas Smith, as if he had accused
M. Doctor of some doctrins which Nic-Smith laid not to his charge, but only
showed, that out of his Tenets, certain Conclusions would follow, which
neither he, nor any other could defend; but he did not say, that M. Doctor
foresaw, or intended such Conclusions.

In this manner Nicolas Smith termed a certain Argument, a Doughty one, which
yet he did not affirm, to be M. Doctors argument, but only that out of S.
Cyprians words, rightly understood, no better Argument could be drawn in
favor of M. Doctor, who out of the same words, framed an argument, quite
different from that, which Nicolas Smith termed doughty, as may be seen in
the Discussion q. 2. n. 5.6.

The like I could show, in all the rest, but content my self with requesting
thee, impartial Reader, still to suspend thy judgment, till, in particulars,
thou have seen the words, and connection of Nicolas Smith his discourse.

The Replyer himself, is far from Nicolas Smith his modesty. Scarcely he
gives any one answer, not accompanied with some taunt; So that, to set down
all his sharp speeches, were but to re-coppy the Book.

Within the compass of two Questions, he has these charitable sayings: He
favors Heretics. page 26. Behold Nicolas Smith his little subtility. page
31. Which is no less then a false calumniation. page 32. I pity M. Nicolas
Smith his arguing, and the necessity he is driven to, which cogit ad turpia.
page 43. Nicolas Smith joins with heretics in this point page 96. And the
same again page 110. What Divine, yea Cathecumen, who knows his Cathechisme,
would have given such an answer? page 10^. He favors Calvin. page 111. And
in the same page, I cannot tell how hereafter he can look them in the face:
although in this he have reason, for he spoke of some Jesuits, who dyed long
since, and it would be hard for the Discussour to look them in the face, if he
be yet living, as the Replyer will have him, in his Preface to the Reader:
where also page 16. he says, That the Discussour seems to show little of the
spirit of a Religious man: for which, if it be true, the Discussour, I grant,
ought to be sorry, and endeavor to correspond better to his vocation.
Howsoever, I dare say for Nicolas Smith, that, if he were alive, he would
heartily thank the Replyer, for the occasion he affoardeth him of merit, and so
do I, in his behalf; wishing, that as we are all domestici fidei, so we may be
charitatis, of one belief, and heart.

The Questions handled.
1. What judgment may be framed of M Doctors Treatise in general. page 1. 2.
Whether without a Bishop, there can be a particular Church? page 5. 3.
Whether by the divine Law, every particular Church, must have its Bishop? page
19. 4. Whether a Country, although the Persecution should be increased, by
occasion of having a Bishop, could refuse one, if it were only for the
Sacrament of Confirmation? page 38. 5. Concerning M. Doctors Comparison,
between Bishops, inferior Pastors, and Religious men. pa. 53. 6. Whether
Religious, as Religious, be of the Hierarchy? page 68. 7. Whether by the
precedent Questions, we have sufficiently answered M. Doctors Treatise, for
such points, as either deserved Confutation, or required Explication. page 75.
APPROBATIO.
LIbellum hunc Anglico idiomate conscriptum and inscriptum, A Defense of
Nicolas Smith, against A Reply to his Discussion: attente and accurate perlegi,
and diligenter and mature examinaui, and inuenio non solum ab omni nota,
quantum ad doctrinam Fidei Catholicae morumque proborum immunem: verum etiam
afflictae Patriae nostrae valde vtilem, and ad conscientias Catholicorum in
eadem serenandas fere necessarium. Tractantur enim in co breuiter, solid tamen
and modeste, quaestiones nonnullae graves and difficiles, ex quarum veridica
solutione constabit Catholicis, non imminere illis tantam in multis causis
obligationem, tantumque onus conscientiae, quantum nonnulli auctores editis
suis libris, imponere nituntur ex leuibus fundamentis. Quod eo magis in hoc
Scriptore laud and um est, quo omnia, quae dicit and docet, sunt conformia
communiori magisque receptae Theologorum Classicorum auctoritati; quinimo and
recentibus decretis ac responsis a Sede Apostolica insinuatis. Quapropter
censeo omnino dignum and iustum, vt hic liber, permissu tamen Superiorum,
praelo mandetur. Datum Duaci in Conuentu nostro Sancti Gregorij Magni, 10. die
Ianuarij. 1631.

F. Rudesindus Barlo S. Theol. Doctor, and Professor in Vniuersitate Duacena.

ATtente legimus Anglicum hoc Scriptum, cuint titulus est, A Defense of Nicolas
Smith against A Reply to his Discussion, of some points taught by M. Doctor
Kellison in his Treatise of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. In quo nec Catholicam
Fidem, nec bonos mores vllatenus offe^di, sed susceptam Defensionem, cum plena
antedicta Replicae satisfactione, praestitam inuenimus. Datum Louany 16.
Ianuarij 1631.

Fr. Robertus Chamberlinus S. Theol. Lector in Collegio Fratrum Minorum
Louaniensium. Fr. Malachias Fallon S. Theol. Lector.


QVandoquidem a supranominatis doctis viris, and linguam Anglicanam callentibus
liber hic citatus probatus est, per me quoque licet vt imprimatur. Actum
Tornaci Neruiorum 22. Ianuarij 1631.

Ioannes Boucher S. Theol. Doctor Sorbonicus, nec non Cathedralis Ecclesia
Tornacensis Canonicus, Archidiaconus, and Librorum Censor.

THE I. QVESTION What Judgment may be framed of M. Doctors Treatise in
general.
THE Replyer thinks he has taken the Discussour in a contradictio^, for
affirming M. Doctor to have been the first that put in print A Treatise of the
Hierarchy, in the English tongue, and yet confesses that diverse before him
handled this argument, both in Latin and vulgar la^guages. But it is clear the
Discussour speaks of such a Treatise concerning the Hierarchy, as M. Doctor
put in print, intended, prosecuted, appropriated to England, for proof of the
obligation Catholics have to receive a Bishop, and such like purposes
peculiar to our Country. This M. Doctor has done, and has done it the first
of any in these days. Would to God he had not. The law of Nature pleads for
the right men have to defend themselves from aggression, but does not warrant
him that unprovoked offends his neighbor.

2. If writing of Books in this kind be of small Comfort to Catholics, the
inconvenience must be ascribed to him alone who gave the first blow, and
imposed upon the parties aggrieued, a necessity of just offense. To cure a
wound given at once to a number of worthy persons, is but a bounden duty, and
an obliged act of common charity. This did other Regulars; this I do at this
present, and noe more. M. Doctor and his Second, obliged us to some answer; I
will tie my self to do it with moderation. Likewise Suarcz, Platus, and others
have written of the calling of secular, and state of Religious men, but not by
way of application to particular circumstances of any persons, places, or
controversies. M. Doctors exhortation to charity is not by the Discussour
styled Verbal, as though it came not from the heart, which the Replyer
obiecteth n. 7. (for he only is to erect a Tribunal of search into man's heart
who made it,) but because while in words he persuadeth to charity, eue^ then
in deeds by the writing of this book he did mightily prejudice Charity, as by
too much experience we find, and was easy to be forseene.

3. Nicolas Smith never accuses M. Doctor absolutely of want of Logike, or
Prudence, as the Replyer auerreth n. 12. He says that in this Treatise, to
prove the necessity of Bishops in England, M. Doctor serves himself of
Principles more hard then the Conclusion, which is against the rules of Logike.
This may argue him to defend a bad cause, not universally to want Logike. What
the Replyer has n. 19. is also objected by the Inquisition, and answered by
the Qualificatour Sect. 6. n. 19. showing that M. Doctor is not taxed for
proving his Conclusions by Causes, or Effects etc. but because he assumeth
Principles more uncertain, and less warrantable then the Conclusion, as in
the said place is demonstrated. I believe it would be an hard task for any man
to prove, That for the only vndoubtednesse, or greater assuredness of
Confirmation, Catholics are obliged to have a Bishop, although we suppose,
that by his coming their pressures were to be aggrauated with new increase of
persecution. For why should this affliction be, of necessity, added to the
already afflicted? Because (forfooth) some very few Authors have taught that
Confirmation cannot be administered by a Priest, with special commission from
the Pope, although the whole stream of Deuines run to the contrary side,
with S. Thomas; and some hold, that since the Council of Florence the other
opinion meriteth Censure. This point is sufficiently handled in the
Qualification. Here I add this instance. Some few Deuines are also of opinion,
that the Priest is Minister of the Sacrament of Matrimony, without whom,
according to these Authors, it is only a civil Contract, not a Sacrament; will
therefore the Replyer say, that English Catholics are obliged to receive
Priests, with increase of persecution, if it were only for to have the
undoubted Sacrament of Matrimony? And yet if the matter be duly considered,
perhaps one may truly affirm, that as great inconveniences, and sins of
enmity, injustice, incontinency etc. are like to be daily, and hourly
incurred, for want of grace, conferred by the Sacrament of Matrimony, as in
another kind for want of Confirmation, even in a persecuted Country. If those
Deuines who teach, that the Priest is the Minister of Matrimony, had taught
that a Bishop were the necessary Minister of the same Sacrament, the Replyer
would perhaps allege them for the necessity of a Bishop although with increase
of persecution.

4. The chiefest point of doctrine in this Question, or rather the point which
enters into all the ensuing Questions, is touched by the Discussour n. 15. and
by the Replyer left without answer. It was: That M. Doctors arguments for the
necessity of a Bishop in England, prove more then himself intends or can
avouch. For the institution, and command of our Savior, that his Church
should be governed by Bishops, concerns such Bishops, as are properly
Ordinaryes, Princes, and Bishops of Diocesses, not by Delegation, Deputation,
or Ordinaryes in an extraordinary manner, which is not of Diuiue institution,
and is the most that my Lord of Calcedon does challeng. If the divine
instistution, and command, were fulfilled by Ordinaryes, in an Extraordinary
manner, the Pope might govern the whole Church by such extraordinary
Ordinaryes, which no Catholic can grant; and therefore, as I said, M. Doctor
must answer his own arguments, drawn from the divine institution (for
according to that ground, we must in England have properly an Ordinary) and
come to confess, that there is no divine Positive Precept, for his Holiness
to appoint us in England a Bishop, but only a divine natural command to
provide us of all things, necessary to salvation, whether by Bishops, or other
means.

THE II. QVESTION. Whether without a Bishop there can be a particular Church.
THE substance of all that is contained in the first 16. numbers of the Reply,
is taken out of the Inquisition sect. 3. and sect. 6 about the words of S.
Cyprian: The Church is a people united to the Bishop, and, the necessity of a
particular Bishop to make a particular Church; which points are cleared by the
Qualificatour in the same Sections. And the Reader of himself may answer all
his objections, if he remember how the Discussour expressy teaches; That in
some particular Churches, there must be particular Bishops, distinct from the
Pope: That in England while we wanted Bishops, properly called Ordinaryes in an
ordinary manner, the Pope could be, was, and is our sole particular Bishop:
That these words of S. Cyprian (The Church is a people united to the Bishop) as
they were spoken by him, precisely, immediately, and formally, signify, that a
people divided from their lawful Bishop is no church, but a Schismatic
multitude, and not only by inference, as the Replyer u. 9.13. and in other
places does suppose; and out of that his own supposition, deduceth absurdities
against the Discussour, as not distinguishing betwixt mere inculpable want of
a Bishop, and sinful separation from a Bishop: Whereas indeed S. Cyprian,
only speaks of sinful separation, and therefore affirms, that such as are
not united with a Bishop, in the sense he spoke, are not in the Church: That
Catholic writers, may fitly against heretics, infer out of S. Cyprian, a
necessity of having Bishops in Gods Church; because it were no crime of Schism
to be divided from a Bishop, if in the Church there ought not to be Bishops:
That the said words of S. Cyprian, may be taken for a definition of the
Church, if the word Bishop be taken indefinitely of a particular Bishop
distinct from the Pope, or for the Pope himself. For no multitude, can be a
Church, without vnio^ either to a particular Bishop under the Pope or to the
Pope himself. Without Union (I say) either actual, or aptitudinall, really,
or in readiness of will, to accept one, when he shall be lawfully given them;
which promptitude they may, and ought to have, when actually they want one. The
Replyer himself must yield that S. Cypria^, if he mean of a potiue Union with
a Bishop (as he would have him to mean) can not be understood determinatly of
a particular Bishop distinct from the Pope, unless he will teach it to be
against the very definition, and essence of a particular Church to have the
Pope for its particular Bishop, which I am sure he will not auerre. For who
dare say, that the particular diocese of Rome, which has the Pope for its
sole Bishop, is no particular Church?

2. Thus is answered all that he alead geth out of Bellarmine, Stapleton, etc.
who only teach, that in the Church there must be some particular Bishops, and
that the Church, is a people, vnted to the Bishop, in the manner I have now
declared. Yea all that I have said is much confirmed, by what the Replier
cites out of Stapleton; That the word (Church) in scripture, signifies
properly, not a vagrant, headless multitude, but a multitude to which Pastors
and Prelates are constituted by God. For I trow, English Catholics, were no
vagrant, headless multitude, as long as they were, and are governed by Christ
his Vicar. And the Replyers objection n. 9. That every Catholic family, every
Nunnery, yea and Company of Catholic women, should be a particular Church,
if union to the Pope were sufficient, to constitute a particular Church; is
easily answered, by demanding of him, whether in a Diocese, enjoying its
particular Bishop, every Nunnery, every family, every particular Catholic, be
a particular Church? what he shall answer in that supposition, the same I
answer in our case, who acknowledge the Pope for our particular Bishop. S.
Paul faluteth the Church in the house of Nimpha, Coloss. cap. 4. v. 15. and the
Church in the house of Philemon, ad Philem. v. 2. and S. Gregory Thanmaturgus,
at first, had for his particular Church only 17. Catholics, nor are we certain
that they were not in one house or family. But to my purpose it imports
nothing, and therefore I will not dispute, whether one family can be fitly
called a particular Church.

3. Here comes, of it self, a ready answer, to another objection of the
Replyer. To show that the often cited words of S. Cyprian, cannot infer,
that a Bishop is necessary, to make a particular Church, the Discussourn. 6.
retorteth them in this manner: Whosoever are not in schism with any lawful
Bishop, do fulfill the definition of S. Cyprian: But those who without their
own fault have no Bishop, are not in schism with any lawful Bishopp; Ergo,
those who have no Bishop, do fulfill the definition of S. Cyprian. This
argument, the Replyer would return upon the Discussour, by saying; That seeing
a Catholic family, without a Bishop, is not in schism with any Bishop, it
would follow, that such a family, considered by it self, fulfilleth the
definition of S. Cyprian, and consequently is a Church. But the answer is
already given. If one man, or family, may be termed a particular Church, in
case they were positiuely united to a particular Bishop, much more may they be
a Church in S. Cyprians sense, which requires not positive union, but only,
that they be not divided from their Bishop. If one man, or family, be not
capable of the denomination of a particular Church, then his objection touches
not the Discussour, whose argument proceeded in respect of a multitude, Plebs,
and Grex, a people, and multitude (such as English Catholics are) capable of
the said denomination, if other requisite conditions were not wantinge. Still
then it is true, as the Discussour inferred, That a people, not divided from
their lawful Bishop, is according to S. Cyprian a true Church, although they
have no actual vnio^, with a particular Bishop.

4. His proofs n. 17. That M. Doctor was not injurious to English Catholics
by saying; They did not fulfill the definition of a Church, given by S.
Cyprian, while they wanted a Bishop, do still rely upon a ground not solid:
to wit, that S. Cyprian, by a people united to their Bishop, understands a
positive Union with a Bishop; whereas Nicolas Smith proved out S. Cyprians
words, and whole drift, that by Union with a Bishop, he understands only, that
the people be not divided from him, and this supposed, it clearly follows:
That if English Catholics, did not fulfill the said definition, they must be
taxed of division from a Bishop, and consequently of Schism.

5. The Discussour q. 2. n. 8. 13. and the Qualificatour sect. 7. answer all
he brings to prove, that the Pope was not our particular Bishop: and the
Qualificatour shows, that Nicolas Smith does not argue, a possibili ad esse.
But (says the Replyer n. 21.) if when a Church is deprived of Bishops, the
Pope remain their particular Bishop, no Bishopric should ever be vacant, nor
any College want a Rectour, or Province a Provincial, because the Provincial
would become Rectour, and the General Provincial. And if per impossible,
there were never a Bishop in all the Church, but the Pope; the Church should
still be Hierarchical, composed of diverse particular Churches.

6. I answer: This argument must be solued, by the Replyer himself; who in
the next number grants, that the Pope may be the particular Bishop, of a
particular Church; and yet he would not admit, that he may make himself sole
particular Bishop of all Churches. The reason is; because our Savior has
instituted, that there should be some particular Churches, governed by Bishops
distinct from the supreme Pastor; not because the Pope alone cannot make a
particular Church, but because, he can not make all Churches particular
Churches, in the manner our Savior has instituted, by their proper
Ecclesiastical Princes, distinct from the Pope, as is required in a Hierarchy.
In this sense, Bishoprics are said to be Vacant, because they want a Bishop,
distinct from the Pope.

7. And here I must observe, that it is so true, that a Church without a
Bishop, may be a particular Church, that the Replyer while he is speaking
against it, speaks for it, by saying, That a Bishopric may be Vacant. Ergo,
say I, by the Vacancy, it cease not to be a Bishopric, a Diocese, a
Church. If a Church, surely not an Universal, but a particular one. When the
Bishop of a particular Church dies, do they not demand a Bishop for such a
Church? Ergo, they suppose, that it still remains a Church. Otherwise when a
Bishop was demanded for England, it might have bynne answered: First find a
Church in England, and then ask a Bishop for the Church of England. M.
Doctor page 378. n. 3. says: that when a Bishop cannot be had, the particular
Church, must be governed, as it may. And page 374. alluding to England, he
says. If for a time some particular Church be governed by Priests, or an
Archpriest without a Bishop, it is a thing accidental etc. Ergo, a Church, and
England in particular, without a Bishop, may be, and was a particular Church.
And indeed we can not teach otherwise, unless by the death of every Bishop, we
will have all men become speachlesse. For, when the Bishop of a particular
Church dies, how can we express it, but by saying, such a Church has lost
its Bishop? The same is demonstrated, even out of the other examples, alleged
by the Replyer. For by the death of a Rectour, or Provincial, the College
cease not to be a College, nor the Province, a Province: neither does it
follow, that a Provincial, or General upon the death of every Rectour, or
Provincial, must become Rectours and Prouinciass. The reason of this depends
on the knowledge of particular institutes of Religion. In general it is
sufficient to say, that no General, has over his whole Order, so absolute,
and unlimited extent of power, as the Pope, by our Saviors institution, has
over the whole, and every member of Gods Church. I grant, in Catholic
Countries, where after the death of the Bishop, other officers remain, to
govern till a new Bishop be elected, the Pope need not actuate his immediate
power and Pastorship, as he is obliged to do in countries wholly and for a long
time destitute of Bishops.

8. Because the Pope has immediate power over all particular Churches, and is
Proprius Pastor of England, and all other countries; to make himself
particular sole Bishop of any church, he needs not take the name, of that
particular church, but begins to be sole Bishop, as soon as it begins to
be destitute of a Bishop. But other particular Bishops who have no such
universal, immediate power, must acquire it, by a new Title to their
particular Churches. And seeing the Pope in respect of England, has indeed
performed the Office of a Bishop, no doubt but he would also call himself
Bishop of England, if, with the Replyer, he conceived, that there were a divine
precept to make England a particular Church, and that to make it such, it were
necessary, and sufficient, that he took the name or title of it, as the
Replyer n. 22. confesses. For who will say, that for a matter of no more
difficulty, then is to take a Name, the Pope will break a divine command? It
is then a sign, that he may make us a particular Church, without calling
himself Bishop of England, because in very deed so he is. His Holiness
styleth not himself Bishop of Holland, where nevertheless he has a Vicar,
which supposes the Pope to be the particular Bishop of that country. For a
Church cannot be a particular Church, by union to a Vicar, but by union to him,
whose Vicar he is. My Lord of Chalcedon is not called Bishop of England, or of
any Church, or Diocese thereof; and yet the Replyer thinks, he makes us a
particular Church, because he has the power of a Bishop of England, which no
man can deny the Pope to have, in as immediate and more ample high manner: and
therefore he may make us a particular Church, although he take not the Name
thereof.

9. Yea, whereas the Replyer n. 22.23. teaches, that the Pope could not be
particular Bishop of England, unless he did either the office of a Bishop
himself, or by his Delegate, or as lest styled himself Bishop of England: I
answer; that it is sufficient he do the Office of a Bishop, according as the
circumstances of the time, and place permit, or require; which his Holiness
most carfully has and does perform, by sending into England Priests, or also
a Bishop with authority from him delegated etc. and the Replyer pleades against
himself, telling us in effect, that the Pope, by the very delegating my Lord
of Chalcedon, and not making him Bishop of England has declared himself to be,
the sole particular Bishop of that Country, where he does the office of a
Bishop by his Delegates. As Ireland is not a Kingdom, in respect of his
Majesty's Deputy but because it is united to his Majesty, as to its King: so
England cannot be a particular Church, in respect of my Lord of Chalcedon, but
in regard of the Pope, whose Deputy my Lord is, being not spiritual Prince,
and Bishop of England. If to be Ordinary in an extraordinary manner, be
sufficient to make us a Church, how will the Replyer prove, that before my lord
of Chalcedons coming, his Holinesses Nuntio in Paris, did not make us a
particular Church?

10. Against the Discussours doctrine n. 11. That persons exempt from all
Bishops, and subject only to the Pope, are a particular Church, without a
particular Bishop; the Replyer n. 26. obiecteth, That Monasteryes, subject only
to the Pope, are no particular Churches, unless we will make every Nunnery of
women, a particular Church. I answer, the Discussour speaks in general, of
places, and persons, exempt from Bishops. And it is well known, that there be
diverse Territoryes, of extent, sufficient to make a Diocese, subject to no
Bishop. These Nicolas Smith affirms to be particular churches. One Monastery,
or Nu^nery, immediately subject to the Pope, are as much a particular Church, as
if they had a particular Bishop, as we said above n. 2.3.

11. In his numbers 28.29. he teaches, that it is a great Luster to a Church
to have a particular Bishop: That a Church governed by a Delegate, wants some
perfection of that, which is governed by an Ordinary: That if a Pope should
send a Priest into England, with power to confirm, England should be in its
kind a particular Church, but not in the degree and perfection, as if it had an
Ordinary Bishop. What? Is the necessity of having a Bishop come only to a
greater Luster? Must Catholics be trodden under foot for a greater luster?
Does all this dispute end in degrees of Comparison? Has our being, or not
being a particular Church, so great latitude, that it may reach to a Church
with a Bishop Ordinary, a Bishop Delegate, a simple Priest? I confess the
Replyer is forced to step back, and not to stand so punctually on his
ground, of Englands not being a particular Church, without a Bishop. I desire
he would speak plainly. Does the divine law, in these sore times, oblige us to
be a particular Church, in the greatest perfection you mention, by a Bishop
Ordinary? You will not say so. Is the divine law, of our being a particular
Church well satisfied, by persons endued with authority, sufficient, and
proportionable to these days, let them be Priests, or Bishops, Ordinaryes, or
Delegates? So you must say. Let us then speak no more of being a particular
Church, or of having determinatly a Bishop, by the diuiuine law; but let our
care be, in the sight of God, impartially to consider, and with indifferency to
desire, what may be most expedient for Catholics, not in France, Spain,
Italy, and other Countries, happy with peaceable possession of Ecclesiastical
splendor; but in England blessed only with joyful suffering a long continued
persecution.

12. Well, to leave speculations, and Schoolpoynts, seeing you constantly
persist in this, that without a Bishop we cannot be a particular Church; before
you burden our consciences, with a heavy obligation, to purchase our being a
particular Church, with hazard of goods, liberty, and life; you must not blame
us, if we request you, to produce some precept of God, or the Church,
commanding us to be a particular Church, in your sense: and why we may not
content our selves, with being good Catholics, and members of the Universal
Church, as Nicholas Smith n. 14. proposed to M. Doctor? In this consists the
point of the difficulty. The Replyer answers, that this demand is by the
Discussour brought out of its place, and so must expect answer in the next
question, which treats, Whether by the divine law, every particular Church,
must have its Bishop? What is this, but to avoid the difficulty? for M. Doctor
proposes as two reasons, or titles, The divine precept of having a Bishop in
every particular Church, and, The necessity of having a Bishop, because without
him we cannot be a particular Church, as may be seen Chap. 14. n. 4. 5. 6. 7.
and in other places. Now the Replyer will make M. Doctor walk in a circle,
and prove, that we are bound to be a particular Church, because we are obliged
to have a Bishop; and we are obliged to have a Bishop, because we are bound to
be a particular Church. If the Replyer will defend M. Doctor, he must tell us,
what command we have, precisely to be a particular Church, so that, if a
Bishop were not necessary in other respects, yet for this cause alone, he could
not be refused. This the Replyer does not prove in the next question, nor is it
a thing, in it self, factible or credible.

13. From the number 13. to the end of this Question, he taxes the Discussour,
as stretching M. Doctors words Chap. 14. n. 9. further, then he intended. But
those words which he seeks to defend, must either teach as far, as the
Discussour extends them, or else they will come short of proving M. Doctors
purpose. For if it be as necessary, to have a particular Bishop, to make a
particular church, as to have an Universal Bishop, for the making an Universal
church; and that, by the divine law every country of extent must be a
particular Church; it follows clearly, that according to M. Doctor there is
as much necessity to have a Bishop in England. which in his opinion is a
particular church of extent, as to have a Pope of Rome. You will perhaps say,
that the divine Law, of having a particular Bishop, in every particular church,
does not so generally bynd, as the other does, but may cease to oblige, by
reason of some particular circumstances of time, or place. This answer
ouerthoweth M. Doctors whole edifice. Because if any reason may take away the
obligation of a divine law, certainly a general persecution, threatened to a
whole Country, may free us from such a bond. How then will M. Doctor
conclude, that by the divine law we are bound to have a Bishop, in a case,
wherein the divine law cease to bynd? You see the Discussour had reason to
say, That M. Doctors words imported too much, or else you must yeald, they
proved too little.

14. In like manner what M. Doctor said, in the same place; That unless every
particular church have a Bishop, the Universal church should not, as Christ
has instituted, be a Hierarchy, composed of diverse particular churches, is
rightly taxed by the Discussour, as either not sound, or not sufficient for M.
Doctors purpose. If it be understood only indeterminatly, that is, The whole
church cannot be a Hierarchy, unless some particular churches have Bishops it
proves not, that England must have a Bishop: because, although England want a
Bishop, other churches may have them, and so the Universal church remain a
Hierarchy. If he understand of every determinate particular church; then it
follows, that the church of God cannot be a Hierarchy unless the determinate
particular church of England have a Bishop, as the Discussour urged n. 16. and
the Replyer does not confute.

15. By the way I espy in his n. 32. a word for my purpose, which overthrows
the Repliers whole discourse in this Question. The church (says he) cannot be
at al without a supreme Bishop, or not without order to him, when the sea is
Vacant. This I take as granted, and very true: and hence I infer; That as the
Universal church may be an Universal church, without actual union to a
supreme Bishop, while the sea is Vacant, because it still has Order,
reference, and aptitude to be governed by an Universal Bishop, as soon as he
shall be elected; so a particular church, may be such, by Order, and aptitude
to be united with a particular Bishop, whenever he shall be appointed; and so
S. Cyprians definition (The Church is the people united to the Bishop) does not
require, that the people be actually united to the Bishop, but only in readiness
of mind, or aptitudinally. And thus England while it wanted a Bishop, was a
particular church, because it was always in disposition to be united to a
Bishop. Where now is that argument, so often inculcated by M. Doctor, the
Inquisitour, and the Replyer? S. Cyprian defines a church to be the people
united to the Bishop. But the people cannot be united to a Bishop, unless they
have one: Ergo, they cannot be a church unless they have a Bishop. For the
Replyer himself has told us, that when the Sea is vacant, the people may be a
church, with only Order to a Bishop, which implies not the actual having a
Bishop, but only a fit disposition to have one.

THE III. QVESTION. Whether by the divine Law every particular Church must have
its Bishop?
THE divine precept, of having Bishops in the Church, is only to be understood
indeterminatly, or in general; that in the whole church, there must be some
Bishops, as many, or few, as may be necessary, or requisite, to the end of
governing the same Church. But in respect of particular, and determinate
churches, the command is not absolute, but bears a great respect to
circumstances of time, place, and the like, as the Vicar of Christ shall judge
it best fitting, for governing, and providing such churches of al things
necessary to salvation. Wherefore from the divine precept, of having Bishops, in
general, we cannot infer a necessity of having Bishops, in this, or that
particular country although otherwise of extent. For there may occur good
reason, why some other government, in some particular circumstances may conduce
more to the glory of God, and particular good of such a country. Contrariwise
it may happen, that some church of small extent, may in particular
circumstances more require the government of a Bishop, then a larger country.
The thing therefore which is (as I may say) formally to be considered, is the
quality, or greater, or less necessity; not the greater, or less quantity of
place, or number of persons, but in as much as these may induce, a greater
necessity of having Bishops.

2. For this cause, in the primitive church, even in time of hoatest
persecution, Bishops were multiplied, and placed in diverse Cittyes, because
those times did so require. In so much, that some Authors write, that in those
first days of Christianity, in a manner all Priests were Bishops, contrary to
the present practice of Gods church. The reason was, the paucity of Priests, of
which if many had not binne made Bishops, to ordain Priests, particular
churches would have remained unfurnished of Priests, to convert infidells, and
assist the^ being converted. Every church having enough to do within it self,
could not affoard help to others. For this same cause, Bishops were allotted to
smaller flocks, then is now either usual, or lawful, to be commonly
practiced. S. Gregory the Thaumaturge, cited by the Replyer n. 14. was created
Bishop over only 17. persons. A number competent for those old, not these
latter times, in places where by neighbourchurches, the want of other may be
relieved. The more the Universal church is dilated, the less every particular
church needs a a Bishop of its own. Because other churches, without much
prejudice unto themselves, may frequently, lend them a helping hand. In
countries, by vast distance, remote from help, and comfort of Christian
Nations, a Bishop may be needful for a few. In Europe, the case is otherwise.
If one ship be in want, it can becken to those who abound in diverse others.

3. Hence it follows, that, to prove the necessity of a Bishop in England in
vain we have recourse, to the divine precept in general, of having some
Bishops in the church. All the question must setle on this; Whether England,
can be sufficiently furnished of Priests, and provided of all necessaries for
our journey to heaven, without a Bishop; Or whether the inconueniece of
coming, might not counterpoyse the commodityes he would bring. This should be
the only Question; and the answer ought to be referred, to the same Bishop, to
whose charge Christ has committed England, and all other countries. In the
mean time, let not Catholics be frighted, with divine precepts where none
are.

4. The Replyer does not rightly state the Question, while he tells us n. 8.
that M. Doctor only teaches, that Catholics cannot refuse a Bishop,
although by his coming persecution should be increased, supposing he be sent
by lawful authority. Because (says he) in that case, the Pope rather
declares, that the divine law cease not to oblige. A goodly construction of
M. Doctors meaning, and a fair account of all his pains; which are reduced
to this issue: Catholics are bound, by the divine law, to receive a Bishop,
if the Pope declare, that the divine law, of having a Bishop, byndeth them. As
if the Question were, whether Catholics be obliged, to believe the Popes
declarations, whether or no divine Laws do oblige. Surely for this, there need
no writing of Hierarchyes, Inquisitions, Replies. The answer might speedly
have binne given. That in all things, the Catholics of England have binne,
are, and eternally will be, as zealous, prompt, and constant in submitting
their understandings, and wills, to the commanders, or declarations of his
Holiness, as any Catholics whom^ the Sun beholds. But it is evident, that
M. Doctor speaks absolutely, and ex natura rei, of the necessity we have, to
receive a Bishop, abstracting from the Popes declaration or Mission. This, his
reasons demonstate, drawn from the divine precept of having Bishops in every
great part of the church; from the vtility, or necessity of Confirmation,
without which men are in danger to forsake their faith, as M. Doctor urges
etc. as may be seen in the very title, and throughout his whole 14. Chapter.

5. Neither is it a good Consequence: The Pope sends a Bishop to England,
Ergo, he declares, that there is a divine precept, to have a Bishop in England.
Many things are holily done, which a man is not obliged to do. When the Pope
makes a Diocese, and endueth it with a Bishop, distinct from other particular
Bishops, does he therefore declare, that there was a divine precept, to make
such a Diocese, or to place a Bishop in it? We see some Territoryes, capable
of Bishops, to be governed by Abbots which could not be, if there were a divine
precept, to place Bishops in such Territoryes, although it had not likewise
binne against the divine law, to have placed Bishops in the same Territoryes.
This is a good Inference. The Pope, for many years, sent us no Bishop: Ergo,
he judged there was no divine precept, obliginge him to send us one; but the
other consequence is of no force, as I have showed. Will the Replyer admit this
argument; The Pope for many years left us without a Bishop: Ergo, he judged
there was a divine precept, that we should be left without a Bishop?. It is as
good as his. Nicolas Smith n. 4. said truly; The deliberation about sending a
Bishop to England, was only, Quid expediret, what was expedient, not what was
necessary, by the divine law, which, as I said, is only of Churches taken in
general and indeterminately. And I cannot but esteem it injurious, to those
Fatherly bowelles of his Holiness, to think, that he ever judged us obliged, to
accept a Bishop, with a general increase of persecution. If he were persuaded,
that the coming of a Bishop, would occasion to Catholics, a general
persecution, I dare say, he would never impose upon them such an obligation.
And yet M. Doctor, and the Replyer are rigid Censurers of Catholics, as
infingers of the divine Law, if they should refuse a Bishop, even upon that
heavy supposition.

6. Supposing the Institution of having Bishops, do not oblige in all times,
places, and other circumstances, Nicolas Smith had had reason to say, n. 4.
That M. Doctor, if he will speak home, must prove, not only that there is a
divine precept for us to have a Bishop, but also that no persecution can excuse
the obligation thereof, or yield sufficient cause of dispensation. For although
we should grant, a divine precept in general, yet if in some circumstances it
do not bynd, the transgressors should not sin. Now, if any cause may affoard
a lawful excuse, what can be greater, then the avoiding of a general
persecution, whereby not only goods, and life, but also christian souls are
exposed to danger.

7. The Replyer n. 3. speaks in such manner, as one would conceive Nicolas
Smith to have affirmed, that M. Doctor denied the Pope may dispense in the
divine Law; which Nicholas Smith never said: yet because the Replyer first
mentions this matter, I must add, that seeing M. Doctor proves our
obligation to have a Bishop, by the necessity of Confirmation, and danger of
denying our faith, through want of that Sacramet; it will not be easy for him,
to defend, that the Pope can dispense in that obligation. For what dispensation
can be given, for exposinge of men's souls to damnation? Or if M. Doctor, and
the Replyer grant, that the Pope may dispense in this command; I must be bold
to say, their arguments, drawn from the necessity of Confirmation, are
farre-fetched frights, not solid reasons.

8. Whereas the Replyer n. 12. writes, that Nicholas Smith said not truly, that
in England the multitude of Catholics, not the extent of the place, is only
to be considered: I say truly, that Nicholas Smith says no such matter, but
only, That if England be considered, not materially, but formally (as Deuines
express themselves) that is, not the extent of land, or multitude of people,
but the number of Catholics, which only can make a trae Church, we shall find
it to be more then sarre from a great, or notabic part of the Catholic Church
spread over the whole word. Whether or no the extent of place, or number of
persons, although not Catholics, be also considerable, Nicholas Smith would
answer, that it depends upon other circumstances, which may make such an
extent, more, or less, or not at all, considerable, as we have showed n. 2. As
for England in particular, if the extent of place were less, a Bishop would be
more useful, for the Sacrament of Confirmation, which might be administered to
more, if they were less distant in place* And this urges much against the
Replyer, who, in proving the necessity of a Bishop in every great country,
finally n. 20. reduces all, to the necessity of Confirmation.

9. It is strange, how zealous the Replyer n. 10. is against Nicholas Smith,
for making the Catholics, as it were a contemptible number, only because he
says, they are not a notable great part of Gods Church, notwithstanding that
Nicholas Smith cited in that behalf, a Writing entitled; A Paratell etc. (the
Author whereof, is thought to be a person of greater rank, then the Replyer)
wherein it is said, that all our Catholics together, would scarcsely make
one, of diverse Bishoprics in England. And it is worth the noting, that the
Paralellist said so, in proof, that some Regulars, who wrote that the
government of certain Churches, anciently belonged to them, did thereby make a
greater Challenge, then my lord of Chalcedon, which surely must have respect
only to the number of persons, and not extent of place. For those Regulars
never challenged power over all Catholics, through England, as my lord of
Chalcedon does. But by this we may see, how the number of Catholics must be
raised, or cried down, as it makes most for their purpose. It seems his
Holiness had consideration, chiefly of Persons, not of the Place, by making my
Lord, not Bishop of the country, but only giving him authority referred to the
persons. Ordinaries have jurisdiction, in respect both of place, and person,
Catholics, and Heretics: and therefore in them, extent of place is much more
considerable. Lastly, although it were granted (as a thing not making much for
our present purpose) that the extent of place in England, were much
considerable, thence at the most could be inferred, that England is capable of
a Bishop, not that it must of necessity have one, which is our only Question.
As there be some Diocesses, for extent of place, well capable of too, or more
Bishops, and yet it does not follow, that of necessity they must have too or
more, if by one they can be sufficiently governed; yea there are diverse places,
capable of one, or more Bishops, who have no Bishop at all, but are governed by
other superiors.

10. Likewise the Replyer n. 9. about this point, cites the words of the
Discussour n. 7. very imperfectly in this manner. To affirm, that one
Diocese, or City, is a notable part of the Church, is a thing, which no
divine, yea no man of judgment will say. The words entirely cited are these: To
affirm, that one Diocese, or City, or indeed not so much as one Diocese or
City, is a great, or notable part of that Chuch, which reaches, as far as
the rising and setting of the Sun, and that it must therefore, iure diuino, by
the divine law, have a Bishop; so as no cause can excuse the want of one, is a
thing, which no Divine etc. This saying of Nicolas Smith is so evident, as no
man can deny it to be true; and yet for this speech, he is deeply charged by
the Inquisitour, and Replyer of great immodesty. Besides Nicolas Smith never
say d M. Doctor affirmed all this, but only by good consequence, he showed
that this and diverse other hard conclusions, must follow out of his Principles.

11. What he cites n. 14. out of the Regulars Answer, to my Lord of Calcedons
letter, is by him odiously forced, to a sense by the neither meant, nor
written. It is clear, they speak not of Episcopal authority in general, but
of a Bishop, in these times, with power of Ordinary, in foro externo, coactiue,
to erect a Tribunal etc. which they say, would in these times, prove
pernicions to souls etc. as M. Doctor Chap. 15. confesses, my Lord of
Chalcedon to say, that such a Tribunal is not suitable to these times. Preaching
is a holy thing, and as ancient, as our Savior Christ; yet to do it
publicly, in these times, may be called, a Nouelty, and pernicious to
Catholics.

12. In more then three whole leaves, from n. 16. he labors to make good,
that Sotus favors M. Doctor. All his discourse is reduced to this. When
Sotus teaches it, to be of divine law, that in general to every Church
according to the Ecclesiastical division, proper Bishops are to be applied;
those words (in general) are to be interpreted, as if one should say, Christ
in general has ordained, that every man shall be baptized, and therefore by
our Saviors command, every particular man is to be baptized. The Discussour
interprets Sotus by the word (ingenerall) to mean indeterminatly of some
Diocesses according as particular circumstances of persons, time, and place
shall require, and not that Sotus did teach an absolute precept, of placing
Bishops in every determinate particular Diocese. This interpretation, is
gathered out of Sotus his whole drift, which was to prove afterward against
Catharines, that the Residence of Bishops, is de iure diuino, of the divine
law; and also out of his words, cited by the Replyer n. 22. that the Bishop
must, adsalutem gregis oculate attendere; look as it were with his eye, to the
good of his flock: and, propter peculiarem curam and vigilantiam; for the
peculiar care and vigila^cy necessary to his Church. All which demonstrate
Sotus his meaning only to be, that Bishops, by the divine law must be so
applied to particular Churches, as may suffice for the good government of the
same, but not so absolutely, that when they may be otherwise provided for,
every Diocese must of necessity have its Bishop; which Sotus knew well to be
against the practice of the Church, wherein diverse Territoryes, as great as
Diocesses, are exempt from all particular Bishops. As Sotus teaches, that
Bishops must be applied to particular Diocesses; so he teaches, that Parish
Priests must be applied to particular Parishes, as may be seen in the words
cited by the Replyer; and it were strange, that Sotus should therefore be
alleged, to hold, it a divine law, that every Parish, have its Parish Priest,
if otherwise it be sufficiently provided. Sotus then must be understood, only
indeterminately, that some Diocesses must have their Bishops, because otherwise
they cannot be sufficiently governed; but not absolutely, that by the divine
law each one must have its Bishop, although otherwise it can be furnished with
all necessaryes. And this in effect is no more then we said in this Question n.
1. and euinceth, the no necessity of a Bishop in England, by the divine law, if
without a Bishop we can be sufficiently provided for. According to this true
meaning of Sotus, it follows not, as the Replyer thinks; Sotus teaches,
that there must be a Bishop in every particular Diocese: Ergo much more in
every notable part of the Church; because if a notable part of the Church, can
be otherwise well governed, it will no more, according to Sotus, require a
Bishop, then a particular Diocese. Yea there may hap to be a greater
obligation, of placing a Bishop, in some particular Diocese, then in a great
Country, where the Bishop cannot perform his office or cannot come without
great damage to Catholics, which are considerations depe^ding wholly upon
particular circumstances, and not to be determined by general notions of
greater, or less extent of place. Besides, M. Doctor alleged Sotus
absolutely; now the Replyer has recourse to inferences. If Sotus mean as the
Replyer will have him; That by the divine law, the Pope must apply a
particular Bishop to every Diocese, or rather to every place capable to be a
Diocese, the doctrine is not true in it self; and is against the Replier page
30. n. 12. who grants that the Pope may govern some little Provinces,
otherwise then by a Bishop, as we see frequently practiced in Territoryes of
good extent. It was then a hard shift out of a doctrine not true, by inference
to prove a point so prejudicial to Catholics, as M. Doctors conclusion was.
At least it cannot be denied, but Sotus his words, by this diversity of
Interpretation, appear to be obscure, and therefore could yield but uncertain
relief to M. Doctors hard assertion.

13. Concerning Bannez, see the Discussour n. 11. who truly affirmed, that he
made nothing for M. Doctor. When he teaches, that the Pope cannot remove
Bishops from a great part of the Church, he understands as we commonly call
one thing, a great part of another, as certainly one country is not a great
part of the Catholic church, which extends it self as far as the world,
especially, if in such a country, there be no more Catholics, then are in
England.

14. The Replyer n. 28. does his utmost to prove, that by divine Law, every
particular Church must have a Bishop, and when all comes to all, the point is
reduced to the necessity of Confirmation. But this is a weak ground, to oblige
Catholics to receive a Bishop, with increase of persecution. For first a
Bishop, for Confirmation only, can be no more necessary, then Confirmation it
self, which is not a Sacrament of necessity, and according to all Deuines, may
be omitted without sin, when commodiously it cannot be had; which certainly
happens, when a Bishop cannot come into the Country, but accompanied with
addition to a grievous persecution. 2. That Sacrament may be administered by a
Priest, with commission from the Pope. 3. Although it were necessarily to be
administered by a Bishop yet it requires, only Episcopal Order, with voluntary
jurisdiction, as Priests in England have over their Penitents. 4. It requires
not a Bishop belonging to England, or residing in that Kingdom. 5. M. Doctor
alleges the divine precept, of having Bishops in every notable part of the
Church, as a distinct argument from his other reason of the necessity of
Confirmation, as may be seen in his chap. 14. n. 4. and the Replyer does not
sufficiently defend M. Doctor, by flying from one to the other. The point
touching Confirmation belongs to the next Question.

15. All that he has n. 29. 30. 31. 32. is the very same with the objections,
of the Jnquisition Sect. 6. and is answered by the Qualificatour, in the same
section so clearly, as I need add no more.

16. By the same form of argument, whereby M. Doctor proved the necessity of a
Bishop, in every Country of exent, the Discussour said, it might be proved;
That in every Country, Religious Institute is to be maintained, because the
Pope is obliged to conserve it, in the whole Church of God. But there is no
more reason of one Country, then of another: Ergo it is to be mantayned in
every Country. To this the Replyer answers n. 33. 34. First, that Nicholas
Smith can not find out a divine precept, obliging the Pope to admit any
Religious Order, as he is bound to give Bishops to the Church. But I believe if
he consider the matter better, he will not adventure to say; That the Pope can
deprive the Church of a Religious Estate, Instituted by our Savior Christ,
whose Councels faithful people cannot, without injury, be universally hindered
to follow. Secondly, he answers; That he has proved it to be of the divine
law, that every notable part of the Church have a Bishop; whereas no Religious
Order is necessary by the divine law in every notable part of the Church. But
he neither has proved, what he assumeth as proved, nor does he answer the
form of Nicholas Smiths argument, which was the same with that, which M.
Doctor used to prove the necessity of a Bishop in England. And so when the
Replyer bids the Discussour make what he can of this answer; till he give a
better, this use any man may make of it, to say with truth, that it makes
nothing for M. Doctors reason, but only to show the insufficiency of it.

17. No less deficient is he, in satisfying another form of Argument, brought
by Nicholas Smith, in resemblance of that of M. Doctors: It is not of the
divine law, to have a Bishop in every particular Diocese of England: But, if
we respect the divine law, there is no more reason of one Diocese then
another; Ergo, all the Diocesses of England may be governed without a Bishop.
And the same argument may be made of all other Countries. To this form of
argument the Replyer answers; That there is more necessity of a Bishop in a
whole Country, then in every particular Diocese, which was not the question,
but whether it was not as good a form of argument, as that which M. Doctor
used. I omit to note, that the Replyer misciteth the Discussour, who said not,
that M. Doctor confessed, that a particular Diocese may be without a Bishop,
but spoke reseruedly, that M. Doctor seemed to confess it; which is true,
because he still expressly declared himself to speak, of a notable great part
of the Church. Howsoever, the thing it self is true, that the Pope is not, by
divine law, obliged to give a Bishop, to every place capable of one, as we see
often practiced. Would M. Doctor perhaps, have in England, as many Bishops, as
there be Diocesses? What mystery may there be, that the Replier does so
purposly conceal M. Doctors opinion in this point? To confirm more, what
Nicholas Smith said, I argue thus in M. Doctors form. It is not of the divine
law, that England have a Bishop: properly called Bishop of England, or of any
Diocese therein: But there is no more reason of England, then of other
Countries. Ergo all other Countries may be without a Bishop, properly called
Bishop of such Countries, or of any Diocese therein. This is M. Doctors form
of argument, and yet the consequence cannot by any Catholic be maintained.

18. At length the Replyer n. 36. agrees with us, that it must be left to the
supreme Pastors discretion, whether the divine law obliges a Country to have
a Bishop, in this, or that circumstance, and so M. Doctor and the Replyer
might have spared their pains, in proving that England must have a Bishop,
because there is a divine law, that every great part of the Church, as they
conceive England to be, have its proper Bishop. Yet I cannot approve his other
saying, that when we demand any thing, there is more reason to demand, that
which is ordinary, then that which is extraordinary, and therefore England may
demand an Ordinary. For the rule of wise men ought rather to be, that they
demand, what is most suitable to time place, and other Circumstances, and not
what is ordinary, or extraordinary. God grant our case of England, were not
extraordinary, and much different from that of other Catholic Countries.

19. He does likewise not a little relent, in the same n. 36. where fynding M.
Doctor sore pressed by the Discussour n. 15.16. that his arguments, if they
pass for good, must also prove, that Scotland is obliged to have its Bishop,
yea that both England, and Scotland must have an Ordinary, properly so called,
because Scotland is a Country of extent, and by the divine law, beside the
supreme Pastor, there must be other Ordinaryes, or Ecclesiastical Princes in
the whole Church, and consequently (according to the grounds of M. Doctor and
the Replyer) every notable part of the Church, must have a Bishop, in that
proper sense. To this the Replyer answers: If England, and Scotland be both
notable parts of the Church, both ought to have, by the divine law, their
proper Bishop, be he Ordinary, or Delegate. If? Does he begin to doubt,
whether they be both notable parts of the Church, or Churches of extent? Or can
he assign us a divine law for England, not for Scotland? I see, he may in time
accord with Nicholas Smith, whom ere while he so much taxed, for saying, that
England, as now things stand, is no notable part of Gods whole Church.
Moreuer, the divine law, of having some Bishops in the Church, is of Ordinaryes
in an ordinary manner, not of Delegates; and therefore if Delegates suffice in
England, or Scotland, it is a sign the divine law does not oblige in those
Countries; and if by Bishops Delegates the divine law be fulfilled, it may be
fulfilled by Priests Delegates, for as much as concerns jurisdiction.

20. I will answer his n. 37. only by adding, what he leaves out in citing
the Discussours words q. 7. n. 15. I (says Nicholas Smith) would most
willingly spend my blood, for purchasing of times, suitable with the enjoying a
Catholic Bishop in England. Where the Replyer leaves off, and makes a long
needless descant upon a point every plain, if he had added the words,
immediately following, namely (endued with as much authority, as any particular
Bishop in the whole Church of God.) Which times almighty God grant us with
speed, if so it be his divine will.

21. The confutation of M. Doctors arguments, drawn from the Affrican Church,
is by the Replyer answered, with a gentle, and implicit concession, of all that
the Discussour had objected. For omitting all particulars, he tells us, that
they were alleged by M. Doctor, only to show their zeal, and great desire
of a Bishop. But seeing Nicholas Smith did show, that there was no parity
betwixt their case and ours, and also that the Affrican Bishops, did not
approve the peoples zeal, but rather gave a president, that zeal is to be
tempered with discretion, the said examples, were neither rightly alleged by
M. Doctor, nor is M. Doctor well defended by the Replyer. As far as
Knowledge will give way, English Catholics will yielde to none, in zeal to
have a Bishop.

THE IIII. QVESTION. Whether a Country, although the Persecution should be
increased, by occasion of having a Bishop, could refuse one, if it were only
for the Sacrament of Confirmation.
THE Replyer charge Nicholas Smith, for changing the question, as if he had
imposed upon M. Doctor that he taught, every man in particular to be obliged,
to hazard goods, liberty, and life, for enjoying Confirmation, whereas M.
Doctor only spoke of persecution in general. But Nicholas Smith never imposed
upon M. Doctor that saying, nor do the Discussours words, alleged by the
Replyer, import any such matter, but he ever spoke of persecution, to be
increased by the coming of a Bishop, which might as well fall upon this, as
that man, and in that sense, every one in particular, might fear it for
himself. Yet Nicholas Smith never disputed, whither some in particular, might
not, without danger, receive Confirmation, supposing we had a Bishop, which
touched not the question in hand. For certain it is, that Confirmation cannot
be said, to be had commodiously, (which was the point that made most for the
purpose) if it cannot be received, without a Bishop, whose very coming, was
supposed to cause increase of persecution, to Catholics in general; which is
more considerable, then if it were certain, that by his coming, some one man
only were to suffer damage, as Nicolas Smith n. 17. said truly, but is not
rightly taken by the Replyer n. 5. And by this is answered his long discourse
n. 29. 30. 31. 32.

2. His arguments, concerning Perfect Christianity are examined in the
Qualification sect. 4. where it is explicated, in what sense we are by
Confirmation, made perfect Christians, and is demonstrated, that Nicholas Smith
never denied it, in the sense in which the holy Fathers spoke.

3. Likewise the Qualificatour sect. 3. shows that Nicolas Smith, concerning
the authority of S. Clements Epistles, has no more, yea less, then is to be
read in Bellarmine, Possouinus Sixtus Senensis, and Baronius. And further
shows, that Nicolas Smith does not reject them, as Heretics do; and lastly,
that the said Epistles make nothing against the Discussour.

4. That which M. Doctor and the Replyer should have done, and by Nicolas
Smith n. 16. were urged to do, should have bin, to prove that to be perfect
Christians in the Fathers sense, was of so great necessity, that for attayning
thereof, Catholics ought to endure persecution: But this neither M. Doctor
did perform, nor does the Replyer, as much as take notice of. And truly in
what sense soever we take S. Clement, and other Fathers, or Councels, teaching,
that without Confirmation we are not perfect Christians, nor properly
Christians, yea not Christians at all (for so some speak) it is always to be
understood, if that Sacrament be omitted voluntarily, when it may be had,
otherwise we may be perfect Christians; that is, it shall not be imputed to us,
that we are not perfect Christians, but God will supply that want by other
means. As if a Cathecumen, believing perfectly in Christ, dye without Baptism
yet with intense Contrition, not having possibility to be actually baptized, he
may be said to dye a Christian, yea a good, and holy Christian; because the
want of Baptismal Character is not imputed to him (as it would to one, who by
his fault had omitted it) in regard he wantes it, only negative not privative;
he has it not, yet wa^ts it not, by reason in that case he was not bound to
have it in act, but only in effectual desire. As after Baptism, remission of
deadly sins, the proper effect of the Sacrament of Penance, may be obtained by
Contrition, as it includes a desire of that Sacrament; which desire in that
case, is reputed for the act. This is a clear explication, of those words left
out by M. Doctor, in citing S. Clement (si non necessitate etc. Jf he shall
remain so, not upon necessity, but by carelessness, or voluntarily.) Which
were words of chief importance, when we disputed of omitting Confirmation,
not carelessly, but for just fear of persecution, because we are not bound to
be perfect Christians, in that peculiar sense, with so great damage; nor will
the want of such perfection, in that case, be imputed to us, but God of his
goodness, will be ready to supply, the effect of Confirmation, for as much as
concerns actual grace, and assistance, without the Character; because, upon
that supposition, of persecution to be increased, there is a moral kind of
impossibility to receive it. By which observation, falls down all that the
Replyer objects, n. 16. about Baptism not actually received, and Confirmation
n. 22. and both Baptism and Confirmation n. 23. as the Reader will perceive, by
applying to his objections, what even now I have noted. For we do not say, that
without unction one can be anointed, although it be omitted upon necessity,
but only, that the want of it shall not be imputed, yea shall be otherwise
supplied; and the like I say of Baptism: whereas if unction be omitted
voluntarily, the party shall be anointed neither Sacramentally, by the
character, nor Equiualently by other helps from God, and so he shall deserve
to be truly called not a perfect Christian. By the way I observe, that n. 22.
he confounds two disstinct answers given by the Discussour, by which means
it is easy to make a show of difficulty, or to confute any two opinions, or
answers given as different, yet both as probable, as Scholars daily give
diverse probable answers to one difficulty, which taken together cannot both
subsist, being quite different, or contrary; and if one be determinatly
embraced as true, the other must be relinquished as not true, all-though it may
still retain its probability, and to some other man perhaps seem also more
true. The Qualificatour Sect. 7. n. 17. shows that other Catholic Authors,
might well leave out those words of S. Clement (if not by necessity etc.)
because they treated not the case of persecution, of which M. Doctor did
speak, and so they had no like obligation to cite those words.

5. But (says the Replyer) rather Nicolas Smith falsifyeth S. Clement, whose
words are these: All therefore must make have, without delay to be regenerated
to God, and then to be co^signed by the Bishop etc. And when he shall be
regenerated by water, and afterward confirmed by the Bishop, with the
seauenfolde grace of the spirit, for otherwise he cannot be a perfect
Christian, nor have place amongst the perfect, if he so remain, not by
necessity but by carelessness, or volu^tarily. Where the Discussour left out
these words (nor have place amongst the perfect,) which he thinks to be of
great importance, and to signify that he cannot be admitted to the sacred
Eucharist, nor to the rank of the^ that are admitted to it, if not by
necessity, but voluntarily he shall so remain. For if by necessity, the party
baptized wanted Confirmation, he might be admitted to the Eucharist. But I am
not of his opinion that those words were of importance, and dare assure him in
the Discussours behalf, that he never dreamed of any mystery, which could move
him, purposely to omit them. It is very strange that the Discussour should be
blamed, for omitting only the mentioned words, and M. Doctor excused, although
he left out the very same words, and also the words that followed (Jf not by
necessity etc.) Are you so unfriendly to Nieolas Smith, that upon condition to
espy one omission in him, you are content to acknowledge a double one in M.
Doctor? Your self must satisfy for Nicolas Smith, and answer your own
arguments n. 22.23. wherewith you so much pressed the Discussour; for in S.
Clement, these words (If not by necessity, but by etc.) are refered to both the
precedet clauses (he cannot be a perfect Christian) and to the other (nor have
place among the perfect) as appears by the coniunctio^ (nor) and therefore S.
Clement signifies, that he cannot be a perfect Christian, if not by necessity,
but voluntarily he omit Confirmation. Wherefore those words, nor have place
amongst the perfect, either are but a repetition or explication of the former,
or if they signify somewhat else, they have no more reference to the words (If
not by necessity etc.) then the other clause (he cannot be a perfect Christian)
which as I explicated above, signify, that the want of perfect christianity,
acquired by actual unction, and by receiving a military Character, shall not
be imputed to him, but that God will supply the grace of Confirmation, by other
means, if indeed he want it upon necessity, as they do, who are deprived of
it, upon just fear of persecution. The Replyers explication of these words
(nor have place amongst the perfect) must be rejected by himself for he
teaches, that there was in these times, an Ecclesiastical custom of being
confirmed, before one received the B. Eucharist, and consequently it was not
lawful to do it, except in some case of necessity; for example, at the hour
of death, when the divine precept of communicating did oblige and as it were
drown the Ecclesiastical precept; in which case the person vnconfirmed was
bound to receive the B. Sacrament, whether he had omitted Confirmation by
necessity, or voluntarily; only he was bound to have Contrition for his former
omission. And therefore the Replyer cannot assign any case, in these times, of
disparity betwixt him, who had omitted Confirmation voluntarily, and him who
had omitted it upon necessity; because when such a necessity did urge, both of
them might, and ought to receive the Blessed Sacrament, (and so according to
the Replyers explication have place amongst the perfect;) and when no such
necessity did happen, neither of them could receive the B. Eucharist: and
therefore as I said, the Replyers explication cannot subsist with his own
grounds. Moreover, Nicholas Smith had reason to think it a hard doctrine that
without Confirmation, we shall be sure to want such a perfection in our
Christianity, as we should be obliged under sin, to suffer a general
persecution, for redeeming the want of such a perfection. For to that severe
purpose M. Doctor alleged S. Clement and in that sense Nicolas Smith had
reason to deny, that without Confirmation we could not be perfect Christians.

6. What he says n. 27. that Confirmation is a perfecting unction, is not
against the Discussour, who never denied it, nor ever treated, whether S. Denis
in his 5. Chapter spoke of Confirmation; but only says, and proves, that in
the said Chapter, he speaks also of oil used in Baptism, and that therefore
out of such general speeches alone, M. Doctor could not infer any thing
peculiar to Confirmation. See the Discuss. n. 17. which in this point is clear
enough.

7. The Reader must understand with circumspection, the Replyers doctrine n.
10. That God obliges himself, to give the special grace of Confirmation (to
profess our faith) to such as receive it. For this must be understood, if
Persons Confirmed, do on their part concur with Gods grace, moving, and
inciting them, to the observation of his commandments, and performance of other
good works, according to his inspirations, besides the only receiving of
Confirmation. Otherwise he may justly deny them particular efficacious grace,
permitting them to fail in the Confession of their faith, whiles others, by
humble frequentation of other Sacraments, and diligence in good works, do by
those means supply the want of Confirmation, and remain constant, in the
confession fo their faith. Likewise, whereas n. 40. and in other places, he
teaches, that Confirmation is the ordinary means to get grace, for confessing
our faith; If he understand that all other means are extraordinary, his
doctrine is not true. For otherwise Confirmation were a necessary means, for
the profession of our faith, and for salvation; so as no man vnconfirmed, could
without miracle confess his faith, although he inculpably omit Confirmation,
and otherwise keep the commandments, frequent Sacraments, be assiduous in
prayer, and fervent in all other good works: which no man can defend. If, by
ordinary means, he understand a means ordained to give grace, for the
Confession of our faith, the doctrine is good. But thence does not follow, that
other means also may not suffice, for the Confession of our faith, because the
same end may be attained by different means. See the Qualification Sect. 4. n.
7. Nevertheless, if in some particular case, one did in Conscience persuade
himself that without Confirmation, he should not have strength to profess his
faith, such an one were bound to receive that Sacrament, as Conick related by
the Replyer n. 41. affirms. But this is per accidens, as one may some time be
obliged to fast, or undertake other corporal austerityes, to confess, receive
the B. Sacrament, or some such pious work, if he were in Conscience persuaded,
that without such a particular determinate means, he could not overcome some
temptation.

8. From the 33. to the 38. number he endeavors to defend M. Doctors
saying, That Eusebius recounteth, Nouatus to have fallen, for want of
Confirmation. First, he answers, that indeed Eusebius does not say so in
express terms: Ergo do I infer, M. Doctor said not well, that Nouatus
fell for want of Confirmation, as Eusebius has remarked, for so, he speaks
in his Epistle n. 18. Secondly, he tells us, that Eusebius does insinuate so
much. But M. Doctor says more: and I deny, that Eusebius does otherwise
insinuate it, then by saying, that he wanted the grace of Confirmation; as
likewise he relates, that he was ambitious, with many other crimes. And indeed
his schism, and heresy may be ascribed to his ambition, and opposition to
Cornelius for the Popedom, rather then to any thing else. For Heresy, and
schism, are the immediate brood of pride, and ambition. Thirdly he says,
that at least it may be probably inferred out of Eusebius, that Nouatus fell
for want of Confirmation. But here we talk not of inferences, but whether, or
no, Eusebius do affirm it? Neither does it follow; He fell, and wanted
Confirmation: Ergo, he fell for want of Confirmation. For as he wanted
Confirmation, so was he ambitious, and laden with other sins. Yet Nicholas
Smith out of respect to that Sacrament, said, it might well be, he fell for
want of Confirmation, as also it may be, that he fell, both for his sin of
neglecting, and contemning that Sacrament, and jointly for other his gross
enormityes. Only I still deny, that Eusebius says, he fell for want of
Confirmation. His last answer is, that others before M. Doctor have written
out of Eusebius, that Nouatus fell for want of Confirmation, which is to
confess that M. Doctor takes his arguments upon trust, in a matter
concerning the obligation of afflicted Catholics, to endure a heauyer
persecution, and upon trust from Authors, who treated not that particular,
important Conclusion, which M. Doctor was to prove: and this is so much the
more to be wondered at, because, the example of Nouatus, is by him diverse times
repeated, as if it were some Maister-peece, and yet finally the Replyer
confesses, that M. Doctor took it from the notes of the Rhemes Testament,
granting thereby, that for alleging some other Authors, to the same effect, he
is obliged to the Replyer, and so not those Authors, but only the Rhemes
Testament can excuse M. Doctor. But indeed, neither those Venerable Authors of
the said notes, nor other Catholic Authors, can give excuse for his
misalleadging Eusebius. For out of Eusebius they clearly prove against
hereticques, that Confirmation is a Sacrament, and a thing not to be contemned,
because for want of it Nouatus received not the holy Ghost, and was by
Cornelius condemned for neglect to receive it. All which Eusebius does in
express teames relate, and so makes good, what Catholic Authors intend to
prove against Hereticques, although indeed he say not, that Nouatus fell for
want of Confirmation, which made not much to the purpose of the said Catholic
Authors. But the strengh of M. Doctors argument, does wholly rely, upon
Eusebius his affirming, that Nouatus actually fell for want of Confirmation.
For it was to prove, that without Confirmation, if one fall not, others
probably will, as (says he) Nouatus did for want of it. Thus he speaks Chap.
14. n. 8. and in other places. And it had binne a strange argument, to say:
Nouatus fell not: Ergo, English Catholics by his example, may fear to fall.

9. But what if M. Doctor do also mistake the Rhemes Testament, and so the
Replyer in lieu of apologizing for M. Doctor his misalleadging Eusebius, be
put to defend both M. Doctor and himself, for mistaking those very notes of
the Rhemes Testament? I believe it will prove so. We must therefore distinguish
a double fall of Nouatus. The one, when for fear of persecution he denied
himself to be Priest, refusing to help some Christians in necessity, and
hazard, for which and the like occasions, against fear in time of Persecution,
Confirmation is peculiarly ordained. His other fall, was into schism,
opposition to Cornelius for the Popedom, and heresy. This second lapse was not
caused by fear of persecution, but proceeded from pride, ambition, and
neglect, or contempt of Confirmation, which in him was either a formal act of
heresy, or a disposition preparing his soul for a fall into further schism,
and heresy: neither did he in this second kind of fall deny himself to be
Priest, but rather sought to usurp the highest Priesthood; and the persecution
tended not to drive men into schism or heresy, but wholly to bereave them of
Christianity. Now M. Doctor must understand, that Nouatus his fall, or denying
himself to be Priest, in the foresaid circumstances, for fear of persecution,
happened, because he wanted Confirmation; whereas the Rhemes Testament says no
such matter, but speaks only of his fall to heresy, and of his contempt of
that Sacrament, and so makes nothing for M. Doctors purpose. Let us hear the
words of the Rhemes Testament, cited by the Replyer n. 36. Never none denied,
or contemned the Sacrament of Confirmation, and holy Chrisme, but known
Heretics. S. Cornelius that Blessed Martyr so much praised of S. Cyprian,
affirms that Nouatus fell to heresy, for that he had not received the holy
Ghost, by the consignation of a Bishop, whom all the Nouatians did follow,
never using that holy Chrisme. What is here for M. Doctors purpose concerning
the fall of Nouatus for fear of persecution? Perhaps, if he had bin more
persecuted, he had not binne so subject to ambition, and prone to schism, and
heresy. Bayus likewise, cited by the Replyer, speaks of Nouatus his propension
to heresy, and so makes no more in excuse of M. Doctor then the Rhemes
Testament did. Besides, the Replier gives no answer at all, to Nicholas
Smith, showing, that the case of Nouatus, was infinitely different, from that of
our Catholics in England, although it were granted that Nouatus indeed fell
for want of Confirmation, which he omitted not upon just cause, but neglected,
and contemned, whom all the Nouatians did follow, never using that holy
Chrisme, as even now we have heard out of the Rhemes Testament. The Replyer
then is many ways deficient in this point. I could add, that M. Doctor cites
Eusebius more then once, very particularly, lib. 6. Chap. 33. alias 34. whereas
the Rhemes Testament cites Chap. 35. so as it is not very obuious, how M.
Doctor took his relation from those notes, seeing with such particularity, he
cites Eusebius differently from them. But I will not be so minute with the
Replyer.

10. In his number 40. he says, that many who may commodiously receive
Confirmation, have right to receive it, and that the rest of Catholics
cannot, for a general persecution, deprive them of that right. But this at the
most proves, that if once we have a Bishop, those who may commodiously receive
Confirmation, cannot be hindered, but not that they should be wronged, if others
for avoiding a general persecution, and providing for their own indemnity
should, by lawful, and orderly means, oppose the coming of a Bishop. Rather,
the particular good of some, must give place to the general harm of others.
Besides, the danger being general, every one might fear that it would fall
upon himself.

11. To prove, that a Bishop cannot be refused, he brings this reason n. 43.
It cannot be denied, but that Christians are more able, and likely to profess
their faith, with the Sacrament of Confirmation, then without it, and that more
in a Country persecuted, are like to stand to the Profession of their faith,
with this Sacrament, then without it; Ergo, in a Country persecuted, and
destitute of this Sacrament, many do fall, who otherwise would stand; and for
every one that stands, perhaps twenty will fall. God forbid. Hitherto we have
not, nor I hope ever shall behold so twentifold infirmily in our glorious
Catholics. To your argument, I answer. No doubt, out considering the
Sacrament of Confirmation in it self, Christians are more able to profess
their faith with it, then without it yet if we suppose, that by the very having
of it, persecution must be increased, some will be of opinion, that more might
be in danger to fall by reason of that increase of Persecution, then in calmer
times, although they wanted Confirmation. And if the Antocedent be granted
without distinction, yet it would not infer the necessity of a Bishop, with
increase of Perfecution. No doubt, but by often receiving the Sacrament of
Penance, and the most B. Sacrament of the Altar, for example, every eight
days, Christians are more enabled, to profess their faith then without them.
Will therefore the Replyer, impose upon Catholics, an obligation of frequenting
those Sacraments, every eight days, even with increase of persecution? Which
instance will be of more force, if one affirm (as I doubt not but diverse will)
that by humble, and diligent frequenting those two Sacraments, persons who
without their fault want Confirmation, may be thought to have greater strength,
for professing their faith, then such as have received Confirmation but are
remiss in frequenting those other two Sacraments.

12. Yet M. Doctor, and the Replyer, come short of their intent, unless they
can further prove, that persecution is to be undergone, not only for enjoying
Confirmation, but also, for the assurednes or vudoubtednes the ^ro by having it
from a Bishop, as I touched in the first Question n. 2. and the Discussour
handles n. 8. and the Qualificator Sect. 6 n. 21.22. Which point, and diverse
others in this Question treated by Nicholas Smith are omirted by the Replyer,
as may be seen in the Discussion.

THE V. QVESTION. Concerning M. Doctors Comparison between Bishops, inferior
Pastors, and Religtous men.
1. IN this Question, the Replyer extends himself either in proving things
expressly granted and taught by Nicholas Smith as that the state of a Bishop, is
higher then that of a Religious man; or else in impugning Nicholas Smith, as if
he had said, what he never said nor thought, and therefore we may be more breife
in returning him an answer. Only, I must renew my first request to the Reader
that if he find any seeming difficulty, objected by the Reptyer, he will be
pleased to peruse Nicholas Smiths words, before he spend his judgment.

2. The Qualificator Sect. 4. n. 16.17.18. answers the objections of the
Inquisition, and Reply against Nicholas Smiths saying, that the state of a
Bishop does suppose, but not give perfection which is the express doctrine of
Suarez and common among Deuines. The state of a Bishop is not only different,
but also separable from Episcopal Order, or Character, as is manifest in a
Bishop confirmed not consecrated, who has the state, not the Character of a
Bishop. Nicholas Smith never denied, that Episcopal consecration conferreth
grace, but only that Episcopal state of it self yields means to acquire
personal perfection. By this is answered what the Replier obiecteth n.
14.15.16.17.

3. To prove that in some case, an Oath not to be Religious, is not wicked, he
alleges n. 26. the command of the sea Apostolic, that all those, who will
enjoy the benefit of the Popes Seminaries, do swear that they will be Priests,
and will not enter into any Religious Order, or Congregation, without license
of the Pope, unless they first labor in the Mission, the space of three
years. I answer Nicolas Smith spoke of an absolute Vow (or oath) not to enter
into Religion, which certainly is inualid, and unlawful, and may be well
termed wicked. For what greater disordination can there be in man's will, then
deliberatly to swear, or vow, that he will resist almighty God, inspiring him
to follow those Counsels, which were recommended by the Savior of mankind? The
oath alleged by the Replyer, is as it were conditional (not without the
Popes leave, or the leave of his Nuntio, for so is the oath now conceived) and
temporary (for the space of three years.) The reason of difference is, because
a vow is inualid, if it be impeditiuum maioris boni, incompatible with a
greater good, as a temporary and conditional vow is not. For, not to enter
into Religion without leave, or not for a certain time, does not absolutely
hinder entering into Religion. If one vow to make a pilgrimage, or to perform
some such pious work, the vow is valid, although the performance thereof, do
for a time, hinder the Pilgrims entering into Religion. Neither does it follow,
that therefore a Pilgrimage, is an act more perfect, then the embracing of a
Religious life, taking holy Orders etc. Or that the Vocation of students in the
Seminaryes, is more perfect then the state of a Bishop out of England, which
yet Seminarists, by reason of their oath to go into England, cannot embrace
without leave, at least, unless first they satisfy their dath, by coming into
England. Or that the state of Religion, or Vocation of Seminary Priests is more
or less perfect, by the expiring, or not expiring of three years, after which
time, seeing all may freely enter into Religion, even in England, it is a
sign, that Religious state, all things considered, is to be preferred.

4. Without any necessity, he endeauoreth to prove, that in case of necessity
of the church, when it cannot be otherwise provided, a vow to accept a
Bishoprike is lawful, of which Nicholas Smith did not dispute, but only said
in general that a Vow not to accept a Bishopric is lawful, which no man can
deny, unless he will oppose himself to all those Popes, who have approved the
Institute of the society of Jesus. And those very words, which the Replyer n.
32. without cause, notes Nicholas Smiths to have left out of S. Thomas 2.2. q.
185. a. 1. (Unless in a manifest, and imminent necessity) confirm what Nicolas
Smith said, that according to S. Thomas, it seems presumption to desire a
Bishopric, even for the good of souls, namely speaking in general, and not
in some particular case of necessity, which is not very frequent; and who I
pray you, will persuade himself, that he alone is fit for so high a state? It
is also most true that, Valentia as he is cited by Nicholas Smith, teaches,
that (in general and abstracting from particular case of necessity) to desire
a Bishopric, even for what is best in it, is commonly a deadly sin,
although the Replyer tells us, that Valentia thinks oftentimes it is a
mortal sin. Besides, Nicolas Smith, because he would not meddle with that
dispute, knowing there was multiplicity of opinions, after he had alleged the
doctrine of Valentia warily, added: This belongs not to me to define. But the
Replyer willingly takes all occasions to dilate himself.

5. His 33. and 33. numbers, are employed, by occasion of a mere partly
misinterpreting, and partly misciting Nicolas Smith n. 7. as the judicious
Reader will find, by perusing the place in the Discussour.

6. I cannot excuse the Replyer from fault in saying n. 37. that Nicholas Smith
affirms, that a Bishop elected, yea and confirmed may marry. Nicolas Smith
his words number. 8. are these: A Bishop, not in holy Orders, Elected, may
lawfully marry, and some also hold, that a Bishop confirmed may do the same;
but of this I do not dispute, yet if he marry, it is valid. Nicholas Smith then
only says, that some hold that a Bishop confirmed may marry, which is true,
but himself a bstayneth from that Question.

7. He shows that willingly he would find fault with any thing while n. 36.
he tells us, that S. Thomas 1. 2. q. 104 ar. 4. as he is cited by Nicolas
Smith, says nothing of the Evangelical Counsels, yet confesfeth that in his
q. 108. ar. 4. he teaches that, for which Nicolas Smith cireth him, namely,
that Evangelical counsels are proper to the new law. The misciting of the
place was an error of the print, as the Replyer might have seen in Nicolas
Smith himself page 161. where the same place of S. Thomas is cited aright.

8. What he writes n. 37 of the knights of Calatraud etc. is answered by the
Qualificatour sect. 5 n. 4. etc. by occasion of a like objection made by the
Inquisitor.

9. His saying n. 41. that Regulars, as Regulars, are not to have care, or
charge of others, but of their own so dies, is either a mere Equivocation, or
a doctrine very untrue, and often confuted by the Discussour. For some Regular
Priests, as Regulars, have at least as much to do with other men's souls, as
secular Priests, as secular, have; and if Regular Priests, be also Bishops, and
Pastors, they are equal to secular Bishops, and Pastors. Every body knows,
that Religion in general, is divided into the Active, Contemplative, and Mixte
life, by which such Religious are obliged to atte^d, both to their own
perfection, and to the help of others, neither does that Mixed kind of life,
make a Regular to be Secular; Ergo such Regulars, even as they are Regulars,
and not seculars, are to help others. If secular, as secular, did artend to the
help of others then all seculars should attend to the help of others, even lay
men, and women, according to the Replyers frequent-manner of disputing, who is
wont to infer, that if Regulars, as Regulars, were of the Hierarchy (and the
same may be said of attending to the help of others) then all Regulars, even
lay-Brothers, and Religious women, should be of the Hierarchy, and attend to
the help of others. If he say, that secular Priests, not precisely as Secular,
but as Pastors, attend to the help of others, the same say I of Regulars if
they be made Pastors. In a word, he ought to compare Regular as Regular, with
secular as secular, Regular Priests, with secular Priests, Regular Bishops or
Pastors, with Secular Bishops or Pastors, which yet could never be obtained of
M. Doctor, or the Replyer. This manner of unequal reduplication, Nicolas
Smith reprehended, and not reduplications in general, which every body so well
knows to be usual in Schools, that the Replyer need not to have taken so
much pains to prove it q. 6. n. 1. I add, that these Religious, who by their
Institute, must help others, by preaching, administering Sacraments etc. must
also by their Religious Institute be Priests; but no Secular, precisely as
Secular, is bound to be Priest. I say precisely as Secular, for a Secular man,
by some other title, may be obliged to be Priest.

10. The Discussour n. 11. says that a Bishop is obliged to enlighten others,
and give his life for his flock, by justice, in regard of mantenance, and
honor affoarded him by his flock, or by the virtue of Fidelity, in respect of
a certain implicit pact, whereby he obliges himself, when he is made
Bishop. But Religious men, merely upon Charity, or Religion (more noble
Virtues, then Justice or Fidelity) do illuminate others, and adventure their
life for the saving of souls, obliged, not only by Institute, but also by
particular vow made to that effect. In which doctrine I can espy nothing blame
worthy. But the Replyer n. 43. somety mes cites these words of Nicholas Smith
by halfes, and somtymes draws them to an odious sense, as if Bishops performed
their functions mercinarily, for honor, and mantenance, or, as if their giving
their life for their sheep, were not a work of Heroical Charity, or did not
require in the Bishop very great Charity according as our Savior said Joan.
21. Amas me? Pasce ones meas: whereas the Discussour only says, that the
obligation which Bishops have, arises from the virtues of Justice, and
Fidelity, although when they give their life for their flock, administer
Sacraments etc. they may exercise acts of diverse virtues, as Charity, Religion,
Fortitude, Patience etc. yet, as I said, the obligation of those very acts
originally proceeds from the virtues of Justice, and Fidelity; and if another
man, should chance voluntarily to exercise the same acts, he should not
perform them, by the same title, and obligation of Justice, by which Bishops,
and Pastors, are bound to perform them. The soldier, by reason of his pay,
is bound to adueture his life, wherein he may exercise acts of Fortitude,
Charity to his Country, Religion in a pious cause, and of other virtues; and
yet his obligation to these acts of virtues, radically proceeds from Justice.
Neither can we rightly affirm that he dies for his Pay, if he chance to loose
his life, but only that by reason of his Pay, in Justice he was bound to dye.

11. The Discussour n. 12. says: Merit does not confist in office, but in
acts thereof. Would any man think that in this speech there could be
difficulty? Or does any say, that we merit otherwise then by acts? Yet the
Replyer is not pleased with it and enters into a question, which would require
a long dispute, to wit: When there, and how far the dignity of the person,
dignifyeth the operation? Which Axiom requires many limitations, and
explications, as for example; If a Bishop pay his debts, fast, or the like, I
see not why by these acts he should merit more, then a private Person, endued
with equal degree of justifying grace, and working with equal fervor:
neither can I hold for true, what the Replyer says, that the same action done
by a Regular, and a Bishop, are more meritorious in a Bishop, then in a
Regular, not only in respect of actions, proper to the State of a Bishop, but
also of other actions; unless the Bishop be more in Gods favor, and do those
actions, with greater perfection. If it were to our present purpose, one might
add, that in Scholasticall rigor, for the point in hand, there is great
difference betwixt height of Office, and Dignity of person, as our B. Saviors
operations were of insinite value and merit, by reason of the dignity of his
person, not precisely, and formally by any office.

12. In his 49. and diverse other numbers he treats of Secular Curates
compared with Religious Priests: and no doubt but that some things there are,
wherein Secular Curates excel a Religious Priest, not Curate; which his
arguments do prove, and no more. But the Question is, whether all things
considered, a Religious Priest be not more perfect then a secular Curate, as S.
Thomas 2.2. q 184. art. 8. cited by the Discussour n. 14. proposes the
Question, and resolves it in favor of Religious Priests, as may be seen at
large in the Discussion. And the Replyer n. 54. cites Suarez very imperfectly,
that so he may seem the more to favor Secular Curats. For he, tomo 3. de
Relig. lib. 1. cap. 21. absolutely prefers Religious Priests, teaching that the
state of inferior Pastors is more perfect only in speculation, not in
practice, or secundumquid, in some sort, seu ex quadam hypothesi, quae
moraliter vix adimpletur; or upon a certain supposition which morally speaking
is scarsely fulfilled. The Replyers arguments, That secular Curats are
Illuminators and Agents, and therefore more perfect then those who are
illuminated, do not concern Religious men in respect of whom Secular Curats
are no Illuminators. Besides according to S. Thomas, Secular Curates do
illuminate not principaliter, but with limitation, and some participation from
the Bishop, who by office is principal Illuminatour etc.

13. Because S. Thomas, and out of him M. Doctor proved, that the state of a
Bishop is more perfect, then that of a Religious man, because otherwise a
Religious ma could not be made a Bishop, for that were retrospicere, to look
back; The Discussour by the same reason proves, that Religious state is more
perfect, then the vocation of a Secular Curate, because he may lawfully enter
into Religion. The Replyer answers that the reason of this is because
Religious vocation, is more secure then that of a Curate, not because it is
more noble. But he does not satisfy. For according to this answer, a Secular
Curate might forsake his charge, and leading a private life, attend to himself,
without obligation to give account for the souls of others, which no doubt
were more secure; and yet the Replier would not excuse such a one from a
Retrospection. Moreover a Religious state is more secure then that of a Bishop,
and yet a Bishop cannot without leave enter into Religion, as a Secular Curate
may; Ergo, it is a sign that Religious vocation is not only more secure, but
also more perfect then that of a Secular Curate, especially if we add, what
the Replyer seems to admit, that as the Bishop is wedded, and has a pact
with his Church, so also, in proportion, a Curate has with his charge.

14. He says n. 62. that he will not interpret so rigorously, the words of the
Oath, which students in the Seminaryes do take, as if they were bound to
return into England, so often, as the Superiors of the said Seminaryes shall
command. Neither will I dispute of that point, but only say, that what soever
perfection they have by reason of that oath, they owe it to Regulars, by whose
motion the taking of that oath was enjoined. If we respect the practice, I
conceive that the Replyer will find men, more eminent in the English Clergy
then himself, not to admit of so strict an interpretation, and consequently,
that the Replyer cannot by virtue of the said oath, place Seminary Priests in
an immouable state. Without doubt, Religious men have an obligation to
transfer themselves into England, as often as their Superiors shall so
command. Moreover seeing Regulars in England, expose themselves to the same
dangers, and exercise the same functions, with Secular Priests, and in the same
manner, namely, by Delegation, and Commission, not as Ordinary Pastors; it
follows, that in this, Regulars are equal to them, and in respect of
Religious state surpass them, as Nicholas Smith n. 16. observed, and therefore
the comparison betwixt Regular Priests, and Secular Curates, can only be in
respect of such, as are Ordinaryes. Wherefore the Replyers saying n. 62. that
the Seminary Priests, under the Bishop, is the highest calling in the Church of
God, is not to be approved, if he intend to prefer their calling before all
Regulars, who certainly, as Regulars, excel them, as Seculars, and in Calling,
some are at least equal. I say, at least, because there want not Regulars, who
are bound by an especial Vow, to expose their lives for the good of souls,
not only in England, or for a limited time, but perpetually, and in whatsoever
most remote place of the world; and even in that respect, although they had no
other Vow of obedience, are in an immovable state, bynding them to acts of
great perfection, with hazard of liberty, and life, forsaking of Country,
kinsfolks, friends etc. I will not stand with him, whether Pastors in
Catholic Countries, who are properly Ordinaryes, will be content, that he
prefer the Seminary Priests Calling, before theyrs, whereby they are also
obliged to hazard their Isues for their sheep, and with greater immobility,
then Seminary Priests are. This I will say, that his assertion destroys those
grounds whereby n. 42. he end eauoureth to prefer the Calling of Secular
Curates, before those Religious, who by their Institute perform the functions
of Pastors, by Preaching, admanistring Sacraments etc. For the same reasons,
which there he allead geth, in favor of Curates, against Religious men, do in
the very same manner urge against Seminary Priests, all being reduced to this,
that Curates do those functions by Ordinary right and office, Religious by
Commission, Delegation, and Privileges, as likewise Seminary Priests do: and
therefore he must either prefer those Religious, or not prefer Seminary
Priests before Curates. Besides, if Seminary Priests ought to be preferred
before Curates, because they daily hazard their liberty, and life; Curates will
say, that this reason proves too much, namely, that the Seminary Priests
calling is not only the highest under the Bishop, but also, that it is higher
then the calling of those Bishops, who do not daily hazard their liberty and
life, that is to say, of most part of Bishops. Lastly, if once the Replyer
grant, that the Ordinary Pastorship of Curates, may be preponderated by the
danger to which Seminary Priests expose themselves, he opens an easy way, to
defend, that Religious Priests by reason of their state, fitness to help their
neighbor etc. may be preferred before Curats, although these be ordinaryes,
and Religious be not, especially if those Religious, be also ordained to help
their neighbor. And here I cannot omit to note some strange speeches of the
Replyer, who n. 42. speaking of those Religious who by their Institute do many
functions of Pastors, as preaching, ministering of Sacraments etc. says, That
in Regulars this is accessory, in Pastors principal; in Regulars it is
voluntary, in Pastors necessary etc. For who ever heard that it is accessory,
or voluntary to a Religious man, to perform those things, to which he is
obliged by his very Institute?

15. All that he has against the Discussour about the distinction of leaving
all things in preparation of mind, and actual leaving all things, goes upon
a supposition, as if Nicholas Smith had denied that distinction, which he never
did; and therefore in vain he alleges Authors in proof of that distinction
against the Discussour, who only said, and proved, that even in preparation of
mind to leave all things, Religious excel secular Persons; and that the
leaving of all things added a great perfection to the preparation of mind, it
being an Heroical, and very meritorious act; so much, that S. Thomas 1. part.
q. 43. art. 6. doubted not to teach, that the Holy Ghost is sent in a
particular manner, when one forsakes all that he possessed. Likewise all that
the Replyer brings to prove, that Counsels are iustruments to Perfection it
self, for which he needlessy alleges Authors; is answered out of the
Discussion, where we may gather, that a thing may be said to belong to
Perfection only instrumentally, or essentially, as Charity is; or lastly
instrumentarily and secondarily, as S. Thomas says the Cousels are, which is
more then only instrumentally, as the habits of virtues distinct from Charity,
are Perfection secondarily, but not only instrume^tally; which the Discussour
explicateth n. 23. What Nicholas Smith alleged out of S. Thomas that Charity
consists seco^darily in the love of our neighbor, was only to show, that
there is difference betwixt secondarily, and only instrumentally; because
according to S. Thomas, Charity consists secondarily in the love of our
neighbor; but no man will say, that Charity consists in the love of our
Neighbor instrumentally; and that therefore M. Doctor said not well, that
Perfection consists in the Counsels only instrumentally; whereas S. Thomas
had said, that Perfection consists in the Counsels instrumentally, and
secondarily. But the Discussour never intended, to make a parity in all
respects, between the love of our Neighbor, and the Evangelical Counsels.
And so all is answered, that he has n. 65. Finally that which Nicholas Smith
chiefly found fault with in M. Doctor, was not the distinctions of preparation
of mind, and actual leaving all things, or a perfection essentially, and
instrumentally; but his indistinct, ambiguous, and obscure manner of proposing,
and applying them, as in express words may be seen in the Discussion n.
23.24.25. And indeed Nicolas Smith did of purpose use, that circumspection,
because he knew well, that those distinctions were good, being rightly
understood, and fitly applied. I desire the Reader to peruse the place
alleged in the Discussion.

16. To prove that the Apostles were not Religious, he does his best endeavor,
and in fine Sarmiento alone is the man, by him alleged, who does indeed deny,
that the Apostles were Religious. But seeing that, as Nicholas Smith q. 7. n.
7. did wish, a Learned Pen has since the printing of this Discussion hand
led this matter, so fully, as more cannot be desired, I refer the Reader to
that Treatise, namely the Apology for etc. which in my Preface I mentioned,
where he shall find this point handled, Cap. 7.

THE VI. QVESTION. Whether Religious, as Religions, be of the Hierarchy.
1. THE whole discourse of the Replyer, in this question, is answered by only
setting down the state of the Question aright, as the Discussour has done n.
8. and the Qualificator Sect. 5. where all is answered, that is brought by the
Inquisitor; and the Replyer has no more in effect then he. For both of them
will needs have the Question to be; whether Religious, as Religious be of the
Hierarchy, as Hierarchs, Princes, or Governors thereof, which is to make the
Hierarchicall body of Gods church consist only of Heads: whereas the Question
is; Whether properly, simply, and abiolutly, Regulars, as Regulars, be not of
the Hierarchy; as without doubt they are more then Secular, as Secular, who, as
such, are inferior to Religious, as Religious. Not only amongst the Hierarchs,
but amongst those also, who are governed, there is diversity of degrees, and
all belong to the Hie rarchy, more, or less, according to the perfection of
their state, and calling, which in Regulars, is very remarkable among diverse
degrees of Persons in Gods Church.

2. He endeavors at large to prove, out of S. Denis, That none are of the
Hierarchy, except Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which is true in that
particular sense, which S. Denis intends. But the Replyer must answer his
own argument, and confess, that in another sense, others besides those three
mentioned, are of the Hierarchy. For M. Doctor Chap. 8. teaches, that all in
lesser Orders, as Acolyts etc. are of the Hierarchy, and the Replyern. 43.
endeavors to prove, that M. Doctor places Cardinals in the Hierarchy.
Besides, as I have said, some Religious, by their Institute, must illuminate
others, and be Priests; Ergo, such, even as Religious, belong to the Hierarchy.

3. If the Replyer will exclude all from the Hierarchy, except Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, then M. Doctor Chap. 8. n. 8. does by the sacred Council of
Trent, pronounce him accursed. Thus he writes: Certain it is, that the Orders
of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons are of the divine Institution.
Wherefore the Council of Trent thus pronounces (Sess. 23. can. 6.) Si quis
dixerit etc. If any one shall say, that there is not in the Church a Hierarchy,
instituted by the divine Ordinance, which consists of Bishops, Priests, and
Ministers, let him be accursed. In which words the Council defyning, that
there is a Hierarchy instituted by the divine ordinance, and which consists
of Bishops, Priests, and Ministers in the plural number, must needs understand
at least Deacons, and Subdeacons. So that this Hierarchy of Order, at least in
respect of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons is instituted by Christ.
Thus far M. Doctor. Wherefore to free your self from a Curse, and S. Denis
from error in M. Doctors opinion, you must grant, that you have not rightly
alleged S. Denis, to prove, that only Bishops, Priests and Deacons, are of
the Hierarchy, in such manner that all other must be excluded. For M. Doctor
has told you, as a matter of Faith, that Subdeacons also are of the
Hierarchy, and that by divine Institution. You must then explicate S. Denis,
that he names Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, not to exclude all other, but
because these are the highest Orders in the Chutch, and so Religious may be of
the Hierarchy, notwithstanding what you allege out of S. Denis, who does
expressly place the order of Monks in the Hierarchy Cap. 6. tit. Contemplatio.

4. Likewise, when the Council of Trent defines, as a matter of Faith, that
by divine Ordinace, there is in the Church a Hierarchy, which consists of
Bishops, Priests. and Ministers, which some modern Heretics denied, it only
follows, that such are certainly of the Hierarchy, but not that they only
are, as many Deuines hold lesser Orders not to be of the divine Institution:
and yet M. Doctor teaches that all in lesser Orders, are of the Hierarchy,
and no man will affirm, that the sacred Council intended to condemn as
Hereticques, those Deuines, who teach that the Lesser Orders are not of divine
institution: or that, according to the Council, it is an Heresy to say, that
Car^inals, Vicar-Generals, Archdeaco^s etc. who are not of the divine
Institution, yea are not necessarily Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons,
can belong to the Hierarchy. And therefore the Replyer had no reason to blame
Nicholas Smith so severely, as he does n. 11. for saying, that it were
rashness to affirm, that the Council intended, to define as a matter of
Faith, that under the name of Hierarchy could be comprehended only Bishops etc.
At length the Replyer n. 13. is forced to extend S. Denis his doctrine, and to
bring in Subdeacons, and other inferior Orders, as likewise he must find means
to bring in Cardinals, Archdeacons, Vicar-generals etc. and finally give some
place to poor Religious men.

5. Thus his reasons from n. 21. to 26. fall of themselves, as only proving
that Religious, as Religious, precisely, are not Governors, or Illuminators in
the Hierarchy, but not, that they are not of it properly, and absolutely, or not
more then Secular, formally as Secular. And if they be Priests, and Pastors,
they are as much of the Hierarchy, in every respect, as Secular Priests, and
Pastors.

6. It is strange to see how n. 28. he trifleth, as if Nicolas Smith had ever
denied, that the Hierarchy comprehends both Order, and Jurisdiction. Whereas
he expressly affirms it n. 3. and thence infers, that the word Hierarchy
has a latitude.

7. He does not n. 31. sufficiently free M. Doctor from the Discussours just
complaint, for his saying, That S. Bernard affirmed the Hierarchy to be
perturbed, when Abbots are subtracted from the Bishops Jurisdiction. For the
Saint expressly approves Exemptions, and only reprehendeth such as are granted
without cause, or procured upon ambition, as at length the Replyer himself
confesses; and therefore M. Doctor ought not absolutely to have alleged S.
Bernard, as saying, the Church is perturbed, when Abbots are subtracted from
the Bishops Jurisdiction.

8. The Discussour never taught, Grace, or Charity alone can place one in the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy: For they alone, are not sufficient, to make one a
member of the Church militant. But he taught, that an external Profession, and
state of Life, ordained to Perfection of Grace, and Charity, is sufficient to
place the Professors thereof in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, in that degree,
wherein according to their rank, they excel others not in that degree, wherein
some particular Religious man, may chance to excel some Bishop, in grace, and
Charity, because that is accidental to their states: as likewise some lay man,
or woman, may exceed some Religious man, in perfection of the love of God. And
by this is answered, what he has n. 33. about Nauclerus, who cannot be denied,
to have placed Religious men in the Hierarchy, in a high degree, not only
accidentally, by reason of some particular Religious men's Charity, but per se
loquendo, and by reason of their state. Also, out of what we have said, is
easily answered the objection he brings n. 42. against the argument, which
Nicolas Smith made n. 9. where he proves; That if some men by Grace, may,
according to S. Thomas, be assumed to the Order of Angels, in the Celestial
Hierarchy; an external state of life affoarding most effectual means, for
perfection of grace in this life, may well place men on earth, in the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. But Nicholas Smith never dreamed, that men by grace
become indeed Angels, Archangels etc.

9. All that he has n. 34. 35. about the translation of S. Denis his
definition of a Hierarchy, is answered in the Admonition to the Reader,
adjoined to the Qualification.

10. The Discussour, to prove that one may be of the Hierarchy, although by
office he do not illuminate, or perfect others, instanceth in the lowest
Angel, who is not to illuminate any other, and yet cannot be excluded from the
Celestial Hierarchy. What does the Replyer answer? Nothing in effect, but by
denying, that the lowest Angel, or Order of Angels, are absolutely of the
Celestial Hierarchy, but only in a certain sense, which indeed he must needs
affirm, by the same reasons for which he denies Religious to be of the
Hierarchy, because their office is not to illuminate, or perfect others. But
this doctrine is a thing unheard of amongst Deuines, who with the holy Fathers
teach, that there are nine Orders of Angels, comprised in three Hierarchies:
but now the Replyer will have one Order of Angels, belonging to no Hierarchy.
If he put Angels out of the Celestial, Religious men have, I confess, less
reason to wonder, or take it ill, if he exclude them from the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy.

11. What he says n. 43. 44. to wit, that M. Doctor denied not Cardinals to
be of the Hierarchy, he will not be able to mantayne, without granting, that to
be of the Hierarchy, neither Jurisdiction, nor Order is required. For although
Cardinals may be in Orders, and actually have Jurisdiction over their titles,
yet their Jurisdiction, as M. Doctor Chap. 10. n. 19. says out of Bedarmine,
is but like to the Jurisdiction of a Parish Priest in his Parish; and that
Jurisdiction is accidental to the office of Cardinal, as Cardinal, which
respects the common good of the universal Church, and yet even as
Cardinals, they have a most eminent place in the Hierarchy, next to the Pope.
If once it be granted, that neither Order nor Jurisdiction is required, to
place one in the Hierarchy, then Religious men, whose state is in the Church of
God much respected, yea besides whom, none except Bishops, are in state of
Perfection, according to S. Thomas, may be, and are of the Hierarchy in a very
perfect manner, In a word. if Cardinals be not of the Hierarchy, M. Doctor
had not been much wronged, although Nicolas Smith had said, that by his
Principles they must be excluded from it: and yet for this cause the Replyer n.
43. is much offended with the Discussour. If they be of the Hierarchy, then not
only Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are of the Hierarchy, as the Replyer has
much labored to prove out of S. Denis: and by that labor, has only put
himself upon an inevitable necessity, to answer the arguments he made for
excluding Religious men.

12. Nevertheless, if to make one of the Hierarchy, it be necessary that he
illuminate, and perfect others; Religious, eue^ as Religious, cannot be
excluded: because for Regular obseruances, they illuminate one another, and in
that, do not necessarily depend, but are exempt from Bishops, as the King or
Master of a house depends not on the Bishop, for the mere temporal
administration of his Kingdom, or family. And so that part of the Hierarchy,
which by S. Gregory Nazianzen orat. in laudem Basil. is styled Ecclesiae pars
selectior and sapientior, the more wise and choice part of the Church, has its
proper Illuminatours, touching noble actions, and a state of life* which for
the perfection of it, was by our B. Savior counseled not commanded, as being
above the reach of Ordinary persons, according to that of Matt. 19. Qui potest
capere, capiat.

THE VII. QVESTION. Whether by the precedent Questions, we have sufficiently
answered M. Doctors Treatise, for such points, as either deserved Co^futation,
or required explication.
1. THIS Question was proposed by Nicolas Smith, not to boast of what he had
done, in the precedent Questions, as the Replyer page 20. n. 31. is pleased to
insinuate, but to the end the Reader might know, where to find answer to any
difficulty in M. Doctors book, which the Discussour did not answer Chapter
for Chapter, and number for number.

2. The Replyer n. 3. writes, that to him it seems a strange speech, and
little edifying, to say, as Nicolas Smith says, that he never heard, that the
Church must be governed by the Secular Clergy. Nicolas Smith did indeed
wonder, to hear M. Doctor say in his Epistle n. 12. that Secular Priests, are
by the divine Institution, governors of the church. The Church (said he) must
be governed by the Secular Clergy. May not Bishops, and other Pastors in Gods
Church be Religious men? How then is it a divine Institution, that the Church
must be governed by the Secular Clergy? Thus the Discussour. And what can be
more true? For if by divine Institution, the government of the Church belong to
the Secular Clergy, then is it a breach of the divine law, to assume Religious
men to be Bishops, or Pastors, which is to condemn the daily practice of Gods
Church. The Replyer brings not one reason to confute what Nicolas Smith said,
save only, that the Church, for the most part, is governed by the Secular
Clergy, which is far from proving, that it is a divine Justitution, that the
Church be governed by the Secular Clergy; as it cannot be proved, that
Preaching, for example, or converting of Infidels, by divine Institution
belonges to the Regular Clergy, because they preach at home to faithful
people, and are sent to remote Countries for the Conversion of Infidels, more
then Secular Priests. Snarez cited by the Replyer n. 5. never said, that
Religious Pastors, govern by Delegation, or Privilege or that it is against
the divine Institution, that Religious me be made Pastors.

3. From his n. 10. to 15. he goes about to prove, that my Lord of Chalcedon
is Ordinary, after an extraordinary manner, by arguments, easy to be answered,
if it were pertinent to the defense of Nicolas Smith, as it is not; and
therefore I refer the Reader, to the answer of the Regulars, to my Lord of
Chalcedons letter. For the Defense of Nicolas Smith, it is enough, to take what
the Repiyer yields, to wit, that my Lord is not Ordinary, in an Ordinary
manner, as Nicolas Smith proves by the definition of an Ordinary, given by M.
Doctor. For this grant supposed, I argue thus: The divine Institution, that in
the whole Church, and (as M. Doctor would thence infer) in every notable
part thereof, there should be Bishops, is either fulfilled in England, by
placing there my Lord of Chalcedon, or not. If it be fulfilled, then the Pope
might in the whole Church place only Ordinaryes in an extraordinary manner, by
Deputation, or Commission, which no Catholic can grant. If it be not
fulfilled in England, then (...) the Pope is yet obliged to give us a Bishop,
Ordinary in an ordinary manner, which I believe he will not admit, and therefore
he must finally yield to the Discussour; That there is no divine precept, to
have a Bishop in England, but all must be left to the supreme Pastors
discretion, whether it be best for us to be governed by a Bishop, or otherwise.

4. The Discussour n. 5. concerning my Lord of Chalcedons maintenance, uttered
nothing upon his own opinion, but truly related, what others did, and do say,
himself abstayning to intermeddle in that matter: yet the Replyers argument n.
17. rather proves* that Catholics are not obliged to mantayne my Lord of
Chalcedon, if without his Lordship they can be sufficiently provided, of all
spiritual helps, by Priests, Secular or Regular; because by the law of
Nature, they are obliged only to provide themselves, of means to atrayne
salvation. Whether or no, Catholics can be sufficiently provided for, without
my Lord of Chalcedon; Nicolas Smith never disputed, nor did he ever give the
least insinuation, that it were better not to have a Bishop in England, wholly
referring that point, to the determination of his Holiness: and the Replyer is
much to blame, for his taxing the Discussour, as opposing the coming of a
Bishop into England. Those Houses which the Replyer n. 18. terms stately,
and turns from the singular, to the plural number, are known by those, who
have best reason to know it, not to have put English Catholics to charges;
and although they had, yet it is known, that all was for their service, to
prepare such as might, in due time, employ their labors, and life, in help of
England.

5. The Replyer has no reason, to be offended with the Discussour, for saying,
that M. Doctor was mistaken, while he put Ioannes Siluerius, and Martinus to
have suffered martyrdom before Constantines time. For his marginall note has
(27. Popes martyrs before the time of Constantine) amongst which 27. those
three were placed. Yea M. Doctor produces them to prove, that Popes were
created, even in time of Persecution, when the Creation of Popes, or Bishops
was opposed; for which purpose, the example of those three Popes, could not
serve, unless he had conceived, that they were before Constantine, for
otherwise he could not imagine, but that they suffered in time of Christian
Emperors, as de facto those three Popes did, when the creation of Popes, was
not particularly opposed. The reasons alleged by the Replyer, only prove,
that if M. Doctor mistook, he had no reason for it: yet to do the Replyer a
favor, I will be content with him, to cast the error upon one, whom he says
M. Doctor trusted, in making the marginall notes, upon condition that he give
me leave to say, that those three Popes, who dyed not before Constantine, made
not to the purpose, for which they were by M. Doctor alleged. And because I
would not wrong him, who made the marginall notes, I must in his behalf say,
that he had but reason, to make the note as he did, considering M. Doctors
drift, and manner of expressing himself. It is a wonder that in this very
place, the Replyer would help himself with a marginall note, and excuse M.
Doctor, because he cites Bozius in the margent, which (says he) Nicolas
Smith should have mentioned. But Bozius never said, that those three Popes were
before Constantine, and therefore yields no excuse for M. Doctor, nor had
Nicolas Smith any obligation to mention him.

6. The Replyer n. 27. ends his book with these words. He that finds
himself able to overcome the temptations of the world, and with the grace of
God, has Confidence not only to work his own salvation, but also the
salvation of many others; let him, if he like that state, take upon him an
Apostolical, Priestly course of life; Priests being to live in the midst of
the difficultyes of the world, by reason of their Preaching, Teaching, and
Administering Sacraments. Jf he otherwise be weak, feeble, and is hardly able
to pass through those te^ptatio^s and allurements with safety of his own
soul, let him hasten to some Religious course of life, proportionable to his
force, and liking: and if he has not those talents, which are required in
Priests, and that he cannot brook the austerity of Religion, let him endeavor
to serve God in the world. Thus he declaring, what mean conceit he has of
Religious perfection. And I pray God, the like apprehension, have not taken
deep root, in too many now a days. Your division of diverse sorts of
persons, is not adequate. For, besides those whom you mention, there is a
fourth kind of persons, who have confidence, by Gods grace, to save their
souls in the world, and yet for attayning of Perfection, and greater union
with their Creator, are not content, only to keep Gods Commandments in the
world, but also are inflamed with a desire, to observe the Euangelical Counsels
in a Religious state: and some of those, besides the perfection of their own
soul, are further called, even in a Religious state, to procure the salvation,
and perfection of their neighbor, either by their proper Institute, or by
command of their Superiors. If your conceit were solid, whosoever beboldeth a
Religious man, might point at him, and say: This was a weak, and feeble
person, and hardly able to pass in the world, with the safety of his own
soul. A rash, unworthy, and, I may say, unchristian censure. S. Thomas 2.2. q.
189. ar. 1. of purpose teaches, that not only persons, already habituated in
observation of the commandments, but all sinners may enter into Religion;
those to increase in perfection, these to avoid sin. This Saint then held it
for certain, that Religion is not only for those, who are weak, and feeb^e,
and hardly able to pass through the temptations of the world, with the safety
of their soul, but much more, for such as are already grounded in virtue, and
by that means, better disposed to attain Religious perfection. Certainly, the
Angelical Doctor would have made us an Exhortation, far different from
yours, and would have said: If any fear his own frailty in the world, and
otherwise have talents for Religion, let him undertake that state. Religion is
a state of security. If any with the keeping of the commandments, desire to
join the observation of the Evangelical Counsels, let him hasten to Religion.
Religion is a course of life, for its height, counseled, not commanded. If any
already good, desire to be perfect, let him fly to Religion. Religion is a
school of Perfection, as our B. Savior Matthew. 19. to one that had all ready
kept the commandments, said: Jf thou will be perfect go sell the things that
thou have. etc. If any together with his own Perfection, thirst after the
salvation, and perfection of others; with great merit, and security to
himself, let him embrace a Religious course. Religion not only perfecteth a
man's self, but also enableth him to help others, with less danger to his own
soul. God grant we were as careful to correspond to our Vocation, as we are
certain the Vocation in it self is perfect; of which S. Bernard (l. de
praecept and dispo.) was not afraid to say, Praeeminet vniuersis vitae humanae
gencribus: It has a preheminency before all kinds of humane life.

THE CONCLUSION.
One says, it is the worst property of war that prosperous successes are
imputed to all, misfortunes to some one. (Tacit. in vita Agric.) Contrariwise
in this Pen-Combat, I wish, that whatsoever is amiss, may fall only upon my
self. If any thing yield satisfaction, I heartily desire, it may wholly redou^d
to the honor of Episcopal Dignity, to the commendation of a Religious state,
to peace amongst our selves, and, above all, to the Eternal Glory of the most
B. Trinity.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 37. lin. 7. every corrige very. Page 52. lin. 1. thero corrige thereof.
Page 53. lin. 1. -mily corrige -mity. Page 66. lin. vlt. Chrity corrige
Charity.

