ARTICLES Ministered by the Reverend Father in God Anthony by the grace of God
Bishop of Chichester to the Churchwardens throughout the whole Diocese of
Chichester, at the visitation begun there the 6 of September 1600, and to be
enquired of quarterly within the said Diocese.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Charde. 1600.

Articles to be enquired of within the Diocese of Chichester.
Touching the place of Common Prayer in the Church.
WHether the Chauncell, Church and Chapel be sufficiently repaired as well
in stone, Timber, Lead, Tyle, Glass, as all other necessary things, and if
they be not, through whose default this is omitted.

2 Whether your Churchyard be sufficiently fenced and decently kept, and the
trees therein growing not spoiled.

3 Whether the walls of the Church be within whited, and beautified with
fruitful sentences out of the holy Scriptures: and paued comely in the body
of the Church and the Chancell.

4 Whether you have in your parish Church and Chapel, all things necessary
for the setting forth of common prayer and administration of the Sacraments,
namely the book of Common prayer, two Psalters in prose and meeter: the
English Bible in the largest volume, which now is authorized by consent of the
Bishops of this Realm: the two tomes of Homelies: the Paraphrases of Erasmus
in English: the table of the ten Commandments of God: a convenient Pulpit well
placed, a decent table standing on a frame, for the holy Communion, with a
fair linen cloth to lay upon the same, and some covering of silk, buccharam,
or other such like, for the keeping clean thereof, a comely Communion Cup of
silver, with a cover of silver for the same, which may serve for the
administration of the Communion Bread: a decent Surplus with large sleeves: a
Regester book in parchment of Christnings, weddings, and burials: a sure cofer
with three locks and keys for the keeping of the said register book.

5 Whether all monuments of supersticion be defaced and clean removed: as
Alters, Roodeloftes, Copes, Vestments, Holy water, Stocks, Images, and all
popish books either Latin or English.

6 Whether you have a Clarke, Sexten, or decon, to asist your priest dutifully
in reading the psalms, first lesson, the Epistle, and such other services: and
also to keep the books and ornaments of the Church, the Church it self, the
quier, the Communion table, the Pulpit and the Font, fair clean and decent,
against the time of service of the Communion, Sermon and Baptism, and by whom
he is chosen.

Touching service used in the Church.
7 Whether there be any within your parish, or else where near about the
same, and within this Diocese, to your knowledge or as you have heard, that
comes not to Church, but is a recusant in that point: or that comes, but
uses not to stay during the time of divine service and Sermons, or does not
receive the Communion in his parish Church, three times yearly at the least.

8 Whether do you know or have heard any within your parish, or near about
the same, within this diocese, to hear or say Mass, or any other service not
publicly allowed, or to receive, entertain, or lodge any priests,
seminaries, Jesuits, or other deprauers or mistikers of the Ecclesiastical
state or government, and what be their names.

9 Whether you do know or have heard of any, within your parish or near about
the same, within this Diocese that uses to diswade any person from the
Religion now professed, or to persuade any to the Romish religion.

10 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, or the Parson, Vicar, or Curat,
or any other of any other parish within this Diocese, near unto you, to your
knowledge, or as you have heard, upon sundaies and holidaies, use to say
morning and Evening Prayer, and the Letanie distinctly, and in such manner and
form, and under such words as are set forth and prescribed in and by the book
of Common Prayer: if no, then what other form or manner, has he or does he or
they use, and what has he or they omitted or added in any of the premises,
other then is in the said book expressed.

11 Whether does your Parson, Vicar or Curat, or the Parson, Vicar, or Curat,
or any other of any other parish, within this Diocese, and near about you, to
your knowledge or as you have heard, use the ministration of the Lords Supper
and Baptism, the instruction of children, solemnization of Matrimony, the
visitation of the sick, the burial of the dead, and the churching of women,
in such manner and form, and under such words, rites and ceremonies, as are
set forth and prescribed in and by the said book of Common prayer: if no, then
what other form does he or they use, and what has he or they used to add
or omit of, in or about the premises, or any of them: and does he or they use
to omit the Ring in Marriage, and crossing the Child's head in Baptism.

12. Whether has your Parson, Vicar or Curat, or any other within your parish,
or else where near about the same, and within this Diocese, to your
knowledge, or as you have heard, preached, declared, uttered, or found fault
with, or spoken any thing against the said book of Common prayer, or any thing
in the said book expressed, or against any doctrine, office, function, or
calling Ecclesiastical, within this Realm by public authority established:
or against the ordinance and election of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Decons,
or any of them, and what was the same thing or fault so found, uttered
declared, or preached, and by whom.

13 Whether has your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, or any other within your parish
or else where, near about the same, and within this Diocese, to your
knowledge or as you have heard, preached, declared, uttered, spoken, or
signified in writing, word or deed, any thing in liking, maintayning,
extolling, commending, or persuading, of any other doctrine, discipline or any
other form of Common prayer, election or ordination of any other offices,
officers Decons, Pastors, Elders, presbiteries or Ecclesiastical Censures,
then are by the laws and statutes of this Realm established.

14 Whether you have on Wednesdaies and Frydaies service in your church and
chapel, according to order appointed for all our necessities set forth by
authority.

15 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, do every sunday when there is no
sermon, read plainly some part of the Homelies prescribed to be read: or
whether any of them not being found to have sufficient ability to preach, or
not lawfully admitted thereunto, do take upon them to expound any part of the
scripture and thereby omit the reading of the homelies.

16 Whether the Communion be administered every month, where there be forty
households in the parish otherwise once every quarter at the least at the
discretion of the Minister.

17 Whether your Minister, or any other within the parish or else where in this
Diocese, to your knowledge or as you have heard, has published, spread
abroad, delivered, sold, or uttered, or received, retained, or kept any
English books set forth by an English papist beyond the seas, either against
the Queens Majesty's supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical: or against true
Religion and Catholic doctrine, now received or set forth by any other within
this Realm or else where, against the state of the Archbishops, Bishops, and
Clergy of this Realm: or against the doctrine, orders and ceremonies now
retained by public authority.

18 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, do preach or cause to be preached,
every month one Sermon at the least, and whether there-in they do four times
in the year, teach the people that all foreign usurped authorytie is justly
abolished: and that the Queens Majesty is and ought to be the supreme
governor over all persons, and in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as
civil, within her dominions.

Baptism.
19 Whether your Children that be in no great peril of death, be baptized
after the last lesson of Morning prayer at the Font, upon the sunday or holy
day next after the birth thereof, with Godfathers and Godmothers that can say
the Catechism, the Lords Prayer, the Articles of the Christian faith, and the
ten Commandments, and whether your Minister has refused to baptize any child
at any day in the week, in case of great weakness.

20 Whether any child borne within your parish, has not been baptized in your
parish Church.

21 Whether your children baptized at home in cases of extreme weakness and
infirmity, be brought to the Church after their recovery, that the Minister
may examine whether they be lawfully Baptized or no.

Matrimony.
22 Whether they have married any manner of persons with out the banes asking
three several sundaies or holy days in time of divine service, in the
presence of the people.

23 Whether they have solemnized any marriage in the night season, or at
unlawful time of the day.

24 Whether they have married any of diverse parishes with out a certificat of
the banes asking, from the Minister or Curat, where the parties dwell, or else
do solemnize any marriage out of their own Church, or marry any in their
own Church, which be not of their own parish.

25 Whether your Minister or Curat exhorts young persons not to make any
contract of marriage privately or openly, with out the consent of their parents
and friends that have authority over them, according to Gods law and man's law.

26 Whether they marry any that cannot say perfectly the Lords prayer, the
articles of a Christian man's faith, and the ten commandments of God.

27 Whether any man have two wives, or any woman two husbands.

Visiting the sick.
28 Whether they have been dilligent according to their duty, in visiting and
adminstring unto the sick, to call the lost sheep to Christ's fold by
repentance, comforting them with godly and wholesome sentences out of the
sacred scripture and Gods word, whereby they may put their whole trust in the
mercies of God in Christ's death our Savior, contemning the world, and in
forgiving all men as they would be forgiven at Gods hand.

29 Whether they have exhorted all persons, as well in health as in sickness,
to make their Testaments, and dispose their goods, for the discharging of their
consciences, the quietness of their wives and children, and satisfieng of the
world.

30 Whether they do exhort their parishioners to cause a bell to be tolled for
them and their families in the time of their sickness, to the intent they may
be commended unto Gods mercy by the prayers of other men.

31 Whether they have called upon them that have made their testaments, to
bestow according to their ability some part of their goods upon the true
works of mercy: as upon the poor and needy, upon the fatherless and
motherles, upon desolate widows and marriages of poor maidens, upon the
maintenance of the ministry and Schools, upon the reparations of the Church,
high ways and such like, and whether the Churchwardens call for the same.

32 Whether they have been diligent to bury the dead being brought to the
Churchyard, using no other ceremony then is appointed for burialls.

33 Whether after the decease of any person there is any more ringing then one
short peale before the burial, and an other after the burial.

34 Whether there be any excessive ringing or toling used upon sundaies or
hollidayes, or their euens, saving to common prayer, and to a Sermon, or such
as do not tend to supersticion, and to the maintenance of popish purgatory
and of prayer for the dead.

Commination.
35 Whether they use out of the pulpit in a public assembly to read the
commination against sinners once every quarter, immediately after the Letanie is
said upon some sunday or holliday.

Touching the Function of Ministers.
36 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do travail diligently and
painefully, according to their ability to set forth true religion, to adorn
the same with the examples of good life, to beat down, vice, supersticion,
Idolatry, papistrie, and all manner of heresies: to exhort all men to unity,
peace, and brotherly love, and to their dutiful obedience to their Prince and
such as he in authority under her, unto the diligent hearing, reading, and
teaching of Gods word.

37. Whether they endeavor to have the parishioners to say service and sing
Psalms in prose and meeter with them in the Church.

38. Whether they say the common prayers, read their Psalms and Chapters, and
other prayers, so audibly plainly and distinctly, in convenient time, and at
such a place, as all the people may well hear, and understand the sense thereof
to their edifying.

39. Whether they use after morning and evening prayer said, to bestow
themselves in godly meditation of good learning, and instructing of youth.

40. Whether they use the exhortation set forth in the administration of the
Lords Supper, thereby to stir up their parishioners to the oftener receiving of
the same.

41. Whether they have admitted any notorious offendour or malicious person, or
any notoriously known to be out of charity, or that has done any open wrong
to his neighbor either by word or by deed, to the holy Communion, without
open acknowledging of their fault and reconciliation.

42. Whether there be any in your parish, that reads any private Lectures in
the same, or uses exposition of scriptures in any private man's house
whatsoever, or that preaches any Doctrine of innovation, to withdraw the
people from their due obedience: and whether any Preaches, and does not at
certain times in the year, minister the Sacraments, and say service according
to order. Also whether any new presbiterie or consistory of Elders be in the
parish erected, or any private Conuenticle of those whose ears ich with
singularities, and impertinent matters, in the which schismatic Ministers
be admitted to deal in the Ecclesiastical function and such as despise
rulers and speak evil of them that are in authority, or whether any of your
parish contribute to such schismatic dealings and conuenticles.

43. Whether does your minister or any other, use any solemn Feasts or
public exercise, upon any day not appointed by public authority: and who
were at the said feast or exercise.

44. Item, whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curat or any other, preach,
expound, interpret, exercise or Catechize, in any private meetings or
conuenticles within your parish where are the same held, and who resort thereto.

45. Whether does your Parson, Vicar, and Curate, at their Sermons, Lectures,
or exercises, pronounce all that form of prayer for her Majesty and the whole
Realm, set forth in the end of the Queens Injunctions.

46. Whether does your Minister bid all such holidays and fasting days, as
are appointed by the book of common prayer, and say service upon the same
holidayes, and upon every Wednesday and Friday: and does any of your
parishioners work upon any of the said holidayes.

47. Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curat, do Preach, expound the Scriptures
in his own cure, or in any other place, not being lycenced so to do by the
Ordinary.

48. Whether any Curat or Minister be suffered to serve in the Church, before
he be examined and admitted by the ordinary in writing under the seal of his
office, and before he show his license unto the Churchwardens.

49. Whether the Register of all weddings, burialls, and christnings within
your parish, be well kept, and a coppie of them once every year, within one
month after Easter, transmitted to the register, and whether the Queens
Majesty's Injunctions be quarterly read.

50. Whether yearly in the Rogation week, for the better knowing and
retayning of the circuit of your parish, and for the obtaining of gods
blessing upon ye fruits of the ground, the Parson, Vicar, or Curat, the
Churchwardens and certain other of the substantial of the parish, with other
of the younger sort, walk the accustomed bounds of the parish, saying or
singing in English the hundred and third, the hundred and fourth psalms, the
Letanie with an homily devised for that purpose, and other devout prayers.

Beehauiour of Ministers.
51. Whether your Parson or Vicar be resident upon his benefice, and keep
hospitality according to his ability.

52. Whether they keep their mansion houses and chauncels in good sufficient
reparations.

53. Whether they keep in their houses any persons, men or women suspected of
evil life, or of evil religion.

54. Whether your Minister or Curat be suspected of any notorious crime, as of
filthy lucre, covetousness, adultery, blasphemy, perjury, drunkenness,
idleness, filthy and vain talk, or else is flaunderous in any part of his
conversation, through brawling, fighting, quarrel picking, and peace breaking.

55. Whether they haunt alehouses, tauerns, Innes, or any suspected place, or
use any unlawful gaming, as dancing, carding, dicing, hawking and hunting.

56. Whether your Minister and Curate do use at home and abroad such apparel
as public order appoynteth to be decent for them to wear, and that their
wives, children and families, be appareled handsomely without vanity, and great
charges fit for the calling of their husbands, and do use the Surples at the
time of common prayer.

57. Whether your Parson or Vicar has at any time since the thirteenth year
of the Queens Majesty's reign, made any manner of lease or grant of his
Parsonage or Vicaridge, or any part thereof, he being absent and not risident
upon the same, to any other then to his Curat that did or does serve his cure
in his absence.

Schools.
58. Whether the Schoolemaisters and Teachers within your parish, be examined,
allowed or licensed by the Ordinary under his seal, whether they teach the
Grammar set forth by King Henry the eight, and no other: whether they teach
any thing contrary or repugnant to the order, Doctrine, and ceremonies of this
church of England by public authority established, and whether they teach
the Catechism in Latin, set forth Anno. 1570. and allowed, and such other
Godly learning, as may induce them to godliness, true religion and good
conversation.

59 Whether they do encourage the youth committed to their charge, to the love
of true religion, and godliness, causing them daily, coming and departing from
the schole, to pray unto God for increase of learning and godly life, and also
teaching them such sentences of the holy scriptures, as may frame them to fear
God and live virtuously, and also causing them to say grace in English before
meat and after, and to give thanks to God for all his benefits that they at
any time receive of his mercy, and not of their deserts.

60 Whether your Scholemaisters be negligent in teaching, or else be common
officers, farmers, artificers, or otherwise entangled in other affairs, that
they cannot benefit their scholars in learning, and what schoolemaisters be in
any private house.

61 Whether as well the Schoolemaister as the scholars do come to school and
leave it in due time and hours.

Hospitalls.
62 Whether your Hospitals, spittles, and Alms houses, be well repaired and
godly used, according to the foundation and ancient ordinances of the same,
and whether there be any other placed in them, then poor impotent and needy
persons, that have not wherewith or whereby to live.

Churchwardens.
63 Whether your Churchwardens be chosen yearly one by the parish or the mayor
part thereof, and the other by the Minister, upon the day accustomed.

64 Whether at any time heretofore, the Churchwardens, or the Minister, or the
parishioners, or any of them to your knowledge, or as you have heard, have
withheld or detained in their custody, or have sold, wasted, spent, or
otherwise alienated any of the Church goods or stock.

65 Whether the Churchwardens yearly in writing, make their accounts to the
parish, as well of all receipts as of their necessary expenses.

66 Whether they do leuy for not coming to the Church to hear divine service
upon sundaies and holidaies, xii. pence, for every person absent without
lawful cause, or present every such person.

67 Whether they do wast or spoil any part of the church goods and whether
they call for all manner of legaces given to the poor of the parish, to the
reparations of the Church, and such other good uses, and whether they call for
the money due to be paid for those that are buried in the Church.

68 Whether the Minister of the Church and the Churchwardens, do certify in
writing under their hands and seals to the Ordinary at least wise 14. days
before the Assizes or quarter Sessions, throughout all the whole year, all
such persons as be absent from hearing divine and public service in the
Church, the space of a month together at any time, that the same certificat
may be delivered to the Justices, and the offenders therein indicted according to
a statute, what lands tenements, anuities, or goods or chattels are belonging
to any use about the Church and in whose hands the evidences thereof remain.

Midwiues
69 Whether your Midwiues be honest, sober, and skillful, void of supersticion,
drunkenness, and unseemly behavior.

Of the Parishioners.
70 Whether the Parishioners and every of them do come daily upon the sundaies
and holydaies to church, or kept open his shop, or done any work upon any such
day, or used at any time to braule or fight in the Church or Churchyard, or
use Maygames, Lords of Misrule, dancing, on the Sabbath day, or holy day in
time of divine service.

71 Whether any that keeps an Alehouse, Tavern, or Inn or any other,
suffers any to dance or play at any unlawful game, or utters any meat or
drink, in time of divine service, either of Sunday or holiday.

72 Whether there be any within your parish, or near about you within this
Diocese, suspected or known to tell fortunes, to help men to things lost, use
charms, witchcraft, sorceries, soothsayings, prophecieng, or any such other
supersticious and deuillish illusion: whether any within your parish have
committed adultery, fornication, or incest, or be a common drunckarde, or a
common swearer, or an unlawful usurer, above ten in the hundredth, or is
suspected of any of the premises.

73. Whether any within your parish do entertain or keep in his house, or
other place, any woman suspected to be of lewd life, or any woman with
child, and after her delivery shall suffer her to depart, before she have
done pennaunce, and how many such have you known or heard of.

74. Whether the people upon any occasion do eat or drink in the church, or
any excommunicate person has intruded himself into the church at the time of
common prayer, and who does keep company with any excommunicate person,
knowing him so to be.

75. Whether every householder, their wives, children and servant, do use to
make prayers unto God every morning, before they go to their work, and every
evening before they go to bed.

76. Whether they, their Children and servant, beehaue themselves reverently
in time of common prayer, preaching, or ministering of the Sacraments, without
walking, talking, sleeping, or disturbing the congregation.

77. Whether every Parishioner have framed himself to receive often the holy
Communion, and has received at least thrice the Communion this year,
according to the duty of a Christian man, and namely at Easter last, or
receiving have not signified the same to the Minister, or have not come to the
Minister to be examined and to be better instructed touching his duty toward
God and man.

78 Whether any man woman or child, use to occupy himself otherwise in the
Church in the time of divine service, then in praying and in marking
attentively, that which is read or preached by the Minister.

79. Whether there be any in the parish that presume to execute or to minister
the goods of those that be departed out of this world, without an
administration or probate of testament, or have falsified, or suppressed the
will of any person, or any executors that have not fulfilled the testators
will, and has not lawfully proved the same will before the Ordinary.

80. Whether any child being borne since the thirteeneth year of the Queens
Majesty's reign, has not been brought to be baptized at his parish church.

81. Whether any mis^iuer or doer, has had his pennaunce or any part thereof
omitted, without consent of the Bishop himself first had.

Patrons of Benefices.
82. Whether your Parson or Vicar, or any other for him, has for or in respect
of any sum of money, reward, gift, profit or benefit directly or indirectly,
or for or by reason of any promise, agreement, grant, bond, covenant, or
other, assurance, of or for any sum of money, reward, gift, profit, or
benefit what so ever, directly or indirectly, procured or obtained the gift or
presentation of his benefice.

83. Whether you know any Patron or any Aduousoner in your parish, that has
made a gain by any color, deceit, or simoniacal pack, in bestowing his
benefice, or by receiving money, or promise of the lease of the whole, or of
part, or by reserving his own tithes, or any pension to himself, his child,
servant or friend.

84. Whether does your Parson or Vicar, let out, or suffer any to enjoy his
benefice, or any part thereof, or give any pension out of the same, or suffer
any man to hold or enjoy his own tithes, or to enjoy any of the gleebe land.

And you shall make and bring in your presentiments touching all the Articles
above mentioned, within four-teene days after the feast of Easter, Saint John
the Baptist, S. Michaell the Archangell, and the nativity of our Lord.

FINIS.

