Articles to be enquired of in the general visitation of Edmonde Bisshoppe of
London, exercised by him the pear of our Lord. 1. 5. 5. 4. in the city and
Diocese of London, and set forth by the same for his own discharge toward
God and the world, to the honor of God, and his catholic church, and to the
commodity and profit of all those, that either are good, (which he would
were all), or deliteth in goodness, (which he wissheth to be many), without
any particular grudge or displeasure, to any one good or badde within this
Realm, which articles he desires all men of their charity, especially
those that are of his Diocese, to take with as good intent and mind, as he
the said Bishop wyssheth and desires, which is to the best. And the
said Bishop wythall desires all people to understand, that whatsoever
opinion, good or badde, have conceived of him, or whatsoever usage or custom
has been heretofore his only intent and purpose is to do his duty
charitablye, and with that love, favor, and respect, both toward God, and
every Christen person, which any Bishop should show to his flock in
any wise.

The first Articles are concerning the Clergy, because they should of duty
give good example, and that their fault is more in deed, and more worthy
punishmente, then the faults of the laytie.
1 First whether the Clergy, to give example to the laytie, have in their
living, in their teaching, and in their doing so behaved them selfs, that
they (in the judgment of indifferent persons) have declared the^ selfs, to
search prin cipally the honor of God, and his church, the health of the
souls of such, as are committed to their cure and charge, the quietness of
their parishioners, and the welthe and honor of the King and Queen of this
Realm.

2 ITem whether your person, vicare, or any other ministryng as priest within
your parish, have been, or is married, or taken for married, not yet
separated from his concubine or woman, taken for wife, or whether the same
woman be dead or yet living, and being living, whether the one resorteth to
the other openly, secretly, or sclaunderouslye, maynteynyng, supportyng, or
findyng the same in any wise to the offense of the people.

3 ITem whether there be any person, of what estate, condition, or degree he
be, that does in open talk, or priuelye defend, maynteyne, or uphold the
marriage of priests, encouraginge or boldyng any person to the defense thereof.

4 ITem whether ye have your person or vicare resident continuallye with you
upon his benefice, doing his duty in the seruyng of the cure, and whether
being able he do keep hospitality upon the same, feadyng his u^ocke with his
good living with his teaching, and his releauing of them to his power.

5 ITem whether your person or vicare, being absente, have a sufficient
dispensation and license therein, and whether in his absence he do appoynte an
honest, able, and sufficient learned curate to supply his rowme and absence to
serve his cure.

6 ITem whether your person or vicare, by him self or his good and sufficient
deputy, for him do releaue his poor parishioners, repair, and maynteyne his
house or mansion, and things thereunto apperteynyng, and otherwise do his
duty, as by the order of the law, and custom of this realm he ought to do.

7 ITem whether the said curate so appointed in ye absence of your person or
vicare do in all points the best he can to minister the sacraments and sa
crame^tals, and other his duty in seruyng ye same cure, specially in
celebrating divine service at conueniente hours chiefly upon sondayes and
holy days, and procession days, and ministering the said sacraments and
sacrame^talles, as of duty and reason he ought, mouinge and exhorting
earnestly his patishioners to come unto, and deuoutlye to hear the same. And
whether he him self do reverently celebrate, practice minister, and use the
same as apperteyneth.

8 ITem whether he the said curate, person, or vi care, have been, or is of
suspecte doctrine, erroniouse opinion, misbelefe, or evil judgment, or do
set forth, preach, favor, aid, or maynteyne the same contrary to the
catholic faith, and order of this realm.

9 ITem whether they or any of them does haunte, or resort to ale houses or
tauernes, otherwise then for his or their honest necessity and relief, or
repair to any disinge houses, common bo wlinge alies, suspecte houses or
places, or do haunte and use common games or plays, or behave the^ selfs
otherwise vnpriestly and unseemly.

10 ITem whether they or any of them be familiar, or keep company, and be
conuersaunt with any suspect person of evil conversation and living, or
erroneous opinion or doctrine, or be noted, to aid, favor, and assiste the
same in any wise, contrary to the good order of this realm, and the usage of
the catholic church.

11 ITem whether there be dwelling within any your paryshes any priest,
forrener, stranger, or other, who not presented to the Bishop of this
diocese, or his officers, examined and admitted by some one of them, does take
upon him to serve any cute, or to minister any sacraments or sacrameutalles
within the said paryshe.

12 ITem whether there be dwellinge within any your paryshes, or repayryng
thither any priest, or other namyng him self minister, which does not come
diligently to the church to hear the divine service or sermons there, but
absenteth him self, or discourageth other by his example or words to come
unto the same, expressinge their name and surename with sufficient knowledge of
them.

13 ITem whether there be any married priests, or namyng them selfs
ministers, that do keep any assembles or conuenticles with such like, as they
are in office or sect to set forth any doctrine or usage not allowed by the
laws and laudable customs of this realm, or whether there be any resort of
any of them to any place for any privy lectures, sermons, plays, games, or
other devises not expressly in this realm by laws allowable.

14 ITem whether there be any of them, which is a common brawler, scoulder, a
sower of discord among his parishioners, a hawker, a hunter, or spe^ding his
time ydely and vnthriftely, or being afornicatoure, an aduouterer, a dronkard,
a common swearer, or blasphemer of God or his saints, or an unruly or evil
disposed person, or that bath come to his benefice or promotion by simonie,
unlawful suite, or ungodly means in any wise.

15 ITem whether they and eueryche of them to the best of their powers at al
times have exhorted and stirred the people to quietness and concord, and to the
obedience of the King and Queens majesty's and their officers, rebukyng all
sedition and tumulte with all unlawful assembles, moving the people to charity
and good order, and charginge the fathers and mothers, masters and governors
of youth to keep good rule, and to instruct them in virtue and goodness, to the
honor of God, and of this realm, and to have them occupied in some honest
art and occupation to get their living thereby.

16 ITem whether they or any of them do admit any person to receive the blessed
sacrament of the aul tare, who are openly known, or suspected to be
adversaries and speakers against the said sacrament, or any other article of
the catholic faith, or to be a no torious evil person in his conversation or
doctrine, an open oppresser, or evil doer to his neighbor, or being in hatred
and malice with his said neyghbor, not being confessed, reconciled, and having
made satisfaction in that behalf.

17 ITem whether they or any of them have of their own authority admitted
and licenced any to preach in their cure, not being aucthorized and admitted
thereunto, or have denied or refused such to preach, as have been lawfully
licensed. And whether they or any of the^ having authority to preach with in
their cures, does use to preach, or at the least does procure other lawful
and sufficient persons to do the same, according to the order of this realm.

18 ITem whether they or any of the^ since the queen's majesty's proclamation
has or does use, to say or singe divine service, minister the sacraments or
sacramentalles, or other things in English contrary to the order of this
realm.

19 ITem whether they and every of them in their suffrages, collectes, and
prayers does use to pray for the King and Queens majesty's, by the names of
King Philippe and Queen Marye, according to a letter and commandment therein
lawfully given now of late unto them by their ordinarye.

20 ITem whether they and eueryche of them have diligently moved and exhorted
their parishioners, how and in what manner children should be baptized in time
of necessity, and they the said parishioners reverently and denoutly to
prepare them selfs to receive and use the sacraments, especially of the
sacrament of the aultare. And whether any person have refused or contempned to
receive the said Sacrament of the aultare, or to be confessed, and receive at
the priests hand the benefit of absolution, according to the laudable
custom of this realm.

21 ITem whether they and eueryche of them has diligently visited his and
their parishioners in the time of sycknes and need, and ministered sacraments
and sacramentalles to them accordingly, and whether they have exhorted and
monished them to have due respect to their soul health, and also to set an
order in their temporal lands and goods, declaryng their debtes perfitely,
and what is owing bnto them and they so to make their Testamentes and last
wills, that as much as may be, all trouble and busynes may be excluded,
their wives and childerne with their friends may be helped and succored, and
them selfs decentlye buried and prayed for, and to have an honest memory and
commendations for their so doing.

22 ITem whether they and eueryche of the^ have solempnised matrymony between
any his parishioners, or any other persons, (the banes not before asked,
iii. several sondayes or holy days) or without certificate of the said
banes, from the curate of any other parish, if any of them be of another
paryshe, and whether (touching the solempnization and use of this Sacrament of
matrimony, and also of all other the sacraments of the Church) they have
kept and observed the old and laudable custom of the Church without any
innovation or alteration in any of the same.

23 ITem whether they and eueryche of them upon the sunday at the service time
does use to set forth and declare unto the people all such holy days and
fasting days, as of godly usage and custom has heretofore laudablye been
accustomed to be kept and observed in the weke following and ensuing, and
whether they and eueryche of them does observe and keep them selves the said
holy days and fasting days.

24 ITem whether the person or vicare does repair and maynteyne his chauncel
and mansion house in sufficient reparation, and (the same being in decay)
whether he does bestow yearelye the syfte part of his benefice, till such
time, the same be sufficientlye repaired, doing also further his duty
therein, and otherwise, as by the law he is charged and bound in that
behalf, distrybutinge and doing, as he is bound by the law.

25 ITem whether there be any person, that does serve any Cure, or mynyster
any Sacraments, not being priest, or if any do take upon them to use the
rowme and office of the person, or vicare, or Curate, of any benefice, or
spiritual promotion, receiving the fructes thereof, not being admitted
thereunto by the ordynary.

26 ITem whether they and eueryche of them does goo in priestly apparel and
habit, having their berdes and Crowns shaven, or whether any of the^ does go
in lay men's habites and apparel, or otherwise disguyse them selfs, that they
can not easelys be discerned or known from lay men.

27 ITem whether they or any of them have many promotions, and benefices
ecclesiastical, Cures, secular seruyces, yearly pensions, Annuyties, fermes,
or other revenues, now in title or possession, and what the names of them be,
and where they lie, gyuing al good instruction, and perfect Information therein.

28 ITem whether such as have churches or Chapels appropried, and mansions,
or houses thereto apperteynynge, do keep their Chauncelles and houses in good
and sufficient reparations, and whether they do all things in distributions
and almose or otherwise, as by law and good order they ought to do.

29 ITem whether any such, as were ordered scismatically and contrary to the
old order and custom of the catholic church, or being unlawfully and
scismaticallye married after the late innovation and manner, being not yet
reconciled nor admitted by the ordinarye, have celebrated or said either Mass
or other divine service within any cure or place of this city or diocese.

30 ITem whether any person or vicare, or other ha uyng ecclesiastical
promotion, do let out the same to ferme without consent, knowledge, and
lscence of his ordinary, especially for an unreasonable number of years, or
with such conditions, qualities, or manners, that the same is to the great
prejudice of the church, and the incumbente of the same, and especially of
him, that shall succeed therein.

31 ITem whether there be any person, vicare, curate, or priest, that
occupies buying and selling as a merchant, or occupies vsurye, or lays out
his money for filthy lucres sake, and gain, to the sclaunder of priesthode.

32 ITem whether they or any of them do wear swords, daggers, or other
weapon in times and places not convenient or semely.

33 ITem whether any priest or ecclesiastical person have reiterated or
renewed baptism, which was lawfullye done before, or invented and followed any
new fashion or form, coutrary to the order of the catholic church.

34 ITem whether the person, vicare, or curate do (ac cordyng to the law)
every quarter in the year, upon one solemn day or moo, it is to wit, upon
the sunday or solemn feast (when the parishioners by the order of the
Church do come together) expou^de and declare by him self, or some other
sufficient person unto the people in the vulgar or common tongue, plainly,
truly, and fruitefully the articles of the catholic faith, the ten
commandments, expressed in the old law, the two commaun dementes of the
Gospel or new law, that is, of earneste love to God, and to our neighbor,
the seven works of mercy, the seven deadly sins with their ofsprynge,
progenye, and issue, the seven principal virtues, and the seven sacraments of
the church.

35 ITem whether that every priest having cure, do admonyshe the women (that
are with child) within his cure to come to confession, and to receive the
sacreme^t (especially when their time draws nigh) and to have water in
readiness to christen the child with, if necessity so require it.

36 ITem whether stipendarye priests do behave them selfs discretelye and
honestly in all points to war destheir person or vicare, gyuyng an oath, and
doing according to the law and ecclesiastical constitutions, ordinances,
and laudable customs in that behalf.

37 ITem whether any person, vicare, or other having any ecclesiastical
promotion, have made any alienation of any thing, perteyning to their church,
benefice, or promotion, what it is, and what warraunt they had so to do.

Articles concerning Archedeacons their officialles and ministers.
1 FIrst whether they and eueryche of them has executed and done his office
in all points, according to the order of the law, and the ecclesiastical
constitutions and laudable customs of the church.

2 ITem whether the said Archedeacons have faithfully and profitably visited
all the churches within their Archedeaconries, inquiring dilige^tlye, how
divine service in all points has been celebrated and said, the sacraments
and sacramentalles ministered, and how the ornaments of the church have been
kept, and what lack has been there of the^ or what saulte has been in them,
and generallye of all things spiritual and temporal, apperteynynge to the
good order of their Archedeaconries and the said churches, correctinge and
punyshyngdiligently and faithfully all such offenses, transgressions, and
crimes, as apperteyneth to the worthy punishment and reformation.

10 ITem whether the said Archedeacons do sorsee and provide, that the blessed
Sacrament of the aultare be reverently reserved and kept in a pixe, and hanged
upon the aultare, or otherwise decently and safely kept and placed. And that
the host so reserved in the pixe, be ones in the weke taken and received of
the priest, or sick person, for whom the same is reserved, and another
consecrate host to be put in the place thereof, and the same not to be
suffered there long to continue, but changed and renewed according to the
old custom, and usage of the Church.

11 ITem whether they and every of them have admonished the persons, vicares,
curates, and all other priests, being called, or coming to any sick person,
making his Testament and last will to put the sick person in remembrance
of the great spoil and robberye, that of late has been made of the goods,
ornaments, and things of the church, exhorting charitably the same, not only
to relieve and help the nedy persons being abroad, but also according to the
old and laudable custom used in times past, effectually to remember both his
parish church, and the need thereof, and also the cathedral and mother church
of this city and diocese of London, relienyng the same with some what,
according to his devotion and power, and whether the said persons, vicares,
curates, and other the said priests have done accordingly.

Articles concerning the thing of the Church, and ornaments of the same.
1 FIrst whether there be at the entree of ye church or within the door of the
same an holy water stock or pot, having in it holy water to sprinckle upon
ye enterer to put him in remembrance both of his promise made at the time
of his baptism, and of the shedding and sprynckeling of Christ's blood upon
the Cross for his redemption, and also to put him in remembrance, that as he
wassheth his body, so he should not forgette to wash and cleanse his soul, and
make it fair with virtuous and godly good lyuinge, and finally to put him in
remembrance, that as water passes and slydeth away, so he shall not tarry
and abide in this world, but pass and slide away, as the water does.

2 ITem whether there be every so^day holy water and holy bread made, and
distributed amongst the paryshioners, the one done for considerations, before
rehearsed, the other practiced as well to put men in remembrance of unity and
concord, expressed by the several graynes, which being many, are ground
and brought to one lofe made of them al, as also to bring to memory the usage
of the primative Church, which was to have often, and especially on the
Sunday a Communyon between the multitude, for lack of which Communion this
holy bread is now given men to understand, that they should have done the
other, and for lack of the same do now receive this for a memory thereof.

3 ITem whether there be a paxe in the church, not only to put people in
remembrance of the peace that Christ bequeathed to his disciples, but of that
peace that Christ by his death purchased for the people, and also of that
peace, which Christ would have between god and man, man and man, and man to
him self. And the said paxe in the Church to be kissed of the priest, and to be
carried to the parishioners at Mass time in especial remembrance of the
premises.

4 ITem whether there be any, that refuses to receive the said holy water or
holy bread, or refu seth to take the paxe, or to kiss the priest at the
solempnisation of matrimony, or use any such like ceremonies, heretofore used
and observed in the church.

5 ITem whether there be in the church a hye aultare of stone, consecrated and
dedicated specially to say or singe Mass upon, and it is not meant any grave
stone taken from the burial, or other vusemely place, and put up for an
aultare, but a meet and co^uentent stone, as has been accustomed in times
passed in the Church for Mass decentlye and comlye to be said or song there
upon.

6 ITem whether the things underwritten (which are to be found on the cost
of the parishioners) be in the church, it is to wit, a legende, an
Antiphonar, a Grayle, a Psalter, a Drdinall to say or solempnise divine
office, a Missale, a Manuale, a Processional, a Chalice, two Cruettes, a
principal vestiment, with Chisable, a vestiment for the Deacon and Subdeacon, a
Cope with the appertenaunces, it is to wit, an Amiss, Albe, Girdle, Stole and
Fannon, the hye aultare with apparel in the front, and other parts thereof,
three Towels, three Surplices, a Rochette, a Cross for Procession with
Candelstyckes, a Cross for the dead, an Jucenser, a Ship or vessel for
frankensence, a little sauctes bell, a Pyxe with an honest and decent cover, and
a veil for the lent, Banners for the rogation week, Bells and Coopes, a Bear
for the dead, a nessel to carry holy water about, a Candelstycke for the
Paschall taper, a font to Christen children with covering and lock, and
keye, and generally all other things which after the custom of the country
or place, the parishioners are bound to find, maynteyne, and keep.

7 ITem in case such things be in the Church, when they were provided and
used, if they be not, by whose fault and negligence the same proceeds.

8 ITem whether there be a Churcheyarde, and if it be, whether the same be well
and honestly repaired and kept, so that no cattle, specially hogs and
filthye beasts be suffered to come in, and defyle it.

9 ITem whether there be a Crucisixe, a roode lost as in times past has been
accustomed, and if not, where the crucisixe or roode lost is become, and by
whose negligence the thing does want.

10 ITem whether the water consecrated, being in the font, be ones in a month
at the least duelye changed and renewed, according to the old custom of the
Church.

11 ITem whether in the said Church there be a Chrysmatorye for holy oil and
Chrysme, decently and well kept after the old custom, and whether the said
oil and Chrisme be also therein, and frequented and used, as they ought to be.

12 ITem whether in the said Church there be seetes and pewes for the
parishioners to sytte in, honestly prepared, and kept after the old usage and
custom, and the doors, windows, and al other places of the Church duly
repaired and kept.

13 ITem whether there has been, or be any plate, ornaments, or Jewels,
belles, Candelstyckes, orleade, or other goods, of, and in the said Church,
what they were or be, and in whose hands they were or are, or whether they be
alienated or pled ged, declaryng the value thereof.

14 ITem whether there has been made any inuentary or inuentaries of the same
church goods, and where the said inuentaries are, and whether there be wantyng
the said plate, Jewels, or ornaments specified in the said inuentaries, and
being such want, by what occasion and mean the same is, and by whose
commandment and doing.

15 ITem whether there be Church wardeynes in the said Church choosen every
year, and whether the same do yearly make a faithful and true account to
the parishioners accordingly, bryngyng in with them the said inuentaries, and
doing all such things, as on their behalf are to be done.

16 ITem whether the said Albes, vestimentes, and all other ornaments be kept
clean and well, and sufficiently repaired and maynteyned.

Articles concerning the Laytye.
1 First whether there be any lay person, man or woman, that is a notable and
open transgressor and breaker of any of the ten commandments of god, or an
open offender in any of the. vij. deadly sins, or of the laudable customs
and ordynaunces of the catholyke church.

2 ITem whether there be any lay person, man or woman, that has laid violent
hands upon any Ecclesiastical person, especyally being in holy orders.

3 ITem whether there be any lay person, man, woe man, or child, being of
sufficient age and discretion, that can not say the Pater noster, the Aue
Maria, and the Creed.

4 ITem whether there be any of them that bathe contracted matrymonye with any
one, being of Consanguynytie or affinity prohybyted, or has pryuely
contracted and made any matrymony with any person.

5 ITem whether there be any man, that besides his wife has kept, or does
keep a Concubyne, or carnally has had to do with any other man's wife or
other person.

6 ITem whether there be any woman, that besides her husband has taken any
other manue, and carnally has had to do with him.

7 ITem whether any man has had, or now has now ij. wives living at ones,
or any woman ij. husbands living at one tyuie especyally no iawefull dyuorse
being made between them.

8 ITem whether there has been or be any, that does not faithfully, duly,
and truly pay his tithes, oblations, Crysomes, Clerckes, wages, the holy
loofe, and all other ecclesiastical duties, as of reason and laudable custom
they ought to do.

9 ITem whether in the city of London or diocese of the same there be any
person, that is an notoriouse or commen vserer, which lends his money for
unlawful and excessyue gain and lucre, contrary to the manifest words of
the scripture, to the evil example of other christen people, to the danger
ofhys own soul, and to the utter undoing and hynderaunce of many, especially
of poor and young begynners, borowyng for their necessytye.

10 ITem whether there be any bawdes, men or women, that does keep within his
or their houses, or else where any strompettes or harlottes, to have the more
resort to their houses, and utter there by their chaffer and wares, to their
moore wordelye advantage, and whether there be any vehemently suspected
thereof, or of conueyng or keeping young we^ches for such unlawful and ungodly
purposes.

11 ITem whether there have been any men, women or children of the age of.
xiiij. years and above. who upon sondayes and holy days have gone a hunting
or hawkyng, bear baytyng, games, and other plays, dysporte, and passetymes,
or who has upon the said sondayes or holy days w yllyngly absented them
selfs from their paryshe church in the time of deuyne service, and who upon
feigned occasions, either upon the even before, or the same day in the morning
does use to go for the abroad out of their paryshes into the fields or
countreye, or other where, or does secretly keep them selfs in their houses,
and do not come to their service, as they ought to do.

12 ITem whether there has been any, that has murmured, grudged, or spoken
against dyrectly or indyrectly the mass, or other deupne service,
admynystratyon of sacraments and sacramentalles, as holy bread, holy water,
Palms, Ashes, Creping of the Cross, holy oil and Chrysine, bearyng of Palms
and Candels, burying of the dead, praying for them, specially in saying of
Diriges and commendations, or in vsyng any laudable or godly ce remony of the
Church, heretofore used and accustomed, or yt has made noise, iangled,
talked, or played the fool in the Church in the time of divine service or
preaching, to let or disturb the same in any wise.

13 ITem whether there be any, that has maynteyned and holden the opinion or
belief, that a man has no free will, and that all things do come and chance
by a precyse and absolute necessity, so that whatsoever any one does, he does
it not of free will, but of mere necessity, and can not choose, but so to do,
and that therefore whosoever is dampened, is dampened through Gods defaulte. and
not of his own free will and choice. And whether any has maynteyned or holden
opinion, that faith alone without charity, hope, and good works in time does
justify. or think the same a wholesome and profitable doctrine to be taught and
preached abroad.

14 ITem whether there be any, that is a Sacramentary, an Anabaptiste, or
Lybertyne, either in reiteratyng baptism again, or in holding any of the
opinions of the Anabaptists, especially that a Christen man or woman ought
not to swear before aiudge, nor one to sue another in the law for his right,
and that all things would be common.

15 ITem whether there has been any, that has holden, maynteyned, or
defended any opinion or doctrine, contrary to the catholic faith and unity of
the catholic Church, and has favored and maynteyned such, as has holden
the same, or like erronisufe opinion or doctrine, or has kept or used any boo
kes or wrytynges, containing the same evil doctrine, or has used to read,
or resort to any private or secret lectures.

16 ITem whether there has been any, that has not in Lent last passed been
confessed of his own curate, or by his license of some other honest priest,
and received the blessed Sacrament of the aul tare, according to the order of
the catholic church.

17 ITem whether there has been any, that has, or does wylfully interrupte,
let, or disturb any preacher in the time of his sermon, or disturb,
discourage, or let any curate or priest to singe or say Mass, Euensonge, or
other divine service, or to minister the Sacraments or Sacramentalles in
Latyne, according to the old laudable custom of the Church, or that does
mock, Jeste at, threaten, or beat any priest for saying Mass, or such
divine service, or so ministryng, and who they be.

18 ITem whether there be any, that will not have his child Christened, but in
the English tongue, nor have any service in the Church, except it be done in
the said English tongue.

19 ITem whether there be any, that will not suffer the priest to dip the
child three times in the font, being yet strong, and able to abide and
suffer it in the judgment and opinion of discrete and txperte persons, but
will needs have the child in the clothes, and only to be sprynckled with a
few drops of water.

20 ITem whether there has been any of the laytye, that has wyllyngly and
wilfully doubted in any article of the catholic faith, or that has openly
disputed, or irreverently talked in any open places of the same, not
submittyng him self in all points to the catholic Church, but wylfully
defendyng his own erroneous opinion and belefe, contrary to scrip ture,
encouragynge other to the maynteynaunce of their folly, and to induce other to
the same.

21 ITem whether there has been, or now is any no table evil rule, and
manifest disorder in breakyng the laws of GOD, and the ordinances and
laudable customs of the catholic Church, and many things worthy
reformation and correction in the late Minores, or at Bedlem, or at saynct
Martensle graunde, the late black friars, the white friars, the graye friars,
Augustyne friars, cruched friars, sayncte Katherines, or other places in, or
about the city of London.

22 ITem whether there has been any, that denies or refuses to go in
procession upon sondayes or other days, when it is used, or that departs out
of the Church, before that service be done, without a just and reasonable
cause so to do.

23 ITem whether there has been any, that upon the sondayes or holy days
has worked or labored seruyle work, or has kept open their shoppes, or
otherwise occupied and exercysed their handy crafts and occupations on the
same days, to the sclaunder of other, and contrary to the laudable custom and
usage of the catholic Church.

24 ITem whether there has been any vytlers, tauerners, or ale house kepers,
that on the sondayes and holy days have commonly used to sell and utter their
vittals, meat, and drink, and chaffer, and to keep their doors open in the
time of divine service against the godly order and usage of the church.

25 ITem whether there has been any, that being able to sing at the least
his plain song (and who in the time of the English service did commonly use
to sing in the quere) does now since the setting forth, and renewyng of the
old service in the Latyne tongue, absent and wythdrawe him self from the
quere, declaryng and expressing the names, surenames, and dwelling places of
all such persons.

26 ITem whether there has been any contention, discord, debate, or strife
between any paryshioners of any paryshe, especially in the time of divine
service, for sitting in pewes or seats in the Church, or for any other
cause or matter, to the sclaunder of the rest of the people, declarynge what it
is, and between whom.

27 ITem whether there has been any, that by open fact, deed, or threatenyng
has compelled, caused, or otherwise procured, or induced any curate or priest
to sing or say any common prayer or seruyre, or to minister any sacrament
privily or openly contrary to the order of the catholic church.

28 ITem whether there has been, or is any registre book in the church,
safely kept under lock and keye, in the which there are written every sunday
the weddynges, christenynges, and buryinges, that were had the weke before, and
whether the same have been accordingly done.

29 ITem whether there has been any person, man or woman, lawfully before
precontracted, or mar ried to other, which afterward has broken the contracte,
and married to another person, especially the banes not lawfully asked.

30 ITem whether every parishioner upon the sunday, as it comes to his course
and turn, has paid and given the holy loofe with other accustomed duties
and offerynges, as of old custom it has been laudably used.

31 ITem whether there be any, that has eaten flesh upon any fish day, and
has broken the fasting days, (such as of old aunciente custom has been
laudably kept and observed) gyuynge offense and sclaunder to other in their
doings.

32 ITem whether there be any, that at the sacrynge time, which do hang down
their heads, hyde them selfs behind pyllers, turn away their faces, or do
depart out of the church at that time.

33 ITem whether parish clerks or sextens be obedient to their persons,
vicares, and curates in things that be lawful and honest.

34 ITem whether there be any, that do use charms wytchecraft, sorcery,
inchauntementes, false southsayinges, or any such like thing, inverted by the
craft of the devil.

35 ITem whether such legacies (as were bequeathed for the repayryng of high
ways, fyndyng of poor scholars, marrying of poor maidens, and other such
like deeds of charytie) be faithfully and truly paid and performed.

36 ITem whether there be any Printer or seller of Books, that has since the
beginning of the Queen's Maiestes Raygne Printed or sold the books of the
schismatic and slanderous communyon, the like homelies, and such other
books, having in the heretical and dampnable opynions, declaryng and
specifying their name, sir name, and dwelling place.

37 ITem whether there be any, that has prynted or sold slanderous Books,
Ballades, or plays, contrary to christen religion, declaring and specyfying
their names, surenames, and dwelling places.

38 ITem whether any lay person of his own aucthoritye have expounded and
declared any portyon or part of scripture in any church, or else where, or put
the same to prynting or writing, affirming and maynteyning, that every pryuate
and lay person may so do without approbatyon of any ordynarye,

39 ITem whether there has been any lay person, that has refused,
contempned, or denied to bring his child, being christened, unto the
bisshoppe to be confyrmed, or that has dissuaded or discouraged any other so
to do.

40 ITem whether the churchewardeynes and other being monyshed in the
archedeacons visitation to provide for necesiarye things, that did want in
the church, have (according to the monition and commandment to them given)
sufficiently and well provided for the same.

41 ITem whether there be any scriptures or pictures painted or set forth upon
the walls of the church, or otherwise within the church, and yet remaining,
which chiefly and principally do tend to the maynteynaunce of carnal
liberty, especially in eating and drinking upon all days, fasting, or other
all manner meats and drynkes, or for the defense of the marryage of priests,
and incontinente life with defacynge of virtuous and godly living, or to the
express derogation and slander of the blessed Sacrament of the aultare.

Articles concerning scholemaysters, and teachers of children, men or women.
1 FIrst whether they, that take upon them to teach chyldreu, whether it be
English, or Latyne, to singe, or play, or such like, be them selfs sober,
and discrete, of honest and virtuous living, conversation, and behaufour, with
other good and commendable qualities, so that they may edifye and profit the
scholars, as well by their living, conversation, and good manners, as by their
teaching.

2 ITem whether the same scholemaysters and teachers do well and diligently
apply their scholars, teaching and hearing them often, and dyscretly using
them.

3 ITem whether the said scholemaysters and teachers do cause their scholars to
fast, to pray, to ferue god, and to fear him, to come often to the church,
to hear mass, and all other deuyne service, and to honor and reverence every
person, according to his vocation and degree.

4 ITem whether there be any other grammar taught and learned within the city
and diocese of London, then that grammar, which was set forth in the time of
our late Sovereign Lord, King Henry the Eyghte.

5 ITem whether that any printer dwelling in Paul's Churcheyarde, within the
paryshe of sayncte faythes in London, in the time of King Edward the sixte,
and the year of our lord M. D. Lij. heretycally, maliciously, and naughtly did
imprinte a grammar in Englshe and Latyne, puttyng in the Latyne, grammar but
only two sacraments, it is to wite, baptism and the supper of our lord,
infectyng thereby the youth, and other, to think and believe, that there be no
moore sacraments in christ's church, but those two.

6 ITem whether any teachers or scholemaysters do teach and instruct any his
scholars in any point of heresye, either in the Articles of our faith, or the
ten commandments, either in the sacraments of the church, or other
things, received and believed in the catholic church.

7 ITem whether any teacher or scholemayster do teach or read to any his
scholars any evil or noughty corrupt book, ballade, or writing, or do
interpretate and set for the unto any of them the new testamente in English
or Latyne, or any other books English or Latyne, concerning scripture, not
expedient for young children to medie with all.

8 ITem whether any teacher or scholemayster do teach any his scholars to
hold, maintain, de send, or believe any heresy, error, false doctrine, or
opynyons, contrary to the catholic faith, and deter mynatyon of the same.

Articles concerning middewiues and such, as come to the travail of women
being with child.
1 FIrst whether there be any woman, ye does occupy or exercise the office
and rowme of a middewife, before she be examined and admitted by ye bishop, or
ordinary of this diocese, or his chauncelor, or comissary, having sufficient
authority (except in time of extreme necessity) where the presence of the
middewife can not be had.

2 ITem whether such as heretofore has been allowed and admitted to the said
rowme and office of a middewife, be catholic and faithful, discrete and sober,
diligent, and ready to help every woman trauayling of child, as well the
poor as the rich.

3 ITem whether any middewife, or other woman coming to ye travail of any
woman with child, do use or exercise any witchecraft, charms, sorcery,
inuocations or prayers, other then such, as be alowable, and may stand with
the laws and ordinances of the catholic church.

4 ITem whether any middewife, or any other woman denies or lets, so much
as lies in her, that the child being new borne, shall not be brought to the
Church there to be decentlye, reverently and orderly baptized, and the mother
thereof after a convenient time likewise purified, according to the old
ancient and godly ceremonies, and custom of ye catholic church, heretofore
used in that behalf, and whether the said middewife, or any other such woman
do attempt, use, or do any thing in this matter, contrary to the said
custom, or otherwise indecently and unseemly.

5 ITem whether any woman within this city or diocese by them selfs, or by
sinister counsel have purified them selfs after their own deui ses, and
fantasies, not coming to the church, according to the laudable custom
heretofore used in the same, where the priest would have been ready to do it,
and some of the multitude to have been witnesses accordingly.

6 ITem whether there be any other disorder or evil behavior, concerning the
said middewyues, or the woman brought a bed, or lyinge in chyldebedde, or any
other woman, coming to the labor, or visitynge the woman, that so lies in
childebedde, and whether the nourse attempt, or do any thing unlawfully.

Articles concerning the original patrones of benefices, and other, that have
aduousons of the said benefices.
1 FIrst whether the said patrones and other having aduousons of the same, do
dilygently and faithfully present a sufficient and able clercke to be admytted
to the benefice vacant within dew time, or else do suffer the benefyce to
remain and abide long vacant, or do present an unmeet and unable person to
the same, offendyng god and his own conscience in so doing.

2 ITem whether the said Patrons, or other having such Aduousons, do
practyse or covenant in any manner of wise with any priest directly or
indirectly, (before, or after he has promised or given his presentatyon) to
have the benefice in farm him self or his friends, or to have the mansion
house, the glebe lands, ye fruits and commodities thereof, or some good fleese
or part thereof, paying little or nothing for the same, or to have his own
tithes free, being and remaining within the said benefice, or some yearly
pension, portion, or annuitie, or some co^ moditie to him, his child, kinsman,
servant, or friend, or use any other color, deceyte; or falsehead, and the
priest presented to serve for a yearly stipende, far under the value of the
benefice.

3 ITem whether the said patrones, or other, having such aduousons of any
church or chapel with cure or without cure, have pulled down the said
church or chapel, or taken away the lead, the belles, the orname^tes, or
other goods of ye same, or in any wise spoiled it, conuertinge the tithes,
profits, commodities, revenues, and possessions thereof to his own use and
commodity, and putting the same church or chapel to profane and ungodly
uses, declaring who, and how many there be, that so does.

4 ITem how many benefices be now vacaunte within this city of London, or
in other places of the diocese of London, who be the patrones thereof, how
long they have been vacaunt, and who does receive the tithes, oblations,
profits, and commodities of the same, during the time of the vacation thereof.

5 ITem whether in such patronages or aduousons therebe any other disorder, or
unlawful doing, and finally to inquyre and search faithfully, truly, and
diligently, whether in this City or Dyocesse of London there be any other
things amysse, worthy correctyon and reformatyon.

The tenor, form, and effect of the oath, given by the said bishop of
London, to ye inquisitors and searchers for knowledge of things amiss,
especially concerning the articles before rehearsed.
YE shall set aside all worldly love and favor, all hatred and displeasure, all
hoope of reward and meede, al carnal affection and corruptyon, all worldely
respects and co^sideratio^s, that might stir and move you to declyne from
the truth, or to add unto the truth, or to pull any thing away from it, ye
shall have the fear of god before your face, the terrible Judgment of god at
the day of dome, the danger and peril of your conscience in hidyng or
alteryng the truth, ye shall consider the honestye of your selves and your
good name, the honesty and profit of your paryshe, that you come for, and
finally the honor of the King and Queen of this Realm, and the Realm it
self, with all other honest consideratyons and motyues, that may stir and
move you godly, and these things considered, ye shall faithfully, truly,
plainly, uprightly, charitably, discretly and indifferently search and inquyre
for all things, which in your conscience, and in the opinion and Judgment of
good men, are to be searched and inquired for, especially such things, as are
mentioned in certain Articles, delivered unto you by your ordinary, and you
shall bring in your certificate and report fully and perfectly in writing,
sealed with your seals, or subscribed with your hands to your said ordinary,
or his officer, having sufficient authority therein on this side the next
coming without failing in any thing hereof, as God shall help you, and the
holidome, and the contents of this book.

FINIS.
EXCVSVM
Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maiestatis. Anno. M. D. L
1111.

Mense Septembri.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


