To the most reverend Father in God, TOBIE by divine providence Archbishop of
YORK, Primate and Metropolitan, of England, etc.
MY Most reverend good Lord, The late experience of some defections and reuolts
in children of lewd behauior, which have contemptuously profaned all
obedience to parents, together with some desire of mine own, to retain the
wavering dispositions of others, which may be in like ieopardie to be abused
hereafter, have put me into a business would God so helpful for them, as
necessary for the time, I mean this English translation, of a most excestent
Latin Original. It treats for the honorable maintenance of parents
authority, and was compiled some five and twenty years since by the famous
French Ciuilian Petrus Aerodius, in purpose to reclaim his son Renatus, who
at that time, being under age, and without his fathers leave had betaken
himself to the Jesuits, company. Doubtless, the good parents grief for an
injury of such heinous quality, (if he may be heard speaking out of the
tender bowels of his affection,) is ever within measure though it be
excessive, just, though past hope of recovery. A son, nay the eldest son, the
first fruits of his strength, so fair a bud, to be stripped from his natural
bark perforce, and inoculated in a stock of astrange kind, would abate the
imputation of being censured passionate without a cause: every man, to my
thinking, upon the supposall of such a person, being apt to acknowledge so much
in himself, and that in the Poets phrase, Huic vniforsan poteram succumbere
culpae, The dignity of the discourse, needs no enlargement by a preface, for
(if too much incredulity ouerweene not my judgment) the most censorious
Critic, if he find patience to peruse it in the native edition, will in mere
justice commend most, or allow all. The style is close wrought, and full of
stuff, the choice of his words apt and frugall, the sentences deep and
ponderous, the shafts of his arguments, drawn by a strong arm up to the head,
the nouelty of examples delightful, the authorities venerable, yet infinitely
various, his dealing fair and fatherlike, contending, rather for truth than
conquest. Now might I take so much presumption upon me, as to hope of some
degree of your Graces good acceptance, (to whom especially, for discourse or
title it is most properly belonging) I would farther allege for my self,
that I have often seen my worthy predecessor M. Doctor Gentilis, his Majesty's
professor for the Civil laws, reading me some Lectures, and teaching me how
to offend in this kind, whom I ever found of this opinion, that his excellent
Lucubrations never prospered better than when they received luster from your
Graces judicious confirmation: to whom, as he was very much obliged, so was he
not sparing rather by preventing occasion than by taking it, thankfully to
report the same. And lastly because the age wherein we live, is so much visited
with an Epidemiall distemper of disobedience, the cure would be sought for at
their hands, who by reason of their eminent place of practice, best know (out
of their great learning) to apply sovereign antidotes against such malignant
qualities: and if that will not work, then me thinks Lucius Brutus his
severity well allaied would not come out of season, that derobed himself of
all respects of a father, that he might the better act the part of a Consul,
exuit patrem vt Consulem ageret. For such austeritie in parents many times
proves pity, and is powerful, to make obedience where it finds none. A
reformation of so general importance that every man may be said to have a part
in it, though he can challenge no property, because quod commune est meum est,
and (without peradventure) an undutiful son so reclaimed to his natural
obedience is that commune bonum.

Your Graces in all humble service to be commanded, JOHN BVDDEN.

The Author to the Reader.
Having for three whole years together, made continual inquiry after my
eldest son, and that to small purpose, (for he is among the Jesuits) I am
now determined to present that to public view, which otherwise I should have
sequestered to private use. I treat with him as with an offender, that
contemptuously refuses to make his appearance, and as a man should do with a
runaway, that is, by writ of outlarie, and proclamation of rebellion. Therefore
I beseech thee good Reader, if this expostulation and complaint of mine appear
unto thee altogether causeless, and if it happily so fall out, that thou meet
with this poor youth, thus esloigned and seduced from me, be ameanes, that he
may sometimes peruse this small treatise: then if he find himself resolved, to
be at his own reins, and disposing, I pass not, father or not father,
whether he so take me or so refuse me. From Angiers 1589 in October.

A DISCOVRSE for Parents honor, and Authority over their Children.
WHat is the reason that the famous Doctor Gregory Nazianzene in his oration
Apologeticall which he made to the people says, that there is a great deal
more in the authority apertaining to parents which is given the^ from almighty
God, than in that which has bin established by men, either in their written
laws, or long continued customs? Is it so that this one commandment Honor
thy Father and thy Mother commands more with children, than that hideous
thunderclap of disinheriting them, invented by the Grecians, or then the
commission of life and death, which though it be detestable in nature, yet was
it our own French law, and in use likewise with many other nations beside; or
then those three solemn alienations, whereby children were freede from their
parents subjection, and so many countersales, which made them bond again:
devises (as it is well known) of the Roman policy? Should the son been
found disobedient to his Father, by these laws, the father did right himself,
and was both accuser, witness and judge. Moreover the execution of
punishments, whereunto he might sentence them, were of such nature, as the very
representation of them to their memories (they were so bloody and cruel) might
presently deter from attempting or entertaining the least breach of their
bounden duty: but on Gods part, a bare commandment only is sufficient: be
the child dutiful, there is a reward for him; be he obstinate, there is no
punishment inflicted. And yet we say, that laws prevail more when they be
penal, then when they simply do but will and require, and that authority is
more awful, which is properly our own, and exercised in our own name and
right, then that forsooth which is indented with covenants, and taken upon
courtesy from an other.

Now sir, how wrought that same sovereign fatherly authority, I mean that
which issued from the provision of man, and not from the sacred constitution of
God? why it wrought thus much, that this private discipline, did sometimes
far exceed the public, insomuch, that wherein the Magistrates immediate
authority seemed feeble and in a manner maimed, there the domestique discipline
(being appealed unto as to an higher jurisdiction) gave present help and
assistance; that is to say, parents were able to do more with their children,
then law or legion, or Dictator himself. Cn. Martius Coriolanus marched forth
with a dangerous army, against his country, breathing forth nothing but ruin
and vastation, whomade him to disarme himself, forsake his ensigns, and leave
the command of the field but Veturia only? He that neither yielded to Senators
sent unto him, nor Magistrates, nor priests, yielded to his mother. He that
neither the Majesty of the Empire, nor any touch of religion could cause once
to retire, did soon relent at the name of his mother.

Cn. Seruilius, L. Sergius, M. Papirius, being Tribunes together, and in like
authority, which was also Consular, were vehement competitors, which of them
should be general in the war against the Lucani: every one was for himself:
and thereupon despised the charge of the City as an office altogether
thanklesse and base: the Senators beheld the contention with astonishment,
Dictator was there none, that by strong hand might order these factious
Tribunes, says Q. Seruilius, nay since there is no respect hereby carried to
your own rank and quality, nor duty to the estate of this common wealth, my
fathlery authority shall soon dispatch this controversy. I tell you, my son
without drawing of any lots for the matter, shall bide at home, and govern the
City. And what did the Father of C. Flaminius tribune of the common people,
which enacted the law about the partage of some french grounds, by the poll,
the Senate was against it, his colleagues mainly opposed him, which he set
light by, an army was mustred against him (in case he should persist in that
opinion (but that danted him nothing, his father, even as he was in the place
to have proclaimed his new made Law, seizes upon him: how was it now with my
young master? down comes he from his chair of estate, and this brave gallant
that before set at naught all the majesty, authority and prerogative of his
country, is now subdued at a poor private man's check, and as M. Valerius
storieth it in his fifth book, was not so much as once blamed for it, by the
least muttering of the sessions so disappointed and broken up. How then is it
possible, but that in the point of parents authority, there should be more
force in man's law than in the bare and simple precept as it was delivered from
God by Moses, especially if that be true which Halicarnassus reports that
contempt, impiety, murdering of parents, were therefore ordinary monsters among
the Greeks, but exceeding scarce and seldom to be found in Rome, because the
authority which those ancient Law makers Charondas Pittacus and Solon, assigned
to parents, was a mild and feeble regiment contrariwise that which Romulus
gave, was absolute, full, and without limitation, whence it came to pass that
in all the large territory of the Roman Empire, hardly will you meet with one
Malleolus that is, such a desperate ruffian as butchered his own mother?

What then may we say of this divine commandment established (as we see)
neither by threat of abdication, nor loss of life? here is only commanded that
which honesty and good conscience persuades unto. Nor let any man think that
it is a good answer to the objection to say that Moses Law, as well as any other
law, did not only sharply censure parricide, but even every dishonest and idle
speech uttered by a son, for we entreat not, what authority a public
magistrate has, neither of a judicial proceeding held in consistories, and
common Assizes, we talk of that which may be exercised at our home dwellings,
in our own private households, which fathers, not officers, by virtue of their
office, challenge over their children, that is to say without appeal to any
higher be^ch, without assistance of any other Judges office? For so it is, he
that punishes by the help of another, does in deed not punish but complain.
But yet over and above all that which we have already objected against S.
Gregory, it falls so short that parents by this heavenly oracle have any more
dominion over their children, than either by these, or other humane laws, that
in truth they cannot be said, to have received thence any one jot of power or
authority. For let a son be negligent in performing of that one command,
honor thy father, what may the father do in such a case? It is true, it
allures him with reward, that is, with a prosperous and a long life, but it
puts over no punishment into the fathers hands, no none at all. As though in so
doing, somewhat would be found, which nature of her self could not well abide.
Did Moses then mistake, and when he delivered Gods laws was he somewhat more
careless in this point which concerns Fathers? A sin it is so to say; for
this authority of parents, which we seek after, was for precedence of time
far more ancient than the commandment it self, which is demo^stratiuely,
proved by this very insta^ce that God almighty, would never have commanded
Abraham to have sacrificed his son Isaacke, if he had had no commission of
life and death over him. Would God have enjoined it, would the father have
executed it, would neighbors and strangers have endured it, which in no case
at no time, by no law a father might be able to justify? besides they that
lived long before Moses, would never have busied themselus so much in matching
of their children in wedlock: for that was a matter resting in their choice,
not in the choice of the parties contracting marriage, which sin of theirs was
cause of the universal deluge) nor would the children bin so eager in pursuit of
their parents blessing: and what shall we say more? surely the bare enditement
brought in by the father to the Magistrate, would never have served for a
sufficient evidence against an undutiful child, if even in those days, the
power of a father and his domestique discipline had not been very
transcendent. What shall we say then? Did God by his latter law repeal the
former and confine this duty to an inhibition of words alone? If the case
were so, what then might we say for Nazianzene? Without doubt something might
be spoken for him, and very much, were it not, that the very self same
Christian Religion, which in a manner we received from him, did in some sort
now cross the good Christian Bishops assertion. For this authority of parents
(if there be any such thing extant) is so far revolted from that which was
ordained and established by God, by nature, by the Law of nations, and Law
positive, and that forsooth upon no othet occasion (but that we (I cannot tell
how) sever this filial duty from religion) that among Christians now a days
to be a Father, is nothing else but so to be termed, the duty is gone though
the name continue. Can Christian religion then, and Gods heavenly
commandment, which Saint Gregory so highly commends, maintain the home
discipline, if Christians be the men which especially overthrow it? But before
we pass any further in the discourse, let us satisfy this great Divine, and
then consider, whether it be true, that now a days there is any authority left
us over our children or no, and if it be any, and yet but of very small
esteem, whether notwithstanding it be such, or so much, as should be exposed
to all contempt and wrong. Certain it is, that the outrageous cruelty which
the ancient Lawmakers devised to improve the power of parents withal, was but
a cast of policy, that so in regard thereof, either out of pure constraint, or
of a ready mind, children might conform themselves to better behavior, and at
no hand be withdrawn from that reverent obeisance, which natural affection
(and no law nor ordinance of man) taught them, as they were sucking of their
mothers breasts. They in their wisdom knew right well, that youth was so prone
to riot and lust, so arrogant and lascivious in behavior, so hard to be tamed
and menaged, that they concluded it to be a case of mere necessity by way of
enacting such terrible punishments, to renew and repair that, which was so far
corrupted and depraved from natures primitive institution; that as in old time
they kept debtors to their word by tearing their lims in sunder, and drawing
blood from them, and the like, so the very show and representation of such
horrible tortures and martyrdomes which parents might inflict upon their
children, might lesson them obedience and bear them down, if they should ever
attempt or undertake any thing that past not first by their allowance and
leave, by whom they lived, and had their education: but yet thereby no check
was given to natural affection, for it was to be intended that although
parents might be so tender of their childrens good as to enter into such severe
terms of consultation for them, yet the lawmakers never dreamed it would once
so happen, which they permitted: that is, that a son might be sold by the
father for a bond-slaue, disinherited, and then killed. Or if perchance it might
so fall out, that it should be upon such as had worthily deserved it, and with
such circumstantiall considerations, that justice her self, should sne have
given judgment could neither have said better, or done more uprightly. But God
almighty handles matters otherwise, that which he commands is plainly set down,
not with fetches and devices. For he needs no compassing or prefacing to
persuade that to be just and good which he once requires, he is so essentially
good of himself, and has such a prerogative of justice and equity
co^substantiall to him as his bare command necessarily enforces our precise
obedience. Religion keeps men more in aw, than fear: for were the son loose or
dishonest, of conversation, and for that cause oftentimes turned out of doors,
nay lastly refused of the parents for their child, because no gentle means
prevailed ought with him? Why if once he were converted to christianity
presently (says Septimius) he became to live in good order, and good counsel
regaind him to duty and obedience. Doubtless though God unto these laws of
men and nature inserted also his heavenly behest, yet did he nothing thereby
prejudice those former laws; he commanded obedience, but never abrogated any
part of their authority. Nay long time after Christ's passion, the commission of
life and death which parents might exercise upon their children, was still
current amongst Christians, and though the more ancient of them reproved some
things amongst the Pagans, as the murdering of young infants, the bloody fencing
of sword players, yet against that terrible authority of parents they spoke not
a word. And howsoever God in bare terms pronounced this Commandment, honor
thy father and thy mother, yet notwithstanding for two reasons especially it
far exceeds the laws of men. The one is, because what he commands is
constant and perpetual, but our laws be mutable and repealeable: if anything
please us to day, to morrow we are out of love with it: a pattern whereof we
may see in that very law which Romulus ordained. For at first without all
exception or bar, it was free for a father to put his child to death.
Afterward it might not be done but upon the assistance and advice of others,
then the cause must be heard iudiciallie: lastly the magistrate might decide
it, but no private jurisdiction, nay in conclusion that rigorous law, utterly
vanished and became void: the other is, because if the iniunction of a Consul
be greater, than the Pretors and the Pretors greater than an order of the
Edilis, it will necessarily follow, in good proportion, that the law of God
is to be preferred before any ordinance of man whatsoever. And why so? because
men in their wisdoms may err, and thereupon be of mean reputation by reason
of such escapes and over sights, as says the same Tertullian. In God there is
no such matter; so then S. Gregory who understood this well enough, and was of
opinion that this precept of our Lord God should be left at large, and never
concluded by any limitation, (when he had forsaken the world, against the will
and express commandment of his father, and had betaken himself to a
monastery, and had refused a Bishopric which before was his fathers, yet at
length he began to be touched with a sense of inward regreeting: and can I
(says he) be undutiful and disobedient unto so good a father, and be
blameles; can I endure to be accused for a stubborn and contemptuous son, to
be guilty of violating and distaining my natural obedience unto my father? and
thereupon leaving the solitary life, he gets him home, accepts the sea and
Bishopric which had been before his fathers: and all this do I (says he)
more for God almighties commandment sake, than for any fear of mortal men:
therefore now good father, I pray give me your blessing. And in this sense (you
see) may S. Gregory be well understood. For even S. Chrysostom in his eleventh
book against such as discommend the monastical life, writes in this manner:
Thy son loves and observes, and honors thee, not because the law of nature
enioynes him so to do, but much more for that in so doing he may testify his
duty to the commandments of almighty God, for whose love he has perfitly
despised and relinquisht all the world. But if notwithstanding all this, it be
true, that now a days there be no trace left of this fatherly power which we
so much hunt after, and if this home bred authority be scarce remaining in
shadow or show among us, how may S. Gregory be then defended? the power of life
and death long since has bin discontinued by an immemoriall custom to the
contrary (as before we mentioned) you cannot pawn or sell your son, much
ado you will have to disinherit him. If he get any thing it is for himself,
his father has no part nor property in it, he will serve his father with
process, he will endite him at the common Assize without asking him any leave.
And in a word such is the religion now adays, such is the Churches tradition
(as men say) that let the son entet into any kind of life, be married, be a
monk, or so forth, all this may he do in spite of his fathers teeth, and
absolutely against his will. How then (good father Nazianzene) or wherein
stands that sanction so much enforced by God and nature, honor thy father. What
did thou see in that authority royal, and pre-eminence of parents when thou
upon a timorous scrupulositie of conscience durst not once so much as to
trespass against it. If in the cases before mentioned our children may disobey
their parents, and yet not be punshed by them, put me some cases out of the
old law, why they should not now enjoy the like liberty? or what be the
principal points of this domestique monarchy, which the christian religion,
does yet retain and defend for lawful? can it be possible, that heathen
parents have punished even to the pit of hell a shameless and ungracious son
(so far were they in love with the childrens obedience) it is a matter spoken
of that father which (as Pausanius relates it in his tenth book) Polignotus
drew in a picture of hell taking pains to be his own sons hangman for a
special prancke of undutifulness, that he had played him in his life time: And
have christians on the contrary invented cases, to authorize unnatural
impiety and breach of duty against parents? can it be possible (as says
Theophilus in his third book to Eutol.) that Platoes law for the community of
wives, was principally upon that point disliked, because the danger might be,
that the son might sometime honor him that was not his father, and upon
ignorance at another time might also do him no reverence, who was his father
indeed, (a reverence nevertheless so due by the rules of the law of nations,
and in such order marshalled by them, that (as Pomponius testifies) it is to
be ranged in the second place, first God, after him our parents, and then our
country) and should we under color of religion in that one point principally
offend. First and foremost, therefore we will speak thus much in general (as
men do use to sell wares in gross that the position and assertion is very
sottish and impious, because the government of parents, is weakened and rebated
in some points, and circled within an order, that, Ergo there is no such matter
at all remaining, because the pre-eminence of parents is abrogated, (to speak
in the Roman dialect) ergo it must follow there is no duty no natural
reverence at all left unto them. Then descending to particular duties, we
will take a view, whether every one of them be so important, as that of pure
necessity parents ought to be obeyed in special or no? Which will be soon
found if we take some farther view, and make a quire, what that was which the
ancients did so exactly require of their children when they past over such a
large jurisdiction and power unto the parents; the case is clear, that they
did it not therefore, that parents should be as magistrates to their children,
and so administer justice at home to every one that their children had
offended, again as the Praetor did in the Court of the common pleas, nor that
there should be one authority public, another private and domestique. For if
the crime were public, and committed without the verge of the fathers house,
the officer was to order it. Nor is it a good conclusion, the child has
offended, therefore he must have no other judge but his father. Indeed it is
true that there were such fathers in times past at Rome, and likewise amongst
other nations (whereof we have written in the sixth book of our reports, the
seventh Chapter) that by virtue of such fatherly authority, would take
cognizance of such crimes as their children had offended in abroad; as Cassius,
Manlius Torquatus, C. Flaminius and some others besides,) so then this was no
occasion, that gave such a prerogative to the power of parents, but that rather
which Halicarnasseus in the life of Romulus alleges, that when children did
perceive, how they were awed at home and that their subjection under their
private parents, was much more strict than under the public Magistrate, (for
they are commanded first to yield obedience to their parents, after that to
their country) that the Prince himself might scarce do any thing without
judicial proceeding. But the father might do every thing at his own will and
pleasure (for so speaks Aristotle in his politiques) they might learn to be
more dutiful to do nothing without line and level, that is, without express
commandment and iniunction from their parents, might neither will, nor nil
ought, save that which proceeded first from their parents pleasure and by his
allowance. In a word, that as the bit, spur, and switch, makes the horse
obedient to his rider, so the fear of so great chastisements might enforce the
sons conformity to his father, as to a demie God on earth, and sole founder
of his being And surely, had our forefathers meant no other thing hereby then
to put a snaffle into youths mouth, to restrain them from such vices as
nature is prone unto, why then they would have determined this their
authority, at some certain time or age of the son, upon some certain
office or honor, that might have befallen, or some condition and estate of
life whereunto they might possibly be advanced. But the son, were he never
so old, bare he never so great office, yea had it been the high Priesthood, was
ever notwithstanding under his fathers check. And what think you was the
issue thereof? marry sir, whatsoever the father had once determined concerning
his children, to what kind of life soever he had bound them, yea and though it
had been to the cart and plough, as L. Manlius did use his son, why by reason
of so eminent a power, against which there was no help, no remedy to be had,
he must of necessity rest content. Hence it was that all the sons
negotiations had such dependence on the fathers will, as you see counterpaines
have, that must accord with their originalls, or rivers have, that must be fed
from their fountains head. And though (put case) the son swaruing some deal
from this course of duty, as being stubborn and past all shame, found his
penalty thereupon executed, sometime with more rigor, sometimes with more
clemency, though the father by the ordinances of some countries might sentence
his son to death, by others complain of him to the magistrate, and only give
in evidence against him ^ay though by long prescription these domestique
censures have been altogether disused. For to small purpose is their instance,
and (God knows it is a poor one) that allege why but young children be still
yet under their parents correction: it will be no good inference to conclude
that therefore it is not now any longer just and reasonable because law had
once determined it to be so; it will be no good inference to conclude, that the
law and edict of all nations, which decrees an absolute obedience to parents,
is now clearly vanished and out of use. Laws be laws still, though they be
not penal, though there be no loss of life nor forfeiture of goods ensuing:
as for example, adultery though there be small ado made about it, now adays,
yet in its own nature, it is always foul and dishonest. If either by
negligence or coniuencie it be not sharply punished, the law notwithstanding is
still chaste and honorable which forbids it. And so the law for childrens
obedience, is ever right and convenient, though many times no penalty ensue
This is evident specially out of Moses. it is true, he would not that a father
should put his child to death with his own hands, but rather seek for it by
petition from the magistrate, and so have it executed, and that also without
any other enquest, or evidence, than at the fathers suit: from whence it is
more then probably collected, that in the common wealth of the Jews the father
had a sovereign authority, in cases of life and death, for although by this
order of Moses, it were somewhat staid from speedy execution, yet the matter is
plain, that it is easier for me to be a petitioner that another man should be
executed and die, than that I should be his executioner with mine own hands.
But howsoever, I would feign know and learn, why and for what offense a father
might endite his son, by this Hebrew Lawmakers decree, that upon such
conviction he might be presently stoned to death. Was it because he was a
murderer a Church-robber, a traitor, a thief, a fornicator, or an usual
offender against the peace of the King, his crown and dignity? Let us hear his
own words delivered to this purpose:

If any man have a son that is stubborn and disobedient, which will not
harken to the voice of his father, nor the voice of his mother, and they have
chastised him and he would not obey them.

Then shall his father and his mother take him, and bring him out unto the
Elders of his City, and unto the gate of the place where he dwells:

And shall say unto the Elders of his City, this our son is stubborn and
disobedient, and he will not obey our admonition, he is a robber, and a
drunkard.

Then all the men of the City shall stone him with stones unto death.

I pray what manner of offenses be there herein mentioned? be they not
trespasses against parents, private misdemeanors and domestical, hatched
within doors, not acted in public view? certainly as by order of military
discipline contempt in a soldier is a crime very capital, because there is
nothing so far endangers the state of an army, as one mutinously disposed, so
by the same correspondencie of reason, it is fit and requisite that all persons
belonging to my charge, as my servants, my children, my wife, my cattle, all
should be at my beck, all should be under my conduct as the chief general,
all should be actuated by my motion, as having surrendered the interest of their
liberty into my plenary disposition and authority. Aelianus tells us a story of
one Rhaco Mardus, who having brought his son Cartomes like a prisoner with
his arms fast pinacled into the presence of King Artaxerxes to receive
judgment of death, upon suggestion that he was a graceless desperate
castaway, and grew to be very earnest to that point, why (says the King of
Persia) can thou endure to behold thy sons life taken from him? his answer
was, I have in my garden a lettice rudely ouergrowne with leaves, and though
they be lims of the body, yet do I now and then crop off and prune some of
the bitter stalks, and such as may be spared: What does my lettice think you
die for grief upon the matter, or does it mourn, because there is a limb or
two lopt off? nay, it flourishes the better and such a maim makes him eat a
great deal the sweeter. In like manner may it please (you O King) to deem of
me, for albeit I shall see and behold the death of this wretched varlot that
hurts and anoies my household, corrupts, by his stubborn and lewd example his
poor young brethren, I will nevertheless be still of the opinion to speed the
better by it, yea and rather thrive by such a maim than any ways be endamaged
by it, and this is suitable to that of M^s^s and Halicarnasseus. But that I may
the better prove this point, how is it that this question, namely whether a
son, in some case may lawfully disobey his father, first stepping aside out
of private men's houses, entered into the public schools of the university,
to be disputed and questioned there, and after to be decided finally at the
seat of judgment, but that it was never in man's memory heard of before, nay
the contrary was ever held for certain and true, that such a question would
never have been propounded? when Danaus much against his will, had matched his
fifty daughters to Egisthus his grandchildren, and had charged the young
virgins that on the marriage day every one should murder her husband with such
a sword, as to that end he had given them, (the just like tale may you read in
Chalco^dilas, of a Physician of Florence that commanded his daughter to poison
Lantislaus King of Naples the first night they should lie together) every one
did as their father had enioined them excepting only Hypermnestra which saved
her husband Lynceus his life. But what followed hereupon? these murderous
paricides were so far from being brought, to answer the law and plead not
guilty for the matter, or that their obedience herein was deemed culpable,
that contrariwise Hypermnestra, for that she had not performed her fathers
behest, was thereupon publicly arraigned, and much ado to be freed at the
common Assis^s, so that in point of obedience unto parents no exception would be
taken, to have denied them or to have doubled with them had utterly been
unlawful. The truth is, freed she was, but the verdict was brought in upon
even voices, with such demurring, and so much hazard of life, (the record is
famously known by her own letter in Ovid) that as though she had escaped some
dangerous shipwreck, she built a Temple unto Venus and Diana, and hung up a
table in memorial of her delivery. How then should that domestique duty be
blemished or broken, when children though they had offended in obeying, their
obedience notwithstanding, was unto them their chiefest commendation, their
refusal a crime utterly unpardonable. That great Oracle of the Law Vlpian
holds this opinion, that he may not properly be said, to have any will of his
own that lives under command of a father or master, and well worthy is he of
pardon (as he thinks) in this case, that pretends necessary obedience for his
excuse. L. 11. F. de his qui notantur infamia.
And question less Tiberius was of the same mind, that a son might by no
means refuse the command of his father. But howsoever, it has been always
held (says Gellius) be the thing honest which is commanded, or be it
indifferent, the obedience thereunto ought to be absolute. Be it dishonest and
against good manners, yet the care must be nevertheless such so not to obey,
as that it be done with a modest and lowly behavior, notwitha vain of tart
reprehension, or refusal, or the least show of dislike. Respite the doing of
it for a time or put it off handsomelie, rather than refuse to do it, let
there appear a maidenlie bashfulnesse in a constant denial, and let the son
discover some zeal that he would fain obey his father, when he obeieth him
not. As Agesilaus did, who when his father charged him that he should give a
sentence against law, marry father says he I well remember, that long since
you willed me to be ever for the law, I will therefore at this time not do
that which you command me now, but that which was your pleasure I should have
done long ago. And as Acrotatus did, of whom when his parents required some
thing unjustly he denied it honestly in this manner: I know you would have
me to do that which is honest and just, for so you bred me up (I thank you) I
will therefore do that which you once willed me to do, but that which you now
command, I may not. He that should openly gainesay and arrogantlie oppose
himself against his father, should prove no better than a malepert wicked
ungracious impe. Even in a good cause, a sons speech toward his parents
should be humble and reverent, (as Saluianus says) for how else should that be
true, which our forefathers were wont prouerbiallie to speak, a man may wrong
his duty, by the cast of his countenance, if by any law in the world a sons
disobedience were maintainable. Should the person of an Ambassador be sacred,
and inviolable, among enemies, and must you spare to use the least word of
disgrace against him? and would you have the master of a family entertain,
and harbor within his own walls, under the roof of his own house, one
authorized to be his comptroller, his checkmate, nay his professed mortal
enemy? but why bestow we so much time, and proof about this position?
forsooth to this end, to make good the devise and plot of this domestique
authority, that in case children should object or pretend ought against it,
all passages of contradicting or questioning might hereby be prevented: for it
is an obligation wherein we are bound to nature, and the condition is that we
be euersubiect to our parents It is holy and acceptable, not only before God,
but even amongst men, that children should be obedient unto their parents in
singleness of heart and without all malice, as says Theophilus to Eutolicus.
And whereas almighty God added nothing besides the bare and simple commandment
to threaten the offender, he did it upon this reason, that he thought it
sufficient for him briefly to comprize that, which otherwise was natural among
all men and notoriously known in their conscience well enough to be a true,
unchangeable, and perpetual notion. To the intent therefore, that we may show
that this authority of parents streams forth from natures spring tell me, is
there any reason to be given, that a woman should be more in subjection to a
man than a child is to his parents? why; but a woman in respect of the sole
infirmity of her sex is subject to a man, and there is no other reason but the
son owes him double service, the one in respect of disparitie of years,
between them, the other in respect of his fathers goodness toward him. But
grant there be no fee of duty to be acknowledged: for the first, which is
ods of age, and when once they come to strength and full years, in Gods name
cancel that obligation; (and yet Aristotle will tell you, that such
prerogatives of advantage can never be determined) I would feign know of what
sort you take this last to be. I mean a parents bounty, and whether that may
expire by any age or time: it is a doctrine of natural reason, that we are
bound to requite them which have been good unto us: for in this point none can
be of a contrary opinion to Vlpian, (and as it is fairly delivered by Philo,)
the unthankful man sins against humanity, if according to the means of his
ability, he require not kindly a benefit received; nay, not to return one
good turn for another, in the sense of Saint Ambrose, is little better than
wilful murder. Well then, but there is no greater obligation, the^ that which
is due from children to their parents, after God they be our Gods; that we
are, that we live, and move, it is the bounteous gift of our dear parents, and
such a gift as may admit no manner of recompense, for it can never be
possible, that the son should beget his Father: now concerning the mothers
tender care and diligence, what think you of the sweet food wherewith she
nurses her poor infant? what think you of those pretty lovely injuries which
the innocent Babe many times does to his mother? as soon as he is thirsty,
the mothers dugge is ready to give him drink; and before they breed teeth,
they meet that with their lips, which needs no chewing; as he speaks, that
is the supposed author of Saint Ieromes epistle, De honor and is parentibus,
for the honoring of parents; and he adds moreover, that for this cause
parents ought to be dearly esteemed of their children, because they can never
be repaired by any other; for when once the law of all flesh has taken them
out of this world, a man shall never be able to find another father or
mother; then what a devilish ingratitude were it (as that other Plato says
right well;) If we for great matters cannot find in our hearts to bestow small
trifles? for many benefits a few poor retributions? whatsoever to the
uttermost of our power we should render to them of what value were it; what
scale would it bear being compared with this light which we see, this
educatio^ which we have, this Country which we enjoy, this native Country
wherein we live, those large possessions from Fathers and Grandfathers,
lineally descended upon us, which must maintain us and ours: for all these we
are tenants in fee, and hold them from our parents donation. (Let Seneca
speak his pleasure to the contrary, he speaks but like a disputer;) but what
says the great Doctor Origin, who when he speaks well, no man speaks
better: he in his eleventh Homily upon Leuiticus, writes in this wise: The
name of a father is a great mystery, the name of a mother is a concealed
reverence, God is thy spiritual father, and heavenly Jerusalem is thy mother.
First, God thy father that created thy soul, and therehence it is said, I have
begotten sons and exalted them; secondly, thy bodily father, is thy father,
by whose means thou wast borne and begotten in the flesh, and came into this
world, that bare thee in his loins. Now then, because the name of a father is
so sacred and venerable, therefore whosoever shall curse his father, shall die
the death. In like sort must we imagine of our mothers also, by whose labor
and care we were borne, and bred up, wherefore as the Apostle says, thou
ought to be reciprocally thankful to thy parents, for if thou dishonor
thy carnal father, his contempt reflecteth upon thy spiritual father, and if
thou injury thy mother, that injury redoundeth to the heavenly Jerusalem,
therefore at no hand must we be at variance, or contestation with our parents,
no not so much as in word. He is thy father, she is thy mother, let them in
Gods name do and say as they please, they know well enough what is fitting to
be done. As for us be we never so obsequious and dutiful to them, yet shall we
come short, of that full measure of thankfulness, which we owe them, for our
birth, for our bearing, for the fruition of this glorious sweet light which we
behold, for our food, and lastly for the course of institution (perhaps as it
may so fall out) in some of those learned and liberal sciences, nay oftentimes
they be the cause, that we come to the knowledge of God, that we frequent his
Church and hear the word of his heavenly law. Now if this instinct which
proceeds from God and nature, and this kind retaliation of benefits be found
even in senseless and bruit beasts, then should man, whom the graces have
fostered, to whom curtelie and good manners is hereditarie, be worse than a
lion, a Storke, a parde? for of the piety of Storkes and Swallows, S. Ambrose
speaks excellently in his fifth book of the Exam^ron the sixteenth and
seventeenth Chapters, and if so be (as Epictetus will have it) that nature is
not over curious, of what quality or condition thy father be, be he good or
bad, base or honorable, he is still thy father, the obligation which thou
enterest into by being his son can never become void Can then any doubt be
made, whether his will and commandment be in all cases to be fulfilled? the
very person of parents and patrons should be always religiously honored, and
observed of the son and the freed man, as Vlpian the father of the Law has
adjudged it. But put case that the son should object that, which Diogenes
sometimes did object to Zeno. That children were nothing beholding to their
parents for their begetting, because that proceeded rather from a passion of
pleasure and sense than from any sound love or good affection. He that imploies
himself about the begetting of children lest of all intends that which he goes
about, he heeds not procreation, but the satisfying of his own appetite and
voluptuous desire. Indeed this were well spoken for a Cynicke, and well said to
turn away the imputation from brute beasts and put it upon men; yet even
very beasts when by course of nature and season of the year, they couple
together for breed, do it more to rear their young than for any rage of
sensual appetite, (as Athenagoras thinks) twere Well, if there were no ods
between their copulation and our marriages, if matrimony proceeded wholly from
the law of nature, taught in general to all living creatures, not from the law
of nations peculiar only to men of reason: or that now it were no longer held
for a matter of high mystery amongst us christians, but of shame and dishonor:
not a league of love to live together in the estate of holy wedlock, but some
partnership, or conspiracy rather to the satisfying of brutish lust, and
carnalitie. But such men's judgments concerning marriage, comes either from
ignorance, as not knowing what it means, or from some tedious discontent,
which they find in living single. But Socrates in Zenophon has given Diogenes
his answer in this point to the full. For (says he) why should men marry, if
children were begotten to satisfy sensuality: cannot the fire of lust be
quenched except ye first must needs marry? but now, in that we are content to
undertake the yoke of marriage, (which I must needs say lies heavy upon some of
us) we do it to multiply the world by propagation of children. For were it
otherwise, we would never be so curious about the matter, I warrant you, to
enquire of what age she was whom we meant to marry, of what house she came,
what good conditions she had, we would never be so careful, for the education
of our children borne under that marriage, give them such means for their
institution, take so much deliberation for their matching afterward, if lust
and pleasure had been our only ends and respects. Far more divine was that
conceit of Philo in a dialogue of his concerning marriage, who expresses
himself thus, Parents when they beget children, be deputy officers, and
vicegerents under God, both serve and be subordinate for procreation, the one
frames the body, the other works the soul: and therefore Ignatius writing to
the Philadelphians terms parents fellow laborers with God, in which sense
man is the lively image, and counterfeit of God, as Clemens Alexandrinus
reports in his eleventh book of Institutions. Therefore neglect one, neglect
both: condemn the vnderworkman, and set at naught the master workman himself.
Nay says Philo, they be not workmen, they be even Gods amongst us, and when
they beget their children, they represent one God, that is from all eternity
not begotten. The difference is, God is the creator universal, man the
individual, God of all creatures, man of his children only: whereupon it
follows, in his opinion necessarily, that he must needs be implous, against
the invisible, and incomprehensible God, that is careless in performing all
good offices, and duties to these inferior Gods our parents, that live amongst
us, be ever in our eye, and in our familiar acquaintance. The very same
witnesses S. John in his first epistle and fourth Chapter, If any man say, I
love God, and hate his brother, he is a lier, for how can he that loves not
his brother, whom he has seen, love God whom he has not seen? for love God
and the sparks of love will be kindled toward your neighbor: love your
neighbor and then your love to God ward will be in a burning fire, as Gregory
the great speaks in the seventh of his Moralls, the tenth Chapter Nay besides
all this, Moses that gave laws to the Jews, in delivering his holy
ordinances, marshalleth the honor due unto God in the first table, but
repeating afterward in Leuiticus the very same precepts, he begins with the
honor due unto parents, requiring us to yield them honor and obedience:
afterward in a second place he commands the same for God, as who should say,
they be both Gods alike and the definitions are but one in sense and
signification, he that honors his father and mother, honors God, and he that
honors God, by an infallible consequence, honoreth his parents also. Most
certain it is, that when Zenocrates the Philosopher, wrote; that the Athenians
kept most religiously in their Temple of Eleusis, three fundamental precepts,
whereunto their use was to reduce all such laws as ever Treptolemus had made
for them: the first begins with parents, (as S. Jerome testifies writing
against Iouinian) saying honor thy parents, worship thy God, abstain from
flesh meat. And that most divine Plato, who may truly be styled another Moses,
after that he had written many things concerning God, why says he, these be no
laws, but the preambles and prefaces to such laws, as we intend to make for
the honor of parents. Mark, how he that says the father must be worshipped
deduceth his premises from God himself. What an holy speech was this in
comparison of that of Telencer, who though he knew the nature of this duty
well enough, being on a time demanded why the young men of Lacedemon rose up,
and gave place to their ancients, made this answer, that being trained up so in
civility toward strangers, they might be more apt to honor their parents
also? Tertullian in his book of prayer, is verily of the opinion that the name
of a father is a name of reverence and authority, and he which should attempt
to take away duty from children, or government from parents, or upon
partiality lean more to the one than the other, he in so doing, should take
away both, and rob parents of that pre-eminence which the Laws of God, nature,
and men have ever invested them with. So then if we must still continue this
duty toward our parents, ever be heedful to observe and keep it, why may we
not conclude the same for parents auhoritie over us, in this manner. Children
must always honor their parents, ergo parents must ever command their
children. These sweet loving affections were both jointly worshipped in one
oratorie by the old Romans, and in my fancy should not now be sequestered from
being mutuallie dependant one to the other. For my better proof herein, I
would pray leave a little to examine an argument of Tertullians, and to
consider the necessity of his illation whereby he will demonstrate Christ to be
God, yet not God the father, but God the son. I am not come says Christ to
do mine own will, but the fathers that sent me, this did he ever fulfill even
to his death. Hereupon he infers the conclusion ergo he was not the father but
the son. Now sir, how could this argument follow if the sons will should be
distinct or any other, tha^ the fathers will? what majesty or honor were there
added unto God, in calling him a father (we have no name else whereby to know
or express him) if there were no proper or natural signification for the name
to this purpose? if there were no more difference betwixt parents and children,
but a nominall distinction, and the diversity to rest only in name, but no
title of authority or jurisdiction? but now a days where can you find any
other difference for fathers at this time to emancipate or enfranchize their
children, is held not necessary If my son could speak as soon as he were
borne, I think this would be his language, Sir I acknowledge you thus far
forth for my father, as to give me maintenance and bring me up. I came a free
man into the world and if I live but one welue or fourteen years to an end, I
hope to sue out my liuerie for my wardship. If I can but keep my hands from
doing violence to your person, I am sure though in other matters I prove
respective or undutiful, no man will much complain of me. The power and
authority of you parents is clean reuersed, and abrogated. Now should you
threaten him with some curse or revenge that would follow upon this contempt,
this answer would be, it is a long while ere that comes Sir, and I shall loose
nothing by the forbearance. But if so be this through persuasion did sink into
men's hearts, that he that offended his father offended God, that to be excluded
from the fathers presence, were above all other punishments the chiefest, in
brief, if the son could be made to to understand how dreadful the bitter
curse of a father were (whereof we may chance to speak somewhat more at large
hereafter,) why these might be sufficient props to defend and keep up, this
excellent fabrique of rule and authority which in these days is so much
ruinated and decayed. But now (such is our corruption) all this will not serve
the turn, that ancient severity of the Romans would better prevail with
them, that is, they should never be brought to anieiudiciall trial for the
matter, but be condemned and never heard speak, which is a course of
proceeding that Halicarnesseus and Quintilian oftentimes mention. And why?
because a commonwealth is nothing else but a body incorporate of so many
private families, and so founded and begun by parents, that as (me thinks the
resemblance were not much unfit) to term a family the nurse, the womb, and
the root of a common wealth: contrariwise a common wealth, a swarm, or
colonie deduced from a private family. He therefore that will govern a common
wealth in good fashion, and banish al loose and dissolute behavior thence and
all crimes and exorbitant offenses, let him look first to good order at home.
If he can make them lowly, sober, and dutiful within doors, they will come
into the world, so nurtered, so taught, so affected, well may they change their
homes, they will be sure never to leave their old manners. Contrariwise, let
him look carelessly to it, let him but once suffer the reins to be at
liberty, presently shall you see treasons, murders, rapes, adulteries, gush
out in large swelling streams, and surround the countrrie. And this is the
cause (if I be not mistaken) why in ancient time they appropriated to private
families peculiar gods, taking it for good policy, to countenance the
infirmity of domestical jurisdiction, with the authority of divine religion,
that both these two like mighty cable ankors, might hold them in all tempest
fast to their obedience. That even as the tender infant, led and guided by
the little finger, is able afterward of himself to walk without a guide; so
coming to man's estate, the means of this private education, might awe and
order him in the Common wealth, to carry a due respect to the Magistrate, but
not to dread his person, as having the sword borne before him to grace his
office withal, not to terrify well-doers. But verily in mine opinion there
can be nothing more absurd or incongruous, than once to think that Religion
is any way assistant to this good order; for (if it be true, which before I
touched) certes Christian Religion as it is used, does more suppress and pull
down, than either establish or set up this authority of parents: and there is
nothing so much withdrawes our children from duty and obedience as those two
precepts of the first and second Table, which now a days men make mere
contradictories, Honor God, and honor thy parents. Its a marvelous matter,
that whereas ever heretofore these two commandments, held good correspondency
with each other, and might both be fulfilled together, they should now be
termed opposite, and so repugnant one to the other, that he which fulfilles
the one, must of necessity break the other. But whence come these strange and
newfound problemes? Marry Sir I will tell you, even from the disputes of our
ancient Philosophers that wra^gled about this question, whether at all times,
and in all matters, we ought to obey our Fathers commandments? for as there
have been some that handled this question just as Bias did the question of
sacrilege; there is no body, says Bias, that is sacrilegious, for if some God
or other be resiant in every place of the world, then does a thief convey
nothing out of one hallowed place, which he carries not into some other
hallowed place; so have some of our Philosophers used the like subtlety in
treating the matter of this power of parents. There is no necessity (say they)
why you should obey your parents: for either they command that which is just,
and we must do it, not because they command it, but because it is just; or
else they command that which is unlawful, and we may not do it, not because
they command it, but because it is unlawful. Whereupon the conclusion
follows, ergo there is no obedience due to them at all; yea but Gellius
replies, the Dilemme is not perfect, for that some things are of a nevvter and
indifferent nature, wherein we must obey them absolutely, and some things
are in their own nature good, and honest which we are the more bound to do,
because they command them. Some distinguish otherwise; in some cases we must
obey, in others we may not. For, what if my father should command me to plot
treason against my Country, to murder my mother, to kill my Prince, or facts
of the like detestable and impious nature. Right so, whilst the School
Divines began to argue, whether one might serve God and man, or whether God
were to be served before father (as though there were any question to be made
of it, but God must, without all exception be obeide, when the matter
commanded tends to impiety) they fell foul upon the same tenants, with the
Philosophers, which were very uncertain, idle, and blasphemous. In good
south, I hate not the person of any man that makes difference betwixt honest
and dishonest, lawful and unlawful, nor yet them neither, which make some
things neuter and indifferent. The opinion in some sort is to be excused: but
without doubt, the safer way had been, never to have stirred in the matter,
that is, if they had not revolted from those men's judgments, which held the
question affirmatiuelie, and without distinction, that parents in all things
were to be obeide. For say it be true, which by a cauilling distinction they
have put upon us, yet to my thinking they have no sound footing to stand upon
for it: and to speak my opinion, the determination of such questions is
exceeding dangerous. How much more cautelous and circumspect then was Philo,
writing upon the decalogue, when treating of the two first commandments of the
two Tables, he says (as his manner is to do all things) most diuinelie: they
that leaving all other affairs of the world, bestow themselves wholly upon
contemplation, or they that abandoning all devotion, apply themselves to action
wholly to observe their parents disposition, conforming themselves
respectiuelie to live in the world, as though they would be taken apart,
either for Gods servants in the one, or men's friends and followers in the
other: I tell you these men's virtues are but perfect by the halfes: nay, he
that offends against either party offends against both. Doubtless some such
matters there be which will never be drawn to any manner of mediocritie or
indifferency, but presently they do some harm or other: for do but shake
them a little, and they stagger presently; bring them to the touch, you will
find they cannot endure the trial. These diminitiue questions be like fine
cates, for as the more dainetie and delicate they be, do sooner putrify and
corrupt in the stomach, so these if they be too much minsed and refined, they
mar the general tenant which is defended of all men. Whether the Bishop of
Rome be above or under a general Council, whether the Emperor be above the
people, whether democracie be better then monarchy, whether in religion
contrariety of sects may be tolerated, at first sight, they be set forth with
a marvelous fair show, but if you mark them well, there is poison served in,
when you come to the reckoning. For upon these and such other like disputes,
every day ensue, schisms, seditions, civil wars, and this question now in
handling, is much after the same sort. For he that once made but a doubt
whether the duty and respect which we owe to our parents were to bind us for
term of life, and not rather of Turuus his opinion maintained against
Tarquinius) that there was no such summary proceeding, as when father and son
were parties, where the issue was soon tried, if he be undutiful, fare him
well, and al ill luck go with him. Make but the least breach into the fort of
natural duty, ye shall presently see how he falls to railing, and reuiling,
to stabbing, nay to murdering of it. And so having begun with his father, he
is like enough to finish it with insurrection against his Prince. This then was
ever a maine determination, amongst the ancient philosophers, that obedience in
all things was precisely to be yielded unto, when our parents required it. Or
put case, any inconvenience should happen thereupon, better were it to admit
the proposition, in terms of largest extent, than out of any private or
particular case to argue against a common and received opinion, and to
determine it accordingly, either in schools, consistories, or pulpits. And
this does Cicero wifely observe in his book of offices, ye shall not find
anre such question in all his book: he was ever resolute and confident upon
the point, that children must not be their parents master, nor subjects their
Princes, nor scholars their teachers, nor servants their Lords: not, but that
sometimes they far surpass them for wit and pregnant discourse, but that it
cannot be avoided but that injuries and contempts will be offered, when such
comparison and opposition of persons is once endured. Let authority be once
disgraced, and farewell authority. When in a great session of the Centumuiri
holden at Rome, Accia Variola, went about to disprove the will of her father,
which sometimes had borne the office of a Praetor there, for that he had
bequeathed unreasonable legacies to her stepmother, there came to the hearing
of the cause so many fathers together with their children, upon a fear and
expectation of which side the fathers or the daugters, the sentence should
pass, that the Judges (as Pliny reports) like wise men left the matter as
they found it. For no other occasion than this, least peradventure if judgment
had been given for the daughter, other children by her example might in time
presume to contest with their parents. But to come nearer to the matter, in
these like questions, I would feign learn whom we should follow, profane
Philosophers, or the blessed Apostle Saint Paul who in his Epistle to the
Colossians, aduiceth thus, Children obey your parents in all things, for this
is pleasing with God, where when he expressly sets down in all things, has
he not utterly excluded, those two parts of the distinction, In some things you
must obey; in some things you may choose whether you will obey or no? and the
conclusion withal, we be not bound to obey? nay but why did God the father of
all parents, forbid Adam to eat of the fruit of the tree in the midst of the
garden, but that he would try whether Adam would obey him in all things or no,
as says Theophilus to Eutol? nor is the objection worth the standing upon: why
but what if the father should command any treasonable practice or attempt
against the estate? because here is a case put which never happens at the
hundreds end, or so seldom, that it would be past over in silence, and never
more looked after. Nay contrary wise, (as I should think) the presumption is
strong and holds for the father, what manner a man soever he be; good or bad
that he will never command his son, that which he in his conscience knows to
be foul and dishonest. Yea let the mother be never so lasciuiouslie given, yet
will she train up her daughter in chaste and virtuous demeanor. Moreover, he
that argues this act of a fathers command makes that a reason for his
allegation, which is mainly against all reason, that is, he supposes old men
doting fools, and young men grave counselors: he makes the son judge whether
the fathers actions be lawful or against law, good in their own nature, or by
his construction and surmise. And all this can never agree to discretion, and
honesty. For so he sowes matter of question and debate, where indeed the only
virtue should be (the virtue so highly esteemed of the noble Lacedaemonians) to
yield obedience and that readily. But because error is grown potent, and has
given such a deep wound as the scarre will hardly be covered over, let us a
little by the way consider what were those neuter and indifferent things which
Gellius speaks of? to my remembrance they be these, as if (says he) thy
father bid thee to be a soldier, to till his land, to be an officer, to be an
advocate, to marry a wife, to go upon his errand, come when thou art sent
for, and such like, which in themselves be neither good nor bad, but as the
intent is and manner of doing them, so may they merit blame or commendation.
For if the father should charge me to marry a wife that were infamous, past all
shame, or disparagious for any enormious crime, if he would have me plead
Catiline or Bibulus, or Clodius his cause, then were his commandment herein
not indifferent because here is a troop of dishonesty one upon the neck of
another. So that if his pleasure were to enioin me such actions, the question
were at an end, how far forth I should obey him: were it not that the thing
which Gellius plainly pronounces for indifferent, as to marry a wife, to
enter into this or that kind of life, now adays are taught to be of such
nature, that consent and authority of father is nothing thought of or
respected in them: my son may marry, may be a Church man, may be a monk,
not only without my leave, but spite of my teeth though I do expressly forbid
him, and that which all Universities, all Consistories, all opinions, of
learned men, without any interruption or impediment have ever permitted in
favor of natural duty, that do these men, under pretense of faith and
religion, utterly reuerse and disanull. But our ensewing discourse shall
specially in this place be confined within the compass of religious vows,
wherein I must have leave to tell thee, that either thou art in falt that
without any priuity or consent of mine betookest thy self thus to the Jesuits
order; or I am to be blamed that notwithstanding holy Church affoords thee such
a liberty, grieve and take on for the same. For as concerning the argument of
marriage and the freedom thereof, whether parents have any voice in their
childrens bestowing, our countriman Paquerius has written so learnedlie
thereof in his Epistles, as who should but offer to add one line, to that
which he has written of that subject, might rather prejudice his own
judgment, than any way the picture drawn by the pencill of so curious a
workman. I must needs confess that the determination of the Bishops assembled
in the Council of Trent makes much for my contryman his purpose, that although
clandestine contracts, made without the parents advise and leave) stand for
good marriage till the Church disalow them, yet nevertheless for many weighty
and important considerations, the Church thought it best altogether to
interdict and disauow them. It seems she would have a reservation in her self
to determine the controversy, and not permit it over to the arbitrament of
parents, whether such marriages were good and according to law, or contrarily
void and of none effect. I must likewise grant that sundry constitutions
enacted heretofore by many of our christian Princes in their Diets and
Parliaments, are pregnant for his purpose, namely that such matches are no
better than a rape and no marriage at all, or if it be, they take order to undo
the marriage knot with the point of an imperial sword. Yet for all that which
Paquerius has written about the question, I would pray leave to add two
notable precedents, not with that self conceit or arrogancy, as though I
meant to confirm or confute ought about the contract of maiarge, which either
the Church or our most illustrious Princes have been pleased hitherto in their
excellent wisdoms to determine, but that our children might hereby know and
be well instructed, that all that is according to law, is not therefore by and
by according to honesty, least perhaps that contempt and neglect which now
they measure unto us, be afterward by a just sentence of revenge written in
heaven, measured by their children unto them also. The one example is of
Rebecca, and the woman of Timnath, both which although God had appointed the
one for Sampson, and the other for Isaacke, yet it pleased him notwithstanding
that these marriages should first be made by the advice and liking of their
parents, that Rebecca should be demanded of Bathuel, of the mother, and of the
Uncle, yet so, as Abraham the father must give charge about the message, and
not the son Isaacke, thou shall be discharged from my oath, says Abraham to
his servant, if thou go unto my country and to my kinsfolk, and they shall not
give her unto thee. The Angel of the Lord made way to these marriages, but
their parents contracted them; The other example is of Tertullian in a treatise
written to his wife: Oh how shall I be able (says he) worthily to describe and
set forth the blessed estate of that couple, whom the Church has joined
together, prayer and thanksgiving have confirmed, angels in heaven proclaimed,
and the father in earth approved, for even here in the world children may not
marry without their parents consent and approbation, either in respect of due
solemnity or force of law. Doubtless his meaning hereby was, that marriage
among Christians had better success and prosperity when first it was approved
by almighty God, as having in this world the consent of parents, and in that
other the consent of our father which is in heaven. The same opinion was
maintained by Soterus living under the reign of the Emperor Commodus, as also
auerred by Euaristus and S. Ambrose. Proceed we then in Gods name and let us
now discourse of religious vows, not questioning their validity, nor the
perfection of the religious or lay life, which of them both is better nor any
such matters. But whether children be at their own liberty and pleasure to
conceive and make solemn profession of a vow, if the father be not acquainted
first with it, or else if he disclaim it; as also whether without him a son
may enter into the Ecclesiastical vocation, and the father must not present him
before he be admitted to holy orders. Hereof I say we will presume to entreat
so far forth as a mean Ciuilian may have good leave, either to know or take
in hand, such secret mysteries of your profession. And if the whole faculty of
Divines, or those seducers of yours, have any thing else in store, to give me
satisfaction in my question, let me understand of it as soon as may be
possible, that so for mine own part I may set down, and rest contented by
their resolution. But for you sir, I would have you to lurk no longer in
corners, but make your personal appearance to the summons, and be not afraid
boldly to chant that high sentence of S. Jerome, against them, which in a
depraved sense they have perhaps trumpt in thy way: Cruelty in such a case is
your only piety.

First then let it be considered how paynim people observed their vows. For
though they were far wide of the true worship of God, yet in their religion,
they left out nothing which might any way make, either for the honor,
maintenance, or enlargement of it, nay it were hard to say, whether therein
they surpassed not us Christians. True it is, that these paynims were not very
scrupulous to offer either themselves or their goods to Idols, nor was it very
material with them why and wherefore they made such rash vows. Nevertheless,
this was ever a disputable question among them, whether the vow were of any
validity, without the fathers consent and authority. Most certain it is that
in the matter of sacrificing the children the parents were to offer them to the
sacrifice, the case is clear out of Tertullian in his Apologeticus, whereas
says he, Saturn never used to spare either his own children or other men's,
but indifferently devoured both; thereupon such as were parents offered their
sons and daughters to be his sacrifices, and willingly exposed them to him,
nay they would fawn and flatter the poor innocents, to the intent, that they
should not howl and cry, when they were to be sacrificed which you may likewise
read in Plutarch in his book which he entitles Of Superstition, toward the
end: but say, there were no parents living to give up their children to this
devilish abomination? what was to be done in such a case? Its well enough
known, that the Priest had no such power or authority, to take whom he
pleased for the sacrifice. This was a special prerogative reserved for the
Magistrate (and more then this came to) he chose out the virgin by lot, which
was appointed to be sacrificed, that so the Gods might seem to be at their own
choice for the oblation, and not at the Priests devotion, and on whomsoever the
lot fell, she was to be offered, as you may read in Homer of Iphigenia
Agamemnons daughter, in Pansanias, of Lyciscus and Aristodemus their daughters,
in Plutarch of Smincheus his daughter, whom the Dolphins safely set a shore,
with her sweet heart Eualus. Hence come those themes usual and frequent in
declamations. A virgin sacrificed to the pestilence. A son that is
disinherited, to be offered for sacrifice. A sister living infamously to be
sacrificed. Which sort of Rhetorical exercise, partly you may read in
Quintilian, (an Author by me first restored to his integrity) partly in
Calphurnius, for whom the learned Pitheus did as much; but in all these and
the like, it would be noted, that should the son or daughter voluntarily
offer themselves, their parents are ever opposed as meet and able persons in
law to except against the^. For no man would have admitted such a bar (I
promise you) I think scarce among boys in the School, if children might have
been permitted to sacrifice themselves. And hence it comes (as you may read
it in Philostratus) that Meneceus Creons son, upon an answer of Tiresias the
Prophet, sacrificed him self without his fathers priuitie, which otherwise
meant to hinder him from such a purpose. But most memorable is that which is
written by Plutarch in his book of Superstition, that if a man had not any
children of his own, the fashion was to buy them of some poor people: but in
that case, it might not serve the turn to have him present, and consenting,
that made sale of his child, it was besides requisite that the natural
mother, should come forth, either to testify her willingness, that her son
should die in that manner, or to forbid the sacrifice. Virgil in the eleventh
of his Aencidos glanceth at such like sacrifices, when he brings in Metabus,
drenching of his daughter Camilla in the river Amasenus, and thus bespeaking:
Fair Queen of the springing woods, chaste Lady Diana,
Here to thy service I do vow Camilla my daughter.
Upon which place, Seruius his note is good. It Was well said, the father
himself vowed her: for that none but fathers had their children under such
bonds of obedience. And Plutarch in his book of Isis and Osiris, talks to
Clea the Nun, in a Phrase of the like strain: Even since thou wast a child,
thy parents dedicated thee to the service of the Goddess Osiris. And thus much
in brief for the Grecians.

Now to come to our Ancestors, among the Gawles (as it is yet with us) there
were three estates and orders among them: the Druidet were the men of most
principal mark and esteem, and were so highly reputed of, and had such large
privileges, by reason of their sacred Ministeries, and their interpretations
of doubtful questions in religion, that well was he that could be of their
company, to be enrowled and professed in their rule. What? but might children so
do without their paparents liking? No forsooth, as you may well understand by
Caesar his own relation, some (says he) be allured with great rewards, some
out of a voluntary disposition enfrock themselves into the Religion; some
their parents send thither, and some their kinsfolk. Such were Voluntaries, as
were at their own disposing, such as were sent thither, lived under awe and
charge of parents or guardian. The Romans have a title in their book of
Digests, De Pollicitationibus, of Promises, in them there is special mention
made of such promises, as either we make solemnly to God, or to our Country:
but if a son living in subjection to his Father, should make any such
promise, it were nothing worth, and this, Vlpian out of his learning delivers
unto us for law. Men that be Masters of families after they come to be of full
age, are bound by their vow and solemn promise: but as for a son during his
minormity, or a bondslaue whilst he is a villain, neither of them can bind
themselves by their vow without the fathers or Lords authority. Indeed he that
is a master of a family after the death of the auncestor, must necessarily be
of full age, to make his vow good, but let the son be never so old, and make
a vow, be it not ratified first by the fathers approbation, it is utterly
void and of no effect in law: and the case is the same, though he have a
stock of money or any patrimony of his own, to employ and occupy for his
preferment: the vow notwithstanding all this is of no force or obligation in
law. And what may the reason hereof be? because he that is not his own man,
can neither come in bond himself, nor statute out any thing that he has.
Moreover he that has right and interest to any thing, cannot loose it but by
some fact of his own. And therefore a son living in subjection under his
father, howbeit he might be termed to do a godly and religious act by vowing
and promising that which is none of his own, yet were the act (though to never
so religious use) no better than plain theft and pillage: first in vowing his
patrimony, and substance, because the father has a property in it, then in
vowing his person which is a matter in deed of greater consequence, because he
is no free man to this intent, absolutely to dispose of himself: and the
parents by such a consecration should wrongfully be deprived of the heir of
the house, the hope of their lineage, and the propagation both of their name and
family, and lastly of all such goods and chattels, which being purchased by
the child, were after him, to reuert unto the fathers possession, so that for
justifying of the sons vow, the consent and allowance of the father was
essentiallie necessary. Very favorable is that interpretation which makes for
religion, (we doubt not) yet withal not to be rackt to so high a strain, as
thereby to neglect all due and laudable solemnities, for that were the next way
rather to profane religion, than to advance it. Our father and our country
have each one as much authority as the other (let that be granted) yet (as
Liuy storieth it) when P. Cornelius Scipio was Praetor in Spain, and had upon
the great ieopardie of a battle, promised solemn plays and shows, after the
victory was obtained, made afterward suit to the Senate for some alotment of
money out of the treasury to that use, their answer was, that his vow bound
not the Senate of Rome and therefore he should make plays and shows in Gods
name, at his own charge, and upon his own purse, or with such spoils and
booties as he had taken in the war. Now may a son do that with his fathers
goods, and that without asking him any leave, which the greatest officer in
Rome could not do without the Senates warrant? if you tell me, that thevestall
virgins might bestow themselves against their fathers will, because they were
said to be taken, not to be chosen, and that therefore the high Priest, did
not receive them as presented by their parents, but took them away perforce;
such kind of reasoning, from the nature of the word, will stand them in small
stead: for this solemnity or phrase of speech which the Bishop used, I take
thee Amy, is so far from implying, that there was any unwillingness or
violence in the action, that it makes most especially for that purpose which we
maintain. Surely there was no taking without some giving, and in this sense
the high priest, took her that was dedicated to Vesta, but by your leave she
was first given and presented by her father. Whence Metabus in Virgil infers,
Take here thy servant Goddess chaste. but Gellius cleares the point in his
first book: therefore it seems to be said, that the maiden is taken because
(says he) the high Priest taking her by the hand, lead her away as a captive
from her father under whose obedience she lived: and some few words before
that, having recited the ancient solemnity of the Papian law, which enacted
choice and lot as fittest means to be used in the admission of any person unto
religion. At this time, says he, if any man of credit or worship, come to the
high Priest, and offer his daughter to be a Nun, the profession is as lawful,
as if all the ceremonies had been performed, which the Papian law requires. And
it was a matter of such necessity, that the daughter should be offered by the
parents, that if she were an orphan fatherless and motherlesse, she was
reputed vneligible for that religion. The same may be said, if either she her
self were emancipated, and set at liberty by her father, and in the life time
of the father, became subject to the power of her grandfather, she was to be
refused and put by, as a person vneligible: and why so, might not her
grandfather present her? might not her guardian? might not her ouerseer? if she
were at her own disposing, might she not vow and offer up her self? Labeo
Antistius will tell you she might not, because a girl under six, or above ten
could not be received into the order. Why but might not any other present her?
no, there was none so fit, and without all exception for the purpose, as her
own father. If any else had done it, there must have been some ordinary
hearing and debating of the matter, but had the father done it, it was thought
needless and unnecessary. For as when a natural father, will adopt his
natural and base borne child, to be his lawful son, the adoption will hold
upon any terms, so it is in point of consecration; let but the father tender
his child to religion, and there is nothing else expected For what if the
daughter, upon some dislike or other would leave Vestaes cloister, and lay it to
her grandfather or gardians charge, that they had no such authority or
commission, to make her change her estate and manner of living, that this power
belongs only to him that has power of her life and death, that is, her father,
as Seneca tells me? For the grandfather had nothing to do with it: surely he
that makes a poor young girl enter into an order of religion, that lived
before in the world at large, does in manner execute her alive, and make her a
banished woman in her own country: and therefore not without good cause, the
father alone was put in trust with this high authority. For as for the chief
Priests authority and usurped right, were it not first given and taken by the
fathers leave and permission, it was judged to all intents and purposes
clearelie void in law. Now should it be urged, why but this which you speak
of, was of use only in vest all Nuns, and that principally by reason of
their minority, when they were professed Nuns, this objection is easily
answered and the contrary opinion clearly euicted by Gellius his own words
which be these, Many be of opinion that only virgins should be taken after
this fashion, to orders of religion, nay but even Jupiters Priests, the
Bishops, the soothsaiers, were to be taken and admitted in the self same
fashion. And certain it is, that male children in their parents life time,
were so taken. Do we not read in Dion, that when the great controversy was
about Cornelius Spinter his admission into the Chapter of the high Priests,
though Faustus were both his kinsman and an high Priest, likewise in the
College, that the natural and adoptiue fathers did both join in this, to
make good their presentation for their son and not the son for himself?
questionless it is, that children could not exempt themselves from filial
obedience, had not the father first allowed them the liberty, which needed
never to have been granted them, if they might have made vows at their own
pleasure, and without their fathers consent. But that I may come by little and
little to times of christianity, (for perchance these heathenish examples, can
do little good with you) I pray you, as you think, what law or custom had
the Jews for their precedent in this case? first, it is not said any where in
express terms to the son, Leave father and mother, but with this prouisoe,
that he should cleave to his wife. If any thing be otherwise spoken it is by
way of advice, and may not pass upon trust without stricter examination, as it
shall else where be declared more at large. In deed in case of marriage there is
an absolute commandment penned, without all limitation, to renounce all
natural affection and duty, but in other cases it is done with so many
cautels and deliberations, that in my judgment it were better still to keep
on the high rode way, than to journey by coasting. But whatsoever it be, that
Adam in that place speaks of the relinquishment of our parents, does the
argument thereupon conclude, that the knot of wedlock, is of more force and
power then the bond of filial duty? nay verily, for this proceeds and springs
from nature, and (which is more) from our own individual and personal
subsistence: that other, from a desire to propagate a mutual society and
conversation amongst men. And whereas, a man and his wife be accounted as it
were for one person, this is in the intent and imagination of the law, and
therefore we see them easily to be parted again, as Anastasius speaks in the
tenth book of his commentaries upon the Hexameron. But the son is altogether
bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, he is one and the self same person
with his father, a parcel of the self same substance, and (as I may so say) a
very piece carved out of his body and soul: whence it follows, that come
what can come, a son must ever be a son: Disinherit him, turn him into the
wide world to shift for himself, sell him, leave him to his own liberty,
suffer him to be adopted into another family, still nature holds her own,
blood and kindred will never be altered Before the Emperor Constantines days,
had the father unnaturally forsaken and cast off his daughter, yet might she
not marry an husband without his consent But a man might be rid of his wife
(God he knows) many wais: by the sentence of a Judge in Court, by madness
(such a law the Emperor Leo made) by a separation from bed and board, by
bondage and lastly by divorce: but in children the case is admirable: that,
though the principal obligation be extinguished, (as say I am divorced from my
wife) yet the accessorie holds, that is, children which be wedlockes pledges,
though their mother be not my wife, yet are they my children: they be morgaged
by nature, and so must they ever continue. But if the case stand so, then why
does a son forsake father and mother to cleave unto his wife? why does he
forsake the greater commandment, and betake him to the less? because in this
case, the parents underhand be willing hereunto, as in a desire to have the
world peopled, by propagation of children, so to maintain a lineall succession
in posterity, and the inheritance ever to descend upon the grandchild after the
death of the son and heir. And yet to keep house with a wife, in any
construction, is this, to leave or abandon ones father? nay herein consists
their principal duty and obedience. And if they marry, and keep house
together and so deduct as it were new Colonies, all is done with leave, and
reference to their parents. And for my part, I would feign know, how it can in
any sense be construed that for a man to marry a wife is to forsake and
relinquish his father and mother, whereas children though they be married never
so often, are not thereby exempted from obedience, and though they be eftsoons
man and wife, yet be they still in subjection to their father? and marriage
changes not the laws of nature, and civility? But be it as it may be,
almighty God calling to his remembrance the law which first he established in
paradise, added also this heavenly divine commandment to Adams sentence, that
whether children marry or not marry his oracle should continue without all
exception and instance to the contrary, honor thy father and thy mother: yea
and that in more precise and determinate manner of speech than if he should
have said obey father or mother, for obedience is contained in honor, and he
that is not bound to obey, must nevertheless be bound to honor. For examples
sake, if by extremity and rigor of law, you may marry or profess your self
a monk, against my will, and that such a vow and marriage, is in a sort
justifiable and good, yet should you notwithstanding even by force of that
commandment come and ask me first leave, and crave mine advise in the matter,
which though it be no obedience in your part yet it is mine honor. Lastly you
should have showed me, what moved you to this or that course of life, whether
your own natural propension, and deliberate inclination, or some strange
circumuention and foreign persuasion? But let that duty and custom be
omitted, and let the act nevertheless, be accounted as lawful as is any, yet
where is the honor which God has prescribed? where is that reverence and
duty, which humanity binds you unto? if it be done only but for
solemnity, why then you must know that solemnity gives the essence to the act.
Let us proceed. It is storied by Marius Victor that famous orator of Marseiles
in his third title of his Commentary upon Genesis, that God commanded not
Abraham (albeit from his youth up he worshipped the true God with all his
soul, and abhorred gentilisme) to leave his country, and that wicked land and
polluted house, before that he saw, that after his fathers death, he might
without offense keep that commandment, which he had given him. What shall we
say the^? that the Jesuits have greater command over thee, then God had over
Abraham: he was 75. year old, and his parents were dead, before God commanded
him that he should leave his country, and go up unto the land of Canaan, and
do thou which art yet but 16. years old, my self and thy mother yet living,
forsake me and thy country, because the Jesuits bid thee? if thou do it for
the keeping of another vow, yet that duty which both by the law of God and
nature, thou owe me is greater. But Marius of Marseiles (for your learning)
lived in the time of Theodosius and Valence the Emperors, and the Jesuits were
not heard of: there were no such creatures, till the reign of Francis the first
our King. Moreover why did God command the same Abraham, to sacrifice unto him
his own son, and to be the Priest himself, but because he thought the
counsel of the fathers was expedient to be used in every cause, that
concerned their children? if it had been all one unto God, who had offered up
Isacke unto him, and if the sacrifice should have been as grateful and
acceptable unto him being offered by another man as by the hands of his own
father, why surely he would have commanded this office to some other, rather
than to his father Abraham. For religion is not the holier or the more
sanctified because it is joined with parricide. what then? God would have
Isaacke offered up unto him. But because this oblation was to proceed from his
father, he commanded him to do it, who by reason of his fatherly authority,
could not offend in slaying him. A father is not guilty of parricide, says
Aelius Martianus the great counselor at the Civil law. If thou will say that
in Isack and Samuel the cause, why it was necessary that their parents should
offer them to the Lord, was by reason of their minority, in regard they were
young and under age: why the daughter of Iephthe for certain was sacrificed by
her father (as was Praxithea by Erictheus, and Calpurnia, by her father Marius)
after the Cimbrian war, when she was fit for marriage. Moreover what might be
objected against Eliseus? he being called to the office of a Prophet (which was
a regular and strict kind of life, as appeared both by their unction mantell
and abstinence) albeit he was an elder in years and called thereunto by the
Prophet Elias, and that by a special command from God, made this answer, I
pray thee let me go kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow,
thee. The kiss was the fathers benediction, and the leave was that which he
desired so much of the Prophet, to take before his departure? what said Elias?
Go and return, for what was my duty, I have done unto thee. As if he should
have said, that which remains to be done, belongs to thy parents. For
although God expreslie commanded me, that I should anoint thee to be a
Prophet, in my room, after me, yet how could this be done, if these second
Gods our parents, should have gain said it? therefore afterward when the
Prophet had cast his mantell on him, forthwith Elizeus left his plough, and
followed Elias. But he departed not from his father, before he had first taken
his leave of him. Certain it is, that in the time of the old law personal
vows were ransomed by money, and the vows of the Nazarites endured but for a
time. But in the thirtieth Chapter of Numbers, it is so manifestly set down
what ought to be observed concerning the daughter, that it were shame for a man
to vouch any thing to the contrary. If a woman (says Moses) vow a vow, and
bind her self with an oath, being in her fathers house, her vow shall stand,
except she has done it, against her fathers consent. But least her youth might
be pretended for an excuse, the same is written of a wife also, whether she as
yet remain in her fathers house, or whether she be brought unto her husbands,
her vow should not stand, if her husband consented not unto it. Moses excepted
none besides a woman divorced, or a widow; whence was this? because Gods power
was lessened, by reason the fathers or husbands consent, concurred with his?
surely no. But because those very powers which they have, are from God, and by
establishing theirs, he confirms his own. But those exceptions of widdowhood
or matrimony vere not necessary in a son; For as soon as he was out of his
fathers command there was no doubt, if he were at man's state, but he might
lawfully bind himself with any of those vows, which were admitted in the old
law. For except it were with the vow of fasting or abstinence from meats,
they scarce bound themselves with any other. But a woman (as at Rome) was in
perpetual wardship sometimes of her father, sometimes of her husband, and
sometimes also of her brother, if her father died before she was married.
Wherefore if the woman voweda vow, there the lawgiuer you may see) was more
cautelous and difficult. But of the son so long as he remained in his fathers
house, who ever douted in that case, but that he was of the same condition with
his sister? vowed he the gift of any piece of money? why it was another
money? vowed he his own person? why he had no right to it? that was subject
unto another. How then could he, which was not at his own disposal, bind
himself and vvrong his father, who had all dominion and rule over him. It will
not be well, to say that there was more duty expected from women than from
men. For tell me, why did those ancient lawyers so much vary in the question,
whether the sons of a furious and phranticke man might contract marriage, and
yet did all agree that the daughter might. Why did they make such doubt of the
son? was it not because he was the pillar and proppe of the family? in him
was the hope of their posterity? from him was expected the continuance of
their stock, and on him depended the line of their petigree? therefore it is
requisite that greater care be had, that he be not disparaged in his match, of
whom more reverence, more respect, and more obedience is required. If he
enter into new alliance, if he make his father a grandfather, and beget an
heir for him, ought not all this to be done with more advice, and
circumspection than ordinary. And was it not also, because age in a son did
not so importune and call for marriage, but in a daughter it did even enforce
and hasten it before her time? A son, albeit he stayed till his father were
perfectly recovered, and well in his wits, there was no inconvenience befell,
for thereby his judgment was ripened, and he proved the worthier man after,
(and I may tell you) good behavior is as necessary at home as abroad, if old
Cato may be believed. But a daughter may be the worse, if she stay beyond her
time. And that did Phalaris once tell Claeneta that for the same reason, she
should not defer the marriage of her daughter that was twenty years old in any
case, because her father Philodamus was absent in a foreign country. For he
was traveled farther, than that her daughter might conveniently expect his
return home. But concerning a son percase he would have altered his opnion. It
follows therefore that what Moses did forbid in a daughter, he would have
much more forbidden in a son likewise.

But you think it long perchance ere I come to the times of christianity, you
do well. For that is the point of the card whereunto all our courses should be
intended and directed. Christian religion (you will say) otherwise determines
of childrens duty. Let us see then whether Christ came to destroy it, or to
perfect it, corrupt and mar all good manners, by abrogating God his fathers
precepts to teach children contempt and stubborn behavior, or rather whether
it were not laid as an imputation upon him, to the end it might be believed,
that he did deface all respect of amity and alleagiance, to rent in sunder all
dutiful affection, and make heart-burning and discord between the father and
his children, as says Saint Ambrose writing upon Saint Luke? We will therefore
begin with Christ himself, and afterward come unto the Church, where if your
more refined Divines have anything for me, that is in truth more learned and
witty, let it have the victory: for albeit we are all Christians, yet all of us
are not interpreters of the faith: therefore all such Disputes of greater
mystery, we leave to deep Divines; and will content our selves with such as
are obuious and triuiall. Christ was twelve years old ( Luke 2.24.) when he
went up to Jerusalem with Mary and Joseph, but forsook them at their
departure, therefore they returned back to Jerusalem to seek him, and it came
to pass, that three days after they found him in the Temple sitting among the
Doctors; to whom Mary said; Son why have thou thus dealt with us? thy Father
and I have sought thee with heavy hearts. He answered somewhat obscurely; but
yet (if I am not deceived) no less fitly for the mitigation of their sorrow,
(than thou supposest that thou have done for the appeasing of mine anger) viz.
That it is better to obey God than men. Yet he returned and went down with his
parents, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them, says Luke in his
Gospel, did he ever afterward forsake them? no not until the time of his
passion. But I pray thee, let us hear farther, what Bernard the Abbot says.
Although Mary and Joseph understood Christ's words (for it is likely they did)
because he thus bespake them, Knew you not that I must go about my Fathers
business? yet notwithstanding they would not be quiet, says he in his 19.
Sermon on Solomon, but would have him obedient unto them: therefore all the
rest of his time, he ever afterward followed them. Now, from whom may we draw
a better pattern of obedience and duty toward parents for children, than
from Christ. Learn (says S. Ambrose upon these words) what thou owe to thy
parents, when thou read that a son was never contrary to his father,
either in fulfilling his will, performing his duty, or observing his
opportunity. Thou owe to thy mother the hazarding of her chastity, the loss
of her Virginity, her peril in thy birth, her tedious sorrows, her continual
troubles (who, wretched as she is) is then in greatest danger, when she has
the fruition of her desires, and brought forth the son of her desire: for
albeit she is free from the sorrow in his birth; yet is she not free from the
fear of his death. What need I speak of those Fathers, which are so provident
for their childrens good? or of the riches which they have so multiplied and
laid up for them? or of being so wary husbands for their childrens thrift?
might not this goodness of theirs at the least, challenge some tribute of
obedience? The same Author in his first book de Virginibus, says, how sweet
a pledge is that which has its beginning in peril, and its ending in peril,
which first is a grief unto parents before it can be a pleasure unto them?
The Master disdained not (says Bernard) to follow his Disciples, nor God to
follow men, nor the word and wisdom it self to follow a Carpenter and his
wife: and yet Joseph was not properly his father. Jesus fulfilled the will both
of his heavenly and earthly father, teaching us thereby that nothing hinders,
but that they may be both obeyed at once, and that it is not necessary, that
one should be neglected for the other. Justin Martyr out of this place in his
136. question, handles some other questions also very wisely, (as he uses to
do all.) If it be forbidden by Gods holy Scripture, to contemn our parents,
(says he) and if he who does that which is forbidden, is to be termed a
sinner; how comes it to pass that our Lord Jesus Christ in many places
despised his parents, and yet nevertheless is said to be without sin? For
at the marriage of Cana he checked his mother, saying: Woman what have I to
do with thee? And when his mother would feign have seen him, he called those
his mother and his brethren, that did the will of God: Furthermore, when it was
said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that gave
thee suck: he replied, yea blessed are they that obey the will of God. All
which words are thought to be spoken of him in some contempt of his mother;
because whereas she was properly called blessed; others in opposition of her by
him, were termed blessed also. But now since this most holy Virgin was chosen
for the conception and birth of our Savior Christ, how came it to passs, that
she was accounted unworthy to be called blessed? Here Justin Martyr makes
this answer. These words (what have I to do with thee?) were not spoken by
way of obiurgation, but as if he should have said in other terms; I am not
such a one as have undertaken the care of wine, which is spent in marriages;
yet notwithstanding if your desire be that there be no want of wine, bid the
servants do whatsoever I shall say unto you, and you shall easily perceive
there shall be no want of Wine; which as he spoke, so it fell out. Therefore
it is not likely that he did check his mother in words, that did so much
honor her in deeds. As for other places Christ spoke not so, as if he would
deprive her of that honor, which was due unto a mother; but he taught her how
she was entitled to true blessedness. For if he that hears the word of
God, and keeps it be Christ's brother, sister and mother; and Christ's mother
has done both these, then it is clear, that Mary in this respect ought rather
to be called blessed. And because God chose not an ordinary woman to be the
mother of Christ, but such a one that was (...) other the most excellent in
perfection and virtues, therefore Christ would that his mother should be most
commended for that virtue, which gave her pre-eminence above all women, that a
Virgin should become his mother. Moreover Luke the Evangelist testifies, that
Christ never did any thing in contempt or disgrace of his parents, when he
says, He went down with Joseph and Mary to Jerusalem, and was obedient to
them, even to his death: And so also says S. Augustine interpreting these
words in his book, De Sancta Virginit. Now Christ after that he began to
preach to the people, and withal perceived that the Scribes and Pharisees did
err most grossly in this commandment, whereof we treat, and retorted the same
against their parents, under this color, that forsooth they might perform any
thing else in stead of their bounden duty, so they did that which they thought
to be as just and holy, said, Why do you transgress the law of God by your
tradition? for God has said, Honor thy father and mother, and he that
curses father or mother let him die the death: but ye say, Whosoever shall
say unto his father or mother, by the gift that is offered by me thou may
have profit, though he honor not his Father and Mother, he shall be safe. O
ye hypocrites, ye worship God in vain, preferring man's precepts before Gods.
Why spoke Christ this so severely? was it because the Pharisees so greatly
abused those offerings, and that sacred treasure which they called Corban? or
was it because those oblations, which were destinated unto the Temple, were by
them misapplyed to themselves, and to their own lusts, and not unto God?
surely no, for then he would have noted only their luxury and abuse. But
he checked the priests because they made comparison of precepts, and preferred
their own (which were otherwise good) before Gods. And because they took
occasion by their gift, howsoever holy to contemn their domesticke rites and
laws of piety, and that bond of natural duty which is more ancient tha^ any
whatsoever. And yet there is somewhat more in it, then so: For the first
commandment, that you stand so much upon, and the fifth you so lightly regard,
are both Gods commandments, they both issue from the same Author, and the same
Lawmakers. It is necessary therefore that either the one hinder the other, or
that the latter be abrogated by the former (which is against all law that ever
I could read) or else that both of the^ be kept, as well the first pertaining
unto God, as the fifth pertaining unto parents. But the truth is, that some
precepts are immutable, and they are (says Hildebert in his last Epistle)
such as the eternal decree of God has established. Of which sort (says the
Archbishop of Towers) are these, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and all thy soul, and thy neighbor as thy self. And honor thy Father
and thy mother, and such like: Other precepts are mutable, which the eternal
Law of God has not decreede, but the wisdom and policy of some later wits
have invented for some conuenience and use, and not so principally tending to
salvation. And of this sort it is to be a Jesuit; Certain I am, that the law,
whereby thou stand bound unto me, is perpetual, and unchangeable. But
what if here we be bold to say, that God himself is less sollicitous for his
own honor, than for our parents honor? And therefore of those two
commandments, the latter in a sort is to be preferred before the former. And
shall yet these Pharisees please thee more than Christ? It was not without a
mystery, that God gave those commandments concerning his own honor simply,
without imposition of punishment, if any brake them, or proposal of reward if
any kept them: but when he gave this commandment concerning our duty toward
our parents, he added this clause, that thy days may be long upon earth. For
albeit hereby it be clearly evident, that nature cannot suffer, that he
should live long upon the earth, that respects not these of whom he has
received life, nor endure that it should go well with him any where, that will
hide himself for no other end, but that he may not show himself grateful
unto them that with so great care and trouble after they had given him life,
have nourished and sustained him; yet that which we so principally intend,
appears from thence. For he says that he is full of jealousy, if a man
worship strange and false gods; but if he worship his parents, God is so
far from envying it, that by all means possible, he wills and comma^ds it,
and that with such a reward, which of mankind is most desired. Why presses he
all these things so earnestly? because when parents, these second gods are
honored, whom he so much acceptes, and so well accounts of, whatsoever is
done unto them, he takes it done unto himself: but if any duty be left
undone unto them, let us worship him in the best manner we can devise, yet
does it not excuse us. And perhaps this may be the reason, that God (if I may
so speak) is not so hard to please in that honor and worship which we owe
unto him, as every man is curious in the duty, which is to be done unto him.
God is reverenced as sufficiently as he would be, if every one according to
his sex, age, and quality do honor him as he is able. For it is not the
Ecclesiastical dignity that makes a Christian, says Jerome. One man in the
Church is an eye, another the tongue, another the hand, and another the foot
or the ear. In whatsoever vocation a man be, if therein he serve God as he is
able, he pleases God exceeding well. For God exacteth not the same obedience
of all. But in man it is far otherwise, except his son be obedient and
dutiful at his beeke, and at his service, when he shall think fit, he is
by no means contented. Neither is it much material, of what condition both of
them are, for whosoever is a father, is a father in the same proportion, and
whosoever is a son, is a son in the same degree. Therefore that we may
honor our parents without exception, and beyond that voluntary obedience,
which we ought to show them, the Lord says, this I will, this I command and
for this duty I prolong thy years, that thou may perform it always. What
then? if Christ did justly and deservedly reprehend those Jewish Priests,
do thou think (especially seeing both of us profess one Religion) that
thou being my son should addict thy self to some certain College, Rule
or Society, (which say it be lawful and holy, yet is it but the invention of
men) and thereupon contemn and despise me thy father (a sin which God and
Nature has forbidden thee?) Excepting that worship, which we owe unto our
God, (such as is adoration and invocation.) What is there in religion it self,
more religious and more divine, than to honor and reverence our parents?
Sacrifice is a holy work, yet Christ (as you may see) less esteems it than
the duty and obedience of children. It is a holy and religious work for a man
to deuote himself unto the Church, Ministry and service of the brethren.
Nevertheless S: Paul commands in his first Epistle to Timothy 5. Chapter, and
4. verse: If widows have children or nephews, let them learn first to show
godliness to their own house, and to recompense their parents, for that is
honest and acceptable before God. Certainly, if we ought to choose any to
that Ministry, he or she ought to be chosen, who are well reported of for
their good works, and they are of this kind, if shse has nourished her
children, etc. Would Paul have prescribed this so earnestly, except he
himself being the author had well perceived that there were some private and
domestical duties, which of necessity were to be preferred before all other
though sacred and public? the truth is, that these latter proceed from those
former. For when the question is of moral and natural institution, Christians
differ in nothing from Pagans. He that lives contrary to Nature, keeps not
Gods commandments, as Nilus says in his institution to certain Monks. And as
Athenagoras in his Apology for Christians observes, that God mooues not man to
those things which are against Nature. And therefore Saint Paul spoke nothing,
but that which Socrates had spoke before him in Zenophon, and which the
Athenia^s had long before thought upon and provided for in their laws. If any
one be disobedient to his parents (says he in his 2. book de fact. and dict.
Socrat.) let him be incapable of all Magistracy. For how can he offer pure
Sacrifice or sit well at the stern of the commonwealth, if he be a bad liver
at home, and if he be unkind, unnatural and injurious to the people of his own
house? As for the laws of the Athenians, you shall find them in Aeschines
against Timarchus, and in Plutarch in the life of Aeschines: but what says
Saint Paul? he as if he were in some emulation with Socrates says; If there
be any of you that provides not for his own, namely for them of his own
household, he denies the faith, and is worse than an Infidel. Now see what
conjecture may be gathered of thee to the contrary. Certainly (say they) he
cannot choose but of necessity be most obedient to the general, Provincial,
Presbyters, who so resolutely contemnes his Father, and so coragiously
renounceth him for a stranger and a Publican. See (my good son) how far thou
art diuerted from the way of the Lord, and how exceedingly thou art estranged
from his commandments, although thou arrogantly think, that thou do know
and understand them better, than all thy fathers and thy forefathers did, yea
better than Christ himself. Without doubt a father and a mother are not to be
compared with God, yet are they to be beloved with God, says Tertullian
against the Gnostickes. And in his book of Chastity he says, you may know by
the placing of every commandment, the manner: by the order, the state, and by
the end the reward: therefore he which honors not his father and mother, is
worse then an adulterer, worse than a murderer, and worse than a thief. But I
had rather compare virtues with virtues, than vices with vices. what is so
good a work in the Church as to give legacies to charitable uses. And yet says
S. Augustine, whosoever will disinherit his son, and make the Church his
heir, let him seek one that will accept it, truly he shall not find that
Austin will be his heir, and by Gods grace he shall find no man will be. And
in his 119. Epistle unto Ecdicias; does he not reprehend her, because she vowed
continency not acquainting her husband first with it? and when he had
afterward consented unto her vow, does he not blame her because she took upon
her the habit of a Nun, against his will? and did he not reprove her because
she gave her goods to two poor Monks, when she had a son living on whom she
might have bestowed them? which I speak not (says he) as though I thought
that if any of us should be ill spoken of and scandalized for our good works,
therefore we should desist from doing them, but because in every society the
respect we bear to our kindred ought to be one, and the respect we show to
strangers, another, the condition of a christian is one, and the condition of
an infidel another, the duty of parents to their children one, and the duty of
children to their parents another. Write therefore unto him a letter of
satisfaction and ask him pardon (says he to Eridicea) because thou have
sinned against him, and disposed of thy goods after thy pleasure, without his
advise, and contrary to his will: not that it repents thee, that thou did
bestow thy goods on the poor but because thou were unwilling that he should have
any share or part in so charitable a work. Is not the fact memorable, which is
recorded of Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, who restored a deed of gift he had
received of a father that then had no children, unto him again, when
afterward he had children? For it is not likely nor to be presumed in any
case that he had rather have another man to be his heir, than his own son;
See here a far better judgment of filial duty, than that which those vpstart
Pharisees put upon thee, viz. That there is neither sacrifice nor vow, nor any
oblation that is to be preferred before the obedience which God commands unto
children. But let us proceed and try by examples borrowed from him, that is
both God and man, whether it be true that a man which is desirous to take the
ministry, or to lead a monastricall life, may renounce all kind of obedience,
and that it is to no purpose for him to ask his fathers consent and judgment
in taking those orders upon him or no? I pray thee whom did Christ call to be
his Apostles? called he such a one as thou art a young boy? and tell me if they
left their ships, their nets, and all their tackling to follow Christ, did they
for all that leave their parents? or if they left them did they leave them
without leave? yea, which is more, did they that were husbands put away their
wives, or did they which were fathers, for that cause forsake their children?
Certain it is that James and John were above 25. years old, when they departed
from their father. But did they further to show their more impudency in
departing, leave Judea and travail into Italy, Lorraine, or Spain? or else
because themselves were Christians, could they not endure to look upon their
fathers? or was his presence, speech, or conversation, irksome unto them? Had
they done so, they should have done otherwise than their Lord and Master had
done before, who (as I said) never went from Mary and Joseph. But that I may
demonstrate unto thee, that they went not out of their country, or fathers
houses, until such time as after Christ's passion, they were to go into the
whole world, and that albeit after their calling, they accompanied Christ, yet
nevertheless they were conversant at home, and dwelt with their parents; It is
written that Jesus came to the house of Peter and Andrew, where when he saw
their mother in law sick of an ague, he cured her, and forthwith she
ministered to him and to his disciples. Therefore to follow Christ was not to
forsake ones friends, his parents, his wife, his children, or his household,
yea (which is more) James and John, albeit they were grown in years, would
not have followed Christ, if Zebedeus their father had not consented thereunto.
For seeing they were together, with their father, when Christ bad them follow
him, it cannot be but that either Zebedeus did express his consent in words,
or imply it by holding his peace. But tell me whether thou think all
vocations be of one kind, as well they that proceed expreslie from Gods
immediate will, as they whereunto the Church calls us? God knows directly
and changes the hearts of men, therefore he is not deceived. But men in their
elections do only conjecture and guess, wherefore they oftentimes
exceedingly err? for to be a man and subject to error be terms conuertible:
as to be God and not to be subject to error. what then? why we had need use all
diligence and be very wary, in these vocations so that no solemnity be
passed over especially the consent and good leave of our parents. If I should
allege that place unto thee, where Christ said unto his Apostles. Suffer
little ones to come unto me, thou would say, that there he speaks of such
as are young in age. And in very deed you shall find in the Gospel that these
little ones were brought unto Christ, and that they came not of their own
accord unto him, therefore he said not, Come unto me, but suffer them to come,
and again forbid them not, to teach that the calling of little ones, as well
as their Baptism did depend both, upon their fathers tutors and curators suit
and promise made for them. But whereas it was said over and above, forbid them
not, that was not spoken to their parents but to the disciples, that found
fault with such as brought them unto Christ: and this without doubt is spoken
of such as are in their minority. But that which was before alleged, makes
no distinction at all of any age. It is written to all in general terms,
Honor your parents, I know when the son is once come to five and twenty,
that then his fathers approbation, yea his dissimulation, and which is more,
his very silence, (such as was that of Zebedeus) goes for his consent. But yet
that, such as it is, is very requisite. Neither can thou depart from thy
father or mother if they be unwilling. What said I? from thy parents? I say
thou can not go from thy brethren or thy kindred (for S. Paul speaks
generally of the whole family) but thou must perforce sin against God and
be guilty of a cruel and faithless conscience. But I suppose there is a text
alleged thee to the contrary, that when one of Christ's disciples desired
him, that he would permit him to go and bury his father, before that he
followed him, Jesus replied unto him, Follow me and suffer the dead to bury
their dead, whereupon they dispute thus: Burial is a very religious and holy
duty, especially if it be done to a man's father. But Christ nevertheless
wills us rather to attend him, than the burial of our parents. Again,
laymen are accounted as dead men, for they which are so hampered and entangled
in the pleasures of this world, that they cannot swim out of them, may justly
be esteemed for drowned and dead men. Hence says S. Paul, The widow that
lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. 1. Timoth. 5.6. The clergy men
on the contrary may properly be said to live: For they are the part and
portion of the living God, therefore well may he be said to abstain from the
dead, who has left his father and his mother to follow Christ (that is as they
make it) to be a Jesuit. Very acutelie collected, Sir, but we have our answer
in a readiness for you. First it follows not, that whatsoever was pronounced
of Christ must forthwith necessarily be applied to the Clergy, and all such
at have betaken themselves to a regular course of life. Indeed all his doctrine
was delivered over unto them, but not all power, says Tertullian, in his book
of Chastity. And verily it is one thing, to embrace Christ and another thing
to follow, so many orders of monks as be now adays; yea though there were
small ods between them and those of whom Dorotheus spoke of old. Secondly,
when the father of that disciple was once dead, that exact reverence which
perhaps he pretended to Christ, ceased, and was no longer to be performed. For
it was certain that he was then no longer a son. Lastly, the Lord commanded
not that the burial should be wholly omitted, but that it should be procured
to be done by some other, and whosouer that was, he was said to celebrate his
fathers funeral, in regard that we commonly call all those, which are departed
out of this life before us, our fathers or forefathers. The charge and cost of
funerals is a public business, says Papinian the sanctuary of the law,
whence also Justinian in his 43. and 59. Novel manifestly shows, that in
Constantinople the charge and expenses of funerals was wont to be defraied out
of the public treasury. Why therefore should this celebration hinder the
disciple from following Christ, since that it might be done as well by another
as by himself. But yet there is great difference whether children destitute
their parents in malice or pure simplicity. This exposition will serve thee
against all these arguments wherewith they have beguiled thee. If thy parents
be dead, that is if they be Jews. if Idolaters, if Pagans, if Infidels, and if
the son contrariwise be a christian, if a Catholic, and the father would
bury this his son with him, that is, command him to commit idolatry, leave
this father and follow me (says Christ) let the dead bury this dead. That
these words ought so to be taken, and understood, is clear bothout of S.
Ambrose, when he says, The son is not dissuaded from his duty toward his
fathers, but a believer is severed from the fellowship of an unbeliever. And
also out of S. Austin as well in that one book of observations on S. Matthew,
as in his first book to Marcellian concerning the Baptism of children. Can
thou therefore persuade any man that the Jesuits only live the best kind of
life, and that we miserable christians, because we are of the laity must be
reputed for dead and buried. S. Hierome writing unto Furia thinks far
otherwise: whosoever believes in Christ (says he) lives. And Tertullian in
his book, de carne Christi, does not therefore rank Marcion among those that
were dead, because he was not a Monk or an Hermit, but because whilst he was
an heretic, he was not truly and properly a good christian. But we fathers,
poor men though we be, even we are believers we are called the sons of God,
his friends, his brethren, and coheires with him, and we also are made
partakers through him of the holy Ghost. As many as have a true faith, and lead
an upright life, yea although they work not miracles, nor cast out devils,
yet they are holy, says S. Hierome in his 59. Homily. But if you pretend the
same, yea, if thou boast of greater things than these, why this also is our
benefit, this also is our advantage. For if you ask any of us Christians of
what religion we are, every of us being taught by you, can make you this
answer: of the same religion, whereof our fathers and ancestors were. There was
no oath more inviolable, than that which we swear by our fathers faith, says
Philo, who borrowed this sentence of an ancient Philosopher: therefore why thou
should so excredinglie despise us, now there is no reason: or if thou will
needs contemn us, do it then, when we can expect nothing from thy hands but
our burial. You shall have in this case if not the meaning, yet the words of
Christ to his Disciples, when our Savior Christ said unto him follow me, he
well knevv that his father was now dead, says the same S. Ambrose in this
very place. But I believe the text in S. Matthewes Gospel has most seduced
thee. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: And
again in S. Luke, if any man comes unto me and hates not his father and his
mother, his wife and his children, his brethren and his sisters, yea and his
own soul, he cannot be my disciple. These and such like places seem to yield
thee great and forceable arguments for thy defense: but since those reasons and
authorities, which we have already brought to the contrary, be as pregnant and
forceable to all intents, it had been your course to infer, that surely these
latter places do require some farther exposition and declaration, least God
should seem to be contrary, or to contradict himself. For, I pray you, tell
me, what manner of doctrine is this, or what kind of religion may this be
called, which teaches, that a man of necessity must hate his father, and his
mother, his wife, and his children, his brethren and his sisters, yea his own
dear soul also that will be Christ's disciple, if we should stick unto the
words and not stand unto the meaning? for if he that should hate his father,
must therefore be a good disciple, doubtless he that should well beat him,
were worthy to be a patriarch, and he that should kill him, might exceedingly
well deserve to be a Pope. See how many absurdities and mischiefs, would arise
from these words, not ill conceived, but il understood. So S. Chrysostom in
his 36. homily, upon S. Matthews Gospel, he did not absolutely command thee,
to make inuectiue speeches, against thy familiar friends and acquaintance, for
that were an action sauouring of indiscretion, and might procure harm. But
look how much any other desires to have thee love him more than me, hate him,
says he, so much the more. I confess then that we ought rather to love God
than our parents: and that is the lesson which Solomon teaches us, begin your
love with me, as Origin witnesses. Which is also spoken by S. Ambrose on S.
Luke, if men ought to perform duty to their parents, how much more then ought
they to render their most bounden duty, to the creator and maker of their
parents, in yielding him always thanks, that gave the^ parents. But I am much
mistaken if the consequence hold, ergo, it is more blessed, to become a
Franciscan Friar, or a Jesuit, than either to love or reverence thy father. For
christian religion is grounded especially upon faith, but does not depend,
upon this or that particular order of religion. Nay I may further tell you may
a general Council have been summoned, that never confirmed or approved these
orders. And if (put case) it be a degree of more perfection to be a Clergy
man than a lay man, I think it must not be inferred, ergo, a son need not
refrain any stubborn undutiful or ungodly behavior to his parents, if he
intend to be a Priest rather than a lay man. God has no where (that I ca^
find) laid any such precise commandment, on either of us both to be Priests,
his especial charge to thee wards, is that thou should do me honor, by all
means. Have thou then wilfully done me this open wrong? thy sin is of so
heinous a nature, that Gods curse and man's is upon thee for it. For I tell thee
son it is a matter of mere indifferency to be one of the Jesuits company. A
man may be a good christian, and walk in the way of Christ, which is the path
to everlasting life, and yet never turn Jesuit for the matter. And therefore
it ill became thee to put by an act of absolute necessity, for a project of
thine own private fancy, and voluntary concept, as S. Thomas very wisely
informs thee. I pray thee tell me, if there were two ways to follow Christ
in, and the one were so fair and plain, that thou might love me, and thy
savior Christ also, the other so stony and craggie that unless thou did
perfectly hate me, it were impossible for thee to love him, which of these
ways would thou rather choose? but (O son) S. Matthew and S. Luke are so
clear in this point, that there is not so much as the least letter which may
cast thee into any such labyrinth, or intricate maze. Read these Evangelists
and read them from the beginning to the end, thou shall find it delivered, that
if question be of undergoing martyrdom for Christ (which they call to carry
the cross and follow him) and these two should be in terms of opposition, To
deny God before men, or to honor and love ones father, it is far better to
hate father, yea to hate himself and his own foul, than once to distrust the
promises of his sweet Savior Christ. So then if I should have persuaded thee to
abjure the Christian baptism, whereunto I first brought thee, and might well
enough have been thy Bishop in it, had I advised thee to cast away that most
precious pearl, which S. John the Apostle gave him that told him where he
might find the woluish God, that had year by year had 12. young children
offered up unto him for sacrifice, had I requested thee to renege
Christianity, to entertain Mahometisme, Atheism, or heresy (I may not have
thee tell me now with Saluianus, that such a time may happen, wherein some
thing that is not God ought to be preferred before God) then might thou by
virtue of this scripture, in these cases have lawfully refused to do me such
duty, and reverence, as appertains to a father: and Saturus, or the worthy
Lady Victoria, would have been good precedents for thy imitation (of whom
Victor the Bishop reports in his first book De persecutione Vandalica, that
they had rather be held from their children, parted from their husbands,
deprived of all their worldly wealth, than by any seducements whatsoever,
become Arrians. In such a case it would have been good for thee, to have been
without father or mother like Melchisedech, who was therefore said to be
without both, because he was a devout holy man, though his parents were wicked,
and cruel Canaanites. Heathen people love their native country exceedingly,
and none can have any part in their love but their parents. Now we (says
Pontius, S. Cyprians Deacon) we detest and abhor our very parents, when once
they go about to persuade us for any thing against our God. But since we are
both good christians and Catholics, who should prevail more with thee than my
self, that have done more for thee than all the world besides? if any father
might be justly despised of his child, abused and wronged by him, choked
with that text in Leuiticus (I am ignorant, I know you not) certainly it were
such a father, as should dedicate his children to strange Gods, or aduow them to
the worship of the molten Calfe, according to that of Moses, (let thy hand be
upon them and power forth their blood which would seduce thee from the truth)
in which place notwithstansta^ding, maybe observed as also out of the 32. of
Exodus; that although Moses in this case, allows of parricide, yet he
exemplifieth it in the wife, in the son, in the brother, in the sister, in
the kinsman and friend, he makes no mention at all of the father. So sacred,
venerable, and inviolable is that name of a father, nothing may lawfully be
attempted against a father. Read the Epistle of Moses, Maximus, Nicostratus,
Rufinus, and other Confessors (it is the 77) to Cyprian, thou shall find these
words understood in this sense; peruse likewise Chrysostom in his 65. homily
upon S. Matthew, where he expounds them. These words (says he) to my
understanding, closely do betoken persecutions. For many sons have been
drawn to wicked courses by their parents, many husbands by their wives, which
whenever they attempt, let them neither be respected for wives, nor parents.
And the author which wrote on the same Evangelist in his 27 homily. It is not
to be believed (says he) that God which commanded thee to honor thy father and
mother, would bid thee forsake father and mother: if therefore thou have an
unbelieving father, continue thy obedience to him for in so doing, thou shall
receive the reward of thy duty, and contrariwise he shall find the
condemnation of his infidelity. And therefore our Savior said not he that
loves his father is not worthy of me, but he that loves his father or mother,
more than me, is not worthy of me. For as to love our parents after God it is
duty, so to honor them more than God, is plain impiety. If therefore (he
repeats it again) thou have an unbelieving father, still obey him, but if he
would have thee swallowed into the gulf of infidelity, love God more than thy
father, for he is the father not of the soul, but of thy body only.
Howsoever yet, he does not require that the son upon any such occasion,
should desert him by his bodily presence, but by dissenting from him in point
of religion. Mark how these words of the old law, these men, says the Lord,
have kept my commandments, which have said unto father and mother we know
you not) are expounded by Philostratus sometimes Bishop of Brixia, and S.
Austins ancient in his book of heresies. You are not to understand hereby, to
condemn your father, for begetting you, but to condemn the gross impiety of
your father that would mislead you. And this was the opinion of Salonius Bishop
of Vienna, writing upon Ecclesiastes. For the profession of our faith in
Christ, we must contemn, yea and hate, father and mother, and all our
kindred, when they be any stops or impediments unto us, in the way of the
Lord: as we read that the holy Martyrs, many times did: whence it is that S.
Austin in his sermons, says, these words, seem to encourage men to
martyrdom. Finally, Christ Jesus himself being ready to give up the ghost
(to speak in the words of Arnold the Abbot) that he might superlatiuelie
commend this noble and great article of the second table, Honor thy father and
thy mother, and that by all the bonds and leagues of piety, does give and
bequeath it to his mother the blessed virgin, (woman behold thy son) and to
his best beloved disciple S. John, (behold thy mother). And that S. John was
likewise of his masters mind, Prochirus relates Chap. 21. for having baptized
Chrysippa in the Island Pathmos, and she would thereupon in all speed leave her
unbelieving husband, S. John told her, no, that is by no means to be
permitted, for God has not sent me to separate man and wife, I have no such
commission, and therefore return in peace to your own house. For if it were
lawful, that a woman might separate her self from her husband, yet were it
not expedient (says Austen in his book De Adulterinis coniugijs) to
Pollentius. Now if it should be said, that in these days there be no
martyrdomes, and therefore the former exposition will not now hold: then Gregory
the great in his 37. homily De Diuersis Euangelij lectionibus, will give this
interpretation, that the place is to bemeant of concupiscence, and carnal
affections. For then says he, we truly hate our own soul, when we repose
not our selves on carnal desires, when we subdue our inordinate appetite, and
strive against our delicious pleasures. Yea but the Jesuits buzze into thy
ears, that twere better for thee to spurn and trample thy Father under thy
feet than to be without a cowle. Well, then I would feign know for my better
learning, whether S. John Chrysostom attained to the true sense of these words,
of S. Matthew and S. Luke, (now we are come to be tried by God and the Church)
when in his first book de Sacerdotio, he reports of himself (and so does Leo
the Emperor report of him in a certain Panegyricke oration) that having
finished the course of his studies in the University of Athens he returned to
Antioch, and there through the often admonitions of one Basilius (for it was
not Basil the great, if we may take Simeon Metaphrastes his word.) had a
great longing to have been a monk, who hindered him from his course of
devotion, for he was pitifully perplexed a long while? It was no conceit
of nonage, he was then 25. years old, and was a pleader in the Court: it was
no respect of reverence to his father (for he was departed out of the
world:) it was not that his resolution was somewhat staggered by the remembrance
of his old friends and fellows, for he more regarded Basile then them all? how
then, where was the impediment? it was observance to his poor mother: for when
she set upon me with this speech, O son I was a fresh young beautiful widow,
when I refused the profers of a second marriage, thereby to enable my self to
do thee the more good, and then (alas poor child) when thou wast a small
infant, all my care was, that thou might have plentiful means for thy
education and preferment; And now in liew of all these my kindnesses, in stead
of al those thanks and comforts which so many benefits might challenge from
thee, can thou find in thy heart to forsake me now? to contemn and disdain
me now? make me twice a widow? and waken my time of mourning which was now
laid asleep? why tell me (good son) did thou ever lack any thing that I
could help thee to? did I ever vvrong thee in all my life? If thou will needs
enter into a monastery, why first see me honestly buried in my grave?
Hark: do thou not hear the voice of the Lord crying aloud [sonne honor thy
mother Authusam.] Surely he performs fair obedience to Gods commandments,
that by such demeanor grieves his mother: O son had thou done for me all
that possibly a son can do for his mother, yet have thou paid me nothing for
my manifold sorrows, for my throbs in childbed, which for thy dear sake I so
patiently endured, for my pains in bearing thee, for the sustenance which I
gave thee, when I stroaked my breasts into thy lips, with the true affection
of a most natural mother! What have I for my hunger and fasting which I
sustained for thee, when I refrained to eat any thing that might hurt thee, and
drink any thing that might mar my milk. If I kept fast, it was for thee,
if I did eat, it was for thee, If I refused any meat, it was for thee, if I
accepted of any meat it was for thee, and many a night I have watched for thee,
and many a bitter tear have I shed for thee, and do thou now utterly
forsake me? I could hold out no longer (says he) but forthwith yielded, as
being strongly overcome with a reverent respect to so good a mother. And
thereupon he makes his excuse to Basilius, and in despite of al these arguments
(which have been forceably bent and discharged against thee) chose rather to
continue with his mother, than to abide in a monastery. He himself writing
afterward to Basilius, uses these words: I confess I have broken my promise,
for when I left Athens, and such familiar acquaintance as I had in that
university, my purpose was to have addicted my self wholy to your company,
and with you to have spent my days in contemplation. But I have broken my
word and that not upon any wilful disposition (I would have you so to
understand me) but, for that one law has more prevailed with me than another,
I mean that law which requires dutiful obedience unto parents, more than the
sociable Law of friendship and good fellowship. Now parallel thy self with S.
Chrysostom. When thou wast yet in thy nonage, all thy contriuing was, how to
be a Jesuit; fatherles, I am sure thou wast not, except thou will say thou
were fatherless in this sense, that thou had a Father, but such a one as
thou did not care for: nor motherlesse, for, that thou had a most kind and
loving gentlewoman to thy mother. How was it then? that neither thy fathers
authority, nor thy mothers tender love and affection might ought prevail with
thee in not attempting any thing without their approbation and advice. Thou
have shunned their presence, wandered up and down the world like a vagabond,
and for three whole years together concealed thy self, after such a manner of
insolent indignity and arrogancy, that in all that long time, thou have
neither vouchsafed to write me one letter, nor send me so much as one word how
I might know to find thee out, either in France, Lorryne, or Spain. Perhaps,
you stood in some fear that your Mother Hortensia should affront you with such
an encounter as this. Why son, if God should have called away thy Father (which
I hope never to see) what stay should I have found in the world after him? Thy
brethren, alas poor souls they be too young. And what hope could I have had
from them, that have thee for a pattern of disobedience? No doubt God is much
bound unto you for your good service done unto him, that in a jealous
comparison thereof, cannot endure any commerce or correspondency with your
parents? no not so much as for the return of a few letters? If this you have
done upon some nice conceit, that they respect you too too near, because you
are of their blood, and alliance, yet remember withal they be good Christian
folk, not pagans, and that this tender affection of theirs proceeds rather
from a fear of thy well doing, than from any doubt which they can possibly
make of the articles of their Christian faith and religion. It was not without
good cause (I perceive now) that good Veturia refused utterly to be employed in
embassage to Martius Cariolanus her son. For what says she, shall I get at
his hands? what shall all my little nephews get, when he that has lived in
banishment for 4. years together, in all that while never sent me so much as
one letter? has quite forgotten his kindred, as well as his native country,
which (might I speak like a mother) most discourteously and undeservedly
condemned him. She notwithanding all this, embarkt her self in the message,
and forced him to come in, by no other stratagem of war than the name of a
mother. What think thou? art thou more religious than S. Chrysostom, more
hard hearted than was Coriolanus? yet he came to meet his mother half way,
thou fliest from thine, and eschewest her very presence. What? fear thou to
write unto me? in Gods name write, write without date of day or year. Indeed if
S. Basil be your countenance for this irreligious devotion, the imputation were
the less, and the fault more excusable on you part, I must needs grant.

But (I fear me) that we have little aduantaged our cause all this while by
quoting of so many ancient Fathers, except it be, the filling up of a long
empty catalogue with names. Our best way therefore in my judgment to deal
with thee, will be with some records and precedents of antiquity. And whereas
S. Chrysostom has written some books, against such as discommend the
monastical life, and has given counsel to parents to take some care that
their children be trained up in such speculatio^s, rather then to make them
swordmen or of the long robe, his intent is thereby in preferring that kind of
life before any other, to aduize men rather to bestow their children in a
course of religion, than a secular employment; but not to make them in any sort
disobedient to their friends, and in despite of them to abandon cities, and
inhabit vast mountainous deserts, nay he wills them after some time spent,
after they have been well seasoned in Christianity, to repair home again to
their parents. Which makes me to think that the Monks of that world, were
not termers for life in their monastery, as now they use to be, but at courtesy
to return home when they list. Again read the same S. Chrysostom in his
books de prouidentia, there you shall observe how he spends himself in
comforting Stagyrius the Monk, who was therefore vexed with a devil, because
that contrary to the advice of his Father, he had cast himself into a
cloister, and whom for that cause, he terms an intruding Friar. But Stagyrius
was the^ of ripe years and his father had not expressly forbid him that
calling, only he counseled him otherwise. S. Austine himself and S. Ambrose
in his first book, De Virginibus, toward the end, proves that parents should
not hinder a daughter from consecrating her self to theseruice of the Church,
but yet withal so, that a Father may (if his pleasure be) peremptorily to
forbid it. And does not Saint Austin in his 109 and 110. epistle to Ecdicia
plainly say, that she had made a deed of gift of her son in her life time,
whereby to kill him, in that his father was not first made acquainted
therewith, what course of life upon more maturitie and discretion he
afterward might follow, to be either a Monk a Priest, or a married man:
therefore till he came to such an age, his fathers voice and consent was
absolutely necessary thereunto: but the conclusion of all is, that the son
borne in lawful and holy Wedlock is more to be in subjection to the Father
than to the mother. And therefore he cannot be denied him wheresoever he be,
when once he is lawfully demanded. The same Father in his 233. Epistle to
Benenatus, does not he write of a certain girl, that as the report went,
would feign have been a Nun, how he consulted about the matter with Felix
her Aunts Husband, and that otherwise he neither could nor would have given way
unto it. What would his opinion have been (think you) of her mother, whose
direction and will in bestowing of her daughter, was ever to be preferred
before all others? Without doubt if the mothers interest be so much, the
fathers is a great deal more, and so great as he would not have much demurred,
whether the son were under years or above, for such a question would never
have been proposed. Lastly, I appeal to thy conscience (good Father
Saluianus) wast thou a stranger to this new Church discipline, when thou
tookest such extraordinary pains to Hepatius and Quieta, that they would
please to excuse that action of their daughter Palladia, for that she was
converted from Paganism to Christianitye, without their priuity? do I say her
action? nay to excuse thine own, that after the birth of thy daughter
Auspiciola, refrainedst the company of thine own wife, the better to give thy
self to fasting and prayer, having no warrant so to do from thy father in
laws permission. When they betrothed Palladia to thee, they gave her to a
Christian husband, and thereby sufficiently expressed their consent that she
likewise for her behalf should become a Christian. Yea and certain it is, that
a little after this blessed match, thy wives parents that so dearly affected
their daughter, became Christians also. Howsoever then they might have taken it
ill at thy hands, that vndertookest this without their special leave, (for
what hope could they conceive of any grandchild to be borne under that
marriage, where the man and wife lived a part?) what reproache was it unto
them, that in a matter of such weighty importance they should not be worthy so
much as to be looked after? If they for such an insignious contempt done unto
them should have said unto thee, Sir, pack out of our sight, and write
letters upon letters as long as thou list, and it be seven years together
thou shall receive not one line from us in way of answer, (and yet I must have
told you that Palladia now after the enter-marriage, belonged not to her
Father but to her husbands disposition) could thou in defense of thy self
have said, that it was a point of fervent zeal to Godwards, first to hate and
set at naught thy Father? Oh, but read his epistles, and read them over, thou will tell me another tale: there is nothing but bitter tears, pitiful
suites: and begging pardons, although says he, for my part, I do not well know
how, or wherein I have offended them. Now upon these premises, see how I could
conclude against thee: I have written many letters to thee, but never received
any one for answer back again. Thou art not yet come to years of discretion,
thou have entered into a vow, (I will not say of chastity but of single life,)
and never told me of it. Poor soul, how could thou make any vow at that
years? thou can not defend thy self and say, why but Father, I had your
consent, though you did not openly express it. For thou know well enough
that I did mainely withstand it: in a word whereas thou have revolted to the
Jesuits company, it is not paganism that thou have forsaken: but the holy
fellowship and Communion of thy Christian brethren. Why then do thou not upon
thy bare knees ask me forgiveness, thou have more reason so to do, son, than
ever Saluianus had: for he in humility acknowledged his offense, but thou
can not be brought to confess thine. Now I pray thee, son, bethink thy
self how grievously this holy man would have been affrighted with the remorse
of his disobedience, if he had offered such wrong, I will not say to
Idolatrous parents, such as they were, but to believing, whereas he takes on
so much, for being the occasion of their heaviness, which were yet infidells,
and not his parents by birth, but by affinity only, and thought himself no
good Christian, for not honoring them, as Gods commandment would have enioined
to honor his natural parents, that is, without distinction of being good or
bad, Jew or Gentile, faithful or unbeliever.

Doubtless he took this lesson out of Aristaeus, where King Ptolomie asking
one of the 72. interpreters, how he might be kind and thankful to his parents,
received this answer, that the next way was, never to grieve or molest them.
Or else he had read the description of the last judgment in the Poet where
they are ranked among the damned ghosts by Sibyila, That do forsake their aged
Sires, and care not to reward
Their parents which did foster them, or spitefully refuse
To do them service at their need, or them with soornes abuse.


Certain it is, that Bishop Faustus in his first book De libero arbitrio, and
the twelfth chapter, interpreting those words in the Gospel, Let us nowfeast
and be merry, for this my son was dead and is alive, lost and now is found,
expounds the loss to be his departure from his father: he was not lost in
person (says he) but he that forsook his father, and by such his contempt was
no better than a dead man, by a dutiful desire that he had to come home to his
father, was again revived, and restored to life. For as it was a sin in him,
to travail into a far country, out of his kind fathers presence, so was it a
point of his good nature and duty, resolutelie to change his course, and to
return with tears to his fathers merciful embracements.

And now I take it to be high time, to cease to instance any farther by
example, and directly pass over to the decrees and Canons of the Church, least
happily it be replied, that all which is hitherto alleged, is but for
particular ends, and not sufficient to prove the general assertion. For
albeit, I must ingenuouslie confess, an Idolatrous father may be destituted
and forsaken by his son, if he should offer upon violence to compel him to
Paganism (as Theodoret has it it his third book and fourteen and 22.
Chapters, and Chrysostom in his second book, against such as discommend the
retired and solitary life) yet if there be no compulsion used, I can show you
general and provincial Councels both, which have ordained, that neither the
father may forsake the son, nor the son the father, nor the wife her
husband, nor the servant his master, for this cause only, that they differ in
religion. Sir it is not your Friars cowle, nor Monks habit, nor any order of
knighthood, that ye can enter into, shall ever be able to raz or blot out, that
fast tie and obligation, which in this case, God and men have interchangeablie
sealed and delivered the one to the other It is a fashion well becoming
Barbarians and heretics (so says Bishop Victor in his first book De
persecutione Vandalica) to separate husbands from their wives, or children from
their parents. And when Valentinian the Emperor like a most glorious Prince,
had authorized the profession of Christian religion, and the city of Carthage,
whence by reason of Arrianisme it was for a season exiled, the first work that
the Bishop did, was, that al marriages should hold though the parties were of
different religion, and parents should have their children again, that the
Arrians had forceably taken from them.

So then to begin our relation with the story of a slave. If he would fall off
from his master because he was a Gentile or a Jew, might not the favor of
liberty, but especially of religion, plead his excuse? the Canons, which be
termed the Canons of the Apostles, flatly say no. If servants be promoted to
holy orders without their masters consent, ipso facto, their masters may
challenge them back again for slaves, (it is to be found in the 81. Chapter,
But if any person of servile condition be worthy the degree of holy orders (as
was One simus and the master yield thereunto) after they be enfranchised and
made free men, it may be done. The Council of Gangrene which was held An. 324
and somewhat after the Nicene, forbids it likewise, saying: Let him be accursed
whosoever he be that shall seduce another man's servant to be undutiful to his
master under color or occasion of his religion, and does not rather teach him
to serve him with an honest heart and all due observance, that so he may be a
free man of Christ, (as Ignatius supplies it) let him be accursed. Certain it
is, that this is to be meant of the slaves of hethen, and the religion there
mentioned is to be intended of the Christian. But in the Council held at
Orleance under King Childebert, there is a great deal more: for over and
besides that it disauowes the voluntary oblation of a slave to the service of
the Church, without his masters knowledge, it lays a penalty upon the Bishop
that so admits him: to wit, that in six months after, he is not to celebrate.
Justinian in his 123. novel Constitution, appointed a certain time, wherein the
master was to recover his slave from the Church, but Leo the 9 made an act,
that the challenge should still hold and be perpetual. Yea but if you say the
case is altered, in a Monk, for his estate being regular, is more to be
privileged than a secular priest. Charle^maine (as it should appear by a
certain constitution of his) is of a contrary opinion. Let no man, says he,
entice another man's slave, to become a Priest or a Monk, without leave and
license of his master (you may read the Act in the 20. and 27. Chapter. The
primitive Church observed as much, not that she thought God was any way
dishonored by the ministry of a poor slave, (for with God all men are alike)
how then? Tertullian against the heretic Martion will give you the reason.
Says he, what action is there more unjust, wrongful, and wicked than so to
demerit my servant, with your kindness, as that never afterward he shall live to
do me any more service? another man shall lay claim to him, and let me have
any suit in law, he shall produce him for a witness against me, and that (which
of all bad is the worst) even then, and at that time, whilst he lives in my
house with me, lives upon my allowance, trembles and quakes under the stripes
of my rod. A wise man should be as sparing to do another man's wife, his slave,
free man, or any under his charge, any courtesy extraordinary, as to procure
them any harm. For a man cannot possibly inueagle or allure any of them, but
withal of necessity he must bereave them particularly of that love and truth
which in conscience the wife should bear to her husband, the slave to his
master, the freeman to his patron, and lastly the subject to his sovereign.
And no doubt by Gods grace, but he that lives in subjection to another man's
rules, in that course of obedience, may be partaker of eternal bliss: whereas
he that spurns and murmurs in that he is called to be a servant, should I say,
diuorceth himself from the religion and faith of Christ, nay maliciously
reneges it, which consists wholly in love and obedience, except there be some
such action inioined, which is directly opposite to piety. And so writes S.
Chrysostom in his 35 homily upon those words of S. Paul, Children obey your
parents in all things.

Now concerning wives (for that is our next passage) ye find it thus decreed,
Let neither Bishop, Priest or Deacon, put away his wife, under color of
religion: if he do, let him be excommunicated, and if he so continue, let him
be degraded. The same Canon is thus transcribed into Gratians decree, at the
28. distinction, whosoever shall teach that a Priest upon pretense of religion,
may refuse his wife, let him be accursed. And the Fathers assembled in the
Council of Gangrene published this decree, that whosoever should put a
difference between a married or unmarried Priest, as though his marriage
disabled him from administering the holy communion, and for that cause refuses
to communicate with him, let him be accursed. And a little after: Whosoever
shall condemn marriage, or think that a faithful devout woman, cohabiting
with her husband, is therefore iudiciallie to be indicted, as if, forsooth, the
married couple could not possibly enter into the kingdom of heaven, let him
be accursed. What can thou say for thy self to the contrary? do thou not
find by these laws, that as well she is to be reputed for an excommunicate
person, which upon pretense of living continent, lives a part from her husband,
and refraines his bed, as they, which stand so highly upon commendation of
chastity, (and because they would be termed abstinent) do vilify and
disgrace the holy estate of wedlock?

Now concerning parents and children, their obligation, as well as their
relation, is mutual. Therefore the Synod says thus much first of parents:
Whosoever shall forsake his own children, and shall not bring them up, as it is
the part of a father, and give them not things necessary, but under pretense of
living continentlie, thinks they may be forlorn let him be accursed. Son, thou
never foundest me yet defective in any one point, that a kind father should do
for his child, which if I had I must have been extremely negligent, and so
reputed in the judgment of Ptolomie. I have maintained, cherisht, and taught
thee: for Greek and Latin, I dare be bold to say, thou have been instructed, so
far forth, as was fitting for a young gentleman, Thy good uncle Monsieur James
Aerodius the president, and my self, have made it our eager contention (as
indeed we exceed both in our love and affection, toward thee) that thou
sholdst fail of nothing that might be any way devised meet for any excellent
purpose, that so finding the course whereunto thou wast most inclined, we might
in time accordingly dispose of thee, (which Nazianzene says was the fashion
among the Athenians) or that thou might dispose of thy self, in case we
were dead before, and thou come to full age. And have we this fair recompense
for all our love and kindness to be forsaken by thee now, and not thought good
enough to be spoken unto at thy departure. It is reported in S. Hieromes
Epistles, that the holy matron Paula left both town and children, excepting
only her young daughter Eustochia, whom she took in her company with her to
Bethleem, upon a resolution there to live retired. But I must tell you, all
these children (beside Toxotius) were come to years, and he was not left
unprovided neither, for the mother made him, and his sister Rufina, that was
mariageable, her sole executors, and gave them all that she had, and appointed
them guardians to ouersee them. And the like story you may read in Paulinus in
his 10. Epistle to Seuerus, how he commends exceedingly the holy woman
Melania, that having buried her husband, and being the mother of one little
boy, left him behind her, sailde to Jerusalem, and there betook her self to a
life of more perfection. But she left him (which likewise would be observed,)
exceeding rich, she left him kin, and allied to all the great men of Rome.

But now that I may have a saying to thee, come on sir, stand near, and
hearken to the doom which shall be pronounced against thee, and bethink thy
self, who shall give thee absolution from the curse of the foresaid Synod,
whereunto without doubt thou art notoriously liable. If any son (says the
16. Canon) shall forsake their parents, especially such as are believers,
taking occasion by pretense of religion, and shall not yield them more duty
and reverence in that respect, let them be accursed. Now I pray thee, tell me
truly did they conceal this Council from thee? I verily believe they did. I
cannot be persuaded that thy judgment is so erroneous as to imagine that a
son may do more against his father, than a slave against his master: as to
imagine that it were a grievous sin for a father (not to provide for his
children) and but a peccadilio in a son to stand out undutiful, despitefull,
and contemptuous against his parents. See, the Council makes noe distinction
of believing parents or unbelieving, of childrens minority or their fulage. But
peradventure, they will privily whisper, and tell thee that this Council was
but to hold for a time, not to continue. To this I answer, that the reverend
fathers of the Church, for a long time after, approved that Synod, as you may
find it recorded in the fifth general Council of Constantinople, and so did
Gratian also in his Decrees: for to what purpose else did he incorporate it
among them? Lastly, that answer might stand for good, if the Council of
Gangrene had intended their Canon against desertion of heathen parents only:
for whereas Gentilisme was then in more request and sway than Christianity,
the greater care was to be taken for it, that they should not loath our
Christian religion too much (as possibly they would) and not unlike, but at
that time, the Church might directly inhibite the believing man to forsake his
unbelieving wife, unless in point of violence forced to paganism and
Idolatry. But sure it is, that the Counsels meaning never was that Children
should forsake their parents, because they were Christians, for it says in
express words: [Let children reverence their parents, if for no other end,
yet for this, because they are Christians], a reason (as I conceive) that will
ever hold for Christians: for Vigoreus, a writer of our time, cites the same
Synod to this very purpose. But it will not be amiss in my opinion, to set
down the cause and occasion of the summoning of this Synod. It was not
because Pagan parents did make it their complaint of grieuance, that their
children did abandon and forsake them, the cause was clean contrary, which
was, that they which were Christians left them which were of their own
profession, and religion, malapert and saucy sons and trespass so against
their parents, as thou have lately done against me: marry, the difference if
any be, is this, that they in former time, affected a true monastical retired
life, and thou according to the fashion of the time, do affect a profession
barelie consisting in an habit of apparel, and formalitie of words: they
crucified the world to the flesh, and the flesh to the world, but men of
your coat save half the labor; and crucify the world only. From whence
then comes such a corruption in this discipline? I will tell you. About the
time that some new fangled fellows sprung up in the Church, and termed
themselves Anchorites, Eremites or Monks, there steps me up one Eustatius, who
led by an inconsiderate zeal, began wheresoever he came, to thunder out those
glorious magnificent words written in the Gospel, [that they were unworthy of
Christ, that loved Father or mother more than Christ,] and thereupon to infer
that all things in the world are to be contemned and set at naught: as house,
posisessions, parents, children, brethren, yea (and to make short work,) all
the universal world, the better to live in some solitary hermitage, under some
rule, and in some company severed and shut from all men. And why so think you?
because it was nothing worth to be a Christian, except you had been also of
the order of Eustatius. But what was the issue of this Doctrine? Sir this, that
the wife would leave her husband, and be his wife: the servant his master, and
he his servant: the parents their children, and they their parents: that
Christians set light by marriage, and all duty else, which every man owes unto
his country: that religion, which was wont to keep all in good order, was now
become ringleader to all confusion and disorder. Lastly, that the Gentiles
might well say (and Zozimus by name) The Christians be barren and unfruitful
in all affairs of duty, which is a speech that Tertullian in his apologeticus,
holds to be the most disgraceful and scandalous that over yet was uttered
against Christians. But the sectaries of Eustatius reioynde, why but this
desertion is, because we would be the freer for the service of God. But the
Fathers assembled in Council, condemn this fair occasion, and proved full
and whole, that it was an act far more Christianlike and Religious, to worship
and love our parents, (for that is the commandment of God) than so to serve
God, as thereby to despise the parents, a thing which he utterly forbids. For
God and parents may well be honored together, but no man living can truly
worship God without he honor his parents also. Thereupon this new founder
Eustatius, shortly after changed his copy, and came to be a Bishop in the
Church, and not a cloisterer. And that this was the true occasion of assembling
that Council the very letter of that Council, as also Socrates, Sozomen,
Isidor and Gratian in his 16. and 30. Distinct. do apparently testify. How
now sir? Will so many and so weighty authorities do no good with you? for (I
thank you) you have been bold to set my authority at naught? or are you
eftsoons persuaded, that should I afford my consent never so much, you could
not yet be a true and absolute Jesuit? peradventure you are yet some what
grauelled in this doubt? so then let us take some view of that which they
allege unto you out of S. Hierome, and withal consider, whether there be any
cloister Divinity, or new found Gospel lately sprung up among them, to repeal
these ancient Canons and decrees of the Church, which you in your brave ruff
do so lightly esteem of. It may not be denied, but that S. Hierome writing to
Heliodorus in commendation of a solitary life, uses these words [should thy
little nephewe hang fast clasping about thy neck: and thy mother with her
tresses disheueled about her ears renting and tearing her garments, discover
those paps which gave thee suck: should thy father that begat thee lie down
before thee in the way: pass over thy father, and trample him under thy feet,
shed not a tear, but with an heroical resolution, fly towering up in high
speed to the standard of thy Saviors cross. Savage cruelty in such a case is
your only pity. Doubtless, here is a right noble sentence and well
becoming the high spirit of so excellent a Father in the Church: but before I
clear the point, and show in what meaning this was spoken, wherein S. Hierome
(as it should seem by this) makes such cheap reputation of parents authority,
and in so doing dishonours the chastity of all natural kindness: I would feign
see that passage in him, concerning parents obedience, (it is in his Epistle de
vitando suspecto contubernio) reconciled to this. There you shall read him
thus, Father and Mother, says he, are names of duty, words of respect, bonds
of nature, and under God, the second truce and league of our love. It is none
of your commendation to say you love them not, it is a notorious sin in you,
if you hate them. Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was subject to his parents.
He reverenced that mother to whom he was father, loved that nurce; whom he
fostered, and forgot not that womb where he was conceived, nor those arms
that so often bore him. You will perhaps reply and say, but here lies the
exception, when a son living under the government of his Father is once
resolutely determined to go into a monastery, why then he may be bold to
forbear all show of duty, and pass neither for good nature nor good manners.
Then cruelty in that case may be interpreted mercy; incluilitie, good
conditions; contempt obedience. But think not (good son) though S. Hierome
used such a fair colorable speech to Heliodorus that if he should have dealt
in earnest with him, he would have advised him, to ben so behaved, as his words
do implye. God forbid that S. Hierome should ever be taken for principal or
accessory in parricide: that for the same very cause that Aeneas was surnamed
the pious (as Virgil in all places styles him) Amids the scorching flames, and
thousand shot of darts
I rescued mine aged Sire, and made these shoulders bow
To guard him from the enemies troop.
For an action directly contrary, a Christian man should go about to merit,
the same surname and appellation: or that S. Hierome by any means, should
rather propose wicked Tullia for an instance of piety, that road in her coach
over her fathers coarse, than devout Aeneas, for an imitation to Heliodorus.
Yea though he might purchase thereby all the kingdoms and seignories of the
world, or all the vast territories of hell, where ghostes Lord it, as Painims
suppose: or lastly, that who so professed himself a Monk in such a scornful
fashion to his parents, should be better thought of than Cleobis and Piton,
that drew their aged mother in a litter, (to a place where she was to
sacrifice) in stead of a pair of co^tch-horses. Or those brethren, which for
they rescued their impotent parents, from the rage of a tempestuos fire, the
people of Catanna, in a reverence of their devotion, called by no other name
than the godlie-children. Certainly it is so far from S. Hieromes meaning to
have his words perverted and drawn to the maintenance of such a barbarous
crucity and impity, as that when he spoke this to Heliodorus, neither his
Father or mother were then living: so that the inference is impossible that had
his Father and mother forbad him to have been an Eremite in the wilderness of
Syria, he would have gone over them, and stamped them under his feet. What
then may S. Hieromes meaning be? why this: After Heliodorus had long time been
a soldier in the wars, and dealt much in negotiating of state matters, growing
into some years, and having no issue, (as we told you before) he bad farewell
to the world, and in S. Hieromes company which was his puysne, vowed a solitary
and retired life, and to that end they both entered into a monastery, lived
there long time together, at last Heli^dorus had a great longing to see how his
only sister, and her young son did: and there (lo) did he alter his former
resolution, for there he betakes himself to the Church, and in stead of being
a Monk, becomes a Clergy man. This was the time without all peradventure,
when S. Hierome wrought these matters in commendation of the monastical life,
being for years but a stripling, and almost a very boy, (as he speaks of
himself in another place,) and coming fresh from the university, then he
uses these flourishing speeches unto him, alluding from his secular to the
heavenly warfare, interlacing withal such strong motives, and persuasions as
friends use often to their friends, all to this purpose in effect, that whereas
we are commanded to be Eunuchs for Christ's sake, to put the very eyes out of
our head if they offend, to leave and forsake all that we have in this present
world, as if the case were desperate for a rich man ever to come to heaven, (a
point whereof S. Austen discourses excellently in his 89. epistle to Hilarious)
not to be careful for to morrow, to turn thy left cheek to him that smites
thee on the right, and many more sayings of the like nature, which were they
literally understood and not spiritually, without question, would fill the
Church full with heresies, and yet concerning worldly wealth does not S.
Austen in an Epistle to Bonifacius tell us, a valiant Christian minded man
should not be puffed up if he have it, nor be dejected if he loose it? was not
Leontius a Bishop of Laodicea, condemned of the Church for dismembring
himself? vvhereupon Anastasius a Bishop of Nice in his 73. and 79 question
says, what is meant by this Gospel, (if thy right eye offend thee, or thy
right hand, cut it off from thee) Christ meant it not of our bodily parts and
members, (God forbid) but of our friends, and kinsfolk, for he slanders Gods
workmanship, that dismembers himself? And even S. Hierome himself, has he
not written so many things in that strain of vehemency for commendation of
virginity and single life, that he seems in a manner to disallow and condemn
all marriage? yet questionles he never meant it. For were it so that he spoke as
he thought, and persuaded Heliodorus rather to make his way over his fathers
body, than to forsake that blissful estate (which as it seems in your
conceit) the cloister affoords, why then would he prefer Priesthood before it?
indeed he confesses that Heliodorus answer, may serve any other man's turn
else, but cannot serve his own, who having professed in precise terms, the
active life, might not without blame, renounce his former profession, and
betake himself to an order of higher perfection, as namely Priesthood. Indead
he describes the good and happy estate of them that live in monasteries, and
likewise how perilous and subject to all manner of temptations, their condition
is, that live at large in the world and says he was a glad man, to see him
come up so high, but very fearful to think of his fall. So that he blames
not Heliodorus, for leaving his cloister, nor his entrings into Priesthood, nay
he persuades him not directly, to forsake the one, and return to the other.
But because first he revolted from being a soldier, to become a Monk, and
afterward grew weary of his cowle, abjuring the profession which he undertook
in S. Ieromes company, his endeavor is now by these forceable reasons, or
rather rhetorique schemes and colors, to draw him back again into his
monastery. And as for these words of the Gospel (he that loves father or
mother more than me) I pray mark whether Heliodorus answered S. Hierom well,
that they were to be understood in case of martyrdom, or whether S. Hieromes
reply to this answer, be sufficient. But be it as it may be, that no man should
stand to too stiffelie upon the authority of that speech, which is not
altogether so true, as neat and elegant, observing more his words, than his
meaning, for an vpshopt of all, when he came to riper years, he recants that
opinion, in an epistle written to Nepotian, who by this time also, was both in
years and discretion grown to be a man. And as concerning such arguments, as he
had proposed to Heliodorus, he says he did it as a young man, after the fashion
of the schools, when the fire of his study and learning in Rhetorique was not
clean beat out of him for verily at that time, a man might freely enter into a
monastery, and when him list leave him. And then the question was idle,
whether a man might follow this course of life, without his parents liking,
because then there was no such obligation by vows as now a days there is, and
had a man misliked of his profession, his punishment was none other but the
imputation of lightness and inconstancy, which is evident out of S. Austins
epistle to his friend Boniface. The profession of being a Monk in those days
was nothing else but the meditation, and exercise of the ancient, free, and
truly christian manner of living. And therefore in this pretense, they might
with much more honesty loose themselves from their kindered, and alliance. So
then let no man father it upon S. Hierome, which makes nothing for his purpose.
Indeed he went about to solicit some of his fellows, to enter into this kind
of life with him, but every one liked it not, and among others Pa^^machius
that was his chiefest friend, had least fancy unto it. For his desire was
rather to live married than to be tied to such strict rules of religion. Only
Bonosius followed him, and professed himself a Monk, not passing for mother,
brother, or sisters, yet still respecting his father. Nay even S. Hierome
himself, after he had been an Hermit for some time, returned back again to
Rome. S. Austin indeed in his 76. Epistle, is not thoroughly resolved in this
point, whether a Monk forsaking his cel, might afterward be in holy orders.
Therefore bethink now with thy self, and consider it well, whether that
assertion of S. Hieromes can be thy just excuse, I say whether it can be any
just excuse, for thee that art not yet five and twenty years of age, that have
a father and mother yet living, that never made any vow to the Jesuits before
hand, that art not hereupon either to renege Paganism, or to secure thy self
from persecution, or to wander into vast and uncouth wildernesses, and there to
continue, but to be entertained into as delicate and pleasant places and
cities, as the worlds yield any, that have an abbie for thy prison, and a good
town for thy paradise. But make of S. Hieromes speech what can be made, make
him of what age thou will, when he wrote this Epistle, if notwithstanding all
this, the name of such a great workma^ so deeply with you, why may you not for
your satisfaction herein parralell Heliodorus example with him? why not the
example of Letus (especially if that be S. Austius epistle which is written
unto him:) who having vowed a religious life, and that not in his minority but
at man's estate, upon the sole discontent and grief which he conceived
afterward, because he had neglected the duty to his mother, in not making her
acquainted with this vow, returned fairelie home again to his country, which
before in the hot zeal he bare to a religious life, he had abandoned. Why may
you not oppose S. John Chrysostomes example. these men were never for all this,
either the less holy, or worse Christians, most certain it is there is
nothing can be a bar to a godly life. You may not plead pretense that you are
married, that you are a father of children, that you are a soldier, a merchant,
an artificer, a servant, a rich man, a beggar, (for so speaks S. Chrysostom
in a certain marriage sermon.) I tell you one that dwells in the City, may com
very near to a Monks devotion, and a married man, that lives at home, may say
his prayers, and fast, and be penitent for his sins, as the same Father also
affirms in another place. Now that you may not thwart me, and say, that such
precedents were proper only for the primitive Church, and that the comparison
stood then betwixt gentilisme and Christianity, betwixt a religious life in a
cloister, and an upright godly life abroad in the world, when this
controversy was treated of. I will produce you that very age wherein S.
Bernard lived, and lastly to leave you without all scruple of doubt, I will
answer an objection, which is made out of the Emperor Justinians constitution,
which in some men's conceit, is very strong for the liberty of children, in
dedicating themselves to the service of the Church, without their parents
leave, to the intent, that having thoroughly considered what can be alleged
of both sides, thou thy self may be judge, and pronounce the sentence,
whether this fact of thine which thou have thus committed against me, be to be
termed a fact of honest behavior, or contrariwise altogether of vnrespectiue
demeanor. Here then the question consists generally between Catholics, nay
in a far more narrow compass, than Catholics, it consists between monks:
that holy Abbot had a nephew whose name was Robert, his father purposed to
make him a Monk of the order of Cluniacenses, but he dying before his son
was tendered, Robert professed himself a Cisterian Monk, and S. Bernard himself
adopted him thereunto. Soon after this, certain Monks of the order of
Cluniacenses, seduced the poor youth, and drew him from that Abbie to their
own. Hear then began the brige between the two regulars. S. Bernard was the
first man that accused this their fact, and said it was done by mere seducement
and enueagling of the youth, in that they had used fraud, flattery, and
crafty conueiance, to effect this their purpose. For they that should seduce
his nephew, first attempted it by a nouice of their order, after that by a
Monk that was better able, lastly by one of their greatest Priors, amongst
them. Then he laid to their charge, forceable intrusion, in that they had hurt
the porters of the Cel, and so rescued young Robert out of his cloister, as if
they would have broken a Gaile. Without acquainting either the superior of the
order withal, or the Abbot, or his uncle S. Bernard, now I pray thee tell me
whether thy case and this be all one, first, because one that was penitentiarie
and Confessor there, buzd this into thine ear, and after him, another that was
master of the chamber, came and told thee that there was no estate of men so
blessed, as the Regular was, and lastly the provincial of the order came, and
said, that among all the regular, there was none comparable with your society,
as being called after the name of Jesus: but mark what S. Bernard alleages,
and that will sufficiently refute and condemn your so highly magnified
vocation and inspiration: there was no suite (says he made for his admission
by his parents, which the rule expressly enioyneth.) as though he should have
said, albeit his Father when he was alive did much wish to have his son of
the order of Cluniacensis, but being prevented by death never lived to see his
desire fulfilled, and the common rule expressly requires, that he that will
enter into a monastery, must be offered unto it first, by his parents, in the
view and presence of some witnesses (for that is also in the rule) this wants
in his profession, to your order of Cluniacensis: but these provisions, were
not necessary or requisite, for his admission to the Cistertians, because then
he was past his nonage, and was at his own choice and bestowing. Why then
(exclaymes the good Abbot) why then have you robbed me of my nephew? why have you
bereft me of my joy? Why have ye taken away the fruit of my spirit, and the
one half of my poor soul? might he not have been saved with me, if he had
continued with me? O nephew says he, the vizard of holiness has beguiled
thee, the pretense of religion has seduced thee, the authority of the Ancients
has undone thee. Now surely if the good Abbot inueigh so bitterly against
these monks, that thereupon he calls them ravening wolves, what might be fit
for me to do against these Jesuits that have robbed me in my life time of my son,
in such an unworthy fashion? and when I challenge him, they deny him
trecherously? peradventure they took some compassion of thee, as the monks did
of young Robert. peradventure thou had been in state of damnation, if thou
had remained with thy Christian Catholic parents, thy Uncles and Aunts,
Brothers and Sisters. But if the bare changing of one monastery for another,
was of such fearful sequel, that the poor soul was in danger of being
damned for it (for so thinks S. Bernard) what will betide thee, that treadest
under thy feet and in such a presumptuous insolent manner, spurnest at, not
God almighties commandments alone, but also the decrees and canons of our
reverend prelates and pastors? and why forsooth? not to change thy religion
but thy habit, not the Church, but thy rank and order in the Church. Pray let
me tell you what Vigorous once wrote in a sermon of his, which he made of S.
Martin, it is written to us French men, you shall never find him vary in
opinion from the ancient and most sanctified Church government: his words be
these. S. Martin was a nouice in the Christian religion, and not admitted into
the congregation by the Sacrament of Baptism, and albeit he dwelt with his
parents which were gentiles, yet did he perform all good offices unto them as
became a Christian: (for the Law of God does not acquit that obligation,
wherein a son is bound to his Father, or a servant to his master. And surely
the Church never taught Martin to be a rebel against his parents, but rather
in all things to yield them due obedience and respect, so God were not
offended.) Whereupon by reason of such reverent conformity unto his parents
command he got this grant from them, that considering for what vocation he
was most fit and addressed unto that they would be pleased to bestow him in,
for questionless the son is not left to any such liberty, as either to
marry or betake himself to any sort of living, without his Fathers
approbation, I say unto any sort of life, heeres no limitation [except he will
be a monke]. And now that we pass not over Justinian the Emperor, grant him
to be of the opinion, that for a son to vow a monastical life without his
Fathers consent, was neither a sin of ingratitude, nor any cause able in law
to disinherit him. Does it therefore follow that because it is no such heinous
offense as parricide or incest, therefore it is no offense? or it deserves not
disinheriting, therefore must it pass without all correction, or if it be no
sin is it therefore no fault? Why I tell you, a son might not marry
without his fathers leave, put case he had married, there was no law could
extend so far as to disinherit him, unless his wife were some leaud and
infamous person: will your inference hereupon be, that therefore he offended
not his father in marrying against his will, this is a notorious nonsequitur.
And now sir, I tell you for your learning, let Justinian speak or think as
pleases him, all the Emperors before him made this case a matter of
disinheriting: ask you me what warrant I have for it? marry sir this, because
he professes in this one point, to correct the ancient Civil Law, and this I
tell you withal, that take all those Emperors together, especially those that
were Christian Emperors, and I trust their joint authorities shall sway more,
than Justinians alone: who in all likelihood might have as good leave, to err
therein, as he did mistake in the matter of divorce, and in participating with
the heresy of Eutiches. But certain it is that in the end of that
constitution, [which is an act for bondmen coming to Christianity,] whereas
Justinian takes away the penalty of disinheriting, it is to be understood of
such children of the Gentiles, as entering into holy orders, or monastical
profession, were therefore emancipated in case they were sons, or ipso facto
enfranchised, if they were bondmen. For had the act been general, comprizing
all, or more special extending only to the children of Christians, it is not
to be presumed, but that he would have used some distinction, concerning
their age, that thus betook themselves either to holy orders, or monastical
profession; and have said, before fourteen years be complete there is a nullity
if a man profess: after fourteen, there is none, the vow holds, and there is
no danger of being disinherited for the matter. So then Justinians
constitution (in the titles of Bishops and Clergy men) is in this sense to be
understood, that whereas the cause of our Christian religion is to all intents
much more favorable, than Pagan Idolatry, therefore Pagans children, lived
they under their parents verge and jurisdiction, or lived they without it, both
the one and the other might vow and profess religion, without pain or peril
of being disinherited, (the form whereof is described by Theodoret in his two
and twentieth chapter:) and so might the bondmen of infidels be enfranchised,
and in lieu of such manumissio^ the church to yield no ransom back again
unto their former masters as it was enacted before Justinians time, (the like
provision is made also by Gregory the first in his second book, and 78.
epistle; if a Christian maiden would become a Convert in any house of
religion, against her masters leave) whereupon the close of the constitution
follows in this manner, and thus much has our Imperial majesty been pleased
to ordain and decree in contemplation of Gods cause and the enlargement of
Christian Religion. And if it be lastly replied, yea but Justinian made the
same Law even for Christians also in 123. novel constitution, and one of the
last Paragraphs there: Probable it is, and in all likelihood to intended, that
the case in most men's opinions would have been hardly thought of, for one to
be disinherited because he was a monk, for in so being, he still
notwithstanding continued Lay, and entered not into holy orders, He succeeded
his father by inheritance, his goods escheated not to the Abbey, he kept
himself still master of his own, (as it is evident out of the 239. epistle of
S. Austin to Alipius (and as I said before) it rested in their own free choice
whether they would still continue in their monastery, or forsake it. But when
once vows of poverty and single life, came to be in request, it had been
very idle, for the parents to have disinherited them, that ipso facto by their
entrance into the monastery disinherited themselves, there was then no farther
controversy to be made of the matter, but whether the profession would hold
good against the Fathers consent. Does all this displease you sir, and stick
you yet so close to Justinian? To encounter him, I oppose the sixth general
Council of Constantinople, I oppose that great Canon of the Church in both
which the heavy sentence of excommunication which the Council of Gangrene
pronounces against all such kind of offenders, is again renewed and
confirmed. But in a word to this foreign Emperor, (whose laws have no
authority to bind us) I oppose the most excellent and flourishing Princes of
our own native country, the decrees and constitutions of our French Church,
the most common and received opinions of al men, and the book cases as they
were debated and determined in the court of Parliament. Charles the great, with
the advice and consent of his Lords spiritual and temporal enacted sundry
laws about Church matters (my Author for that which I deliver is Ansegistus)
amongst the rest, these be some in the fifth book, and 95. Chapter.

Now concerning boys and young maidens it is flatly forbidden that either the
one should be clipped, or the other veiled, without leave of their parents. And
whosoever shall attempt ought against this act, shall be liable to that fine
and amercement which is mentioned in some of the branches of our temporal
laws, and in deed the fine in that Salique law is under the title of them
which either kill or clip young boys or maiden children. Where it would be
principally noted, that in the intent of the law, it is absolutely all one,
to kill our children and to match them to a monastery against their parents
liking. For I pray tell me, is it not a kind of murder so to tirannize over
them, that now they must become aliens to their own parents, no kin to their
kinsfolk? must die intestate, leave no issue, keep no company, must never see
them so long as life lasts, as though they were dead men, and out of mind? I
ever before this thought that the Fabian law had only taken order with these
purloining companions and man-stealers. But now I find that this great Emperor
has brought the^ within compass of the Cornelian law, and made them
murderers. So then to sum up all in a word, what manner of reproof is this,
what a strange kind of challenge, that such holy and blessed men forsooth our
Savior Christ should not only deem hypocrites, the Church accursed
miscreants, the law manstealers, S. Bernard wolves, but the Emperor should
brand them also for murderers? Look to it in time Sir, and look to it, that
such and the like enormeous crimes do not turn you and your mates one day out
of this country and all the kings dominions, for some such kind of spiritual
murder, as hereafter you are very like to have a hand in. And now let us take
a short view, of that which remains whether there be any such statute at this
time in force, as was that of Charles the great. Charles the ninth a Prince of
famous memory in a Parliament holden at Orleance, the 19. article, makes this
order, that no parents, gardians, or kinsmen, man or woman, should suffer
either their children or their wards to enter into any monastical profession,
unless the one first, were going into five and twenty, the other into
twenty. And if any were professed before such times, the parties so professed
might nevertheless have power and interest to make and declare their last
wills and Testaments (ever with this prouiso) that they bequeathed nothing
therein to their monastery, any former law or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. This constitution is of larger extent, than the Council of
Mentz in their 16. and 20. question, the third and seventh Chapters. For in
case any man before such age should have shaued his crown, the intendment of
the law is, that it was done in fraud and couin altogether, and to satisfy
the monks hungry covetous humor. Furthermore it is so short of permitting
children before that age, to enter into religion without parents leave and
liking, that it expressly forbids parents, gardians, or kinsmen, to give any
such leave. Now if reports and book cases can do any good with you, see here
is the judgment of a parliament assembled both of Lay and Ecclesiastical
persons as it was punctuallie given in thy very case, by name (a case
peradventure, which the Jesuits of purpose have concealed from thee) and it is
this, that whereas Petrus Aerodius Justice of the Pleas of the Crown has put
in a bill of complaint against his young son Renate by the Jesuits
fraudulently seduced and purloined from him, and whereas the Rector and
President of Clerement College have been cited and brought personally into
the Court about the matter, it is therefore ordered and thought good by the
Court at the motion of Faius the Kings Attorney general, that Aerodius shall
have a commission granted unto him to enquire and make search after his stolen
son, (for had they not stood upon the negative in pleading not guilty, the
decree would have been that they must have lain fast by it till they had
rendered thee openly in Court) in the mean while the Court does straightly
forbid that ought be done to the prejudice of this their order, and that the
Jesuits entertain him not into their society as they will answer to the
contrary, and that no excuse of ignorance may be herein pretended by the
brethren of that company, they charge and require with all that they of
Cleremont College certisie so much unto their several companies wheresouer.
Given at the Parliament the 20. of May. 1586. Happily you shall also in time
read, what the states of France assembled at Blois have humbly besought his
majesty now our king, Henry the third in this very business, and what he
will conclude thereupon after his brother the king deceased. I am sure in the
Interim his pleasure was that the Pope should be certified thus much, that
whereas all good men were much offended heerewith, his holiness would set to
his helping hand, that it might be reformed and redressed. Now sir what can you
answer to all these reasons? all these laws and precedents? If for this
offense of thine, or rather thy seducers offense (to whom indeed it is more
proper) I have bin grieved, am I grieved (think thou) without cause? or is
it natural affection, flesh and blood that makes me beyond measure passionate?
or is it my gross ignorance that knows not in the matter of religion what
appertains to piety, honesty, or any duty else of great importance. I trust
you are informed and thoroughly resolved by this time, that be the religious
life good and commendable in it self, or newter and indifferent, it ill
beseemed you, (son) in making choice of either so contemptuously to have
neglected me. For were it indifferent there is a necessity would have forced you
to obedience, but had it been good and commendable, it would never have proved
the worse for my approbation. Indeed if none could be sound now a days, that
would offer their children to the Churches service, and if it were absolutely
necessary that young men should minister in the Church, in Gods name then let
religion be privileged to rob and steal our children from us (as thou wast
from me) it skills not much by force or policy: but whereas there is such a
number of Churches and Abbeyes, can any man say, that there is not plenty
enough to supply such places but if (and speak what may be spoken for the
contrary) the vow which children make, be good and justifiable, without the
parents leave, yet, me seems somewhat should be left unto their disposition,
wherein they should bear some stroke, as peradventure; to make choice of one
Abbey before an other, for their children to be professed in; and if there be no
remedy but that parents must besosleightly put by, when the question stands
betwixt them and religion, yet me thinks twere well, that some few relics
should still remain of that ancient duty and reverence, which God and nature
prescribed for parents. But the case is far otherwise now, for it comes so
short to the business in hand, that parents in any law, should be
relinquisht and destituted of their children, that even they which have written
in an high style for commendation of the solitary life (as most monks have
done) confess that children may be dismissed out of their cloister, and
disclaim their vow, to be attendant on their parents. And that this vow is of
a greater obligation, and much more ancient for continuance, then any other vow
whatsoever, it may be proved out of S. Gregory Nazianzene, for he being sent
for to come home from his monastery by his Father, because he was now grown
old, and not able to follow suites in law, which came thick upon him by
reason of a public charge wherein he bare office, and having lost also his
other son Caesarius, forsook his Covent, made speed to return to his Father
Gregory, and his mother Nonna, which then to their farther grief, had buried
their daughter Gorgonia: the same appears in like manner out of Heliodor of
whom we spoke before, who left to be an Eremite, and left S. Hieromes company,
to assist and help, not his Father, but his sister and nephew. S. Austin holds
the same opinion or whosoever be the Author ad fratres in Eremo; and will have
no man enforced to return back again to his monastery, except his Father be
dead first. S. Hierome in an Epistle to Fabiola, speaks of this kind of
desertion, where he says, how many monks have been cause of destroying
their own souls, in compassionating the estate of their Fathers and Mothers?
in which words he does not simply condemn such desertion, so it be without
frawde, to do true service to their parents, but his meaning is, that many
monks pretending such manner of excuses, do thereby hazard the utter undoing of
their own souls. Wherefore put case I had been content and willing to have
made thee a Jesuit, could thou yet find in thy heart, now at this time
especially, to leave me, and live apart from me? could thou hold it for a
religious course, to lurk in a Cell, (nay a Gayle for that is Baccharius word
for a monastery) where thou might sleep in a whole skin at pleasure, and
understand of our civil broils or rather lawless open robberies, that ruin
and lay wast thy flourishing native country? nay could thou forbear, to
repair home with all speed possible, to be helpful, attendant and serviceable
unto us, to allay and mittigate the surpassing sorrow, whereof every good man's
heart is sensible in this our countries combustion? But perhaps they detain
thee by violence; Well, be it so, for I am more prone to think so, then to
imagine thou art clean past all sense of humanity, al good nature and gentry,
chiefly at this time and season, when Princes ioyn issue in arms, not for
matter of religion, but for a soueraign monarchy? but laying aside all
prerogative of antiquity in our present question (if you be so pleased) let us
argue the matter by reason a while: whereas it is so that you account marriage
for a Sacrament and for precedence in time, the first that ever was ordained in
this world, how happens it, that you give it no better entertainment amongst
you? does it not necessarily follow, that Church and commonwealth both must
partake evident loss, when either it is so prophanelie polluted, or not set
by? when it is bereft of the fruit of marriage, which are children, robbed of
those sweet love pledges? when you untie that knot, which is knit faster, than
any knot that fire and water, bed and board, or plighting of troth, did ever
tie? Why, who will take any pains to bring up his children, if after all his
care taken, and costs bestowed, when all is done, they must be another man's
children, and not the fathers? If by direct authority or indeed rather by a
kind of Mahometicall immanitie, they be hald and lugd away from their parents?
if as soon as our wives be brought to bed, and delivered, the shaueling that
first can seize upon our child must have him for his pains? he that robs a
father of his child, a foster father of his foster son, or a master of his
man, in the opinion of Tertullian writing against Marcion, commits an act of
impiety against God, sins against the parent, wrongs the foster father, and
trespasses against the master. To take away filial obedience, and duty to
parents, is to grub up nature by the root, to windshake all that commerce and
society, which is between man and man, even from the very ground plot, and
foundation. Obedience says S. Cyprian in his book of the abuses of the world,
is the mother of all government, then farewell all government when parents
cannot be obeyed. And because paritie in honor and estate breeds quarrels and
contention, therefore has God made many forms of government, many of
subjection. As husband and wife, father and son, old and young, bond and free,
Prince and subject, master and scholar, as S. Chrysostom speaks in his
Epistle to the Romans, take away these subordinations, and there is no
company or society of men can possibly continue. Nay the conclusion cannot
be gainsaid, do but once prove disobedient to parents, and presently you fall
down headlong into Atheism, or heresy, as it is delivered with common
consent, by all sorts of men, as well Christians as heathen; and by name, by
Plutarch in his book de fraterna amicitia, and by the author of a late
discourse. But it were better to hear the Authors in their own words. There is
no man says Plutarch, who though he think otherwise in his conscience, would
not affirm and in words maintain that the Gods ought to be worshipped in the
first place, our parents next to them, and that in so large an extent, that
nothing can be so acceptable to the Gods as when they see children repaying
some usury for their parents bounty, whereas they be not able to pay the
principal. Contrariwise that there is no argument so pregnant, to convince them
of Atheism, as by despising their parents, and trespassing never so slightly
against them. The other vtters himself thus; What makes young men now a days
so soon turn schismatiques? why says he, they do not honor their parents, as
they ought to do, as if he should have said, it is no great wonder if they
forsake the faith and religion of their forefathers, when they once take a
taste of contempt and disobedience against their natural parents. Good God, if
such disloyal behavior might either be endured or commended, what? ought this
to be a time for such tolleration? to be a place? where there is scarce to be
found any one, who by some means or other claims not an immunity, from doing
his duty to God, or the king, or the Magistrate, or lastly to his Elders? why
but all these preheminences are to be found in a father, all these relations of
duty in a son. Is it then honest and convenient for me, to show any
countenance to him that besides his graceless neglect: of me, is so
ungrateful and irreuerent? In the latter days (as S. Paul writes to
Timothy) there shall come perilous times, men shall be lovers of themselves,
blasphemers, disobedient to fathers and mothers ungrateful, without natural
affection. Should thou now reply and say, why but good father, after I am
once professed into religion, I will honor you a great deal the more, I will
esteem of you much more highly than before? I tell thee again, duty can never
spring from disobedience. Besides all this, I would feign know what color can
be given, why those grand school men, as Scotus, Durandus, Aquinas, Paludanus,
Dominicus Soto, and many mo, should enter into such serious and deep disputes,
whether the children of infidells might lawfully be baptized against their
parents will, Thomas absolutely holds that they may not, and says that the
Church never permitted such a baptism, (not Pope Siluester to Constantine the
great, nor S. Ambrose to Theodosius) And yet to make no question of maintaining
this doctrine, that our children may bind themselves by a religious vow, though
the father never so much protest against it. Doubtless if the parents be
christians, the general tenent is, that they may be forceably compelled, to
initiate their children in the same religion: but if it be but a particular
rule or covent of Regulars, then they hold they may not, for that is left to
their own discretions. As for example, they say, that to be baptized in the
faith of Christ it is sufficient for any: but to be of Dominickes or S. Austins
order, it is not necessary. But were a man Jew or Gentile, Saint Thomas
peremptorily denies, that either in case he be of full age, he should be
violently constrained, or being under years, his parents should be forced to
yield their consent to his baptism. And the Toletane Council, whereof you
shall find Record in Gratians decrees, at the five and fortith distinction,
in the chapter of the Jews. And Gregory the great, writing to Virgilius and
Theodorus, Bishops of France, in his five and fortieth Epistle; If you list
(says he) you may speak him fairelye, and ask him whether he likes better,
to live in a cloister, then in the world at large. But I pray you tell me, is
it force or fair dealing when such a promise as this has been extorted from
him (as to say I will be a monk) afterward to keep him a close prisoner, or
to lead and drive him up and down, to the intent he shall never light upon his
father or any one of his kin, which might perchance divert him from that
resolution, which was put upon him before he came to years, or in the prime
of his youth when (as Cicero says) counsel and discretion is at the weakest?
What sir, are you become an other Hercules Prodicus, that must forsooth by and
by be wise, as soon as you are eighteen? what, is there no other course to be
held, for the furnishing of Churches and monasteries, but that children do
presently abjure their parents sight and company, as if they were banished
persons? the Church of God never allowed of this course, but in the children of
the Jews, which was to this end, that having been once voluntarily Christened;
they might not afterward relapse into their parents errors. And so it is in
the Canon. But for one Christian brother to suspect or distrust an other, in
such a case as this, of infidelity or Iudaisme, what manner of strange Gospel
were this? how can any man make this good, that whereas by the discipline of
the Church, Priests may not bless the married couple, if they be not given by
their parents, a Bishop of one Diocese may not give orders to one of another
Diocese, without the leave of his Diocesan: A Clarke that is a forrayner may
not be entertained to serve any where, without letters dimissoryes, or a
certificat from him that made him: but our sons and our daughters may make
vows, which shall be admited and accepted of, though there beno giving no
commending of them, no aprouing of them? yet the vovv must still be observed.
And now at length to conclude all this discourse, whatsoever has been
hitherto alleged against thee, reckon thou of it at thy pleasure, make as
light account of my fatherly authority as thou will, or rather as they please
to command thee to make, with whom thou live in so blessed and deifying an
estate, yet such as be well borne, not of base kind, will be of a different
opinion from thee, and think it built upon four maine columns. The
principal pillar which bears up the fabrique, is the indignation of the living
God, that esteems a wrong done to parents as done to himself. How ill is the
report of him that forsakes his Father (says the Preacher,) and accursed of
God that is bitter to his mother? The second is the judgment of banishment,
which the Father pronounces against him for his undutifulness. Depart from
me, come no more in my sight: for albeit, (as it should appear) thou have but
a very mean conceit of it, yet very certain it is, that Gods severity is
then greatest, when a Father will not vouchsafe to see his child, a Prince not
deigne to look upon his subject, nor admit them unto their presence, which
ought to be most gladsom and cheerful to them. I said Gods severity was then
greatest, for is it not so that everlasting damnation of body and soul
consists only in the depriuatio^ of Gods blessed vision, and Gods blessed
(...) the wages and reward that man, can (...) for from God? And men use to be
must severe likewise in this kind. For David punished Absalon so. Whereupon,
after two years space continued in this disgrace, oh (says he) if my Father
be yet mindful of mine iniquity, good ^oab, be thou a suitor for me rather
that he will kill me? And did not Ma^lius Torquatus proceed in the self same
manner against Iunius Syllarius of whom the Macedonians complained of for
briberie and extortion. Because thou have not (says he) demeaned thy self so
in thy office, as thy worthy Ancestors have done before thee, therefore I
forbid thee from henceforth ever to approach unto my pre^^^^ surely he was not
able to endure the (...), he slew himself. The like is reported of Marcus
Scaurus, that when his son returned dishonourably out of the field, sent him
this message, since I hear you are turned base coward, let me never see you
more. The message delivered, he fell upon his sword with more valor and
resolution than ever before he had used against the enemy. And Augustus Caesar,
when one Tarrius his son was conuented before him for the like offen^^, gave
this judgment, that he was punished with a witness, whom the Father would not
endure once to look upon. Plato yields an excellent reason, if there be no
shrines in the Temple so beautiful in the eye of the children to look on as
the portraiture of the Gods, no treasure so precious at home, as their aged and
impotent parents, what worse punishment can you devise against them, than so to
doom them, as to deprive them of their presence, that be the patro^ gods of
their family, and never to be suffered, to touch or to kiss them more. If
banishment seem only in this respect, a punishment intolerable, because it
depriues us of beholding certain fair buildings, and tomb stones, which we
term monuments, what then may we think of such a punishment as whereby we shall
be bard, of their sweet company that erected such sumptuous buildings for us,
nay erected us? that would possess no more then what they might leave after
their death to us their children. Now concerning the King, Augustus Caesar's
example is at hand to prove it, who upon a revenge to punish the Athenians
chose rather to ariue at the Island Aegina which was much out of his way, than
(as he thought) to do them so much honor as to be seen at Athens. The like
example have we in Marcus Antonius the Philosopher that travailing by Antiochia
would not be entreated to come into the City, because they took part with
Auidius. Fresh also is the example of Charles the eight our French king, who
coming with his army back from the expedition of Naples, and rendering his
devout thanks to God at S. Denis for the victory, would not so much as endure
to come at Paris, because they aided him not in his iourny for the wars. The
third sort of animaduersion which parents, ever had, and ever shall have, (as
says S. Ambrose in that one book of his which he entitles de benedictionibus
patriarcharum,) is that blessing which they give to their kind and dutiful
children, and that curse which they denounce against unnatural and disobedient
ones. The fathers blessing (as Elias the Cretia^ speaks) is the wages of
obedience, and therefore S. Gregory that had bin dutiful to his father,
desires not that he would give him his blessing, but that he would pay it him
for his service. But be it that thou value it not at any such high rate as
Jacob, or Joseph, or Nazianzene, yet I would wish thee stand in fear of the
curse. Remember Noah's sons, think on that which is written in Deuteronomy and
is second in order of the Comminations: Cursed is he that honors not his
father and mother and all the people shall say Amen. Meditate of that which is
written in the third of Ecclesiasticus, the blessing of the father establishes
the houses of their children, but the curse of the mother roots up the
foundatio^s: al which you shall find in Antiochus who was himself a Monk, in
his 108. Homily. Look upon that in Homer his 2. Odissea, where Telemachus
stands fearful to cast his mother out of doors, because of her curse. Call
to thy remembrance that which is written by Plato, in the eleventh book of his
Laws, how that all those imprecations of Oedipus, Amynter, and Theseus uttered
against their children, were entertained and ratified in heaven, oh there is
nothing in the word says he so pernicious to a child, as the curse of his
father! Lastly bethink thou of that which is in Suidas of Leo^tius a Bishop of
Tripoly, whose prayer God almighty heard, and that was, that his son might
rather die, than that he should see him live a graceless and dissolute life.
The last remedy that parents may use in this case, is the help of the Judge
who upon complaint made, severely censures or imprisons the offenders, and
gives such judgment against them, as the parents do require. For so Alexander
the Emperor answered one that made the like petition. All hard measure, and
rigor would be used toward a saucie and malepart son, though should a
stranger so offend, the offense I grant were not so heinous. And what is the
reason? mary sir, that children might not so much as conceive, that there was
any thing in the world more sacred or inviolable than their parents. It is
storied in the French Chronicles in the reign of King Lewis, that Steven Boley
Provost of Paris, caused one to be hanged, for no other reason, but that his
mother had complained of him, that do what she could do, he would never leave
filching and stealing. To conclude then, that may be spoken to you which Ierom
has in his book de honora^dis parentibus, you that will be fathers hereafter,
you must honor your fathers, and love your mothers with a tender affection,
that your wives after you be married may deserve to be mothers also. It remains
therefore that if you have a purpose to free thy self from these punishments,
which as thou see all laws do inflict upon a disobedient son, and if this
discourse of mine, work so well with thee that thou come to thy self again,
if there be any goodness in thee, bethink thee of thy duty in Gods name,
presently and out of hand thus do, fulfill Christ's parable in me, let us make
good cheer my friends and be merry, for this my son was dead and is alive,
lost and now is found. The Church has her arms always open, to embrace the
penitent soul (it is true) yet this merciful disposition they first learned
from parents. Before thou can cry, I will hear thee, come then and we will
be friends, return unto me and all shall be well: and now will I use the like
words to thee as S. Bernard did to his nephew: Against all due proceeding of
law, I, that have been wronged, do yet withdrawn mine action, I have bin
offended and despised, yet sue I unto the scorner, I have been injuriously
dealt withal, yet I offer ame^ds unto him that did me the wrong, and in few
words, I seek unto him that first should have besought me. Or to use the speech
of Caesarius, in his 30. homily, he that is the judge entreates to pardon the
prisoner: but if they buz into thy head that when thou shall once be five and
twenty years old, then may thou be at thy own disposition, and after that
age who can challenge thee for thy disobedience. I tell thee son, and tell
thee again, though natural duty, can neither be dayde nor yeard, nor
determined by age, or eldership, nay the more years the more duty, (whereupon
Plato used more severity to one of thirty, then to one under five and twenty,
for being undutiful to his father, (I tell thee I say, had thou been with
me, and so continued to the term of lawful age, by that time, in likelihood I
might have yielded somewhat unto thee, especially if I had seen a suitable
disposition in thee for that kind of life, whereunto thou wast addicted. But
now the case is far otherwise, for as a woman child under the age of twelve
being forced and abused, by any man, and she after the rape committed abide
with the rauisher, can not be said all that while to be of years, and there is
anullity in the marriage, if any such be contracted between them, as it has
been decreed in the Council of Trent: so what age soever thou come to in that
place, where thou art kept prisoner much against my will, think not that any
such advantage acrues thereby, but may be void, and frustrate, to the intent
either of law or religion, notwithstanding all your prescription. Would you
have a reason? why sir, because the Jesuits seduced thee, and still deteine
thee, with an evil conscience, and a sca^dalous example. The excuse will not
serve to say, the action was the holy ghosts, for surely the holy Ghost has
no hand in a sinful action. As stolen goods till they come home to the true
owner, be still felonious, so be the never so old, and continue with them never
so long, thou shall never be better then felons goods. Is there any tells thee
the contrary? tell him again, and say that Plato said it, Sir you are much
scanted in the faculties and power of your understanding: For there is neither
God nor good man were he well in his wits, that would enueagle any man's child
to be undutiful to his parents.

FINIS.

