illustrated border framing title page Matthew the evangelist, represented by a
winged man or an angel HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a
crown John the evangelist, represented by an eagle with outspread wings,
holding a pencase and inkwell in its beak emblematic representation of Faith
with a flaming sword and shield FIDES
emblematic representation of Humility holding a lamb HVMILITAS
Mark the evangelist, represented by a lion blazon or coat of arms Luke the
evangelist, represented by an ox ARTICLES to be enquired in the visitation, in
the first year of the reign of our most dread Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by
the grace of God, of England, France, and Irelande, Queen, defendour of the
Faith. etc.

Anno domini. 1559.



Articles.
1 Residencie. FIrst, whether any Parson, Vicar or Curat be resident
continually up on his benefice doing his duty in Preaching, reading and duly
ministering the holy Sacraments.

2 False miracles. Item whether in their Churches and Chapels, al images,
shrines, all tables, candlestickes trindelles. and rolls of wax, pictures,
paintinges, and all other monumentes of feigned and false miracles,
pilgrimages, Idolatry, and superstition, be removed, abolished, and destroyed.

3 The Lords prayer. Item, whether they do not every holy day when they have
no Sermon, immediatelye after the Gospel, openly, plainly and destinctlye,
resite to their parishioners in the pulpit, the Lords prayer, the belief, and
the ten commandments in English.

4 To bring up youth. Item, whether they do charge Fathers and mothers,
masters, and gouerners of youth, to bring them up in some virtuous study and
occupation.

5 Curates. Item whether such beneficed men, as be lawfully absent from their
benefices, do leave their cures to a rude and unlearned person, and not to an
honest, well learned, and expert Curat, which can and will teach you wholesome
doctrine.

6 Reading the scripture. Item, whether they do discourage any person from
reading of any part of the Bible, either in Latin or English, and do not
rather comfort and exhort every person to read the same at convenient times,
as the very lively word of God, and the special food of man's soul.

7 Tauernes and gains. Item whether Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and other
ministers, be common haunters and resorters to Tauernes or Alehouses, giving
themselves to drinking, ryoting, and playing at unlawful games, and do not
occupy themselves in the reading or hearing of some part of holy scripture,
or in some other Godly exercise.

8 Preachers. Item, whether they have admitted any man to preach in their
cures, not being lawfully licensed thereunto, or have been licensed accordinglye.

9 Superstition. Item, whether they use to declare to their parishioners, any
thing to the extolling or setting forth of vain and superstitious religion,
pilgrimages, relics, or images, or lighting of candels, kissing, kneeling, or
decking of the same images.

10 Register. Item, whether they have one book or register kept, wherein they
write the day of every wedding, christning and burying.

11 Obedience Item, whether they have exhorted the people to obedience to the
Queens Majesty, and Ministers, and to charity and love one to another.

12 The Sacrament. Item, whether they have admonished their parishioners, that
they ought not to presume to receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, before they can say perfectly the Lords prayer, the articles of the
faith, and the ten commandments in English.

13 Hospitality. Item, whether they be resident upon their benefices, and
keep hospitality or no. And if they be absent, and keep no hospitality,
whether they do relieve their parishioners, and what they give them.

14 Reparations. Item, whether Proprietaries, Parsons, Vicars, and Clerks,
having Churches, Chapels, and Mansions, do keep their Chauncels, Rectories,
Vicarages, and al other houses appertayning to them in due reparations.

15 Prayer in English. Item, whether they do counsel or move their
parishioners, rather to pray in a tongue not known, then in English, or put
their trust in any certain number of prayers, as in laying over a number of
Beads, Beads.
or other like.

16 Diffamed persons. Item, whether they have received any persons to the
Communion, being openly known to be out of charity with their neighbors,
or diffamed with any notorious crime, and not reformed.

17 Pore men's box. Item, whether they have provided, and have a strong chest
for the poor men's Box, and set and fastened the same in a place of the
Church, most convenient.

18 Testament. Item, whether they have dilligently called upon, exhorted and
moved their parishioners, and especially when they make their testamentes to
give to the said pore men's box, and to bestow that upon the poor, which
they were wont to bestow upon pilgrimages, pardons, trentalles and upon other
like blind devotions.

19 Sick. Burial. Item, whether they have denied to visit the sick, or bury
the dead being brought to the Church.

20 Simonie. Item, whether they have bought their Benefices, or come to them by
fraud, guyle, deceit, or simonie.

21 Adulterers. Item, whether they have given open monition to their
parishioners, to detecte and present to their Ordinary all adulterers and
fornicatours, and such men as have two wives living within their parishes.

22 Church goods. Item, whether they have monished their parishioners openly,
that they should not sell, give, nor otherwise alienate, any of their Church
goods.

23 Many benefices. Item, whether they, or any of them do keep mo benefices
and other Ecclesiastical promotions then they ought to do, not having
sufficient licenses, and dispensations thereunto, and how many they be, and
their names,

24. Communion. Item, whether they minister the holy Communion any otherwise,
then only after such form and manner, as it is set forth by the common
authority of the Queens Majesty and the Parliament.

25 Letters of the word or preaching. Item, whether you know any person within
your parrishe or else where, that is a letter of the word of God to be read in
English, or sincerely preached in place and times convenient.

26 Goersout of the Church. Item, whether in the time of the Letanye, or any
other common prayer, in the time of the Sermon or Homily, and when the Priest
reads the scriptures to the parishioners, any person have departed out of
the Church without just and necessary cause, or disturb the Minister
otherwise.

27 Church money. Item, whether the money coming and rising of any cattle,
or other moveable stocks of the Church, and money given and bequeathed to the
finding of Torches, Lights, Tapers, or Lamps, not paid out of any lands
have not been employed to the poor men's chest.

28 Keepers of the Church money. Item, who has the said stocks and money in
their hands, and what be their names.

29 Contempt of Priests. Item, whether any indiscreet person do uncharitably
contemn and abuse Priests and Ministers of the Church.

30 The kings Grammar. Item, whether there be any other Grammar taught in any
school within this Diocese, then that which is set forth by the authority
of king Henry the eight.

31 The time of Service. Item, whether the service of the church be done at due
and convenient hours.

32 Talkers in the Church. Item, whether any have used to commune, iangle, and
talk in the church in the time of the prayer, reading of the Homily,
preaching, reading or declaring of the scripture.

33 Heresies. Item, whether any have wilfullye mayntayned and defended any
heresies, errors, or false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ and holy
scripture.

34 Drunkards. Item, whether any be common drunkardes, swearers or blasphemers
of the name of God.

35 Adulterers. Item, whether any have committed adultery, fornication or
incest, or be common bawdes, or receivers of such evil persons, are
vehemently suspected of any of the premises.

36 Brawlers. Item, whether any be brawlers, slaunderers, chyders, scholders,
and sowers of discord between one person and an other.

37 Sorcerers. Item, whether you know any that do use charms, sorceries,
inchauntmentes, inuocations, circles, witchcrafts, soothsaying, or any like
crafts or imaginations invented by the Devil, and specially in the time of
women's travail.

38 Pulpittes. Item, whether the Churches, Pulpittes, and other necessaries
appertaining to the same, be sufficiently repaired, and if they be not, in
whose default the same is.

39 Resorters to other Churches. Item, whether you know any, that in contempt
of their own parish Church do resort to any other church.

40 Inholders. Item, whether any Inholders, or Alehouse kepers, do use commonly
to sell meat and drink in the time of common prayer, preaching, reading of
the Homilies, or scripture.

41 Deuorse. Item, whether you know any to be married within the degrees
prohibited by the Laws of God, or that be separated or divorced without the
degrees prohibited by the law of God, and whether any such have married again.

42 Privy contractes. Item, whether you know any to have made privy
contractes of matrimony, not calling two or more witnesses thereunto, nor
having thereto the consent of their parents.

43 Banes. Item, whether they have married solemnelye, the banes not first
lawfully asked,

44 Executours. Item, whether you know any executors, or administratours of
dead men's goods which do not only bestow such of the said goods, as were
given and bequeathed, or appointed to be distributed among the poor people
repayring of high ways, finding of poor scholars, or marrying of poor
maidens, or such other like charitable deeds.

45 Images. Item whether you know any that keep in their houses any undefaced
Images, Tables Pictures, paintinges, or other Monumentes of feigned and false
miracles, pilgrimages, idolatry and superstition, and do adore them, and
specially such as have been set up in Churches Chapels and Oratories.

46 ^ookes. Item, what books of holy Scripture you have delivered to be
burnt, or otherwise destroyed, and to whom ye have delivered the same.

47 Bribes. Item, what bribes the accusers, promoters, persecuters,
Ecclesiastical Judges, and other the Commissioners appointed within the
several Diocese of this Realm, have received by them selves or other of
those persons which were in trouble, apprehended or imprisoned for Religion.

48 Loss of goods. Item, what goods moveable, lands, fees, offices, or
promotions, has been wrongfully taken away in the time of Queen Mary's
reign, from any person which favored the Religion now set forth.

49 How many burnt. Item, how many persons for religion have died by fire,
famine, or otherwise, or have been imprisoned for the same.

50 Certificat of the dead. Item, that you make a true presentment of the
number of all the persons which dyed within your parishes, sithen the feast of
saint John the Baptist, which was in the year of our Lord God a thousand five
hundred, fifty and eight, unto the same feast last past, making therein a
plain distinct declaration, how many men, women, and men children the same
were, and the names of the men.

51 Secret Masses. Item, whether you know any man in your parish,
secretly, or in unlawful conuenticles, say, or hear Mass, or any other
service prohibited by the law.

52 False rumors. Unlawful books. Item, whether you know any person in your
parish, to be a slaunderer of his neighbors, or a sower of discord between
party and party, man and wife, parents and their children, or that has
invented, bruted, or set fourth any rumors, false and seditious tales,
slanders, or makers, bringers, buyers, sellers, kepers, or conueighers of any
unlawful books which might stir and provoke sedition, or maintain
superstitious service with in this realm, or any ayders, counsailers,
procurers or maintainers thereunto.

53 Patron. Tithes. Vacation. Item, whether the Church of your parish be now
vacant or no, who is the patron thereof, how long it has been vacant, who
does receive the tithes oblations, and other commodities, during the time of
the vacation, and by what authority, and in what estate the said Church is,
at this time, and how long the Parson or Vicar has had that benefice.

54 Minstrelles Item whether any Minstrelles, or any other persons, do use to
sing or say any songs, or Ditties that be vile or unclean, and specially in
derision of any godly order now set forth and established.

55 Letanie in English. Item whether the Letany in English with the Epistle
and Gospel which was by the Queens highness proclamation willed to be read to
the people, were put in use in your Churches, and if not, who were the letters
thereof.

56 Distinct reading. Item, whether the Curates and Ministers do leisurely,
plainly, and distinctly read the public prayers, Chapters and Homilies, as
they ought to do.

God save the Queen.
JMPRINTED AT London, by Christopher Barkar, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


