ARTICLES to be enquired of in the visitation of the most Reverend father in
God, MATTHEW, by the sufferaunce of GOD Archebyshop of Canterbury, Primate of
all England, and Metropolitan, In the year of our Lord GOD, M, D.LXIII.

M A

Imprinted at London by Reginalde Wolf, Anno Domini M.D.LXIII.

Articles to be enquired of, in the Uisitation of the most Reverend Father in
God, MATTHEW, Archebyshop of Canterbury, In the year of our Lord, GOD
M.D.LXIII.
IN primis, whether Divine service

Item, whether you have in your parrysh churches all things necessary and
requisite for Common

Item, whether your Prestes, Curates, or ministers do use in the time of the
celebracio^ of divine service to wear a surplesse, prescribed by the Queens
majesty's Injunctions, and the book of Common prayer. And wheather they do
celebrate the same divine service in the chauncelor in the Church, and do use
all Rites and orders prescribed in the book of Common prayer, etc. and none
other.





them self, and presume to exercise any kind of mynistery in the church of
God, without imposition of hands and ordinary authority. Whether their
church or chapel be served with any readers, Or whether any Minister do
remove from any other diocese to serve in this, without leters testimonial of
thordinary from whom he came, to testify the cause of his departinge thence,
and of his behavior. Or any being once priest or minister, that does not
minister, or frequent and resort to the Common prayer now used, and at times
appointed communicate. And whether any such do go and boste himself like a
lay man.

Item, whether your Parsons and Uicars be residente

Item, whether the communion table be decentlye

Item, whether any of your ministers does or has And whether you do hear or
know any that does use to say or hear the private Mass, or do use any
other service then is prescribed by thee laws of this Realm.







Item, whether your ministers keep their registers

Item, whether your Parsons and Uycars have

Item, whether the lay people be diligent in coming by the Churchwardens of
the forfets.







the goods, of those which be dead, without authority: any executors yt
have not fulfilled their testators will, specially in paying of legacies given
to good and godly uses, as to the relief of pouerte, to poor scholars,
orphans, high ways, marriage of poor maidens, and such lik. Whether your
Hospitals and Alms houses be justly used, according to the foundation and
ancient ordinances of the same. Whether there be any other placed in the^ then
poor, impotent and needy persons, that has not other wise where with or
whereby to live.

Item, whether there be any which of late has

Item, whether there be any moni or stoke appertaining any stock of tattel or
grain appertaning to your churches, be decayed: by whose negligence, and in
whose hands.







brauler, barrator or scowlder, or any other yt gives occasion of the breach
of Christian love and charity amongst you: Any that stubburnly refuse to
conform them self to unity and good Religion: Any that bruteth abroad rumors
of the alteration of the same, or otherwise that disturbeth good orders, and
the quietness of Christ's Church and Christin congregation.

Imprinted at London by Reginalde Wolf, Anno Domini M.D.LXIII.


