Articles to be enquired of by the Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of
every Parish and Chapelry within the Deanery of (...) in the year of our Lord
God (...) And presentment to be made by them containing a particular Answer to
every Article.
The form of the OATH taken by the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you and every of you shall duly consider and
diligently inform your selves of these Articles given you in charge, and that
all favor, hatred, hope, fear, or any other corrupt affection set aside, you
shall present all and every such person now or lately of your Parish, which
have committed any offense comprised in any of these Articles, or which ar^
vehemently suspected or defamed of any such offense. Wherein you shall deal
according to an upright conscience, neither presenting nor sparing t^ present
any person contrary to truth, So help you God, and his faithful promises in
Jesus Christ.

WHETHER have you in your Church all things requisite for the common Prayer,
(...)ing (...)rch.
and due administration of the Sacraments? Canon.
And namely a fair Bible, the Book of common Prayer, 80. 81. 82. 83. 84, 70.
lately ordained only to be used? A Font of sto^e set up in the ancient usual
place? A decent Communion table standing upon a frame, with a carpet of silk
or some other seemly stuff, and a fair linen clot^ to lay thereon at the
time of communion? A fair communion Cup with a cover of silver: a decent
Pulpit with a cloth and Cushion for the same: a conueni^t seat to read service
in: a comely large surplice: a strong chest for alms for the poor with three
locks and keys, and another chest for keeping the Ornaments of the Church and
Register book: and whether have you a Register book in parchment of all
Christnings, Weddings, and Burials: and whether is the (...)ept according to
the Canons, and a transcript thereof brought yearly into the Office of
principal Registrie of the L. Archb. of Canterbury? And whether (...) Minister
upon every Sunday read the names of such as have been christened, married, or
buried in the week before?

2 Whether your Church, 85. 88.
Chancell and Churchyard be kept in good reparation (...) without: whether any
profanation be or has been used in them: or whether any man has incroached
upon them: And whether your personage or vicaridge ^ thereunto belonging, be
likewise maintained in sufficient reparations: If not, through whose default,
and what is the defect?

3 Whether have you a Terrier of all the gleabe Lands, 87.
Meadows, Gardens, ^des, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and portions
of Tithes lying within or without your Parish which belong to your Parsonage or
Vicaridge, and in whose ha(...)oeth it remain: If not, you shall together with
your Minister make diligent inquiry of all the premises, and exhibit with
your next presentment a true note of them in (...)ent subscribed with your
hands, specifying how they are buttalled or bounded, and in whose occupation at
this present they are?

4 Whether divine service be said in your Church by your Minister distinctly
and re^erently, (...)ing (...)
upon Sundays and such holydaies as are appointed to be observed by the book
of Common prayer, 14. 15. 58.
and their Eues, and upon Wednesdaies and Fridaies at emuenient and usual
times: and whether does he in ministering the Sacraments, solemnizing of
matrimony, visitation of the sick, burying the dead, churching of women, or
any other rites and offices of the Church, use the forms of prayers prescribed
in the same book, without any omission or addition: And whether does he read
the book of Canons once yearly, and wear a Surplice according to the Canon?

5 Whether does your Minister solemnly give warning to his Parishioners for the
holy Communion, 22. 64. 67. 84. 66. 26. 27. 28. 29. 62. 63. 68. 69. 62. 100.
and for all Holydaies and fasting days? And whether does he visit the sick
when he is thereunto desired to comfort and instruct them? And whether does he
offer to confere with Recusants in your Parish if there be any? And whether
does he admit to the holy Communion any notorious offenders, schismatickes, or
strangers of other Parishes; or r^iect any, who are not by presentment or
public scandal infamous for some notorious crime? And whether does he admit
any Father to be Godfather to his own Child; or any to be Godfathers and
Godmothers which have not received the holy Communion? or does not use the
sign of the Cross in baptism? or does baptize in any basin or other vessel,
and not in the usual Font? or does baptize any children that were not borne
within the Parish? And whether does he marry any in any exempt place, or
without banes published three, several Sundaies or Holidaies, or without a
sufficient dispensation or license, or without license in times prohibited,
albeit the banes were thrice published, or not betwixt the hours of 8. and 12.
in the forenoone, or if the parties be under the age of 21. years, before
their parents have signified their consent unto him? or whether does he refuse
to Christen, or to bury, or does defer the same longer then he should? and
whether by his default any Child has died without baptism in your Parish?

6 Whether does he preach, minister the communion, baptize children, 70. 71.
72. 73. 74.
or church women (unless in case of necessity) or in any case without a
faculty solemnize matrimony in private houses? Or does keep or suffer any
Fastes, Prophesies, Exercises, or Exorcismes without lawful authority; or
does hold or suffer any private conuenticles? And whether does he frequent
Tauernes: Alchouses, or any place suspected for incontinencie, or does table or
ledge in any such house? or is he a common gamester at Dice, Cards, Tables,
or any other unlawful game; a Swearer or Drunkard, or one that applies not
himself to his studi^ Or does not use decency in his apparel? Or is
otherwise offensive or scandalous to his function and ministry?

7 Whether is he continually resident upon his benefice, 45, 46. 47. 74.
and how longtime has he been absent from the same? (in case he belicenced
to be absent) whether does he cause his cure to be sufficiently supplied? And
whether (if he be allowed a Preacher) does he preach one Sermon every
Sunday? or (if not so allowed) does procure monthly sermons, and read Homilies?
And whether (not being so allowed) does he expound any Scripture, or suffer
any man to preach in your Church, whom you have not well known, to have been
sufficiently licenced, and who has not first subscribed his name, together
with the day when he did preach, and who was not soberly and decently
apparrelled?

8 Whether does your Preacher and Lecturer read divine service, 56. 55.
and minister the Sacraments twice a year at the least, in his own person?
And whether does he use the form of prayer before his sermons for the Kings
most excellent Majesty, exhorting the people to obedience to his Majesty, and
other Magistrates in authority under him?

9 Whether does your Minister on Sundaies and Holidaies Catechize the Youth and
ignorant persons in your Parish? 59.
And whether does he admit any women to be churched who were begotten with
child in adultery or fornication, without license from the Ordinary And
whether does he in the Rogation days use the perambulation of the circuit of
the Parish?

10 Whether does he every six months denounce in his Parish Church all such
o(...)rish as do persevere in the sentence of excommunication, not seeking to
be absolved? And whether has he admitted any such excommunicate person to
the communion, (...) Church without certificate of his absolution? And whether
does he or any of your Parish familiarly frequent the company of any such
excommunicate person?

11 WHether any of your Parishioners do not cause their (...) (...)rs.
and Apprenti^es, to come to (...) upon Sundaies and Holidaies to be instructed
in the Catechism by them? 59.
or whether any of them refuse to come? or if they come, refuse to be
instructed? And what be the names of them so not causing, or refusing?

12 Whether any of your Parishioners, 13. 14. 18.
or other strangers soiourning, lodging, or commonly resorting to any house
within your Parish, above 16. years of age, do wilfully or negligently absent
themselves from your parish Church, upon Sundays or Holidayes at Morning or
Evening prayer? or who come very late to Church upon the said days? or who
depart from Church before service be finished? or who do not reverently
behave themselves during the time of divine Service, devoutly kneeling at such
times as the general Confession of sins, the Letanie, the ten Commandments,
and all prayers and Collects are read? or who do use any gameing or pastime
abroad, or in any house, or do sit in the street, or Churchyard, or in any
Tavern, or Victualing-house upon any of those days in time of divine Service?
or who have quarrelled, brawled, or used violence to any person within your
Church, or Churchyard? or who has used filthy or profane talk, or other
rude and in modest behavior there?

13 Whether there be any of, 21. 22, 28.
or within your parish being sixteen years of age, and upwards, that do not
receive the holy Communion in your Church thrice in this year at the least,
and chiefly once at Easter? And whether any of your parish does not devoutly
kneel at the receiving thereof? And whether does not your Minister receive it
himself on every day that he administreth it to others, and use the words of
institution at every time that the bread and wine is administered? And whether
do your selves diligently observe your office, in marking what persons of or
within your parish offend against this, or the next precedent Article, and in
due presenting their names?

14 Whether any in your parish have a Preacher to your Parson, 46. 10. 57. 9.
10. 100.
Vicar, or Curate, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to other
places to hear other Preacher? And whether any having been ordained Priest,
or Deacon, has relinquished the same, and be ^en him to a course of life as a
lay man? Or whether any not being in Orders, does openly read Common prayer, or
execute any ministerial duty in your Church, and what be their names?

15 Whether there be any that do publicly or privately speak against the
Book of Common prayer, deprauing the same or any thing therein contained? or
against any of the said Articles of Religion agreed upon in. Anno 1562? Or
against the Kings Royal Supremacy i^ causes Ecclesiastical? Or against any
of the rites or ceremonies of the Church of England? Or against the government
of the said Church of England under the Kings most excellent Majesty, by
Bishops, Archbishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and other Officers in the same,
affirming, that the same is repugnant to the word of God, and that the said
Ecclesiastical Officers are not lawfully ordained? Or whether there by any
that be Authors or maintainers of Scisme, or frequenters of any private
conuenticles or meetings? or that be, or are suspected to be Anabaptists,
Libertines, Brownists, of the Family of Love, other herefie orschisme, And
what be their names?

16 Whether do you know any Schoolmaster that does teach, 77. 48. 79.
or Curate that does read divine Service within your parish, without license
of his Ordinary under his Scale? And whether does not such Schoolmaster
instruct his scholars in the Catechism, and teach them he grounds of
Religion, and bring them to Church to hear divine Service and Sermons? And
whether is he a common officer or artificer, or any ways reprooueable in life?
And whether is your Clarke also allowed by the Ordinary? And whether does your
clarke serve more cures than one? And whether do they demean themselves
according to their se^rall duties?

17 How many Midwiues have you in your Parish which do exercise that office?
how long ^ue they so done, and by what authority? Also how many in your Parish
do practice as Physicians or Chirurgions? how long have they so done, and of
what skill are they reputed their profession?

18 Whether do you know any persons that do administer the goods of the dead
without la^full authority? 86.
or suppress the last will of the dead? or withold any stock of the Church,
or any Legacies given to godly and charitable uses? and whether is the alms of
the Church faithfully distributed to the use of the poor? And whether the late
Churchwardens have given a just account before the Minister and Parishoners at
the end of their year, according to the Canon?

19 Whether do you know in your parish any common swearers, drunkards,
blasphemers, any ^oniacal persons, or vsuerers contrary to the Statute 37. of
Henry the eight, any soothsayers, charmers, fornicators, adulterers,
incestious persons, brawlers, common slanderers of the neighbors, raylers,
scoulds, silthy and lascivious talkers, sowers of discord between neighbors, or
any that receive or lodge incontinent persons, or harbor women with child
whi^ be unmarried, conueying or suffering them to go away before they have
made satisfaction to the congregation? or any persons that are by common fame
noted or vehemently ^ected of any of these crimes? or that being heretofore
suspected, or presented for any of these faults, have for that cause departed
out of your Parish, and are now returned again?

20 Whether there be any persons within your Parish that be married within the
prohibited ^grees of consanguinitie or affininitie, or their old wives or
husbands being yet alive, albeit divorced from them; 99. 57.
or that being lawfully married, do live scandalously apart, (...) married in
times prohibited, or without banes three several Sundays or Holy Days
published, having no sufficient license or dispensation for the same? And
whether there ^ar do communicate, or cause their children to be baptized in
other Parishes abroad, or keep their children unbaptized longer then is
convenient?

21 Whether any woman deliured of child in your Parish, in time convenient
after child-b^th, do not come to the usual place in the Church to give God
thanks? And whether does your Clarke lap a Cushion at the said usual place?
117.
whether any inhabitant within your Parish does detain the Clerks wages,
duties for bread and wine, or any other Church duties? present particularly
what be their names, and what and how much those duties be?

22 Whether any person in your Parish do exercise any Trade, Handicraft, or
bodily labor or do buy and sell, or keep open Shops or warehouses upon any
Sunday or Holiday, by themselves, their servants or Apprentizes, or have
otherwise profaned the said days contrary to the order of the Church of
England? And whether there be any Inne-keepers, Alehouse-keepers, or
Victualers, that permit any persons in their houses to eat, drink, or play at
any games during the time of divine Service, or Sermon in the forenoone or
afternoon upon those days?

23 Whether do any in your Parish familiarly frequent the company of
excommunicate persons? And whether does your Minister or any of your Parish
without consent of the Ordinary, cause any to do penance, or to be censured
or punished by any Vestry meetings, or otherwise by their own anthoritie, or
do, or have taken any money for any crime or matter punishable by the
Ecclesiastical Law? who have been so punished? in what manner? an^ upon what
cause?

24 If any one or more of you do know, 113.
or have heard of any fault inquired of in these Articles or of any other
crime, the reformation whereof belongs to the spiritual iurisdicton,
happening from the (...) day of (...) that then you do inform one another
thereof, and you shall likewise present the same by virtue of your oaths?

25 The Minister of every Parish may join in every presentment with the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, 118. 118.
who if they will not present, the Minister may himself present to the said
Commissary or his Surrogat such faults or crimes abouesaid, as shall be thought
to require due reformation.

You are charged to specify the fault or crime, proper name and surname, trade
or addition, and place of dwelling of every person presented. And to bring your
first general presentment upon all these Articles into Bow Church in
Cheapeside in the forenoone between the hours of viij. and xi. of the clocks,
the 28. day of (...) next coming. And your last general presentment on the
(...) day of (...) then next following, or else they and there to appear
personally, to show the cause of your default therein. Intimating further, that
you may (besides those general days.) present offenders, as often as you shall
think meet, as by the Canonis prescribed, Unto the said Deane, Commissary, or
his deputy, sitting at any time in the open court.


