Injunctions GEVEN BY THE Queen's Majesty. Anno Domini MD.LIX. The first year
of the reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

Iniu^ctions given by the Queen's majesty, as well to the Clergy, as to the
laity of this Realm.
THe Queen's most royal Majesty, by thaduyse of her most honorable
counsel, intending thaduauncement of the true honor of almyghtye God, the
suppression of superstition, through all her highness Realm and dominions,
and to plant true religion, to thextirpacion of all hypocrysye, enormities, and
abuses (as to her duty apperteineth) does minister unto her loving
subjects, these godly Injunctions hereafter following. All which Injunctions,
her highness wylleth and commands her said loving subjects, obediently to
receive, and truly to observe and keep, every man in their offices, degrees,
and states, as they will avoid her highness displeasure, and the pains of the
same hereafter expressed.
THE first is, that all Deanes, Archedeacons, Parsons, Usurped and foreign
aucthoriti^^
Uycars, and all other, Ecclesiastical persons, shall faithfully keep and
observe, and as far as in them may lie, shall cause to be observed and kept
of other, al and singular laws and statutes made for the restorynge to the
Crown the aunciente jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical, and
abolyshyng of all forrayne power repugnaunte to the same. And furthermore all
Ecclesiastical persons, having cure of soul, shall to thuttermost of their
wit, knowledge and learning, purelye, sincerely, and without any color or
dissimulation, declare, manifest and open, four times every year at the least,
in their Sermons and other collations, that all usurped and forrayne power,
having no establyshemente nor ground by the law of God, is for most just
causes taken away and abolyshed. And that therefore no manner of obedience or
subjection within her highness realms and dominions, is due unto any such
forrayne power. And that the Queen's power within her Realms and dominions, is
the highest power under God, to whom all men within the same Realms and
dominions, by Gods laws, owe most loyalty and obedience, before and above al
other powers and potentates in earth.

Besides this, to the intent that all superstition Images
may vanyshe away, they shall not set forth or extol the dignity of any
Images, Relics, or miracles, but declarynge the abuse of the same, they shall
teach that all goodness, health and grace, ought to be both asked and looked
for only of God, as of the very aucthour and geuer of the same, and of none
other.

A sermon every month.
one Sermon every month of the year at the least, wherein they shall purelye
and sincerely declare the word of God: and in the same exhort their hearers
to the works of Faith; as mercy and charity, works of Faith.
specially prescrybed and commanded in scripture, and that works devised by
man's fantasies besides scripture:As wandryng of Pylgrymages, setting up of
Candels, works of ma^s devise.
praying upon bedes, or such like superstition, have not only no promise of
reward in scripture for doing of them: but contrarywyse great threatenynges
and maledictions of God, for that they be things tendyng to Idolatry and
superstition, which of al other offenses, God almyghtie does most deteste and
abhor, for that the same diminishe most his honor and glory.

Item that they the persons above rehearsed Quarter Sermon or Homely
being licenced specially thereunto, as is specified hereafter, or else shall
read some Homely prescrybed to be used by the Queen's authority every Sundaye
at the least, unless some other preacher sufficiently licensed as hereafter
chance to come to the paryshe for the same purpose of preaching.

Item that every holy day through the year The pater noster, Credo and ten
commandments.
they shall immediately after the Gospel, openly and plainly recite to their
parishioners in the Pulpitte, the Pater noster, the Creed, and the ten
commandments in English, to the intent the people may learn the same by
heart, exhorting all parents and householders, to teach their children and
servants the same, as they are bound by the law of God, and conscience to
do.

Also that they shall provide within three months next after this visitacion,
The Bible and Paraphrasis.
at the charges of the paryshe, one book of the whole Bible of the largest
volume in English. And within one.xii. months next after the said visitacion
the Paraphrases of Erasmus also in English, upon the Gospelles, and the same
set up in some convenient place within the said Church that they have cure
of, whereas their Parysshyoners may most commodiously resort unto the same,
and read the same, out of the time of common service. The charges of the
Paraphrases shall be by the person or proprietarie and paryshyoners borne by
equal portions. And they shall discorage no man from the readyng of any part
of the Bible, either in Latin or in English, but shall rather exhort every
person to read the same, with great humility and reverence, as the very
lively word of God, and the specyal fode of man's soul, which all Christian
persons are bound to embrace, believe, and follow, if they look to be
saved: whereby they may the better know their duties to God, to their
Sovereign Lady the Queen, and their neighbor, ever gentely and charitablye
exhortyng them, and in her Majesty's name, strayghtly charging and commaundyng
them, that in the readyng thereof, no man to reason or contend, but quietlye to
hear the reader.

Hauntyng of Alehouses by Ecclesiastical persons.
then for their honest necessities, haunt or resort to any Tauernes or
Alehouses. And after their meats, they shall not give the^ selves to drynkyng
or riot, spendyng their time idelly by day or by night, at dyse, cards, or
tables playing, or any other unlawful game. But at all times as they shall have
leisure, they shall hear or read somewhat of holy scripture, or shall occupye
them selves with some other honest study or exercise, and that they always do
the things which apperteyne to honesty, and endeavor to profit the common
wealth, having always in mind that they ought to excel all other in purity
of life, and should be examples to the people, to live well and Chrystyantly.

Prea^hers not licensed.
to be sufficientlye lycensed thereunto by the Queen's Majesty, or the
Archebyshoppe of Caunterburye, or the Archebyshoppe of york, in either their
prouynces, or the Bishop of the Diocese, or by the Queen's Majesty's
visitours: and such as shall be so lycensed, they shall gladly receive, to
declare the word of God, at convenient times, without any resystaunce or
contradiction. And that no other be suffered to preach out of his own cure or
paryshe, than such as shall be lycensed, as is above expressed.

Also if they do, or shall know any manne within their paryshe, or else where,
that is a Letters of the word.
to be readde in English, or sincerely preached, or of thexecution of these
the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions, or a fawter of any usurped and forrayne
power, now by the laws of this Realm iustelye rejected and taken away,
Fa^^^^rs of the usurped power.
they shall detecte, and present the same to the Queen's Majesty, or to her
counsel, or to the Ordinarye, or to the Justice of peace next adioynyng.

Also that the Parson, Uycar, or Curatte, and paryshyoners of every paryshe
within this A Regeste^.
shall in their Churches and Chapels keep one book or Regester, wherein they
shall write the day and year of every wedding, Chrystenynge, and Buryall,
made within the Paryshe, for their time, and so every manne succeadynge them
likewise, and also therein shall write every persons name that shall be so
wedded, chrystened, and buried. And for the safe keeping of the same book, the
Paryshe shall be bound to provide of their common charges one suer coffer with
two locks and keys, whereof the one to remain with the Parson, Uicar, or
Curate, and the other with the Wardens of every paryshe Church or chapel
wherein the said book shall be laid up, which book they shall every Sundaye
take forth, and in the presens of the said Wardens or one of them, write and
record in the same all the weddynges, chrystenynges, and buryalles made the
whole weke before. And that done, to lay up the book in the said coffer, as
before. And for every time that the same shall be omitted, the party that shall be
in the fault thereof, shall forfeit to the said Church.iii. s. iiii. d. to be
employed, the one half to the poor men's box of that Paryshe, the other
half toward the repair of the Church.

Furthermore, because the gooddes of the Distribution of the.xl. part.
nothing is less seen then the poor to be sustained with the same: All
persons, Uicars, Pentionaries, Prebendaries, and other benefyced men within
this Deanrye not being resydente upon their benefices, which may dispend
yearly twenty pound or above, either within this Deanery, or else where, shall
dystrybute heareafter among their poor parisshioners or other inhabitauntes
there, in the presence of the church wardens or some other honest men of the
parish, the fortye part of the fruits and revenues of their said benefice,
least they be worthily noted of ingratitude, which reserving so many parts to
them selves cannot vouchsafe, to impart the forty portion thereof emonge the
poor people of that parish, that is so fruitful and porfytable unto them.

12 And to the intent that learned men may herafter spring the more for
thexecucion of the premises, Exhibition for scholars.
every person, vycar, clearke or beneficed man within this Deanery, having
yearly to dispende in benefices and other promocions of the church an hundredth
pounds, shall give.iii.li.vi. s. viii. d. in exhibicion to one scoler in any
of the universities, and for as many.C.li. more, as he may dispend, to so many
scholars more shall give like exhibicio^ in the university of Oxford of
Ca^bridge, or some gramer schole, which after they have profyted in good
learning, may be parteners of their patrones, Cure and charge, as well in
preaching as otherwise in execution of their offices, or may when neade shall be
other wise profit the common weal, with their counsel and wisdom.

13 Also that all proprietaries, persons, vicars, and clearkes having churches,
The fifte part for reparations.
chapels or ma^sions within this deanery shall bestow, yearly hereafter upon
the same mansions or chaunselles of their churches, being in decay, the fifth
part of that their benefices, till they be fullye repaired and shall always
keep and maintain in good estate.

Readinge of the Injunctions.
14 Also that the said persons vicars and Clearkes shall once every quarter of
the year read these Injunctions given unto them, openly and deliberatly
before al their parishioners, at one time or at two several times in one day,
to thentent that both they may be the better admonyshed of their duty, and
their said parishioners the more moved to follow the same for their part.

Payments of Tithes.
15 Also forasmuch as by laws established, every man is bound to pay his
tithes, no man shall by color of duty omitted by there curattes, deteine
their tithes, and so requite one wrong with another, or be his own Judge: but
shall truly pay ye same, as he has been accustomed to their persons, vicars
and Curates, without any restrainte or diminucion. And such lack and
defaulte as they cane Justly find in their persons and Curattes, to call for
reformacyon thereof, at their ordinaries and other superiors, who upon
complaynte and dew proffe thereof, shall reform the same accordingly.

The new Testamente and paraphrasis.
16 Also that every person, vicar, Curate and Stipendary priest, being under
the degree of a master of art, shall provide, and have of his own within
three months after this visitacion, the new testament both in latten and in
English with paraphrases upon the same, conferryng the one with the other. And the
bishops and other ordynaryes by them selfs or their officers in their synodes
and visitacions, shall examyne the said ecclesiastycal persons, how they
have profyted in the study of holy scripture.

17 Also that the vice of damnable dyspayre, Comfortable Sentences for the syck.
may be clearly taken a way, and that firm belief, and Steadfast hope may be
surely conceived of al their parishioners being in any danger, they shall
learn and have always in a redynes, such comfortable places and sentences of
Scripture, as do set forth the mercy, benefits and goodness of almyghtye god,
toward all penytente and beleauynge persons, that they may at all times when
necessity shall require. promptly comfort their flock with the lively word
of god, which is thonely stay of man's conscience.

18 Also to avoyde all contentyon and strife Procession to be left.
which heretofore has rise^ among the Queen's maiestyes subjects in sundry
places of her realms and dominions by reason of fond Curtesy, and chalengynge
of places in processyon: and also that they may the more quietly hear that
which is said or song to their edifiyng, they shall not from henceforth in
any paryshe Church, at any time use any procession about the Church or
Church yard, or other place, but immediately before the time of communion of
the Sacrament, the priests with other of they quyre, shall kneel in the
mids of the Church, and sing or say plainly and distintly the letany which
is set fourth in Englysh with all the Suffrages following, The letanye.
to thintente the people may hear and answer, and none other procession or
Letanye to be had or used, but the said Letanye in English, adding nothing
thereto but as it is now appointed. And in Cathedral or Collegiat churches,
the same shall be done in such places and in such sort, as our commissioners
in our visitacion shall appoint. and in the time of the letanye of the common
prayer of the Sermon, and when the priest reads the scripture to the
parisshioners, no manner of persons without a Just and urgent cause shall use
any walking in the church, Le^ bearinge of divine service.
ne shall depart out of the church, and all ringinge and knollynge of belles
shall be utterly forborne for that time, except one bell in convenient time to be
ronge or knowled before the Sermon. But yet for the reteyning of ye
perambulation of the Circuites of paryshes, they shall ons in the year at the
time accustomed with the curate and the substancial me^ of the parish, walk
about their paryshes as they were accustomed, and at their return to the
church make their common prayers.

19 Provided that the curate in their said common Perambulation of parishes
perambulatyons used heretofore in the days of rogations at certain convenient
places shall admonyshe the people to give thanckes to god in the beholdynge of
gods benefittes for thencrease and abundance of his fruits upon the face of
therth, with the saying the.103. Psalm Benedic anima mea. etc. or such like,
at which time also the same minister shall Inculke there or such Sentences.
Cursed be he which translateth the bounds and dolles of his neighbor, or
such other order of prayers as shall be hereafter appointed.

20 Item all the Queen's faithful and loving subjects shall from henceforth
celebrate and keep their holly day, Spendinge all the holy day.
according to gods holy will and pleasure: that is in hearing the word of
god red and taught: in private and public prayers: in knowledginge their
offenses to god, and amendment of the same, in reconcylinge their selfs
charitablye to their neighbors, where displeasure has been, in often times
receauinge the communion of the very body and blood of Christ, in visityng of
the poor and Sick, in using all sobernes and godly conversation: yet
notwythstandinge all persons vicars and Curattes, shall teach and declare unto
their parysshioners, that they may with a safe and quiet conscience after their
common prayer in the time of harvest, labor upon the holly and festival
days, and save that thing which god has sent. And if for any
Scrupulositie, or grudge of Conscience, men should superstitiously abstain
from working upon those days, that then they should grievously offend and
displease god.

21 Also forasmuch as varyaunce and contention is a thing that most
displeases god, Open contenders to be reconciled openly.
and is most contrary to the blessed communion of the body and blood of our
Savior Christ, Curates shall in no wise admit to the receauynge thereof any of
their cure or floke, which be openly known to live in sine notoriouse without
repentance, or who has maliciously and openly contendyd with his neighbor,
onles the same do first charitably and openly reconcyle him self again,
remittynge all rancoure and malice, whatsoever controuersye has been between
them, and nevertheless, their just tytles and ryghtes, they may charitably,
prosecute before such as have aucthority to hear the same.

Contemners of laudible Ceremonies.
22 Also that they shall instruct and teach in their cures, that no man ought
obstinatlye and malitiouslye, break and vyolate the lawdable Ceremonies of the
Church commanded by public aucthorytye to be observed.

The abolishement of things supersticio^^.
23 Also that they shall take away, utterly extyncte and dystroye all shrynes,
covering of Shrynes, all Tables, candelstykes, tryndalles, and rolls of wax,
pictures, payntinges, and al other monumentes of feigned miracles, Pilgremagies,
Idolatry and supersticyon, so that there remain no memory of ye same in
walls, glasses, wyndowe or else where within their churches and houses,
preserving nevertheless or repayuynge both the walls and glase windous. And
they shall exhort all their paryshyoners to do the like within their several
houses.

The pulpit.
24 And that the Churchwardens, at the common charge of the paryshyoners in
every Church, shall provide a comely and honest Pulpet to be set in a
convenient place within the same and to be there semely kept, for the
preachinge of gods word.

25 Also they shall provide, The Cheste for the poor.
and have within three months after this visitatyon, a strong cheste with a
hole in the upper part thereof, to be provided, at the cost and charge of the
paryshe, having.iii. keys, whereof one shall remain in the custody of the
person, vycar or Curate, and the other two in the custodye of the
Churchwardens, or any other two honest men, to be appointed by the paryshe from
year to year, which cheste you shall set and fasten in a most couenient
place, to thentent the parishioners should put into it their oblacyons and
alms for their poor neighbors. And the person vicar and Curate, shall
diligently from time to time, and specially when men make their Testamentes,
call upon, exhort and move their neighbors to confer and give, as they may
well spare, to the said cheste, declairynge unto them, whereas hertofore they
have been dilygent to bestow much substance otherwise than god commanded,
upon pardons, Pilgremages Trentalles, deckynge of images, offering of
Candelles, geuynge to friars, and upon other like blind devotions: they ought
at this time to be much more ready to help the pore and neady, knowing that to
releue the pore is a true worshippinge of god, required earnestly upon pain of
everlasting dampnation, and that also, whatsoever is given for their comfort,
is given to Christ him self, and so is accepted of him, that he will mercifully
reward the same with everlasting life. The which alms and devotion of the
people, the kepers of the keys, shall at times convenient take out of the
cheste and distrybute the same in the presens of the whole paryshe or six of
them to be truly and faithfullye delivered to their most nydie neighbors, The
distribution of the Alms.
and if they be provided for, then to the reparacion of high ways next
adioyninge; or to the poor people of such parishes nere as shall be thought
best to the said kepers of the keys. And also the money which ryseth of
fraternities, guildes and other stocks of the church (except by the queen's
majesty's authority it be otherwise appointed) shall be put into the said
cheste, and converted to the said use, and also the rentes of lands, the
proffit of Cattaile, and money given or bequethed to obbittes and diriges, or
to the finding of torches, l^ghtes tapers and lamps, shall be converted to the
said use, saving that it shall be lawful for them to bestow part of the said
proffittes upon the reparation of the said church, if great need require, and
where as the paryshe is very poor, and not able otherwise to repair the same.

Simony.
26 Also to avoid the detestable sin of Symonye because byinge and Sellinge
of benefices is erecrable before god: therefore al such persons as bye any
benefices, or come to them by fraud or deceit, shall be deprived of such
benefices; and be made unable at any time after, to receive any other
spirytuall promotion. And such as do sell them, or by any color do bestow them
for their own gain and profet, shall lose their right and title of patronage,
and presentment for that time, and the gift thereof for that vacation, shall
apperteyne to the Queen's Majesty.

Also because through lack of preachers in Homelies to be read.
the people continue in ignorance and blyndnesse, al Persons, Uicars, and
Curates, shall read in their Churches every Sunday, one of the Homelies which
are and shall be set forth for the same purpose, by the Queen's authority in
such sort as they shall be appointed to do in the preface of the same.

Also whereas many indiscret^ persons do Contempt of ministers.
uncharitably contempne and abuse priests and ministers of the Church,
because some of them (having small learning) have of long time favored fond
fantasies, rather than Gods truth: yet forasmuch as their office and function
is appointed of Godde: the Queen's Majesty wylleth and charge all her loving
subjects, that from henceforth they shall use them charitably and reverently,
for their office and ministracion sake, and especially such as labor in the
setting forth of Gods holy word.

Item although there be no prohibition by was by act of Parliament in time of
our dear brother king Edward the syxt, made lawefull, whereupon a great
nombre of the clergy of this realm were their married, and so yet continue, yet
because there has grown offense, and some slander to the Church, by lack of
discrete and sober behauyoure in many mynysters of the Church, both in
chosyng of their wives, and in indiscreet living with them, the remedy whereof
is necessary to be sought. It is thought therefore very necessary, that no manner
of priest or deacon, shall hereafter take to his wife any manner of woman
without the advise and allowaunce first had upon good examination by the
bishop of the same Diocese, and two Justices of peace of the same shyre,
dwelling next to the place where the same woman has made her most abode,
before her marriage, nor without the good will of the parents of the said
woman, if she have any living, or two of the next of her kynsefolkes, or for
lack of knowledge of such, of her master or mastres where she serves. And
before he shall be contracted in any place, he shall make a good and certain proof
thereof to the mynyster, or to the congregation assembled for that purpose,
which shall be upon some holy day where diverse may be present. And if any shall
do otherwise: that then they shall not be permitted to minister either the
word, or the sacraments of the Church, nor shall be capable of any
Ecclesiastical benefyce. And for the manner of marriages of any Bishops, the
same shall be allowed and approved by the Metropolitan of the province, and also
by such commissioners as the Queen's Majesty shall thereunto appoint. And if
any master or deane, or any head of any college, shall purpose to mary, the
same shall not be allowed, but by such to whom the visitacion of the same does
properly belong, who shall in any wise provide that the same tend not to the
hynderaunce of their house.

Item her Majesty being desirous to have Of apparel of ministers.
as otherwise regarded for the worthynesse of their ministeries, and thinking
it necessary to have them known to the people, in all places and assembles,
both in the Church and without, and thereby to receive the honor and
estymation due to the special messengers and mynysters of almyghtye Godde:
wylleth and commands that all Archebyshoppes and Bysshoppes, and all other
that be called or admytted to preaching or mynysterye of the Sacraments, or
that be admytted into any vocation Ecclesiastical, or into any society of
learning in either of the universities, or else where, shall use and wear such
semely habytes, garments, and such square cappes, as were most commenly and
orderlye received in the latter year of the reign of King Edward the syxte,
not thereby meaning to attribute any holiness or special worthynesse to the
said garments. But as saint Paul writes: Omnia decenteret secundi^^ ordinem
fid^t. 1. Cor. 14. Cap.

Heresies.
errors, or false doctrine, contrary to the faith of

Charms.
Item that no persons shall use charms, sorcery, enchauntmentes,
witchcraftes, southsaying, or any like deuelyshe deuyse, nor shall resort at any
time to the same for counsel or help.

Absente from common prayer.
resort to any other church in time of common prayer or preaching, except it
be by the occasion of some extraordinary sermon, in some paryshe of the same
town.

Inholders andalehouses.
preaching, reading of the Homelies or Scriptures.

Images in houses.
Item that no persons keep in their houses any abused images, table, pictures,
payntinges and other monumentes of feigned miracles, pilgrimages,

Disturbers of Sermons or service.
Item that no man shall wyllyngly let or disturb the preacher in time of his
Sermon, or let or discourage any curate or minister to sing or say the divine
service now set forth, nor mock or jest at the ministers of such service.

Rash talkers of scripture.
Item that no man shall talk or reason of the holy scriptures, rashelye or
contentiouslye, nor mayntaine any false doctrine or error, but shall commune of
the same when occasion is given, reverently, humbly, and in the fear of God,
for his comfort and better understanding.

Item that no man, woman, nor child shall be Attendau^ce to the service.
then in quiet attendaunce to hear, mark and understand that is read,
preached, and mynistred.

Item that every Scolemaster and teacher, The Gramer of king Henry the eight.
and continued in the time of king Edward the syxt, and none other.

Item that no man shall take upon him to Allowance of Scolemasters.
but such as shall be allowed by thordinarye, and found mete, as well for his
learning and dexterity in teaching, as for sober and honest conversation, and
also for right understanding of Gods true religion.

Item that al teachers of children shall stir Duty of scolemasters.
now truly set forth by publyke authority.

Item that they shall accustom their scollers Sentences of scripture for
scollers.
as shall be most expedient to enduce them to all godliness.

Item forasmuch as in these latter days Unlearned priests.
being children, and otherwise utterly unlearned, so that they could read to
say mattens and mass: The Ordinaries shall not admit any such to any cure or
spiritual function.

The Cathechisme.
and every second Sunday in the year, hear and instruct all the youth of the
paryshe, for half an hour at the least, before Evening prayer, in the ten
commandments, the Artycles of the belief, and in the Lords prayer, and
dylygentlye examyne them, and teach the Cathechisme, set forth in the book
of public prayer.

The book of the afflicti^^s for religion.
their books, or a true copye of the same, conteynyng the causes why any
person was imprisoned, famyshed, or put to death for religion.

Overseers for seru^^e on the ^^ly days.
and his true relygyon, shall be appointed by the Ordinaries, diligently to see
that all the paryshyoners duly resort to their Church upon all Sundays and
holy days, and there to continue the whole time of the Godly service. And all
such as shall be found slack or negligente in resortyng to the Church,
having no great nor urgent cause of absence, they shall strayghtly call upon
them, and after due monition, if they amend not, they shall denounce them to
the ordinarye.

Inuentories of church goods.
shall deliver unto our visitours the inue^tories of vestmentes, copes, and
other ornaments, plate, books, and specyallye of Grayles, Couchers, Legendes,
Processionalles, Hymnalles, Manuelles, Portuesses, and such like apperteynyng
to their Church.

Item that wekely upon Wenesdayes and Service on wenesdayes and frydayes.
not being holly days, the curate at the accustomed hours of service, shall
resort to Church, and cause warning to be given to the people, by knollyng of
the bell, and say the Letany and prayers.

Item because diverse Collegiate, and also Continuance of syngyng in the church.
there has been lyuynges appointed for the maintenance of men and children,
to use singing in the Church, by means whereof the lawdable science of
music has been had in estimation, and preserved in knowledge: The Queen's
Majesty neither meaning in any wise the decay of any thing that might
conuenientlye tend to the use and contynnaunce of the said science, neither
to have the same in any part so abused in the Church, that thereby the
common prayer should be the worse understand of the hearers: Wylleth and
commands, that first no alteration be made of such assignementes of
living, as heretofore has been appointed to the use of singing or musyke in
the Church, but that the same so remain. And that there be a modeste and
destyncte song so used, in all parts of the common prayers in the Church:
that the same may be as plainly understood as if it were read without
singing. And yet nevertheless for the comforting of such as delight in music,
it may be permitted that in the beginning, or in thend of common prayers,
either at morning or evening, there may be song an hymn, or such like
song, to the praise of almyghtye God, in the best sore of melodye and music
that may be conuenientlye devised, having respect that the sentence of the
hymn may be understood and perceived.

Against sclau^derous and inf^mus words.
there happens discord emonges the people, and thereupon slanderous words
and ^^^linges, whereby charity, the knot of all christian society is losed.
The Queen's Majesty being most desirous of all other earthly things, that her
people should live in charity, both toward God and man, and therein abound
in good works: wylleth and straightly commands al manner her subjects, to
forbear all vain and contencious disputacions in matters of Religion, and not
to use in despite or rebuke of any person, these conuitious words, papyst or
papisticall heretic, scysmaticke, or sacramentary, or any such like words
of reproach. But if any manner of person, shall deserve the accusation of any
such, that first he be charytablye admonysshed thereof. And if that shall not
amend him, then to denounce the offenders to the ordinary, or to some higher
power having authority to correct the same.

Item because there is a great abuse in the Against heretical and sediciouse
books.
which for covetousness chiefly regard not what they print, so they may have
gain, whereby arriseth great dysorder by publicatyon of unfruitful, vain and
infamous books and papers: The Queen's majesty straytly chargethe and
commands, that no manner of person shall print any manner of book or paper,
of what sort, nature, or in what language soever it be, except the same be
first licenced by her majesty by express words in writynge, or by.vi. of her
privy counsel, or bs perused and licensed by the archbyshops of Cantorbury and
york, the bishop of London, the chauncelours of both vnyuersities, the bishop
being ordinary, and the Archdeacon also of the place where any such shall be
printed, or by two of them, whereof the ordinary of the place to be always one.
And that the names of such as shall allows the same, to be added in the end of
every such work, for a testymonye of the allowaunce thereof. And because many
pampheletes, plays and balletes, be often times printed, wherein regard would
be had, that nothing therein should be either heretical, sedicious, or unseemly
for Christian ears: Her majesty likewise commands, that no manner of
person, shall enterprise to print any such, except the same be to him lycenced
by such her majesty's commyssioners, or.iii, of them, as h^ appointed in the
city of London to here, and determine diverse causes ecclesiastical, tending
to the execution of certain statutes, made the last parliament for vnyformitye
of order in religion. And if any shall sell or utter, any manner of books or
papers, being not licensed as is abouesaid: That the same party shall be
punyshed by order of the said commyssyoners, as to the quality of the fault
shall be thought mete. And touching all other books of matters of religyon, or
polycye, or governance, that has been printed, eitheir on thisside the Seas,
or on the other side, because the diversity of the^ is great, and that there
needs good consideration to be had of the perticularyties thereof: her majesty
refers the prohibition, or permission thereof: to thorder which her said
commissioners within the City of London shall take, and notifye. According to
the which, her majesty straightly commands al manner her subjects, and
specially the wardens and company of Stacyoners, to be obedyent.

Provided that these orders do not extend to any profane aucthours, and
works in any language, that has been heretofore commonly received or allowed
in any the vnyuersities or Scoles: But the same may be prynted and used, as by
good order they were accustomed.

Reverence at prayers.
yet all other times, in time of common prayer the same is most to be regarded.
Therefore, it is to be necessaryly received, that in time of the Letanye, and of
all other collectes and common supplicatyons to almighty god, all manner of
people shall devoutly and humblye knele upon their knees, Honor to the name of
Jesus
and give ear thereunto. And that whenever the name of Jesus shall be in any
Lesson, Sermon or otherwise in the church, pronounced: That due reverence be
made of all parsons young and old, with lowlynes of cursey, and vncouerynge of
heddes of the men kind, as thereunto does necessarylye belong, and heretofore
has been accustomed.

Item that all ministers and readers of public Curates to read distinctly.
chapyters and homelyes, shall be charged to read leasurly, plainly and
dystynctly, and also such as are but mean readers, shall peruse over before
once or twyse the chapyters and homelyes, to the intent they may read to the
better understanding of the people, and the more encoragement to godlynes.

An admonition to simple men, deceived by malicious.
THE Queen's Majesty being informed that in certain places of this realm,
sundry of her native subjects, being called to Ecclesiastical ministry in
the Church, be by sinister persuasion, and perverse construction induced to
find some scruple in the fourm of an oath which by an Act of the last
parliament, is prescrybed to be required of diverse persons, for the recognition
of their allegiaunce to her Majesty, which certainly neither was ever ment^^e
by any equity of words or good sense, ca^ be there of gathered: Would that all
her loving subjects should understand, that nothing was, is, or shall be meant
or intended by the same oath, to have any other duty, allegiaunce, or bond
required by the same oath then was acknowledged to be due to the most noble
kings of famous memory king Henry the.viii. her Majesty's father, or king
Edward the syxt, her Majesty's brother.

And further her Majesty forbyddeth all manner her subjects to give ear or
credit to such perverse and malitiouse persons, which most sinisterly and
maliciously labor to notify to her loving subjects, how by the words of the
said oath, it may be collected yt the kings or Queen's of this realm,
possessours of the Crown, may challenge authority and power of ministry of
divine offices in the Church, wherein her said subjects be much abused by
such evil disposed persons. For certeinlye her Majesty neither does, ne ever
will challenge any other authority, than that was challenged and lately used
by the said noble kings of famous memory king Henry the eight, and king
Edward the syxt, which is and was of ancient time due to the Imperyall Crown
of this realm. That is under God, to have the soueraintie and rule over all
manner persons borne within these her realms, dominions, and countries, of what
estate either ecclesiastical or temporal so ever they be so as (...) there
foreign power shall or ought to have any superiority over them. And if any
person that has conceived any other sense of the form of the said oath,
shall accept the same oath with this interpretacion, sense, or meaning; her
majesty is well pleased to accept every such in that behalf, as her good and
obedient subjects, and shall acquit them of all manner penalties contained in
the said act against such as shall peremptorily, or obstinately refuse to take
the same oath.

For the Tables in the church.
Whereas her Majesty understands that in many and sundry parts of the
realm, the Alters of the Churches be removed, and tables placed for
ministratio^ of the holy sacrament, according to the form of the law
therefore provided, and in some other places the Alters be not yet removed,
upon opinion conceived of some other order therein to be taken by her Majesty's
visitours. In thorder whereof, saving for an uniformity, there seems no
matter of great moment, so that the sacrament be duly and reverently
mynystred. yet for observation of one uniformity through the hole Realm, and
for the better imitacion of the law, in that behalf, it is ordered that no
Alter be taken down but by ouersyght of the curate of the Church, and the
churchwardens, or one of them at the least, wherein no riotous or disordred
manner to be used, and that the holy table in every Church be decently made,
and set in the place where the alter stood: and there commonly covered as
thereto belongs, and as shall be appointed by the visitours, and so to stand,
saving when the communion of the sacrament is to be distributed, at which time
the same shall be so placed in good sort within the Chauncell, as whereby the
minister may be more conveniently heard of the communicantes, in his prayer
and ministration, and the co^municantes also, more conveniently and in more
number communicate with the said minister, and after the Communion done, from
time to time the same holy table to be placed where it stood before.

Item where also it was in the time of king Edward the syxt used to have the
sacramental bread of common fine bread: The Sacramental bread.
It is ordered for the more reverence to be given to these holy mysteries,
being the sacraments of the body and blood of our savior Jesus Christ, that
the same sacramental bread be made and formed plain without any figures
thereupon, of the same finenesse and fashion round, though somewhat bygger in
compass and thickenes, as the usual bread and wafer heretofore named
singing cakes, which served for the use of the private mass.

The form of biddinge the prayers to be used generally in this uniform sort.
YE shall pray for Christ's holy catholic church, that is, for the whole
congregation of christen people, dyspersed throughoute the whole world, and
specially for the church of England and Irelande. And herein I require you
most specially to pray for the Queen's most excellent majesty our sovereign
lady Elizabeth Queen of England, France and Irelande, defendour of the faith,
and supreme governor of this realm, as well in causes ecclesyasticall as
temporal.

you shall also pray for the ministers of gods holy word and Sacraments, as well
Archbyshops and bishops, as other pastures and curates.

you shall also pray for the Queen's most honorable counsel, and for all the
nobylitie of this realm, that al and every of these in their calling, may
serve truly and painfully, to the glory of god and edifiyng of his people,
remembringe thaccompte that they must make.

Also you shall pray for the whole commons of this realm, that they may live
in true faith and fear of god, in humble obedyence and brotherly charytie one
to the other.

Finally, let us praise god for all those which are departed out of this life
in the faith of christ and pray unto god, that we may have grace so to direct
our lives after their good example, that after this life, we with them may be
made partakers of the gloriouse resurrection, in the life everlasting.

And this done show the holly days and fasting days.
ALl which and synguler Injunctions, the Queen's majesty mynystreth unto her
clergy, and to all other her loving subjects, straytly charginge and
commaundynge them to observe and keep the same upon pain of depryuatyon,
Sequestratyon of fruits and benefyces, Suspension, excommunication and such
other cohertion, as to ordinaries, or other having ecclesiastical
Iurysdiction, whom her majesty has appointed, or shall apoint for the due
execution of the same, shall be seen convenient. Charging and commanding them,
to see these Iniunctyons observed and kept of al persons, being under their
Iurisdictyon, as they will answer to her majesty for the contrary. And her
highness pleasure is, that every Justice of peace being required, shall assiste
the ordinaryes and every of them, for the due execution of the said Injunctions.

Imprinted at London in Poules Church yard by Richard lugge and John Cawood
prynters to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


