A Mirror to all that love to follow the wars.

Go trudge my little book,
Possess each willing hand,
And give all leave to look,
That seeks to understand,
The travels of thy Knight,
Plead hard to hold his right:
Who finds thee may be bold,
His actions to unfold.
LONDON, Printed by John Woolfe, 1589.

depiction of St George on horseback killing the dragon

To the honorable minded Soldier.
THese late frostie mornings (pleasing my humor) roused me sooner (then of
custom) from my drowsy bed, and with desire (pressing me) I went abroad to
walk.

Where all alone, betrampling frosned ground,
Me thought to hear, some fierce and warlike sound:
For Phoebus then began his course in skies,
On rolling wheels, his fiery wagon flies,
Most swift, to send black Pluto to his bed:
Who giving place, left sky like blood as red.
This made me conceive some discourse within my self, and wondering much,
there came unto mind, how God had pleased to bless, and keep our Queen, and
land from the thundering and tempestious storms of all our mortal, and
furious enemies: with this conceit my joy was much augmented, and did amase me
greatly to consider, how far from common expectation, the late rumors of wars,
and the rage of those which wrought to destroy us, were blown over and gone
from us (with their own confusion:) and we inrest still living (in all
felicity) ruled, and governed by Elizabeth our most blessed, and redoubled
Princes. This seemed to my wonder most marvelous, and more moved me to muse,
when stepping on a piece of broken Ice, I spurned forth a paper (rolled up,)
wherein when I had opened and read, appeared matter sitting my present devise:
which noting, by what chance and fortune, and in what season it came to my
hands, suddenly resolved to have it printed: yet not willing to be over rash in
presenting unto your viewes, what I knew not assuredly true, found after
occasion of conference, with sundry of good judgment, who I knew had long
frequented the Low countries (from whence they lately came) By whom under
standing all was most true, and that they added much more honor unto the Lord
Willughbie, (her Majesty's Lieutenant general) whom this book touches: I
greatly longed (although I never did see his Lordships person) to have his so
noble endeavors (with all speed) published: which as it may worthelie be placed
for a looking glass, to such as would game fame, and honor: So with your good
favor and patience, I will be bold to name this short discourse, A Mirror to
all that love to follow the wars: Whereby if any shall take profit (in
imitating his Lordships so honorable desire) to purchase Englands good, it will
advance him, and his to a never ending fame. And our sacred Prince (by whom we
live most happy) shall reap sweet comfort (in her so blessed days) when her
flourishing realm shall be garnished, and stored with many such Lord Willughbies;
who leaves not both day and night to live in restless toil and travel, and
ioyeth most when news is brought, or means found, how he may best spoil or
encounter her Majesty's enemies. This only do I crave, that with good
construction you will (with favor) read what follows, and yield but due
right, where naught besides is demanded: and when by chance I find the like of
any one of you, I promise to perform as much, (and more) if so your actions
merit, or deserve.

Yours in a greater matter at command, R. B.

P Praise worthy yeald to Mars his noble knight,
E Excellent fame, in world shines passing bright,
R Reporting still his valiant acts and deeds,
E Engraued be his name, so well he speedes,
G Gould is too base, his actions of more price,
R Registered are in hearts, by wars right happy thrice,
I In blessed time his life, did nature frame,
N None knows his deeds, but will confess the same,
E Except they hate, no man dare wrong his name.
L Lord by descent, the honor of his house
O O comfort great, to each good English heart,
R Rejoice, be glad, for now your noble men,
D Disdaines no toil, nor flies from painful smart.
W Will any man deny, that he is wise,
I I think not one mo good acts does devise,
L Let him stand up, when honor bids him rise:
L Let him said I, nay sure he can not fall,
V Upright he stands, whom valiant all men call,
G Give him then duly right, that honored is of all,
H Heap shame on such, as wish thee ill to speed,
B By courage stout, make Princes foes still bleed,
Y Your God, and Queen, will recompense indeed.
A Mirror for Soldiers.
THose which in ought do well, deseru's some praise to gain,
Yet not so much by far, most will presume to think,
As he which still sustaines, a world of endless pain,
And that from task him set, no toil can force to shrink:
Then yield him duly right, whom fame with trump co^mends,
That wisely, and with care, his countries cause defendes.
For learned and discret, most men do know him well,
That he is wise, and just, report has spread the same,
His actions, and deserts, no less abroad can tell,
He serves, and fears high Jove: And reuerenceth his name:
His wit, his will, applied, his learned skill, and all,
That naught but happy hap, to Englandes cause might fall.
His gallant Sprit appeard, when young to Danish king,
Was sent Ambassador, from our most Royal Queen,
How gravely he declarde, and answer back did bring
To trust reposde in him, Not better has been seen
Such care of common cause, did rule his liberal mind,
As king, and people there, most loving he does find.
Since he began to bear, the Martial pearcing Lance,
And to the wars to bend, his well addicted will,
Himself before his men, he ever does advance,
With courage pressed to fight, their minds with joy to fill:
His worthy heart vpstird, Soon breaks their brauest troup,
And Princes rightful cause, makes all her foes to stoop.
He chaseth them in fear, like Lion fierce with rage,
And leaves not off pursuit, till all are pulled down,
His courage makes him often, himself midst them enrage,
And suffers naught unsought, to get or win renown:
Then Willughbie (in right) Lord worthy of great praise,
For Countries cause maintainde, lives happy in these days.
How many men of Rome, And of the Grekish rout,
Had been forgot (now dead) And smothered with the grave,
Of other Nations eke, (that valiant were and stout,
If whilst they lived some friend, their actions would not save:
Or write them straight in books, as now this noble knight,
(For yielding Countries due) deserves in his right.
What man has Parma found, in all this four years war,
More pressed with will (then he) To meet him in the face,
With pain has he not sought, to find him near and far,
And often spoyld his men, with foul, and much disgrace:
He marches on with cheer, his friend Fortune does stand,
And toils like him that has, his Princes cause in hand.
At Zutphen when the Duke, came to relieve the place,
This worthy Willughbie, did serve right well that day,
and surely mounted there, with gallant comely grace,
First brake his lance, and then, with sword he made his way:
Emidst his foes in place, And did bestirre him so,
As he whom Countries cause, made desperate on to go.
He passed on so far, As all began to dread,
If God blessed him not well, he would be take or slain,
His Basses pulled away, his plumes cut from his head,
His Arms broke with blows: yet safe returned again:
He Cariscio took, And prisoner brought away,
So just was Countries cause, that no man could him stay.
No Conuoie could escape, From his victorious hand,
Nor enemy durst approach, nor come before the town,
Of Burgen whilst he ruled, And governor did stand,
They doubted then so much, his greatness of renown:
The garrison him loved, and honored him in heart,
For Princes cause and them, he could endure much smart.
His Challenge nobly made, often times to brauest foe,
Declarde a courage stout, dispising cowardice:
He dared to the fight, (the letters yet to show,)
of Guast Marquis right, that valiant was and wise:
But he refusde to cope, with him most worthy knight,
Who^ countries cause made strong, and doubled force and might.
When th'erle of Leycester, by Princes straight behest,
For England should return, And leave those watres and toil,
Lord Willughbie (as fit) in honor eke the best,
Which on that side remainde, was thrust therein to moyle:
His good endeavors past, to further Countries right,
Made him soon to deserve, favor of every wight.
Confirmed then in place, He entered straight in care,
And with upright respect, regarding his great charge,
To end all troubles first, no travel he did spare,
Those Countries were in pick, and fury went at large:
But such a course he took, the peoples hearts to gain,
To favor common cause, toil was to him no pain.
The Commons were at strife, great discord did appear,
Each town divided was, one Province other hate,
To Arms they run amayn, the helm fierce wrath then stird,
Each thirst for others blood, such was their heavy state:
But he by grave foresight, brake all this frantic fit,
And seeks for Countries good, their humors for to hit.
When States ensconsed round, the town of Medinblicke,
Count Maurice joined with them, In hope poor Snoy to spoil,
Such malice ruled their brains, as none had seen the like,
And for to win the same, they kept a marvelous coil:
Till they with pain and cost, by this brave Lord sustainde,
(For Countries cause in chief) to peace and love were gainde.
When Gertruidenberge, in mutiny discontent,
Put Hollocke forth their gates, with him the Captains all,
Not dreading Count, nor States, for desperate all were bent,
To yield themselves and town, And to the foe to fall:
The States in fear besought, Count Maurice then did pray,
For Countries common good, that he would work a stay.
Wherein, though hard it seemd, to stop so mad a will,
From working some outrage, in hazard of the place,
Which for to gain, the foe, lay pressing on them still,
Not sparing crowns, nor gold, to purchase such a grace:
Yet found this noble Lord, such means as saved all,
And for his Countries cause, wrought to his will their fall.
Him governor they make, Th'inglish Cross they bear,
And English Captains take, to lead there horse and foot,
They chaste the italian troup, of lances, who for fear,
Fled to Breda amayne, his Lordship made them stoop:
And though he did but walk, unarmed out of town,
Yet zeal for Countries cause, them bloody left on ground
When Parma pressed to meet, the Spanish fleet at seas,
Lay houering at Dunkerke, with forty thousand men,
In purpose to invade, and England take with ease,
This lord then well preparde, was ready (even then)
To take the seas in hope, to meet him on the way,
And for his Countries cause, resolved to force him stay.
But when the Dukes great bragges, to smoke and wind did turn,
And when his hope had failde, and spanish fleet was gone,
He bended all his power, to Bargen fast they run,
And against that town he makes, his chiefest force and head:
Thirty thousand at least, his army did contain,
Yet for our Countries cause, our men them do disdain.
At first approach when he, did think to view the town,
With cannon from the wall, amasde was made to stand,
The general did shoot, two pages fell to ground,
Stark dead, such happy luck, went with his noble hand,
Then sallied bravely forth, at Steunberge port our men,
And for their Countries cause, the foe they further send.
No day almost did pass, but horse, or foot went out,
And skirmish brave with foe, to Englandes honor great,
Themselves confessed our men, to be both bold and stout,
And passing fierce (they said) if stirred up to heat:
This noble Lord went forth, as foremost as the best,
His zeal for Countries cause, eclipst his sleep and rest,
And though the town was weak, unfurnished for defense,
When Parma first approcht, and works but new begun,
And though the common voice, was he would never thence,
Until he took the same, no means his rage could shun:
Yet so bestird all men, with wills to save the place,
As care for common cause, made him part with disgrace.
Yet lay he at that 'that siedge, encamped on three sides,
Ten or eleven weeks, his trenches brought hard by,
Not full Calliuer shot, wherein his men abides,
And vantage for to get, in them they close did lie,
But all in vain they spedde, their trenches served for grave,
For countries common cause, our men would not them save.
But when his hope (by force) to take the town was fled,
And that his pains and men, he daily there had lost,
With coin he thought corrupt, brave Grimston, and Red-head,
False Sligo, Simon was, his life the practice cost:
The North sconce by device, or force they think to take,
But zeal for Countries cause, their hearts enforst to ache.
Eight hundred men were slain, and drowned with the tide,
For seeing themselves deceived, with force they straight assail,
Down falls the Pallisad, and long at sault they bide,
But twice put to retire, their purpose thus did fail:
Lord Willughbie himself, with Russell did defend,
And for our Princes cause, their force against them bend.
Thus their devise did prove, a plot their throats to cut,
For they by grave foresight, were drawn to the spoil,
By Grimstone resolute, who forth of sconce was put,
To lead them on like sheep, unto this deadly foil:
Where you may view deceit, caught fast in his own net,
For common zeal, and cause, their devilish plot did let.
I wish no better hap, in treason may succeed,
Then many years have chanst, To men of cursed minds,
Which sought by spightfull drifts, in purpose for to speed,
As Sligo did, but all, too late repentance finds,
Fear naught their treasons then, let courage buckler be,
And in your countries cause, their heart blood you shall see.
Here may you see the works of mighty Jove above,
Here may you eke behold, that foes build in the sand,
God will defend us still, his people he will save,
And against all furious fiends, will fight with strongest hand,
Who will not then rejoice, when wish succeeds to will,
And when their countries good, does grow, and prosper still.
Would god our chiefest men, And men possessed with wealth,
Could frame their minds and means, as Willughbie has done,
To seek to gain renown, by working countries health,
And some frequented toiles, would thereby leave and shun:
Then plenty of our foes, to England soon would seek,
With honor to our cause, for mercy at our feet.
I mean not here such men, which countries cause do love,
Nor those will seem to blame, which have no means, to will,
From these and such as serve, my thoughts I far remove,
And against the rest, which might, with plaints their ears I Will fill,
And cry, and call amain, Let common cause in right,
Be still respected dear, and precious in your sight.
We see the Pope procures, great Princes us molest,
We see what armies huge, are raisde against our Queen,
We see how safe we are, when each will do his best,
And our good God for us, most strong has still been seen:
Let all then courage take, Of what sort or degree,
Our countries cause is just, by proof our foes may see.
Our Princes sacred power, anointed from above,
With hearts, with hands, with lives, and with our dearest blood,
Shall still maintained be, The people fear and love,
Let him in sorrow dwell, that would her not much good:
Long happy have we lived, in her most blessed days,
Her care for subjects all, has much aduanst her praise.
Most mighty Jove, who rules, and guides each living thing,
And that from highest throne, do keep, and bless our Queen
Protect, defend her right, Shame and destruction bring,
Upon her cruel foes, and grant it may be seen.
Throughout the world (O God) that thy strong stretched arm
Herself, her cause, and land, preserues from hurt or harm.
THis knight deserves much more, then here I write,
My verse so blunt, at full, cannot recite,
His wise and worthy acts, what fault you find,
Excuse the same in me, and me you bind,
A friend (in power though small,) this grace yet give
Lord Willughbies deserved good fame may live;
Whose deeds his secret friend, would not leave dead,
which done farewell; I Will go to hide my head,
Yet ere I fly, your pardons gently give,
And then I hope from shame abroad to live.
FINIS.
I. B.


