ARTICLES to be enquired of, within the Diocese of Sarisbury, in the first
visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God, MARTIN by the providence of
GOD, Lord Bishop of Sarum.

HOLDEN In the year of our Lord God, 1619.



AT LONDON Printed by John Beale, 1619.

Articles concerning the Clargie.
WHether has your Minister read the constitutions set forth by his Majesty,
once every year upon some sunday or holidaies in the afternoon before divine
service, according as by the Canons he is bound?

2 Whether does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty King James,
and [for the Queens Maiesty] the Prince and all their royal progeny, giving
unto him such style and title of supreme Governor in all causes and over all
persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, as by law are due unto him,
exhorting their Parishioners to yield him obedience according to the same, and
also in their sermons do pray for all Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, according to the 55. Canon?

3 Whether is the prescript form of divine service used by your Minister upon
sondaies, holidaies wednesdaies and fridaies according to the book of common
prayer? and whether does your Minister duly observe all the orders, rites and
ceremonies prescribed in the said book of common prayer, as well in reading
public prayers, the Letany, as also in administering the sacraments in such
manner and form, wearing the surplesse as by the book of common prayer by law
now established is enjoined?

4 Whether does your Minister administer the holy Communion so often, and at
such times as that every Parishioner, may receive the same at least thrice in
every year, whereof one at Easter, as by the book of common prayer is
appointed: And whether does your Minister receive the same himself on every
day that he administreth it to others, kneeling at the same, and administreth
it to none but such as do kneel at the receiving thereof, and use the words
of the institution according to the book at every time that the bread or wine
is received, in such manner and form as by the Prouiso of the 21. Canon is
directed, or wherein is he faulty, and whether is warning given by him before
hand for the Communion, as the 22. Canon requires.

5 Whether has your Minister admitted any notorious offenders, or
Schismatiques to the Communion, contrary to the 26. and 27. constitutions,
without satisfaction by due course of law before enioined them or rejected any
from the communion who were not by public presentment or other open scandal
infamous and detected of some notorious crime by common fame published in the
parish?

6 Whether the Minister together with the Churchwardens and Quest^en, do take
diligent heed and care, not only that all and every of your own
Parishioners, do re^ue thri^ in every y^re, as aforesaid: but also that ^o
(...) of any other Parish do forsake their own Minister and Parish to receive
with you contrary to the 28 Canon?

7 Whether has your Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen presented unto the
Lord Bishop or his Chancellor within forty days after Easter the names of all
the Parishioners, as well men as women, which being above ^6. years of age,
received not the Communion, at, or about Easter before, according to the 112.
Canon.

8 Whether does your Minister use to sign the Children with the sign^ of the
cross, when they are baptized, according to the Book of common prayer, and
the thirtith Canon? and whether he has deferred, or wilfully refused to
baptize any infant in his Parish being in danger, having been duly informed of
the weakness thereof? and whether the child has dyed in his default without
baptism, contrary to the 68 and 69 Canons?

9 Whether is your Minister continually resident with you upon his benefice? or
for how long time has he been absent? and where is he resident for the most
part? and what other benefice has he?

10 Whether does your Minister, being a Preacher, preach usually according to
the constitutions, either in his own Cure with you once every Sunday, or else
in some other Church or Chapel near adjoining, where no Preacher is,
according to the 45 Canon? or how has he been negligent in that behalf?

11 Whether is your Minister a Preacher allowed? If yea, then by whom? If no,
whether does he procure Sermons to be preached among you once in every month
at the least, by such as are lawfully licenced, according to the 46. Canon? or
does he contribute toward a licenced Preacher, if his living will bear it?

12 Whether has your Minister another benefice? and whether does he supply his
absence by a Curate, that is sufficiently licenced to preach in that cure of
his whereon he himself is not resident? or otherwise in case he does not find
a preaching Minister there, by reason of the smalnes thereof, whether does he
preach at both his benefices ^sually himself, according to the 47. Canon.

13 Whether is your Curate licenced to serve by the L. Bishop of this Dioces,
or by any other, and by whom? Whether does your Minister or Curate serve any
more cures then one, contrary to the 48. Canon: If yea, then what other cure
does he also serve?

14 If your minister be not licenced to preach as aforesaid, whether does he
read Homilies, or rather take upon him to e^pound the s^riptures, either in
his own cure or else where, contrary to the 49. canon: if you the^ you are to
present him, and speri^e the place where he so h^th preached?

15 Whether has any person been admitted to preach within your Church or
Chapel, but such as you have well known to be sufficiently licenced? whom have
you so admitted? you shall present their names: and how often have any such
been admitted to preach, and by whose procurement? And whether have you caused
every strange Preacher, licenced or not licenced, to subscribe his name
together with the day when he preached according to the 50. and 51. Canons? And
if he were l^cenced, then by whom was he licenced? And whether have they, or
any other, preached in your Church not being soberly and decently apparelled,
according to the 74. Canon?

16 Whether does your Lecturer and Preacher read Divine service, and
administer the Sacraments in his own person twice every year observing all the
ceremonies in the book of common prayer established, according to the 56. Canon?

17 Whether does your Minister wear the Surplesse, whilst he is saying
public prayers, and administering the Sacraments? And if he be any Graduate,
whether then does he wear also upon his Surplesse, during the times before
said, such a h^d as by the o^ers of his Uniuersity is agreeable to his degree,
according to the 58. Canon?

18 Whether does your Minister, every Sunday, and Holiday, before evening
prayer, for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth, and ignorant
persons of his parish, in the ten Commandemets, the Articles of Relief and in
the Lords prayer, as also in the Catechism last set forth in the book of
common-praier, whereby the children of the parish may be prepared for
confirmation, according to the 60 Canon.

19 Whether has your Minister without license from the Archbishop, the Bishop
of the Dioces, or his Chancellor, solemnized marriage betwixt any parties, the
Banes not being three several Sondaies, or Holidaies first publis^ed, in time
of Divine Service, in the several churche^ or Chapels of several abode,
according to the book of commonpraier and the 62. Canon? and that also betwixt
the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoone, contrary to the 102. Canon.

20 Whether has your Minister since the last Canons published, solemn nized any
marriage betwixt any persons, being under the age of 21. years, although the Ba^
^e thrice asked, before such time as the Parents has made known unto him
their consents thereunto, contrary t^ the 99. and 100. Canons? I whether has
he married any of another Dioces? who are they? and by what authority and when?

21 Whether does your Minister upon Sondaies at morning prayer de clare unto
the Parishioners what holidaies and fasting days are appointed to be kept, the
week following, according to the 64. Canon, whereby the^ (...) ^e put in mind
to prepare themselves accordingly, and to repair to Church to public prayer
as by law they are bound.

22 Whether does your Minister in the Rogation days use the Perambulation,
move the people to give thanks to God for his benefits, using such Psalms,
Prayers, Homilies as are to that end set forth.

23 Whether does any man (being neither Minister nor Deacon) read common Prayer
openly in your Church or Chapel, or administer the Sacrament of Baptism, or
solemnize matrimony, or take upon him to practice any other ministerial duty
in the Church, that is prescribed to be executed by such as are either
Ministers or Deacons? And what is his name that so does?

24 Whether does your Minister every six Months denounce in his Church all
such of his parish as do persevere in the sentence of excommunication not
seeking to be absolved? And whether has he admitted any person excomunicated
into the Church without a certificate of his Absolution, from the Ordinary or
other competent Judge under seal.

25 Whether does your Minister being a Preacher, endeavor and labor
diligently with mildness and temperance to confer with, and thereby to
reclaim the Popish Recusants in his parish from their errors, if there be any
such there being? And whether is he painful in visiting the sick according
to the book of common prayer and the Canons in that case provided?

26 Whether is your Parson, Uicar, Lecturer, or Curate too much frequent or
over conversant with, or a favorer of Recusants, whereby he may be suspected
not to be sincere in Religion?

27 Whether has your Minister or any other taking upon him the place of a
Minister, preached, baptized children (unless in case of necessity)
solemnized marriage, churched any woman, or ministered the holy Communion in any
private house or houses? If yea, then where? whom when? And how often has he
so offended in any of the premises?

28 Whether has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private
fasts or prophecies not approved and established by law or public authority?
Or has he attempted, upon any pretense either of possession or obsession, by
fasting and prayer to cast out devils contrary unto the 72. Canon?

29 Whether has your Minister or any person or persons within your parish used
to meet in any private house or other place, and to hold private conuenticles
contrary to the 73. Canon? If yea, then you shall present them all and every
one of them.

30 Whether does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his apparel
as by the constitution is enjoined as well at home as when he goes abroad?

31 Whether do you know in your parish any that having heretofore taken upon
him or them the order of Priesthood or of a Deacon, has since relinquished the
same, and betaken himself in the course of his life as a Layman, neglecting
his vocation? If yea, then you shall present his name and the place of his
abode.

32 Whether is your Minister noted or defamed to have obtained his Benefice by
Simonie, or reputed to be an incontinent person, or does keep any man or
woman in his house that are suspected either to be of evil Religion or of bad
life, or himself to be a common drunkard, or to be a common haunter of
Tauernes, Alehouses, or other suspected places, a common Gamester or plaier at
dice or other unlawful games, a common swearer, or notorious person, or faulty
in any other crime punishable by ecclesiastical censures, whereby he is
offensive and scandalous to his function or ministry.

33 Whether does your Minister use the form of thanksgiving to women after
their childbirth, and whether has he admitted any thereunto that was begotten
with child in adultery or fornication, without license of his ordinary? And
whether have any married wives refused to come to Church according to the book
of common prayer to give God thanks after childbirth? If any be faulty
herein you shall present their ^ames.

34 Whether does your Minister baptize any children in any Fason or other
vessel then in the ordinary Font being placed in the Church according to the
81. Canon, or does use to put any basin into it?

35 Item whether is the prescript form of divine service used by your
Minister, upon the eeues of Sondaies and Holidaies according to the book of
common-praier? and does he read the Letany upon every wednesday and friday as
is required by the 15 canon? and whether does every house-houlder of your
parish dwelling within half a mile of the Church come or send thither
accordingly.

36 Item whether has your Minister married any without a ring? has he
admitted any to be Godfather, or God-mother, to any child that has not
received the Communion? does he refuse to bury any which ought to be interred
in christian burial, or defer the same longer then he should, or bury any
in christian burial, which by the constitutions of the church of England ought
not so to be interred.

37 Item whether has your Minister used the prescript form of thanksgiving
for his Majesty's deliverance upon the fifth of August and the fifth of November
according to the ordinance in that behalf.

38 Item whether does your Minister and such others that preach in your church
or chapple, or read any Lecture or Homily, before and at the beginning of
every such Sermon, Lecture or Homily, move the people to join with him in
prayer, in such manner, and form, and to such effect as in the 55. (...), (...)
herein you shall present his (...).

39 Item whether has there been any ^que ^tion bent preacher and preacher, in
your Church or Chapel, touching any Sermons of doctrine, or otherwise form^ly
preached by any other preacher either in your parish church, or in any (...)
chapel ^re ^ing: for the au^ing of offense and (...) that may gr^w thereby.
you are diligently to observe the directions of the 53. (...), and so to
present it.

40 Item whether has your Minister taken especial care to prepare the
children and youth of his p^sh (not being as yet confirmed) to be made ^itte
for confirmation against this next visitation, or in wh^m is the fault.

Articles concerning the Church.
1 Whether have you in your several Churches and Chapels the book of
constitutions or Canons ecclesiastical ready to be read by your Minister
according to his Majesty's pleasure, published by his highness authoriti^
under the great seal of England?

2 Whether is there in your Church or Chapel one parchment Register book
provided for christ^ings; marriages; and burials? And whether is the same duly
and exactly kept according to the constitutions in that behalf provided, and a
transcript thereof brought in y^rely within one month after Easter into my Lord
Bishops Registers office? And whether does your Minister upon every Sunday read
the ^ames of all such as have been married, christ^ed, or buried the week
before?

3 Whether have you provided the book of common prayer lately commanded by his
Majesty's authority only to be used, together with a Bible of the largest
volume, and last translation; the two books of thanks giving for his Majesty's
deliverance upon the 5. of August and fifte of November; and the book of
Homilies, and two Psalters: and whether have you in your Church or Chapel a
Font of stone set up in the ancient usual place, a convenient and decent
Communion Table standing upon a frame with a carpet of ^ke or some other decent
stuff, and a ^aire (...) ^ath to lay thereon at the Communion time? And
whether is the same table then placed in such convenient sort within the
Chancell or Church as that the Minister may be best heard in his prayer and
administration, and that the greater number may communicate? And whether are
the ten Comma^dements set up on the East end of your Church or Chapel where
the people may best se^ and read them, and other Sentences of holy Scripture
written on the walls likewise for the same purpose?

4 Whether have you a convenient seat for your Minister to read Service
(...), together with a comely Pulpit set up in a convenient place with a decent
cloth or cushion for the same, a comely large Surplesse, a fair Communion Cup
of ^uer, and aco^er agreeable for the same, a standing (...) of pewter or purer
metal to put the wine in, whereby it may be set upon the Communion table at
the time of the blessing thereof, with all over things and ornaments necessary
for the celebration of Divine Service and administration of the Sacraments, and
a strong chest for the alms of the poor, with three locks and keys, and
another chest for the keeping of the Ornaments of the Church, and Register
Book?

5 Whether are your Church or Chapels with the Chauncels thereof, and your
Parsonage or Uicaredge house, and all other housing thereto belonging, in good
reparations, and decently and comely kept, as well within as without, the seats
well maintained, your Churchyards well fenced and kept without abuse according
to the 85. Canon? If not, then through whose default and what defects are? All
these things in these Articles, to be prepared, according to the Canons under
the title appertaining to Churches.

6 Item whether have you a terrier of the gleebe-lands, and other rights,
duties and possessions belonging to your Parsonage and Uicaradge? if no, then
to enquire thereof upon the view and knowledge of honest substantial men,
within your parish, together with the advice of your Person and Uicar, and the
same so made to certify and bring unto us, that it may be safely kept in our
Registrie ad perpetuam rei memoriam, at this our first episcopal visitation.

Articles concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
1 Whether do you know or have heard of any payment, composition, or
agreement, to, or with any exercising ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this
Dioces, or any their Registers or officers Ecclesiastical, for suppressing or
concealing of excomunication, or other Ecclesiastical censure, of, or against
any Recusant? what sum of money or other consideration has been received,
or promised by, or to any of them for concealing of them? by whom, and with
whom?

2 Whether any using Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this Dioces, their
Registers, Actuaries, Apparitors, or Summoners, have at any time winked at, and
suffered any adulterers, fornicators, ince^s, or other faults or offenses
presented unto them, to pass and remain unpunished and uncorrected, for
money, rewards, bribes, pleasure, friendship, or any other partial respect?

3 Whether has any exercising ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this Dioces,
or any Register, Apparitor, or Minister belonging to the Ecclesiastical
courts, exacted extraordinary or greater fees then heretofore of late have
been accustomed? and whether is there a Table of the rates of al fees set up
in several courts and offices, or whether they or any of them have taken upon
them the office of Informers or Promoters to the courts, or any other way
abused themselves in their offices contrary to the law and canons in that case
provided?

4 Item, are your Ecclesiastical Judges and their substitutes masters of Arts,
or Batchellors of the Law at the least, learned and practiced in the civil and
ecclesiastical Laws, men of good ^ife and fame, zealouslie affected in
Religion? and just and upright in executing their offices? have they heard any
matter of office privately in their chambers, without their sworn Registers,
or their Deputies presence? do you know, or have you heard of any sums of
money to be taken by them, or any of their officers, of any dying intestate,
upon pretense to bestow the same in pios vsus, and how has the same been
bestowed?

5 Item, what number of Apparitors has every several judge Ecclesiastical,
and wherein, and in what manner is the country ouer-burthened with them? and
whether have they caused, or summoned any to appear in the said courts without
a presentment or a citation first had, or whether have they threatened any to
prosecute them in the said courts, if they would not give them some rewards?
and what bribes in that behalf have they taken?

6 Whether has there been within your several Parishes since the day of last
past any wills proved or administrations granted by the Archdeacon and his
Official? or any known incontinent persons? or any suspected of that vice, or
any other offenders whatsoever (having not before the said day of last past
been duly presented by their Churchwardens) for the same been called or cited
by the Archdeacon or his Official? If yea, then you must present their names,
and their offenses, now at this visitation, for that since the said day of last
the Archdeacons authority was restrained and suspended by inhibition, and al
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical ever since has been in the Lord Bishop,

Articles concerning Schoolemasters.
1 Whether the Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters withinyour parish openly or
privately in any Noble or Gentleman's house, or in any other place, be of good
and sincere religion, life, and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of youth, and whether they have been examined, allowed, and
licencedfor Schoolmasters by the Ordinary in that behalf? and how many
several Schoolemasters have you? and what be their names?

2 Whether your Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters do themselves receive the holy
Communion as often as they ought to do, and whether do all their Scholars,
which be of age sufficient, and of capacity by instruction to receive the Lords
Supper, come to the Communion either in your Church, or where their Parents
dwell, once every year, and be diligent to hear common-praier?

3 Whether the Schoolmaster or Schoolemasters either private or public do
teach their scholars the Catechism authorized by public authority, at the
least once every week, and do instruct and examine them in the same, or do
teach any other Catechism, and what Catechism it is that they do so teach?

4 Whether your Schoolmaster, or Schoolemasters, or any of them be known or
suspected to read unto their scholars privately any un lawful books, or
priuatlie to instruct them in their young years either in Popery,
superstition, or disobedience, or contempt to his Majesty, and his laws
Ecclesiastical by public authority allowed?

5 Whether your Schoolmaster, or Schoolemasters, or any of them under pretense
of Catechizing their scholars, which is a most godly order carefully by them
to be observed, do keep Lectures, readings or exposition in divinity in their
houses, having repair unto them of people not being of their own family and
household?

6 What Reccusant Papists are there in your parish? and whether do they, or
any of them keep any Schoolmaster in their house, which comes not to Church
to hear Divine Service, and receive the Communion? what is his name? and how
long has he taught?

7 Whether the Schoolemasters within your parish do teach his or their
scholars any other Grammar thenthat which is commonly called the Kings
Grammar, set forth by the authority of K. Henry the eight, teaching the
prescript form thereof, whereby their scholars may perfectly understand their
Grammar rules and constructions?

Articles concerning the Parishioners, and other of the Laity.
1 Whether is there any in your parish, that has or does impugn the Kings
Majesty's supremacy, and authority in causes Ecclesiastical, or do any way
or in any part impeache the same, being restored to the Crown by the laws of
this Realm established in that behalf?

2 Whether is there any in your parish, that de^ieth the Church of England by
law established under the Kings most excellent Majesty, to be a true and
Apostolical church, teaching and maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles?

3 Whether is there any in your parish, that does impugn any of the Articles
of Religion agreed upon in Anno 1562. and established in the Church of England?

4 Whether is there any in your parish, that does impugn or speak against the
rites and ceremonies established in the Church of England, or the lawful use
of them? you shall present their names.

5 Whether are there any in your parish, that do impugn the government of the
Church of England under the Kings most excellent Majesty by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear office in the same,
affirming that the same is Antichristian or repugnant to the word of God?

6 Whether is there any in your parish, that do impugn the form of
consecrating and ordaining of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, or Deacons,
affirming that the same is repugnant to the word of God, or that they who are
so ordered in that form, are not lawfully made?

7 Whether is th^re any in your parish, that does hold or frequent any
conu^nticles or private meetings, and there do confer or agree upon any
private orders, other then such as are by the Canons set forth by public
authority, to be by them or any others in Church government observed?

8 Whether any person have lurked and tippled in Tauernes, or Alehouses, on
Sondaies or other holidaies, or used his or their manual craft or trade, or
keep their shops open upon the said days, or any of them, and espectally in
the time of Divine service?

9 Whether are there any in your Parish, that do or have profaned the Lords
day called Sunday, or other Holidaies, contrary to the orders of the church of
England, prescribed in that behalf?

10 Whether has any person in your Parish quarrelled, or stricken or used any
violence unto, or with your Minister, or any other in the Church or Churchyard,
or used himself disorderly in the Church, by ^lthy and profane talk, or any
other rude and immodest behavior?

11 Whether is that due reverence, and humble submission used within your chur^
chapple in the time of Divine service, as by the 18. constitution is
prescribed? and whether each one in the Church or chapel do apply and order
himself there in time of Divine (...), as by the letter part of the same
constitution is most commendably enjoined?

12 Whether the Churchwardens and Questmen from time to time do their diligence
in not suffering any idle persons or loiterers, to abide either in the
Churchyard or Church porch in service or Sermon time, but causing them either
to come into the Church to hear divine service, or to depart, and not to
disturb^ such as are hearers there?

13 Whether the Churchwardens do provide against every Communion with the
advice of the Minister, a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and of good
and wholesome wine, for the number of the communicants, that shall receive, and
that to be brought in a clean and sweet standing pot of pewter or other pure
metal.

14 Whether have any in your Parish been Godfathers or Godmothers to their
own children? Or whether your Minister, or any Godfathers or Godmothers have
used or do use any other form, answer, or speech in Baptism, then is in the
book of common prayer appointed? or whether any which have not communicated,
be admitted to be Godfathers or Godmothers, contrary to the twenty ninth
Canon?

15 Whether is there any in your parish, that does refuse to have their
children baptized, or themselves to receive the communion at the hands of your
Minister, because he is no Preacher? you shall present their names. And if
your Minister since the publishing of the said book of Canons, have received
any such persons (being not of his own cure) to the communion, or baptized any
of their children, you shall likewise present him?

16 Whether do all the Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses cause their
children, servants and apprentices to come to the catechism upon the Sondaies
and Holidaies before evening prayer to hear and to be instructed and taught
therein? and those that ^e not their duties herein, you present their names.

17 Whether have you or your Predecessors, Churchwardens suffered any plays,
feasts, banquets, church-ales, drinkings or any other profane vsages, to be
kept in your church, chapels, or churchyard, or ^els to ^rung superstitio^e
upon holidaies or Eues abrogated by the book of common prayer, contrary to the
88. canon?

12 How many inhabitants within your Parish, men or women above the age of
sixteen years, do refuse to frequent Divine service established by public
authority of this Realm, or to receive the holy Communion, or are negligent
therein? what be their names? and of what degree, state, or trade of life are
^hey? you are to present them all ^f both forts.

19 Whether have you or your Predecessors brought unto my Lord Bishop or his
Chancellor, within forty days next after Easter, the names of all such as
have not communicated that Easter before, contrary to the 11. 2. Canon?

20 Whether do any of the Inhabitants of your said parish entertain within
their house any soiurners, lodgers, or any common resorters and guests, who
refuse to frequent Divine service, or receive the holic Communion as aforesaid?
what be their names? of what quality or condition are they?

21 Whether are any of the said Popish Recusants of insolent behavior not
without public offense, or do boldly busy themselves in seducing and
withdrawing others either abroad or in their own families, by instructing
their children in Popish Religion, or by refusing ^o entertain any, especially
in place of greatest service or trust, but such as concur with them in opinion
of religion? and what be their names that so do?

22 How long the said Popish Recusants have obstinately abstained either from
Divine service, or from the Communion as is aforesaid? whether of any long
time, or only since his Majesty's reign, and how long?

23 What persons aforesaid within your parish, either for the offense
aforesaid, or for any other contumacy or crime, do remain excommunicated?
what be their names? and for what cause? and how long have they so stood
excommunicate?

24 Whether were you the Churchwardens and Questmen chosen by the consent of
the Minister and parishioners in Easter^ke, according unto the 89. and 90.
canons? and whether have the churchwardens before you given up a just account
for their time, and delivered to you their Successors, whatsoever money or
other things of right belonging to the church, which was in their hands,
according to the 89. Canon?

25 Whether do all persons above the age of sixteen years vsualie reso^t to
hears Divine service upon sondaies and holidaies approved, and whether has
each one of your Parishioners (being above the age of sixteen years as
aforesaid) received the holy communion thrice this last year, chiefly once
at Easter in your Parish Church kneeling? If no, then you shall present their
names, which have not so done?

26 Whether have you a fit Parish Clerk, aged 20. y^res atleast, of honest
conversation and sufficient for reading and writting? and whether he be paid
his wages without fraud^ according to the most ancient customs of your Parish?
If not, then by whom is he so defrauded and denied? and whether he be chosen by
the Parson or Uicar, or by whom according to the 91. Canon.

27 Whether have any in your Parish been married within the prohibit degrees,
forbidden by the Law, and expressed in a certain Table published by authority
in Anno 1563? If yea, then your shall present their names, and whether have you
the said Table publicly set up in your Church, and fastened to some convenient
place?

28 Whether does any heretofore divorced keep company with any other at bed
and at board as man and wife? what be their names? when and where they married?
and how long have they so continued?

29 Whether have you any in your Parish, which heretofore being popish
Recusants or Sectaries, have since conformed themselves and come to Church to
hear Divine, service and receive the Sacraments? If yea, then who they are?
And how long since have they so conformed themselves? and whether do they
still remain and abide in that conformity?

30 Whether have you any in your parish to your knowledge or by common fame and
report, which have committed adultery, fornication, or incest, or any bawdes
harborers or receivers of such persons, or publicly suspected thereof, which
have not been publicly punished to your knowledge? If yea, then with whom, and
whether are there any which are by common fame and report reputed and taken to
be common drunkards, blasphemers of Gods holy name, common and usual swearers,
filthic speakers, raylers, sowers of discord amongst their neighbors, or
speakers against Ministers marriages, Usurers contrary to the statute made in
the 37. year of K. Henry the eight, Symonicall persons, fighters, brawlers or
quarrellers in Church or Churchyard? you shall not fail to present their names.

31 Whether have any in your parish received or harbored any woman gotten with
child out of wedlock, and suffered them again to depart without penance
first inflicted upon them by their ordinary? You shall truly present as well
the party harboring as harbored, and who is suspected to have committed
incontinencie with her.

32 Whether any person or persons suspected or detected heretofore of
Incontinency, and therefore departing out of your parish for a season, is now
returned again? or in what place else is he or she now abiding to your
knowledge, or as you have heard? you shall not fail to present the whole truth
in that behalf.

33 Whether are there in your parish any wills not yet proved, or goods of the
dead dying intestate, left vnadministred by the authority of the Ordinary in
that behalf? you shall not fail to present the Executors and all others
faulty and culpable therein.

34 Whether (...) any of or within your parish affirm, (...) that the sacred
Synod of this nation assembled by the (...) authority is not the true Church
of England by representati^ or has or does any of your parish affirm, the no
persons either of the Clergy or La tie, that were not personally present in
the said la^ Synod, are (...) to the decrees thereof in causes Ecclesiastical
made and ratified by the Kings supreme authority, because they gave not up
their voices unto them? you shall present their names.

35 Whether is there any among you, that ha^ or do^ (...) the aforesaid late
Synod, saying or affirming, that the same was a company o^ such persons as did
conspire together against godly and religious Professors of the Gospel, and
that therefore both they and their proceedings in that behalf are and ought to
be despised and contemned, or words to the like effect? you shall not fail to
present their names.

36 Whether there be any person or persons Ecclesiastical or temporal within
your Parish or else where within this Dioces, that have retained and kept in
their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry or deliver to others
any English books, or Libels set forth either on this side or beyond the seas,
by Papists or Sectaries, against the ^ings supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, or against true Religion and Catholic doctrine now publicly
professed in this Church, or the government or Discipline of the Church of
England, now within this Realm received and established by common authority,
and what their names and surnames are?

35 Whether there be any in your parish who are noted, known or suspected to
conceal or keep hidden in their houses any Mass books, portesses, br^iaries,
or other books of Popery and super^ition, or any Challices, Copes, Uestments,
Albes, or other ornaments of superstition, uncancelled or undefaced, which it
is to be coniectured, they do keep for a day, as they call it?

38 Whether any of your Parishioners having a Preacher to their Parson, Uicar,
or Curate, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to any other
place to hear other Preachers?

39 Whether there be any Inkeepers, Alewiues, Uictualers, or ^iplers, that
suffer or do admit any person or persons in their houses to eat, drink, or
play at dice, cards, tables, bowls, or such like games, in the time of
common prayer or sermon on the Sondaies, or Holidaies: or any Butchers, or
other that commonly use to sell meat or other things in the time of common
prayer, preaching or reading of Homilies* and whether in Faires or common
Markets falling upon Holidaies, there be showing of any wares before morning
prayer be (...) and whether any Markets and selling of wares be used or su^ in
any Churchyards on the Sabbath day by common packmen and pedlers going about,
or any Butchers?

40 Whether has your Minister or any of the parish without the consent or
priuitie of the Ordinary, caused any to do penance or be punished either
openly or otherwise, for any crime punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws
only, and what be the names of the parties that have been so punished, and in
what manner?

41 Whether there be any in your Parish, who will come to hear the sermon, but
will not come to the public prayer appointed by the book of common-praier,
making a schism or division (as it were) between the use of public prayer,
and preaching? and whether there be any, who being present at public prayer,
do not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees, at such times as by the
book of common prayer they are appointed, to wit, when they make a general
confession of their sins: when all prayers and collects are read: in the time
of the Letanie: when the ten Commandments are read: and at the receiving of
the holy communion? and what are their names, that have at any time showed
themselves undutiful and vnreuerent in that behalf?

42 Whether there be any married woman or others within your Parish, which after
childbirth, refuse or contemn to come to the Church to give God thanks for
their diliuerie, and to have the prayers publicly appointed on that behalf by
the book of common prayer?

43 Whether any within your parish do resort unto Farnes, fields, woods,
private houses, or to any extraordinary exposition of scriptures or
conferences together? or that be drawers or perswaders of others to any such
schismatic conuenticles?

44 Whether any do keep their children unbaptized longer then is convenient,
unless that it be for sickness of the child, or other urgent occasion? And
whether any do carry their children from the Parish they are borne in, to
other Parishes to be baptized, and so refuse their own Parish: or do bring
strange Ministers into their own houses to baptize their children privately
according to their own fantasies?

45 Item, whether have you any Coniurers, Charmers, ^lcours, Witches, or
Fortune Tellers within your Parish? who are they, and who do resort to them
for counsel?

46 Item, have you the Church wardens exhibited into the Bishops Registrie a
true copy of the names of all such as have been christened, married, or
buried within your parish this last year, according to the 70. Canon?

47 Item, whether has the fifth of August, and the fifth of November been kept
holy, and thanksgiuings made to God, for his Majesty's, and the States happy
del^rance, according to the Ordinance in that behalf?

48 Item, whether have you, or your Predecessors Churchwardens, (according to
the branch of a Statute mentioned in the latter end of this book) levied
twelve pence for every Sondaies absence to the use of the poor of your parish,
of the lands, goods, and tenemen^s of every one that has without lawful
execuse absented himself from his parish church? if not, you are to present it
your selves by virtue of your oaths? If yea, then has the money been employed
to that use, and distributed accordingly.

49 Whether do you know of any other matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance,
worthy the presentment in your judgment, above not expressed, which you hold
fit to be reformed? and if you do, you shall likewise present the same by
virtue of your Oaths.

FINIS.

