A PLAIN AND TRVE RELATION, OF THE going forth of a Holland Fleet the
eleventh of November 1623, to the Coast of Brasile.

With The taking in of Saluedoe, and the chief occurrences falling out there,
in the time of the Hollanders continuance therein.

As also, The coming of the Spanish Armado to Saluedoe, with the beleaguering
of it, the accedints falling in the Town the time of the beleaguering.

And also, The base delivery up of the said Town by cowardly Officers, with
the great loss of honor and riches, and the hopeful expectation of a
Princely Land: the excellency thereof is truly (yet briefly) discovered.

Lastly, The Reasons and Motives moving the Author to the publishing thereof.

All which are briefly, truly, and plainly set down, without fraud or
favor.

By I. B. that has been an eye and eare-witnesse of this subject.

Printed at Rotterdam by M. S.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL ROBERT JOHNSON Alderman of the Honorable City of
London, Governor of Virginia and Bermoda: and to that Honorable Company of
Virginia and Bermoda. I. B. unfeignedly wishes honor to your person and
persons, and flourishing prosperity to you in your affairs.
Right Worshipful,
IF not over bold, yet very bold I am, without your license to shelter a
weather beaten book under your protection, being a stranger to you and remote
from you, but those which better know (then I) your readiness in the well
acceptance of a weak man's willingness, has imbouldned me to present it at
your serucie, if it may be serviceable to you it has it desire, it requires
no further wages: your wisdom may find what I aimed at, by the reading of
it: you are in authority to make choice (with the rest of the Honorable
Company) of Officers to be remote in foreign parts: behold as in a map the
danger of discoragous, unwise, yea foolish Officers: that so in those great
affairs you may have (if you have not) Officers that are wise, courageous, and
feareing God, so shall prosperity be to you, (maugure the power, malice, and
treachery of foreign Enemies or home borne slaves: which may be feared, for
reasons which to some of your Company I have discovered, but now silence:) yet
easily defeated, by wise, religious, and careful Officers: and this will be
your wisdom: such wisdom crown all your affairs, so shall Barmodus be
still truly styled Summer-Ilands, pleasant and fruitful to our Nation.

Rottardam this 19 of January 1626. A well willer to his Country and
Contrymen, I. B.

To The Reader.
EXspectest thou from hence a matter beautified with Learned phrayses, or
adorned with Scholar like terms, thy expectation is frustrated: grapes may
not be had from a thorny hedge. Reader, in this ensuing vollomne, the writer
chiefly desires to manifest the true proceedings of a matter not truly, not
faithfully, nor yet not wisely carried. The taking in of Saluedoe in Brasile
by the Hollanders, and the giving of it up again to the Spaniard, by
vnderstandlesse and cowardly Officers: a rumor of which has been hard of in
all parts of Christendom, and in particular in England. part whereof has been
truth, but another part untruth; for parties in their own cases are commonly
parshall, as some in this thing has been: if an officer of Bay should write of
this matter, soldiers of the same place would say he writ to lesson (if not to
nullify) officers faults and false dealings, if a soldier should take in hand
the discovery of all the proceedings in these affairs, presently would the
Commanders say, envy (not love to his Country) did stir him up to write, what
the soldiers would have go for truth, not what is truth indeed; if any should
write hereof that has not ben eye witness of all things that has been passed,
he might vnwitingly and unwillingly write contrary to the truth, I being not on
officer in Saluedoe, let not any think I have masked the matchless baseness
of these officers: nor being a soldier I may not be suspected to have drawn
a curtain before the condemned faults of soldiers, I have not been a
stranger to these things, that any should challenge me of ignorance, but I have
en an eye witness of all things from the going out of the Fleet from Taxsel
in Holland, which went forth the 13 of December 1623, till our coming forth
from Bay the 18 of July 1625. And further to take away all suspicion of dubble
dealing in my proceedings concerning the officers, I do unfeignedly
acknowledge, that I have been above my cauling respected of all the officers,
and most kindly and friendly used of them all, so small is my hatred to them,
that I could wish (with a prouiso) that they were in the like honored estate as
I have seen them in Saluadoe. Beloved Countrymen, I do ass in the presence
of God intend to write the true proceedings of the Brasilian Voyage, not
feareing the frowns or yet the fury of base officers: only I desire that all
that reads will not be curious in prying into the manner of my writing, for I
know it is faulty: I see it my self, how then may it appear faulty to
iudissiall judgments: to go to amend it will require as much time and pains
as to make a new one: and if I should so do I should still make my apology to
excuse my faults: wherefore as it is I send it forth, desiring thee good Reader
is bear with small faults: and leave the grater to my correcting, so I leave
thee to wisdoms direction, and the Lords protection,

I. E.

A PLAIN AND TRVE Relation of the going forth of a HOLLAND Fleet the leuenth
of November 1623, to the Coast of Brasile.
BRasile is a Continent so great and large that it is not yet by any wholly
discovered, yet as by a pattern of stuff or cloth the whole piece is known,
so by the relation of part thereof you may gather what the whole is. The Land,
namely those parts which ye near to the Bay, is a Land very fruitful and
healthful. Saluadoe which is the name of the Town, it lies in thirteen
degree; it is a Land that consists of hills and valleys, the hills are not so
high, but the highest bears trees and fruit of many sorts, the valleys and
plain Land is not so low but that it auoids all waters, and brings forth
grass, fruits, and herbs in abundance; the fruits of the Land as they are
many for variety, so is their abundance of every sort, and generally they are
pleasant to eat, and very healthful to the body; there are a numberless
number of Oranges and Lemons, the Oranges are generally sweet (yet there be
some sower) great in proportion, like unto a 2 penny loase, the Lemons are
ordinary smal^r then the Lemons that come to England, yet they be of an excel
nt relish and taste, there be also very many Plantings of two or three sorts,
they are called in Spanish Bonantos, in one cluster there grow some 250, there
is also a fruit which we call an apple, it is excellent against the bloody
flux, which disease is subject to those who distemper them^elues with drinking
of wine and eating of grapes, it cots like to a Pomgranet, Pomgranets there be
many and extraordinary great, there be also many other sorts of fruits like to
Cherries and Plummes, there is a fruit like in proportion to an Artichoke
called Annanasses, it is twice so great, it has the most excellent taste in my
judgment of any fruit that is, at has a little taste like to a Strawbery,
but far more sauory, there be also Pine Apples, Muskemillons, Potatoes,
Water-millions, Cowcumbers, Radishes, and all sorts of herbs, and many sorts
of Hours, it brings forth a berry which is stronger in taste then pepper, I
am not able to call to mind the particulars of fruits which it brings forth,
there be also many Grapes: some of these fruits are all the year to be got,
some three times a year, others twice a year, the Land has very much
cattill, as Bulls, Kine, Sheep, and Swine. When as the Town Saluades was
given up to the Spaniard by the Hollanders, and the Spaniard did victual the
Holanders, I did hear of credit (and I do believe it) that one husbandman
did se'l to Don Frederico General to the Spanish Armado 18000 Beefes, besides
Goats, Swine, and Sheep, and of them there be great store, also there be many
Hens, Turkies, Peacockes, and other sorts of small fowls, there be many wild
foul, as Parrats and Perrecitos, the Land breeds many good Horses, the
Brasillians and Portugals employ themselves and their Negers chiefly to the
planting of Sugarcanes and Tobacco, and to the making of both, the goodness
of both, and the quantity of both I need not relate of, for England has good
knowledge of both, the best Tobacco is but worth a Royal a pound, which is
six pence English. It has plenty of diverse sorts of woods and roots fi^ for
the use of Apothecaries and Dyers: the Land has in it many great deep and
long Rivers of fresh water, in which R^uers there is a great quantity of fresh
fish, likewise the Sea runs up into the Land by cricks 40, 60, 100, mile^ in
some places, within one days sail there be Towns and Villages thought to
be richer then Saluadoe. Some 140 miles from the Baye lies the River
Dela^plato, vhere there be mines very rich; one of Baye that was a slave told
me, that in that place there is not one in ten but has their ch^sts and doors
with locks of silver; by the r^^e of reason and prop^rtion you may conceive
whether that place may not (...) called the River of Plate. Some three months
after we had taken the Town of Bare, there came a Ship from that place which
was taken price, that had in it all kind of kitchen vessels of silver.

160. Leagues from Baye lies Fernaborke, by land it may be marched to in 25
days as has been reported to me, the Town is not strong on the Land side,
but by Sea it has three strong Castles, having this but by report I will not
further insist upon it.

The people that are the natural inhabitants thereof are the Brasillians, they
which are now the chiefest are the Portugals. The Spanish King clames
Sovereign, though by some denied, and by the rest unwillingly acceped of. The
Brasillians are of complexion tawny, of condition beastly, like unto ravenous
beasts they will eat the bodies of dead men, and for that cause they are
called men-eaters: some of them are brought up to the profession of the Romish
religion, they are a people very laborious, which is contrary to the desire and
disposition of the Portugals and bastard Spaniards. The Portugals which there
inhabit are a people proud by nature, and haughty in their carriage in time
of prosperity, but in time of adversity a flattering and crouching people,
they are very idle people, desirous to command but cannot endure to put a
finger to work, and that is one maine reason that makes Negars to be so well
sold in that part, they are very curious in their apparel, and so in their
diet, the women for daintiness may not set a foot on the ground, they must
have their Negars to carry them in Caroches and Chaires, the meanest of them in
Emackos (yet I saw the time when they were glad to make use of their feet to
save their lives.) The Town of Saluadoe had in it many whores, some of them
being left behind remained in the Town all the time we remained there, which
was a snaire to our Commanders and a maine cause to the Lord to recompense us
according to all he did to the former adulterous people that were cast out
before us; These Portugals are partly Jewish partly Romish, and a great part of
them are very A theists (having no outward reformation to any religion.)

This people has had long peace, every one sitting under his own vine, having
plenty of all things, but considered not from whence they enjoyed them, they
looked not to the giver of them. But though they would not look up to God in
way of thankfulness and true obedience, yet God (after long forbearance did in
justice look upon them, their pride, their whoredom, their Sodome-like
idleness, and their Romish Idolatry (in steed of their prayers) has peirced
the heavens, and did make way for the wrath of God to come upon them which came
upon them suddenly in a moment, which strocke fear and terror to their
hearts, and palenesse in their faces, distraction and desperation in their
minds. A Nation out of the North came upon them, a people whose language they
understood not hastily assaulted them, so that though their pots were on
boiling, their Negars cooking, yea though their tables were covered, their wine
drawn, yet had they no stomachs to eat, not hearts to inui^e the strangers
that were come upon their Coast, yet those strangers fell a board having good
stomachs, not having the manners to stay till they were bidden, but it was
likely the meat would have been cold had they stayed till they had been
invited, for they were gone in have out of the Town, but made no have to
return in again, their have was such that they left their Jewels, Rings,
their Gold and Silver behind them, yea some unnatural Mothers left their
Children in their cradles. Behold and wonder: Behold for thy instruction, thou
Land, City or Man, which art lifted upon glory, what the Lord did unto this
people, the Lord gave them riches, yea great riches, peace and plenty was in
their borders, they had their hearts desire, so far as naturally they could have.

The M^rchandize of the West India was not wanting in her, the curious works
of Turkey was the adorning of their houses, the fine clothes of England and
Spain, with Wine, Oil, and Fish, and much fine flower was in her, the fine
linen and thread of Holland and Flauders was found in her, the Jewels of the
Sea precious stones with the bones of Fishes and Beasts were there, there was
not wanting Musk, Siuet, Coral, Amber, Ambergris, Pomander, in a word what
Merchandise and commodity that may be had in that honorable City of London,
fit for the Nobility and Gentry but was there for people of mean condition,
I say the Lord did give to them these and greater things in abundance, but in
that they spent them to pride, idolatry and whoredom, and the satisfying of
their fleshly and wicked desires, the Lord has stripped them naked and taken
their glory from them, putting them into the hands of an other people, our
neighbor Nation Hollanders by name; I say the Lord put them into their hands,
but they trampled them under feet, I do not say the Lord gave those things to
them, for the following Treatise will truly and plainly discover, that for
the Hollanders great abuse of that great glory the Lord put into their hands,
the Lord took it again out of their hands, and has placed it in the power of
the Spaniard, but let the Spaniard take heed, the bird has wings that is in
their hands. So much for the discovery of Brasile, wherein I must acknowledge
I have been much wanting, and on maruile. For first I have not ben in the Land,
because we were in a manner beleaguered all our being there. Secondly, because
I had not the use of the Portugals tongue, whereby I might have made further
inquiry. Thirdly, because of an accident that fell out being homeward bound, I
had my book of remembrance taken out of my Cabbine by some as had no great
love to an Englishman.

THE TAKING AND LOOSING OF SALVADOR IN THE BAY, BY A FLEET OF HOLLANDERS.
THe leuenth of November 1623, there was a Fleet of the Hollanders waied
anchor at Taxell, pretending to go for the West India, the Fleet was 25 ships
in number, having a strong wind there was some dispertion of the Shiping, so
that we lost our Colonels ship, which came not to us until we had taken in the
Town of Saluado. After some months sail, we came to an Island called S.
Vinsons Island, adjoining to S. Anthonies Island, some 20 Leagues from the South
Islands, where the Fleet stayed 13 weeks, in which time there was diverse
sloopes made, this Island has an excellent Harbor and there is very good
watering. The Island is very barren, yet it has (as I guess some 20. thousand
Goats in it. The soldiers going on land, would catch some 400. at a time by
compassing them in. I leave this digression. The Fleet waying Anchor made
their course for Brasil, contrary to the expectation of the Soldiers. In
twenty days the Fleet passed the line, and with a fair gale of wind
discovered on Tuesday the twenty of April the coast of Brazil, where the ten
Companyes of soldiers were put into four Ships. On Wednesday we were seeking
but could not find the Bay of Saluadoe. On Thursday the 30. of April we found
it, and with a fair wind we went into the Bay. At our coming in St. Anthonies
Castle saluted the Admiral with two or three shot, who had the like
gratulation from the Fleet. Where one of our Ships did send a shot that
uncapped the Castle. Before which Castle the Ships which had the Captains
and land soldiers anchored; the Admiral, the four Ships did go some two
miles below the town, the rest of the Ships cast Anchor before the town,
where we were welcomed by the battery and Ships of the towns who for two
hours, did very manfully defend their place and discharge their pieces, but
the Hollanders did over man them, and over match them, that within three houer,
they had sunk some eleven of their Ships and burnt some of them, the Vice
Admiral himself in a shallop went very boldly to the Fort, and he with his
sword and Pistol, set foot on the battery, upon which the Portugalls left the
water side, and fled up into the town, so that the seafaring men made plunder
of the town the same night.

In the mean space the soldiers were landed, the Castle made many shots at
the floopes and boats of the soldiers, but not any was touched,
notwithstanding they made some forty shots, but when a few of the Soldiers
were landed, they fled and left their goods for their enimyes. The army
marched to the town without any interruption, we came before the town about
nine of the clock at night, they made some 100. shot at our Army, yet our
soldiers made not any shot to them, but came under the Port by the order of a
guide, who did purpose to go a back way into the town, when the enemy could
do no good from the Port with their Muskets to our people, because they were
under the wall they cast stones. The Leiftenant Colonel wheled the Army on,
marching in a narrow lane, the enemy contrary to the expectation of the guide,
had made a little breast work: from whence they did play upon our Army, at
which instant their were killed the Leiftenant Colonel and a gentleman next to
him, upon the which the soldiers retreated, at their retreat there came out of
a house by the gate some 30 Musketters and made a vollie of short at our
soldiers, at which there fell an Englishman one Philip Rowlands and a Dutch
Canoner, which Musketeers went into the Port, we being to my knowledge within
forty yardes of the gate, Captain Mayor Scoutton commanded a Retreat to a
Cloister, half a Musket shot from the town, whereupon the soldiers did lay
down their Arms, and went to Plander the outhouses and Cloisters, and
finding much wine, half of the soldiers were drunk, and also some of the
co^manders lay scattering on the ground, but the enemies not thinking how to
do any exployte on us, took not advantage thereat, but with all speed in the
night time made their flight from the town, only their remained some forty
soldiers with the Governor.

At the break of day there was Arm, Arm, all to their colors and places,
intending to go on the town, the Captains not knowing what the Ships had
done, nor what the town had done, whilst we were preparing for the making of
an assault on the town, the white flag from the town was discovered, which
was brought out to Captain Mayor, who marched into the town to the market
place where all the Companies were drawn in batalio, and so commanded to
several parts of the town, The Governor with some twenty more, with two
Jesuits: were presently sent prisoners into the Ships. The soldiers leaving
their Arms, made boot of all things they could come to in the town, where
there was much spoil of breaking of Tables and Chests wherein there was much
riches, and great spoil of wine, so that I have gone to the ancles in wine in
cellars, I suppose that there was spoild, twenty thousand pounds, which might
have been well saved by careful Officers. I think that the value that
Officers, Soldiers, and seafaring men got, was more in value then that which
came into accounts for the Masters of the Voyage, and yet it was cr^dibly
reported, that the booty which was got then: was five Millions. Two days
after the taking in of the town, the Governor, the Colonel and the Lord of
Dort came with his Ships and Slopes, who understanding that the town of bay
was taken in, he stormed and took on mightily that he had lost the honor of
the day in not taking the town himself.

The Portugalls which were in the town were kindly entreated, and their houses
and goods they possess freely, all that came into the Town had passes from
the Colonel, they promising to use their best for the bringing in of the
Portugals to traficke, but the Portugals had not sooner obtained their end,
namely the fetching out of their hid riches in the Town, but they showed
themselves treacherous; for some 26 days after the Town was taken in, two of
the soldiers going into the Land were killed by the Portugals, the Colonel
was much in censed thereat, and going out of the Town he took five Portugals
whom he caused to be shot to death without the Town.

The same morning the Colonel with some twelve horsemen went out of the Town,
with some twenty Negars and a squadron of men, the Colonel riding before some
twenty yeards in a narrow path, and woods on both sides, the Portugals lying in
ambush got about the Colonel, a Negar shot him in the breast, and the Portugals
pulled him of his horse, who killed him and cut of his head and other parts, the
most of the horsemen and soldiers retired to the Town, yet an Englishman
brought in his head, upon which there was a great alarm, but nothing done
worth the writing. In his place there was made Colonel Captain Alden Soulton,
his brother William Soulton was made Captain Mayor.

Some ten days after, the Admiral with two ships made his course for Holland.

Three days after, the Vice Admiral with seven ships 250 soldiers hesides
saylours went for Angoly, which was a hart-smart to some, and a weakening to
the Town, as also an encouragement to the Spaniard to hear of the weakening
of the Town.

The same day their went also four ships to the Salt Islands, and so for
Holland. So that there was left in the Town but four men of war, and some
five small ships besides the prizes.

Some five weeks after the Town was taken in, there came in a ship into the
Bay from Lishorne which the Sloopes took, in it was Oil and Flower, and other
Merchandise.

The same week there came two ships from Angolia with some 1200 Negars, they
came among our ships before that they found the Town was the Hollanders, the
one yielded and cast anchor, the other loward his sails and made as if they
would cast anchor, but passing by our ships into the Land-ward, hoysed sail
and away into the Land, our sloopes and ships followed her but came back
without her.

The latter end of July there came another ship from Fernabuck, who making in,
our sloopes with a pinnace and ship made out, she suspecting something made
out but the wind was against her, the sloopes got to the wind of her and made
fight, yet she would not stricke sail, till the man of war gave her a shot,
then she struck, there was Tobacco and Sugar in her, with Silver and other
commodities to a good value.

The beginning of August there came another ship in the morning amongst ours,
yet she got away into the Land: It was reported by a Negar that came from the
Enemy that the ship had eight iron pieces and other munition, with wine and
other provision,

About the twelfth of August 1624, there came a ship into the Bay, having a
forewinde and ready to cast anchor, a (...) from us boarded them, the Admiral
of our ships was in the sloope (who now remains with the Spaniards, the
reason whereof I shall after show) he coming into the Cabine found the
Governor of Reginero Deplato, his wife and three daughters and two sons in
law, the Admiral Captain Cherk most badly went to search the Ladies, which
was very grievous to the Governor, he told him in Spanish, that there was no
need of that straitness, for there were chains, jewels, and plate enough
besides. In which ship all their pots and vessels were of silver. I my self
had the weight of the vessels of silver which came to 150000 pound. Certainly
it was a rich prize. The Governor was well entertained, with his wife and
daughters, one of them was thought to be over kindly used, if it be not true,
yet the Colonel was much to be blamed for his private entertainment of some of
them into his chamber, and in that he was truly condemned for a whoremaster,
for he was not ashamed to go in the middle of the day to an open whore-house,
which whore he caused to be married to a Dutch Merchant or Factour, to whom he
gave a horse that he might ride abroad whilst he had the key of the
Factours house at home. This Colonel was also a great drunkard, his brother
Williams Scoulton Mayor, did diverse times reprove him for his wickedness.

In September 1624 he sent a party of 25 soldiers and some Negars, to gather
Plantings and Oranges for his whores two miles out of the Town; their
Commander was the Leiftenant to Captain Isanack with a Sariant of the same
Company, when they came to the place where the Oranges and Plantings were, the
soldiers with the Negars left their arms on the ground and went unto the
trees, the Portugals coming on them with some 200, fell upon them killed nine
soldiers and the Leiftenant, took prisoners the Sariant with some Negars, the
rest went into the woods and hid themselves: some of the Negars came into the
Town and made a great alarume, 200 went forth to relieve them, and did fetch
of the nine dead men, but not the Leiftenant. Some ten days after that, the
Enemy came to a by-gard and killed two, and the rest escaped into the woods.

About the latter end of September 1624 Colonel Al. den Scoulton died suddenly
being much swollen with drinking.

The next day after, the Counsel made choice of William Scoulton for Colonel,
and Captain Kyfe for Mayor.

The former Colonel did show himself more careful in fortifying the Town
then his brother William Scoulton: for the former would yeald to advise of
those who had better understanding then he in those particulars, but this man
would have his words without counsel for Law though it were contrary to all
reason: this man did much reprove his brother in his life time, for whoring and
dronkennes, and he himself when he was Colonel, did far worse in those
particulers.

In October, their came a Ship of some 140. Tun from Holland with a prize in
it, it brought tidings that the Merchants of the West India, had provided a
great Fleet for our releife, and was ready to come out of Taxell. In the
Christmas holidayes, the Colonel with most of his Captains and Skippers, were
for four days together feasting in their four men of War, and at every
health, they had three pieces of Ordnance shot off out of every Ship, in those
four days it was counted, there was shot off, 1600. shot by water and land,
somewhat too much to be wasted especially in that foreign land, the want of it
was felt not long after.

In three weeks after, there came three Ships and each of them got a prize,
they likewise brought tidings of the Fleet, there were also letters sent that
the Spanish Fleet would be at the (Bay) at the beginning of May; yet to my
knowledge there was not any extraordinary making of provision there.

On Friday morning the 3. of April, there were discovered some 12. Ships
upon the coast, but not discryed what they were, at 12. of the clock there was
a rumor that they saw a 100, sail that the sea was full of Shiping, all was
in a maze, yet nothing done, at four of the clock their Fleet came to Anchor
without the Bay some Leage to the North of S. Authonies Castle, then they were
told to be some 50 Ships, there was great talk what Fleet it should be,
some said it was the Spanish others the Hollanders.

Saturday the 4 of April there came betimes in the morning, nine small sail
out of the land ward, who did pass our Ships and so went to the Fleet, the
sloopes and Ships might have prevented that, but thy did not, what there
reason was I know not, I guess but I will not writ.

About eleven of the clock the same day, the Fleet wayed Anchor and came with
a fair wind and tide into the bay, and cast Anchor some mile from the Town
altogether, then the doubt was resolved, the Spanish cullers proclaimed that
our enemies were arrived, them might you have seen palenes in faces, and
amazement in most countenances, such were the distractions of them, that no
speedy resolution could be resolved one, at this time we had in our Harbor
four men of war, two great Merchant Ships, Six Youghts, three sloopes,
three fire ships. We had Sailors and Soldiers some 2200. fit for to bear
Arms, besides some 700. Negers: It was thought by some, that had they sent
forth then their fiery ships with their Youghts, and sloopes, they might have
made a good piece of service on their enemies, for we had a fare forewind and a
dark Evening, and men fit and willing to have gone on that service, but the
Colonel would not admit of any such thing. The next day, the enemy landed their
Land-man: two miles from the Town, and came marching within Musket shot of
the Town, yet our co^mander lay still: only they then began to fortify the
Town. The same Sunday night, the Soldiers which were in the Castle some six
miles from the towme, came in a sloope to the Town: by the command of the
Colonel, they made that have away, that they left fourteen days provision for
30. men behind them, power and shot, four pieces of Ordnance with diverse
Musketts, yet the Leiftenant was not blamed for it.

On Monday the 6 of April, the enemy did fall down with his Shipping below
the Town, where they landed their bag and baggage, and the sick men with
their Pee^es and Churchmen. At Eleveen a clock the same day there went out
some 300. soldiers under the command of Captain Mayor Kife, and Captain
Hellman^, at which time we had taken from us one English man, and their was
killed one Dutchman and a Scotch-man wounded, they were not out one hour but
they came in again, with many buffe coats, and gilt Rapiers and Ponyards,
with the slaughter of many chief commanders and soldiers,.

An English Constable told me on the Spanish side (after the Town was
delivered up,) that in that out fall there were killed and wounded some 170, had
they been but seconded with 300 more out of the Town, it had been a good days
work indeed.

The Enemy after this was some six days still, only their ships now and
then did make a shot, but our Ordnance from the Forte did shoot them through
and through, that made them way anchor and lay farther from the place.

Some ten days after they came to besidge us, they sunk three pieces of
Ordnance on the side of an hill to the seaward upon our ships, and hardly did
they make a shot but they shot into the ships, where they killed and wounded many
of our saylours, yet they drew the ships near to the shore, I could not
conceive nor cannot apprehend to what purpose they did leave their Munition and
provision in their ships, with some 250 saylours, whereas they could not do
any thing to the Enemy from their ships, either by sea or land; not long had
the Enemy plaide at our ships but the Enemy had wounded and killed some 70 of
our sea-fayring-men, and brought to ground some sour of our small ships and
the Admiral, to the great loss of provision and Munition, then somewhat late
they commanded the saylours to forsake the ships, and in the night they got
some of their Pieces with some of their provision on land.

Within 16 days after the beleaguering, our people had planted on the sea side
in Forts and other places 36 pieces of Ordnance, they had 300 Musqueters on the
water side.

The Enemy had planted against the Town to the new Port ward called Iasanaks
Port three half Cannons, the bullets was 28 and 36 pound, the first shot that
did hit the new Port went through and through, it might have been fitter called
a baubell then a Port, fitter for banqueting then battering. The Town lay so
low, and the hills without so high, that the Enemy did not make Forts, but
sunk their Ordance in the gronud. The Enemy did begin to make a battery
near to the same side of the Town, the Constable of Iasanacks Port perceiving
the same, did make diverse shot (he was an Englishman) to the great
disturbance of the Enemy, but the Colonel did come and command him that he
should not shoot at all: the like was commanded to the other Constables, to
the wonder of all: all that was alleged by this Colonel was the want of
Munition, if it was true, how worthy of reproof was he, that would wast so
much before in jesting, as I have noted before: but if there was Munition
enough (as there was) I think there was just suspicion of treachery. The
Enemy had within five days placed in that battery five half Cannons and
presently dismounted our Ordnance on that side of the Town, then they would
but could not play with their Ordance, and when the Colonel was required to
suffer to take sacks of cotton and pieces of bays to stop the the breaches
that they might remount their Pieces, he would not yeald thereto.

It was also reported that ^^e Colonel had three several Letters from the
Spanish General, but there was on good proof thereof, yet after the Town was
delivered up, the man that said he brought the Letters did testify the truth
of it, nominating the time and place, where and when he met the Colonel: this
I had from Captain Deshen one that was of the Counsel who is with the
Spaniard now.

It was likewise reported that the Colonel with two other Captains, did intend
to fly away in a small Ship.

Some three weeks after the Leaguer, the enemy had planted nine Pieces of
Ordnance at the other Port, and four in another place, and five in another
place, so that there was in all thirty seven half Cannons.

We had mounted in the Town 61. Pieces, but after the Enemy had mounted and
planted their Ordnance, they dismounted ours, so that we had not four Pieces
mounted, then they began to make new Fortes in the Town, and blinds: upon
those reports of the Colonel above named, the Soldiers began to speak and
mutter many things against the Colonel, and Council and Captains. The
Soldiers reported, that their Captains, nor Leiftenants, would not in the day
time come in the works and tronches, It is some what credible, for they are
like unto those Captains, which were known by their rich attire, not by their
wounds.

The Soldiers some five days before the Town was given over, went and
complained to the Captains that the Colonel was treacherous to the Town, and
the desired that they would make another Colonel, and they would spend their
lives in defense of the Town, otherwise they said, they would kill him and
make another of their own choice, this was one Satturday morning the 25. of
April, at Eleven of the clock on Satturday, there was a great alarm, so that
we thought verily that they would have made an assault on the Town, we had
killed and wounded in two hours some fourteen men. At the same time there was
a Soldier, going to fill his Bandaleroes with Powder, he having his light
match in his hand did foolishly set fire on the Powder, to the burning of some
sixteen men, some to death, all to great misery, at two of the clock the
Alarm ceased, so that every man was commanded to his Colors.

At four of the Clock, there went to the market place some fifty soldiers
(as they say) by some Captains private assents, the Colonels seeing them
marching toward him comes to them, demands the cause of their coming, one
answered that they came to put out such a treacherous fellow as he, and to make
choice of one that would be faithful: for their Master and for the Town, but
before he could reply (as I was told) one struke him down with his Musket, and
other with their swords, but he got from them into the house wounded, the
soldiers presently turned to the Major Captain Kyfe: and required of him to
take the protection of the Town, and them and they with all they soldiers
would die with him, he accepted the same and promised the same.

On Monday the 27 of April, there was one from the enemy which called to the
Centrie on the Port that they would send a Drum forth, presently it was told
to the Colonel together with the Council, who speedily sent forth a Drum,
when the Enemy saw the Dru^me, they required the cause of the Drums coming
forth, it was answered because they called for one, they replied that they did
not call, but seeing there was one come, he was commanded to be brought to the
general, who returned an answer to us, that his Commission was to destroy all
the Hollanders, and to put the English and French to the Galleys, yet if they
would seek for mercy, he would in his own Clemency, give us all our lives;
upon this truce was taken for 6. hours, no sooner was this noysed, but that
the Enemy came over their works, and brook some pales down, and the Soldiers
on both sides did ralke freindly together, two from the Enemy was let in
blindfold and led to the Colonel. There were conditons propounded on our part,
but thought to great to be granted by the Enemy. Truce was continued for 24.
hours, and two from our Captains sent to the General of the Enemy, others
also came from the Enemy, in the mean time, I saw the Enemy working (contrary
to order.)

Truce was continued till Wednesday. On Wednesday, their went a soldier to the
Council, and told them that the soldiers did understand, they would not yield
unto those conditions the enemy propounded, so that it would be the loss of
all their lives, for which reason he said that the soldiers were purposed to
give up the Town, if they would not make composition, they thanked the
soldier for his speech, but did not enquyer from whom he had heard the same
conspiracy.

The Council upon this one man's speech (and a common drunkard too) resolved to
deliver up the town upon any conditions, the Truce being continued again till
Thursday, the Mayor went to every Court of Guard: and demanded whether the
soldiers would be content with that agreement as the Council should determine
off, which should not be dishonorable, they all assented to the same. Whereupon
the conditions were agreed upon, but not such as the soldiers liked off for it
was ordered that the soldiers should the next morning go to Ship, and they
should either send their Arms before them to the Shipping, or they going
before should be sent after aboard. Further it was agreed upon, that the Town
with all the riches: should be left there, and the Officers should have their
Chests with wearing apparel only, (I mean Captains, Skippers, Preachers,
Readers and Merchants) the rest only with their Knapsacks on their backs. The
same night about five of the Clock, there was let into on of the Ports: a
squadron of the enemies and many Officers. The next morning, the Enemy came in
at seven of the clock in the morning, and our soldiers leaving their Arms in
the market place, were commanded down to the water side.

The same day being Friday the last of April, there came the Enemy down to
the waters side in their Arms, their match light, and did march in the midst
of us. Such a ragged Regiment did I never see, half of them had no shoes to
their feece, their Arms were like to them, some had half a Rapier, others had
them tied in match, not one in twenty, was in his full Arms fix, they were
lodged in the strongest houses at the waters side, where they kept their Courts
of Guard.

Don Frederico commanded upon pain of death that there should no wrong nor
violence be offered to us, which was carefully looked unto by his Officers.

Eight days after, there came a command that we should go aboard, so the seat
chers came down and the saylours were searched very strictly to the ripping up
of their shoes and all suspected places about them, this search was continued a
day and a half, so that most of the saylors and a company of soldiers were
searched. But Don Frederico came down to the water side, and gave way that all
the rest of the soldiers should to the ships without searching. The
fifteenth of May came the Hollanders Fleet before the Bay 34 in number, with
their bloody colors. The next morning they came sailing into the Bays mouth.
The Spaniard seeing that, hoysed sail, and with some 30 sail went forth
toward them. The Admiral from the Spaniard made a shot at the Hollander, the
Admiral from the Hollander returned him the like again, and so went back
with the whole Fleet to sea. At this time were the Spaniards ships much
unprovided, had the Hollander known so much I suppose they would have come in
and ouer-throwne the whole Fleet.

There were many reports concerning that Fleet of the Hollanders, but nothing
so credible as for truth I will write.

After we were put into the ships, some half Musket shot from the Town, the
General Don Frederico, did give order, that every soldier of ours should have
a pound of beef a day, besides wine and bread, for 2000 was this ransom
given, but the neglect of most of our Officers was great, in so much that many
times for 3, 5, and 8 days together, the soldiers ransomes were neglected by
them, they lying drinking on Land, and the poor soldiers famishing on ship
board, and this is the maine cause why our soldiers came home so bare and
naked, for they were forced to sell their apparel for daily provision. They
were put to such a straight, that they were forced to swim, and with pipes to
fetch themselves water to drink, whilst their Officers must have the boats
to attend them at their whore-houses and wine-houses. It is true that the
Officers have been taxt for this there, but they would excuse it, but in truth
they cannot, they be but mere excuses. Our Enemies did much blame them for
this thing: and worthy of blame they were.

After the delivering up of the Town we stayed thirteen weeks four days in
the Baye, and that was by Don Ferderico his entreaty, as Captain Francisco
told me; why Don Frederico did so, was, because he knew not where the
Hollanders Fleet was, and he seared least we going forth should join with
them. In the mean time, they trimmed up seven of the Hollanders ships, and by
entreaty (if not by command) got 250 saylors from us, to manage their ships to
Spain.

At the latter end of our being there victuals grew scarce, so that Don
Frederico wished that our ships should wait on him to Fernabocke, and there
he would be liberal to us. Friday the twenty-two of July, we with the
Spanish Armado hoysed sail. But let me note one thing here which is worth the
observation, concerning the Portugals. The Prince Don Frederico a little before
his goeing away sold to the Portugals their houses, which before were their
own, and at his goeing away did not only take away all goods till it came to
old stools and doors, but also stripped them naked of all Arms and Munition,
and did take away all their Ordnance that was planted to sea or land-ward. So
that the Town is now more vveake then it was when the Hollander took it
in. More may be said of this But I will not.

We with the Spanish Fleet hoysed sail (as I said before,) the Spanish Fleet
was some 42 of their own ships, and leven ships which they had of ours that
they trimmed up, namely, the Samson, the Tiger, the ^ricke, the Gringe, King
David, Saul, and the House, we had seven ships but such ships as n^u^r^a^y made
such a Voyage in, they had not been trimmed in two years, they had no good
tacklings at all, some of them had but an anchor a piece, they were all
exceeding leakey. In the ship that I my self came in, our soldiers pumped 20
and 24 thousand strokes a day: our ship was courted the best, and yet such it
was, that mad the Skipper to say to me, that he couid wish himself in (...),
to play cross and pile for his life. The provision in our ships was small,
there was but for ten weeks, such small alowance as many could well have eaten
it up in two days: their weekly ransom was 4 pound of bread or veryua, half
a pound of beese, 4 ordinary spoonful of oyie, a quart or a pint of wine and a
quart of water a day: let all men that reads or hears, judge if our Officers
w^ not much faulty herein, or the Spaniard, if not both. Our Officers will not
deny but that the Town was delivered up upon conditions, but what conditions
few knows, base conditions all knows. The soldiers disarmed, left to the
mercy of the Spaniard, their Apparel., their vittals, and their goods, given to
the Enemy, they put in ships as captives taken by the Enemy, and turned to the
Sea: that if God had not extraordinary preserved us, we had never seen our
native Country. Nor to the Spanyard nor yet to our officers do we give the
praise of our safe arrival, but unto our good God. As all dew is, so do we
give the soole honor and praise of our preservation, from all those manifold
dangers.

One Friday night having a cross wind, we cast Anchor at the Bays mouth, at
which time four of our 7. Ships (in the night time) made away from the
Fleet, the next day at Evening, the Admiral from the Spanish Armado wayed
Anchor with the rest of the Fleet, and went into the Bay again, with our 3
Ships went in with them. On the next day at 6 in the Evening, there came
command from Don Frederico, that Captain Cherke, and Captain Deshene, should
go into two Spanish ships, the reason why it was thus commanded: was thought
to be, because the 4 ships went away without the Generals leave, but I rather
believed their was greater reasons. For this Captain Cherke did as I have writ
before, dealt very basely in serching of the wife and daughters to the
Governor of Regturo de Plato, then was the time or never for them to repay him
his baseness, the other Captain was he that was our guide to the Country of
Brasil and to the Town of Saluedoe, for he was there three years prisoner as
he told me, the Spaniard it may be thought, that such a man was not for their
profit to be returned to Holland.

On Monday morning the 25 of July, the Admiral shot and wayed anchor, and we
with them went out: some five days we kept with the Fleet, but in the night
time the sixth day we lost (if it may be called a loss) the Spanish Fleet,
which was bound for Fernabocke, so that we made for Holland, and
notwithstanding the leaking of our ships, the shortness and scarceness of
our victuals, by Gods protection all our seven ships came safe for England and
Holland: not looseing 22 men in all our 1650 men. In that ship I was in we lost
but one, and that on the English coast, for which, all glory and praises be
given to God, of us which have been so miraculously delivered, and of all that
wishes well unto us.

If any enqnire or require a reason or reasons why I have caused to be
published this small book, it might be answered, that it is a book of news,
and is not that a sufficient reason? But I answer, the maine reasons which
have moved me to publish this book are these.

First: By the earnest persuasion of some Merchants of London and others, which
in part heard the relation thereof.

Secondly: That the reading and consideration of this might be a motive to all
in authority that put men in office, to beware of advancing base minded men,
men that regard goods more then God, their own profit more then the honor of
their Prince and Countries, especially to beware of advancing such into offices
as respect not their own credit, but will defaime their name by whoreing and
drunkenness and beastly Borish carriages as was some, and a great some of
their Officers. And this kind of doings did so besot them, that they became
vnderstandlesse in these weighty affairs, (for I presuppose that those which
chose them saw something in them worthy the choice.) I am fully persuaded, had
they been such commanders as Iethroe had advised Moses to make choice of, men
that seared God, and men of courage, ha^ing covetousness, Saluadoe had borne
Orange colors this day; but these men feared not God, had they feared God,
they would have done as good Ezechiah did in time of danger, sought to the Lord
for help, not Saul-like to a Southsayer as did Colonel William Scoulton with
others, these men were so forre from hating of covetousness that they loved
covetousness; that is plain, not only by their engrossing of Gold, Chains,
and Jewels in their chests, but in that they too unworthy men gave places of
office for money; and it is most plain, and now evident, that they were not men
of courage, by two or three witnesses may a truth be affirmed, but I can bring
forth two or ten hundred to confirm this, who have been eye witnesses of their
cowardly carriages. But let that serve to prove this which is known of all,
their base delivery up of the Town: they had at their command 2000, besides
600 Negars; this they cannot deny, for they received ransom after the Town
was given up for so many.

Let them plead for their baseness as they will, and say they had not ammunition
and provision, I partly know the contrary (by one of their secreet concell,)
they had to serve for three months credibly so reported, but a badge of their
cowardlinesse, was this their keeping of house, when they should have kept
their works, and encouraged their Soldiers; If search should be made, you
might indeed find soldiers which have lost some their arms, some their eyes,
some their legs, with other demonstrations of soldiers of courage, but let all
the Officers that came from Bay be searched: and one will not be found (save
the Enginer M.Iose Middleburghe) to my knowledge that has received there, any
wound or scarre by their Enemy. I will not deny but they may have a wound, some
of them which might be received in the wine-house of the Portingals, after the
Town was given up: but that rather demonstrate their baseness then their
courage, their not coming into their works was a great occasion to discourage
the soldiers, for I did hear the soldiers much complain of this very thing.
How may Holland be greiued that so great and Princely a thing fell into the
hands of such base cowardly Officers, double dishoner have they done, to that
Noble Prince, and Honorable States of the Nether-Lands, if they pay their lives
for their great baseness, what is that to so great loss? The best that can be
made of this loss is to make choice of Officers for the like enterprises as
are men of understanding, fearing God, loving the Honur of the Prince and
Country, more regarding a good name and credit, then an evil reproach with
life.

The third reason of my writing is to set a looking glass for base and
cowardly Officers to look in, wherein they may see their future shame and
disgrace, if they will persist in such wicked courses, such may ride on horses
having gold and scarlet to adorn their persons, they may have command of
others, imprisoning and hanging whom they will, but look one our Captains of
Bay, they were such; but what are they now? The day of account is come, they
are in prison, their honors is come down, they would be (I think) now content
to go on foot, and all their comfort is now, they have more merciful Judges
then themselves were, wherefore all that know your selves to be such, in time
captivate your baseness, least being your selves captivated your baseness be
discovered.

The last Reason of my writing: and yet not the least cause, is to publish to
all (that will take notice) the wonderful works of God, in these particulars
whereof I have written, by the which we may see Gods proceedings against a
people. These Portugalls had peace and plenty: abundance of outward
blessings, and these were continued to them for many years, but the abuse of
these blessings: did provoke the Lord to anger, and though he did spare them
long, yet they did not consider it, and laid it not to heart, and turn from
their wickedness, therefore the Lord took his own cause in hand, and while
they were sacrificing to their Netts, the Lord cetch them in his Nett. He sent
the Hollanders one them, who suddenly came against them, and laid their honor
and pride in the dust. We were but a handful in regard of them, it was
reported they were in the Town 9000. able to bear arms among them, and
provision they had for 12. months. They had a battery in the water for 9.
pieces, some of which pieces wayed 41110 pound, they had besides 8 Castles and
great Forts on the water side: they had some 70. Pieces of Ordnance in all, yet
all could not help. God was against them, and they thought the whole world was
come upon them. For among them selves they made report, that 10000 thousand was
landed, whereas there was not landed 2300. God the Captain of our host went
before us, who took a way from our enemies all courage and boldness, as he
took off the Chariots wheels of Pharaohs host, the enemies of Israel,
before we had once compassed Saluadoe before our Trumpets did sound, or our
Drums make an alarm, like Jericho to Israel, so Saluadoe to us was
delivered up. True was and is that saying which some has said, namely, that we
took not in Saluadoe, but Saluadoe took us in. Here was Gods work and it is
worthy to be taken notice off: and to be had in everlasting remembrance, it is
good for Cities and Countries to take notice of this work of God, take heed
least Pharasaically you justify your selves (without just reason) and say you
are not such sinners as they, lest an ha^dwriting come against you, and the
words be read, except you amend you shall likewise drink of the cup of Gods
wrath, which cup of trembling has bin put into our hands: and we have drunk
deep thereof. And justly has the Lord dealt with us, he gave us (we got it
not by our own harm) honor, riches and victory, he took from our enemies all
their glory, and put it into our hands, but we have trampled them under our
feet. Our glory is become our shame, thougth we have been better taught then
they, yet indeed we have done worse then they, they sinned in curiosity and
daintiness of diet, but we in glottonie and drunkenness, if it could be we
excelled them in pride, the sin of whoredom, me thinks was more abominable
in our time amongst us, then before amongst our enemies, for their religion
gives a dispensation in some cases, ours not, they could have pardons before
the committing of it, but we by our conscience and the rule of God tells us,
that whoremongers shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, without God give
repentance and pardon. And me thinks, the sin of our whore-masters was the
greater, in that they prostrated themselves to their captivated harlots, and to
Heathenish Black-amores. I doubt I should be tedious, if in each particular I
should make comparison betwixt our enemies sins, and the sins of our Army,
only this I will writ, that two things has been special motives to cause
the Lord to be wrath with us. Our not consideration of Gods great judgments on
our Enemies for their sins, and our great unthankfulness for so many, so rich
and undeserved favors bestowed on us, well may it be said to us, that we have
bin a foolish and unwise people, so evelly to requite the Lord our God, who
gave us so many things and hopes of greater matters. While we be humbled for
these things, let other people before warn to take due notice of Gods
judgments and his se^^ritle on sinful people: and in time repent, so shall
thou prevent a future repentance, and destruction shall not be thy ruin. In
the last place, I bend my exhortation to all these, whom God has given honor,
glory and riches above their brethren; be sure to abound in thankfulness to
God, as God has abounded in mercyes to you above others, thanks is the least
thou can return to God, being the least, if thou neglect it, me thinks it is
one of the greatest motives, to strip thee naked to thy shame, and disgrace:
and to make thee an ensample to others, as we that have benin Saluadoe,
examples to others.

Let not any misconster my meaning, nor misapply my writting, as if I should
writ in the disgrace of Hollanders, our neighbor Nation and professed friends,
though it be true that most of the Commanders in this voyage were Dutchmen, yet
they were but few in regard of the whole Nation, and therefore injustice it is
to condemn a Nation for a few false persons, and if we should thus censure, we
should happily condemn our selves. Lay the fault where it ought to be laid, and
then drunkards, whore-masters, and vnderstandlesse persons shall justly be
condemned, not the fault less Nation.

FINIS

