The true description of a Child with Ruffes borne in the parish of Micheham
in the Cou^tie of Surrey in the year of our Lord. M. D. LXvi.
The for part and the back part


THis present year of our Lord M. D. Lxvi the.vii. day of June one Helene
Iermin the wife of John Iermin Husbandman Dwelling in the parish of Micheham
was delivered of a Woman Child named Christian being aftur this manner and
form following. That is to say, the Face comely and of a cheerful
countenance. The Arms and hands, Legs and Feet of right shape, and the Body
with all other members thereunto apperteini^g, well proporcio^ed in due form and
order, saving yt it is as it were wunderfully clothed with such a Flesshy skin
as the like at no time has been seen. For it has the said flesshy skin
behind like unto a Neckerchef growing from the reins of the Back up unto the
neck as it were with many Ruffes set one after another and being as it were
something gathered, every Ruf about an inche broad having here growing on the
edges of the same, and so with Ruffes coming over ye Shoulders and covering some
part of ye Arms proceeding up unto the nape of the neck behind and almost
round about the neck, like as many women's Gowns be, not cloce to gither
before: but that the throat being (with a fair white skin) bare between
both the sides of the ruffes, the said ruffes about the neck being double and
as it were thick gathered, much like unto the Ruffes that many do use to wear
about their necks.

This Child beforsaid (the day of the date under written)was to be seen in
Glene Alley in Suthwark being alive and x weeks old and iiii. days not
unlikely to live long.

An Admonition unto the Reader,
THis picture pressed in paper white, our natures does declare:
Whose form so strange by natures spite may learn us to beware.
By natures spite, what do I say? does nature rule the roste?
Nay god it is say well I may: by whom nature is cost.
The face full fair, the members all, in order stand and place:
But yet too much: by natures thrall, does woork a great disgrace.
This ruffeling world in ruffes al rolde, does God detest and hate:
As we may learn the tale well told, of Children borne of late.
What means this child by natures woork: thus Ruffed for to be?
But by these Ruffes our natures spurk, we might be hold and see.
Her squares our squaring does set out, this here our here is does check:
This monstrouse monster out of dout, agrees in each respect.
Our filthy lives in Pigges are showed, our Pride this Child does bear:
Our rags and Ruffes that are so lewd, behold her flesh and here.
Our Beasts and Cattle plagued are, all monstrouse in their shape:
And eke this Child does well declare, the pride we use of late.
Our curled here her here does preche, our ruffes and gises gaie:
Our strange attire whereto we reche, our flesh that plese we may.
The poet tells how Daphenes was, transformd into a tree:
And Io to a Cow did pass, a strange thing for to see.
But poets tales may pass and go, as trifels and untruth:
When ruffes of flesh as I do trow, shall move us unto ruthe.
Deformed are the things we were, deformed is our heart:
The Lord is wroth with all this geere, repent for fere of smarte.
Pray we the Lord our hearts to turn, whilst we have time and space:
Lest that our souls in hell do burn, for voiding of his grace.
And ye O England whose woma^kinde, in ruffes do walk to often:
Parswade them still to bear in mind, this Child with ruffes so soft.
In form as they in nature so, a maid she is in deed:
God grant us grace how ever we go, for to repent with speed.
FINIS. THE.
Imprinted at London by John Allde and Richard Iohnes and are to be sold at
the Long Shop adioining unto S. Mildreds Church in the Pultrie and at the
little shop adioining to the Northwest door of Paul's Church. Anno domini. M.
D. Lxvi. the.xx. of August


