Injunctions exhibited by John by gods sufferance Bishop of Norwich in his
first visitacion beginning the second day of May in the third year of our
soueraign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England, France and
Ireland. Defendour of ye faith. etc. unto all and singular the diocesans of the
diocese of Norwich so far as they concern any of them.

Jmprinted ad London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

CVM GRATIA ET PRIVILEGIO REGIAE MAIESTATIS.

Injunctions exhibited by John by Gods sufferaunce Bishop of Norwich in his
first visitacion beginning the second day of May in the third year of our
soueraign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England, France and
Ireland. Defendour of the faith etc. unto all and singular the diocesans of the
diocese of Norwich so far as they concern any of them.
FIrst ye every parson, vicare and Curate, do so order the common service
within the city of Norwich and other like places where be diverse parish
churches in one town, that it may be done on ye so^daie, by nine of the clok,
before the beginning of the sermon, where any is appointed, ye all the people
after common prayers be done in their parish churches may resort thither to
hear the sermon.

2. Item that as many of them as be entered into orders, do say the morning and
evening prayers daily in English or Latten, either openly or prinatelie, that
they may be the more reddie in the Scriptures.

3 Item that they see unto their Clerks and Sextens, if they do ring at the
burial of the dead, noone or curpheue, they ring but one peall, and that
berie short, omitting all other unnecessary ringings as it is prescribed by
order taken herin.

4 Item that they neither suffer the Lords table to be hanged and decked like
an altar, neither use any gestures of the popish mass in ye time of
ministracion of the communion, as shifting of ye book, washing, breathing,
crossing or such like.

5 Item that they baptize not children on the wourking days, or when the
congregation is not come together, except it be thought that evident Ieoperdie
require the contrary.

6 Item that they marie no young folks, except they examine them before,
whether they can say, the articles of the Christian faith, the Lords prayer
and the ten commaundeme^ts: and if they can not: then to stay them from going
forwards, till they can say them. Likewise that they examine the godfathers and
godmothers, when they come to baptize children in ye same points: secretly, and
modestly, bearing with the age of some parsons. For how can they be sureties
for an other to be instructed in that faith, which they can not skill of
themselfes. Thirdly yt they suffer none to come to the holy communion, except
they also know the same necessary points of Religion.

7 Item yt they marie none before dewetime, yt is before six of the clock in
the somer, and seven in the winter, at what time the broad day light does
appear.

8 Item that they preach their sermons limited by the Q. Mayesties Injunctions
that is every month one orels at the least wies get them to be preached, so
that they them selfs preach four times in the year in their own parsones
being habled thereto by their ordinarye if they can not preach then to read
some homely set out by the Queens Majesty.

9 Item that they with such diligent trauail industry and conference do
every weke read and peruse two chapiters of the new testament and study the
same that they may be able to answer to all matters contained therein with the
true understanding thereof to begin with Saint Mathewes gospel and after
with saint John's, and so consequently till they begone over and so to the
Epistles. This to begin in August next, and to make account to such as bithe
said reverend father shall be appointed ye first twesdaie of every month
following. And besides this they shall also cause every quarter one sermon at
the least to be preached at there beneficesbi some learned preacher till they be
hable to preach them their selfs. To this task as touching ye chapters the
curates also be enjoined though they have no benefices.

10 Item that they teach the Catechism every sondaie and every holidaie one
hour at the least before evening prayer and to begin the same the first
sondaie in August next and so to continue every sondaie and holydaie.

11 Item yt they warn the parents and masters to cause their children and
youth to learn the Catechism, either in schools or else at home so as they
may be examined by ye minister every so^daie and holydaie that they may make
answer to the ministers standing in the pulpet dema^ding questions of them and
this shall be done inmediatlye after the last peale to evening prayer.

12 Item that they require the young folks unmarried to resort to the hearing
of the children examined and rendering of the Catechism to the intent that they
by hearing may learn the same, and thereby (besides discharge of their dewty
toward God) avoid worldly rebuke and shame which should happen unto them, if
they should be rejected from marriage for ignorance of the christian faith,
the Lords Prayers, and the ten Commandments. Exhorting also thelder
married folks to be present both for the good example of the youth and also
to learn them selfs, by hearing if they by reason of evil educacion in time
of ignorance, have not been sufficiently instructed in times past.

13 Item yt they see the places filled up in walls orells where, where imagies
stood, so as if there had been none there. The stones foundacio^s or other
places, frames or Tabernacles devised to advance Imagerie, holy waterstones
also to be quite and clean taken away and the places where they were set,
comely and decently to be made up with convenient expedicion, orells to
declare to the ordinary the lettes and stays thereof as soon as may be.

14 Item that every Parson, vicarre, Curate and reader, shall every quarter
ones, read openly in the pulpet the Queen's majesty's Iniunctio^s, and also
these present Injunctions with the confession hereunto annexed, and besides
that, get him a copy of these Injunctions and set them up by the last of
Septembre in some convenient place of their quier there to remain still to be
seen of them that list to read them.

15 Item that ye master, pryest, and other governors of all hospitals be
vigilant and look diligently, as well to the well ordering and godly instructing
of the sik and sore people within ye same hospitals: as also to the virtuous
and godli educacion of the children and other youth there, so as they may be
taught to follow and favor the sincere verity of almighty God, as it is now
manifestly set forth by the Queen's most excellent Majesty and that they
themselves also be folowers thereof.

Interrogatories.
WHether the parsons, vicare, curate, or reader does read the common service
with a loud, distinct, and treatable voice.

2 Whether the lessons epistels and gospels be read or so^ge so as they may be
plainli barde of the people.

3 Whether the parsone or vicare preach or cause to be preached in his church
every month one Sermon.

4 Whether every parson or vicare preach in his own parsone one sermon every
quarter, if there be no sermon they read the homilies plainly and distinctlie
according to the Iniunction.

5 Whether to the uttermost of their wit power knowledge and learning they do
with out color or dissimulacion, declare four times yearelye in their several
sermons or exhortacions that the power of the Bishop of Rome and all other
forreyn power, are justly taken away.

6 Whether they do exhort the people to remember the poor after the homelye
when they read the sentences exhorting the Almose.

7 Whether they teach the youth of their parish the Lords prayer, the
articles of the faith, the ten commandments and the Catechism every
sundaie and holidaie.

8 Whether they and their church wardeyns have provided in their parish a
Bible in the largest volume, and Erasmus paraphrasis upon the new Testament.

9 Whether they declare to their parishes any thing to thextolling or setting
fourth of vain and supersticious religion.

10 Whether the parson or vicare being absent has left upon his benefice an
honest learned and expert Curate.

11 Whether any minister or priest in the time of trouble have deuorced him
self from his wife and whether his wife has been married to any other man
sithen, or that he himself has married any other woman without judgment of the
Church.

12 Whether the Priests, and deacons say daily the morning and evening
service, ope^lye or priuatelye.

13 Whether any yt took orders in king Edwards days not contented with that,
were ordered again in Queen Mary's days.

14 Whether the parson or vicare, or any for him has bought his benefice or
has come by it by simonie fraud or deceipte.

15 Whether the parson or vicare have more benefices then one.

16 Whether any of your benefices be vacant, and how long they have so been
and who is the patro^.

17 Whether there be any lay or temporal men not being within orders or
children that has or enjoys any benefice or spiritual promocion.

18 Whether there be any patron that suffers any benefice to be vacant and
takes the tithes and other duties to him self.

19 Whether any parson, vicare or Curate give any evil example of life,
whether they be incontine^t parsones, dro^kards, haunters of tauernes,
alehouses or suspect places: dycers, tablers, carders, swearers or vehemently
suspected thereof.

20 Whether they have received any parsone to the holy communion openly
known to be out of charity or diffamed with some notorious crime before he has
made sufficient recompense for his wrong or evil doing.

21 Whether they have a fit and decent table to minister the communion on.

22 Whether the parson or vicare being not resident upon his benefice gives
the forty part thereof, to the poor of the parish.

23 Whether any parson or vicare finds but a reader under him where he
should find Minister.

24 Whether the chauncell, the body of yt parish church or chapel, the
parsonage and vikerage house, and other belonging to the same: be in good
reparacions, and whether the better coueringes of any of them have been pulled
of and worse set in the place and by whom.

25 Whether they celebrate the communion with less nombre then four or three
comunicantes at the least in such parishes wheare there be xx. parsones of
discretion and in greater parishes with out a greater number.

26 Whether if there be more Priests in any church then one: they do all
comunicate with the minister when the communion is celebrate.

27 Whether that any reader being admitted but to read: takes upon him to
baptize, to marie; to celebrate the Lords supper or to distribute the Lords cup.

28 Whether they baptize children in any other days then the sundaies and
holidaies except it be thought need that they should be baptized at home.

29 Whether they have married any without banes asking, or if ye parties married
be of diverse parishes, whether they have married them without certificat from the
parsone or parsones where they where asked: or have married any yt be out of
their own parishes not licenced thereunto, or has not openly denounced their
certificat or license accordi^gly at the time of marriage or has married any
parson not in due place or convenient time.

30 Whether they have exhorted young folk to abstain from privy contractes
and not to mary without the consent of such their parents and friends as
have authority over them.

31. Whether they have admitted to ye holy table, any of an other parish
except they be strangers without the license of ye ministre from whence they
came.

32 Whether that there be any yt preaches out of their own parishes not
licenced thereunto, orels takes upon the^ to preach being not ordained nor
licenced thereunto.

33 Whether the master and governors of the hospital within Norwich and
other hospitals with in the diocese of Norwich do look diligently to the well
orderyng and godly instructing of the sick and sore people within the same
hospitals.

34 Whether the youth within ye same hospitalls be taught to favor and follow
the sincere verytye of almighty God as it is now set forth by the Queens
most excellent Majesty.

For the duty of church wardeines.
WHether they have provided a comely and honest pulpet to be set in a comeli
place of ye church.

2 Whether al aulters, images, holiwater stones, pictures, paintings, as of
Thassumption of the blessed virgin, of the descending of Christ into the virgin
in the form of a little boy at Thanunciacion of the Angel, and al other
supersticious and dangerous momuments especially paintings and Imagies in
wall, book, cope, Banner or else where, of the blessed trinity or of the
father (of whom there can be no Image made) be defaced and removed out of the
church and other places and are destroyed and the places where such impiety
was: so made up, as if there had been no such thing there.

3 Whether that any Imagies, beads, books of saruice, or vestiments not allowed
by law be reserved of any man or in any place, by whom and where they be
reserved.

4 Whether they know any man that refuses to contribute to the Alms of the
poor as a thing not rightly appointed and discorageth other from such
charitable Alms.

5 Whether the Churchwardeynes have provided a strong chest, for the poor men's
box and have fastened it in a fytte place.

6 Whether ye church money coming of moveable stocks money given to find
torches, tapers, lamp light not paid out of any lands, be employed to the
poor men's box or no?

7 Whether the Churchewardeynes of every parish do duly levye and gather of
the goods and lands of every such parsone yt comes not to his own parish
church upon the sondaies and holly days and there hear the deuin service and
Gods word read and preached xii. d. for every such offense, and whether they
have distributed the same money to the poor.

8 Whether there be a register had and kept faithfully of Christenings and
Burials.

For Scholemaisters and their office.
WHether any Scholemaister take upon him to teach not allowed by the ordinarye.

2 Whether they move and teach their children duly to reverence and love the
true religion yt is now set fourth.

3 Whether they teach their children such sentences out of the scripture as
may frame them to Godlynes.

4 Whether they teach any other gra^mer then such as is appoincted by the
Queen's Majesty's Injunctions annexed to the same.

For Clerks and their duty.
WHether that the song in the Church be modest and distinct so devised and
used that the ditte may plainly be understand.

2 Whether they use to sing any number of psalms, dirige like, at the buryall
of the dead or do any other thing otherwise then it is appointed by the common
order of the service book.

3 Whether they use to ring often or long peales at the buryall of the dead or
use much iangling in festival days in ringing none or curphew.

For the people and their duty.
WHether there be any man that mocketh or iesteth at the divine service, or at
ye ministers thereof or speaks any thing by jest or earnest to the dispising,
derogacion or letting thereof.

2 Whether any man has burned or caused the holy Bible to be burned, torn or
defaced or has conveyed it out of the Church that it should not be read of
the people.

3 Whether any parishoner denies to receive the sacraments and other rites
ecclesiastical according to ye book aucthorized by common authority.

4 Whether any man is known to have said, or heard mass since it was
abrogate by law, wherher any man makes any singing cakes to say mass with
all, reserueth vestiments, superaltaries, mass books or other instruments of
this supersticion.

5 Whether any do defer their children to be baptized be yond ye next
sundaie or holidaie after their birth and upon what causes they do so.

6 Whether any be so hasty to baptize their children that having no need they
will not tarry till ye next holiday that the child may be partaker of the
prayers of the whole church, then present.

7 Whether any have married with in the degrees of consanguinitie prohibited by
the laws of God, either whether any married without those degrees, have
unlawfully forsaken their wyfes or husbands or married others.

8 Whether any man keeps in his house any abused Images namely such as be
removed out of the church, or S. John's head. S. Catheryn, S. Nicolas or such
like.

9 Whether any body uses beads laten prymers or any other prayer books then
that be allowed by public authority to be used.

10 Whether there be any that mainteyneth any heresy or false opinion contrary
to Gods word.

11 Whether there be any that exercises sorcery, sooth saying, whytchcraft or
such like cuxyous arts.

12 Whether there be any incontinent parsones druncardes, swearers, blasphemers
of the name of God, raylers at religion or fautie in any other enormouse crime
or vehemently suspected of the sam.

13 Whether there be any that neglects to resort commonly to his parish
church and there abides orderly and soberlie during the time of services.

14 Whether there be any that uses byeng, selling, dressinge, carrying to and
fro of cloth, followyth his occupacion, gives himself or causes his to
labor bodelie or to attend their occupacion on the saboth day, hindering
both them selfs and theyrs, thereby to learn gostly things.

15 Whether therbe any that walks or talks in the Church at service time
or goes out with out urgent need.

16 Whether therbe any body otherwise occupied at service time then to here
and mark the same orels suffer their children to disturb the divine service.

17 Whether any parson of discretion has not comunicate thrice in the year and
in especially at easter last past who they be and what be their names.

18 Whether any has married the banes not being laufully asked before except he
had a dispe^sacion of the ordenarie.

19 Whether fathers, mothers, masters, and dames sends out their children
and servants to be instructed in the Catechism on sondaies and holidaies.

20 Whether vinteners or they th^^ keep vitayling houses do sell meat or
drynk in time of service (...) sermons.


