ARTICLES To be inquired of, in the ^^^st Metropoliticall visitation, of the
most ^euerend Father, GEORGE, by Gods pro^^^ence, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Primate of all ^^gland; in, and for the Dioces of Peterbury, in the year
of our Lord God, 1613 and in the third year of his Graces Translation.

HEB DDIM HEB DDIEV printer's device of William Jaggard

LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard.

The Tenor of the Oath, to be Ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you, and every of you, shall duly consider, and
diligently enquire, of all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and
that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain, or fear of
displeasure, or malice set aside; you shall present all and every such person,
of, or within your Parish, as has committed any offense, or made any default
mentioned in these, or any of these Articles; or which are vehemently suspected
or defamed of any such offense or default: Wherein you shall deal uprightly and
fully; neither presenting, nor sparing to present any, co^^^^^ to truth: having
in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth,
and to suppress vice. So help you God, and the holy Contents of this Book.

Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches possessions.
IMprimis, whether have you in your several Churches and Chapels, the whole
Bible of the largest volume, and the Book of Common Prayer, lately set forth
by his Majesty's authority, both fairly and substantiallie bound: a Font of
Stone, set up in the ancient usual ^^ace: a convenient and decent Communion
Table, with a Carpet of ^ilke, or some other decent stuff, continually laid
upon the Table at ^^ne of Divine service, and a fair Linen cloth upon the
same, at the ^^ne of the receiving of the holy Communion. And whether is the
same ^^ble placed in such convenient sort within the chancell or church, as
that ^he Minister may be best heard in his Prayer and administration, and that
the greatest number may communicate: And whether is it so used (...) of time of
Divine service, as is not agreeable to the holy use of it; as ^atting on it,
throwing Hats on it, writing on it, or is it abused to other ^^phaner uses: and
are the Ten Commandments set upon the East^d of your church or chapel where
the people may best see and read ^un, and other sentences of holy Scripture,
written on the walls like^^se for that purpose?

2 Item, whether have you in your said church or chapel, a conueni^^ seat for
your Minister to read service in, together, with a comely pul^^ set up in a
convenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for the ^^e, a comely large
Surplice, a fair Communion cup, with a cover of ^^uer, a Flaggon of Silver,
Tin, or Pewter, to put the Wine in, hereby it may be set upon the Communion
Table, at the time of the ^essing thereof, with all other things and ornaments
necessary for the ^^bration of Divine Service, and administration of the
Sacraments? and whether have you a strong Chest for Alms for the poor, with
three ^^ckes and Keys, and another chest for keeping the Books, and Orna^ents
of the Church, and the Register Book. And whether have you a ^egister Book in
Parchment, for Christnings, Weddings, and Buri^^, and whether the same be kept
in all points, according to the Cannons in that behalf provided? And whether
have you in your said Church or Chancell, a Table set, of the degrees wherein
by Law Men are prohibited to marry?

3 Whether are your Church and Chapels, with the Chancels thereof, and your
parsonage or vicarage house, your Parish Almes-house and Church-house, in good
reparations: and are they employed to godly, and the r^ght holy uses? Is your
Church, Chancell, and Chapel decently and comely kept, as well within as
without, and the seats well maintained, according to the 85. Cannon, in that
behalf provided? Whether your Churchyard be well fenced, and kept without
abuse: and if not, in whose default the same is, and what the defect or fault
is? and whether any person have incroached upon the ground of the Churchyard,
or whether any person or persons, have used any thing or place consecrated to
holy use, profanely or wickedly?

4 Whether have you the Terrier of all the Gleabe Lands, Meadows, Gardens,
Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tiths
(whether within your Parish or without) belonging unto your parsonage or
vicarage, taken by the view of honest men in your said Parish? And when her the
same Terrier be laid up in the Bishops Registery, and in whose hands any of
them are now. And if you have no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his
absence, with your Minister, are to make diligent inquiry and presentment of
the premises, and make, subscribe, and sign, the said Terrier, as aforesaid?

Concerning the Ministers.
1 Whether does your Minister, distinctly and reverently say Divine service
upon Sundays and Holidaies, and other days appointed to be observed by the
book of Common Prayer: as Wednesdayes, and Fridaies and the eeues of every
Sunday and Holiday, at si^ and usual times? And does your Minister duly
observe the Orders Rites, and Ceremonies, prescribed in the said Book of
Common Prayer, as well in reading public prayers and the ^etany, as also in
administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the sick
burying the dead, Churching of Women, and all other like Rites an^ Offices of
the Church, in such manner and forms, as in the said Book of Common prayer he
is enjoined, without any omiss on or addition And does he read the Book of
the last Cannons once yearly, and wear^ a Surplice according to the said
Cannons?

2 Does your Minister bid Holidaies and Fasting-daies, as by the Book of Common
Prayer is appointed? And does he give warning before hand to the Parishioners,
for the receiving of the holy Communion, as the 22. Cannon requires? And
whether he does administer the holy Communion so often, and at such times, as
that every Parishioner may receive the same, at the least thrice in every
year: whereof once at Easter, as by the Book of common Prayer is appointed?
And does your Minister receive the same himself, on every day that he
administreth it to others, and use the words of institution, according to the
Book, at every time that the Bread and Wine is renewed; accordingly as by the
Prouiso of the 21. Cannon, is directed? And does he deliver the Bread and Wine
to every Communicant severally? Whether he has admitted to the holy Communion
any Offender, or Schismaticke, contrary to the 26. and 27. constitutions, or
received any to the communion being not of his own cure, or put any from the
Communion, who are not publicly infamous for any notorious crime? Does he
use the sign of the Cross in Baptism, or Baptize in any Basin, or other
Vessel, and not in the usual Font? Or admit any Father to be Godfather to
his own child, or such which have not received the holy Communion: or Baptize
any children that were not borne in the parish; or wilfully refuse to baptize
any Infant in his Parish being in danger, having been informed of the
weakness of the said child: and whether the said child dyed through his
default, without Baptism?

3 Whether has your Minister married any without a King, or without Banes
published three several Sundaies or Holidaies in time of Divine service, in
the several churches or chapels of their several abode, according to the
Book of common Prayer, or in times prohibited, albeit the Banes were thrice
published, without a License or dispensation from the Archbishop, the Bishop
of the Diocese, or his Chancellor; first obtained in that behalf? Or not
betwixt the houses of eight and twelve in the forenoone, or have married any in
any private house, or if the parties be under the age of twenty one years,
before their Parents or Governors have signified their consent unto him?

4 Does he refuse to bury any, which ought to be inferred in christian burial,
or defer the same longer then he should, or bury any in christian burial,
which by the constitutions of the church of England ought not so to be interred?

5 Is your Minister, a Preacher allowed? If yea; then by whom, if not? Whether
does he procure some who are lawfully licensed, to preach monthly amongst you
at the least?

6 Does your Minister (being licenced) preach usually according to the Cannons,
either in his own Cure, or in some other church or chapel near adjoining,
where no Preacher is, and how often he has been negligent in that behalf,
and does he preach standing, and with his hat off? Or whether does he or his
Curate upon every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read an Homily, or some
part thereof, according as he ought to do; or in case he be not licensed to
preach, does he take upon him to Preach or expound the Scriptures in his own
Cure, or elsewhere; If so, then you are to present the same, the time and
place, when, and where he did it?

7 Does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King James, and for
the Queens Majesty, the Prince, and all their Royal Progeny, with addition of
such style and Titles as are due to his Highness, and exhort the people to
obedience to his Majesty, and all Magistrates in authority under him?

8 Is your Minister continually resident upon his Benefice, and how long time
has he been absent, and in case he be licensed to be absent; whether does he
cause his Cure to be sufficiently supplied, according to the Cannons: or in
case he has another Benefice, whether does he supply his absence by a Curate,
sufficiently licensed to preach in that Cure where he himself is not resident.
Or otherwise, in case the smalnesse of the Living cannot find a Preaching
Minister, does he preach at both his Benifices usually?

9 Does your Minister or Curate, serve any more Cures then one: if yea, then
what other Cure, does he serve, and how far are they distant?

10 Does your Minister every Sunday and Holliday, before Evening Prayer, for
half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant persons of
his Parish, in the Ten Commandments, Articles of the Belief, and in the
Lords Prayer, and the Sacrament, according as it is prescribed in the
Catechism, set forth in the Book of Common Prayer?

11 Does your Minister in the Rogation days, go in perambulation of the
circuit of the Parish, saying and using the Prayers, Suffrages, and
Thanksgiving to God, appointed by Law, according to his duty, thanking God for
his blessings, if there be plenty on the earth; Or otherwise, to pray for his
grace and favor, if there be a fear of s^^sitie?

12 Has your Minister admitted any Woman, begotten with child in Adultry or
Fornication, to be churched without license of the ordinary?

13 Has your Minister or any other Preacher, baptized Children, churched any
woman, or ministered the holy Communion in any private house, otherwise then as
by Law is allowed?

14 Does your Minister, being a Preacher, endeavor and labor diligently to
reclaim the Popish Recusants in his Parish from their errors, (if there be
any such abiding in your Parish.) Or whether is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate,
over conversant with, or a favorer of Recusants, whereby he is suspected not
to be sincere in Religion?

15 Has your Minister taken upon him, to appoint any public or private
Fasts, Prophesies, or exercises, not approved by Law, or public authority, or
has used to meet in any private house or place, with any person or persons,
there to consult how to impeach or deprave the book of common prayer, or the
Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England: If yea, then you shall present
them all?

16 Has your Minister stated the publication of any excommunications or
suspicions, or does he every half year denounce in his Parish Church, all
such of his Parish as are excommunicated, and persevere therein without seeking
to be absolved, or does he wittingly and willingly keep company with such as
are excommunicate: And has he admitted into your Church, any person
excommunicate, without a Certificate of his absolution from the Ordinary, or
other competent Judge?

17 Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from
time to time call upon his Parishioners to give somewhat, as they can spare, to
godly and charitable uses, especially when they make their Testaments?

18 Whether your Minister or any, having taken holy orders, being now silenced
or suspended, or any other person of your knowledge, or as you have heard, hold
any conuenticles, or does preach in any place, or use any other form of Divine
service then is appointed in the Book of Common prayer: If yea, then you are
to present their names, and with whom?

19 Whether is your Curate licensed to serve, by the Bishop of this Diocese,
or by any other, and by whom?

20 Does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his apparel, as by
the 47. Cannon is enjoined: and is he of sober behavior, and one that does not
use such bodily labor, as is not seemly for his suntion and calling?

21 Is your Minister noted or defamed, to have obtained his Benifice or his
orders, by Symony, or any other way defamed, to be Symoniacall person, or any
way noted to be a Schismaticke, or scismaticallie affected or reputed to be an
incontinent person, or does table or lodge any such in his house: or is he a
frequenter of Tauernes, Innes, or Alehouses, or any place suspected for ill
rule: Or is he a common Drunkard, a common Gamster, or player at Dice, a
Swearer, or one that applies himself not at his study, or is otherwise
offensive and scandalous to his function or Ministry?

22 Does your Preacher or Lecturer read Divine service, and Minister the
Sacraments twice a year at least in his own person, according to the Cannons?

Schoole-Maisters.
23 Does any in your Parish take upon him to teach School, without License of
the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the Religion now established? And does
he bring his Scholars to the Church, to hear Divine service, and Sermons? And
does he instruct his Shollers in the grounds of the Religion now established
in this Church of England, and is he carefall and diligent to benefit his
Scholars in learning?

Parish Clearkes and Sextons.
24 Have you a fit Parish Clark, aged twenty years at least, of honest
conversation, able to read and write? whether are his and the Sextons wages
paid without fraud, according to the ancient custom of your Parish: if not,
then by whom are they so defrauded or denied? By whom are they chosen? And
whether the said Clarke be approved by the Ordinary? And has he taken an Oath,
as in such cases is fit and required: And is he diligent in his office, and
serviceable to the Minister, and does he take upon him to meddle with any thing
above his Office: as Churching of Women, burying the dead, or such like?

25 Does your Clarke or Sexton keep the Church cleave, the doors locked? Is
any thing lost or spoiled in the Church, through his default? does he suffer
any unseasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in your Church? Or does he
(when any is passing out of this life) neglect to tole a Bell, having notice
thereof.

Concerning the Parishoners.
1 Whether any of your Parishoners, being sixteen years of age or upwards,
or others lodging or commonly resorting to any House within your Parish, do
wil^ullie absent themselves from your Parish Church, upon Sondaies or Holidaies
at Morning and Evening Prayers? Or who come late to Church, and depart from
church, before ^^ruice be done upon the said days? Or who do not reverently
behave ^^emselues during the time of Divine Service, devoutly kneeling, when ^e
general confession of sins, the Letany, the ten Commandments, and all
Prayers and Collects are read, and using all due and lowly reue^^nce, when the
blessed name of the Lord Jesus Christ is mentioned, and ^tanding up when the
Articles of the Belief are read; or who do cover their heads in the Church
during the time of Divine service, unless it be a case of necessity, in which
case they may wear a Nightcap or coy^e? Or who do give themselves to
babbling, talking, or walking, and are ^ot attentive to hear the word preached,
or read; or reading, or praying, ^^ring the time aforesaid? Whether any of your
Parish being of sixteen years of age or upwards, do not receive the holy
communion in your church thrice every year; whereof once at Easter, and
whether they ^^e not devoutly kneel at the receiving thereof?

2 Whether any of your Parishioners, being admonished thereof, ^^e not send
their Children, Servants, and Apprentizes, to the Minister, (...) be catechized
upon such Sondaies and Holidaies as are appointed? Or whether any of them do
refuse to come; or if they come, refuse to ^^ne those instructions set forth in
the Book of common prayer?

3 Whether any of your parish do entertain within their house, ^^y soiourner,
common guests or other persons, who refuse to frequent ^iuine service or
receive the holy communion, as aforesaid? present ^^eir names, their
qualities, or conditions.

4 What Recusant Papists are there in your parish? present their ^^nes,
qualities, or conditions? whether keep they any Schoolemaister (...) their
house, which comes not to church to hear Divine service and ^^trine the
Communion? What is his Name, and how long has he ^^ght there, or elsewhere?

5 Whether any of the said popish Recusants, do labor to seduce (...)
withdraw others from the Religion now established? Or instruct (...) Families
or children in popish Religion: or refuse to entertain any, ^^^cially in place
of greatest service, or trust, but such as concur with (...) in their
papistry?

6 How long have the said Popish Recusants abstained from divine ^^^uice, or
from the communion, as aforesaid?

7 Is there any in your parish that retain undefaced, or sell, utter, (...)
verse, any popish Books or writings, or any Books, Libels, or ^^^ings of any
Secturies, touching the Religion, State, or Gouern^^nt Ecclesiastical of this
Kingdom of England, or keep any Ornaments of superstition uncancelled or
defaced?

8 Whether have you any in your Parish, which heretofore being Popish
Recusants or Sectuaries, have since reformed themselves, and come to Church to
hear Divine Service, and receive the Sacraments: If yea, then who they are?
And how long since have they so reformed themselves? And whether they still
remain and abide in that conformity?

9 Is there any in your Parish that refuse to have their Children Baptized, or
themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking
exception against him, and what causes or exceptions do they allege; or have
any married Wives refused to come to church, according to the Book of common
Prayer, to give God thanks after their Childbirth, for their safe
deliverance? And whether do any of, or in your Parish, refuse to have their
children Baptized in your parish church, according to the form prescribed in
the Book of common Prayer?

10 Whether any of your Parish having a Preacher to their parson, Vicar, or
Curate, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to other places to
hear other Preachers? Or whether any of your parish do communicate or baptize
their Children in any other parish?

11 What persons within your parish, for any offense, contumacy, or crime, of
Ecclesiastical Conusance do stand excommunicate? present their names, and for
what cause they are excommunicated, and how long they have so stood, and what
parson or persons do wittingly and vsualli^ keep them company?

12 Whether any, not being in orders, do execute any priestlie o^ ministerial
office, in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, and wha^ be their names?

13 Whether any in your parish, that having heretofore taken upon him the
order of Priesthood or Deacon, has since relinguished the same, and lives a
Layman, neglecting his vocation?

14 Have any person in your Parish, quarrelled, or stricken, or used any
violence to your Minister, or have stricken or quarrelled with any other person
within your Church or Churchyard, or demeaned him self disorderedly in the
Church, by filthy or profane talk, or any other lewd or immodest behavior?
Or have disturbed the Minister in time o^ Divine service or Sermon, or have
libelled or spoken slanderous word against your Minister, to the scandal of
his vocation, or diffamed an^ of his Neighbors, touching any crime o^
Ecclesiastical conusance?

15 Whether any of, or in your parish, without consent of the Ordinary, or
other lawful authority, have caused any to do penance, or (...) be censured
or punished for any matter of Ecclesiastical conusance, by any Vestry
meetings, or otherwise by their own authority? Or have ta^en any Money or
commutation for the same? Present their names that ^^ue done it? And who have
been so punished? In what manner, and upon what cause?

16 Whether any person in your parish, do exercise any Trade or ^^bour, buy,
or sell, or keep open Shoppes or Warehouses upon any Sunday or Holliday, by
themselves, their Servants, or Apprentizes, ^r have otherwise profaned the
said days, contrary to the orders of the church of England? And whether there
be any Inne-keepers, Ale-house-keepers, Victulers, or other persons, that
permit any persons in their Houses, to eat, drink, or play, during the time
of Divine Service or Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoone or
afternoon, upon those days?

17 Whether the fifth day of August, and the fifth day of November, b^eacute;e
kept holy, and thanksgiving made to God, for his Majesty's and this States
happy deliverance, according to the ordinance in that behalf?

18 Whether any of your parish, hold or frequent any conuenticles or private
congregations, or make or maintain any constitutions, agreed upon in any such
assemblies? Or any that do write, or publicly or privately speak against
the Book of common prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against any of
the Articles of Religion agreed upon, in Anno 1562. or against the Kings
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, or against the Oath of Supremacy, or of
Alleagiance, as pretending the same to be unlawful, and not warrantable by the
word of God? Or against any of the Rites or ceremonies of the Church of England
now established? Or against the government of the church of England, under the
Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, and other Officers of the same: affirming, that the same is
repugnant to the Word of God, and that the said Ecclesiastical Officers, are
not lawfully ordained? Or whether there be any Authors, Maintainours, or
Favorers of Heresy or Scisme, or that be suspected to be Annabaptists,
Libertines, Brownists, of the Family of Love, or of any other Heresy or
Scisme? present their ^^mes?

19 Whether any in your Parish have married within the degrees by Law
prohibited, or any couple in your Parish being lawfully married: live apart one
from the other, without due separation of the Law, or any that have been
divorced, which keep company with any other at Bed^ and at Board, and when and
where were they married?

Physicians, Surgeons, and Mid-wiues.
20 HOw many Physicians, Chirurgions, or Mid-wiues, have you in your parish?
How long have they used their several science: or offices, and by what
authority? And how have they demeaned them selves therein, and of what skill
are they accounted to be in their profession?

21 Whether do any persons administer the goods of the dead without lawful
authority, or suppress the last will of the dead? Or are there in your parish,
any Wills not yet proved, or goods of the dead (dying intestate) left
vnadministred? By authority in that behal^e, you shall not fail to present the
Executors, and all others faulty therein; and also how many persons being
possessed of any Goods and Chattels, have dyed w thin your parish, since the
xvij. day of April 1613.

22 Whether any withold the stock of the Church, or any goods, or other
things, given to good and charitable uses.

23 Whether your Hospitals and Almes-houses, and other such houses and
Corporations, founded to good and charitable uses; and the lands, possessions,
and goods of the same, be ordered and disposed of as they should be? And do
the Masters, Governors, Fellows, and others of the said Houses and
Corporations, behave and demean themselves, according to the godly Ordinances
and Statutes of their several Foundations?

24 Whether have you any in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame or
report, which have committed, Adultry, Fornication, or Incest; or any which
have impudentlie bragged or boasted, that he or she have lived incontinently
with any person or persons whatsoever: or any that has attempted the chastity
of any woman or solicited any Woman to have the carnal knowledge of her
body, or which are commonly reputed to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of
Gods holy Name; common Swearers, common Slanderers of their Neighbors, and
owers of discord, filthy and lascivious Talkers, Usurers, sc^monicall persons,
Bawds, or Harborers of Women with Child, which be unmarried, or conueying or
suffering them to go away before they have made satisfaction to the
Congregation, or any that having heretofore been presented, or suspected of
any the foresaid crimes, have or that cause departed your Parish, and are now
returned again? Or any which have used any enchantments, sorceries,
incantations, or witch ^asts, which are not made felony by the statutes of
this Realm, or any which have committed any perjury in any Ecclesiastical
Court, in an Ecclesiastical cause, or which have committed any lorgerie,
punishable by the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the procurors and abettors of the
said ^fences: You shall truly present the names of all, and singular the said
Offenders, and with whom they have committed the said offenses, in ^ase they
have not been publicly punnished to your knowledge for the ^^me crimes?

Tou^hing the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
^ Whether you and the Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen, from time to
time, do, and have done their diligences, (...) not suffering any role person
to abide either in the Churchyard, or Church Porch, in Service or Sermon time,
but causing them either to ^^me into the Church to hear Divine Service, or to
depart, and not di^^urbe such as be hearers there? And whether have they, and
do you di^^gentlie see the Parishioners duly resort to the Church every
Sundaie and Holidaie, and there to remain during Divine service and sermon?
and whether you or your predecessors, Churchwardens there, suffer any places,
Feasts, Drinkings or any other profane vsages, to be kept in ^ur Church,
Chappeil, or Churchyards, or have suffered to your and ^^^ir uttermost power
and endeavor, any person or persons, to be tip^ng or drinking in any Inn or
Victuling House in your Parish, du^^g the time of Divine Service or Sermon, on
Sundaies and Holie^ies?

2 Whether, and how often have you admitted any to Preach ^^thin your Church or
chapel, which was not sufficiently licensed? and whether you, together with
your Minister, have not taken diligent ^^e and care, that every of your
Parishioners, being of sixteen years ^^ge or upwards have received thrice
every year, as aforesaid; and (...) that no stranger have usually come to
your church, from their own ^ish-church?

3 Whether have there been provided against every communion, sufficient
quantity of fine Wh te Bread, and of good and wholesome ^me for the
Communicants that shall receiu^? And whether that wine brought in a clean and
sweet standing Pot of Pewter, or of other ^^r Metal?

4 Whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the parishioners?
And have the late Churchwardens given up a just account for their time, and
delivered to their Successors the Money, and other things belonging to the
Church, which was in their hands? And are the Alms of the Church faithfully
distributed to the use of the poor?

Concerning Ecclesiastical Magistrates and Officers.
1 Whether do you know or have heard of any payment, composition or
agreement, to, or with any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, or Officer, for
winking at, or sparing to punish any person for any offense of Ecclesiastical
Conusance, or for suppressing or concealing of any excommunication, or any
other Ecclesiastical Censure, of, or against any Recusant, or any other
offender in the cases aforesaid? what sum of Money, or other consideration
has been received or promised, by, or to any of them, in that respect, by
whom, and with whom?

2 Has any person within your parish, paid or promised any sum of Money or
other reward, for comutation of penance for any crime of Ecclesiastical
Conusance? If so, then with whom? When, and for what, and how has the same
been employed?

3 Are your Ecclesiastical Judges and their substitutes Masters of Arts, or
Batchellors of the Laws at the least, learned and practiced in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws: Men of good Life and Fame, zealously affected in
Religion, and just and upright in executing their offices? Have they heard any
matter of office privately in their Chambers, without their sworn Registers,
or their Deputies presence?

4 Do you know, or have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge, Off cer, or
Minister, has received or taken any extraordinary Fees, or otheir rewards or
promises, by any ways or means, directly or indirectlie, of any person or
persons whatsoever, either for the granting of the administration of the Goods
and Chattels of those that have died intestate, to one before another, or for
allotting of larger portions of the goods and Chattels of those who have died
intestate, to one more then to another: or for allowing large and unreasonable
accounts, made by Executors or Administrators: or for giving them Quietus est,
or discharges without Inuentory or account, to defraude Creditors, Legataries,
o^ those who are to have portions. And what sums of Money do you know, or
have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer has taken out of the
state of any dying intestate, upon pretense to bestow the same, in pios vsus:
And how have the same been bestowed?

5 Has any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, Officer, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this your Dioces; or any Advocate,
Register, Procter, Clerks, Apparators, or other Minister belonging to the same
Ecclesiastical Courts, exacted or taken by any ways or means, directly or
indirectly, extraordinary or greater Fees then are ^ue and accustomed? And
whether is there a Table for the rates of all fees, set up in their several
Courts and Offices? and whether have they sent or suffered any Process to go
out of the Ecclesiastical Courts otherwise then by Law they ought? Or have
they taken upon them the office if Informers of Promoters to the said Courts,
or any other way abused themselves in their Offices, contrary to the Law and
Cannons in that behalf provided?

5 What number of Apparators has every several Judge Ecclesiastical? And
wherein, and in what manner is the Country ouerburthened by them? And wherein
have they caused or summoned any to appear in the said Courts, without a
presentment or Citation first had? Or whether have they threatened any to
prosecute them in the said Courts, if they would not give them some rewards,
and what bribes in that behalf have they taken?

If you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical Conusence, you
are to present the same by virtue of your Oaths?

The Minister of every Parish, may, and ought to join in present^ent with the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, and if they will not present, the Minister may and
ought himself, present the defaultes and mines aforesaid: and there must be
several presentiments made to every several article: and the Minister,
Churchwardens and Sworne-men, are to meet and confer about the said
presentiments, and answering of every of the aforesaid Articles.

FINIS.

