Articles to be enquired of by the Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of
every Pari^ within the Archdeaconrie of London: And Presentment to be made by
them to Master Archdeacon of London, or his Official, Containing a particular
Answer to every Article.
The form of the Oath taken by the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you and every of you shall duly consider and diligently
enquire of these Articles given you in charge, and that al favor, hatred,
hope, fear, or any other corrupt affection set aside, you shall present all
and every such person which now is, or lately was in your Parish, as have
committed any offense or default comprised in any of these Articles, or which
are vehemently suspected or defamed of any such offense or default. Wherein you
shall deal according to an upright conscience, Canon.
neither presenting nor sparing to present any person contrary to truth. So
help you God, and his faithful promises in Jesus Christ.

WHETHER have you in your Church all things requisite for the common Prayer,
and due administration of the Sacraments, according to his Majesty's Laws and
Canons Ecclesiastical lately established: Concerning the Church.
And namely a fair Bible, 80. 81. 82 83. 84. 70.
the book of common Prayer, lately ordained only to be used? A Font of stone
set up in the ancient usual place? A decent Communion table standing upon a
frame, with a Carpet of silk or some other seemly stuff, and a fair linen
cloth to lay thereon at the time of communion? A fair communion Cup with a
cover of Silver? a decent Pulpit with a cloth and Cushion for the same? a
convenient seat to read service in? a comely large surplice? a strong chest for
alms for the poor with three locks and keys, and another chest for keeping
the Ornaments of the Church and Register book? And whether have you a Register
book in parchment of all Christenings, Weddings, and Burials? and whether is
the same kept according to the said Canons? and whether does your Minister upon
every Sunday read the names of such as have been christend, married, or buried
the week before?

2 Whether your Church, 85. 88.
Chancell, and Churchyard be kept in good reparatoms as well within as without?
whether any profanation be used in them, or any man has incroached upon them?
And whether your Prisonage or vicarage house, and all housing thereunto
belonging, be likewise maintained in sufficient reparations? If not, through
whose default, and what is the defect?

3 Whether have you a Terrier of all the gleabes, 87.
lands, medows, gardens, orchards, houses, stocks, ymplements, Tenements, and
portions of Tithes lying within or without your Parish, which belong unto your
Parsonage or Vicarage, and in whose hands, it does remain? If not, you shall
together with your Minister make diligent inquiry of all the premises, and
exhibit with your next presentment a true note of them in parchment subscribed
with your hands, specifying how they are but alled or bounded, and in whose
occupation at this present they are?

4 WHether divine service be said in your Church by your Minister distinctly
and reverently, Concerning the Minister.
upon Sundaies and such holy days as are appointed to be observed by the
book of common Prayer, 14. 15. 58.
and their Eeues, and upon Wednesdaies and Fridaies at convenient and usual
times? And whether does he in ministering the sacraments, solemnizing of
matrimony, visitation of the sick, burying the dead, churching of women, and
all other rites and offices of the Church, use the forms of prayers prescribed
in the said book without any omission or additton? And whether does he read
the book of Canons once yearly and wear a Surplice according to the said
Canon?

5 Whether does your Minister solemnly give warning to his parishioners for the
holy cammunion, 22. 64. 67. 84. 66. 26. 27. 28. 29. 62. 63. 68 69. 62. 100.
and for all holydaies and fasting days? And whether does he visit the sick
and exhort them to give to the poor? And whether does he confer with
recusants in your Parish (if there be any) according to the Canons? And whether
does he admit to the holy communion any notorious offenders, scismaticks, or
strangers: or reject any, who are not by presentment or public scandal
infamous for some notorious crime? And whether does he admit any Father to be
Godfather to his own child, or any to be Godfathers and Godmothers which have
not received the holy communion, or does not use the sign of the cross in
baptism: or does baptize in any basin or other vestell, and not in the usual
Font, or does baptize any children that were not borne within the parish? And
whether does he marry any in any exempt place, or without banes published
three several Sundaies or holidaies, or without a sufficient dispensation or
license, or without license in times prohibited, albeit the banes were thrice
published, or not between the hours of 8. and 12. in the forenoone, or if the
parties be under the age of 21. years, before their parents have signified
their consent unto him, or whether does he refuse to christen, or to bury, or
does defer the same longer than he should, and whether by his default any
child has dyed without baptism in your parish?

6 Whether does he preach, 70. 71. 72. 73. 74.
minister the communion, baptize children, (unless in case of necessity)
solemnize marriage, or church women in private houses? Or does keep or suffer
any Fastes, Prophesies, Exercises, or exercismes without lawful authority: or
does hold or suffer any private conuenticles contrary to the Canons? And
whether does he frequent Tauernes, Alehouses, or any place suspected for
incontinency, or does table or lodge in any such house: or is he a common
Gamester at Dice, Cards, Tables, or any other unlawful game, a swearer or
drunkard, or one that applies not himself to his study, or is otherwise
offensive and scandalous to his function and ministry, or does not use decency
in his apparel, as by the Canons he is enjoined?

7 Whether is he continually resident upon his benefice, and how long time has
he been absent) from the same? And (in case he be lycenced to be absent whether
does he cause his cure to be sufficiently supplied, 45. 46. 47. 74.
according to the Canons? And whether (if he be allowed a preacher) does he
preach one sermon every Sunday: or (if not so allowed) does procure monthly
sermons and read homilies? And whether (not being so allowed) does he expound
any scripture, or suffer any man to preach in your Church, whom you have not
well known to have been sufficiently yeeneed, and who has not first
subscribed his name, together with the day when he did preach, and who was not
severly and decently apparelled?

8 Whether does your Preacher and Lecturer read divine service, 56. 55.
and minister the Sacraments twice a year at the least in his own person,
according to the said Canons? And whether does he use the form of Prayer
before his Sermons for the Kings most excellent Majesty, exhorting the people
to obedience to his Majesty, and other Magistrates in authority under him?

9 Whether does your Minister on Sundaies and holydaies catechize the youth and
ignorant persons in your parish according to the order prescribed in the book
of common prayer, and according to the said Canons? 59.
And whether does he in the Rogation days use the perambulation of the
circuit of the parish appointed by law, according to his duty?

10 Whether does he every six months denonce in his parish Church all such of
his parish as do persevere in the sentence of excommunication, 65.
not seeking to be absolved? And whether has he admitted any such
excommunicate person to the Communion, or to the church without certificate of
his absolution? And whether does he or any of your parish familiarly frequent
the company of any such excommunicate person?

11 WHether any of your parishioners do not cause their Children, Concerning
Parishioners.
Servants, and Apprentices, to come to their Minister upon Sundaies and
holydaies to be instructed in the Catechism by him? 59.
And whether any of them refuse to come, or if they come, refuse to learn
those instructions set forth in the said book of common prayer? And what be
the names of them so not causing, or refusing?

12 Whether any of your parishioners, 13. 14. 18.
or other strangers soiourning, lodging, or commonly resorting to any house
within your parish, above 16. years of age, do wilfully or negligently absent
themselves from your parish Church, upon Sundaies or holydaies at morning and
evening prayer, or who come very late to church upon the said days, or who
depart from church before service be finished: Or who do not reverently behave
themselves during the tune of divine service, devoutly kneeling at such times
as the general confession of sins, the Letany, the Ten commandments, and all
prayers and collects are read: Or who do use any gaining or pastime abroad, or
in any house, or do sit in the street, or Churchyard, or in any Tavern, or
Victualling house upon any of those days in the time of divine service, or who
have quarrelled, brawled, or used violence to any person within your Church or
Churchyard: Or who have used filthy and profane talk, or other rude and
immodest behavior?

13 Whether there be any of or within your parish being sixteen years of age
and upwards, 21. 22. 28.
that do not receive the holy Communion in your Church thrice in this year at
the least, and chiefly once at Easter next: And whether any of your Parish does
not devoutly kneel at the receiving thereof? And whether does not your
Minister receive it himself on every day that he administreth it to others,
and use the words of institution at every time that the bread and wine is
administered? And whether do your selves diligently observe your office, in
marking what persons of or within your parish offend against this and the next
precedent Article, and in due presenting their names?

14 Whether any in your parish having a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar, or
Curate, do absent themselves from his sermons, and resort to other places to
hear other preachers? And whether any having been ordained Priest or Deacon
has relinquished the same and betaken himself to a course of life as a lay
man? Or whether any not being in orders, does openly read common prayer, or
execute any ministerial duty in your church, and what be their names?

15 Whether there be any that do publicly or privately speak against the
Book of common Prayer, 4. 6. 10. 57. 9. 10. 100.
deprauing the same or any thing therein contained: or against any of the said
Articles of Religion agreed upon in Anno. 1562. Or against the Kings Royal
supremacy in causes ecclesiastical, or against any of the rites or ceremonies
of the Church of England: Or against the government of the said church of
England under the Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, and other officers in the same, affirming that the same is
repugnant to the word of God, and that the said ecclesiastical Officers are
not lawfully ordained? Or whether there be any that be Authors or maintayners
of scisme or frequenters of any private conuenticles or meetings: Or that be,
or be suspected to be Anabaptists, Libertines, Brownists, of the Family of
Love, or of any other herisie or scisme: And what be their names?

16 Whether do you know any Schoolemaister that does teach, or Curate that
does read divine service within your parish, without license of his Ordinary
under his scale? And whether does not such Schoolemaister instruct his
scholars in the Catechism, 77. 48. 79.
and teach them the grounds of Religion, and bring them to Church to hear
divine service and sermons, and whether is he a common officer or artificer, or
any ways reproueable in life? And whether is your parish Clarke also allowed
by the Ordinary? And whether does your Clarke serve more eures than one? And
whether do they demean themselves according to their several duties?

17 How many Midwiues have you in your parish which do exercise that office,
how long have they so done, and by what authority? Also how many in your parish
do practice as Physicians or Chyrurgions, how long have they so done, and of
what skill are they reputed in their profession?

18 Whether do you know any persons that do administer the goods of the dead
without lawful authority, or suppress the last will of the dead, or withold
any stock of the Church, or any legacies given to godly and charitable uses:
89.
and whether is the Alms of the Church faithfully distributed to the use of
the poor? And whether the late Churchwardens have given a just account
according to the Canons?

19 Whether do you know in your parish any common swearers, 109.
drunkards, blasphemers, any simonicall persons, or usurers contrary to the
statute 37. of Henry the eight, any witches, coniurers, soothsayers, charmers,
fornicators, adulterers, incestuous persons, braulers, common slaunderers of
their neighbors, raylers, scoulds, filthy and lascimous talkers, sowers of
discord between neighbors, or any that receive or lodge incontinent persons,
or harbor women with child which be unmarried, conneying or suffering them to
go away before they have made satisfaction to the congregation, or any persons
that are by common same noted or vehemently suspected of any of these crimes,
or that being heertofore suspected, or presented for any of these faults, have
for that cause departed out of your parish, and are now returned again?

20 Whether there be any persons within your parish that be married within the
prohibited degrees of consanguinity or affinity, 99. 57.
or their old wines or husbands being yet alive, albeit divorced from them, or
that being lawfully married, do live scandalously apart, or that were married
in times prohibited, or without banes three several Sundaies or holidaies
published having no sufficient license or dispensation for the same? And
whether there be any that do communicate, or cause their children to be
baptized in other Parishes abroad, or keep their children unbaptized longer
then is convenient?

21 Whether any woman delivered of child in your parish, in time convenient
after Childbirth, do not come to the usual place in the Church to give God
thanks, as is appointed by the book of common Prayer? And whether does your
Clarke lay a Cushion at the said usual place? And whether does your Minister
admit any thereto, who was begotten with child in adultery or fornication,
without license from the Ordinary?

22 Whether any Inhabitant within your parish does detain the Clarks wages,
duties for bread and wine, or any other Church duties? Present particularly
what be their names, and what and how much those duties be?

23 Whether any person in your parish do exercise any Trade, Handicraft, or
bodily labor, or do buy and sell, or keep open shoppes or Warehouses upon
any Sunday or holiday, by themselves, their servants or Apprentizes, or have
otherwise profaned the said da^es contrary to the orders of the Church of
England? And whether there be any Inkeepers, Alchousekeepers, or Victuallers,
that permit any persons in their houses to eat, drink, or play at any games
during the time of divine service, or Sermon in the forenoone or afternoon
upon those days?

24 Whether do any in your parish familiarly frequent the company of
excommunicate persons? And whether does your Minister or any of your parish
without consent of the Ordinary, cause any to do penance, or to be censured or
punished by any Vestry meetings, or otherwise by their own authority, or do or
have taken any money for any crime or matter punishable by the ecclesiastical
Law, who have been so punished, in what manner, and upon what cause?

25 If any one or more of you do know, or have heard of any fault enquired of
in these Articles, or of any other crime, the reformation whereof belongs to
the spiritual jurisdiction, happening from the (...) day of (...) that then you
do inform one another thereof, 117.
and you shall likewise present the same by virtue of your oaths?

26 The Minister of every parish may join in every presenment with the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, who if they will not present, the Minister may
himself present to the said Archdeacon or his Official such faults or crimes
abouesaid, as shall be thought to require due reformation? 113.


You are charged to specify the fault or crime, 118. 128.
proper name and surname, trade or addition, and place of dwelling of every
person presented. And to bring your first general presenment upon all these
Articles into Christ-church in London, in the forenoone between the hours of
viij and xj. of the clock, the. (...) day of (...) And your last general
presentment on the Tuesday senight immediately ensuing after Easter day next,
or else then and there to appeal personally, to show the cause of your default
therein. Intimating further, that you may (besides those general) present
offenders, as often as you shall think meet, as by the said Canons is
prescribed.


