Articles to be inquired of, by the Churchwardens and Sworn men, within the
Archdeao^nrie of Worcester, in the Visitation of the R. Worshipful, M. John
Johnson Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of the Archdeaconry of Worcester
aforesaid, in this present year of our Lord God. 1609.

At London printed by Ralph Blower, ANNO DOMINI. 1609.

Mattters enquirable, concerning the Clergy,
1 Whether any do serve as Minister, or Curat, in your Church or Chapel, not
being lawfully Ordered according to the Laws of this Realm of England: And
Whether your Minister has obtained his Benefice, by any Simonicall Compact,
either directly, or indirectly.

2 Whether your Parson or Vicar be not resident upon his Benefice (and being
allowed to preach) and does he not preach in his own person, one Sermon every
Sunday: And if he be not him-sealfe a Preacher allowed: Does he not procure
one Sermon every Month at the least, to be preached in your Church, and those
also, by Preachers lawfully lycenced. And if your Parson or Vicar reside not
continually with you, is the cure supplied by a sufficient Curat yt is learned
and a licensed Preacher? And how many Sermons have you had in your Church or
Chapel within thiese twelve months last past, and by whom preached?

3 Whether your Minister be negligent in the study of holy Scriptures, or
works of his calling, or uses he to play at any vn-lawfull games? I^ he an
Alehouse hunter, or a sower of discord, and not a peacemaker, or is he
Noted. Famed or Suspected, of any notorious Crime? Does he not use the Surplice
in time of divine prayers, and in administering of the holy Sacraments, and
also, such comely attire, as well in the Church, as else where, agreeable to his
Calling, as is prescribed by the Canons of the Co^uocation lately set forth by
ye Kings Aucthority: Or has he admitted any unlawfully begotten with Child to
her public Thanksgiving in the Church after her Delivery: otherwise, then
in a white sheets, in form of a penitent person: Or has he received to ye
holy Communion, any excommunicat person, or Scismatike, or any known to be
notorious Offenders, without apparent signs of Repentance: Or has he
rejected or put back any from ye Communion, without good and just cause
therein.

4 Whether does not your minister every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read
some part of an Homily? Does he not in ye church before Evening prayer, teach*
instruct and exammin the Youth of Convenient age, in ye Cathechisme and
principles of Religion. And whether upon Wednsdayes and Fridayes, the Letante,
and other prayers be not read in the Church as to enjoined. And does not your
minister use the days of per-ambulation accustomed, and in such manner also,
as is allowable* and no otherwise.

5 Whether does your minister serve two cures, or does any serve as Curat in
your parish, or preach, or any teach school publicly, or in any private house
not licensed under yt Ordinaries Seal.

6 Whether has your minister made any wast or spoil of his benefice, or
suffers be his Chauncell, or houses, or any part thereof, ^ be vn-repayred, or
to fall into ruin or decay.

7 Whether has your Minister neglected the public reading ^^ the late Canons
and Constitutions in the Church, as is required ^^ the Intimating of holidaies
and fasting days appointed to be kept or the setting down in the Church
Registrie, and publishing openli in the Church upon the Saboth days: the
names of all such as we^^ Baptized Married and Buried the whole week before.
And has and not one Key of the Coffer where the Register book concerning to
premises is kept.

8 Whether your Minister, has admitted any of another parish ^ receive the
hofte Communion in disparish Church, or has administered the holy Communion to
any which do (...) kneel at the re^y^ing (...)* (...) excomunicate persons
publicly in the Church, till he receive a warrant to the Contrary, or a
Certificate of their Absolutions from the office where they were excommunicate.
Has he married any within the Degrees of Consanguinitie, or affinity
forbidden, or in time prohibited or without banes of Matrimony thrice solemnly,
asked in the Church three several sundaies or holidaies unless it be by license
of the ordinary under seal: or at any other time of the daie^ then betwixt
the hours of eight and Twelve of the Clock in the forenone, or that your
minister admitted any to be God fathers or God mothers to any Child in your
parish before he or she such god father or godmother has bin partaker of the
holy Communion.

^ Matters enquirable concerning the laytie.
9 WHether have you not in your Chucrh or Chapel, The book of common prayer
lately set forth by the Kings Authority, the great English Bible, of the
tra^slations Authorized, ye two volumes, and all other books commanded, a
table of the Ten Commandments, and a Table of the degrees forbidding mariag,
a conueneint Pulpit, a Comelis Communion table on a frame, A recent Linen
Cloth to cover the said Table, with some other Covering or Carpet of silk or
such like, A Communion Cup and Cover of silver. A fair standing pot of
Pewter or purer me^^^l for the Communion wine, A decent Surplesse with sleeves, A
Font of stone for Baptising of Children A Chest for the alms Box and another
for the Register book with three locks and Keys a peecs, And to there a
transcript yearly given up to the ordinary of all Christnings weddings and
burialls as the Laws requier.

10 Whether is your Church and Chauncell in the roof walls, windows seats
and pauement, and in every other part thereof well and sufficiently repaired.
And the Churchyard well and sufficiently with good ra^les and sufficient
p^les, or stone wall, fenced and kept sweet and clean, if not, in whose
default, and are your bells and bellropes and all other apurtenantes thereto
belonging in good order or not.

11 Whether have not your Churchw, from time, to time, truly levied xij d for
every sunday, of those which absent themselves from their parish Church to the
use of the poor or deteyne they any of the common ^^ocke or ^a^e they not made
and delivered up a just account to the parishioners of all their receipts and
bursements, Whether is the poore-mans Box orderly kept, and such Somes of
Money as are given distributed too the poor accordingly, or have your
Churchwardens continued in that office above one year without a new election.
And were your churchwardens elected in the Easter week as by the late canons
Authorized by his Majesty, is required.

12 Whether is there any in your parish that do refuse to come to their parish
church or chapel to divine prayers and Sermones upon the Lords days commonly
called Sundaies or upon al other festiual or holidaies, appointed by his
Majesty's authority, or any that do not orderly frequent the same, and do
not resort to their said church, or chapel upon such days to divine prayers
and Sermons: and there behave not themselves soblery and discreetlie in hearing
attentively the Scriptures read and in joining with the Minister and people,
in prayers as becomes, or do not reverently remain with their heads
uncovered at such times and places aforesaid. And whether the said parishioners
especially one of every house at least do not frequent their said church or
chapel to divine prayers upon wednesdaies and Fridaies.

13 Whether any in your parish being of the Age of xvj years or above, have
not received the holy communion in your parish church or chapel, and that
humbly kneeling, three several times in this last year at the least, of which
Easter to be one, or any that have not brought or seat their children Servants
and youth to the church upon Sundaies and holidaies in the afternoon to be
catechized according to the order lately appointed by the canons. And whether
any do not humbly kneel at the general confessions and prayers and at their
receiving the holy communion or any that use any talking walking or other
unseemly behavior in the church or churchyard in time of divine Service and
Sacrament or do any way disturbs common prayers Preaching or other exercises
of religion.

14 Whether* any Dauncers players of Enterludes or such like, or any other do
Dance play or use any unseemly parts or games, or sell any victuals or other
Merchandise in the church or churchyard or do use to sit in the street,
tauernes, Alehowses or at home during service time and exercises of gods
Worship* and is there any that suffer any such in their Houses at service time,
and who be they: or be there any feasts drinckings, Churchales, temporal
Courts, lay Iuries musters, or other profane usage in the Church or
churchyard or any superstitious ringing of belles: upon holidaies or Eues
abrogated by authority.

15 Whether any in your parish upon the Saboth days or holidaies do use
their Trade, or do any other work or labor as brewing baking, washing, or
such like, or do open their shoppes for sale of wares upon those days.

16 Whether is there any in your parish known or suspected to resort or to go
to any Mass* or to any other such secret meetings any maynteyners of
superstition, or false Opinions, contrary to the book of common prayer or
Articles of religion or any that speak against the Established government of
the church in this Realm.

17 Whether is there in your Parish, any Child or Children which have bin
Baptized by any midwife, or other lay person, who they be that have see
done, and what and who be the parents of such child or children and whether
any child has not bin brought to the church to be Baptized, or does any
person take upon him or her to be godfather or godmother to any child before he
or she has received the holy communion.

18 Whether have you a Parrish clarke in your church or chapel, was he chosen
by the Minister, is he dutiful and dilligent to the Minister, and learned, and
sufficient to discharge his place. And does he orderly Demean himself and
discharge his said office accordingly as he ought, and is there any that
withold his accustomed duties from him.

19 Whether are there any in your parish who are known suspected or famed, to be
of evil life, to be incestuous persons Adulterers, fornicators, ^au^s, or
barhorers of incontinent persons in their houses, or who have conveyed them
away before they have made satisfaction to the congregation offended. Any
drunkards, Ribands, Kailers, common slaunderers makers of libels, scoulds or
sowers of discord, any swearors, Blasphemers of Gods name, or prophaners of his
Saboth, or any that have fought, or stricken, or brawled in the Church, or
churchyard.

20 Whether is there any in your parish which has, or has had, at one time two
wives, or any woeman two Husbands any married with in the Degrees of
Consanguinitie or affinity forbidden. Any diuerced keeping company still
together. Any married which without order of law live a sunder and not together
as man and wife, Any married which have made precontracts to others or any
married without banes thrice solemly asked in the Church three several sundaies
or holidaies in the several places of their aboade, otherwise then by license
of the ordinary, or any that marry forth of the parish Church where they
dwell, or that marry without Consent of their parents or gardians or at any
other time of the day then betwixt the hours of eight and twelve in the
forenoone.

21. Whether is there any in your parish that have or do take any Usury or
interest above Ten in the hundred for a year for Lending their Money Corn
etc. or by any indirect means and Colorable practices in bargaining, do use
that Detestable Crime, to the pinching and eating by of the Poor: by their
Excessive gain.

22 Whether is there any in your Parish that do presume to entermeddle or
Deal with the goods of any Deceased before the will (if he made any) be
Lawfuly proved, or before Adminstration (if he died intestate) be duly
committed unto him under seal, or is there any hinderers of the Performans of
such will or Administration. Any forgets or Changers of testaments or any
Executors that have not fullfilled the Testators will, Especially in not
paieing Legacies given to the Church, to the poor, to amend High ways or to
such like good and Godly uses.

23 Whether have your Churchwardens and sidemen truly Noted and set down in
writing in a paper book for that purpose, the names of all Preachers which
come to them from any other place, and has every such Preacher Subscribed his
name thereto with the day when he preached, and the name of the Bushop of whom
he had License to preach according to the 52 Canon.

24 Generally Whether do you know any other Ecclesiastical matter, worthy of
presenting or no. And if you do, by the oaths you have Taken you shall truly
present the same, as well now as hereafter, when it shall come to your knowledge.

FINIS.

