ARTICLES, TO BE INQUIRED OF within the Dioces of London, in the visitation of
the Reverend Father in God, Ihon Bishop of London. 1589.

In the xxxj. year of the reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady
ELIZABETH by the grace of GOD Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defender
of the faith. etc.

Imprinted at London, 1589.

The tenor of the oath ministered to the Churchwardens and sworn-men.
Ye shall swear that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain,
or fear of displeasure, or malice set a side, you shall upon due consideration
of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such person of or
within your parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or made any default
mentioned in these or any of these Articles, or which are vehemently suspected,
or otherwise defamed of any such offense, fault, or default: wherein you shall
deal uprightly and according to equity, neither of malice presenting any
contrary to truth, nor of corrupt affection sparing to present any, and so
conceal the truth; having in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest
zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice. So help you God, and his
faithful promises contained in these his holy books.

The charge of the Churchwardens and swornemen set down for the better
performance of their duties, and discharge of their oaths.
THey are straightly charged to hear all these articles read over unto them,
and diligently to consider and enquire thereof. And for that the time is so
short in this the visitation, that they shall not be able to make a perfect
answer unto all of them, and that notwithstanding there are many notorious
faults presently worthy of presentment and reformation: they are charged to
make their answer unto them presently, so far forth as their memory shall
now serve them: And to present now such faults in their Parish, as at this
time are worthy of presentment and reformation. And that after their coming
home betwixt this and Michaelmas next, they shall again hear all the Articles
read over unto them, and diligently consider and enquire thereof with the
Minister of the Parish, who shall (if he know any thing in the Parish to be
reformed) together with them make a due presentment, and a true and full
answer in writing, signed with their hands and marks, wherein they shall
present as well all such faults or offenses, contrary to the Articles as they
forgot or omitted to present at the time of the visitation, as also all such
faults and offenses contrary to the Articles as shall happen and chance
betwixt this and then.

Articles to be inquired of within the Dioces of London in this Visitation,
holden in the year of our Lord God. 1589.
Articles concerning the Clergy.
WHether Common prayer be read by your Minister in your several Churches or
Chapels distinctly and reverently, and in such order as it is set forth by
the laws of this Realm, without any kind of alteration omitting or adding to
any thing, and at due and convenient hours, the Minister wearing a Surples?
And whether the holy Sacraments be likewise ministered reverently in such
manner, as by the book of Common prayer is appointed. And whether upon
Wednesdaies and Fridaies, not being holi-daies, the Letanie and other prayers
appointed for the day be said accordingly.

2. Item, whether the form of Comination against sinners be by your Minister
plainly and distinctly read in your Church or Chapel unto the people,
according to the Book.

3 Whether any Parson or Parsons, not being ordered at the least be a Deacon,
do say Common prayer openly in your Church or Chapel, or do solemnize
matrimony, or administer the Sacraments of Baptism, and what be their names
that do so?

4 Whether the Parson, Vicar, or Farmer of your Benefice do cause or suffer any
Curate or Minister to serve your Church before he be examined and admitted by
the Ordinary in writing, and do show his license to the Churchwardens.

5 Whether your Minister do serve two Cures in one day, whereby he must
needs be driven to serve the one of them at inconvenient houses?

6 Whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate do every Sunday when there is no
Sermon, read distinctlie and plainly some part of the Homilies prescribed and
set forth by the Queens authority to be read: and whether any Minister not
admitted by the Ordinary, or by other lawful authority, do expound any
scripture or matter of doctrine, by the way of exhortation or otherwise, and
thereby omit and leave off the reading of the Homilies. Or be there any in your
Parish that do deprave or speak against the Homilies and the use of them in
the Church?

7 Whether any Lectures, Conuenticles, or private meetings be read or used
within your Parishes, either public in the Church, or private in the house,
by any not sufficiently licensed thereunto by the Ordinary: or whether any
such Reader do teach any Doctrine of Innovation to withdraw the people from
due obedience to the Ordinances of the Church set forth by public authority,
or to cause them to forbear participating in prayer and Sacraments with our
Church?

8 How many Sermons does your Parson or Vicar preach in his own Church
yearly: and if he be no Preacher himself, how many does he yearly procure to
be preached there, and who have preached them: and whether be they that do
preach them licensed or no, and by whom were they licensed?

9 Whether your Minister have or do receive to the holy Communion any persons
which be not of his own Parish, without testimony from the Minister of the
place where they dwell: what they be, that it may appear that they be not
persons excommunicate?

10 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do every Sunday and Holi-day openly
in the Church call for, hear, and instruct all the children, apprentises, and
servants of both sexes, that be of convenient age within your Parish, or at
the least so many of them by course as the time will serve, and as he may well
hear or instruct for one hour at the least, before or after Evening prayer in
the ten Commandments, the Articles of the belief, and the Lords prayer, and
diligently examine and teach them the Catechism, as it is now allowed and set
forth in the Book of Common prayer. And whether for that purpose he does take
the names of them all, and by course call certain of them every Sunday and
Holi-day to come to the teaching of this Catechism?

11 Whether your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or other Minister in your Church or
Chapel has admitted to the holy Communion any open and notorious
fornicator, adulterer or evil liver, by whom public offense is given without
due penance first done, to the satisfaction of the Congregation enjoined him
by his Ordinary. Or any malicious person that is notoriously known and
detected to be out of charity, or detected to have done any open wrong to his
neighbor by word or deed, without due reconciliation first made to the party
that is wronged?

12 Whether in any of your Parishes your Minister be brought in by popular
election, sent by some peculier election of ministry, confirmed by the
Parish, and so allowed privately of before the said Minister be presented to his
Ordinary?

13 Whether your Parson or Vicar have any other benefice besides this: if he
so have, where lies it, how long in the year is he absent from this; how does
he see the cure of this served, and what hospitality keeps he on this
Benefice?

14 Whether your Preachers or Minister be peacemakers, and exhort their
parishioners to obedience toward their Prince, and all other that be in
authority, and to charity and mutual love among themselves: whether they be
diligent in visiting the sick, and in comforting them?

15 Whether any do preach, declare or speak any thing in derogation of the
book of Common prayer which is set forth by the laws of this Realm,
dispraising or deprauing the same or any thing therein contained, or against
the preachers or ministers of the word and sacraments by law authorized?

16 Whether your Parsons, Vicars, Curates and Ministers keep well their
Registers of all weddings, burials, and christinings within your parish
according to the Order of the Queens Injunctions, and whether they read the
Queeenes Majesty's Injunctions every quarter of a year once or no?

17 Whether they or any of them keep any suspected woman in their houses, or
be incontinent persons given to drunkenness, idleness, or be haunters of
tauernes, alehouses, or suspected places, hunters, hawkers, dicers, carders,
common table plaiers, swearers, dancers, or otherwise suspected of any
notorious crime, or light and unseemly behauior, or give any evil example
of life, or use disordered and unseemlie apparel, either in colors, gards, or
light fashion?

18 Whether they or any of them do keep or suffer to be kept in their parsonage
or vicaredge houses, any alehouses, tippling houses, or tauernes, or do
selbale, beer, wine, or any other victual?

19 Whether for the receiving of the perambulation of the circuit of your
parish, the Parson, Vicar or Curate, Churchwardens, and ^^^taine of the
substantial men of the parish in the days of the Rogacions and days (...)
called Gang-daies walk the accustomed Bounds of your parish.

20 Whether any new Presbyteries or Eldership be lately among you erected,
and by them any Ministers appointed without Orders taking of the Bishops, to
baptize, minister the communion, or deal in any function ecclesiastical or
contrary to law gather any private conuenticle whereby the people be drawn
from the Church.

21 Whether there be any in your parish that reads any private lectures in
the same, or uses exposition of the scriptures in any private man's house
whatsoever, contrary to the law. And whether any preaches, and does not at
certain times in the year minister the sacraments in their own persons, and
in such Church where he reads his lecture.

22 Whether there be any in your parish, Ministers, or Preachers, that use
either private or other assemblies out of their Dioces, with other preachees,
or other with them: and do in them use to set down any orders contrary to the
orders observed in the Queens Book, or any in your parish that do
contribute to any such preachers, and what be the names as well of the
contributors, as of them to whom they do contribute, and what several sums
do they contribute?

23 Whether any Minister do reject those women being married, which do come to
the Church to give thanks after Childbirth, according to the order set down
in the book of common prayer?

24 Whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate have married any person not being
three several Sondaies or Festiuali days lawfully asked in their parish
Churches, or not being sufficiently licensed thereunto, and by whose license
the same persons were so dispensed withal to be married?

25 Whether any contention have grown amongst the preachers in these parts
for any matter of doctrine or ceremonies: and what and who was the cause
thereof: and whether any strife has grown about pewes or seats in the Church,
and between whom was it?

26 Whether your Parsons, Vicars or Curates do keep a just and perfect nose of
all such as do communicate in their several parishes, and do not rather
regard their private gain, receiving their offerings at Easter, and delivering
them tokens, and so enter them into their book, and certefie as Communicants
those who never received?

27 Whether there be any Ministers or Priests within your parish which live
idly without any Cure, neither serving in any place, nor having any place
of reading or preaching?

28 Whether any Minister do refuse to use, or neglect such godly exercises of
prayer and preaching, as be by public authority appointed for preservation
of her Majesty, the Country, and Church: or for thanksgiving for any
victory gotten over Gods enemies, and the States of the Realm.

Articles concerning the Church.
WHether have you in your Parish Churches and Chapels all things necessary
and requisite for Common prayer, and administration of the Sacraments,
especially the Book of Common prayer with the new Calendar, two Psalters, the
English Bible in the largest volume of the edition set forth by the Bishops,
and lately imprinted by the Queens Printer, the Table of the ten
Commandments, a convenient Pulpet well placed, a comely and decent Table
standing on a frame for the holy Communion, with a fair linen cloth to lay
upon the same, and some covering of silk, buckeram, or other such like for the
clean keeping thereof, a fair and comely Communion cup of silver, and a cover
of silver for the same, which may serve also for the ministration of the
Communion bread, a decent large Surplesse with sleeves, a sure Cofer with two
locks and keys for keeping of the Register book, and a strong chest or box
for the alms of the poor, with three locks and keys to the same, and all
other things necessary in and to the premises.

2 Whether any do make any laystals, or use to lay any filthiness against the
Church walls, to the anoyance of the Church or of the people, assembling
themselves to hear Gods word, and public exercise of prayer?

3 Whether your Churches and Chapels with the Chauncell be well and
sufficiently repaired and kept without abuse of any thing, and whether your
Churchyards be well fenced and cleanly kept, and if any part thereof be in
decay, through whose default it is so?

4 Whether the Church of your Parish be now vacant or destitute of an incumbent
or no, and if it be, how long it has been so, and who is the Patron, and
whether he suffers the Benefice to lie vacant, and occupies the glebe land,
and takes the tithes and other fruit to himself during the time of the
vacation, or who else occupies and takes the same, and by what authority?

5 Whether your Church be a Parsonage or Vicaredge, presentatiue, a donatiue,
or otherwise served by a Cure? Whether did you ever heretofore hear or know
that it was a Parsonage or Vicaredge, and how came it to be decayed from being
a presentatiue to be in the state it now is, and when was it first decayed
from being a benefice presentatiue as you remember?

6 Whether your Fonts or Baptisteries be removed from the place where they were
wout to stand, or whether any persons leaving the use of them: do Christen or
Baptize in Basins, or other profane vessels, not customably used in the
Church before time, or whether any Christen without either Godfather and
Godmothers, and the sign of the Cross appointed by the book of common prayer?

Articles concerning Ecclesiastical officers.
WHether the Chancellor, Archdeacon, Commissary, official, or any other, using
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this Dioces, their Registers or Actuaries,
Apparitors or Sumners, have at any time winked at and suffered any Adulterers,
Fornicators, incests, or other faults or offenses presented unto them, to pass
and remain unpunished and uncorrected for Money, Rewards, Bribes, Pleasure,
Friendship or any other partial or affectionate respect?

2 Whether at the Archdeacons visitations which have bin sithence 1586. the
Archdeacon of your Archdeaconrie or his officers has called to the Church
wardens for a Certificate from the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of your Parish,
thereby to understand whether the Injunctions of the said Bishop given in his
visitation held in that year 1586. have bin duly and precisely observed or
not, according to the Tenor and effect of one of those Injunctions?

3 Whether any have been lawfully presented to the Chancellor, Archdeaco^,
Commissarie, or Official, within these three years passed, for any crime
punishable by the Ecclesiastical Courts: who neither have made their
purgation, for the infamy of the same offense, nor have received penance,
whereby the parish has been satisfied.

Articles concerning Schoolemaisters.
WHether the Schoolemaisters within your parish openly or privately, in any
Noble or Gentleman's house, or in any other place be of good and sincere
Religion life and Conversation, and be diligent in teaching and bringing up of
youth: and whether they have bin examined allowed and licensed for
Schoolemaisters, by the ordinary or his officer in that behalf.

2 Whether your Schoolemaisters do themselves receive the holy Communion as
often as they ought to do, and whether they bring with them so many of their
Scholars as be of age sufficient, and of capacity by instructions to receive
the Lords Supper.

3 Whether your Schoolemaysters do orderly on Sondaies with their Scholars
come to the Church of their Parish where they teach, and there see their
Scholars placed in some convenient place, so as they do not disquiet the
Minister or parish in time of divine service: but may exercise themselves godly
in reading and hearing the service and Sermons, and in answering with the
Congregation in reading of public prayers.

4 Whether the Schoolemaisters either private or public do teach their
Scholars the Catechism aucthorised by public authority, at the least once
every week: and do instruct and examine them in the same, or do teach any
other Catechism: and what Catechism is it that they so teach?

5 Whether any of your Schoolemaisters be known or suspected to read unto
their Scholars privately any books, or privately to instruct them in their
young years either in Popery, Superstition, or disobedience, or contempt to
her Majesty and her Laws Ecclesiastical, by public authority allowed?

6 Whether any Schoolemaisters under pretense of Catechizing their Scholars
(which is a most godly order carefully by them to be observed) do keep
Lectures reading, or expositions in divinity, in their houses, having
continual repair unto them of such people as seek after innouations, and
refuse their own Parish Churches and their Minister?

Articles concerning the Parishioners and others of the Laity.
Whether all Householders in your Parish, cause their Children, Servants and
Apprentices, both mankind and womankinde, being above seven years of age and
under twenty, which have not learned the Catechism, to come to the Church on
Sondayes and holy days at the times appointed for Catechizing, and there
diligently and obediently to hear. And what be the names of those that do not
cause their Children, Servants and Apprentises so to come to the Church to be
instructed and examined.

2 Whether any do work, or keep any Shop, or any part of their shop open
upon the Sabbath days, or upon any holy days appointed by the Laws of the
Realm to be kept holyday?

3 Whether you your selves or the Churchwardens in the years before you, have
suffered any unmarried women being begotten with Child to go out of the Parish
before she has done penance, or any man defamed of whoredom to depart
unpunished upon direction appointed by the ordinary, and forth of whose houses
have they gone away with Child unpunished, and how many unmarried women which
have bin delivered within your parish these three years last past have gone
away without doing of penance?

4 Whether there be any in your Parish, that do themselves forbear, or
dehort others from coming to public prayer and hearing the word Preached,
condemning all form of prayer which they call stinted prayer, calling our
Churches the Temples of Idols, and our Preachers false teachers sent in the
Lords wrath: which leude opinions, some Sectaries have lately broched?

5 Whether any man keeps or reads any seditious and Schismatic books,
or pamphlets written by any which enuaieth against the Religion now received,
or the order and government of the Church now publicly established, or that
stirs up the hearers to innovation, or altring of the Churches government
by Law now established?

6 Whether the Parish Clarke be appointed according to the ancient custom of
the Parish with the allowance of the ordinary, and whether he be not obedient
to the Parson, Vicar, or Curate: and whether he be able to read, and whether
he keep the books and ornaments of the Church fair and clean, and cause the
Church and Quier, the Communion table and the font to be kept clean and
decent against the service time, the Communion, Sermon, and Baptism.

7 Whether there be any person or persons Ecclesiastical or Temporal within
your Parish, or elsewhere within this Dioces, that have retained or kept in
their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or deliver to
others any English books or Libels, set forth either on this side or beyond
the Seas by Papists, or others, against the Queens Supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, or against true Religion and Catholic doctrine, or the
government and discipline of the Church of England now within this Realm,
received and established by common authority, and what their names and
surnames are?

8 Whether there be any in your Parish which for any cause whatsoever forbear
to come to Church to public prayer, or to hear Gods word preached,
pretending it unlawful to come to our assemblies as the Church of England now
stands?

9 Whether any do refuse to receive the holy Communion at their own Ministers
hands, either because he is not a Preacher, or because he duly observes the
order of ministration appointed by the Book, and who they be that do go from
their own Parish to receive at any other Ministers hands?

10 Whether any of your Parishioners having a Preacher to their Parson, Vicar,
or Curate, do absent themselves from his Sermons, and resort to any other place
to learn or follow after such innouations as are there taught.

11 Whether the people of your Parish, especially householders having no
lawful excuse to be absent, do resort with their children and servants to
their Parish Church or Chapel on the Holi-daies and on the Sondaies to
morning and evening prayer. And who they be that either negligently or wilfully
absent themselves, or come very late to the Church upon the Sondaies
especially, or that walk, talk, or otherwise irreverently behave themselves
in the Church, or use any gaming or pastime abroad, or in any house, or sit in
the street, or Church-yarde, or in any Tavern or Alehouse upon the Sunday or
other holi-day in the time of Common prayer, or reading of the Homilies, either
before or after noone?

12 Whether the forfeiture of twelve pence for every time of absence from
Church (appointed by a Statute made in the first year of the Queens Majesty's
reign) be levied and taken according to the same Statute by the
Churchwardens of every person that offends, and by them be put to the use of
the poor of the Parish: if it be not so levied, by whose default is it?

13 Whether there be any Inne-keepers, Alewiues, Victualers or Tiplers, that
suffer or do admit any person or persons in their houses to eat or drink, or
play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Boules, or such like games in the time of Common
prayer or Sermon on the Sondaies or Holi-daies: or any Butchers or other that
commonly use to sell meat or other things in the time of Common prayer,
Preachings, or reading of Homilies. And whether in any Fayres or common
Markets, falling upon the Sunday, there be any showing of any wares before
Morning prayer be done? And whether any markets or selling of wares be used or
suffered in any Churchyards on the Sabbath day by common Packmen or Pedlers
going about?

14 Whether the Churchwardens of the last year have given to the Parish a
just account of the Church goods and rents that were committed to their charge,
according unto the custom that has bin aforetime used, and what Church goods
they or any other have sold, and to whom, and whether to the profit of your
Church or no, and what has been done with the money thereof coming?

15 Whether the Churchwardens and Sworne-men since the visitation holden 1586.
have of any private corrupt affection concealed any crime or other disorder in
their time done in your Parish, and have not presented the same to the Bishop,
Chauncellor, Archdeacon, Co^missarie, or such other as had authority to
reform the same: and whether they, or any of them at any such time as they
should have been at divine Service on Sondaies or Holi-daies, and should there
have observed others that were absent, have been away themselves at home, or in
some Tavern or Alehouse, or else about some worldly business, or at Boules,
Cards, Tables, Dice, or other gaming, without regard of their office and
duty in that behalf?

16 Whether your Minister and you the Churchwardens, or any other of your
Parish have on your reuesterie made any orders, or do use to call any parties
before you for any cause to be ordered by the Ecclesiastical laws, and so do
use a kind of presbiterie, or censuring over your neighbors?

17 Whether any of your Parish being of convenient age, have not received the
holy Communion thrice this last year at the least, and namely at Easter last,
or thereabouts for once, and what their names are, or which at their receiving
have not signified the same before to your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, that he
might conveniently examine them, and who have refused to come to him to be
examined?

18 Whether there be any in your Parish that administer the goods of those
that be dead without lawful authority, or any that suppress the last Will
of the dead, or any Executors that have not fulfilled their Testators will,
especially in paying of Legacies given to the Church, or to other good and
godly uses, as to the relief of poverty, to Orphans, poor Scholars, poor
maidens marriages, high ways, Schools, and such like, and by whom are they so
detayned?

19 Whether there be any in your Parish that has or does offend contrary to
the Statute made in the xxvii. year of the reign of King Henry the viii. for
the reformation of Usury, and revived by an Act made in the xiii. year of the
reign of the Queens Majesty that now is, and what be the names of such
offenders?

20 Whether has your Minister, or any of the Parish, not being Justices of
Peace, without the consent or priuitie of the Ordinary, caused any to do
penance or be punished, either openly or otherwise, for any crime punishable
by the Ecclesiastical laws, and what be the names of the parties, who have
been so punished, and in what manner?

21 Whether the Iniunction sent from my L. Grace of Canterbury, and the High
Commissioners in November 1587. directed to your Minister and Churchwardens not
to receive strange preachers not licensed, be observed: and whether the said
Iniunction remain in your Church, or no?

22 Whether there be any among you that do use sorcerie or witchcrafte, or that
be suspected of the same: and whether any use any charms, or unlawful
prayers: and whether any do resort to any such for help and counsel: and
what be the names both of such as use it, and of such as resort to them for
help?

23 Whether any couples that be married in private houses within these three
years last, have been known or suspected to have been married after any
other order, than is appointed by the Church of England, by reason that the one
party or the other are noted to be such as refuse to come to the Church, or
dislike of the orders of the Church of England?

24 Whether there be among you any Blasphemers of the name of GOD, great or
often Swearers, Adulterers, fornicatours, incestuous persons, bawds or
receivers of naughty and incontinent persons, or harbourers of women with
child which be unmarried, co^ueying or suffering them to go away before they
do any penance, or make satisfaction to the Congregation: or any that be
vehemently suspected of any such faults, or that be not of good name and fame
touching any such crime and fault: any dronkardes or ribaldes, or any that
be malicious, contentious, or uncharitable persons, railers, scolders, or
sowers of discord between neighbors, and specially railers against Ministers,
and against their marriage?

25 Whether there be any in these parts that have married within the degrees
of affinity or consanguinitie, by the Laws of God forbidden: or any that
being divorced or separated for the same, do yet notwithstanding inhabit and
keep company still together: or any that being married without those degrees,
have unlawfully forsaken their wives or husbands, and married others. Any man
that has two wives, or any woman that has two husbands: any that being
divorced or separated asunder have married again: any that have married or
contracted themselves without the consent of their parents, tutors, or
governors: any that have married without Banes thrice solemnlie asked: any
couples married that live not together, but slanderouslie live apart.

26 Whether there be any in your parish, who will come to hear the sermon,
but will not come to the public prayer appointed by the book of common
prayer, making a schism or division as it were between the use of our
public prayer, and preaching.

27 Whether the Minister and Churchwardens have suffered any Lords of misrule,
or Summer Lords or Ladies, or any disguised persons, or May games, or any
morris dancers at any times to come irreverently into the Church or
Churchyard, and there to dance or play, especially in the time of common
prayer: and what they be that commit such disorder: or that accompanied or
maintained them?

28 Whether there be among you any notorious evil livers, or any suspected
of any notorious sin, fault, or crime, to the offense of Christian people, or
any that stubbornly refuse to conform themselves to unity and godly Religion
now established by public authority: or any that bears abroad rumors of the
alteration of the same, or otherwise that disturbeth good orders, and the
quietness of Christ's Church, and the Christian Congregation?

29 Whether all such admonitions and Injunctions, as have come to your parishes
from my Lord of London in and sithence the last visitation for the observing of
any order for the Church, or putting down any disorder, have been duly kept
ever since or no, and by whose default they have not been kept?

30 Whether there be any married women or others within your parish, which
after childbirth do refuse or contemn to come to the Church to give thanks
for their delivery, and to have the prayers public, appointed in that
behalf by the book of common prayer.

31 Whether any carry out the Infants to be Christened in other parishes, as
misliking the order of Christening in their own parish: whether any preach in
any Noble man's or Gentleman's house, not being licensed of the Bishop?

32 Whether any within your Parishes do resort unto barnes, fields, woods,
outhouses, or to any extraordinary Expositions of Scriptures, or conferences
together: and so do (as it were) make a several Church or Sect unto
themselves; or be drawers or perswaders of others to any such schismatic and
damnable Sects.

33 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar or Curate have wittingly married together
any couples whereof the woman has been got with child, or carnally known
before marriage: or whether the man for money or reward has married any woman
that has committed adultery with another man, without public
acknowledgement of their offenses, and reconciliation to the parish: and what
are the names of all such that have been so married in any such case, and when,
and by whom they were so married together?

34 Whether any do keep their Children unbaptized longer than the Sunday
after Birth, unless it be for sickness of the child, or other urgent
occasion: and whether any do carry their children from the Parish they are
borne in, to other Parishes to be baptized? And whether any do refuse and
carry their children from their own Parish to be baptized in other places,
or do bring strange Ministers into their own houses, to baptize their children
privately according to their own fantasies?

35 Whether the order of prayers on Wednesdaies and Fridaies, set forth lately
by the most reverend Father the Archbishop of Canterbury, by him appointed to
be observed through his whole Province, be observed as it is required, and who
be they that under color of it do bring in any new devised order, prayer, or
fastes, leaving the prescribed order of that book?

FINIS.
The second bills which are to be delivered at Michaelmas next, are to be
brought into Master Blackewels office in Iuie Lane, Register to my Lord Bishop
of London, betwixt Michaelmas and the eight day of October following, or else
the Churchwardens and Sidemen making default herein, are at their perils to
show cause the x. of October next in the Consistory in Paul's, why they should
not according to law, be proceeded against for their contempt.


