The Form of the Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sworn-men.
YOu shall swear, that all hope of gain, fear and affection set aside, you
make true presentment of all such parties as have offended against these
Articles, or are vehemently suspected, famed or reported so to have offended:
So help you God, and the Contents of the holy Gospels.

God save the KING.
Concerning the Church of England.
ARe there any in your Parish that being Popishly affected, do derogate from
his Majesty's supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical? and who be they?

2 Are there any in your Parish that out of factious and schismatic spirits
do affirm that this Church of England by law established under the Kings
Majesty, is not a true and Apostolical Church, teaching and maintaining the
doctrine of the Apostles?

3 Are there any in your parish that affirm that the form of Gods worship in
the Church of England, established by the law, and contained in the book of
Common prayer, and administration of Sacraments, is a corrupt, superstitious,
or unlawful worship of God, or contains any thing in it that is repugnant to
the Scriptures?

4 Are there any in your Parish that affirm that any of the 39 Articles agreed
upon by the Archbishops, and Bishops of both provinces, and the whole Clergy
in the Convocation holden at London, Anno Dom. 1562. are in any part
superstitious or erroneous or such as with good conscience they may not
subscribe unto?

5 Are there any in your Parish that affirm that the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church of England, by Law established are wicked, Antichristian or
superstitious, or such as being commanded by lawful authority, men that are
zealously and godlily affected, may not with good conscience approve them, use
them, or subscribe unto them?

6 Are there any in your parish that affirm, that the government of the Church
of England under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons
and the rest that bear office in the same is Antichristian or repugnant to the
word of God?

7 Are there any in your parish that impugn the form or manner of making and
consecrating Bishops Priests or deacons, used in the Church of England?

8 Are there in your Parish, any Schismatic Separatists, new combined
brotherhoods, deprauers of such as conform themselves to the doctrine,
government, rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or any secret
maintainers and favorers of such separatists and new brotherhoods? Are there
any Corner Conuenticles, or any that maintain or favor or defend them? Are
there any such factious people in your parish, that disliking the government of
the Church of England, take upon themselves the name of Church, and make orders
rules or other constitutions to be observed and kept by themselves.

Concerning the Ministry, Service and Sacraments.
1 WHether are the common Prayers said or sung by your Minister, both Morning
and Evening distinctly, and reverently every sunday and holy day, and on their
Eues, and at couenient and usual times of those days, and in most convenient
place for the edifying of the people?

2 Whether does your Minister observe the orders Rites and Ceremonies
prescribed in the Book of common Prayer, in reading the Holy Scriptures
prayers and administration of Sacraments, without diminishing, or adding any
thing in the matter or form thereof?

3 Whether does your Minister on wednesdayes and frydayes not being holidays,
at the accustomed hours of service resort to the Church and say the Letany:
and other prayers prescribed? And does your Clerk or Sexton give warning
before by tolling of a Bell on those days, and does one person of every house
repair to the Church at those times usually, and there stay according to the
Cannon?

4 Whether does your Minister leaving the use of the Font Christen or baptize
in any Basin or other profane vessels? does your Minister baptize or Christen
any out of the face of the Church and Congregation, or at any other time then
upon sundays or holy days without special cause, or without Godfathers and
Godmothers? Are any persons admitted to answer as Godfathers or Godmothers
at the Christning of any Child, except he or she have before received the Holy
Communion? does your Minister in Baptizing of Children observe the orders,
Rites and Ceremonies, appointed in the Book of Common prayer without addition
omission or innovation?

5 Do you know any Parents that defer the Christning of their Children, or
any that have not had their Children Christened at their own Parish Church or
Chapel? what is the cause that they keep them so long vnchristned? do you
know of any parents that have had their children privately Baptized, either by a
Popish priest contrary to the Laws of the Church of England, or by an
unconformable Minister omitting any part of the form of Baptizing Children
contained in the Book of common prayer?

6 Does your Minister give warning publikly in the Church at Morning prayer,
the sunday before he administreth the Communion for the better preparation of
the parishioners?

7 Does your Minister as often as he administreth the Communion, first receive it
himself? does he use any bread or wine newly brought, before the words of
institution be rehearsed and the bread and wine present on the Communion table?
does he not deliver the bread and wine to every Communicant severally?

8 Has your Minister admitted to the Communion any that be openly known to
live in some notorious offense or Crime without repentance or satisfaction of
the Congregation, or who has openly and maliciously contended with his or her
Neighbors, before he or she have openly and charitably reconciled themselves
again and remitted all rancour and malice, whatsoever Controversy has been
between them?

9 Does your Minister administer the Communion to any but such as kneel, or
do any refuse to kneel? has he administered to any who refuse to be present
at public prayer, or who has depraved the Book of Common Prayer,
administration of the Sacraments or the Rites and Ceremonies prescribed, or the
Articles of Religion agreed upon, or the Book of Ordering Priests and Bishops,
or against his Majesty's supremacy? have any been for these causes repelled,
and have they repented in writing or otherwise and what be their names?

10 Has your Minister more benefices then one? if he has how far distant
are they? and whether serves he two Cures or not? when he is absent, has he an
allowed Preacher for his Curat?

11 Has your Church or Chapel been destitute of a Curate, and how long, and
by whose default? has any Curate served or does any Curate serve without
license of the Ordinary?

12 Do you know any Popish Priests, Seminaries, Jesuits, or Runnagate persons
that do preach, say Mass or minister any Popish Sacraments or Ceremonies, or
else do resort secretly or openly unto your parish, and what be their names,
and unto whose houses do they resort, and of whom are they harbored and
relieved? set down their Names and Sir-names?

13 Is your Parson Vicar or Curate or any other parson in your parish a
favorer of the Romish Church or Religion, or of any other sect or
Schismatic opinion, or has he or does he maintain or teach any doctrine
contrary or repugnant to any of the Articles agreed upon by the Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London Anno Dom. 1562? have they taught publikly or
secretly any doctrine tending to the discredit and dispraise either of the
Book of Common prayer, or of the Preachers and Ministers of the word and
Sacraments, or of the received order for government by Archbishops, Bishops
Deanes, Archdeacons and other Officers in the Church of England, or make any
other innovation? Or have they permitted any man so teaching, or making
innovation in such manner?

14 Is your Minister an allowed Preacher, if he be not, does he procure every
month a Sermon to be Preached in his Cure by Preachers lawfully licenced? And
on every Sunday when there is no Sermon, does he or his Curate read some one
of the homilies prescribed?

15 Does your Minister always in saying the public prayers and administering
the Sacraments wear a decent Surplice with sleeves, and being a Graduate, does
he wear always therewith an Hoode by the order of the Universities agreeable
to his degree?

16 Has your Minister, or any other Preacher in your Church, Preached any
thing to confute or impugn* any doctrine delivered by any other Preacher? and
does he always before the Sermon, Lecture, and homily pray for Christ's
Catholic Church, The Kings Majesty, and our Gracious Queen Mary, the Noble
Prince Charles, the Lady Mary, the Lady Elizabeth, and Her Princely Issue, The
Ministers of Gods Holy word, as well Archbishops and Bishops, as other
Pastors and Curats, for the Kings most Honorable Council, the Nobility and
Magistrates of this Realm and the Commons? And does he always conclude his
prayer with the Lords prayer, According to the Cannon 55?

17 Has or does any strange Preacher preach in your Church which refuses to
conform himself to the Laws, rites and Ordinances established, or which has
not first showed a sufficient license?

18 Does your Minister in his Sermons 4 times in the year at least, teach and
declare the Kings Majesty's power within his Realms to be the highest power
under God, to whom all within the same owe just loyalty and obedience, and that
all foreign power is justly taken away?

19 Does your Minister every Sunday half an hour before evening prayer or
more, examine and instruct the youth of the parish in the Catechism set forth
in the Book of Common prayer? And do the Churchwardens assist the Minister
herein? and who be they that refuse to be Catechized? and what Parents have
not diligently sent their Children and servants to be Catechized?

20 Has your Minister Married any without license in the times prohibited, and
has he married any without license whose banes have not been openly published
in the Church 3 several sundays or holidays? if any of the parties dwell out
of the parish, has he married them without Certificate under the Ministers
hand of the other parish, that the banes of matrimony have been lawfully asked
and published without contradiction? has he married any at any other times of
the day, then between the hours of 8 and 12 in the forenoone, or in any
private house, or when there is no license before the Parents and Gouerners
(the parties being under the age of 21 years) have testified their consent?

21 Has your Minister declared every sunday to the people at the time
appointed what holy days and fasting days be the week following? does he,
being a Preacher, confer with all Recusants and persons Excommunicated and
suspected, to reduce them to the unity of the Church?

22 Does your Minister keep a note of all Excommunicated persons within your
Parish, and once every six months does he denounce them which have not obtained
their absolution on some sunday in service time, that others may be admonished
to refrain their company?

23 Is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate dilligent in visiting the sick and
comforting them? do they bury your dead in such Christian and comely manner,
as is prescribed in the book of Common prayer? has any layman, other then a
lawful Minister taken upon him to bury the dead contrary to order?

24 Has your Minister refused to baptize any child brought to the Church, or
to bury any Corpse brought to the Church, or Churchyard, or to Church any woman
having had convenient warning thereof?

25 Has your Minister, being truly informed of the danger of death of any
Child unbaptized, and being desired to go to the place where the Child is, to
Baptize it, neglected to go, by means whereof the Child dyed unbaptized?

26 Have you any Lecture in your Parish continued without lawful license of
the Bishop? does your Lecturer observe all the rites specified in the 56 Canon?

27 Does your Minister at any time preach or administer the Communion in any
private house, except when any are so impotent that they cannot go to Church,
or are very dangerously sick?

28 Do any Chaplains in your parish preach or administer the Communion in any
Chapel not consecrated, or in any house having no Chapel allowed by law?
do the Lords and Masters that have private Chapels of their own, resort
often to the parish Church and there receive the Communion, at the least once
every year?

29 Does your Minister reside upon his Parsonage or Vicarage house?

30 Has there been any secret Conuenticles or meetings in your parish by any
Priests, Ministers, or others, tending to the deprauation of the form of
prayer, doctrine, or government of this Church of England?

Concerning the Church, Churchyard, Parsonage, and Vicarage house.
1 WHether is your Church, Chapel, and Chancell, well and sufficiently
repaired in the walls and roof, the seats convenient, the floor paued, the
windows glazed, and all these cleanely kept? Is the Mansion house of your
Parson or Vicar with the buildings thereunto belonging, well and sufficiently
repaired, and your Churchyard walls, Railes or pales kept in good repare?

2 Has your Church or Churchyard been abused and profaned by any fighting,
chiding, brawling, or quarelling, any plays, lords of mis-rule, Summer lords,
Morris-dauncers, Pedlers, Bowlers, Bearewards, Butchers, Feasts, Schools,
Temporal Courts or Leets, Lay Iuries, Musters, or other profane usage? Have
any Bells been superstitiously rung on holy days, or their Eues, or at any
other times, without good cause allowed by the Minister and Churchwardens?
have any trees been felled in the Churchyard and by whom?

3 Are your Almes-houses, Church-houses and schoole-houses or other houses and
buildings set upon the soil of the Church or Churchyard sufficiently repaired
maintained and to godly and right use employed?

4 Have you in your Church or Chapel all things necessary for Common prayer
and other Rites of the Church, as the Bible in the largest volume, the Book of
Common Prayer lately authorized by his Majesty, the Books of homilies allowed,
a convenient Pulpit for preaching, a decent seat for the Minister to read
service in, conveniently placed, a strong Chest with three locks and three
keys, one for the Minister, the other for the Churchwardens for the keeping
of the Register Book of the Christnings, marriages and Burials, and a poor
man's box conveniently set near the Church door?

5 Have you in your Church a Font of stone, for Baptism set in the ancient,
usual place, a decent Table for the Communion, conveniently placed, covered
with silk or other decent stuff in time of divine service, and with a fair
linen cloth over that, at the administration of the Communion?

6 Have you all such Bells, Ornaments and other Vtensils as have anciently
belonged to your Church, a Communion Cup of Silver with a Cover, a fair
standing Pot of Pewter or purer metal for the wine upon the Communion table a
comely Surplesse with sleeves, and a Book of the names of all strange
Preachers subscribed with their names, and the name of the Bishop or others
where they had license?

7 Have you a book of parchment for a Register books, of Marriages, Christnings
and Burials? Are weekly the names and Sur-names of all persons married,
christened, and buried, and of their parents with the day and year written
fairly in the said parchment book? Is every leaf (being full) subscribed by
you the Minister and Churchwardens?

8 Have you in the East End of the Church the ten Commandments fairly
written and set up, and other chosen sentences of the holy Scripture written
upon convenient places of the walls? Is there a table of the degrees of marriage
set up? Have you seats enough in the Church for the parishioners to fit on,
and are they in good repair?

Concerning Ecclesiastical Courts.
1 Has the Official, or his surrogate, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in this Archdeaconrie, their Registers, or
Actuaries, Apparitors, or Sumners, at any time wincked at, and suffered any
Adulteries, Fornications, Incests, or other faults or offenses to pass and
remain unpunished and uncorrected, or have they commuted any penance of such
offenders?

2 Has your Register, his deputy, or substitute, set up two Tables of the
rates of Fees; one in the usual place or Consistory where the Court is kept,
and the other in his Registry; and both of them in such sort, as every man whom
it concerns may come to the view and perusal thereof? Or if such Tables have
heretofore been set up, has your Register removed the same, or suffered them
to be removed, hidden, or any ways hindered from sight?

3 Do you know any householder or other person whatsoever, within your Parish
or Chappelrie, that is deceased, that have made their last wills and
testaments, the same not being yet proved; or if without will, who have entered
upon their goods without lawful administration taken from the Ordinary or
other Judge competent?

Concerning Schoolmasters.
1 Have you in your Parish any Schoolmasters, who teach either in public
school or in private house? Is he reputed to be of sound faith and religion?
Does he give any evil example of life? Is he allowed by the Ordinary under his
hand and seal? Or does your Minister or Curate teach, and is he allowed in
like manner?

2 Does your Minister or Schoolmasters who teaches, teach the Catechism by
authority set forth? Does he when there is any Sermon, or divine Service bring
his scholars to Church, and see them quietly and soberly ordered? Does he
examine them after their return what they have learned of the Sermon?

Concerning the Parish clarke, and Sexton.
1 Have you a parish-clerke appointed by the Minister, sufficient for his
place, of the age of twenty years at least. Is he of honest conversation? Can
he read, write, and sing? Is he diligent in his office, and serviceable to the
Minister in time of divine Service, and otherwise?

2 Does your Clerk meddle with any thing above his office, as churching of
women, burying the dead, reading of prayers, or such like?

3 Does your Clerk or Sexton keep your Church clean, the doors safe locked?
Is any thing by his default lost or spoiled in the Church, does he suffer any
unreasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in the Church.

4 Does any of your Parish refuse to pay unto the Parish-clerke or Sexton, such
wages as are unto them due, and have been accustomably paid?

Concerning parishioners.
1 Does any in your Parish profane, violate, or mispend the Sabbath or
Holidayes or any part of them, using any offensive conversation, or worldly
labor in those days or any of them?

2 Has any in your Parish in time of divine Service covered his head, albeit
he has infirmity, in which case a Cap is allowed? Is there any who has not
reverently kneeled when the general Confession, Letany, and other prayers are
read, and which have not stood up at the saying of the Belief?

3 Has any in your Parish disturbed divine Service, by walking, talking, or
any other way; or departed out of the Church during the Service, or Sermon,
without some urgent cause or loitered about the Church or Church Porch?

4 Are there any in your Parish, either man or woman, being above sixteen
years of age, that has not received the holy Communion thrice at least every
year, whereof once at Easter? Or have any received the Communion in any other
Parish Church or Chapel than their own?

5 Does any parent answer as Godfather for his own child? Has any
Godfather or God-mother made any other answer or speech than is prescribed in
the book?

6 Do all fathers, mothers, masters, mistrisses, come, and cause their
children, servants, and Apprentices, to come duly to the Church, and according
to the Ministers direction, to be instructed and catechized; or who be they
that have not obeyed the Minister herein?

7 Have any persons married together within the degrees prohibited, set forth in
a table appointed to be in every Church?

8 Have any persons once lawfully married together forsaken each other, or do
live asunder without the authority of the Ordinary? Or do any being divorced
or separated marry again, the former husband or wife yet living?

9 Has any in your Parish irreverently used your Minister, or have any laid
violent hands upon him, or disgraced his office and calling by word or deed?

10 Have you in your Parish any dweller or soiourner, a maintainer of Popish
doctrine, or suspected to keep or disperse schismaticke books, or to favor
any heresy or error?

11 Have any in time of divine Service opened their shops, exercised their
trades, used any gaming, been in any Tavern or Alehouse or otherwise ill
employed?

12 Are there in your Parish any adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons,
bawdes, receivers, or close favorers, conueiers away or sufferers of any
incontinent persons to depart unpunished; or any which have their meetings in
private places in the night time or other indecent times, and by reason thereof
are commonly defamed or vehemently suspected of any of the said crimes?

13 Is the fifth of November kept holy, and thanksgiving made to God for his
Majesty's and the States happy deliverance, according to the Ordinance in that
behalf?

14 Are there in your Parish any blasphemers, common swearers, ribaudes, and
such as commonly use bawdy, immodest, uncivil, and filthy speeches, malicious
slanderers, scolds, common drunkards, or any defamed of any of the said crimes?

15 Do any in your Parish administer the goods of the dead without authority,
or suppress their Will and Testament? Have any Executors neglected to perform
the wills of the dead, especially in paying of Legacies given to the Church, to
the poor, or to any other charitable or godly uses?

16 Do any refuse to pay to the reparations, ornaments, and other things
required in your Church, as they are cessed or taxed?

17 Have any in your Parish been christened, churched, buried, or received the
Communion; or been married out of your Parish, both parties dwelling in your
Parish?

18 Have all women in your Parish delivered of child, come at convenient time
after to Church to give thanks? And have they been Churched according to the
form of the book of Common Prayer?

19 Has the perambulation of the circuit of your Parish been observed once
every year at the usual time? If not, by whose default?

20 Have any in your Parish given to the Churchwardens or Sidemen or any of
them evil words, for doing their Office according to their Oath, and
conscience in making presentment for any default?

21 Is there any man or woman in your Parish that uses witchcraft, sorcery
charms, or unlawful prayer, or incantations in Latin, or English, or
otherwise, upon any Christen body or beast, or any that resorteth to such
persons for counsel or help?

Concerning Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
1 Do any in your Parish take upon them to be Churchwarden or Sidesman,
which is not lawfully chosen by the Minister and Parishioners according to the
Canon? Do any continue that office longer than one year, except they be
chosen again; and are al such officers chosen yearly in Easter-week?

2 Do your Churchwardens within one month at the most after their year
ended, before the Minister and Parishioners, give up a just account of all such
money, and other things as they have received and bestowed? Have they delivered
all remaining in their hands, belonging to the Church or Parish, to the next
Churchwardens?

3 Have the Churchwardens with the advice of the Minister from time to time,
provided a sufficient quantity of fine white bread and wholesome wine for the
number of communicants? Have you at every Communion collected the devotion of
the Communicants, and put it into the poore-mans-box?

4 Do the Churchwardens and sworne-men before every visitation, and at other
times when there is just occasion, meet and confer about their presentiments,
and who has (after notice given him of the time and place) carelessly absented
himself?

5 Is the forfeiture of twelve pence for absence from the Church appointed by
state for the use of the poor, taken and leuyed by the Churchwardens, and
employed according to the said statute? Is the same forfeiture taken of all
persons which stand wilfully suspended or excommunicated?

6 Have any Churchwardens lost, sold, changed, or retained, any goods,
ornaments or bells, rents, or implements of the Church, without special license
of the Ordinary?

7 Do you the Churchwardens and Swornemen about the midst of Divine service
usually walk out of the Church, and see who are abroad in any Alehouse or
else where absent, or evil employed: and have you presented all such to the
Ordinary?

8 Do you know or have heard of any fame, or offense committed, or duty
omitted, by any of your Parish before your time, and heretofore not presented
by the former Churchwardens to the Ordinary, and as yet not reformed, and have
you presented the same?

FINIS

