THE COPY OF A LETTER, LATELY WRITTEN BY A SPANISHE GENTLEMAN, TO HIS FRIEND
IN ENGLAND: IN refutation of sundry calumnies, there falsely bruited, and spread
emonge the people.

The original whereof was written in Spanish, since the authors being in
England, who by reason of a ship of those that miscarried of the late Armado,
was taken, and there detained prisoner, until his delivery by ransom.

Now newly translated into English, for the benefit of those (of that nation)
that understand not the Spanishe tongue.

Anno, M.D.LXXXIX.

THE COPY OF A LETTER, LATELY WRITTEN BY A SPANISHE GENTLEMAN, TO HIS friend in
England: in refutation of sundry calumnies, there falsely bruited, and spread
emonge the people.
GOOD Sir, and courteous freinde, since the time of my late delivery from
captivity, I have often called to mind, how desirous I found you, to
understand the truth of our intention, though little doubtful of the
justness of our cause: but seeing the suspicious Iealousy of guilty
conscyences, permitted not such conversation as accords with human
curtesy: and that free speech is theare so fatr intolerable, that men are
examyned by torture, not ouly of there indifferent words, but even of their
very thoughts, and future actions, I wished opportunity to give you
satisfaction, but used silence, to avoid your trooble.

Well, seeing it has since pleased God, to lend me life, liberty, and means to
send unto you (which in so dangerous and vvatchfull a world is most
difficill to be found) I could not omit to write at this present, whereby
your self, and such others, as to whom you may with safty communicate it,
may be the better satisfied.

It is to you very apparent, and well known to the whole world, how it
has of late pleased God, to dispose of men's actions, according to his own
pleasure: which we will rather accept as a punishment for our sins, then
take for a discouragement to our cause. Neither can our enimyes therein,
receive any occasion to be the more insolent, or to glory, in that they deserve
not, sith their valor, never made our enterprise frustrate: themselves
confessing, it was not done by the puisance of man, but by the power of God:
which they let not to say, may give sufficient proof of their cause: not
seeming to remember, how sundry examples can give testimony, of diverse
attempts misfortuned at the first, that afterward have succeeded well: And of
all others, that that of the children of Israel is the most notable: They
being commanded, at two several times, by God himself, to make war against
the tribe of Benjamin, Iudic. cap. 20.
were notvvithstanding at both those times overthrown, who yet at the
last prevailed, to the great foil and confusion of there enimyes. And to give
you an example nearer home, you may read, Polid. Virgil.
how the expedition that Julius Ceaser made into England, not for that the
Britains had assisted his rebels robbed his treasure, or entruded themselves
into his dominions: but only for that they had aydid the french, when he made
war against them: came at the first to no effect, yet were those Britains no
whit the more assured of security, for the year follovving he returned
again, and gat the victory.

God has punished us for our sins which are great, but the punishment of
our faults, excuses not your far greater offenses, your superiors must well
know they have deserved a plague, and their guilty consciences greatly fear
to find it, howsoever they strugle and strive against God, as did Nemrode,
when with his Giants he builded the tower of Babylon, Gene. cap.
thincking there was no other way to overthrow there designementes, then a
new inundation.

Vain are those persuasions of theirs, that our losses are irrecouerable, and
that there remains for us, neither hope nor comfort. Which if it were so,
yet are not they freed from deserved vengeance, and that it is not so, a little
time can make manifest. Such speeches only argue, that they have made a
resolution to run on in all impiety, and to try to the vttermoste, whether
Gods puisance or their ungodly practices can most prevail: where in they
shall well find, that he can many ways confound the wicked, when
themselves shall no way prevent it. Mean while, there outvvarde courage is
mixte with inward care, and there feigned Joy with restless iealousy: who
in seeming to fear nothing, are seen to start at their own shadows.

This intolerable fear is more manifested in your English Government, then in
any state else in the whole world: the great impression thereof enforcing
them, to all their spyings abroad, and inquisitions at home: searchings of
houses more at midnighte then at noone days, apprehensions, examinations, and
such daily exercise, and practice of the rack, (...)
as never the like was hard of: still fynding by experience, that never more
labor has bin employed to less purpose, those innocents only able to
confess no more, then that which concerns their own religion and
conscience: notvvithstanding all which, the remedies remaining (rather to
patche up the state of a body so far infected, then to cure an incurable
disease) are principally grounded, upon extreme tyranny, and deep
dissimulation.

Their tyranny is chiefly extended, to the Catholics of your own country, of
whom very many before, and sundry since our disastre, they have cruelly
executed: and by false lying libells after there deaths, have sought to
insinuate that they were of conspiracy with us, (...)
albeit it pleased God to discover this their great injustice, even in the very
execution thereof, for two of that number which were next after condemned to
death for treason, condescending through frailty, to recant their religion,
were forthwith pardoned, and restored to liberty. Which benefyte of life, all
the others might as well and as easily have enjoyed as they, if the grace of
God, had not in them bin the greater. Which evidently argues for what cause
they were condemned, since recantation from treason, after or before
condemnation to death, I never knevve could save a man's life, if himself list.

Touching their dissimulation, being the ground and substance of their,
government, and containing the infynite nombers of deceatfull practices, false
fictions, and slanderous lies, which asvvell in the world abroad, as also
at home, they have artificially exercysed, in every action, is such a
laborinthe to look into, that it would rather require a whole volume, then a
brief relation. I vvil there fore leave the number of those unto such as by
long experience, have made better observation then my self: and for brevity
only set down, some fevve notable examples of their untrue speeches,
familiar to your selves, vvherevvith they have fought to make odious to the
people, to calumniate and condemn, such as themselves pleased. By which fevve
you may receive light to look into the others, and to give such credit to the
like hereafter, as experience has proved, the former to deserve.

It may therefore please yon (among many late rumors of the like condition
and quality) to call to remembrance what dispytefull pamphlets, and odious
reports, were bruited against the late duke of Northfolke, but you may well
assure your self, that never any one man of sense believed, that the said Duke
ever intended, to have fyred London in four places.

You have hard of images of wax hidden in the earth, whereof both books
and ballettes were spread about the country, that this was don by
Catholics, to consume the Queen, and some other: for the which cause, one
Hardinge a protestant minister of Islington was apprehended, charged that he
was a Papist, most cruelly racked, and unjustly condemned to death. And yon
have understood afterward, that one Elkes another protestant, confessed
himself to have bin the doer there of: yet not to destroy the Queen, but to
obtain the love of some Londoners vvyf.

So likewise of that other shamful and ridiculous rumor, raised against
sundry honnorable Gentlemen, which being a little to folishly handled by the
accusers at the beginning, The like was since b^^ched by M. stafford but t^
vvoold not take.
was for very shame in the end, let fall and syncke away. Notvvithstanding
it was most terrible for the time, to hear tell, that the Queen, and the
whole Court, should have bin blovvne up with gonnpovvder, which was said
to be conveyed thither in trunckes, and stravved under the rushes.

An infynite number of such like blazes have bin made, among which, the
often kylling of the Queen, and the sundry plotts for the fyring of London,
are no mean may-games. But how false and feigned soever they were, there
turns thereby have bin served to such purpose, that it has extended, even to
the losses of the lives and lands, of many of greatest virtue and honnour, in
the whole Realm, Such deuis^^ have se^ued to exting^^ ^he the Ancient nobil^^.
whose innocencies and unjust sufferings, equytie and truth, attend time to
discover, how confidently soever in the mean while, untruths are reported:
how generally they may happen to be believed, and how dangerous it be for
any man in their first advancement, any way to insinuate the contrary. The
vviser sort well seeing by experience, whereunto all tends, are so
sufficiently warned by others harm, that they dare not but seem to say and
soothe, whatsoever is agreeable to the humors of their superiors.

Well knovving that any ly, be it never so absurd, must receive free passage, if
so be, it fetch his first original from the Court.

But to dravve to my intended purpose, and to come to that, which concerns
the honnour of my own sovereign, the King Catholic of Spain: In those
particulers whereupon I know you expect my awnsvvere, of whose myld and
sweet proceedings, albeit the whole world has seen sufficient proof:
whose very nature abhors rigor, and whose compassionate mind never
seeks revenge: who pardons such offenses, that to much mercy is rather his
fault, then to severe justice: and forgiueth the greatest contempts, that
subjects can comitt against there sovereigns: yet is he not free from the
venomous tongues of stinging vipers, nor exempt from the lying libells of the
malicious English. Pardon me good Sir, that I speak of your nation as I have
cause, meaning only those that have given the same: the foul mouths of your
ministers never spared to rail against his Catholic Majesty, nor no
contemptible rascal, to revile him at his pleasure, nothing was more frequent
then the defaming of my King, nor nothing omitted that might make him most
odious.

It was made a very clear case, that you should all have bin brought under
the bondage of strangers. Who had divided your country among them, and
allotted to themselves, the lands and lyuings, of all the nobility and
Gentlemen of the Realm: That your wives and daughters should be violated. That
we brought irons to mareke your Children under the age of seven years, to
the end they might be known, to be come of the people of a Conquered country.
And that your Goods should be robbed and taken from you, etc.

To answer all which (since you sometime urged me, when the time nothing
served to give you satisfaction) I am now to desire you, first to consider,
that the question whether his Catholic Majesty, has just cause or not, to
make war against England, is so clear a case, that no man honest and wise,
can in his conscience doubt thereof. And if we look back into former times,
we shall find great vvarres, invasions, and conquests, achiued for far less
matters, then the long taking part with his rebels, or a number of other
English injuries, that can give sufficient cause unto our King, all which
sinister dealings, haning bin long shadowed, and shrovvded under egregious
dissimulations, are now lastly broken out, into most open and apparent
injustice, in the sight of all the world: and in such foul and shamlesse
manner, as is odious to all honest minds: by filching and stealing of his
treasure on the one side, by sneaking, and encroaching, into his towns and
countries, on the other side: all after a very vile and theevis he fassion.
Having gained by force, no one town they hold, not skarsly defended and kept
by valor, such as his majesty's forces has besieged: althonghe by treachery,
periuty, At Bergues (...).
and coosinage, they hauesomtyme prevented intended exploits.

The injuries then that his Majesty has received, being so many, and so
manifest, that long since he has had cause to attempt that, where unto of
latter times, he has bin more and more pronoked. It ^esteth to regard,
whether this cause be given him, by the superiors or subjects. That it should
proceed from the people, noman can deem, that it comes from the prince, noman
can deny. Whether the revenge of the faults of a few, should generally extend
to the utter ruin, and subversion of a whole nation, no reason can prove:
neither has such revenge bin alvvaies common to pagans and infidells, much
less once meant by a Christian king, and most clement prince. Look whether
his proceedings have bin tyrannous, tovvard any of his own subjects: and
whether ever any have entered into more outrageous rebellions, then those of
the low countries, who after there long misdemeamour, did at the lenghte
even utterly renounce and abjure him: received the Duke of Alencon of france,
invested him into the Duchy of Brabant, and swore unto him obedience. All
which actions of theirs, having had such success, as commonly ensues the
equity of such causes: and many of their cities, since reduced unto his
Majesty's obedience, no one man of them all, has for any his former offenses
bin executed.

Truth it is, that the Duke of Alua, did heretofore use some severity
toward them, yet not other then they had deserved, and for one executed by
him, your justice of England would have hanged an hundredth, if the like case
had bin theirs. But notvvithstanding that this was done, by due and lawful
justice, yet was it so far disagreable to his Majesty's mind, that the said
Duke being called into Spain: of all the Governors which since that time
have bin sent thither, no one, nor they all, have used any thing like, the like
severity: albeit there offenses since, There chiefest cause of rebellion was
for heresy, which no ^ne of their preuileges alovved.
have so far exceeded there faults before, as the taking of arms (in defense
of their privileges, as they then untruly spoke) is different from the denying
there sovereign, and electing another. Yet such grace and favor do they
find, eue^ at this day, that yiedling themselves, and their cities under his
obedience: they are not only absolutely pardoned, As those of S. Ger^^ ^enbreg,
etc.
but which is more marvelous, they are with great sums of money ritchly
revvarded. And such subjects of his, that as rebels do yet remain out
unpardoned, are themselves the cause thereof, because they seek it not.

It is further to be considered, that there is no King in Europe, that has
more different nations, of more diverse lands and languages to his subjects,
then his Majesty has. The entire Monarchy of Spain, containing sundry
kyngedomes, is governed in one most flourishinge and peaceable estate, and the
Province of Portugal, newly anexed there unto, remains in more better
condition, then it was in other times before. The nobility thereof,
notwithstanding some resistance at the first, after that they had maturely
considered the cause, together with his majesty's merciful disposition, and
left of to prefer the pretense of Don Anthonio: were not only received into
his great grace and fauout, and confirmed in their own ancient possessions,
but were further gratifyed by his Majesty, with sundry great honors and
dignities. And the common people eftsoons released of many great taxes and
tributes, that their former princes had imposed upon them.

He has of Italians, those of the Kingdoms of Napl^s and Sicilia, the duchy
of Millan, and of diverse Isles of the Mediterraneum sea.

He has Germans, of the Duchy of Luxembourge: And Burgundians, of the
higher province: being all governed in great quiet, and far better estate,
then ever under any other, their former Princes. Having found no conquest,
thraldom, mutation, or inconvenience whatsoever to auoy them but fully enjoy
the comfortes and commodities of their countries, under the obedience of such a
sovereign, as has more better might and means to defend them, then any
Prince his people in the world, most free and far from any lykelyhoode of
rebellion. In which same obedience, his subjects of the Netherlandes, had
doubtless long lived, had they not bin situate so near the noisome infection
of their English neighbors, whose pernicious venim, has not only anoyed
them, but also Fra^^^ce, and Scotland, the next inhabitants on the ^ther
sides: And whose malice so exceeds, were th^r^ means according, that they
would not leave, neither Europe nor India, free from such infection.

And for a further proof, of his Majesty's mylde nature, and (...) benignity,
I shall desire you to con^^der, that there is nothing that can possibly, more
move and stir up the indignation of a Prince, then the open disloyal and
repugnant insolency, of his own people. And that no subjects in our days,
have exceeded his, all the world will witness. Notwithstanding all which,
look whether any bloody, cruel, or unchristian desire of revenge, has
apeered in him, and look whether it be possible that more lenity might be
showed unto such, then his Majesty has done. The truth whereof, being so
apparent, plain and manifest, I leave unto your own self in co^scye^ce to
discern whether thease examples of his Majesty's proceedings, will not
sufficiently awnswere, unto all the calumnies and lies, that his adversaries
can possibly invent to make him odious. Look whether after such a general
revolt wherein so many had so justly deserved to loose both their lives, and
livings, whether their lands are divided to strangers, there wives violated,
their Children marcked with hot Irons, there goods robbed and taken from them,
etc. Or rather, whether they do not live in all security and quiet possession
of their own. And if by reason of the restrainte of their trafique they are
not presently in their former abundance, they may wholly impute that unto you,
being the only cause theerof. But of the like compassion had of a Prince on
his people, yon cannot shevve any examples paste or present, in the whole world.

This Sweet and gracious disposition of his Majesty, being so publyke, and
notorious, how is it possible, that ever such vnchristi^ cruelty, could more be
intended to the English nation, then to any others: or that any man offense
can imagine, why he should more hate them, then any his own treacherous and
rebellious subjects. His great wisdom well seeing, and observing, that the
original of this rancour, principally proceeds from some few in present
authority, whose ungracious designs are executed by persons, neither of
honor, nor honesty. And others of the vulgar sort of people, who with
applause of their superiors, concur in thease courses: he can well discern,
rather to do it of little discretion, then of great malice: themselves not
being of capacity, to consider the equity, or justness of the cause. And
his Majesty espetially considers, that great multytudes, are over borne, by
the impious tyranny, of powrable persons, ontwardly to condescend to that,
which inwardly they contemn: sustayning contrary to the nature of so noble a
Nation, the general reproach of particular men's dishonorable actions: whose
case doubtless, he does rather pity, then desire to punish.

All the world knows that his Majesty has ever had a most singular
affection to the English people, and your selves by experience have perfectly
found it. There could never king co^desce^d to conditions more honorable and
profitable for you, then his Majesty did at his being in England. I suppose
mo^sieur of france, in his late mock marriage, never offered you the like. His
Majesty's actions were without dissimulatio^, as the co^seque^ce well
declared, for being married to your Queen, and proclaimed King, yet sought
not to setle himself in the Crown: nor to possess any ports, towns, or
castells, in the whole country. But after the deceasse, of the most virtuous
Queen Mary his wife, gave place and quiet entrance unto the Lady Elizabeth.
Giving also unto her, all his said wives Jewels, which himself might justly
have claymed and kept. And presently after her coming to the crown, he then
being upon conditions to conclude a peace with the french king, upon the
taking of S. Quintines, did most earnestly stick, at the re^dringe of the
town of Calis, to the English again: she having at that present her
ambassadors there, and as it seemed, for the same purpose, but after his
Majesty had so earnestly urged this matter, that unless it might be granted
there could be no accord the french then flatly confessed, that
notwithstanding the English ontwardly solicited for Calis: yet they had
secretly assured them, that their Queen cared not therefore: which his Majesty
afterward found so in deed, and perceived the fraud, that it imported. But to
leave thease deuyses, to other like dooble dealings, let us return to the
time, when our King remained with you in England: and see with what affable
curtesy he entreated you, what great liberality he used to all sorts in
general, and what honorable pensions he gave to all your Noble men in
particular, with infinyte other favors: among all which, the saving of this
woman's life, who being committed, and in case to be condemned, not for religion,
for she had and hard Mass, First with (...).
pretending to be Catholic: After with others, as the letters found (...)
her testified.
but for conspiringe of treason, and rebellion, against her sovereign, and
sister: was^ benefyte (as it seems) not best bestovved, b^^ause it has bin
woorst requyted, sundry other signs of his most affectionate favor, has he
showed to your nation: and of all others the great^st is, that he has had so
long patience, to revenge so many injuries, as from thence he has received,
Notwithstanding all those, he has ever contyn^ued his princely, benignity,
never hurti^g nor hating, the good for the evil, but relieuing nombers with
very large entretainements, who having abandoned, the commodities of their
country, for their conscience, and religion, have (...) themselves to live in
his dominions. Yea his bounty and benevolence, in very mere gifts, and
liberalities, to sundry nations in general, are so great: that he freely
gives away by the year, more then the Queen of England can yearly dispend.
What should I be tedious to stand upon those points, that his enemies intend,
to have bin his intention: or the terms of tyranny, that every hedge minister,
can amplyfy against us.

That you should all have bin brought under the bondage of strangers, who had
made division of your lands and lyuings among themselves, as though all
Spain, and Portugal, the Indies, east and west, Italy, and the low
Countries, yea almost half the world, were so pestred with people: that there
were no habitation left for us, but that we must needs by danger of sea and
land, seek to take it from you perforce: whereas you may well know, there
has no necessity constreyned us, to abandon our lands, and livings, in our
own natural and ample country of Spain, which we prefer before any
septentrionall region. And albeit we were enforced to change our residence, yet
can we make choice of many places, as fruitful and pleasant as England is, and
obtain them, with far less difficulty. It may be, that this persuasion of
danger to loose there lands, has moved sundry of your gentlemen of late
days, to sell away theirs, and to purchase more assured credit, have set
themselves forvvard in great bravery, to be seen in your service, for the
which I doubt not, but they have bin rewarded* with kind courtly
countenances: and are in possibility, so soon as occasion shall require,
Protections are the best rewards that they are to expect.
with easy suit (for there full recompense) to obtain protections, that no
officer shall arrest them, when they shall have less money then land.

Your impudent ministers, whose mouths are made the trompets, to sound out
untruths: can tell you as confidently, as had they bin of the Kings counsel,
into what great bondage you should have bin brought, and how-much you liberty,
should have bin abridged. Marvel not that these companions, call your
reformation a conquest: and condemn the most Clement King of the world, of
intended cruellty it behooves them most, to speak in this matter, and to
exercise to the vttermoste, the loudnes of their lying, because it concerns
as well their own benefyte, as those from whom they receive their
instructions, perhapps in deed, the large liberty that they take to them
selves had bin somewhat abridged, and many a Royal and Noble sermon left
unmade, The ordinary prices of sermons.
wherewith thease wedded priests of Baal, do maintain their women, and new
generation.

This bondage seems to be the more grievous, because it is said to be under
strangers: would to God there were less difference, between Christian and
Christian, and more discord, between English, The rebels (...) Flaunders.
and Turk, you have not had so few, as fyfty thousand strangers among you,
more then twenty years together, and therefore you might the better bear, a
smaller number.

That your wives and daughters should be deflowred, is a matter, that more men
then ministers cannot brook, and yet seldom among soldiers not guyded by
good disciplyne, this plague in particular is incident, but hereunto can I tell
you, that your liberty of the late Gospel has provided a more sufficient
remedy, to avoid this inconvenience, then any other: insomuch that such of the
soldiers themselves, as were so ill disposed, could tell, that they should
find harlots more then enoughe, already provided.

Those tirrible tales, that we brought Irons wherewith to mark your Children,
under the age of seven years, to the end they might be known, to be the
race of a conquered nation, do doubtless sound most lamentably: but to
comfort you herein, thus much may I say, that albeit a man do utterly refuse
to believe them, I dare warrant him, he shall never be damned, for that
incredulity: but by the way I could wish you to note, that if they did not
think they had framed the people to believe what they list they would never
feed them with such palpable untruths, and if therefore you shall think
them, to have as little honesty, as they think you to have wit, you shall do
them no injury at all.

That your goods should be robbed and taken from you, you need not greatly
fear, for it seems that now of late, more then here-tofore, her Majesty's
collectours and receyuers, have taken such order to take it from you, to save
it from us: that they have sent it out of England to Zealand, and other places
over the seas, wherefore you needed not fear this misery: but rather have
hoped, that Spanish pistolets, should have bin more common and current in
England, then ever they were before. To the other ridiculous, and frivolous
forgeries, that we brought halters to hang you, and whips to whip you, I can
say little, other then that I am very sorry, that in all this ample provision, we
forgot to bring whetstones to give to those that told you this, and bables for
such as did believe them.

But to leave all such absurd lies, to the wisdoms of the creditors, it is
more necessary to see whereunto they served, and whether their further
meaning, may thereby be made manifest. The truth is, and easily it does
appear, that they were not only invented, to make them most odious, that meant
you least evil: but also to blind and bleare, the eyes of the people, by
putting into there heads, the fears of future miseries, to the end they
should the less behold, there own present calamyties, and those that by their
improuident practices are sure to ensue, albeit they never had need to fear
any foreign enemy: but to lead drive and dispose of you, as of brute beasts,
without souls, sense, or understanding: where and to what, themselves like
and allow, ever prouyding to keep you in ignorance, and principally of that,
which most concerns your own common welfare: as among others it plainly
appears, in the prohibiting under great pain, and devising of oaths of
association, that none may once move, or call in question to know, who is to
succeed their Queen, after her death: as though it were treason to say she
should die, or an insufferable crime to know that, whereof they might receive
comfort, of continuing their own quiet, after her decease. And as though
they desired all felicity to end with them, not caring what confusion, civil
discention, and bloudshedd, might afterward fall among the English, by the
English themselves. A resolution doubtless most indurable, and unchristian:
unnatural is that father, that through inordinate avarice, leaves his family
to fall to all discord and discention. But impious is that prince, that in
preserving disordered pleasure, leaves the people in such possibility to be
killed, in the confusion of so many competitours.

But let us look into less matters then thease, and see whether they deny
not, the very privileges of reasonable creatures, prohibiting by publyke
commandment, that none may once ask or inquire, how things do ordinarily
pass in the world abroad. Neither to demand, hear, read, or write, any
news of any matter whatsoever, be it true or untrue: yea scarsly of that,
which touches men's private negotiatio^s. The only restrayning of which free
speech, is of it self a very euydent and sufficient sign, of a Tyrannous
estate, and a markable suspicion, of sinister dealing. By this bridle you are
rayned and brought, to all beastly and slauishe seruytude, without any
knowledge or consideration, either of reason, cause, or conscience, of that
wherein both your bodies and souls are employed: and so much of your
substancontributed, which to the menaginge of thease unjust quarrels have bin
so great and so grievous, that it has exceeded all the former subsidies and
exactio^s, that any seven of your princes predecessors, have had of their
subjects, to make their lawful wars. You pay, what they please to demand,
you bear what they list to lay upon you, you are made to say and soothe, to
whatsoever they will, be it never so false, fond, and unlikely: you are
pressed, compelled, unpaid, clapte under hatches, and carried you know not
where, nor to what end, and when such of you as are left alive, do return
home again (if not carried sick through the streats of London by whole carte
loades, in the Lord of Lecester his Trophee) you see how you are rewarded, and
how your creditt and condition is increased, by that it was before.

You are cut of from all trade and trafique, with the most ritche, and
opulent countries about you, retaining no hope of any outward comoditie, other
then can be gotten by robbery and piracie. The prosperity whereof you find
such, that you see your selves no whitt thereby disburdened, of any your
increasing subsidies, and exactions.

This great misery and daily desolation, does more and more make, your
Gentlemen bare, and your Merchants banckrupte, it consumes the Commons, and
continually wastes the wealth of the Realm: As wisemen do see, though they
dare not say it, and all men do find, though they do not see it. It would
exceed the compass of a letter, to lay open unto you every important
affliction, but that shall not need, for experience will teach you to descerne
them, each day more then other, and you shall further feel the smart, before
you find the remedy.

Woe woorthe the causers of your calamities, who for their own private
ambitious desire to rule, have run on, in all desperate and dangerous attempts
whatsoever: and have lastly by violence, drawn upon their own heads, that
which neither themselves, nor the whole Realm can uphold.

Where are now those infallible grounds, that your great Machiauelist, laid
down at the beginning, when he so boldly presumed to alter religion, and to
begin his new Gospel, with an extraordinary government, whose resolutions to
continue the Republique, were according to the direction of the unholy Ghost,
in the determyninge of religion.

The first was, to establishe their estate, by maintayning rebellions of the
subjects of France, Flaunders, and Scotland.

That failing, the second was, by the credit that they had in the low
Countries, to give and transpose part thereof to the french: and thereby to
kindle a war, between the two houses, of france and Spain.

This failing, then to join with, and to give ports and succors, to all
pirates, to vex and anoy the said two houses, if they should join.

And lastly, thease all failing, there was one remedy left to redress all
again: which was, by the new singing, of an old maingy Mass: so vilely it
pleased him to term the most blessed Sacrifice of the Church, where by the
way, you have here to note the religion of an Athiest.

I am enforced for brevity, to lay down unto you, when, where, and in what
manner, thease plottes have bin put in practyse: neither shall I now greatly
need to stand thereon, for to the wonder of the world, the annoyance of their
neighbors, the ignominy of themselves, and the imminent danger of the whole
Realm, the three former (perhapps corrected, and augmented, by the author)
have bin very orderly effectuated, the last remedy only remaining.

All which plottes and practices, time and truth, having ouerworne and
discovered: you are now to consider, what benefits they have brought unto
you. And therefore look into what state and condition you are now left, and
to what hope and possibility you are delivered: see first, whether themselves,
in their hoary hears, are not full of fear and perplexity, whether the
people be not generally in poverty and decay, The English pract^^ (...)
Tur^kes and other infid^^s aga^^st Christendom.
and the Realm in restless tourmoile and trouble: And being abandoned of all
exterior comfort, whether any one powrable Christian prince, knowing your
cause, does compassionate your case, and lastly look, whether you are not
left to retire, to Turckes, Moors, and Barbarians, for succor.

The Kingdoms of Scotland, Denmarcke, Swethen, and sundry states of Germany,
that maintain opinions, contrary to the Catholic ^aith, from the which they
are fallen, and in the which, the most part of Christendom does remain: are
not in any such fear: either of forreyne or domestical dangers. They make
not such ordinary exclamations, and false allarmes, of treason and treachery,
neither do they thereupon, Tyrannously practice to cut of, and kill, whom
they please: for albeit that they are almost as far infected, with as foul
heresies, yet have they much more morrall honesty: their heresy having only
hurt themselves, and they not seeking the hurt of others. They have not
supported the rebellions of other subjects against their sovereigns, neither
have they practiced with Pagans or Turckes: They made fires and feasts for joy
upon the murder of the Queen of Scotland.
they have quartered no priests, nor Murdered no Queens, nor made triumphs
of joy and victory, upon the committing of most monstrous injustice, neither
by any other public barbarous vilanies, brought themselves in such dread and
distress.

And that it may more better appear unto you, how your dealings, are lyked and
allowed, of other protestant princes: it is not impertinent to my purpose, to
give you one example. At such time as it was bruited abroad, that your. Queen
had resolved to entrude herself into his Majesty's dominions, a merchant of the
low Countries, arryuing at Stockholme, was demanded of the King of Swethen,
whether it were true that the Queen, of England had put herself in possession
of any the King of Spain his countries, or towns there, yea quoth he it is
true: Then quoth the King, she has even stakte down her own crown, and
stands in fair possibility, to be put out of all. Methinkes your self, or
any indifferent English protestant, whose zeal does not ouerbeare his
discretion, may much marvel, that England so much and so many ways seeming
to be troobled, is so little pitied of other people in the world abroad. And
being governed by a woman, your case must be the more capable of pity,
seeing men naturally are given, to compassionate that sex. But alas my good
friend, you may see these false faces dismasked long since, and all the world,
to be as well acquainted with English clamours, as is the fysher of Nylus, with
the tears of the Crocodile. Neither can any of those vain, false, and lying
libells, that from thence are spread abroad, any whit now a days serve your
turns, other then to noosell up those, that you can keep from seeing or
hearing the contrary, for how cuningly soever the colored words therein are
contrived, men make your actions the comentaries.

In the durance of your expyred years, your prince enjoyed the fullness of her
pleasure, and her fauorytes their uncontrolled authority, then advancinge
their felicity, and using all benefytes of time: after all which, you now rest
doubtful, whether your play will conclude, as a comedy, or tragedy: the truth
of all felicity being tried at the last, and no assured happiness before the
end.

When I enter into consideration, of the present state of your country, I call
to remembrance, that at my being at Salamanca, some five years paste, an
English Gentleman showed me, the work of an old English poet, being the
most renowned, that ever wrote in the English tongue: in the beginning whereof
were certain verses, which in manner of a prophesy, so perfectly discribed
then, the future state of England, that at this day, it is the very lively
pourtraict thereof ad Viuum. I requested of him the sense in Spanishe, and the
meeter in English, which is thus.

When faith fails, in priests savves,
And lords hestes, are held for laws,
And robbery is reckned purchase,
And leachery is counted solace:
Then shall the land of Albion,
Be brought to great confusion.
Although I have hard, that by the new laws of England, it is made a
trespass, no less then treason, to talk of old prophesies: yet have I
presumed to repeat thease English rymes, because they are common to be redd, in
publyke printed books among your selves. That the author had the spirit of
prophesy I will not say, but how this accords with the present time, your
self shall see.

First touching the failing of the faith, it is manifest that he meant no
other, then the faith Catholic, which had so long lasted, and so universally
bin believed: and was there then preached and taught by priests, for ministers
at that time were unmade and created: which faith is now failed in those
apostataes, from whence your ministers fetch their original: diverse of them
being yet living, that sometime said Mass in the Catholic Church, and do
now say Comunion in the protestant congregation. The effect of which great
defect of faith, has in a short season so sufficiently appeered, not only in
the increasing companies, of many sorts of protestants, puritanes,
Anabaptists, and loving families, but even in the bringing forth of sundry
such monsters, as dare boldly deny our savior Christ himself: As Ham^^ Lewis
Cole. Kett, etc.
whereby you may see, that forsaking the faith that contemned all heresy, you
have embraced a doctrine, that conteyneth all blasphemy.

Every man in his own particular experience, has had such infynite examples,
of your notable corruption of English justice, that he seeith, it is better to
have a bad cause, supported by the favor of the court, then a good cause,
without the credit of a courtier: The authority of those lords, having of
late days extended so far, Extreme violating of Justice.
as to the discharging of such out of prison, as have lain upon executions,
leaving their creditours unsatisfied. Such was the sovereign puisance, of the
late Lord of Lecester, D. Iulio, etc.
that he could not only extinguishe his own manifest murders, and open
injustice, but his Lord-ships will was a law sufficient, Those that had
indebted themselves by his service of Holand he revvarded afterward with
protections.
to defend the faults of others: and his great plenty of protections, of more
force then virtue. Money, might, and favor, do so sway the justice of
England, and so alter the condition of every case, that more wilful murders,
capital fellonies, and criminal offenses are now pardoned, then ever before.
The judge can tell, the ^ury whether the Queen will have the accused found
guilty or not.
There are none that can live, whom they list to kill: nor none can offend,
whom they please to favor. Truth it is, that there is nothing punished more
then virtue, nor nothing permitted more then vice. There is no blasphemy
comparable to the denial of feminine supremacy, nor no offense against God, so
grievously punished. There is no death so terrible, as that which is ordained
for deuoutest Christians, nor nothing more offensive, then the faith of their
forfathers: who if they were alive and Catholics, their children would
condemn, and quarter for traitors.

According to your good Religion, and well ordered laws, the rest of your
actions, do rightly concur: and your open allowance of rapyne and robbery,
does manifest to the world, that you have made a resignation of all honnour,
and abandoned all honesty: not caring what the whole world present, not all
posterities to come, shall account of your actions: the blot and blemishe
thereof, being so reprochefull, that England sometime so famous, for virtue and
justice, is now esteemed a receptacle for pirates, The greater part of the
nations maritines in all Europe, have (...) ^obbed by the English.
and a den of thieves. And those little companions, that are there daily hanged
for tryfles, being such (for the most part) as your selves have robbed
first, by employing them in your service, without giving them their pays,
wherein having consumed their own substance, are afterward enforced to steal,
for the very maintenance of life: Are not hanged so much for the fact, as for
the manner of comitting it, for if they did it, in any place out of England,
were it never so far westward, nor never so much in value, it should be reckned
very right and lawful purchase. And they should be so far from the danger of
hanging, that they should be rewarded with the dignity of knighthood. As Sir
Frauncis Drake, etc.


Touching the sin of Leachery, I can little say, other then by hear say. And
that is, it was never more common in the country, nor of more creditt in the
court: no, not before the enlarging of Kenelmworthe Castle, nor in the
erecting of Haumbey house nor during the time of the setting up of all the
edifices, situate upon the like foundation: as it has bin since the very
finishing, of Rauleghs Arcke.

Thus you may see, how Faith is failed, Robbery allowed, and Leachery most
delighted in. The confusion to follow, is now next to be expected: but by
whom, when, and in what manner, rests in the deuyne disposition, of almighty
God, whose Justice, no earthly power (much less any English policy) can
possibly resist.

Time woorketh alteration in all things, and in this world there is nothing,
that is not subject to change: all estates increase, diminish, are tossed,
turned, fall, and are destroyed. Which consists not, as Plato the heathen
Philosopher says, in the circuyte and limmits of a certain Period: but in the
pleasure, of the Celestial Sovereign. Those having their being most
assured, and durable, that are founded on religion, and justice.

All plants says our savior, that my heavenly father has not planted,
shall be plucked up by the roots. All temporal governments throughoute the
world, notwithstanding all worldly wit, power, and practices, whatsoever: have
and do daily, so alter and change, that few or none can be found, to have
continued any long course of time, in one order and rule. Only the Catholic
Church of Christ, depending upon the direction of the holy Ghost, has
still remained in one same faith and visible Monarchy, almost sixteen
hundredth years. During which time, diverse kingdoms have bin diversely
tra^sposed vpsyde down: and those only found to be least subject to mutation,
that most have bin directed by the gouuernours of that Church.

The aforesaid philosopher says further, that Republiques are never happy, but
when princes are lovers of wisdom, or lovers of wisdom do rule: S^p. 6.
but Solomon speaking by a mouth more deuyne, exhorts princes to search
(true) wisdom, to the end, they may reign Justly in earth, and eternally in
heaven. Would to God, the resolution of your rulers, had bin laid upon these
grounds, then had the most worthy for wisdom and virtue, bin preferred, and
none for vice, and vilany, advanced to chiefest authority. Then had not his
late excelsi obtained the greatest rule of all, His excelent^e alias Le^^^er.
because of all others, he kept the greatest ill rule himself: then had they
never vpholden there unstable estate, by the only annoyance of their
neighbors, nor by their great injustice, drawn so many dangers, together at
the last. Then had the beginning bin Godly, the continuance quiet, and the end
happy.

The Realm of England, has in other times, bin as often subject to change,
as other countries in the world: but more commonly carrying therewith, the blood
of the best nobility: what great effusion of blood, ensued the coronarion of
King Henry the fourth, at what time, the division of the two houses of
Yorcke, Phil. de Co^^es.
and Lancaster, began: which lasted the lives and reigns, of three Kings
following, and was not wholly extyncte, until the time of King Henry the
seventh. During which time, there died in diverse battles, skirmishes, and
executions, four score, of the blood Royal: and the very flower of the
Nobility of England, with infynite other valiant personages, besides sundry
Lords and gentlemen, consumed in prisons at home, or enforced abroad in
banishment, miserably to end the rest of their days. In this great confusion,
each party as they prevailed, condemned the other for traitors: that in the
end, all the whole nobility and people, were on the one and the other side, so
taken and used. Since which time, even of late, in our own age and memory, we
have seen sundry chaunges: among all which, our Lord dealt most mercifully,
when most danger was feared: at what time, John Dudley Duke of
Northumberlaend, having married the Lady Jane to one of his sons, and
proclaimed them King and Queen, thereby to exclude and cut of the right of
Queen Mary, and pretense of Elizabeth, it pleased the deuyne prouyde^ce so to
dispose, that without battle or bloodshed of the people, the punishment only
exte^ded, to the principal parties, and some few accessaries themselves,

Thus may sundry examples of your own changes show you, that alterations are
no new things: but that they are both common and general. Neither can any be
so senseless (although such great iniquity had never bin committed) as to
think your estate were ever stable, or that no new government, did not ever
bring at the least, the change of many men's particular estates.

But the case being now such as it is, that his Catholic Majesty, is not
only highly iniuried, and continually urged: but the whole repose and quiet of
Christendom so disturbed, that either his Majesty or some other prince, must
of force seek the reformation of your country: not for any particular
comoditie, but for a general good. Whereunto in truth, his Majesty is
especially more obligated, then any other: insomuch, that if there were no
cause at all of religion to move him, yet in regard of the common iniuryes,
daily done unto him, he is even bound in right, reason, and justice, to do
it: and that if neither he, nor any other should attempt the same, you are
notwithstanding assured of civil dissension, no heir to the Crown apparently
known, and so many competitiours, to make claim at once, and the wrath and
indignation of God, for so great impiety, by one means or other to be
satisfied: I cannot see whether the plague of civil war, will be easier, then
the inconvenience of foreyne invasion: neither can I see, how you can avoid
the least of them both. Neither do you desire with David, rather to fall into
the hands of God, then into the hands of men, but persist in the
augmentation, of your wounted wickedness.

It may somtymes please God of his great mercy, to spare a whole city, for a
few just persons therein. And the only hope that remains, for the easy
reclayminge of your country, is the blood of so many marti^s, there powered
out: which being so precious in his sight, may be the mean so to mittigate
his high indignation, that the innocent shall not be confounded with the
impious, but rather, that many multitudes by there means may be saved.

It may also stand with his great goodness, to make his Catholic Majesty the
mean, for the recovery thereof, not to conquer, or make mutation, of ancient
laws and liberties, which he never intended: but only to reduce it, to the old
concord and communion of christendom. This doubtless would be the happiest,
and easiest means of all other: the heroycall endeavors of his Majesty
considered: whose proceedings in all mercy, myldnes and grace, lie open to the
vewe, of heaven and earth, neither needs the tongue or pen of any man,
declare them: except only, to manifest the malice of his adversaries, unto
those whom they so impudently abuse. His Majesty also much relying (among
others of greatest wisdom and virtue of your own nation) upon the grave
counsel and advise, of the Cardinal of England, whose exceeding care and
natural affection, to his dear country, is awnswerable to his great virtue,
wisdom, and learning. You are not here to regard, the raylings of those, that
account his grace and all the other exyled English, traitors, and enemies, to
their country: falsely saying, that they have sold it, to the Pope and King of
Spain: as though it were possible, that so great impiety, could remain
among so many, so virtuous, so wise, so learned, so honorable, and so united
in consanguinitie, throughoute the whole country: that your Cardinal (as I am
well informed) is of kin and alyance, almost unto all the Gentlemen, of the
county of Lancaster. And the other Gentlemen lincked in like sort, welnighe
unto all the honorable and woorshipfull families, in every other province,
being bound by the very laws of nature, to the love of their country and
kindred, if no cause of religion, or reason else did move them. And as tho^ghe
your superiors own, notorious unjust actions, did not more vehemently urge
revenge, or hasten reformation, then any persuation else, that possibly might
be made.

Those of your nation that now live in exile, retayning the true love, and
affection, that Christians ought to carry to their country, preferring the
soul before the body, do first desire the conversion of there dear countrymen,
kindred, and friends, from a confused chaos of heresies, to the one only
Catholic and Apostolic faith. Next, the ancient tranquillity, and quiet
accord thereof, with other Christian countries. And to manifest this their
true and sincere affection they are most ready, and willing, to adventure the
loss of there own lives. Whereas those that unjustly accuse them, could be
content, so that their present authority might continewe, to suffer your
souls in all abominable heresies, to come to utter damnation, and to leave
you in conclusion, to cut the one the others throat, and so to lie open to the
rapyne and spoil, of so-many, as by their means you have offended. These of
all others, be the the greatest enemies to your common wealth, odious to God,
and man, and traitors not only to one prince, and country, but to Christ, and
all Christendom, and have cause to consider this sentence of the sacred
scripture, Regnum a gente in gentem transfertur, propter iniustitias, and
iniurias, Eccles. 10.
and contumelias, and diuersos dolos. that is, A Kingdom is transferred from
one people to another, because of injustice, of injuries, and contumelies, and
diverse deceyts. These now fynding no further refuge, or assured succor, of
Turck, traitor, heretyke, or Barbarian: do labor to put you, in all fear, of
extreme danger and detryment, intended against you: meaning if the woorst
fall, to make your bodies the Bulwarckes, wherewith themselves will be defended:
so that you should feel the smarte, howsoever they shifte with the shame.
Which harm in deed may happen, to the more wilful and unadvised, whereas
those that be of better consideration, may find the mean of there own safty,
and assurance, to rest in themselves, by embracinge those remedies, that it
shall please God of his great goodness, in such cases to provide. Unto whose
deuyne wisdom, and determynation, all must ever be referred, and unto whose
holy protection, I comend your self:

Wishing unto all your countrymen, the due consideration of their case, and the
best auoydance of their calamytie, from Calis this of May, 1589. Your unfeigned
friend whose heart and hand shall never cease to do you service. I. B.


AFTER that I had finished this my letter, understanding that through defaulte
of wind, together with some difficulty that the messenger put, about his more
safe and speedy passage: he was not like to depart so soon, as himself had
promised, and I expected, I therefore detained this letter, some days in my
hands unsealed, attending such opportunity, as might nearest concur to our
desires.

In the mean season, I understood by letters from Roan, that the great and
extraordinary english fleet, furnished at the charges of so many, who either
of force, or favor, had streyned themselves to serve, (...).
they knew not well whom, where, nor when: yet now, after long delay, great
counsel, and correspondence of friends, they were departed, from the west
part of England, about the first of May, stilo nouo: under the conduct (by
sea) of the glorious and famous man Sir, Frauncis Drake, who a little before,
had promised the Queen his mistres, to bring the King of Spain to very great
poverty, and misery. And the charge of service by land, was committed to Sir
John Noris, whose experience, the english were wont greatly to magnify. The
rest of their Captains, and soldiers, were the best that they had: having
retired the principal of those, from those parts of the low countries, which
they presently possess.

Very shortly after, I understood by other letters, from the before said place,
and the same party. That the English were arrived, not very far from St. James
in Galitia. Perhaps with some intention in their way, to have visited that
place, of especial devotion, to the riches and ornaments there. Where albeit,
that very many strangers, from all parts of Europe: according to an old
custom of christians, do continually come on pilgrimage. And that unto such,
the inhabitants thereaboutes do freely give leave, and relief: Yet they now
seeing the English to approach, in a manner much different from other
pilgrims, have accordingly given them a far other kind of entertaiment,
insomuch (that as my friend writes) those that lately so arrogantly boasted,
of some detrime^t of ours: which all the world knows, came not through
english power or puisance, but by the very wyndes, and seas, which it pleased
God to permit to our punishment: Have now received such a check, for that
insolency, that they may see our selves are made the instruments, by our own
arms, to chastise them. Touching the manner and particularities, I cannot at
this present fully certify you. Those your self may there, better understand,
if you have any secrett friend in court, otherwise you shall hardly come by
the certainty, for I fear it will be made treason to talk thereof, among the
common sort of men.

If you can come by the names of those men of mark: number of soldiers,
ships, and artillery, that you have lost: I pray you use some means, to send
them over, because I would gladly see, how our aduises shall differ. The author
of the late pamphlet, printed at London in English, and french, and entitled.
The copy of a letter sent from England to don Bernardine de Mendoza,
Ambassador in France for the King of Spain, no doubt, if he will take the
pains, can very well pen it to the print, because I know, he will carry a
great care, about the putting down of every particular.

And whereas in the beginning of that letter, the author seems to be very sad
and sorrowful: A counterfeit Catholic.
after so late, and long expected comfort, to have an occasion to signify the
lamentable loss, and utter dissolution, of all hope. Now I can assure him, he
may make a piece of amends, in sending over at this time such good news, as
can somewhat counteruaile the former ill: And if it shall please him to make an
estimate, of the one and the others losses, to see who has sustained the
greater: he must also set down some reasons, to show which of both is best
able to bear it, and the most like, soonest to recover it: for by thease
considerations, a man shall surest come to the certainety. Thus good Sir,
understanding of this bearers present occasion to depart, who now attends
the closing up of my letter, I am enforced here to conclude. Once more
committing you to God, and wishing you most heartily well to fare. June 1589.


