Instructions for the Clergy.
1 THat the Lords, the Bishops, give charge in their Triennall Visitations, and
at other convenient times, both by themselves and the Archdeacons, that the
declaration for settling all questions in difference, be strictly observed by
all parties.

2 That they take great care concerning the Lecturers, in their several
Diocesses, for whom we give these special directions following.

1 That in all Parishes, the afternoon Sermons, may be turned into
Catechizing by Question and Answer, where and whenever there is not some
great cause apparent to break this ancient and profitable order.

2 That every Bishop ordain in his Diocese, that every Lecturer do read
Divine Service according to the Liturgy printed by Authority, in his Surplis
and Hood before the Lecture.

3 That where a Lecture is set up in a market Town, it may be read by a
company of grave and orthodox Divines, near adjoining, and in the same
Diocese: and that they preach in Gowns, and not in Clokes, as too many do
use.

4 That if a Corporation do maintain a single Lecturer, he be not suffered to
preach, till he profess his willingness to take upon him a living, with Cure
of souls within that Incorporation, and that he do actually take such
Benefice or Cure, so soon as it shall be fairly procured for him.

3 That the Bishops do countenance and encourage the grave and orthodox
Divines of their Clergy, and that they use means by some of their Clergy, or
others, that they may have knowledge, how both Lecturers and Preachers within
their Diocesses, behave themselves in their Sermons, that so they may take
order for any abuse accordingly.

4 That the Bishops suffer none under Noble men, and men qualified by Law, to
have any private Chaplain in his house.

5 That they take special care, that Divine service be diligently frequented,
as well for Prayers and Catechizing, as Sermons: And take particular note of
all such as absent themselves, as Recusants or otherwise.

6 Lastly the Lord Archbishop is commanded to give an account to the Kings
Majesty every year the second of January, of the performance of these Commands.


