A DIALOGVE OR FAMILIAR talk between two neighbors, concerning the chyefest
ceremonies, that were, by the mighti power of Gods most holy pure word,
suppressed in England, and now for our unworthiness, set up again by the
Bishops, the impes of Antichrist: right learned, profitable, and pleasant to
be read, for the comfort of weak consciences in these troublous days.

Read first, and then judge.

From Roane, by Michael Wodde, the.xx. of February. Anno. Domi. M.D.L.IIII.

A TALK BETWEEN OLYuer a professor of the Gospel, and Nicholas noseled in
the blind superstitions.
NIcholas. Good morrow gossyb.


Oliver. God give you good morrow good Nicholas. whyther away so sone this
morning?


Nicho. To church man, heardest thou not the bell ryng to mass?


Oliver. Ye were not wont to be so hasty a morninges to churchwardes.


Nicho. No, for when we came there, there was nothing to do but to hear a priest
babble. But now I thancke God, I may se my maker again.


Oliu. Your maker Nicholas? who is that?


Nicho. The great apple maker of holdernes.


Oliu. Apple maker? ye mean God, do you not?


Nicholas. Yes marye do I.


Olyu: Then I perceive, that so long as Gods commandments were read in the
Churches, ye counted it bablyng, neither delited ye in hearing the^, but now ye
have somewhat to gase at, that pleases ye. But Nicholas I have heard it said,
that no man ever saw God with his mortal eye. Ex. xxxiii. John. i.



Nicho. Yea, these heritickes tell us so, but I trust to see a good mani of
them fry a faggot for this gear, yet long.


Oliu. Are ye there now Nicholas? I had went ye had loved and favored the word
of God, set out by our late most gratiouse, virtuous, and innocent king.


Nicho. So I did, as long as he lived, but now that he is dead, I will do as
most men do, and so shall fewest men wonder at me.


Oli. In very deed it is a politic worldli saying, but Nicholas, thynckest
thou that god is dead?


Nic. Nay by my faith.


Oliu. what and God wonder at the, to se the so unconstant, and unsteadfast,
waueryng as the wind, as a weathereocke does, that stands upon the steple?


Nich. There are no weathercockes then one.


Oliver. Yea Nicholas that I think, and mo then stand upon steeples also: but
we should not do as the most do, but as the best does.


Nich. So do I, for I do as the richest in all the country does, and as all the
greatest learned men do, in all the country.


Oliu. Rytches are a good gift of God, but when they prevail, and to much
addict a man's heart unto them, they make the same skant a good man. Neither are
the greatest clearkes the wisest men alwai, nor yet the best. But they be the
best, that prefer gods honor before all things, and that constantly abide in
the truth thereof, how soever the rytchest men, and greatest clerks turn them
selves from it. And this I meruel with what faces men can look to be accounted
Christians, that deal so unfaithfully with Christ. For either they took it
for the truth, that was set out amongst us, or for an untruth. If they took it
for a truth, why do they now untruly go from it, as though there were no truth
in it? If they knew it to be no truth, but false doctrine, why did they not as
Christen me^, defend that doctrine, which they knew to be a truth?


Nich. They durst not for fear.


Oliu. woe worth that fear, that puts away the fear of God, notwythstandyng
there was no such cause of fear. For all the reign of that most gracious king,
their reigned mercy and pitye, long sufferaunce, and patient abiding for
amends, even of them, that when they were confuted, so that neither their wit,
nor learning was able to withstand the truth: yet maliciously they would not
consent nor agree unto it, but outwardlye before men, to flatter those that were
in authority, they bare them selves as great forwarders of the kings
procedinges, as could be* and what they were inwardly, now appears unto al me^.


Nicho. They were worldly wise men.


Oliu. Ye say truth. worldly wise in deed: but such wisdom is great folly
before God, and unto such wise men (as Christ says) ar the secrets of god
hidden, so that they neither have faith in god, nor in his son Jesus Christ,
they neither have the fear of his judgments, nor love of his mercy: For
these things ar given unto babes, to the outcastes of this world, yt ar counted
foles and outcastes, as their master Christ was. These do not seek to flatter
kings and princes, but they seek to please God, and to set forth his truth,
with the los (if God so lay the burden upon them) of goods, friends, name,
and eue^ their life. which of these trow ye, ar most worthy to be followed?


Nicho. I can not tell I. we did well enough before, and better then we have done
since, for we had never good world, since this gear began. But our sir John
tells us another lesson.


Oli. what I prai the?


Nich. Mary that he makes God every day, at his mass.


Olive. Can sir John make thy maker?


Nicho. Yea that he does every dai.


Olive. And does he show him unto the?


Nicho. Yea, he is as fair a lifter, as any is within Hamshire.


Oliu. And what does he with hi^ afterward?


Nich. what man? eat him, or hang him in the Pix.


Oliu. Than he makes him, and eats him.


Nicho. what else.


Olive. what hangs in the Pix?


Nich. Gods bodi sacred.


Olive. Thou saydest sir John did eat gods body.


Nicho. Yea, so I said.


Olive. How can he eat him, and hang him up to?


Nich. I can not reason such hie matters. I believe as our sir John tells us.


Oliver. who made gods body sacred?


Nich. Marye sit John.


Olive. And who made sir John?


Nich. God made him.


Olive. Then he is even with god, and makes him again.


Nich. we trow so, for sir Ihon is a pressed anointed.


Oliu. who made him a priest anointed?


Nich. The Bishop.


Olive. wherwyth anointed he him?


Nich. with oil in the Chrismatorye.


Olive. who made the Bishop.


Nich. The Pope,


Olive. Then the Pope made the Bishop, the Bishop greased sir John. and sir
John made God.


Nich By our blessed Lady Oliver, ye are as bad as the best, and I am sorry to
se you fall to this new learning.


Olive. In good faith Nicholas I am sorry to se you and many a thousand mo, thus
to fall again from gods word, to your old superstitious errors and idolatries,


Nic. we believe as our forefathers did.


Oliu. what call ye forfathers?


Nich. Mary my father, my grandsire, and my great grandsire.


Oliu. Is thy father alive?


Nich. Yea, but he is at the last cast.


Olive. How long is it, since thy graundsire dyed?


Nich. He died.xx, year since, when I was twelve year old.


Oli. How think thou, was not saint Peter and saint Paul forefathers?


Nich. Yes marye.


Olive. was not Christ a forefather?


Nich. yes blessed mot he be.


Oliu. Nicholas, ye bless Christ, but you call his word, new learning, herisie
and babbling.


Nich. Nay that I do not.


Oliver. Did not you call the holy readyng of the Bible so even now?


Nich. why? our sir John tells us it was made by king Harry theight.


Oli. No good Nicholas no. That gracious king set it out, and commanded that
the people should read it. without any letting. But the Bible is gods book,
and all that is in it, is gods truth. Therefore the old fathers, that we should
follow, ar Christ's prophets, and Apostles, and Christ him self, and not our
old grandsires and grandames. For God gives an express commandment, zacha.
i.
saying: Be not like your forefathers, unto whom the prophets cried before
time, saying: Thus says the lord god of hosts. Turn from your evil ways,
and from your wicked imaginations, and they heared not, nor took heed unto me,
says the Lord.


Nich. Our forefathers were good men.


Olyuer. But yet Christ was better.


Nich. They were wise men.


Oliu. Yea, but yet Christ was wyser.


Nich. They were holy men.


Olive. But Christ is holier. And what soever you can reckon of them, goodness,
i. corin. i.
wisdom, holiness. etc. Christ excels them in all things. For he is made of
god unto us, our wisdom, righteousness, holiness, sanctification, Iho. xiiii.
and redemption. Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man can
come to the father, but by him. He that hears. Christ's words, has life
everlasting. But Nicholas, tell me, ca^ sir John make an ox, or an horse?


Nicho. Nay by mi truth. I trow not.


Oli. How can he the^ make gods body.


Nich. It is no matter how, we must believe so, for he says so.


Olyu. Nay Nicholas, we must not believe all that sir John says, but we must
believe all that he says, and has gods word to confirm his saying. And this
is an intolerable pride of the papists, to teach the people, that they make
gods body. Truth it is, Ephesians. iiii.
that Christ ascending into heaven, gave gifts unto men, and appointed church
ministers, but far other the^ greased shauelinges: for he appointed Apostles,
prophets, Evangelists, Shepheardes and teachers. Phili. i.
And saint Paul calls the ministers of the church, by the names of Bishops
and Deacons. i. Tim. iii.
The office of these ministers appointed by Christ, and S. Paul, Luke xiiii
is to preach gods word, to call al men to repentance and amendment of life:
John. xxi i. Tim. iiii
and to declare to them that repent, the good news of the gospel.


Nich. Yea, the prests were wo^t to come to our houses, and to say us gospels,
and make us holy water, and holy bread: and so I trust they will again now.


Olive. I pray the hear me a little. The gospel is a glad tidings that god the
father, Luke. ii.
for his son Jesus Christ's sake, ii. cori. v.
is contented, and reconciled, and receives man again to his favor and
grace, Gala. iiii.
and will for his son Jesus Christ's love, take us (by adoption) to be his
children, Ephesi. i.
give us his holy ghost, and make us enheritours of eternal life. Ioh. xvii.
And to confirm this promise, our Savior Jesus Christ has ordained.ii. holy
sacraments: Titus. iii.
Baptism, wherein we are certified, that al our sins are washed away, in the
death of Christ: i. corin. xi
And the holy supper of the lord, that when we come together we should take the
bread, Mat, xxvi
break it. Mar. xiiii
and eat it, in remembrance that Christ's bodi was (upon the good Fridai)
offered up, upon the cross, for our sins, Luke xxii,
and we should al drink of the cup, in re^membrau^ce that Christ's blood was
shed for our sins. Therefore this is the priests office, to preach the death of
Jesus Christ, and to teach the people to know, that none other thing could
deliver them from their sins, and therefore they ought both to consider the
heinous vglines of sin, and the great wrath of god over it, which otherwise
would not be reconciled, nor atone with man. Romans viii
Then on the other part, to declare the great mercy, love and charity of god
toward us, that spared not his own beloved son, but gave him to the death of
the cross for us. Thus should they be moved to repent the euel done, to believe
and love the charity of God, and to walk in love, and good friendship, one to
an other: ever studying to live an obedient life, after the heavenly fathers
will and commandments.


Nich. Does not the priest make Gods body? Do we not eat gods body?


Oliu. First answer me (if thou can) to a question or two.


Nicho. I will if I can.


Olive. Can thou say thy Creed in English?


Nicho. Meanest thou the new Creed, or the old Creed?


Oliver. There is but one Creed.


Nicho. I can say that my mother taught me, Credum deum. I was harping at the
new a good while, but now I care not for it.


Olive. I se it was not for naught that christ said to his Apostles: blessed ar
the eyes that se that you se, Luke. x.
For even as then mani were blind, and would not se the light of his word,
John. ix.
even so is it now, well, I will help you out with your question. Do you not
believe, that the son of God came down from heaven, and was borne for us of
the virgin Mary, taking our man's nature of her substance?


Nicho. Yes that I do.


Oliver. And that he was crucified for our sins, dead and buried, and rose
again upon Esterday?


Nicho. Yes verily.


Oliu. And that he ascended into heaven* and sits on the right hand of God
the father almighti?


Nicho. Ye mary ye


Olyu And from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead?


Nich. Ye mary.


Olyu. Do you believe this in very deed?


Nicho. Ye by my trothe?


Oliver. Then Christ's body was made in the womb of the virgin, not by sir
John, but as our Creed says, he was conceived of the holy ghost, Luke. i.
and borne of the virgin mari. Other making of Christ's body, there is none, nor
never was, nor never shall be. Thus our lord and savior lived in this world,
August in Ioa. tract. Item in pref. pi^. xcviii.
and taught us the wai of gods truth, eue^ the doctrine that is set out in the
holy Bible, whereof the chief and principal article is, how we are redeemed from
our sins, and received into the favor and grace of God, by that holy
ransom of Christ's body broken upon the cross, and his precious blud that
was on the cross shed for us. The holy bread given at the lords supper, is
the sacrament of Christ's body that was broken on the cross, and the blessed
cup that we drink, is the sacrament of that blessed blud shed for our sins.
And when we receive them, as our body fedeth up on the outward things we se,
so our souls are fed with the inward things we see not. For the very flesh
of Christ is not eaten with our bodilye tethe, nor his blood drunk with our
bodily mouths or throtes: but it is a sacramental eating, done by the soul
and mind, not by the body or carnal instruments of the body.


Nicho. How can we eat, but with our tethe, or how can we drink but with
our throtes?


Oliu. You shall the better understand this misterye, if you mark Christ's
deed, when his holy sacrament was first instituted. Christ him self satte at
the table with his.xii. Apostles, and taking the bread, that stood before them,
even such bread, as they then vsuallye had to eat with the pascall lamb, and
gave thanckes to his heavenly father, and brake that bread, and gave it to
them saying: Take, eat ye, this is mi bodi which is broken for you. They did
take the bread, and did eat as he commanded them, and they did drink the
cup that he delivered them saying: this is my blood of the new testament,
which is shed for you. Yet, it was the next day, ere his body was broken, and
his blood shed upon the cross for us, and he sat whole amongst them at supper,
and him self did eat of that same bread, which he called his body, and did
him self drink of that cup which he called his blood, therefore by faith they
did receive and eat his body and drink his blood. They believed that his death
and passion should be for them, and into remission for their sins: as we
now, that Christ is ascended into heaven, by faith do eat his body broken,
and drink his blood shed, although that he lives and sits on the right
hand of his father. But Christ's very natural body is not toren with our
teethe, as the Capernites error thincketh, nor yet his blood dornk with our
throtes and mouths. But Nicholas, have you not a soul as well as a body?


Nicho. Yes that I have.


Olive. what manner of thing is your soul?


Nicho. By mi troth I can not tell.


Olyu. I think Nicholas no more ca^ the greatest doctor of them al. And
therefore because the soul is unknown unto us, the scripture speaking of the
soul and those things that appertain unto it, uses such words as we are
aquainted with, and ascribes those things unto the soul that are proper unto
the body. So David said: My soul O Lord thirsts unto the. And Christ says:
Blessed are those that hunger and thirst for righteousness. The hearty desire of
the soul, is the hunger and thurst of the soul: as the herty desire of meat
and drink is the hunger and thurst of the bodi. Therefore when a sinner feleth
the burden of sin upon his conscience, and the lack of strength and power,
to do the will of God, and is touched with gods spirit, to be sorry for this
imperfectness, and longs fain to be delivered, this is the hunger of the
soul. This hunger is not satisfied till he hear the preaching of christ's
body broken for our sins, and that by his bloodshed, our sins ar forgiven
us, our infirmities healed, and we received into the grace and favor of God.
But when we believe this, then is our hunger slaked, and our thurst put away,
that is: we fear no more dampnation, but know that in Christ we have our
pardon. Thus we eat Christ, believing that his body was broken for us, and that
his blud was shed for our sins.


Nich. wherefore eat we the Sacrament than? we may do this by hearing the
preaching.


Oliu. I am glad yt thou ask me this question: for it seems thou would
feign understand something of this matter. As to writings men set to seals,
for a confyrmation of the same writings, so Christ set to his word, his
Sacraments, for a confirmation of our faith, in his word. And to put us the
better in memory of the gift given unto us by his word, he called the same
Sacraments, by the name of the gift given unto us in them. So circumcision is
called the Lords league, the pascal lamb is called the Lords passing through
Egypt, Babtisme is called the new birth, and the bread and wine is called the
body and blood of the Lord. Therefore Nicholas mark well this. In the Lords
Sacraments there ar.ii. things, an earthli thing, and an heauenli. In Baptism,
the earthli thing is water, that washes the body: the heavenly thing is the
blod of Christ, that washes the soul, and the holy ghost renewing the hole
man, and sanctifying him in Jesus Christ. In the holy supper of the Lord, the
earthli thing is bread and wine, that we receive at our mouths into our
bodies, which are digested in our stomaks, and by the natural powers converted
and changed into our substance, and the excrementes of the^ naturalli cast
forth from us, as other meats be: but the heavenly things, at the blessed
bodi of our lord and savior Jesus Christ, broken for us, and his blood shed
for us, upon the cross, which we receive by faith, with all the blessed fruits
and profits, that Christ by his death, resurrection, ascencion, intercession
and priesthood, has obtained for us. This swetelie and comfortablie we
meditate in our minds, by the working of the holy ghost, it is distribute into
al our actions and deeds, and we are wholi received into Christ, to be one
body with him, as S. Paul says. Heb. ii. He that sanctifies, and they
which are sanctified are al of one. And again S. Paul says. The cup of
thankesgeuing which we bliss. is partaking of the blood of Christ: and the
bread which we brake, is partaking of the body of Christ. For we (though we be
mani) yet ar one bread, and one body, in as much as we al ar partakers of one
bread.


Nicho. These ar good words, but our sir John will deny all this, and we must
do as our curate teaches us.


Oliu. what teaches he you?


Nic. That he offers up Christ in his Mass, for our friends souls.


Oliu. Yea but take away moni that ye like fools give him, and he will sing
another song. In very deed, Christ was offered for our sins, Heb. ix.x
but that was once for all, and then he offered him self upon the cross as our
Creed says, and after he had so (by that offering) satisfied unto God, neither
neded he any more to sacrifice, nor we any more sacrifices, for us. For by one
oblation once offered, he has made perfect unto God, all that are sanctified.
Sir John therefore is a false Antichrist, and a disceiteful iugler in this
point, and teaches his own dream, and not gods word. And (I pray you) what
word of God has sir John, to hang up the Sacrament in the pixe?


Nicho. Mary sir it is a goodly sight in the church.


Oliver. But Nicholas, our creed says, Mat. xvi. Lu. xxiiii Acts. i.
that Christ ascended in to heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the
father almighti. And S. Peter says: The heavens must receive him, until the
time that al thing be restored. And the angels said, he should come from heaven
as he ascended visiblie, and shall be seen. Sir Iho^ therefore does great wrong to
hang up bread in the Pixe, and to make the people believe, that it is Christ's
body or Christ's Sacrament either.


Nich. why, is it not the holy Sacrament?


Oliu. water in the fount, is no Sacrament, but when it is put to the use that
Christ appointed it, then it is a Sacrament. So bread and wine are no
Sacraments, until they be put to the use that Christ appointed, that is, to be
eaten in remembrance of his body broken, and of his blood shed: then are they
Sacraments, and the worthy receyuer has the promises of Christ, but the
unworthy, receives his condemnation. But when the bread is made a gase, a
pagea^t of a plai, borne about for a pomp, and hanged up to be worshipped, it
is an horrible abuse of Christ's Sacrament. For Christ never appointed any such
worshipping of his sacraments.


Nicho. why, may we not worship the holy sacrament?


Oliu. Yes forsooth* we do worship it with most high honor, when we use it as
Christ commanded it to be used, that is, to eat the bread, and to drink the
cup, in Christ's remembrance.


Nich. Nai, sir John teaches us to sai a pater noster to the sacrament, to
find a light before it and such like.


Oli. Sir John has yt out of his own brain* and unlearned nole. Christ nor
his Apostles, nor any of the ancient doctors, never taught any such
doctrine: But I pray you, what can sir John do more?


Nicho. Many goodlye things.


Olive. what I pray the?


Nich. He ca^ make holy water, holy bread, holy palm, holy ashes, and holy
candels.


Oliu. wherefore is holy water good?


Nic. To drive a war devils and troublous dreams, and to wash away venial sins.


Oli. what call thou venial sins?


Nich. Light sins* as swearinge of custom, by gods body, sides, wounds
etc. telling of ribauldry tales, drincking dronken, and kyssing of pretty
we^ches.


Oli. These be horrible sins in the sight of God, Ephesians. v.
and S. Paul says, for such things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the
children of unbelief. what call thou deadli sin?


Nich. Losing of Mass, Matins, and Euenso^g, breaking of imber days vigils
and lenten.


Oliu. Ah Lord, how you worship God in vain, Math. xv Esa. xxix
being afraid to break men's traditions. would to God men were but half so
ready to keep Gods commandments. But what remedy for those deadlye sins?


Nicho. we must be shryuen to sit John, and he shall give us penance.


Oliu. what is penance?


Nic. That our gostly father enioyneth us: as to sai. iii. pater nosters, in
the worship of God and saint Julian, to fast saint Anthonies fast, or to say
every day our Ladies psalter.


Olive. And are thy syns then forgeuen the, when thou haste done thy penance?


Nich. why not? when I have made amends for them. Can God have any more then
amends?


Oli. Ye are deceived Nicholas eueri wai. For first ye think that sin, which
in some cast is done, and that, which ever is horrible and great sin before
god, ye count it light, and small. or no sin. Again, ye think your sins to
be put away, for your own penance doing, and for the worthynesse of your
own works, which is to to great a blasphemye.


Nichol. why should I not believe, that I am absolved, when Sir John lays his
hand upon me?


Oliver. what says he, when he absolueth thee?


Nicho. Many good words, I warrant you.


Oliu. I trow so, but what I pray the?


Nicho. By my troth I can not tell, but believe well and have well.


Oliu. But how can thou believe that thou understand not?


Nich. I believe if I be shriuen. the^ he bears all the charge, and not I.


Olyu. So may thou be easly deceived. But Nicholas, Joel. i. Eze. xviii
true penance or repentance, is a tournyng with the heart unto God, hating and
detesting of the sin before passed, ii. Cor. v. Ephe. iiii
trusting to have forgiveness by Jesus Christ, and fully studying to live a new
life, in time to come. This should sir John preach to us in English, that our
hearts may be broosed unto repentance, by the law, condempning us, and
quickened again by the gracious promise of the gospel. I say it should be don
in English, that we may hear it, and understand it, believe it, and so be
absolved from our sins. For they that repent and believe, are absolved by
Christ, but such as do not, sir John may absolve them at his pleasure, but
Christ absolueth them not. Therefore a latin absolution, to an English sinner,
is as good, as a shulder of mutten for a sick horse. And thynckest thou, that
thou art able to make a mendes for thy sins?


Nicho. whi not?


Oliver. wherefore died Christ then? Gala. iii.
if we could make amends with our good deeds. what neded we Christ then? Neded
his bodi to have been broken for our sins, if our deeds could have made
amends? Or neded his blood to have been shed, if holy water could have
washed away our sins? Christ's death were in vain, if we by our own
merits, might have deserved reconciliation and pardon at the hand of God.


Nicho. And shall I not do good deeds, fast and pray* and humble my self before
God?


Oliu. Yes Nicholas, if thou be heartily sorry, thou shall weep and lament thy
wickedness, fast and and tame thy sinful carcass, pray and instantly ask
mercy of God thy father. But yet al these cannot make amends to God, for thy
wickedness committed, for then neded thou not Christ's death, nor bloodshed to
be between God and the, but thou will not forsake that I trust.


Nicho. No, god forbodde I should.


Oliver. Then mark this well, al thy good deeds are dewty for the time present,
not amends for thy time past. For if thou had done no sin at all, art
thou not bound to keep gods commandments? I trow yes. But if thou offend
against gods commandments, then must thou repent, and turn to god, and ask
pardon in Christ's name, and so obtain forgiveness by his death, who has made
amends for the, and from that time forward, walk in gods commandments
obedientlye. And if thou have hurt or harmed thy neighbor, reason would thou
should make him ame^des. Did thou never fall out with non of thy neighbors?


Nich. Yes by our ladi, sometime.


Oliu. And did thou no displeasure to the^ in thine anger?


Nicho. No by god, but as I came from the hai making, with mi pitch forke, I
dabbed a Cow of his in the flancke, that she dyed of it.


Oliver. And what penance did thou for that spiteful deed?


Nich. I said.v. Pater nosters, in the worship of God and the.v. wounds, and
gave a penny to a poor man.


Olive. Here if thou had had a good ghostlye father, he should have
enjoined thee, Math. v. Luke xvii.
to ask thy neighbor forgiveness. and give him as much money, as he had
loss, by thy cruel and naughtye deed.


Nich. Ask him forgyuenes quoth a? I had rather his eien had been out.


Oliu. I believe the, God will not forgive thee, till this be done, if thou may
by any reasonable means come to him. But I pray thee tell me, when wast thou
shriuen last.


Nich. In Lent, when wast thou shryuen?


Oliver. I am shriuen every day.


Nicho. Thou shryuen every day? to what pressed?


Oliver. To the high priest God himself. Psa. xxxi



Nicho. How can thou come to god, to be shriue^ to him? Thou toldest me, that
I cannot se him.


Oliver. I do not see him by bodilye eyes, but beleuyng him to be every where
present.

I bow mi heart and kne to him, knowledging the great sin and misery that is
in me, and beseching his merci and forgiveness, of that which is past, and his
holy defense against sin, in time to come. And if many thing I perceive my
neighbor to be offended with me, if I be in the fault, I seek atonement,
and make ame^des: but if he be in faut, I am content to forgive and pardon him.


Nich. But thou do no pennaunce.


Olyu. Yes, my hole life is a penance, namely to mortifi the flesh, and to
strive against sin, and to forsake mine own will, obedyentlye to labor, to do
the will of God. But what was thy penance Nicholas, when thou wast last
shriuen?


Nicho. By god sore penance.


Oli. what a good fellowship.


Nic. I may not bewrai confession.


Oliu. Tell me, I warant the, it shall never come out for me.


Nich. May I trust the.


Oliu. On my honesty.


Nicho. Sir John e^ioyned me to fast all the fridaies in Lent, and the.v. Lady
eyens, bread and water.


Oli. That was sore penance for thee, that love good ale so well.


Nich. Further, that I should seek (barefete and wolward) our Lady of
walsingham, and our Ladi of Pity of Da^kaster.


Oliu. How can thou seek them? they were destroyed by king Henry the eight, a
king of most godly memory, and destroier of such manifest idolatries.


Nicho. That is truth, but sir John would have me to be a begin? again, of
those holy pilgrimages. For he douteth not, but within a while, we shall have
them again, or else other as holy as ever they were.


Oliu. what had do thou don that he gave thee so sore penance?


Nicho. Horrible sins, I cry God mercy.


Olyuer. what.


Nichol. It chanced to be holy day upon a Thursday, and upon Friday morning,
or I went to the plow, I was very hungry, and forgetting what day it was, I
thought it had been Monday, and so I eat a piece of a shoulder of mutten
unawares. But god knows I was full sorry for it.


Olive. O grievous sin?


Nich. Another time, it chanced the chalice to be left at mi house, and one of
the fete of it, hang out at a little hole, and so I chanced to touch it with
my bare hands.


Oliu. That was not so great offense.


Nicho. No was? Out sir John would sing no more with it, til it was new
hallowed. And he scraped mi fingers till the blood followed.


Oliver Is not a man better then a sheep.


Nic. Yes that he is.


Olive. Then whether is holier, thy skin on thy hands, that God created, or
the gloves that the Glouer has tanned, and made of a shepes skin?


Nich. I trow the skin of my hands is holier.


Oly. why may thou then touch the chalice and the cloute that covers it,
with thy gloves on, but not bare handed?


Nicho. I think it is, because I handle with my bare hands many foul
things, as my frail, my dongfork, mi spade, and so every man the instruments
of his occupacion.


Olive. Oh I cry ye mercy, ye are none of the clean fingred gentlemen: But
Nicholas believe me, all men know not, what they have handled many times the
night before they mass. But how sai you to S. Paul, Act. xviii.xx.
that got his living with the labor of his own hands? and wrought with
Priscilla and Aquila, sowing tents, and leather couerings for the^. Might not
he (trow ye) touch the chalice, because he had handled such poor
instruments as belonged to that occupation?


Nich. Sir John is none Apostle.


Oliu. I believe that, nor yet Apostolic priest. For if he were, he would never
make men to shote at a wrong mark, with such blind superstitiouse doctrynes:
touch not, taste not, handle not: Collo. ii.
which al perish with the using of the^, and are after the doctrines and
commandments of men. Did thou promise to do thy penance?


Nic. Nay I bought it out partly.


Oliver. Then I see well, sir John is a Merchant. what gave thou for it?


Nichol. Ten grotes, and so he changed my pilgremage, into.x. Masses, v. of
the v. wounds of our Lord.iii. of the purification of our Lady, one of the
holy ghost, and one of Requiem, for all Christen souls.


Oli. A merchant in deed, that sells fine flower, Apo. xviii
and bodies and souls of men: But who song these Masses?


Nicho. Sir John promised me, to sing them him self.


Oli. well, that was enough for x. grotes: but how dyddest thou with thy
fasting, would he not fast for thee also?


Nich. No he might not (he said) for singing of Mass. For he must put wine in
his Chalice.


Oliu. The hipocrites bind heavy burdens, Mat. xxiii
and lay them on men's shoulders, but they will not once move them with their
fingers. VVoulde he in no case release the?


Nicho. Yes, at the last he changed my fasting, to other good works.


Olyuer. what good works?


Nicho. Gilding of an image of S. Frau^ces, and another of S. Leonard, and
bying of an holy water far of brass, with a brazen censer.


Oliu. This cost the a good deal of silver.


Nich. I had rather have spent all the silver that I earned this month, then
have fasted.


Oliu. That knew sir John well enough. And tell me one thing I pray the. what
gave thou weekly to the collectio^ for the pore, when it was used?


Nic. I gave as neighbors gave, they may have a mess of potage at my door, and
such other, but silver has been very ska^t.


Oli. It is very ska^t, when we should do gods commandments, but we have
enough, to do our own imaginations. And se the just judgments of God: you
that hinched and pinched to give.ii. pence, or a penye a week, to the poor of
your parish, which in deed are the very images of God, and Christ, now shall
ye be plaged with gilding and painting of images, of tree and stone, and with a
great deal of like tru^perie, which are expressedly forbidden in the second
commandment of god. And where as for reliuing the pore and nedy, you should
have had gods blessing, now for painting and gilding, ye shall have gods curse.


Nich. But our sir John says, images are lewd men's books.


Oliu. Had he said lewd books, he had said truly. I prai ye what had men
learned of images, a sore the of the scripture came amongst us? Learned we any
other thing, then that the prophet Hieremye complains upon, to lie, and to
forget God, and to run after ydols, as the old idolaters did? Hereof came our
famous idols, at Ipswiche, at Walsingham, at Canturburye, at Hayles, at
Dunstable, and every where. For the Jews had never mo idols. mo blind
superstitions, mo detestable whore huntinges, then we had. And all this may we
thanck our holy ipocrites, bishops and shoren greased priests, that set us to
school, upon such blind books. Who could.xx. years agone* say the Lords
prayer in English? who could tell any one article of his faith? who had once
heard of any of the.x. commandments? who wist what Cathechisme meant? who
understood any point of the holy baptism? As for the Lords supper, no man
ever knew, whither there were any such things, or no. If we were sick of the
pestylence, we ran to Saint Rooke, if of the Ague, to Saint Pernel, or master
John Shome: if men were in prison, they prayed to saint Leonarde: if the welsh
man would have a pursse, he prayed to Daruel Gatherne, if a wife were weary of
her husband, she of fred otes at Poules at London, to s. Vncumber. Thus have we
been deluded with their images, and thus we will be deluded still. And our
solemn doctors preach as sauerly in the maintenance of these idolatries, as
though there never had been any such things. But Nicholas, beware of such
books, and such leude sir John's, that set thee to school upon them. And
harke^ to gods commandments, which says: Exodus xx.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor any similitude of any
thing, that is in heaven above, or in earth beneth, or in waters under the
earth, thou shall not bow thy self to them, nor worship them. I a sure the
Nicholas, the image made by man's hand, and set forth to be kneled, and knocked
unto, to be se^ced, licked, and kissed, or any otherwise worshipped, is a
cursed of god, eue^ it, and he that made it. And as the holy psalm says: Psa.
cxiii
They have eyes and se not, ears and hear not, noses with out breath, or
smelling, hands with out feling, feet and go not, like the^ mot they be, that
made them, and all that put their confidence and trust in them.


Nich. Our forefathers had them in great worship.


Oliu. It is full true, that is bred in the bone, will not out of the flesh. Our
forefathers and grandfathers, were deluded with hipocrites, and shall we be so
to? I told thee before that our forefathers that we should follow, ar Christ, his
prophets and apostles, not our grandsires, and great grandsires. And sure I am
they worshipped none, nor gave any commandment, that we should worship them.


Nic. They are goodly things and become the church well. Before the churches
looked more like old barnes.


Oli. Nicholas ye speak like your self. I am sori for your old blindness, that
think al things goodly, that shines gay in your eyes. and ye nothing regard
what is accepted in the sight of god. would it please ye well, if one should come
into your house, and paint the walls with cow do^g, or with maser scourings


Nic. I should paint him with a cracked crown if I could come by him.


Oli. Then as he should please you nothing, but rather cast you in to a futi, no
more do these image-makers please god, but provoke his anger. For god (in the
writings of the prophets) calls images dong, filthe, abomination: and the
worshyppers of them, he calls whooremongers, backeslyders, ru^agates, and
breakers of his league and covenant.


Nich. we do not worship the thing we see, but god and his saints that are
represented by the images.


Ol. No image ca^ represe^t god, as the scriptur says plainli. And I think,
the apostles, prophets, martirs and virgi^s never knew any such po^pe or
vaniti, as the puppets in churches seteth forthwith vain gilding and painting,
nether require they such honors, but would we should honor the Lord our god,
of whose goodness they received such mercy, to be made saints: And to honor
them, is to follow their faith, in beleui^g gods word, and their virtuous life
in keeping gods commandments: and not so vainly without gods word, to paint
and gild their images, to ca^del them, and sense them, and so commit idolatry.
What and thy servant should serve thee, as he list, and not as thou
apointedst him?


Nicho. Then would I give him wages, as I thought he had deserved. and not as
he looked for.


Oli. How shall thy servant know, what thy mind is, for him to do?


Nich. He must ask me, and I will tell him.


Olive. So then we must ask at gods word, and learn there to know his
pleasure: and according to the same we must do. But in this gods commandment
is: thou shall make none, thou shall worship none. Now, were he a good
servant, that would worship the with breakyng thy commandments?


Nich. Nay by my trothe.


Oliu. No more worshippest thou god, or his saints, but committest gross
idolatry. God is a spirit, and those that will worship him, must worship him in
spirit and truth. That is, we worship not god, till we do (from the botome of
the heart) acknowledge his almightye power, and goodness, and truly fear him, and
truly love him, and studiously serve him, with the faithful observation of his
commandments. So shall we need no visible image, to express unto us the
invisible God. And as co^serning worshipping of the saints, it is far other
then painting or gilding of images, or finding of lights before them, as I
have before told the.


Nicho. And me thinck it becomes the church well, and is a goodly sight, to
se the sweet images, well painted with fair lights before them, and a very
good smell to feel the perfumes and odours, when sir John senceth.


Oli. This is thy thincking, but S. Paul asked the Corinthians, how agrees
the temple of god and idols. And as for candels, they did well in churches,
when the people met in the night, as the old Christians were wont to do for
fear of persecution, and we do yet on Christmas day, and Easter day morning.
But in fair day light, men need them not, and the images can not se them. And
if perfumes were burnt to purifi the air in the church, it is tolerable: but
to do it, to the saints, which are in heaven, it is nedeles, and to do it to
the images of ti^ber, or stone, it is stark foolish fransie. In very deed in
the old Testament, Ex. xxxvii
God made a golden candelsticke, with lamps burning upon it, in the temple,
and he ordained perfumes and odours to be brent upon his altar: but at the
coming of Christ, Heb. ix.
those Jewish ceremonies ceased. For when Christ (the true light) was come,
and had shed forth the bright beams of his Gospel, then the light of faith
nourished with the oil of good works, Mat. xxv.
so shone in the church, that is, in the faithful congregation of Christ's
disciples, that all the world might see their faith, mekenes, patience, goodness
temperantie, sobernes, constaunt confession of Christ, charitable behauoure to
all men, with all other their good works* and glorifi their father which is
in heaven. Thus the sweet perfume and odor of the knowledge of Christ, filled
the hole world, and in eueri place, drew the people to run unto him, that is
their most true lover even our lord Jesus Christ.


Nich. well, say what ye list, it is good to have such things in the church.


Ol what call thou the church?


Nic. The church (man) where we hear our divine service. Mass, Matins and
Euensong.


Oli. The church is the congregation yt believes and professes the name and
doctrine of Jesus Christ. and rightly and deuli administeth and uses the
sacraments, as Christ ordained and commanded. And so we are the church and
temple of god* and every one of us is a temple.


Nich. Are we the temple of god?


Oliver. Saint Paul says so: ii. Cor. vi.
ye are the temple of the living God, as says God. I will dwell amongst them,
and walk amongst them, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.


Nic. And is not our parish church an holy place, and the temple of god?


Oliu. Yes, if it be holily used.


Nicho. what call thou holily used?


Oliu. when gods word is preached, and the people taught to know one ever
living god, Hier. vii. Math. xx.
and his son Jesus Christ, whom he has sent. But if gods word be
blasphemed, and railed upon, errors, superstitions, and idolatries maintained,
then will God refuse our churches, chapels, and al our assembles, and tell us,
as he told them at Jerusalem, that we have made his house a den of thieves.
And in the revelation of S. John, those places that refuse Christ's word and
gospel, Ap. xviii.
and maintain false doctrine and idolatryes, are called Sodom, and Egypt, and
Babylon, mother of whoredoms, and abominations, the dwelling of deuels, and
habitation of al foul spirits, and a cage of al unclean and hateful birds.


Nicho. well Oliver well, I fear me ye will (one day) smoke for this gear.


Oliver. whi Nicholas, what should I disse^ble with the, that art my neighbor?
but plainly to tell thee the truth. what are our parysh churches now? Gods word
is taken away and cast a side, as a thing of naught, and our blind guides,
mumble up their latin Matins, Mass and Euensong, cu^iuring their holy water,
and salt, and giving their holy bread, but no word of god is read in the mother
tongue to the people, no calling men to repentance and amendment of life, no
mencio^ is made of Christ's death nor passion, but all these things that our
most godly kings, with great labor, cost and travail, and with the paineful
studi of the Clergy, reformed in many years, all this (I say) have the popish
bishops and priests cast down, in one hour.


Nicho. Yea, that am I glad of. For now I may have leisure to pray, before we
could not pray for harkning to the priest.


Oliu. And did thou harken to the priest in deed?


Nich. Yea that I did.


Oliu. How began he Matins?


Nic. what wot I now?


Oliu. A goodly herkener, that took head to no word that he spoke. For had
thou taken head, thou moughtest have learned many goodly prays. For when he
began Matins, saying: O Lord open thou my lips, Psalm. l.
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. If thou had learned this well,
and heartily prayed it, every morning, then should not thy mouth have been thus
ready to railing, ribawdrie talk and sweari^g, as it is. For doubtless God
opens not such lips but the devil opens them. Neither is such talk, gods
praise, but his most hiest dispraise. Again what prayer can be more godly,
the^ the verse following, to be said at the beginning of al thy labors? O Lord
make speed to save me. O Lord make have to help me. Psa. lxix.
And in the end of thy day work, to say praising God: Glory be to the
father, and to the son, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in the beginnynge,
is now, and ever shall be world without end, Amen. Sure I am Nicholas, ye
can have no such learning now to pray. I pray the what say thou in the
Matins time?


Nich. Mi beads.


Olive. Cannest thou say the Lords prayer?


Nich. Nay nor our Ladies neither. I can say mi pater noster.


Oliu. what is pater noster?


Nich. Mary Pater noster, what ca^ ye make of it?


Oliver. A good Nicholas, Esa. xxix Math. xv.
you honor god with your lips, but your heart is far from him.


Nich. By God sit, and we think on god and our Ladi, when we say our Pater
noster, and pray for all our good friends souls, as well as ye.


Oli. I think ye do. But what ask ye of god, when ye say: Dimitte nobis
debita nostra etc?


Nic. Maty I pray to God to have merci up on al Christen souls: and to save
their lives, that I sare better for.


Oliu. That is well done. But why have you not learned the Lords prayer in
english all this while?


Nic. Sir Iho^ had me, keep me to mi old Pater noster (for he said the new
would not abide always. And now I see he is a true man.


Oliver. And art thou glad, that the Scripture is taken away out of the
churches?


Nicho. Yea by my trothe am I, for we had never merry world since this gear
began, but hunger, derth, lack of money, and much trouble eueri where.


Oliu. O blessed god, hear the blasphemies of the wicked world. They refused
thy word (O Lord) and lived a detestable life, and when thou plagest them, to
call them to repentance, and amendment, they received not thy correction, but
ascribed all those evils to thy word. But Nicholas Nicholas, trowest thou that
God will not now viset al your sins, and punish them with sword, pestilence,
wild beasts and famine? Yes truly will he, and that the more sharply, because
that to all your old abominations, ye add this blasphemy, and are like the
women of the Jews, in the time of Hieremie the prophet: who^ when the holy
Prophet rebuked, for their worshippi^g of Diana an he then idol, Hie. xliiii
which idol they called the queen of heaven. They with many stubburne words,
laid all the blame of their miserable captivity, upon the prophet of God, and
upon his preaching, and said, as ye say now: They had never merry world, since
Hieremie preached, but they were punished, and even so shall ye be. iii. Regu^.
xviii.
The like did wicked Achab, he laid all the blame of the plages that god had
sent, upon Helyas the Prophet. But Helyas answered him: It is not I that
trouble Israel, but it is thou (O Achab) and thy fathers house, Osee. iiii.viii.
that have forsaken the lord your God, and have served Baal. So Nicholas lay
the fault, where it is worthy to be laid, and doubt ye not, Prou. i.
but the day is at hand (except ye repent) that as ye now cast away God and his
word, so will god cast you away, and as he called to you, and ye would not hear
him, so shall you call to him, Pro. xviii
and he will not hear you. And you that have stopped your ears, that ye might
not hear the law, God shall stop his ears from you, and your prayers shall be
accurssed.


Nich. Tush, care not for that, God was never better served, the^ he is now,
Mattins, euenso^g, and mass, goodli so^g with prycksong, and organs and we do
all good things, as we were wont to do.


Oli. Yea, yea, ye serve him, as ye list, and not as he commands. For he
commands you to believe in his son, and to follow his holy word; but this ye
leave undone, and then ye pipe him a dance, on the organes,


Nicho. There is nothing pleases the.


Oli. what can please any Christian heart, when he sees gods word set aside
and contemned? But Nicholas* wherefore serves holy candels?


Nich. To light up in thu^der, and to bless men, when they lie a dying.


Oliver. The true light for the^ that lie a dying, is to know the sweet
promises of Jesus Christ, how he dyed for our sins, and purchased for us
resurrection and life: that every one that believes upon him, should not
perish, but pass from death unto life. As Christ says: John. xi.
I am the resurrection and life, he that believes in me, although he were dead,
yet shall he live, and whosoever lives, and believes in me, he shall never die.
Ioh. viii.
And again Christ says: Verelye, verelye, I say unto you, if a man keep my
sayings, he shall never se death. John. vi.
And again in the gospel of S. John: All that the father has given me, shall
come unto me, and him that comes unto me, I cast not away. For I came down
from heaven, not to do mine own will, but his will that sent me. And this is the
fathers will, which has sent me, that of of al which he has given me, I should
lose nothing, but should raise them up again at the last day. And this is
the will of him that sent me, that eueri man, that sees the son and believes
on him, have everlasting life: And I will raise them up at the last day.
This light so comforted David, that he said: Psalm. xxvi
The Lord is mi light and my health, whom shall I fear. And again: If I
should walk in the myddest of the shadow of death, Psa. xxii.
I will not fear evil, for thou (O Lord) art with me. This light comforted
old Simeo^, that he said: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
Luke. ii.
according to thy word. etc. This holy candel shone so bright in S. Paul's
eyes, that he said: Phill. ii.
I long to be dissolved and to be with Christ. This is our defense against the
thunder claps of gods wrath, that falls upon sinners. And where this holy
light of gods word shines, Ioh. viii.
men walk not in darkness, but have the light of life. But where this is not,
what can thy holy candel do, but light the into a wrong belefe, and so lead the
into the dark dongeon of hell? wherefore serves holy palms?


Nich. To make crosses, to bear in our pursses, and to set up. upon our
windows and doors, that the devil come not nigh us, nor into our houses.


Oliu. what if the devil be in the house, or ever the cross be set up?


Nich. Then let him fly away on the devils name.


Oli. How shall he fly out, seeing the doors and windows be so crossed, that
he dare not come nie them? Shall he creep into the benche hole, or fly out at
the top of the chymney?


Nich. He may if he list, for I believe he has no power to comeny the holy
cross.


Oliver. what if a cross were set there, made of an hasell stick, or of an
unhallowed palm? were it not so good as this?


Nich. No mary were it not.


Olive. why so?


Nich. For this made upon Palm sundai, in the passion time, of hallowed palm.


Oliver. Se the crafty devil* and how the people are deluded with blind
guydes. The old church kept a memory the su^day before Ester, how Christ's
glory was openly received and acknowledged among the Jews, when they met him
with date tree bows, and other fair bows, and confessed that he was the
son of God, commen into the world to save mankind, and the gospel declaring
the same, was appointed to be read on that day. But now our blind leaders of
the blind took away the knowledge of this, with their latin processioning, so
that among.x. thousand, scarce one knew what this meant. They have their
laudable dumme ceremonies. with le^ten cross, and vptide cross, and these two
must iustle, til Lent break his neck. Then cakes must be cast out of the
steple, that all the boys in the parish must lie scambling together by the
ears* till all the parish falls a laughi^g.


Nic. By our Lady I have laughed well at it ere this.


Oliu. Yea Nicholas, I warant the, the devil laugheth full merrily, that he
could with such preatye toies, mock out Christ's gospel. And then, where the
ancient fathers, appointed the history of Christ's passion, to be read, that it
being well known unto the people, they might the more depelier weigh the causes
of the same, and profit that comes unto mankind, this the devil, and his
ministers mocked out with the latin tongue, which many times neither the priest
nor people understood. But Lord what Apes play made they of it in great
Cathederal churches, and Abbaies?


Nich. what did they there?


Oliu. One comes forth in his albe, and his long stole (for so they call their
girde that they put about their necks) this must be leashe wise, as hunters
wears their horns. This solemn sire, played Christ's part, a gods name.
Then another company of singers, children and al, song in priksong, the Jews
part. And the devil (the deacon I should have said) read the the middel text.


Nicho. what did the pressed at the alter all this while?


Oliu. He stood mum, and played Judas, that betrayed his Master. And in the
mean time, because it was teadiouse to be unoccupied, such plain souls as
thou art, made crosses of palm, to set upon your dorss, and to bear in your
purses, to chase away the devil and god beforen. Has not our spirituality well
ordered this matter (trow ye) to turn the reading and preaching of Christ's
passion into such well favored pastymes? But tell me Nicholas, has not thy
wife a cross of palm about her?


Nich. Yes in her pursse.


Oliver. And a go on felowshyppe tell me, thinckest thou not sometime, the devil
is in her tongue? Syghe not man.


Nich. I would she heard you, you might fortune to find him in her tongue and
fist both.


Oliu. Then I se well he comes not in her purse, because the holy palm cross
is there but if thou could entreat her, to bear a cross in her mouth, the^
he would not come there neither.


Nich. Say you what you list, the holy cross is good.


Oliu. Nicholas, I take god to record, no man living, more highly estemeth the
sign and token that Christ dyed on, then I do: but the holier it is, the more
impietye is it, that the preaching of Christ's death and passion, that he
suffered for us, should be set aside, and the people deluded, with superstitious
opinions. For such superstitious crossinges, rather bring the dyuell to house:
then drive him from us.


Nic. Yea, and such as ye are, may say what ye list, for the people lyked this
better, then your preachings, and Sir John has willed the parish to bie a new
cross, that we might follow the good lord again a precession.


Oliu. why, will he not say the English Letanie, kneling in the bodi of the
church, that the people may say it with him?


Nich. Tush, we care not for it, it is left of long since, it is to teadious,
we will follow the cross a pression, as our forefathers did.


Oliu. O folowers, it is great piti to se one blind follow another, til both fall
in the pyt.


Nich. Sir John told us, Math. xv.
that Christ said: If any man will be my disciple, he must follow my cross.


Oliu. I can sit John thanck, he is a cunning coblet. The text (Nicholas) is
this. Mat. xvi. Mark. viii Luke. ix.^
Christ declared unto his disciples, that he must go unto Jerusalem, and
there suffer many things, of the elders, and of the high priests, and
Scribes, and be killed, and rise again the third day. Here Peter (of a good
carnal love to his master) took him aside and rebuked him, saying: Master,
favor thy self, this shall not be. Then turned he about, and said unto Peter:
Come after me Satan, thou offendest me: because thou sauourest not the things
that are of God, but the things that are of men. Jesus then said to his
disciples: If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his
cross and follow me. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it: But
whosoever shall loose his life, for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall save
it. Here ye see what it is to bear the cross, and to follow the cross, and
mark well the order of the text: Christ declared that he must suffer at their
hands, which in very deed, should of deutie before al other have gloryfied him,
and his doctrine.


Nic. who were they?


Oliu. The bishops, priests and lawyers, as now adays, one bishop being a
crafti lawier, works more myschiefe against the truth, then a. M. beside ca^
do. And yet the same. with fained words of hipocrisi will make all the world
believe that he seeks gods glory, the reformation of religion, and commonwealth of the people: Eue^ as Caiphas did when he said in the counsel, Ihon. xi.
it is expedient that one man die for the people, and that the hole nation
perish not. So sai they it is expedient that this doctrine of the gospel be
destroyed, and the preachers burned so shall we agree with other realms, and
have the highest and greatest in the world, on our side. But Caiphas was
deceived, for ye wai that he purposed to save the people, he destroyed them,
and his wiked counsel fell on his own pate, as it will do (without dout) upon our
hipocrits, at the last. Now comes peter, and as much as in him is,
cou^celleth Christ to favor himself. But then Christ preached this sermon: To
follow Christ.
that those that will be Christ's disciples, must follow him, that is: as Christ
most earnestli and co^stantli did the vocation, that his heavenly father
appointed him, traueling from place to place, preachi^g and teachi^g the will of
god unto the people calling them to repentance and amendment of life, and so
won souls unto the heaue^li father, so must al Christ's disciples do their
vocation with faith and diligence. And would to God our bishops, would well
look upon this text: for it principallye touches them. And to take up his
cross dailye, is to suffer with patience the miserable afflictions and
tribulatio^s, poverty, need, sorrow, syckenes, prison, loss of goods,
catels, friends and al other that god lays upon us. To take these things with
quiet minds, knowledging that they are laid upon us for our sins, to kill sin
in us, and to mortifi our fleshly lusts and apetites, to raise and stir up
true repentance, and hearty invocation upon god, and patiently and faithfully
to wait for deliverance at gods hand. This is to take up our crosses and to
follow Christ, even to deny our selves, and to lose our lives for his word and
gospels sake. This is another manner of piece of work, then to carye palm
crosses in our pursses, or to go a procession after a tin, or copper, or
silver cross. This S. Paul reioyseth in, ^i. cor. iiii
saying: we always bear about in our bodies, the dying of the Lord Jesus,
that the life of Jesus might always appear in our bodies. And again he says*
Gala. vi.
God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crusified unto me, and I unto the world, that is, the
world greatli estemeth outward ceremonies and shows of holiness, as the Jews
mutch boasted the circumcision of the flesh, and neglected the new creature of
the mind, but Paul and al true Christians, rejoice not in such outward shows
of holiness, but in the true holiness of the heart and mind, and espetiallie in
this high benefit and gift of god, that they are called to be partakers with
Christ, of the miseries and troubles of this world. And as the world ever
despiced Christ, and counted him accurssed, and so put him to the most vile
death of the cross: so has it ever done by Paul, and all the Apostels, and
all other that follow their doctrine. These must be dispiced and persecuted of
the world* and not counted worthy common breath* and aier. And Paul and his
folowers the disciples of Christ, again condemn the world by the just
sentence of gods word, because they refuse Christ, cast aside the doctrine of
his gospel, and chose rather to be lead in the darcke dreams, and mistye
imaginations of hipocrits, then in the clear light of Gods holy scripture, and
verity, and thus is Paul crucified unto the world, and the world is crucified
unto Paul God knowith, few bear the cross thus, and yet this is it that Christ
requires of us, to be his disciples to follow him, to deny our selves, and to
bear our crosses. This was not spoken of going about the church yard, with
a cross borne upon a staff, with a goodly banner cloth, but to follow him in
our vocation, leading a godly life, and (as I said) patiently suffering the
tribulation of this world, for his word and truths sake.


Nicho. Yet it is a good sight, to se sir John, how he becomes our best Cope,
and upon an hie day to se al our Copes worn in procession.


Oliu. why have ye Copes yet?


Nich. Yea, as saite as ever we had.


Oliu. were not ye sworen to bring in all such things before the kings
commisioners?


Nich. Yea, but we brought in two or three of the worst, and kept the best
behind still.


Oliu. How will you excuse your selves of perjury?


Nich. we are sori that we brought in any at all, and as for perjury, let god
and us deal it.


Oliu. I am afraid it will be a miserable dealing, when god will arise to judge
the wickedness of so unfaithful people, that nether fears God, nor regarded
the oath made by his name, nor yet the commandment of their king. It were a
much more better sight, to se sir John become well the pulpit, and declaring to
the people, how to follow Christ in godliness of living


Nich. what say ye to processio^ in gang days, when sir John says a gospel to
our corn feldes.


Oliu. I say nothing but this: ye that have forsaken to follow god as he
commands, shall be left to your self to follow your own inuencio^s. And as for
your latin gospels, tead to the corn, I am sure the corn understands as
much as you, and therefore has as much profit by them, as ye have, that is to
sai, none at al And many times this has been seen, that the Clerk has left
the cross behind him, and the priest his gospel book, and scant found the
right way home, they have been so combred with malt worms, and miseled with
the spirit of the butterie. Trow you yt god was not well pleased with this good
Nicholas.


Nic. I trow so. But fare well, Mass will be don, or I come.


Oliu. It makes no matter for one day. I will read the a piece of the scripture
in steed of thy Mass.


Nich. I care not for the scripture, and sir John bad me beware of it, for it
would make me an heritique.


Oliver. Sir John then reads not the Scripture.


Ncho. No, he says he will meddle no further then his portas.


Oli. The Scripture is gods word, ii, Pete. i.
opened to us from heaven by the holy prophets, Apostles, and Christ him
self, Psalm. cxix
it is the light to our feet. and candel to our foot steps: Psalm. xix.
it is the law of life, undefiled and holy, converting souls, it teaches al
things, ii. Tim. iii
that is good perfect, rightwise and holy, to make the man of God perfect unto
all good works. Psalm. i.
He is blessed that studieth in it day and night: but sir John's owlish eyes,
can not abide it. And as for his portas, there is in it a meany of lies,
craftili cloined, to deceive such unstable souls as delight in blindness,
deceived the^ selves, and deceiving other.


Nich. By our Lady, sir John is a good priest, say what ye list.


Oliu. Is sir John married?


Nich. Nay, Marriage.
he cries phie on that.


Oliu. what was the matter that sir John was before the Shriefe of the shire, a
while a go?


Nich. A naughty queen slandred him.


Oliu. wherewith?


Nicho. She had a child in an old baren, and laid it to the priests charge,
that he begot it.


Oliver. Thinckest thou it was not a slander of truth?


Nich. Tushe, if it were his, it was but a course of kind.


Oliu. Had it not ben better sir John had dad a wife of his own, as S. Paul
says, to avoid fornication, let every man have a wife of his own, ii. cor.
vii.
and every woman her own husband.


Nich. what should priests do with wives? Let the^ fast and pray, as theirfore
fathers did, and live chaste.


Oli. Chaste as sir John does?


Nic. Tush he was shriuen or he went to mas, it was well enough.


Ol. Nicholas, I could sai somewhat, of the unwedded priests chastiti, and tell
the many preti histories how holili the foxes abstain from snatching of
goseflesh, as often as they may come to it But as S. Paul says, Ephesi. v.
it is shame to speak those things that they do: and for such things sake,
comes the wrath of god, upon the children of unbelief, although ye make a
tushing at it, i. Cor. vii.
and despice the holy state of wedlock, in those priests that be married. Yet
do their follow the commandment of God, who commands that every man have
his own wife, and every woman her own husband, to the avoiding of whooredome.
And again Gods word says: If they can not abstain, let them marrye, for it
is better to marrye, then to bourne. And again Saint Paul says: as
concerning virgins, i. Tes. iiii.
I have no commandment of the Lord. And again. This is the will of god, even
that you should be holy, and that ye should abstain from fornication, Heb. xiii.
and that every one of you should know how to keep his vessel in holiness and
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as do the Hethen which know not
god. And again he says wedlock is to be had in honor, among al me^, and the
bed undefiled, for whore kepers and aduouterers, god will judge.


Nic. This was spoken of men, but sir John is a priest.


Oliu. He is no angel, nor yet stock not stone, as apeareth by the preti babe.
But Nicholas is not marriage an holy thing?


Nic. Yes that is it, and prests tell us, it is one of the.vii. sacraments.


Oliu. And is not priesthode holy also?


Nich. God forbid else.


Oliu. How chau^ceth that holy priesthode and holy marriage ca^ not agree
together no better.


Nich. By mi truth man, I cannot tell.


Oli. I will tell the. S. Paul says: the sprit speaks euidentlye, i. Tim. iiii
that in the latter days, some shall depart from the faith, and shall give
heed unto spirits of error, and dyuelish doctrine, of the^ which speak
false through hypocrisy, and have their consciences marcked with an hot iron,
forbidding to mary, and commanding to abstain from meats which god has
created to be received with giving thanks, of the^ which believe, and know the
truth. Here may al men, that wilfulli are not blind, perceive and see, from
whence our prests wiueles life, that condemn Matrimony, and maintain so
hily their single life, falsely named chastity, comes even from spirits of
error, from the devil him self, who with that holy snare, has drawn mani a
thousand of souls, into most beastlye and filthy living. And this the
hipocrites know well inoughe. For their own conscience, is a witness against
them, that they live not al chaste, but yet though they know the truth, of a set
malise and obstinatie, and for filthy lucres sake they teach and maintain
such a detestable estate* so as thieves are brent in the hand with an hot iro^,
unto their ppetual shame, so these men are daily burnt in their conscience
witnessing against them, that their doctrine and unchaste living, pleases not
God. Therefore Nicholas, take heed of them, and remember the old saying:
priests and doves makes foul houses.


Nich. I warrant you for sir John, he is as honest a man (for an unmarried
priest) and is vengeance holy, as any is with in this.xx. mile: and as good a
companion.


Olive. what call ye an honest man, and a good companion? A good co^panio^.



Nicho. A good fellow that will keep company all day at the good ale, anst play
his xl. pence at dise, with any good fellow that comes: Yea, I have known
him keep company two days and two nights with good fellows ere this. By god
I dare say this for sir John. if he were as well seen in the chapters of the
Bible, as he is in the tables, dise and cards, by God Oliver, he might reason
with the best of them, and yet I speak not this because I would praise him.
Yea, yea, I tell ye, as little learning as he has, he is a morren fellow.


Oliu. Happy are the sheep that have such a shepherd, and the souls that sir
John syngeth for. Your Alewiues love him well, I dare say, and make much of him.


Nicho. By Saint Julian, else were they to blame, for he is a good customer of
theirs, and spends more silver among them, then any six in our parish, I
dare well say. The bell toleth, I have lost sacrtng a vengeance on it, with
babbling with the. But yet I trust to see my maker dance about the cup: I will
run a pace.


Oliu. I have lost al my labor, with talkyng with him. Alas it is pity to se
the plain and simple people, thus deluded and brought to such a miserable
case, that they embrace lies, instead of truth, and error and superstition,
in place of true godlynes, and Christian religion. But even this was before
prophesied: that Antichrist, ii. Tes. v.
the son of perdicion should come by the woorking of Satan. with all lying
powers, signs and wonders* and in all disceiueablenes of unrighteousness, among
them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. And therefore god shall send them strong illusion* that they
should believe lies, that al they might be damned, which believe not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteous. But our Lord Jesus Christ will come
shortly, and with the breath of his mouth destroy that adversary. He shall not
be destroyed by swerd, zach. iiii. Apo. xix.
nor strength of man's power: but by the power of god, and by the swerd of his
word. Come Lord Jesus, lighten the eyes of the blind, convert the hearts of
thy people: heal our backeslidinges, and tread down Satan and Antichrist his
chaplains. And let thy holy name and word, ever more and more, be magnified
among us, Let al true Christen hearts say Amen. Amen.


Finis.
A DIALOGVE OR COMMVnication for two children, or unlettered folks, profitable
and easy to be learned.
WHo made you?

God almighty.

whereof made he you?

Of the mould of the earth

What has he done more for you?

Given his son for me.

What is his sons name?

Jesus Christ.

What is Jesus?

A Savior.

How has he saved thee?

He has redeemed me.

wherfro^ has he redeemed the?

From sin, death and dampnatio^.

Wherewith redeemed he thee?

With his precious blood.

What is Christ to say?

An anointed.

Who anointed him?

God the Father.

VVherwith anointed he him?

With the holy ghost.

why is he called Christ, or anointed?

For he is king, hishop and prophet.

Of whom is he King?

Of al Gods elect.

What does he for them?

Govern and defend them.

What is Christ more?

Our high priest and Bishop.

How is he priest and Bishop?

Ordained of God.

After what order?

After the order of Melchizedech.

What sacrifice offered he?

His own body upon the cross.

what does he sa^ctifi by ye offri^g?

Our consciences from dead works,

What are dead works?

Sin and wickedness.

What is Christ else?

The great prophet promised.

What is a Prophets office?

To declare the council of God.

what counsel has Christ declared?

The gospel of Peace.

what is the Gospel?

A preaching of glad tidings.

what glad tidings?

Forgyuenes of sins freelye.

what call thou freelye?

It cost them nothing.

whom cost it then?

Our Lord Christ.

what cost it him?

His blessed heart blood.

To who^ is forgiveness preached

To all that repent and believe.

what must they repent?

Their former evil living.

How must they repent?

From the botom of their hearts.

Must we not confess our syns?

Yes verily.

To whom must we confess the^?

To God, whom we have offended.

Must we not confess to a priest?

Yes, when need is.

when is it need?

when we can not otherwise quiet our consciences.

wherefore should we go to the priest?

That he may do his office.

what is his office?

To preach the law and the gospel and to absolve us.

why must he preach the law?

To broose our hearts unto true repentance.

whi must he preach the gospel?

To teach us to fly to Christ to raise us.

How does the law broose our hearts?

It shows us gods wrath and damnation for our sins.

How does the gospel raise us?

It shows our sacrifice and atonement maker.

Who is that?

The la^be of god, offered for our sins

who is that lamb offered?

Jesus Crist crucified.

How often was he offered?

Once for all upon the cross.

who offered him?

Himself and none other.

Does not the prist daili offer him?

No, he dies no more, nor is no more offered.

Is not the ministratio^ of the lords supper, a sacrifice?

It is a memory of Christ's sacrifice,

done on the cross for us?

Can we make no sacrifices to god?

Yes, iii. manner of sacrifices.

what is the first?

Praise and thankesgeuing, and prayer to god.

How is that called in scripture?

The fruit of their lips, that confess the Lords name.

what is the second sacrifice?

Alms deed, and mercy to our neighbors.

How is that called?

A sweet smell accepted and pleasing to god.

what is the third, sacrifice?

Mortifiyng of our carnal lusts and desires.

what is that named in gods word

A lively acceptable offering to god?

Can the priest absolve us from our sins?

Ye, if he repent and believe the gospel

what if a man repent not nor believe?

Then the prist cannot absolve him.

what if he repent and believe?

Then the prist cannot bynd him.

How does the priest bind and absolve?

By the preaching of Gods word.

what if the prist be ignorant of gods word?

Then is he a blind guide.

Cannot an ignorant prist lead us?

Yes, into the pit of hell.

what must he do that is forgeuen his sin?

Bring fourth worthi fruits of repentance.

what ar worthy fruits of repe^ta^ce

A godly life amending that he before offended in.

Give an example.

The dronkarde must leave his dronkennes.

Another.

The lechourer must forsake hordo^

A third example.

The swearer must leave swearing and honor the holy name of god.

where learnest thou this?

In S. Peter's epistle the.iii. chapter.

what says he?

Turn from evil and do good.

what reward shall they have that do so?

The grace and favor of God, and life everlasting.

God grant us all to do so, and ever to walk in his truth.

Amen, and thanks to God forth light of his holy word and gospel.

Amen.

