THE CVRSE OF SACRILEGE. PREACHED IN A PRIVATE PArish Church, the Sunday
before Michaelmas last. TO WHICH ARE ANNEXED some certain Quaere's, which are
pertinent to the unmasking of our homebred Church-Robbers.

ACTS 4. 20. and 21. Whether it be right, in the sight of God, to harken unto
you more then unto God, judge ye; for we cannot but speak the things which we
have seen and heard.

D. E. B.



AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, Printer to that famous University. 1630.

READER,
I CALL heaven to witness, the prime mark I aim at by this my declamation
against Sacrilege, is the flourishing estate of this Church and Commonwealth,
and that by diversion of those Judgments which by the perspectiue of the word,
I descry approaching toward us, unless a non plus vltra be set to this still
spreading Leaprosie. Marvel not how I dare (...) thus freely speak in a
point that trenches so far on the vtile and iucundum of thousands, and some
of those too Grandies, For I am confident he is no Legitimate Priest, who is
afraid to thwart any sin, though never so much backed and vpheld by an arm of
flesh; If sinners have brows of brass, Gods Ambassadors must not have hearts
captiuated with fear and bashfullnes. If the Laities hands be fraudulently
busied in snatching and filching, our tongues must not be locked up from sharp
and zealous reproving. It is the Character of a wise man to be free in
Rebukes, when vice is bold and daring. For mine own part I desire no longer to
live then I dare resolutly say with Gregory the great, In causa in qua Deo
placere cupio, homines non formido, As I acknowledge mine own inabilities, so
withal I remember that one of the Infantery may do acceptable service in the
field, as well as one of the Cauagliery. An ordinary Pursiua^t deliver the
command of a King, as well as a Herald at Arms; That a musket may set a Cannon
a roaring. That their pains was as requisite for the Temple who brought but
stones and Cement, as theirs Who brought Gold and rich ornaments It is the
Lords method to bring great things to pass by small beginnings, to ordain
strength out of the mouths of babes and sucklings. And if like little despised
David I shall not conquer this vast Goliath, yet if I shall put the worthies of
Israel into Arms who are likely to win the day, I shall deem my self so
happy, as to cry out with him, ite triumphales circum mea tempora lauri. Nor
may thou deem this overmuch presumption, when as victory is never wholly
ascribed to him who strikes the last stroke, but they who gave the first or
second onset, may claim a leaf or two in the triumphant Laurel, And all be
it I subscribe to him who says he sees no reason that so high a Princes as
Divinity should be presented to the people in the sordid rags of the tongue;
Nor that he who speaks from the father of languages should deliver his
Embassage in an ill one, Yet have I in this my Sermon followed both the
counsel of blessed Austine when he says, Lib. 4. de doctrina Christi cap.
10.
qui docet, vitabit omnia verba quae non docent, He who teaches must bauke
all those words which teach not. His reason is, quid enim prodest locutionis
integritas, quam non sequitur intellectus audientis. As also that of learned
Tostatus, tenetur Doctor illo modo docere, quo sentiat discipulis vtile esse, A
Teacher must use that method by which he may most profit those who are
learners And that because (says he) docere non est propter docentem, sed
propter eos qui Comment: in 3. prolog. Hieron: Qu. 17. tom. 1 in Mattheum.
docentur. Teaching has for its object the hearers and not the speaker
himself. If thou ask me why I crave not the protection of some powerful
Moecenas, know first, that as it is held a folly to have recourse by our
prayers to the Saints in heaven when the way lies open to Christ himself, so
I take it to be needless to petition for man's countenancing of that which I
am well assured the Allmighty God accepts of as a sweet smelling Sacrifice
offered up from the Altar of a wel-disposed heart. As also I am of opinion, I
may, as fitly as ever Diogenes, light a Candle at noone day, and go up and
down with a hominem quaero as being ignorant where to meet with a man, which
some way or other falls not under the curse of my text, who either by enjoying
impropriated tithes, or by pleading unjust Customs, makes not a sheep of this
or that shepherd by withdrawing from him part of his annual accrewing fleece.
Now for a farewell, let me entreat thee to weigh and examine these ensuing
lines without prejudice, so shall I hope at length to reap some part of the
large crop of my desire.

Thine in the rough and craggy way to bliss E. B.

MALACHIE 3. 9. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me even this
whole Nation.
IN this Chapter we meet with an Assize held, wherein God is the Judge, the
parties arraigned are the men of Judah and Benjamin, the offense Sacrilege or
theft of holy things, the witnesses both their own consciences though strumpet
like, they deny it with their tongues, as also the too too visible neglect of
the Lords service in the Priests and Levites, and that through want of
maintenance, and lastly the sentence of condemnation which lies in the words of
the text, Ye are cursed with a curse. In which sentence you may fitly take
notice of these distinct parts;

First of a Curse inflicted, maledicendo maledicti, ye are cursed with a curse.

Secondly of the parties on whom the curse lights, and these lie in the vos,
Ye, and these ye, are the tribe of Judah.

Thirdly of the reason of this curse, quia spoliastis me, for ye have robbed
me.

Lastly of the universality of this sin, gens omnis ipsa, even the whole
Nation, of each of which, in its order, as God shall enable and the time permit.

Before we can well know the quid, what it is to be cursed, we must first
find out the quis, who it is that curses. Now both God and man are said to
curse, Man curses when he prays or wishes for any ill to befall him with whom
he is offended, whose curses have no necessitating power of causing and
induceing the evil which he wishes and prays for, but may fall out to be but
as Arrows shote against a stone wall which sends them back upon him that shot
them. As for God, he curses other wise, his curse is an actual inflicting of
some smarting punnishment the force of which none can resist, it hitts and
misses not, as soon as it is decreed, As Gods benedicere his blessing of a man
is no verbal thing, no contingent future act, but a present conferring of some
good; So this maledicere, his cursing, is not a bare speaking ill of a man,
though it sounds no more in grammar, but it is a true real inflicting of
something ill to flesh and blood; So that here when the Prophet tells Iudath
they are cursed, we are to understand some present calamity laid on them by
the Lord, Namely, that of pale-cheeked and cleane-teetht famine, for so the
vulgar renders the original, in penuria maledicti estis, ye are cursed with
penury and want, The reason of which translation is because as blessing imports
multiplication and increase, so malidiction implies diminution and defect, to
which as a further Commentary, may be added, that curse which God laid on Cain,
maledictus es a terra, thou art cursed from the earth, even by feeling a want
of that fruit, which otherwise the earth would have yielded thee; Where, by
the way, you may take notice of this Conclusion, A want of necessaries,
especially those prime necessaries, food and raiment is a heavy curse. But I
pass this, and come to the examining of the reason why God tells the men of
Judah, they are cursed, A man would think the present want under which the
groned, was sufficient to make them apprehensiue of a Curse; why then does God
in direct words tell them they are cursed?

Two reasons may be rendered of it,

One is that thereby they might be put in mind that he had a hand in their
misery, that it came not by uncertain chance and peradventure, but by his
settled determinate will and pleasure, that it came so from him, as without him
they had still swomme in a full sea of plenty, without feeling the least ebb
of scarcity:

The other, and it is the chiefest, is, that they being infallibly assured
they were punished by him for their Sacrilege, they might be stirred up so to
hate that sin, as to abandon it for the time to come, yea so to detest it as
to deal by every the least thought of committing it hereafter, what God
commanded to be done to the Children of the Canaanites, even to destroy all
not to spear an infant, the least tempting thought unto it. O altitudinem
misericordiarum Dei, O the fathomlesse depth of the mercies of God to sinnfull
man! what Rhetorique does he use to call him back from sinning, that so he
may cease from smiting? what inexpressable art does he show to make him
sensible of the danger he is in, how he is environed with troops of curses,
Curses for his body curses for his estate, and curses (which is worst of all)
for his soul, and those too, not to be shunned or avoided, by any other
means (which can possibly fall, within the sphere of his actiuitie) but only
by a heart breaking and renting amendment.

Why then are we the Ambassedors of Christ Jesus, men sent for the salvation
of your souls, if you will practically hear and receive our arrands, why (I
say) are we blamed, why thought hardly of, yea blasphemed, as if we speak
from private spirits, when we tell you, that as your sins be the same with
Iudahs, so your punishments in all likelihood will be the same, That as you
stik not to robb God an his Priests with them, and that with a like impudent
browe of denial, so you are already, and will hereafter more be cursed, if
you continue that your theft; For shame make not good that proverb Plain
dealing is a Jewel, but he that uses it shall die a beggar. I have often
dealt plainly with you in many things which are amiss amongst you. but chiefly
in that wherein you are grown old and rooted, I mean your theft by pleading
unjust customs in satisfaction of tithes; O do not (I beseech you) make me
to die a beggar, by gaining few or none of your souls, to the embraceing and
kissing of these fair Ladies Truth and Equity I say Beggar, For truly the
winning of your hearts from that bewitching Siren of Sacrilege is the riches I
most desire, full baggs and lardge yard lands shall not so much glad me, as
your growth in grace; Until the time then I shall gather from you, (who are
now almost dead trees, the livelie sweet fruits of amendment: be not
displeased at my lopping and pruning of you by sharp and keen reproves, as
long as your mouths are accustomed to plead for customs, and your hearts
secretly to say, O blessed Customs because fillers of our purses, so long
expect: I follow the never-erring stepps of my Maker in proclaiming Judgments
against you for so doing, saying unto you in the words of my text, ye are
cursed with a curse,

Even ye; which is my second circumstance. ye; who are a chosen generation, a
Royal Priesthood, a peculiar people, from whence this observation will
naturally arise.

No outward temporal favor or prerogative can privilege or protect a Sinner
from the punishing hand of God. you see the (ye) in the Text lie open to a
curse, though they were of the noble stock of Abraham, though Lords of a land
flowed with milk and honey, a land which was as the diamond in the ring, as the
Apple in the eye, and as the heart in the body of the world, A land so full of
goodly men, as if the clouds had showred them down; It is a true saying, Noxa
caput sequitur, punishments are to sinners what shadows are to bodies, As
there is no body without it is shadow, so is there no unrepentant sinner
without some punishment or other waiting on him.

The Carthaginians hate to Rome was not so surely entailed on their Children,
as whipps are on transgressors;

These are twynnes, on following the other at the heels, yea two maine linkes
in the sure chain of Gods providence; The Poet could say,

Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deservit pede paena claudo:
Which I English in these words of God to Cain in the 4th of Genesis, if thou
do not well, sin lies at the door; whereby sin is by the figure
Metalepsin, meant the punishment of sin, Vbi peccatum ibi procella where sin
is, there will be a punishing storm, a Sea of Iniquity will surely draw
after it a hell of torments; Vengance is a doge, which lies ever ready when
leave shall be given him, to take a Sinner by the throat, and though this dog
be for a time musled and laid asleep, through Gods long suffering patience
yet shall this Cerberus at length be let loose upon wilful sinners;
Punishments are as bailiffs, or as Seriants, ever ready at Gods command to
seize on his Debtors, Sinners; And though some bad Livers do for many years
together, through the longlong conniving mercy of God, escape their Arrests,
yet questionles they will at length lay hands on them, yea at last there shall
be no place of sanctuary, no privilege or protection to be obtained, Gods
revengfull hand will not be kept out of a castle of brass, the sea is not so
deep but vengeance can fathom it, nor the world so wide but Judgment can
quickly surround and compass it. Quod differtur non aufertur, Delays are not
exemptions, a Reprivall and a Pardon are two things, Gods merciful expectation
is not a perpetual protection; Though God created the Angels with so great
care and love, as to make them almost Gods, by the manifold perfections they
were endued withal, yet when they sinned against him, there was nothing could
save them from the heavy stroke of his wrath: Though God crowned had Adam with
many rare blessings, as namely,

First with a happy place of abode, Paradise.

Secondly with a sweet Companion and ready helper Eve;

Thirdly with princely power and authority over all other Creatures, yet lo
when he neglects his Makers Command, nothing is of force to protect him from
the curse of a mortem morieris, thou shall die the death, what did ever either
beauty, wit, or policy, or large and full barnes, or the loud wide applause
of the people, save a Sinner from the wihp of Divine Justice; The unnaturally
ambitious Absolon the treacherousse politic Achitophel, the ungrateful
perplexed rich man, together with the vaineglorious self Deifying Herod the
king, can and will tell you, Nay; Tremble then, O thou man whosoever thou art,
though a darling of fortune, if thy conscience once tells thee thou have any
sin lying hid in thy heart, as that Babilonish garment and wedg of gold did
in Achans tent, tremble I say, for fear of some judgment which may speedily
seize on thee for it. Know there is a handwriting gone out against thee, as
there was against Baltasar, to blott out which, thou have no other way or
means: then to shed the bitter sharp tears of a repentant heart; These
indeed, though thy judgment were written in steel or brass, may eat and
wear it out. Know thou have several curses following, and dogging thee at
the heels, from which thou can not be delivered but by delivering thy
self from thy sin, renounce that, and all curses shall forsake thee. As when
the body dies, the shadow vanishes so when the cause is removed, the effect
ceases. what did not Israells sin take from her those titles of high honor,
Ammi and Ruhama, my people, and the object of mercy, and left her instead
thereof, only those of disgrace fear and horror, Loammi and Loruhama, not my
people, and not worthy of a look of mercy; Did not sin christon her a new,
as it were by these names of misery (...) forsaken and desolate, who formerlie
was called Hephzebah Gods delight, and Beulah his wedded land, Esaias the 62.
verse. 4th yea might she not otherwise have still been a Crown of glory in
the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of her God, as it is in
the former verse of that Chapter.

Did not sin (notwithstanding all her privileges and prerogatives,) twice
carry Judah into Captivity, twice destroy her temples; shall we then
(beloved) look to escape the like fatal Judgments, if we run on still in a
resolution of living as we list, of putting the Almighties mercy as it were
on the tenter hooks; Surely it will at length break forth into fury, The
date of it will ere long be expired,

Justice will another while rule and sway the Scepter, if we will not with
Nineveh repent whilst our 40 days last, then shall we feel the truth of
what many a Jonas have preached unto us, even a flood of curses falling on our
heads, and that which is worst of all, we may feel them when least we dream
of them; So was the case of Nadab and Abihu, so of Dathan, Corah, and Abiram,
so of Lots wife, so of Herod, of Ananias, and Zaphirah, so of Zimri, and of
Cosbi, and so likewise of a thousand others; And what likelihood is there, ours
shall not likewise so be? whatsoever befalls one, may befall all, Judgments may
be fruitful as well as sins; For conclusion of the point, I can say but
this, Let one sodainnesse beget another, the sodainnesse of Gods Judgments
work in each of us sudden and speedy determination of amending his own
ways, of hearkening to the checks and controules of his own Conscience, by
which course we shall avoid the like accusation, which here is laid to Iudahs
charge, namely of being Robbers which is my third general.

Ye have robbed me: So reads our last English translation, which comes nearer
to the original then either the vulgars Configitis ye crucify or fasten, or
the Septuagints supplantatis ye supplant, or Sumachus his defraudatis ye
defraude, or our former English translation, ye spoil, Though each of those
may well stand and bring a man with in compass of robbery; from which
accusation there is offered unto your thoughts this plain note or conclusion.

In Gods account he is a thief and a Robber, who any ways withholds Tithes
or offerings from the Priest the right owner; I say any way, because he not
only offends against the eight Commandment thou shall not steal, who
violently takes from a man, either the whole or any part of his goods, as
highway thieves and open oppressors use to do, but he likewise who by any
close under hand dealing or cunning taking of advantage possesses himself of
what beelongs to another, yea though it be but in thought wish or desire, At
quid ad nos? But what is this to us, you will ask? yea you will say, though it
cannot be denied, but that the non payment of Tithes First Fruits, and other
offerings, was theft in grain amongst the Jews and that by virtue either of
their Ceremonial or Judicial Law, yet follows it not the case should be the
same with us, who are only bound to the observation of the Moral law; As for
the ceremonial and judicial they now tie no farther then Civil humane
authority, reviues and ratifies them, For Answer, It is confessed, it has
heretosore and still is questioned by some, whether the paiements of tithes
fall under the moral Law, though I must tell you, that some has bin made up
partly by such as have studied more the defense of the Popes unjust actions,
then truths oracles, and partly by others, who out of ignorance or malice, or
both together, have taken every thing almost which is related, either in the
book of Exodus or Leviticus, to belong only to the ceremonial or judicial
laws; But however, I shall (God willing) make it appear unto you, and that by
away, which as yet was never questioned by any of the learned, That those
laymen are grand thieves, who at any time with hold or take unto themselves,
Decimam Sacram, tithes once given for maintenance of any holy or Religious
work, which that I may the more fully make good unto you, Let me lay down
two Theoremes or propositions, the one this,

Tithes are in the number of those things which are sacred; By tithes I
understand the tenth part of whatsoever increase comes to a man in his
temporal estate, and by Sacred is meant such things as are devoted, dedicated,
given, and consecrated to the worship and service of the Lord, the consecration
being a holying of them, when before they were of profane, civil, and
ordinary use; Thus both Gramarians, as also Divines. The other proposition
this,

Whatsoever is once dedicated and freely bestowed to a holy use, can never,
with out the guilt of sin, be taken a way or employed to any other use then
what is holy.

To prove the first, I shall offer unto you four reasons;

The first is taken from the parties to whom tithes from the infant cradle-age
of the world have still bnee paid, namely to men consecrated and set apart
from others, I say cradle-age of the world, For albeit we hear of some though
not of a sacred function who have enjoyed tithes, yet you are to know that
Histories the best Interpreters of the actions of fore-past times tell us, they
possessed, but either as wages from houses of Religion, for some care and
pains taken in securing unto them their peace and saftie, or as Sacrifices
from affrighted and perplexed men, who fearing they should not be able to
defend their right against tirannicall Princes and other great ones sacrificed
unto them part of their estates, which was also Sayi^^ Lib. 9. Cap. 12. n. 4.
the very case of the Abbeys and Monasteries here in England, at the
dissolution, the Possessors of which places were enforced to resign up all
their right title and interest in them into the Kings hands: for fear they
should otherwise have lost all, even their future liuelyhood. A second is
drawn from the name which is given to the tithes which Lay men possess, they
are called Impropriations, signifying thereby, they are improperlie placed,
that they are to speak in the phrase of old, tanquam pissis in arido, vel
monachus in oppido, As much out of their place, as a fish is on dry land, or a
monk in a fair or market, yea I may add, as a Crown would be richer on a
Jack Cades, or a Wat Tilers head, naie more, as a Saint would be in Hell, or a
Devil in Heaven; A third reason is fetched from that Act of the 32. of Hen. 8.
which was made Cap. 7.
to enable laymen to sue for tithes, when as before, (says the preface to that
statute) they could have no proceedings either in the Ecclesiastical or Common
Law for the recoverie of them from those who refused to pay them; Whereby it
evidentlie appears, the State (till then) took laymen to be no fit
possessors of such consecrated endowments, yea does not laymen's suing for them
at this day in spiritual Courts, publish to the understanding of any
ordinary man, that tithes are a Spiritual Income and appertain to none but
such as are of a spiritual function. The fourth an last lies in that welknowne
rule or Canon of Vincentius Lirinensis in the third Chapter of his book contra
haerices We are greatly to take care, says he, we hold that for a truth
which in all places at all times, and by all persons has been received and
entertained, which is all one almost with that of Cicero the Roman orator, in
omnire consensio omnium gentium lex naturae putanda est and instar mill
demonstrationum talis consensio apud bonos esse debet; The Consent of all
nations about any one thing is to be taken (says he) for the law of nature,
and to be of more authority with the good and virtuous, then a thousand
demonstrations. Now to bring home these rules to the Business in hand, Let me
ask, was there ever Nation, if once it had but the outward face of Religion,
which has not consecrated her tithes to some God Did not Abraham long before
the law was given dedicate his tithes to the true God in Malchisidech the
Priest? Did not likewise Jacob strongly bind himself to the performance of
the same duty by a sollemne vow? Did not our forefathers in this kingdom
many hundreds of years since, freely resign them up to the propagation of
Gods worship and service; And read we not of tithes vowed to Hercules, to
Jupiter, to Apollo and to several other of the heathen Deities? The learned
Antiquarie Mr Seldon acknowledges thus much; May I not, yea must I not, then
draw this conclusion out of such premises, Ergo tithes have in all ages been
in the Inventory of consecrated goods, and accounted of as a sacred tribute to
the King of heaven, And so I hasten to my second theorem or proposition;
Namely this.

Whatsoever is once dedicated, and freely bestowed to a holy use, can never
without the guilt of sin, be taken away and employed to any use which is not
holy.

The truth of which is proved by three arguments, the first stands in some
texts of Scripture, the second in the deffinition of Sacrilege, And the third
in the opinion of those very men who have declared them selves against the ius
divinum the divine right of tithes.

The Texts be chiefly six, Four in the old testament, and two in the new;
The first is that of Leviticus the last, where there is an express Act of
heavens Parliament, That whatsoever is once devoted or made holy by gift unto
the Lord, cannot be recalled or resumed, but upon terms of disadvantage to
him who recalles it. The second, that of Genesis the 47. where we read how
Joseph would not meddle with the gleabes of the Egyptian Priests, and that for
no other reason but because they were consecrated lands, the property of which
was not to be changed, The third is that of Proverbs the 20. and 25. where the
holy Ghost tells us plainly, It is a snare to the man, Who devoureth that
which is holy. The fourth, that of Daniell the 5. where we read, God dislikes
of Baltasars drinking in the sacred vessels of the temple, written in the
capital red Letters of his destruction. The fifth is that of John the 2. where
we meet with our Savior whipping and scourging men out of the Temple, his
fathers house, and that for no other reason, but because sometimes they fold
such cattle and doves there, as were of use for sacrifice; which our Saviors
zeal in behalf of that consecrated place stops the months of all those who
shall say that that Decree in the last of Leviticus was but ceremonial, for
though so much be granted, yet cannot he be excused, who in those days of
the gospel shall convert to a common and profane use, either a holy place or
a holy revenue, And that for as much as it is a rule approved of by the
suffrage of the best Divines, that whatsoever branch either of the ceremonial
or judicial law we find put in practice by our Savior or his Apostles, even
that straight way became moral and ties for ever. The last text is that of
Acts the 5. where Ananias and Zaphira his wife are both stricken with sudden
and unexpected death, for committing sacrilege though in the least degree, I
say least degree, because they did but with draw under hand part of that money
which in show they had formerlie devoted and consecrated to a pious and
religious use, even the rescuing of the Apostles from the arrest of beggerie,
And so much for the first argument to prove, that whatsoever is once
consecrated to any religious use, cannot quite be taken away from that or the
like use.

The second lies in the deffinition of Sacrilege, which is this Sacrilegium
est rei sacrae violatio, It is an a busing and perverting of the right use of
holy things: so Aquinas, where by holy things he understands 22 Q. Act.
any thing which is set apart to a holy use, and by abuse, he means the
imploiment of such things to any civil common and profane use. whence also
that derivation. Sacrilegium quasi sacrilaedium; so called because it prophanes
holy things, To which let me add that full description made of it by that
Protestant Schooleman Hieronymus Zanchius, It is in his first book de externo
cultu and 17. Chapter, he commits sacrilege (says he) who any way gets into
his possession holy things such as have been consecrated and given to any
religious and holy use whatsoever, Neither find I any other diffinition,
description, or Etimologie which in effect is not the same; It follows
therefore of necessity, that He is a thief who meddles with holy things,
being no consecrated person;

Now my third and last argument stands in the opinion of those men, who though
enemies to the ius morale divinum, the divine moral right of tithes, yet allow
they not any converting of things consecrated to ordinary and profane use. In
the first place I shall produce him, whose memory I know is to all those who
are Canaanites to the Church, like the composition of the perfume that is made
by the art of the Apothecary, I mean M. Cartwright, who in his Commentary on
those words of the Proverbs the 20. and 25. (It is a snare to the man who
devoureth that which is holy) will tell you at large: First how that may be
called holy which either by Gods appointment, or by ma^s volu^tary gift, is
addicted and devoted to holy uses: 2ly, that by holy uses is meant whatsoever
is bestowed toward the maintenance either of the Ministers of the Gospel, or
of Schools, or Hospitalls: 3ly, that however tithes and offerings be not now
due by virtue of Gods immediate constitution, yet are they due by virtue of
humane constitutions, and gifts of men, yea so due, as that he makes himself
a Robber of God, who withdrawes them from those uses for which they were given.
Lastly he will there show you, that the transferring and converting of
consecrated things to a man's private ordinary use, is like that book in the
10. of the Revelation, which was sweet in the mouth but bitter in the belly,
for though Sacrilege be sweet and pleasant in the mouth, that is at the
beginning, yet will it be bitter in the belly, that is at the latter end, as
also, that it falls out to such carnal men, as it does to fish and birds, who
with one bitt of the desired bait, loose their lives, yea with Esau they
forfeite their birthright heaven for a trifle, a mess as it were of pottage.
In a second place I might send you to one who is likewise near you both in
affection and place of abode, but I hold it needless seeing he is but the
formers Echo, turned into English. In a third let M. Cleaver.
him speak, whom the tithe Cormorants of this land hoped should have proved
ere this, such an one, as of whom they might have trivmphantly said: Behold
the man who is set up for the throwing down of a rich and learned Church, that
a beggarly ignorant pentionary one, may come in the steed of it. It is M.
Seldon who so far frustrates their expectation, as in the sixth Chapter of his
Reviewe to say, It is a gross error to think that therefore tithes may now be
possessed by laymen with a good conscience, because it is questioned whether
the Minister can demand them iure divino morali by devine moral right. For
albeit (says he) they be not so due, yet are they due by the free and now
irrevocable consecration of those who were once Lords of them; In a fourth
place, take Peter Marti^s judgment, which is that notwithstanding it was in the
power of the supreme Magistrate to desolue and break up the societies of
Abbeys and Monasteries, yet should he then have converted their houses and
revenewes to some other holy and religious uses, A thing indeed, which Hen:
the 8. solemnly promised to do, upon which condition that vast grant of all
religious houses was made him, yea, a Fox*
thing which other places that emdraced reformation as well as we, carefully
did perform, for so I read of the state of Wittenbergh, in one Christopherus
Binderus quoted by M. Seldom, in his Reviewe of the 9. and 10. Chapters of his
history, as also of other parts of Germany, if we may believe M. Brightman,
either on the 2d of the Revelation, or the 11h; In a fifth room let judicious
Calvin be, who is in the same note, when on the first of Hose, and 3d verse,
he styles Hen: the 8h Homo belluinus, a beastly man, because as Iehu he
converted to his own private profane use, those things which formerly had bin
consecrated to holy ones. In the 7. take in the opinion of those Divines who
wrott those Scolia and compendious notes we have in our English Bibles, which
they fully declare on several texts, but chiefly in that one the 6. of Iosuah
and the 19. as also that of Proverbs the 20. and the 25. To those I might add
great Abulensis in several places of his works, together with several
others, who though no friends to the ius divinum of tithes, because the Popes
vassalls do yet with one consent dogmatize them for robbers who in any degree
profane holy things. But I forbear, fearing the time will outrunne my tongue;
yet forasmuch as I have in my Catalogue of authority mentioned but one of the
Laity, to wit M. Seldom, whereupon you may peradventure imagine there is no
more of that feather and so no summer of advantage thence to be expected, let
me succenturiate and add another, yea and he too a man of the sword, by name Sr
Henry Spelman who has written fully to the same purpose in that his most
learned, acute and zealous tract entitled de non temerandis ecclesiis, an
Enchiridion written of purpose to persuade an Uncle of his to the abandoning of
an Appropriation; And thus as briesly as I could, have I made good both the
propositions I laid down. Now in the next place let me clear such quaeres as
are proposed for the better vailing and pulliating of the Laities detayning of
consecrated goods. The one is made by the Lay Appropriator, and that thus,
seeing I have nothing but what at first I bought and now hold under the
protection of an Act of Parliament, tell me, may I not with a quiet conscience
possess what is so backed and warranted, To whom I readily answer, No, For
would thou think thy self free from adultery, though an Act of Parliament
should allow thee four or five wives at once, or from the breach of the Lords
day, though it should license thee to work or sport thy self, as much on that
as on any other of the week, or from theft, though it should conniue at thy
pilfering, as some states of old have done, If not then how can a state justly
countenance thee in thy doing that, by which thou committest spiritual
adultery, causest the day of sanctified rest to be profaned, and those who
through the preaching of the word, might become Gods faithful servants, still
through ignorance to remain Satan's slaves; O, let no man hood-winke himself
with a conceit of the infallibility of a state met in a Parliament, as if
their decrees were Sybillae folia mere oracles, especially when fear and
covetuousnesse are the speakers, as they usually were in Henry the 8. his
Parliaments: For if general counsels have erred, and may again in matters of
faith, doubtless the state representative has, and may again in matters of
fact, And to put this out of all doubt, let me give you a list of what foul
errors I have observed to have bin committed by the public meetings of this
kingdom, and that since the days of William the Conqueror, wherein Religion
has most flourished.

First I find that William Rufus was admitted to the Imperial Crown of this
Land, though Robert his elder Brother was living, and claymed his right.

Secondly I find, that Rufus being dead, the septer was put into the hand of
Henry the youngest Son of the Conqueror, though Robert the eldest was not yet
departed this life, thereby adding one wrong to another, a new to an old;

Thirdly I find that when Henry deceased, the state received Stephen, and put
by the Son of Henry the right heir.

Fourthly, it appears there was a joint consent of both houses for the
deposing of Richard the second, their true Sovereign, and for the choosing
into his room Henry Duke of Lancaster.

Fifthly we read how Richard Duke of Lancaster, was Crowned supreme of this
Land, with the free consent and applause of both houses, though he were a
Murderer of his Nepheues, and so a plain usurper, yea the Parliament did
entaile the Crown on the son of that Murderer, though the two Daughters of
Edward the fourth were living.

Sixthly it is manifest, that Henry the eights divorce from Queen Katherine was
allowed and ratified by Parliament as being an incestuous marriage; and yet
afterward we see the daughter of that Queen Katherine preferred to the
royal throne before blessed Elizabeth, the daughter of his lawful wife.

Lastly as a Parliament under Edward the sixth banished Popery, so a Parliament
within 6 years after, under Q. Mary, brought it in again with triumph. To
which I might annex many the like, if these were not abundantly sufficient to
make good my assertion, that Parliamentary decrees are many times lame and
defective.

O let then no lay person hereafter fly to that vain fig-leafe excuse, the
statute of the 31. of Hen. 8. whereby Abbey lands and all tithes belonging unto
them Chap. 13.
where conferrd on the King, when for certain, there was never yet any learned
Divine, whether Papist, Protestant or Nonconformitant, who de industria held it
in the power of a state to alienate and convert that to a temporal use, which
was before devoted and made over to a religious! Nay more I never yet heard of
a iuditious layman who upon mature consideration of the point, thought
otherwise, Sure I am, Sir Thomas Smith, who wrote the Common wealth of England,
says, a Parliament has only power to change the right and possession of
private men; Upon the hearing of which, if any Appropriator shall say unto me,
together with other Pastors, as those Jews did to S. Peter and the rest of
the Aposttles, when reproved for their sins, men and brethren what shall I
and others who are in the same case do? Acts 2.
how shall we escape the curse you say attends on us? Would you have us render
up our tithes, and so set our gates wide open to beggary? Surely not as yet
until all other means of redress fail, I should advise you to another
course which is far easier, It is, that you and others who hold tithes would
imitate those Philistines of Ashdod after they became sensible of their unjust
deteining the Arc of the God of Israel, for as they said to the Princes of
the Philistines, what shall we do with the Ark of God? the first of Samuel
the 5. So would I have you to repair to the Princes of this Land, when ever
met together about the Kingdoms weighty affairs, and say unto them, what
shall we do with the maintenance of God's Ark the Church? As by an Act of
this great Assembly we possess tithes, so let us be quit of them by an act
of yours also, and yet let your wisdoms so provide for Gods glory, as not
utterly to impoverish our families;

I but what if the ears of both houses be shut up against our iterated
importunate petitions, what shall we then do? Truly, rather then to keep
Gods curse still with you. I would advise you to do by your grants and
patents, as Judas did by the thirty pieces of silver he received of the
chief Priests and elders for betraying of Christ, even to cast them down in
these Churches and Oratories from whence they were first taken; Nor want I a
pattern for this my counsel. In the second of Cronicles and the 25. you may
read, that when Amaziah king of Judah had hired a hundred thousand men of
Israel to increase his Army, there came a man of God unto him saying, O King
let not the Army of Israel go with thee, for the Lord is not with Israel, as
having been unjustly rent from the house of David, So say I from the Lord,
unto all that have purchased tithes for the increase of their estates, O
Brethren let not these tithes abide with you, for the Lord is not with them,
because misplaced, because rent from the true Proprietaries the Lords Priests,
and when the king said unto the Prorhet upon the hearing of this message, what
shall I do for the hundred talents I have given to the Army of Israel? the
Prophet replied, the Lord is able to give thee much more then this. So if any
Impropriator shall say unto me in his own and his fellows behalf, But what I
pray shall we do for the money we have paid for our patents? My Answer must
be as the Prophets was Let not the loss of your money be a remora a
hold-back unto you For the Lord is able to give you much more then those
sums. And thus much in answer unto the first Quaere made in defense of those
laymen who possess sacred tithes such as were at first consecrated to Gods
glory in the reward of the Churches Pastors.

A second now follows, and it is framed by those who are fellonious unjust
detainers of tithes by customs; What (say they) do you stamp the letter R.
on our foreheads as well as on the Impropriators? Do you make us thieves and
robbers too? Yes verily, you likewise fall within the verge of the same
censure, As for your allegation, that you pay something in lieu of your
tithes, two pence peradventure for two shilling, it is no better an excuse then
his might be, who having stolen a Goose, should say, I brought back the wings
and feathers, or his, who after he has conveyed away the body of a fatt
Wether, should plead, O but I left the skin behind for the right owner; Nay
it would be a worse excuse then that of Dionisius of Syracusa, when he took
from the statue of Jupiter Olympus a Cloak of gold, and left one of Cloth,
saying that of gold was too heavy for summer, and cold for winter; it is an
axiom, Gradus non variant species, though one theft be greater then another,
yet the least is still theft. I must confess if two things were once well
proved, neither of which is possible to be done, no not by the help of those
cunning Tutors of Sacrilege, the Devils of Hell, then Custom-pleaders and
Enioyers, might go free from the guilt of Church-robbery, the one, that tithes
are not due to the Priesthood of the Gospel iure diuino morali, the other
that Patrons who at first endowed the Churches with tithes, appointed less to
be paid then the tenth of all increase; As for the last, if you consult our
supposed adversary, M. Seldom in the 8. Chapter of his History, you shall find
there a congeries, and heap of Donations and Graunts of all tithes in kind in
this kingdom, as also edicts of state for due performance, according to those
consecrations and Graunts; And yet least you might imagine I go too much alone
in this path, let me here acquaint you with what the whole current of Casuists
and Canonists say concerning this point of customs; In briese when the
question is made whether custom may justly carry with it the force and
strength of a law; I find they distinguish of Customs, and tell the Readers
there is one which is vicious and naught, as being contrary to reason, which
though vnconsionable men will plead, yet does it not excuse, much less
obtain the force of a law which is according to that no less true then common
saying, multitudo errantium nonfacit patrocinium, the multitude of those who
err is no patronage of the error nisi consuetudo ratione munita sit, non est
consuetudo, sed corruptela unless Custom be backed by reason it is not
custom, but a crept in abuse or corruption; Agreeable to which, is likewise
that of S. Cyprian, they do in vain cry Custom Custom who are overcome and
co^uinced by reason, otherwise says he Custom would be greater then truth.
Another Custom there is (say they) which is laudable and no way repugnant to
the rectitude of Reason, and such an on they allow to be of as much force and
virtue as a law, if not repeald by the supreme Magistrate, yea to differ from a
law only in modo in the manner of its being A law being delivered by writing,
but Custom only by use, And in this sense is that of Iulianus the Civlian to
be taken, inueterata consuetudo pro lege non immerito custoditur, Now to apply
this distinction to the business in hand, tell me, can any one of you who
hears me this day, say, without giving the lie to his Conscience, that a
Custom of paying a penny for a shilling falls under the head of a good and
laudable on? you heard even now, that custom is only good, which is
reasonable; Answer me then, does it stand with reason, any man should enforce
his brother, nay more his father) for so each Pastor is to his flocck) to take
either nothing, or but a penny in lieu of that which is well worth a shilling?
Is this (I pray) a reasonable and an honest satisfaction? Nor can any man
without putting on the vizard of impudency, produce here the Statute either of
the 27. or the 32. of Hcn. the 8. or the 2. of Edward the 6. For albeit those
at the first blush may seem to ratify and make good all customs in payment of
tithes, yet for certain they say no more then what I have already told you
from an unanimous consent of Classique Authors. Namely that no other Customs
are to be allowed in discharge of tithes, then what are laudable and lawful,
which Epithites you shall be fure to meet withal, in those Statutes, whereby
it evidently appears, they approve not of all those Customs, which in case of
tithes the desperate corruption of this Mammon-seruing age, calls and cries
for,

Blessed then is the Council of Isiodor (he was a father of the Church in his
time) consuetudo authoritati cedat, prauum vsum lex et ratio vincat. Let
custom (says he) give place to authority, and let law and reason conquer a
bad use, where by law he means (says Aquinas) that of nature, that which
preaches to every son of Adam, do as thou would be done by; That which
in substance is all on with the Decalogue, that lastly the transgression
whereof God complaynes of in the verse before the text, and that with a kind of
admiration. Will a man rob his God? this being a fact almost incredible because
it slatly goes against the very light of nature. And so much in answer to the
Second Quaere.

A third apologizing on is this; What is it not a sufficient reason for a state
to alienate tithes and offerings because consecrated under superstition and
Idolatry?

Surely no, nor will the Appropriator, (I know) upon due balanceing of the
business be of another opinion; For if the donations of tithes, may de iure
of right be disannulled by a State, because made under Superstition, then why
may not the same power by the same right now make void all their grants and
patents of Tithes and other Church revenues, because conveyed unto them when
superstition no less ruled and reigned, yea to lay such a foundation for Hen:
the 8. his confiscation of Tithes, glebes and the like sacred Incomes, were to
bring into question at this day the right of most men's possessions, and so by
consequent turn the Common wealth into a woeful Chaos of confusion: And yet
least this pretext against Tithes should for all this, receive a glad welcome
amongst many, let me further give you to understand, that to suppose tithes
as consecrated under Romish superstition in this Kingdom, is to build an
Eutopia, to lay a foundation in ipso vacuo; For tithes were generally dedicated
to the worship of God when first the glorious uncorrupted light of the Gospel
did shine amongst us, before ever true popery was in rerum natura, before those
times came, which lost the primitive faith of Rome.

Mr Seldom may serve as a spectacle to help the dim ignorance of most men in
this point, Nor is yet the Impropriator quiet, he has on objection more, by
which he hopes to set the broad seal of the worlds wide applause, to that of
their patents from Hen. the 8. It is thus proposed.

But may not those things be justly confiscated which were given as supporting
pillars to superstition, might not those tithes be ad placitum Senatus at the
disposition of a Parliament, which were found to have been employed to
superstition, even to the maintenance of Masses for the quick and dead?

I say confidently No, And that for two reasons chiefly; The one is drawn
from that precept which God gave concerning the Censers of those 250. Rebels
in the 16. of Numbers, which was, they should be beaten into Plates for the
Alter, though they had lately been abusd to his dishonor. If then the all-wise
God thought it fit that those Censers should be employed to a holy use which
now had been devoted to rebellion, shall our ignorance be so proud as to
invent a new plat form of disposing abused tithes? shall we deem it fit to
alienate them for ever from all holy and pious uses? Doubtless a stander by,
on not engaged in the quarrel will call this by no better name then a misshapen
brat, framed partly of coue. tousnesse, and partly fond self conceit;

The other lies in that reason which transcendently judicious Austine gave in
this very point, It is in his 15. Epistle to Publicula, where speaking of the
euersion of Idols, and their Groves and Temples, judged they were not to be
converted to private uses, but to public, and that (says he) least it
should seem to have been done rather by avarice then devotion; Nor does that
Imperial decree any way make good a Kingdoms transposing of holy places and
Revenues, The words of it be these.

Omnia loca etc. We command that all places Lib. 1. de Paga^ and sacrifi tit.
14.
which the error of the Ancients assigned to Sacrifices to be appropriated to
our estate, which assertion of mine will easily be received for a truth by all
those who will be pleased to consider what places the Emperors willed to be
appropriated, Namly such only as were assigned to the Idolatrous sacrifices of
Heathens and Pagans. Now who is there so bat-sighted, as not to discern what
difference there is between houses and lands dedicated to Pagan superstition,
and tithes which were at first devoted as a salary of the spiritual Pastors
pains, and afterward only through the boundless authority of the Pope to
superstition. And what more evident demonstration can there be, that those
very Emperors Honorius and Theodosius, put a great Chasme of difference
between things dedicated unto paganism, and those which had been amiss
consecrated vnro Christianisme, then that they are so far from confiscating
both kinds, as to decree the converting of the on to holy uses though not the
other.

In the Code of Theodotius it is thus enacted. Let Lib. 16. tit. 44. Contra
Donatistas.
those possessions where direful superstition has hitherto reigned be
annexed to the venerable Catholic Church, and in the same place we find a
Decree of those Emperors against the Montanists in these words If there be any
of their edifices standing which are rather to be termed the dens of wild
beasts then Churches let them with their revenues be appropriated to the
sacred Churches of the orthodox faith: And for ampler proof that godly
Emperors when they expelld the heretical party did not spoil their Churches
of their possessions, but restored them to the true Professors, I call S.
Austine to witness in his 50. Epistle to Bonifacius a Soldier; his words be
these; Quicquid ergo nomine ecclesiarum partis donati posside batur, Christiani
Imperatores legibus religiosis cum ipsis Fcclesiis, ad Catholicam transire
iusserunt. And who needs spectacles to see how it was only filthy avarice which
made this state to do otherwise at that great day of dissolution of religious
houses? For if it had been sanctified zeal, why did they not at the same time
pull down an dispose of the very stones and timber of their Churches, whenas
they had been as fully dedicated and more abused to superstition then ever the
tithes which belonged unto them? But in promtu ratio, the reason is plain,
because then their purses must have provided new ones without a dispensation
from Amsterdam freely to use their Barnes or other rooms in their private
houses instead of temples, To sum up then my answer to this quaere, We
ought not so much to loocke to the prophanition of tithes as to their first
donation, which was to a pious end, even to the reward of the sacred ministry
of the Church. So that when the superstitious and idolatrous use was abolished,
they ought to have been returned to their primitive and lawful use. A leading
pattern to which discreet Act, we have in the practice of the Jews,

First toward the Arc, which though it had been taken and abused by the
Philistines did not, after it was sent home, imagine the former consecration to
be expired and lost, but honored and reverenced it as much as ever they did
before;

And secondly toward the vessels and ornaments of the Temple, which though
they had bin carried by Nebuchadnezzar to Babylon and there abused by being put
into the Temple of his Gods, yet were they afterward admitted to the same holy
use as they were before in the service of their true God;

Nor as yet have I done with this Accusation of God, the pronoune (me) ye have
robbed me, offers on note more worthy your attentive observation, and that's
this,

God reckons of all as of thieves and Robbers of himself, who any way rob and
spoil his Priests, the word Priest I rather use then any other, both because
it is a name which properly belongs to none but those who serve at Gods Alter,
when as that of Minister without some addition is common to us with Cobblers,
Tinkers, or men of any other inferior office, As also, because it is that name
whose very sound works as strange an effect on the Sacrilegist his guilty
conscience, as that which stories tell us the sound of a drum covered with a
woulfes skin does on silly sheep, even the distemper of fear and horror.
The note cannot be though less then legitinate as long as the (me) stands in
the Text. Neither wants there pressing and urgent reason to believe that the
Lord is so tender of the wrongs which are done to us the Pastors of souls,

First we are his Ambassadors, and therefore he takes whatsoever positive
disgraces, or but privative neglects are shown unto us, to reflect and redound
directly on his sacred Magiestie.

Secondly seeing tithes and offerings are all the wages he has allotted us
for the pains we take in his vineyard, how can he account it less then an
affront to him self, when we are robed of those his pensions.

Thirdly seeing he by the clear perspectiue of his omniscient wisdom looks
into men's hearts, and there finds the chief cause of their hard measure to us
to arrise from our faithful execution of his royal Commissions, how can so
just a Judge but take those injuries to heart?

Many parralells to this zeal of Gods, we meet withal in the Scriptures,
witness that (...) why persecutest thou me? Acts the 9. where our Savior
accounts himself as persecuted, though in Heaven, when his Church is so on
earth.

Again witness that his bill of indictment against the wicked at the last day
Matthew the 25. I was hungry, and ye gave me not to eat, I was thirsty and
ye gave me not to drink, To which when the wicked shall tremblingly reply
(...) when Lord did we see thee so? he shall plainly tell them, (...), In as
much as ye have not done it to my poor members, ye have not done it unto me.

Witness lastly that of Judges the 5. Where the Angel of the Lord commands
the City of Merosh to be cursed bitterly, and that because they came not
(...) Jehovah, to the help of the Lord where the Lord takes their flinty hard
heartedness toward their brethren as shown to himself, Tell me then, O
thou who make thy self an emblem of wretchedness by defrauding any Pastor
through Customs or otherwise, Are not thy thoughts troubled? Are not the
joints of thy loins loosened? And do not thy knees smite on against another
at the hearing of this.

The Prophet Daniell sets before us Baltaser in that woeful plight inflicted as
a due reward of his profaning the consecrated vessels of the temple, how then
can thou be free from an earthquake of fear and dread, who daily deuourest
that which is holy, who daily conuerts that to thine own use, which thy
blessed forefathers freely devoted to God in the perpetual mayntenance of his
service? And so I hasten to my last general circumstance, which is the
universality of the sin, Gens tota, even the whole Nation,

That is says Ribera, your Princes and rich men are Robbers, of me as well as
your poor and private ons, yea it is as much as if he had said in more words
thus, It is true O ye men of Judah the Lord blames you by me for many sins,
for adultery sorcery, false swearing, and diverse others yet not so, as if all
these were committed by you all, but for the sin of sacrilege he co^demns you
all, being generally the Act of you all; So Vatablas, whence I may well infer
this conclusion.

It is possible that a whole Nation may at once make a defection from God by
some one transgression, that that sin which heretofore has bin but personal
or at most but common to few, may at length become National, Experience
prompts unto us that the son which now is ecclepsed but in part, may at
another time be wholly, That a sound member of the true Church of God may ere
long become a synagogue of Satan; May not Conspiracy and treason at length
possess the breasts of those who are now most faithful and loyal subjects?
May it not befall a Kingdom in respect of spiritual fruitfullnesse, as it did
Sodom and Gomorrah in respect of earthly? For as that tract of ground became
from on of the worlds paradises, the Center as it were of desolate barrenness,
so may not a Kingdom which now is another Alcinous garden full of herbs of
grace, and fruits of pleasure, become a wilderness of nothing but stinking
weeds, and hurtful briars and brambles? If the old world did wholly fall from
God, may not one little territory of the new? And if the whole Christian
universe did once lie groueling under the cursed apostasy of Arianisme, and
thereby did seem (as Reverend Hooker speaks) to have given up the very ghost
of true belief, then why may not one part of it lie bedridden (as it were)
with the Cramp of Sacrilege? Surely the defection of one Kingdom in point of
fact, is far more easy then a Christian worlds in point of tenent and belief.

But here some one may demand of me was there none in the populous tribe of
Judah who made a conscience of following the very dictate of nature in paying
God tithes and offerings in his Priests? Did each wilfully put out that light
of Knoledge the seeds whereof they brought into the world with them? Surely no,
Charity teaches me to enterpret this Gens tota the whole Nation by that
distinction of the Schools, made by reason of the word omnes all. This all (say
they) is put sometimes to signify singula generum. each of every Kind: and
sometimes genera tantum singulorum only the several Kinds and species, and so,
though this gens tota make some of every Kind and state of Judah guilty, yet
does it not each in every kind. Such phrases are but hyperboles, involuing the
most and not all; It is sufficient the denomination is after the greater part,
He that makes Italy the Nursery of villains, drunkenness the badge of a
Dutchman, and pride the shadow of a Spaniard, says not each in these places
is so qualified, at the most, his words can be screwed no higher then that the
greater part is so.

Or yet if you will you may take this gens tota to be meant as it sounds, even
to includ each particular in Judah, and to infer that the leaven of
Sacrilege was found under every ones roof, and that thus, The most of them
might be delinquents in Act, the remainder in desire and wish, the most by the
theft of the hand and heart, the rest by the theft of the heart only. you well
know all the Commandments are as well broken by secret wishes and purposes, as
by visible and open Acts, fear of incurring some temporal punishment might
hold back some from doing of that which conscience could not; yea the hope of
some advantage which might arrise, might make those just in payment of their
tithes, who otherwise would have had as deep a hand in robbery as the worst,
God the maker, and therefore searcher of the heart condemns or iustifies by the
works of the heart, Abishai is joined with his brother in killing of Abner
though we find Ioab only stroke him, and that because his heart stroke him
as well as Ioabs hand; Cain (says Philo Iudaeus) was not only cursed afrer he
had murdered his brother but before, even as soon as ever he had hatched such
a thought he gives the reason voluntate profacto aestimata his will and purpose
being taken for the deed,

It was a gross error of Josephus the Jew, when he reprehended Polibius the
heathen, for saying Antiocus died miserably because he had resolved with
himself to have spoiled the temple of Diana;

Excellent to this purpose is that of Austine, nemo inuitus benefacit, etiamsi
bonum est quod facit. No man who is unwilling does good though the thing be
good which he does; To which let me add that of Seneca to Serenus, Potest
aliquis nocens fieri, quamuis non nocuerit, A man may be a nocent when he
hurts not; he proves it by instances, A man says he though he lies with his
own wife co^mits adultery, if he take her to be another, and he is guilty
of murder who runs a sword against his breast, who by chance has a coat of
Male on, so doubtless may they be well styled Robbers, who in heart contriue
and plot how to embeazell those tithes and offerings which yet peradventure
they still miss of compassing And thus have I Ionas-like passed through the
streets and quarters of the text, and yet have I not finished my intended
task; I should now parralell this our Judah of England with that of the Jews,
and show you that as we have been made like to them in enjoying showers of
favors beyond other Nations, so have we already with them, and shall
hereafter far more be cursed, if we like them continue (...) greedy
deuourers and cunning Substractors of spiritual goods; Say I but like them,
yea far more then ever they, and that in that gens tota diminishes our tithes
by unlawful (because unconscionable) customs, a thing never dreamd of amongst
the Jews, much less made good by seting false and counterfeit glosses on the
laws just intents, But I perceive your patience is so far spent, that the
work of my tongue must prove a lame Giles by falling short of the intention of
my heart, only let me add one word of exhortation, and so an end.

I beseech all you beloved who have heard me this day, and that in the name of
Jesus Christ that you deal not by what you have heard as you use to do by your
old apparel when worn to rags, that is not to lay it aside with a purpose
never more to think of it, but meditate and ponder on it with resolution of
preferring heavens everlasting joys before this worlds vanishing trifles, And
thou O Omnipotent Lord who gave such power and efficacy to one Sermon of St
Peter's, as thereby to add about three thousand souls to the visible number of
the faithful, add (I most humbly beseech thee) by my this days ministry, at
least one soul to thy invisible flock, and that for thy son Jesus Christ his
sake etc.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT
READER I judge it requisite to acquaint you with two things thereby to prevent
the injury thou may otherwise do thy self and me, The on is That I am
far from doubting of the ius diuinum of Tithes, though I say little of it in
this Sermon; yea so far, as my belief of it is but one degree short of his,
who made the Tenent of the Popes being Antichrist part of his Creed, I have of
purpose forborne that Tract, because I find it already made smooth and plain
by the happy industry of many a The late R. B. of Winchester Mountegue
Nettells Perrot Sr James Simple and others.
learned pen, when as this other on which I shall set footing, is touched by
few, and those too obiter rather then de industria. The other particular of
which I am to inform thee is, That I quarrel not Bishops and Prebendaries
enjoying of Tithes, so that two things may pass for current truth, the one
that those Bishops and Prebendaries are to be thought to have the chief
charge of those men's souls from whom they receive Tithes, and not the Vicars
who indeed are but their Curats. The other that it were fit they were
interdicted from letting, and setting their Tithes (especially to Laics) for
longer space then their own lives And thus friendly Reader thou have my inside
turned outward in the point of consecrated dewes. The censure of which I only
submit to that holy Sanedrim the house of Convocation as taking that body to
be the only competent and fit decisiue judge in business of this nature.
Farewell.

D. E. B.

A CATALOGVE OF SVCH QVAERES as are submitted by the Author in all due respect
to the Judgment of the wisest sons of his mother the Church.
1 Whether Sacrilege may not be called the worshipping of Mammon?

2. Whether the Sacriledgist his love to tithes be not worse Idolatry, then a
Papist his praying either to Saint or Angel?

3. Whether our forefathers, who lived before Hen. the 8. days, might not have
been more assured of their salvation, though dying Papists, then any Puritan
Church-robber now can be if so dying?

4. Whether those who labor for a pensionary Clergy are not therein secret
underminers of Caesar's throne? Or thus, whether the touching of Gods Priests by
enforced beggary, lead not directly to the touching of the King by a minoration
of his just Prerogative?

5. Whether the scapes and errors of whatsoever faulty ones there be in the
Clergy, may not in part be justly laid to the charge of Church-robbers, and
not only to the tinder-like corruption of humane nature, or the sudaine blasts
of Satan's cunning temptations?

6. Whether a Patron has the least color of reason to expect that his Clerk
should consionably perform the office of a Pastor after he has enforced him
to add perjury to Simony, and that in a breath?

7. Whether it stands not with the rule of equal proportion, the Patron should
take an oath he neither has or will take any thing, directly or indirectly
for his Praesentation, as well as the Clerk, he neither has or will give any
thing? Herein only the supreme Majesty being excepted, because such a
transcendent as cannot (being once crowned,) be put to an oath, without great
derogation?

8. Whether he may not be accounted hypocritically partial who having
several town ships and manors, holds it lawful to discharge his duty in
those places by his Bailiffs and Rent gatherers, and yet will by noe means
allow that Divine to teach a Flock, by the substitution of an able Curate whom
the pinching tyranny of Sacrilege has enforced to accept of a second Benifice.

9. Whether it be not apparent by that of the second to the Corinthians the
11. and the 8. That S. Paul took Maintenance from on place whilst he was
resident in another?

10. Whether it may not truly be said the laypuritan makes up a religion of
his own, whilst he is not content to allow his teacher more then the poor
pittance of Fifty pounds per annum, though cloggd with a long heavy chain of
domestic expenses, besides the want of books, when as not only all sound
Protestants and Papists, but likewise Mr Cartwright, with all the iuditious of
that stamp do claim a liberal and plentiful entertainment, such a one as
whereby they may be able to answer the Apostles Iniunction of being (...)
lovers of Hospitality?

11. Whether in probability the Knoledge of Christ which is the foundation may
not sooner be lost through their means, who run the next way to the
bannishing of all solid learning, then by them who labor by learning to uphold
their errors.

12. What Is the reason why they who are most sacrilegious in withholding tithes
from the Priest, do most cry-out against universality of grace, and man's
freedom to goodness?

13. May it not be imagined, they intend hereby to (...) there profanation of
holy things to the charge of God, because he gives them not wills to a bandon
so sweet a Darling Ganymeded sin.

FINIS.

