A Dialogue, between a virtuous Gentleman and a popish priest, very pleasant
and profitable, both for ministers and gentlemen, men and women, old and young,
made by I. B.

Imprinted at London, by Robert Waldegraue, dwelling without Temple-barre,
near unto Sommcrset-House.

1581.

Deuteronomy. 6.6. The words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart,
and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of
them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

Leui. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall
plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin.

Ezech. 34. Woe be unto the shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves: should
not the shepeheards feed the flocks.

^sai. 5.18. Woe be unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin as with carte ropes.

To the worshipful, and his very good Master, master H. S. Esquire I. B.
wishes the favor of God, the faith of Abraham, the vvisdome of Solomon, the
patience of Job, a virtuous life in this transitory world, and a heavenly
kingdom in the world that never shall have end.
BEcause there can not be a better work taken in hand, and not matter may
have so good success, or any time be so well bestovved, as that which is spent
in seeking to set forth the glory of god: therefore for mine own part, when I
did see the slackneesse of many, the loose living of the most part, and few or
none, to seek for, or set forth those things that might redound to the praise
of God: although of al others most unable, (yet as one lamenting the miserable
condition of the multitude) have done that which in me didly, that God might be
honored, true religion embraced, and vice suppressed and trodden under foot:
and sorry I am that it ^ath now fallen out for my lot to play this part, for I
had rather to have scene it of some other that might have done it better then
my self, but I do well perceive it to be the solly of many of those that
think them selves wise men, rather to bestow their knowledge where it
shall little profit, then well to use that good talent that God has lent
them, they have wit enough to get them selves promotion, they are skillul
enough to wax rich in the world, and they know how to do al things, save
that they should: the wisdom of God is counted near madness, the
preaching of the Cor. 1.18.
cros^e, to them that perish, foolishness, to fear God is counted a life by
it self, and such as the proud Rabbis of this world, yea, and such as can
teach others, in this matter, are to learn many things them selves: it is this
world that they desire, the world to come they are not for, so they may
advance them selves, they care not though the glory of God fall to the
ground, they live as though there were an imortallitie to be found here on
earth, and that their dwellinges should continue for ever: if they may be rich
in substance, they regard not how far they be behind hand in godliness: so
they have pleasure and hearts ease here a while, they may have as it were (to
buy it) laid their souls to pawn for the same. This is true, yea and too
^rue, if it pleased God better to dispose us, and that their madness may
manifestly appear: and that grievous sinners may fear to offend. I have
laid vvide open their shame, and displaying their ungodly behavior, that they
may see what danger they are in that live ungodly, and that there is no man
so godly, as he that Psalm. 91.1.
dwells under the defense of the almighty. And having finished that I took
in hand, I knevv not unto whom I might so well offer the fruits of this my
labor, as unto your worship, whom experience has taught me to be a
favorer of the truth, a detester of vice, and to nourish virtue in your
breasts, as that which you dearest love. In this little rreatise you shall see
the great wickedness of our time displayed, between a virtuous Gentleman, and
a Popish Priest, you shall find in the Gentleman, his talk and behauior bo be
such, as may be an example to the most part, in these our days, his virtuous
talk, and strong persuasions, with sure warrant out of the word of God, that
it will make the hearts of all Popish Priests: and covetous ministers, if they
be not as hard as the adamant stone, to yield to the sweet dropping of his
sugared words: and contrarily in the Priest, the very picture of a poisoned
life, with words full of vanity proceeding from the abundance of a corrupt
heart, which would not yield unto any persuasions, nor hearken to any
instructions of a long time, before the word wrought with him more mightily,
that at the length he was contented to amend his manners and to forsake three
benefices which he did unlawfully possess, and to become a new man, and
spend the rest of his days in the service of God. I vvishe all proud Prelates
and Popish priests, vvoulde cut their coats by the same pattern, and learn
to repent by his example, and leave their sins in season, lost as they have
plovved wickedness, so they shall (...) iniquity. Let no man think evil of
me, for whishing of them well, if they will count him an enemy, that would
give them good counsel, or cover their ^ilthinesse with ^ig leaves of
shamefulnesse, or think them selves giltlesse, vvheras they are faulty, here
is as much said for them, as they can say for themselves, which are words
that deserve poroofe, and a life that will ask amendment: for let them flatter
themselves as fair as they can, and think they do as much as is required of
them, when they have got ten them so many liuinges that they may be called of
men Rabby, and have fed themselves so well that their hearts are so fat as
Brawne, yet if their lips keep not knowledge, that the people may se^^ the
law of the Lord at their mouth, Mal. 2.8.
they have broken the covenant of Leui, and caused many to fall. And let not
such as can say something think they have knowledge enough to serve all men,
for although they know how to get them many livings, and to take upon them
the charge of so many souls, that for want of teaching, some of them must
needs go to the devil for their sins, they shall one day be found
negligent shepherds, and Ezekiel. 3.18.
the blood of their sheep will be required at their hands. And because the
ministry is so maimed that many of them can skarse help themselves, and are
set as candles to give light unto others, and yet themselves are full of
darkness, it stands every man upon to look to himself, and not to trust
unto such as have no help in them. Therefore I would wish every man that
does tender his own salvation, to leave no means unsought for, that might
bring it to pass, and to be most careful for the same, as that which does
deserve greatest labor, if there be any that will say they would willingly do
it if they knew which way to begin, let John. 5.39.
them bring themselves acquainted with the word of God which is able to 2.
Tim. 3.16.
make them wise unto salvation: if they will say their knowledge is small, and
the scriptures are hard to be understood, let them seek, diligently, Mat. 7.7.
pray heartily, and knock hard, and the Lord will open the door of knowledge
unto them, and give them right hearts of a good understanding, if any will say
they have so much to deal in worldly affairs, that they cannot spare one hour
in the day, to read the word of God, let the^ know, except all their actions
be measured by the line of Gods word, their labor is lost, their time ill
spent, their hope is vain, their vvroks unprofitable, and Deuteronomy. 28.17.
all that they take in hand accursed: if there be any that think themselves
so well spedde that they need no more teaching, let them learn to put their
knowledge in practice, in framing their lives according, lest when they know
Luke 12.56.
much and do little, their damnation be the greater: if there be any that
will say there are none so unwise, to do that which they know to be unlawful,
let them know that of that number there are too many, and although the most
part must of necessity confess that there is a God whom they ought to serve,
yet the devil does draw many with great force to live as those that know no
God: such is the corruption of man's nature and so great are the assaults of
our enemy the devil, that when we know our duty, and see the path way
that will lead us unto eternal life, yet through the suggestions of Satan, and
the deceitfulness of sin, we are drawn to tread the steps of death and
everlasting destruction. And some there be to excuse this their fooly, will
defend their life, though never so vile: and that they may have the bridle of
licentiousness, to tun at ran done, though against their consciences, they
will not spare to call evil good, and good evil, darkness light, and light
darkness, they that may make a fair show in the world, and regard not at all
how manifestly they lie before the face of almighty God: this fault was found
in Act. 5.4.
Ananias Saphira his wife, for the which they both lost their lives: and this
wickedness does still remain amongst us, although the punishment be not so
evidently seen: of this number are so many as know their duty and lead a life
clean contrary, that know lying to be a fault, and yet will not stick to
lie for advantage: that know it to be sin to swear, and yet have their
mouths full of vain oaths; that know adultery to be abominable in the sight
of God, and yet live in whordome all the days of their life: that know murder
to be a breach of the law, and yet vvish their brothers throats cut, that
they may have their good: that know covetousness to be the root of all evil,
and yet think lucre to be godliness: that know the reward of sin to be
death, and yet live in wickedness all the days of their life: these men
know it, yea and with all their hearts they know it, and with shame enough
will not stick to say it, and shut up al with tushe, God is merciful, and
with this cloak they think to cover their shame, and by that means to set
God besides his judgments: but when they shall be arraigned before his
judgment seat, to answer for the breach of his laws, I fear me, this
cloak of hypocrisy being found on their backs, will be taken for the
livery of their master the devil, whom as they have served in this world
without any fear of God, so shall they dwell with him for ever in fire
everlasting, which is prepared for him and his Angels. These are the faults
of our time, and such punishments do follow such sins: and the wickedness of
the people is so great, that we have good cause to say with David, that it is
Psalm. 119.
time O Lord, for thee to lay to thine hand. But because these things are
far from you, which do so ill like of them, that you are an enemy to those
that use them, you may think your self happy and thrice happy, whom God
has delivered from so great evils, And for my self, as I am by duty bound
to do you the best service that I may, and have received more benefits at your
hands then ever I deserved, I can but vvishe you that which no man can give
you, and pray for that which you may obtain, that you may so serve the Lord
of heaven and earth, during the time of your pilgrimage in this short and
transitory world, that when this life shall cease, and all vvorldly helps
shall fail you, you may have God your father, Christ your brother, the holy
Ghost your comforter, the Angels your companions, your inheritance above the
Heavens, with joys unspeakable, in a life that shall last for ever. Amen.

Your worships humble servant. I. B.

To the godly Reader.
THe estate of these our days is so dangerous, the people so ungracious, with
sin so abounding, and virtue so little set by of almost al every where, ye it
may melt a christian heart to meditate thereon: such negligence in Magistrates,
such rebellion in subjects, such carelesnes in fathers and mothers, and such
disobedience in sons and daughters, that whereas we look to receive ye fruits
of ye earth, and the blessings of heaven powered out upon us, according so the
prourise of the Lord unto his children: ye marvel is great, ye the sun does
not skorch us, the water drown us, and the earth gape ready to devour us, for
our disobedience and unthankfulness for the same. What blessings are there which
we have not received? and what sin is there but we have committed? what could a
father do more for his own children, then to keep them as the apple of his
eye? and what tokens of ^asterdly impes can there be greater, then to live as
vagabounds, ye regard not their father? oh how well may this complaint of the
Prophet be applied unto us? yt the Esai. 12.
Lord has brought up children, and they have done unfaithfully against him, ah
sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, such as
have forsaken the Lord, and proud^ed the holy one of Israel to anger, and as
the Prophet Osee said of Israel, so may it ^e said of England, that Ose. 14.41.
there is no truth, no mercy, no knowledge of god in the land, but swearing,
lying, and manslaughter, theft and adultery have gotten the upper hand, and one
blood guiltines follows another. Oh yt we knew such an estate to be
dangerous, and that such sins will be punished except repentance, what shall
it profit us to have ^eace under our prince, and yet live as rebels unto our
god? what good shall a fruitful country bring to a faithles people? What if we
^ight live long in this world, abou^ding in ^elth and prosperity, and in the
end^ be ouerta ^en in our sin, and rewarded for our iniqui^y? what
happiness is there in man's estate? although he might live as a prince in this
world, and at last become a firebrand in hell: ^et thus shall it fare with such
as fear not God, and great plagues are imminent over he Palaces of the wicked,
and such as live ungodly, and it is through the great mercy of our God, and not
for deseruinges, that our eyes are not witnessed that this is true, ^ut since it
is the Lords pleasure to he as merciful unto us, as ever he was unto his own
children the people of Israel, although our rebellio^s be nothing inferior to
theirs, and do with partience and long suffering, endure our wickedness,
although all the day long he call, and no man does hear, and still stretch out
his arm, and no man regards it, yet let us once look about our selves, and
like wise children, though long first, yet at last be come obedient, to so
bountiful a father. And because the very Esai. 1.6.
head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy and from the sole of the foot
unto the crown of the head there is nothing sound, but wounds, blains and
putrefying sores, let us all in time seek some remedy for so dangerous
diseases, that we grow not rotten in our sins, and be past cure: and that it
fare not with us as it did with the Jews, that like as the Lord did call unto
Zacha. 7.13.
them, and they would no hear, so they cried unto him and he would not hear:
now is it with us as it was with them, now does the Lord cry unto us by the
preachers of his word, and call alowd with the sound of his gospel. God grant
we never see the time in which we may say for our disobedience that like as he
did call and we would not hear, so we shall cry and ^ot be hard, And that we
may not be found guilty of so great sins, and run in dan^er of so many
miseries, let us learn to be wise in time, and not say with the vngrati^us
servant, my master will be long a coming, and so fall to surfferting and
drunken ^esse, and in the end receive the wages of unrighteousness, but let us
be penitent with ^he Publican, that we may entreat ye Lord ^o have mercy upon
us, and that the wrath of his countenance, may be far from us: Let sin be
forsaken, and mercy will be got^en, let repentance be found and forgiveness ^s
at hand: let amendment of life be a witness of our true repentance, and
heaven and ^arth shall testify, that the Lord will be mer^ifull unto us, but if
our sins remain still, ^f to have pleasure in wickedness, be our greatest
delighte, if virtue be not regarded, but vice has the highest room: if
religion be only in our lips, and the devil possess our hearts: if we be
wise to do evil, and have no knowledge to do well: if to live as Bulls of
Basan upon the earth, be all we seek for, and the heavenly Ierusa^em we
nothing care for: if to have ye muck of this wolrde, we will become bondslaues
to ye devil, we shall be sure to serve a maste that does pay his servants eternal
damnation for their wages, which will be received with weeping and gnashing of
teeth. And although this mischeife be a working for the wicked, and great
plagues remain for the ungodly, who are as hard hearted as Pharao, that never
will leave to do evil, before they be overtaken in their sin: yet let not the
faithful fear, but be always glad Phil. 44.
and rejoice in the Lord for ever: For he will be their father, 2. Cor. 6.18.
and they shall be his sons and daughters, and he will keep them as ye
signet upon his finger: let them be contented to abide with patience a little
while, and he that will come Heb. 10.36.
will not tarry long: let them suffer a while for Christ, and they shall reign
with him for ever: let them be accounted as the abiectes and offscouring of
the people, yet shall they one day be found the sons of God, and heirs of
the kingdom of heaven: let them water their Couche a while with weeping, and
the Lord will once Esa. 15.6. Apoc. 7.17.
wipe all tears from their eyes: let them be cast amongst the pottes, and the
vilest places be thought to good for them, yet shall they one day be trimmed as
the spouse to meet the brydegrome, and be Citizens of that new Jerusalem,
which shall not war old for ever: let them be as sheep Romans 8.36.
that are daily led to the slaughter, yet shall they at length be delivered
out of their enemies hands, and death shall have no more power over them. Let
them not faint in the way, that have begone to tread the path that leads to
eternal, life, for their troubles will once have an end, and their reward
shall last for ever, there is a day coming when al shall be well, and they
shall see Jerusalem in prosperity, and peace upon Israel. Thus much gentle
reader, have I thought sufficient for an entrance into the rest, which I have
written, and through entreaty is put in print, that the sins of our time may
be known, and thereby the better avoided. And as it is the duty of every man
to seek by all means possibe to bring so weighty a matter to pass, so for
mine own part, although as unable as the least, yet as willing as the best,
have done what I might, though not as I would, that virtue might be advanced,
and vice overthrown, and do wish it to be read for the end it was written,
which was to set forth the glory of God, that our wickedness may be done away,
and amendment of life embraced: but if there be any that would seek for
painted speech or rouling Rhethorike, which is not here to be found: when they
have opened the book I would wish them to go no further, for if they seek
till they have read the whole, they shall find in the end, that they have but
lost their labor: but if they would know the truth, here they shall find no
lies, but many things that are too true and I wish it to be a book in every
man's hand, that al estates might learn somewhat, and that the sound of it
might ring in the cares of all Popish Priests, covetous Ministers, and
unlearned Pastors, that when they see as in a glass their sins laid before
them, their duty showed them, and in the end, and example of repentance:
they may learn of the best, and forsake the worst, that God in them may be
glorified, and them selves in Christ sanctified.

Farewell gentle Reader, I pray thee read through the book before thou judge
of it.

A Dialogue between a virtuous gentleman, and a Popish Priest, riding on the
way.
Gentleman. YOu are well ouertaketen master Parson.


Parson, You are welcome gentleman.


Genesis I pray you master Parson, how far ride you this way?


Par. Truly sir, I have forty miles to go, and I mean not (by Gods grace) to
stope before I come to my iourneis end.


Genesis And I must ride as far, an almost so much farther, and I am glad that it
is my chance to fall into so good company as a man of your coat, for they are
(or should be all) such as the company where they are present should be the
better for: and I know that with the Psalm.
holy, men shall be holy, with the perfect, me shall be perfect, with the clean
men shall be clean, and with the froward, men shall learn frowardness:
therefore, to come in company where a man may b^e best taught, is to have the
greatest blessing that in this world may be found, and I pray you sir what is
your name?


Par. The name that was given me in my baptism, is John,


Gent. And I beseech you (master parson) If I may be so bold to ask what is
your surname?


Par. Truly gentleman, my surname is bad (saving that I know the name does
never make nor mar the man) I would be so, to show you.


Gent. What ever be your name, you need fear, no shame thereof, for as it is
not your good name that could profit you, if your life be evil: so shall not
your bad name hurt you, if your life be good.


Par. To tell you my name, and to say the troth, it is Never be good.


Genesis What? master Never be good? I know many worshipful gentlemen of that
name, and therefore you need not to disdain the name.


Par. In deed there are many gentlemen of that name, and I my self am a
gentleman borne.


Genesis Are you so? it is no common thing to see a gentleman's son to take upon
him the ministerye, for they will choose rather some faculty, whereby they may
live at ease, then betake themselves to the ministry, which is a painful
vocation being used as it ought.


Par. Truly you say the trothe, it is a new thing to see gentlemen's sons
given to the ministry, and I promise you it was never my desire to take upon
me that function, but if you will give me leave, I will show you how I came
to it, and by what means I did attain to my living.


Genesis Yes, I pray you (master Parson) say on, let me hear the whole discourse
therrof, it will cause our long journey to seem much the shorter.


Par. The troth is, my father has many children, and of them all I was the
youngest, and for his eldest sons he had great care to bring them up in
learning, some at the university, and some at the Innes of the Court: but I
being the youngest of them all, was kept at home, to be my mothers wanton, and
I was so trained up in pleasure, and had in my young years so much mine own
desire, that when I came to riper age, my parents, which in my youth had kept
me at home to serve their turn, could not by any means persuade me to go
from them, although it might have been the better for me: but as they had
begun to keep me at home? and trained me up in wantonness, so I meant always
to continue at home, and lead my life in lewdness: and my father at length
perceiving where unto I was inclined, having always a desire that I should
do well, was sorry to see me so ill disposed, and beheld the same to his great
grief: and did use as many means as he might, to ingraffe in me some
goodness: but he seeing that I was made of such metal, that no goodness would
hang about me, (and having to much experience thereof) it had all most cost
him his life, to se all the rest of his sons brought up to his contentatio^,
some Lawyers, and some Courtiers, and all had somewhat, and I being as dear
his child as the rest of my brethren, he was sorry that I had not soed so well
as they had done, and when he well perceived, ye sighing could not salve this
matter, nor his thought taken (which did hurt him self) could do me any good,
although full sore against his will, when he saw I was paste all hope of any
goodness, had no shift for me but to make me a minister, and when I was a
minister it was not long before I had a benefice (although I paid well for
him) and when I was once mine own man, and had gotten my self aforehand, it
ws not long before I had another, and having enjoyed these 2. benefices, 3 or
4. years, I was gotten in such credit amongst the gentlemen of our country,
what by house keeping, and what by good fellowship, that there was not a
benefice that should lightly fall in that country, but I should be heard for
my money before another: so that now I thank God and good friends, I have 3.
benefices which be worth me 3. hundred good marks by the year, and although
I be no lawyer nor Courtier, with the rest of my brethren, yet I dare be bold
to say, I live as merry at my hearts case as the proudest of them all.


Gen, Were these the steps whereby you came to such promotio^? I perceive you
are not the man that I took you for, nor yet the man that you should be: are
you but one minister and have you so many benefices? and having so many? have
you gotten them all by simonie? believe me, believe me (master Parson) I am
sorry to hear so ill of you.


Par. Why sir, is there such hurt in having so many benefices? and it is not
lawful to come by them as a man may have them?


Genesis Truly I will tell you what I think, and to show you may judgment in
matter (to be plane with you) I esteem it to be starknaked naught, for the
buying of your benefices how tolerable it is, you may know it to be as
lawful for a minister to buy a benefice, as it is for the Patron to sell that
which is none of his own: and it is as lawful for the Patron to sell a
benefice, as it was for Acts. 8.18.
Simon Magus to obtain the gifts of the holy Ghost for money, and because
both Patron and Priest are gyltie of the same, I would wish them to repent of
this their wickedness, unless them selves with their money do perish together.


Par. What then? would you not have a minister to have a benefice before it be
given him freely? so he may go without a benefice a good while.


Genesis I would not have the ministerye to be corrupted with such faults, of all the men in the world, for it becomes them as they ought to teach the truth
unto their flock, so they 1. Pet. 5.2.
are to be an example unto them of good living.


Par. But (by your leave Sir) before you condemn the matter, you must prove
it to be a fault.


Genesis Why? do you not acknowledge your fault? in so doing you make the fault
greater: for, to sin and not to be sorye for sin, is to heap sin upon
Eccle. 23.11.
sin, and in the end to reap the reward of iniquity.


Par. But I pray you Sir, do you think there is such a fault in buying of
benefices, as you speak of? and that it is any offense against God?


Genesis Truly I am persuaded that if Christ were now amongst us (as he was
sometime amongst the Jews) and did see the merchandise that is made of
benefices now a days, he that could then so ill like of Matt. 21.12.
buying and selling in the church, would worse like of buying and selling of
the church, and therefore I think they that buy and sell benefices do better
deserve a whip to be scourged out of the church, then to have any thing at all
to do concorning the Church.


Par. Me thinks you take the matter very hardly, for truly I am of this mind,
that if a man buy a bencefice, when the money is once told, the benefice is
clean sold, and then it is lawful for the minister to use it as his own.


Genesis And I think it is more lawful for you to use it as your own when you
once have it, then it is to pay for it, when it is in your choice to leave it.


Par. And are you of the same mind of having many benefices, that it is not
lawful for one man to have more then one?


Genesis I think it to be as lawful for you to have 3. benefices, as it is for
me to have 3. wives, and as the one by the law of man is unlawful, so are they
both in the sight of God most abominable.


Par. I pray you Sir show me some reason for these matters, I never hard man
so dislike with these things (as you do) before.


Genesis These be the reasons that cause me to think that the having of more
then one benefice for one man to be unlawful. First because it is not lawful
for one man to have more then one man can discharge: secondly that the minister
should not the so fed with the vain desires of this corrupt world, that it
might draw him from the love of the world to come: for as they feed them
selves, so they feed others, and such meat as they receive into their own
bellies, the breath thereof they blow upon their whole parishioners, and being
persuaded that it is lawful for themselves, to live as hogs in a Stye,
connot teach their flock any other doctrine then to feed the^ selves as the
Ox yt is fed to the flaughter.


Par. Nay, I pray you Sir (saving your tale) cannot one man discharge three
benefices:


Genesis No, I must tell you now, as I told you before, I know it, and I
would wish you to remember it, that it is not law full for one man to have
more then one man can discharge.


Par. That is well said, I will say so too, and of this matter I can speak by
experience, yt one man may well discharge three benefices, for I my self have
had three benefices almost these twenty years, and (I thank God) I know not
the man that can ask a penny of me for the discharge of the same.


Genesis Oh (master parson) I pray you mistake me not, I mean not but you may
agree with the world for greater matters then these, but when you have
discharged your self of this world, and this world shall be discharged of you,
then have you the greateste account of all to reckon for, for when you are
dead and leuiled all your accountes with man, then shall you be arraigned
before Heb. 9.27.20.24.12.
te judgment seat of God, there to answer to such things as shall be laid
to your charge, and if you cannot then answer for your self, no man shall be
aloud to speak for your if you be demanded how you entered into ye ministry,
what will you say, your father did compel you? so you and your Father for
simning together shall without repentance be destroyed for ever: if you be
demanded how you came by your benefices, will you say, you have paid
sufficiently for them, and your Patrons and you did agree well enough? so you
may prove your self well friended amongst men, and be utterly cast out of the
favor of God: if you be demanded how you have lived, will you say you have
been a good fellow, and have fed your Parishioners with the fruits of their
own hands? so you may have heaven and earth to bear witness against you, for
living by the swet of other men's brows: if you be asked when you have fed their
bodies, how you have fed their souls, if you said so many benefices, ye you
could not be resident on the^ al at once, and therefore do what you could, you
could not do as you should, you shall be sure to receive the reward of an
unprofitable servant.


Par. Yea: but sir I say not so, neither do I think, but that I do discharge
my 3. benefices as well as if I had but one, for because I cannot my self be
in all places at all times: I have two ministers that do see as good order in
my other 2. benefices, as if I were there my self.


Genesis I believe you (Master Parson) that the order of your ministers, and your
own, is much like: but do you think to do your duty by an attorney? so you
may chance to go to heaven by an attorney.


Par. You are the straungest gentleman that ever I talked withal, do you find
such fault in me, for having 3. benefices, and these 3. lie somewhat round
together? what if I can tell you of one man that has 4. benefices, and every
of them is fourscore miles a sunder: how think ye, may he supply so many,
and being so far one from the other?


Genesis I think he may better supply these 4. then you do your 3,


Par. What do you think so? I would fain know how so unlikely a matter might
be brought to pass.


Genesis Thus in my judgment it might very well be done: first, if he were
hanged, then if upon every of his four parish churches were hanged one of his
four quarters, so should all his parishioners be sure, always to have some
part of their parson resident.


Par Ah, I perceive you are a merry Gentleman, and disposed to lest, therefore
and you say the word (by my faith) let us have a little merry talk another
while.


Genesis What (master Parson) do you swear?


Par. Oh I cry you mercy sir, can you not abide swearing.


Genesis Nay, cry God mercy, for it is him that you have offended and not me.


Genesis Why, is there such an offense in swearing one little oath, as by my
faith?


Genesis Yea no doubt, although the oath seem little in your eyes, yet the
offense is great in the sight of God: and I marvel that you which have taken
upon you to be a teacher, are now to learn that lesson: therefore I would wish
you, either learn to leave your swearing, or leave your name of teaching, for
commonly such a master, such scholars, and where the blind lead the blinds,
they both fall into the dike.


Par. Me thinks you take upon you to be master controller, and I think you
have (since our first talk) spoken more then you can prove.


Genesis No, (master parson) I mean not to Control you, but I seek by all
means to amend you, and as for that which I have said, or do mean to say,
I doubt not, but I am able to avouch it by the word of God and if you think
that you can disprove me and prove that you say by the scripture, I am
contented to be taught of you.


Par. Nay I promise you I have no scripture


Genesis What have you no scripture? then you are worse then the Devil, for he
had some scripture, when he Mat. 4.6.
tempted Christ he was not without scripture: but you say you have none, and
therefore in that respect you are inferior to the devil.


Par. Truly Gentleman you make but a homely comparison, but I am contented you
shall say your pleasure.


Genesis And you are a very homely minister, that you shame not to say you have no
knowledge in the scripture. What a pitiful thing is this? that you which are
in the room of a master, and have many scholars to teach and see well
brought up, or else a hard an account to make: that you are altogether without
knowledge. You take it upon you to be on of them that will give light (as a
randell) to them that sit in darkness, and are placed in Moses chair to show
the law of the Lord unto his people: but I perceive you may go amongste the
number of those shepherds whom the Esai. 56.16.
Prophet complains of, that are altogether without understanding, that are
blind that are dumb dogs and cannot bark. For I see well you are no
preacher of the word.


Par. No in deed, it was never my bringing up.


Genesis What, can you say nothing? then you may go learn of Balaams Ass, for
he Nom. 22.27.
could say somewhat, and fear before the Angel of the Lord, but you can say
nothing, nor fear the judgments of God due for so great a sin: (although you
are in such estimation that you are called master parson) yet you are worse
then Blaaams Ass in condition.


Par. I think I am so not bad as you make me, for I can read the word unto the
people, and is not that sufficient?


Genesis No, that will not suffice, for one of your calling must not only read
the word, but be able to expound the same, and such things as are hard to be
understood, to make plain unto the people, for faith comes by hearing, Romans
10.14.
and hearing by the word of God, and how shall they hear without a Preacher,
and Solomon says, where Pro. 11.14.
Gods word is not preached, the people go to decay: so that you may now see
(if you be not stark blind) how far you are out of the way, and how unfit
you are to have the charge over souls, which are unable to preach, and cannot
use that ordinary means to save the people, which is ordained to bring them
unto faluation.


Par. I perceive you are a Puritant out right, you are one of these new me^ yt
would have nothing but preaching, it was never merry world since yt sect came
first amongst us: for I dare be hold to say, that there was more good
fellowship in the old time, and all things were better cheap when we had
little preaching or none at all, and a man might have more for a penny, then he
can have now for a groat, therefore I think we have now so much preaching that
we are the worse for it.


Genesis What (master parson) are you of that mind? that the preaching of the
word of God (which is the greatest blessing that we have amongst us) is ye
cause of our unhappiness? Oh in any wise think not so: for the ungodly people
in the time of the Prophet Jeremy, were of the same wicked opinion, and told
him the like tale, that when they did Iere. 44.17.
service unto the Queen of Heaven, they were in prosperity, and had all things
plemie: but when they did leave such ungodly behavior, all things went wrong
with them, and their estate was un happy, and therefore they though that to
serve God, was the cause of their punishments: but the Prophet told them, as
I may tell you, that Iere. 44.22.
our sins are the cause of our troubles, and we are punished for not walking
in the ways of the Lord. Therefore (master parson) you are far deceived to
think that the preaching of the Gospel does hurt the people, and now I well
perceive that there is not that in you, which I thought to have found in a man
of your calling, therefore to discharge mine own duty, and for the love I
bear unto the truth, I (will according to my small knowledge) show you what is
the duty of true sheepeheardes, of the which number I know you would go for
one. First it is said in the prophecy of Ezechiel, that the Ezekiel. 33.7.
shephard is made a watch man over his flock, to give them warning from the
lord, and if they sin, and he show them not of it, that then they shall dye
in their sins, and their blood shall be required at the pastors hands: but
if he give them warning and thye amend not, they shall die in their sins,
but the minister has saved his own soul, another Prophet says, that the
Priests lips should Mal. 2.7.
keep sure knowledge, that the people may seek the law at his mouth, because
he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. And the Apostle Paul says: that
a minister 2. Tim. 3.2.
must be baamelesse, watching, sober, apt to teach, not greedy of filthy lucre
holding the mystery of faith in pure conscience, and Peter agreeing with him,
would have them to feed 3. Pet. 5.2.
their flock, not as though they were Lords over their parishioners, but that
they give a good ensample unto them of well doing, and that of good will, and
Paul (in another place) would have them to be instant, in 2. Tim. 4.2.
season, and out of season, and no time exempted wherein they may be doing
good. This is your duty, and if this be in you, then do you play the part of
a wise servant, whom his master, when he comes shall find well doing: but if
this be sarr from you, and the name of shepherd be only to be found, you are a
Wolf, clothed in a Sheep skin, and shall have your portion with the
ungodly, in that lake of fire and Brimstone, which shall not be quenched for
ever.


Par. Truly sir, it is a hard matter to find all this in one man, and
although I have not this in me, yet I trust I shall have no part in that fiery
lake whereof you speak, nor there is no such danger in the matter.


Genesis That you may not think it to be an untruth, or any invention of mine own
making, mark what the scripture says, which cannot lie. Woe Iere. 48.10.
be unto him that does the work of the Lord negligently Again, Ezekiel. 34.2.
Woe be unto the Shepheardes that feed themselves, should not a Shepherd feed
his flock? Paul cried Cor. 9.16.
Woe unto him self if he preach not the Gospel, and you shall one day cry,
Woe unto your self if you preach not the Gospel, Ezeck. 23.3.
Woe unto the foolish Prophets that follow their own brains. Iere. 23.1.
Woe unto the Shepheardes, that destroy and scatter my flock (says the Lord)
and so thruste them out that they once look not upon them: therefore will I
one day visit the wickedness of their vain imaginations, here you have heard a
great many of Woes, and al these and a great many more, shall fall on you, if
in time you seek not some means to avoid them.


Par. In deed Sir, I must needs say you have told me of many woes, and yet I
trust what so ever you say, there shall none of them light on me.


Genesis Truly I have said nothing of my self, but that which I have told you
are the reports of other men, which used not to lie.


Par. And do you think in deed, that all these woes are pronounced against
such ministers as preach not the Gospel, and ye if they continue in that
state, they shall have them in their portion?


Genesis I pray you (master Parson) let me first ask you this question: do you
think that the Prophets and Apostles have spoken any thing in vain?


Par. I do not think so, but peradventure it may be true.


Genesis Nay I will tell you, without peradventure, that which they have spoken is
so true, Math. 5.18.
that heaven and earth shall fall, before that one jot that they have said shall
perish.


Par. I do not deny but that the word of God must needs stand, but if you
will so conster the scriptures, that all ministers that preach not the Gospel
shall be cried Woe unto, you will make a mad piece of work, and send most of
the ministers in these days to the devil.


Genesis I go not about to send any man to the devil, but I do what in me lies
to draw them unto God: and therefore I would wish you and your fellows, to
look to this gear in time, unless you repent hereafter when it will be too
late, for if your duties be neglected, and this great charge can not be
answered when it shall be examined, you and your fellows shall be sure to
smart for it.


Par. Why? what would you have me to do? that you find such fault in us.


Genesis Truly I would wish you to deal no longer in the matter you have taken
upon you, and are not able to go through with it, out repent for that which is
past, and amend that is to come, and let it not be long a doing: but take the
council of the Prophet that would have us to Esaias. 55.6.
seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he may be heard,
let the ungodly man (says he) forsake his own ways, and the wicked his vain
imaginations, and return unto the Lord, so shall he be merciful unto him, and
unto our God, for he is ready to forgive. Oh refuse not this offer (master
parson) as you love your own soul, for if you take it not while you may have
it hereafter you may chance to seek it with tears and go without it, for
now is the acceptable time, and every tree that brings not forth good
fruit, the Math. 13.10.
axe is laid to his root, that it may be cut down and cast into the fire:
therefore be not leave off from sin, which without shame you have greedily
committed, be no longer amongst the number of thoss whom Paul spcaketh of,
that they are the enemies of the Phi. 3.10.
cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and glory
to their shame, which are worldly minded, let no longer ye love of this world,
draw you from the love of God: but Iam 4.7.
draw near unto him, and he will draw near unto you: resist the devil and
he will fly from you, purge your hands, and cleanse your heart, and humble
your self in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Let the same
mind be in you which was in Moses, who when he was great, Heb. 11.2.
refused to be called the son of Pharaobs daughter, and chose rather to
suffer adversity with the children of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season: esteeming the rebuke of Christ more riches, then all the treasure
of Egypt. And with Saint Paul say that you Phil. 3.8.
account all the world but dung that you may win Christ, and give over your
livings, unlawfully possed, in this short and transitory world, that you may
live for ever in the world to come.


Par. What do you mean by all this talk, that I should give over my benefices? so
you may chance to begin a piece of work which you shall never finish, for I
had as leeue loose my life as loose my living, and I have not had them this
long, to forgo the^ at last, therefore gentleman, I shall desirs you to have me
excussd for this matter, and I will here you in any thing save this: there is no
man so unwise I think, to forsake his living and become a beggar, when it is
in his choice to use it at his pleasure.


Genesis In deed (master Parson) I think few men be so wise, to do that which
may be best for them.


Par. What, do you account that wisdom? I am sure there are many wise men of
the ministry, as you know as well as I, that have more livings then I have,
and yet I think you can not tell me of one that does love the Gospel so well,
that he would depart with any of his benefices, to discharge his conscience.


Genesis In deed (as you say) a man shall hardly find one amongst so many double
beneficed men, that will prefer the truth, before their benefices, or love
the Lord better then them selves: but such deserve not the name of wise men,
for if their be any wisdom in them, it is such as the prophet speaks of,
that Iere. 4.22.
are wise to do evil, but to do well they have no knowledge, and if
scripture will no serve to persuade you, yet let me see what reason may move
you: do you think that our Lord Christ, who is heir of heaven and earth, whose
servants we will say we are, and under whose banner we will say we fight: if
he then being our master, and Phi. 4.21.
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and yet made him self of no
reputation, and refused notto take upon him the shape of a servant, and to
humble himself unto the death of the cross for our sakes, that we by his
example, might learn for his great love, to love him again, and was taught
obedience by the things that he suffered, to submit himself to his fathers
will, and was contented for our sakes to bear this heavy burden, before he
entered into his glory: and do you think it reason that a great many of you,
which are drawn from the Carts tail and set with Princes, that you shall mock
him with the name of servant, and yet live as master, and say you fight under
his banner, and strike the stroke with his enemies, and in the end be accounted
as his brethren, and eat and drink in his kingdom? no, no, (master Parson)
deceive not your self, Gal. 6.7.
he will not be mocked, they are those that 2. Tim. 2.12.
suffer with him, and such as deny him, he will deny them: or think you that
there is any new way to heaven, better then Christ him self has found? no,
doubt you not, if theer had been any way easier, then through many
tribulations to enter into heaven, ye father would have revealed it to his only
begotten son. Therefore (master Parson) seeing the case stands as it does, I
marvel that before you meant to be a builder in this work, you had not
first made your account what it would have cost you, for it is such a piece of
work as will not be done without great charge, for experience does teach us,
that it has cost many a man all that they have had, yea and their lives also,
ye they might be found painful laborers in so sumptuous a building.


Par. Truly Gentleman, I must needs confess that the scripture is true, and
your reasons are very good, and if I thought there were no other sense to be
gathered out of the scripture, then you have showed me, I might chance to do
that which some times I never thought to have done: but although there be many
places that threaten punishment to the grievous offenders, yet I know there are
some that teach us: that God is merciful: and I for my part do not mean to
come to heaven by mine own deserts, but I do only hope of the mercy of God.


Genesis To trust in Gods mercy you do well, for if you should think to come to
heaven by your own merits, you should surely be deceived, but so to hope of
his mercy as those that care not for it, is to trust to a broken staff, and in
the end to be deceived.


Par. Tushe I know God is merciful, and some there be (and that a great many)
that shall taste of his mercy, and why should not I be one of them, as soon as an
other?


Genesis But (master Parson) in any wise deceive not your self, but take the
counsel of the wise man, which says, Eccle. 5.6.
say not tush the Lord is merciful, he shall forgive me my sins, by they
never so many, for as he is merciful, so departs wrath from him, and in the
time of vengeance he shall destroy thee: but because it is true, that God is
merciful, and some there be that shall taste of his mercy, and you are one of
them that would feign taste of his mercy, I will tell you how you may get it,
and also how you shall know when she is sure to have it. The prophet Esaias says,
Esaias. 55.7.
Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways, and the wicked his own
imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord, so shall he be merciful unto
him: so by this you may see, that the way to have Gods mercy, is to forsake
your sin, and when you find from the bottom of your heart, ye you do loath
your wickedness and hate your sins as the greatest enemies you have, and
leave them as things dangerous to be had in keeping: when you find this in
you, be sure that the mercy of the Lord, is not far from you, but if a man
will not turn, he will whette Psalm. 7.13.
his sword, and bend his bow, to the cutting down and utter destruction of
the wicked and ungodly.


Par. And must I needs put away my benefices (think you) before I am like to
obtain the mercy of God, and atteine to his heavenly kingdom.


Genesis Truly (Master Parson) I will tell you, Math. 7.14.
the way to heaven is very strait: and it will be a hard matter, for one man
with three benefices to pass through so narrow a place: therefore if you
will be sure to come thither your self, I would wish you to leave your
benefices behind you.


Par. Why? do you think yt I meant to carry my benefices with me? there is no
man so unwise (I think) but knows he shall leave al things behind him, when
he dies


Genesis But if you be not discharged of them while you may, you shall be sure
to be troubled with them, when you will wish that you had never seen them, when
the blood of your sheep shall be required at your hands, their sins will
lie so heavy on your back, that when you are come to the gate ready to enter
into heaven (I fear me) they will pluck you down as far as the bottomless
pit of hell: therefore if you will follow the counsel of him that wishes you
well, now so deal with the world, that hereafter you repent not your bargin:
and Math. 5.2.
agree with your adversary while you are in the way, least he deliver you unto
the judge, and the judge deliver you unto the Gailor, and he cast you into
prison, and thence not to come out, till you have made good the vtmoste
farthing.


Par. For your good counsel I most heartely thank you, and follow it I would
if I thought if best for me, the paths that lead to heaven I would fain tread,
and the way to hell I would willingly avoid, for I know that these places, the
one from the other do so far differ, that to know the way to heaven is only
my desire, and that I might be sure not to miss the way, I could be
contented to depart with one of my benefices (with all my heart) so that I might
enjoy the rest quietly.


Genesis I am glad that you are come one step lower, and it puts me in hope ye
you will not stick to take a little more pain in this vile and transitory
world, ye you may rest for ever in the world to come, and that this world may
not deceive you, consider it as it is, and think no better of it the^ it does
deserve, and love it no dearer then you would your enemy: for the Apostle
says, 1. John. 2.15.
if we love the world or the things in the world, the love of God is not in us:
and if you will say you Ioh. 14.2.4.
love God and keep not his commandementes, you will prove your self a liar,
and there is no truth in you. Know therefore, ye this world is vain, and al
worldly things are vanity, ye righteousness is perfect blessedness, and to know
God in truth, is the cheifest felicity: and to put away confidence in man, or
any worldly help, is to trust to a broken staff, which in the end will deceive
you: think no freedom so to be desired as the service of God, and to know
that better it is for you to be Christ's Chaplin without a benefice, then to
have all the liuinges in the world, and be out of his service, and think it
not enough to depart with one benefice and keep two in your hand, but if you
may be unburdened of that which you cannot discharge, and have pardon for your
former sins committed, say you are well used and finne no more: and Christ
teaches us, that he that will be his disciple, Mat. 16.2.
must deny himself, and take up his cross and follow him. Now if I should
counsel you to keep any thing that might hurt you or hinder Gods glory, I
should go beyond my commission, and commit sin with you: therefore to tell you
the troth, because you are an unpreaching Prelate, and unmeet for that office,
I would wish you to give over the function you have no skill-of, and leave al
your benefices, as things that perteine not unto you. Let not so many souls
perish, through one man's negligence, but have a care of your self as well as
of them, and flatter not your self any longer, least you and your flock perish
together: let such have your room that can teach them better, and let such
shere the sheep as can feed the flock, that you may save your self and
the^, let not worldly persuasions work you destruction, but let such
flatterers go for liars, that will tell you, you are unwise if you so do, you
shall loose your credit, you friends will fail you, no man will regard you, let
these and such like tales go for chafe, that is blown away with the wind,
and whose substance will soon have an end, for if the Lord will be served,
and his judgment executed for so great a sin, all the world cannot pay your
ransom, neither shall any man be able to set you free. Therefore in this matter
deal wisely for your self, for it is your self that shall stand to the stake
for the whole: depart with this ungodly promotion, which this wicked world
has brought you, and you shall have treasure in heaven, and because it is so
that you are not able to take upon you the charge of souls, without the
destruction of your self and them, discharge your self quite of so great a
danger, and keep not a benefice for fear of displeasure.


Par. What, will you not have me keep one benefice? then you deal more hardly
with me then I thought you would: but there shall be no more ado of the
matter, I will keep my self as I am, and therefore in using these persuasions,
you do but loose your labor, the charge is mine, and I only shall auswere
for it, therefore I would wish you to look to your self, and take no farther
care for me.


Genesis What, are you now come to this pass? and is this the thank that for my
good will I shall receive? I was in good hope when you were once running, you
would not have stayed before you had come to the goal: but oh how true is
that saying now fulfilled in you, which was spoken so long agone? that 2. Pet.
2.2^.
the dog is turned to his old vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to
her wallowing in yt mire: Oh covetousness, covetousness, how well may it be
called the root 1 Timothy 10.6.
of all evil? that sends so many souls headlong to ye devil.


Par. What, you are far deceived (gentleman) do you think that covetousness
is in me, no, I abhor it with all my heart, and love of money is far from
me.


Genesis What are you not covetous: I pray you, what did then move you to take 3.
benefices? when as one of them is living sufficient for you?


Par. I perceive you know not what you say, for I tell you troth, I can not
live with one benefice.


Genesis No? I pray you what is one of your benefices (that does yield you
least) worth you by the year?


Par. I think it be worth me, a forty or fifie pounds.


Genesis And I pray you what do you give unto your Curate by the year, that does
serve your benefice.


Par. I give him ten pound by the year.


Genesis And why can you not live with forty or fifty pounds by the year? as
well as your Curate that has but ten pound by the year?


Par. I see well (Gentleman) you take all things at the worst, but I will tell
you, and not lie unto you, wherefore one benefice would not content me, and so
small a living will not satisfy me, I did consider my calling, how that I was
a gentleman, and therefore I thought it not enough for me to live as the
common sort do, which are but plain fellows of the country, and I knew no
way how to make any difference, but only by procuring my self such livings as
might maintain me like a gentleman, and being once a minister, you know it is
not lawful to possess other liuinges, then such as belong to the ministry,
and therefore I had no way to make up the matter, or bring my purpose to pass,
but only by having two or three benefices: and now you see the world what it
is, how that he that has nothing shall be nothing set by, and having a good
living and being able to bear some countenance, he may be a companion for a
right good Gentleman: and I promise you, these were the causes that did move me
to take so many livings, and not for covetousness sake as you do imagine.


Genesis Was it your chiefest regard to have greatest respect unto these
vanities, I perceive you are a right worldling, and by a wrong door have entered
into the ministry, you say you did respect your calling, and that was how you
were a gentleman: ^ut I perceive you had forgotten another calling, which al
ministers ought to have regard unto, and that is, that you are no longer
called to be a gentleman, and to live at ease: but if you will be the man that
you ought to be, you must forsake your self and follow Christ, and as near as
you may imitate his steps, and then see what examples are laid before you, and
what a life you ought to live. Christ him self, who although now heir of
heaven and earth, when the time was come, that he must be a minister of the
gospel, he left heaven and the glory thereof, and took upon him the shape of
the servant. Paul, which sometimes was in authority being an enemy to the
Gospel, when it pleased God to make him a minister of the Gospel, he was
contented to forsake such promotion, and Gal. 6.14.
rejoice in nothing but in the cross of Christ. Mathewe sitting Mat. 9.9.
at the receite of custom, and in the mids of his worldly affairs, when
Christ meant to make him a Gospeller, he willingly forsook all and followed
him, Peter, Andrew, James, and John, which got their living by fishing and
busied about the same, some Mat. 4.18.
casting their nets into the sea, and other me^ding of their nets being broken,
which did require some have, when Christ came by the^, and told the^ that he
would make them fishers of men, they made no more ado of the matter, but left
all and followed him, but you as though you had a prerogative above Christ and
his disciples, think you may be a minister and a Gentleman too, that you may
be a Christian and a worldling too, that you may serve God and the Devil too,
that you may live at ease and yet bear the name of a painful labourer: but he
that will be a minister of the Gospel, and a servant to Christ, is taken on
this condition, that if he will look to reign with him in his kingdom, he must
suffer for him a while in this world: and deny the vain titles of a proud
Prelate: and forsake the vanities of this vain world: and to be be a 1. Tim.
4.12.
pattern to the godly, in word, in conversation, in charity in faith, and in
chastety, and to give attendance unto teaching, reading, doctrine and
exhortation: this is the calling that you are called unto, and as for the
credit and continuance that you seek to have in the world that you may be a
companion of such as are worldlinges, I will tell you (Master parson) if you
shape not to live another kind of life, you will one day be found a fit
companion for the devil, you must bear with me though I be somewhat plain
with you, and that which I tell you is nothing but truth, and therefore I
would wish you the sooner to believe me.


Par. Nay, I promise you, I will not believe you for this matter, all the
scripture you have in your belly, will not make that sink into my head, that I
being a minister should forgo the calling of a Gentleman, for if I had thought
so much before I was minister, I would never have taken the ministry upon me
as long as I had lived: what is a minister now a dates without a living? and
what is one benefice for a man to keep house upon? or how can he bid his
friends welcome, and give them sufficient entertainment except he have some
other help as well? me thinks you being a gentleman, have least cause to
complain of any man, for I am sure you and your fellows fare never the worse
for us of the ministry, especially as many of us as are unmarried and have no
man to care for but our selves, we spare not to spend upon good fellows, and
gentleman as you are, but you may come to our houses at any time, when we are
resident, and be welcome. We keep good houses at Christmas, we are merry and
have our friends about us, and many a poor body at our gates do fill their
bellies with that which we leave when our bellies are full.


Genesis This is an Oration, that if it had been made before the devil, it would
have pleased him very well: you are a man for his own toothe, for I perceive
you are al for the belly, and care neither for your own soul, nor the
souls of such as you shall answer for: but your greatest desire is to be in
credit and favor with the world. I dare warrant you (M. Parson) as long as
you behave you self in this order that you speak of, you shall have friends
ynowe in this world, and be alowde to have recourse to the devil, which is the
Prince of this world, and Josh. 2.13. Ephe. 6.21.
governor of such as are worldlinges: but know this withal, that his
kingdom does last no longer then this world does endure, and that will have an
end you know not how soon: and although it be long before that time come:
yet you shall bear no longer swaye in it then your own life does last, and
that will be taken from you, it may be very shortly, and when your life is
gone, your work will be at an end, and you shall have your wages home with
you, and for the greedy desire you have had to fill your paunch, you shall have
fire and br^mston your belly full: and for your Esaias. 65.13. Luke 8.24.
mirth and merry pastime, wherewith you thought your self never satisfied,
you shall have more weeping and gnashing of teethe then you would desire: and
for the friendship you have had in the world, you shall have as much of the
wrath of God as you are able to bear: and because you have served your master
the devil diligently, you shall have a loss in this, that shall last for ever.
Therefore (M. Parson) if you like not of such an alteration, I would wish you
to lead a life of another fashion, for such sweet meat will have sour sauce,
and these plagues does follow such an ungodly life.


Par. Why, is there such ungodliness in using these things that I have spoken
of? or is it not commendable to keep a good house, or to be merry amongst our
friends.


Genesis It is your duty always to be a lover of ^. Tim. 3.2.
hospitality: but in that you prefer one time before another, as your
Christmas, which you speak of, and such like it may go amongst the number of
the rest of your faults, for the same fault did Saint Paul find amonst the
Gal. 4.10.
Galath^ans, and was in fear least he had bestowed his labor on them in
vain, because they made a difference of da^es, months, and times, and where
as you say, that the mea^e which you leave when your bellies are full, does
feed many poor at your gates: you may know that you thruste them out of your
gates, which ought to be guests at your tables.


Par. This is more then ever I heard before, therefore I think it to be some
new order of your own making.


Genesis If you think it strange or a new order, you may know that it was an
order set down by our master Christ for a thousand and five hundred years
agone at the least, that when we made our feasts, we should Luke 14.13.
call the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind: and not our friends, our
kinsmen, or rich neighbors, least they recompense us again.


Par. I tell you plain, this is a strange order in deed in my judgment, for
I promise you, I never saw it on this fashion before, neither do I mean to
begin any new orders, for I never made feast yet, nor never will again, but
I mind to have my friends and kinsmen at it, that they may do as much for me
another time, for if I had not used these means to get in credit amongst my
friends, and the gentlemen of our country, I had never had that which now I
have.


Genesis Now it ddth plainly appear, what master you serve: for Christ diddeth you
do one thing, and you shame not to say with open mouth, that you will do clean
contrary wherefore I may be a witness, that you set more by the fellowship of the
world, then by the friendship of Christ: but I would wish you to take another
order in your fe^tings, and frame to live another life, or else there is an
order taken for you, that you shall be accursed, and all that you have. Deuteronomy.
28.16.
Curssed shall you be in the City, and cursed in the field, cursed shall be
your basket and your store, cursed shall be the increase of your kine, and the
flocks of your sheep, cursed shall you be when you go out, and cursed when
you come home, and all that you take in hand shall be accursed, if you serve not
God.


Par. Alas what will you have me to do? you know I am no preacher, and
therefore cannot give them spiritual food, it is reason that I should feed
them one way or another, for you have told me that a Shepherd must feed his
flock.


Genesis Alas, what meant you to take that work in hand, which you cannot tell
how to labor in? why have you taken upon you the office of a preacher, and
yet say you can not preach? why have you this long borne the name of a
shepherd, and know nor yet how to feed your sheep, why have you entered as a
workman into the Lords harvest, and do bestow al your time in lo^tering and
idleness, why are you let to keep the wolf from the sheep, and are a dumb
dog that cannot bark, how has the devil bewitched you, and set you a
feeding only of their bodies, while he in the mean time goes about, ready
to devour both bodies and souls: leave of leave of for shame (master Parson)
and be no longer deceived and led away with the subtle slights of Satan: for
let him tell you what he will, and so blind your eyes that you can not see your
sin, yet although you have atteined to great livings, and are not without
three benefices: because you are no preacher of ye gospel of Christ, you ought
not to keep one.


Par. Then I would I were a preacher, for then I think you could be contented
ye I should have living inought.


Genesis In deed as it is good reason that he that will not 2 Thessalonians. 3.10
labor should not eat, so is it as good reason that they that 1. Cor. 9.14.
Luke 10.7.
preach the Gospel, and such 1. Tim. 5.18.
as labor faithfully should be well rewarded.


Par. Then I see well, if I could preach, you could be contented that I should
keep my three benefices.


Genesis No (master parson) I said not so.


Par. No? did you not say that he that did labor faithfully should have
enough?


Genesis Yes, but I did not say that he should have too much.


Par. Why, do you think three benefices to much for a good preacher?


Genesis Yea, I think three benefices to be two to many for him ye can preach
best.


Par. What do you think so? then I would there were a preacher here that has
three or four benefices, that he might answer for himself: but for want of
such a one, I doubt not, but me self am able enough to defend so good a
cause: for if it were not lawful for him that can preach to have two benefices,
it must needs be unlawful for me to have three which am no preacher.


Genesis In deed you say true, therefore I pray you (master parson) let me here
what you can say, and what skill you have to make darkness light, and light
darkness, evil good, and good evil, the having of two or three benefices for
one man to be lawful, which in the sight of God is most abominable.


Par. You have told me that there is nothing required of a Pastor, but to
preach the word, and feed his flock, and this may one man do, in three or
four benefices very well: for you know by the laws of the realm, that if
every parisly have a sermon once in a quarter of a year, it is sufficient.


Genesis What (master parson) you slander the laws of the reaime, for I know
there is no law to the contrary, but that the minister may preach every
Sabbath day: by the law of God he ought not to Act. 20.28. 2. Tim. 4.2.
neglect any time, that he may bestow in instructing and feeding of his
flock.


Par. But do you not think, that this may be sufficiently done, in preaching
once in a quarter of a year?


Genesis If the Devil would appoint two too meet the Shepherd there cuerie
quarter, and so try who might have the victory, and never came amongst the
sheep, but at such time as the shepherd is there, it were enough: but because
ye devil, as a Wolf does always and at all times, seeks the destruction of
the sheep, therefore the minister as a good Shepherd, ought continually to be
watching, and ready to withstand him.


Par. In deed I must needs confese, that it were best if it might be so, but
seeing the case stands as it does, that there are not Preachers enough to
place in every parish one, is it not better think you, that one Preacher have
three or four benefices that can teach the flock sometimes? then to have a
doult that can say nothing at any time.


Genesis Here (M. Parson) you have given your self a sore blow, which are
amongst the number of the dolts, whom you speacke off.


Par. But you must imagine, that what I say now for others, is but for talks
sake and not condemn my self, neither do I think the worse of my self, what
ever I say: for I know if you had had this talk with a Preacher, he would
have said as much for me, but this does not answer the question, do you not
think it better to have the flock fed at sometimes, then not at all.


Genesis Truly I am of this mind, that it were as good never a whit, as never
the better.


Par. In deed that is true, but you must not think but that it will be
somewhat the better, for although at I must needs faye that the continual
presence of the Pastors be most prositable, yet I think not the contrary, but
that if it be so that he may come amongst his flock but seldeine, yet that
will do them much good: for I pray you, let me ask you this question: if one
of them having 2. benefices, in both which he cannot at one time be resident,
if he spend half in another, is it not almost as good as if he. were
always at one of them?


Genesis This difference there is, that where as the careful minister being
always resident to defend his sheep from their enemy the devil (which does
continually watch for spoil, being ready to devour them) may stand them in
as good steed as a strong defense, against all the assaults of Satan: so such
a one as you speak of, that is a long time from them, may have (in his
absence) his flock scattered, and so he himself be found a negligent
shepherd.


Par. But he may so apply them at his being amongst them, that they shall be
able to spare him a while without any danger.


Genesis Truly (M. Parson) I can tell you, the devil is a subtle byrd, and the
shepherd shall no sooner be from his flock, but he will be amongst them, and
if the minister have two benefices, when he is at one, the devil will be at
another, so that you may now see how needful it is for the Pastor to be
always amongst his flock, since Satan is so greedy to work them their utter
destruction.


Par. But if all this that I have told you will not suffice, yet if the worst
fall out, they that have so many liuinges that they cannot be at them al at one
time, may in their absence, place honest ministers that may supply their
rooure, almost as well as themselves.


Genesis What do you mean? that others shall feed, an they will sheere, that
they shall have the hier, and others do the work? that they shall but bear the
name of Pastors, and live by the sweat of other men's brows? is this that you
mean by others supplying of the room?


Par. Truly my meaning is, that in the absence of the pastors, he should
place one amongst his flock, that may keep them in order?


Genesis What would you that he should only receive the fruits for him? and
take up his tithes, an shere his sheep in due time, and by that means keep
them in order?


Par. I mean that there should be an honest man set over them, that may
seed as well as shere.


Genesis And who shall have the fleese mean you.


Par. It is reason that the Parson of the parish have the fruits of his
benefice, although he be not always resident, and the minister that does
supply his room, may have some reasonable matter, according as he does
deserve.


Genesis Then he must have all, for I have showed you out of the Scripture, that
the Luke 10.7.
laborer is worthy of his hire, but he that will not labor 1. Tim. 5.18. 2.
The. 3.10.
should not eat.


Par. Although you have scripture, that does make for your purpose, yet there
are very good reasons for the which a minister may very well, and for good
consideration be absent.


Genesis Have you so good reason for it (M. Parson) I know there is no reason
that is contrary to the scripture, for although you dream of reason, and
think to prefer your own devises before the word of God yet what ever you
say touching these matters, although it seem never so reasonable if it agree
not with the word of God, it is altogether without reason: but I prate you
what are your reasons that you think (...) good.


Par. For this cause I think a minister may very well be absent from his
flock as if he be but a young scholar, and is like to profit by being in the
university a while, whereby he may be able (for ever after) the better to
discharge his duty: may he not for so good a consideration (for a while)
be a non resident.


Genesis Did you never hear this proved (master Parson) that (many times) whiles
the grass grows, the horse starueth? so no doubt of it, is it with such a
minister that is yet to learn, and has taken upon him the office of a
teacher: while he is in the vninersitie fraighting of himself with learning to
bring home to his flock, many a silly sheep does in the mean time perish
for lack of knowledge, and this did saint Paul very well know, and therefore
he would have a minister not to be 1. Time. 3.6.
a young scholar: but such a one as is ver. 10.
already able to take care of his charge, and 2. Time. 2.24.
apt to teach, before he take so weighty a matter in hand.


Par. Then if it be so that he must first be a good scholar, and able to
teach before he take on him the ministry, there is good reason that he
should use the means that he may continue his knowledge, and therefore he
may lawfully be allowed, two or three benefices, that he may furnish him self
like a scholar, and provide him books, without the which he cannot study.


Genesis Why are they now so dear that they must sell souls, to buy books? you
do not see how you ouershoote your self in your talk (master Parson) for
you think it no matter, though many souls go to the devil so that one man's
study may be well furnished.


Par. I know there be some that could answer you for these matters if they
were here, and prove that they may lawfully have more benefices then you are
willing that they should, for there are some that are very good scholars, and
know what they do, and yet they are not amongst their parishioners skarse
once in half a year: therefore I am fully persiwaded that even the very name of
a preacher, if it be nothing else, although be never (almost) come amongst his
flock, will do some good, do you not think so?


Genesis I think the name of a Preacher only, will do the people so much good,
as the smell of a mess of pottage to a hungry body, or an empty pot to a
thirsty soul: which is no good at all, but does cause him to languish in
vain, with an earnest desire to have that which he can not obtain: If this
be all that you can say, master Parson, I perceive you want skill to defend so
bad a cause, yea and so do they that think them selves best able to say
most in the matter: and under that pretense of a love to the people (for
lucres sake) they seek the destruction of them selves, and such as are their
charge: they feed only themselves and are such as the prophet Ezechiel cried
woe unto, Ezech. 34.3.
they eat up the fat (says he) and cloth them with the wool, the best fed
do they slay, but the sheep they do not feed, the weak they have not
strengthened, the sick they have not healed, the broken they have not bound
together, the driven away they have not brought again, the lost they have not
sought, but with force and cruelty they rule them.


Par. Me thinks there should not be all these faults in them that you speak
of, for there are some of them that are very, good fellows, and keep good
houses, which does deserve great commendations.


Genesis In deed there are some of them that love to fare well, and can make
their guests good cheer, but this is not it, (M. Parson) that they ought
only to be careful for, nor it is not such sacrifice that pleases God: for
do you think that the Lord will be bold with your own inventions, which the
vanity of your own brains has brought forth: with the keeping of a great
house for great men, and feeding only the bodies of the people, when as the
Lord does chiefly require that the soul, (which is the principallest part)
should be best fed? or will you give the fruits of your benefices for the
sin of your soul? or do you think that the Lord has as great pleasure
in burnt offernings, as when his voiyce is obeyed? No (M. Parson) know it, and
know it so well that you never forget it, that to 1. Sam. 15.22.
obey is better then sacrifice, and to harken is better then the fat of Rams:
for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbernesse is as the
wickedness of idolatry, whose reward is an everlasting life full of
continual misery.


Par. I marnaile that other men as wise as you, can not see these faults as
well as you, (if these be faults) I would feign know the cause thereof.


Genesis Truly I can show yon no other cause, nor know not to what and they
give themselves to the love of so many livings, but only for the desire of
filthy lucre, which does spring of a conetous mind, which is the root of all
evil: and now may we take up again the complaint of the Prophet, Iere, 24.2.
like priest, like people, that Iere. 6.13.
from the lest unto the most, they hang all upon covetousness, and from the
Prophet unto the priest they go about falsehood and lies, the priests Miche.
3.11.
preach for lucre, and the Prophets prophecy for gain, but Iud. 11.
woe be unto them for they have gone the way of Caine, and are utterly given
over to the error of Balaam for Iucres sake: and without amendment shall
perish in the gainesaying of Cora, they are such as Paul speaks of, that
can Romans 2.22.
teach others and not them selves, they preach that a man should not steal,
yet they steal: they abhor Idols, and yet commit sacrilege: they make their
boast of the law, and yet through breaking of the law they dishonor God, and
cause his name to be evil spoken of.


Par. What think you of these doctors which are men of great learning, and of
the number of those whom we speak of, how is it possible they should so be
deceived:


Genesis I pray you (M. Parson) can you tell me what was the cause that all the
words which Pharaoh heard from ye Lord, and all the miracles that were wroughte
before him, could not make him to obey God, but still to constinue in his
wickedness before he was ouergotten in his sin?


Par. I have heard that it was because his heart was hardened.


Genesis You say very true, for that Exodus 14.17.
was the only cause thereof, and the same disease of hardness of heart has
taken such hold in the stomachs of these whom we speak of, that it has made
them so sick, that (I fear me) it has brought many of them to their graves.


Par. If it be true that they are deceined, I marvel why they seek to bear the
names of doctors, and to covet such promotion as many of them are in.


Genesis I know not (for my part) what to think them, nor what they mean by
these glorious titles and great livings, but that they are such as Christ
spoke of, that Mat. 23.6.
love the uppermost seats at feasts, and to sit in the chief places of the
Sinagogues, and love greetings in the Market places, and to be called of men
Rabbi, Rabbi


Par. What, can you see nothing else in them but that? then I perceive I can
see more then you, for such as they are, that hear the names of doctors, and
are in some credit and estimation amongst the people, shall the sooner be
believed in that they say, and the word that they preach will be the better
embraced.


Genesis Oh (M. Parson) you are deceived in your sight, I think you lack your
spectacles that you can see no better: if ye word of God should work more in
ye people, being delivered of great men, and such as are in authority, I
marvel that Christ had not foreseen it, which was equal with his father in
glory, and yet made himself of no reputation during the time of his being
upon the earth, when he had always a care to go about his fathers business,
which was to preach the gospel, that as many as were ordained unto
eternallife, might have redemption through him in his hloude, and why had he
not chosen the great and mighty men of the world, and made them his Disciples?
but chose rather poor Fishers and men of no estimation in the world, to be
ministers of his word, and distributers of his mysteries: but you are deceived
(M. Parson) and that is true which Saint Paul says, that 1. Cor. 1.27.
God has chosen the foolish things of this world, to consound the wise, and
the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, and things of no
reputation and despised, to bring to naught those things that are highly
essteemed, that no flesh should rejoice in his sight.


Par. For all this, I cannot yet be persuaded, but that it is lawful for a
preacher to have as many benefices as he can get: and he that cannot preach,
may have three or four, and be very well dispensed withal: for you see that it
is so, and if it ought not to be so, men are worse then mad to do that which
is not lawful.


Genesis In deed it is too true, that it is so with the most part (although not
with all) and therein they show their madness, for amongst a great many of
them, only a few ercepted, which the Lord does reserve to himself, and
has given better hearts unto, if he be once a minister, he thinks by and
by that he is made only to get him many liuinges: and if he be a Preacher
and have a wife and children, he has a conscience large enough, to wish for as
many benefices as he can get: but if his greedy desire can not so be
satisfied: yet if it be possible, he will have three at the least, one for
himself, another for his wife, and a third for his children, and that they
may have these liuinges to maintain themselves so, that they may go amongst
the Gallants of the world, that their diet may be of the best, their tables
traught with all kind of dainties, and that they may not be behind hand, but
in their apparel as brave as the proudest, themselves in their silks, their
wives in their trench hoodes, and their children parinted like puppets, and
that they may a while enjoy this gear, and live at ease in this world, they
care neither what shall become of themselves, their wives and their children in
the world to come: but are contented flock and al shall go to the Devil, for any
farther care they take for them. Is this to John. 21.15.
feed, feed, feed, as Christ said unto Peter: Nay this is rater to kill,
kill, kill, as the Sheep that are led to the slaughter, I think if the Prophet
Jeremy were now living, and did see the lamentable estate of our time, be
would say for us, as he did for the people in his time, that he could find in
his heart to Iere. 9.1.
weep day and night, for the slaughter of the people. Oh that their hearts
were circumcised, and the vilens of their eyes taken from them, that they might
once see and understand, ye to have so great a charge, that some must needs
perish for want of looking unto, and to shere the sheep, and not to feed
the flock, is to John. 10.10.
spoil, murder, and destroy: therefore what ever he be, or by what title so
ever he be called, whether he be a doctor by name, a Parson of many
benefices, or Sir John Lacklatin, that can say nothing: if he have no more
regard, but to satisfy his own greedy desire, and is careless for the
safety of such as do pay him for a better work, let him think of himself
as well as he list, yet these are the titiles that he does best deserve, doctor
Spoils, Parson Thief and Sir John Murderer, for in taking away of the
goods from their Parishioners (without doing of their duty) is before the
majesty of God no better then theft: and to let their souls perish for want
of food, is to be a murderer and spoiler of the souls of them which Christ
did sh^d his blood for.


Par. But me thinks you might use milder speeches, for there are many of
these I tell you, that are of good wisdom, and bear some countenance, and
therefore will take it, as an offense, to have these names at your hands.


Genesis Are they ashamed to bear ye names, and do they take no shame to deserve
the names? do they set more by the countenance of the world, then by the
favor of God? have they a more desire to please men then they have to serve
Christ? can they with brazen brows, commit such faults in open places, and are
they not ashamed so to offend before the Lord and his Angels? do they rather
choose to live at ease a while in this transitory world, then to line for ever
in ye world that never should have end^or will they persecute Christ in his
members, and yet say still, they are good Christians. If it be true, they show
their vnsdome that it is nothing but folly, and if they (...) to be offended
with him that gives them these names, let them look in the tenth of Ihon and
there they shall find, that he that regards not his flock, is John. 10.
a thief, and comes for nothing but to spoil, kill, and destroy: and he
that spoke the words, is Christ himself, and if because they cannot touch him,
they will be offended with me, that have said it after him, they shall be sure to
make a wrong match: for in so good cause I know Christ will take my part, and
having him on my side. I care not though all the world were set against me: for
if the Lord himslef take the matter in hand, mark how his enemies are like to
speed, he can fight with them, form heaven Joshua. 10.11.
with hailstones, as he did for his servant Joshua. He can send them as much
Genesis 19.24.
fire and Brimston, that shall consume them al, as he did the Sodomites. He can
cause the earth to open and Number. 16.32.
swallowe them up quick, as he did Corah, Dathan and Abiram, with their
wicked companions, if they think themselves so strong and so many in ^nmber,
that their adversaries are not able to withstand them: God is able in steed of
other help, to cause one of the^ to kill Iud. 7.22.
another, as it fell out amongst the Madianites, and if there be any that do
escape the sword, and fly unto houses for succoure: God is able to throw
down the 3. Kin. 20.30
walls upon them, as he did upon the Sirians, which at one time slew seven
and twenty thousand, if such as are left will continue still deriding the
servant of God, he is able to send as maine she 4. Kin. 2.24.
Bears out of the woods as shall devour them al, as he did for such as mocked
his servant Eliseus, and if this be not enough, there is no mischief that
they would wish to fall upon others, but God is able to make it fall on the^
selves, this can the Lord do, and greater things then these, for what is it?
but that is possible with him: but although he does with patience endure the
wickedness of his enemies for a while, yet he can and will at length, plague
them through lie, to their utter destruction: and for his own servants
although their enemies rage, as do the waves of the sea: yet shall they not
go beyond the bounds, that the Lord has set them, if they would cast them
into prisous, thinking by that means to use the^ at their pleasure, God is able
to send his Act. 5.16.
Angel to open the doors unto them, as he did for his Apostles, and by ye
means set them at liberty If they would thrust the^ into the fiery oven,
thinking that way to consume them, God is able enough to keep them from Dan.
3.25.
burning, as he did Sidrach, Misach, and Abednega, If they would cast them
amongst the Lions, thinking that way to destroy them: God is able to stop Dan.
6.22.
their mouths: ye they shall not hurt them, as he did for Daniel, If they
would keepo them from meat, that they might kill them with hunger, God is able
to cause the 3. Kin. 17.9.
Kauens to feed them, as he did for Elias, If they would make a Gallows to
dispatche others, God can cause them to be hanged thereon themselves: as it
fell out between wicked Ester. 7.9.
Haman, and good Mardocheus, all this can the Lord do for such as serve him
faithfully: but although he suffer them to be persecuted for a while, yet he
can and will at length, deliver them out of their enemies hands: though they
were as many in number as all the people in the world, and as terrible to look
on as all the Diuelles in Hell, yet shall they once have the victory: and al
their foes shall be made their footestoole, and shall be feign to confess,
though sore against their wills, that such honor shall all the Saints of God
be sure to have, therefore (M. Parson) if these men whom you speak of, be so
whse as you make them, they will beware how they plai the fools, and take heed
that they hurt not Christ's anointed, and do his Prophets no harm.


Par. They shall answer for themselves for me, you are so full of the
scripture, that I know not what to make of you: I marvel ye your father had not
made you a minister, since you are given to be so holy, When I was made
minister, I had no scripture at all, and yet my father did persuade me that I
was fit enough for that function.


Genesis What did he so? the more fool your father, and the greater was his
sin: did he mean to make you a teacher before you were a good scholar? or
had he so little regard of his child, that he could find in his heart to set
you in such a place, that you must needs run to the Devil headlong: a great
token of an unnatural Father. But although your Father were careless in these
matters, and had no regard to that which was chiefest to be sought for: yet I
marvel, how the vishop did let you escape, finding you so unmeet for that
office, for it is his duty to examine you, and (as Saint Paul says) 1. Tim.
3.10.
a minister must first be proved before he be allowed to minister: and were not
you so examined and proved (M. Parson?)


Par. Yes that I was, and that thoroughly.


Genesis What were you so? I pray you (if you remember them) what were the
questions that the bishop did propose you? and after what manner did he examine
you?


Par. I will tell you what they were, for I do very well remember them, and
shall never forget them, as long as I live, this was the manner of mine
examination: when I came to the Bishop, and be under, stood that my coming
was to be made minister, he would not admit me, nor grant me my letters of
orders, before he had examined me whether I were able to pay for them or no,
and when I had answered him yea, yet he would not so be satisfied, but because
I was a young man, and not worthy to be believed at the first, he would needs
examine me farther, where I had ye money about me or no, and when I had told him
yea, yet he would not so be contented, but he must have it out of hand, that he
might examine my money, whether it were as much as he would have or no: and my
Lord finding it to his mind, and that I had answered him very Clarklike to
every question, he was very well satisfied, and to be made minister I was
granted: and then to his officer for my letters of orders I must go, and
there I must be proved, and when I came to him, he seeing that I was a young
man, and but a reasonable Clarke, and did consider with him self that I might
commit many faults before I came to old age, he would needs prove me
whether I would bestow a bribe on him or no, to speak a good word for me unto
my Lord if need did so require, and I having granted him is request: such of
the bishops men, as did know what I was and understood of my liberallitie, they
would needs prove also, whether I would do as much for them, and they would
dor any thing they could for me: and thus I was proved of ye most part of my
Lords men, and they had proved me so long, ye at last I was able to prove
that they had not left me a penie in my purse, now judge you whether I were
examined and proved or no?


Genesis Yes, I must needs say that you were both examined and proved, for they
had proved you so long til they had proved you a very fool, in bestowing
your money upon such lewd fellows as did love to live by bribes: belike my
lord (their master) never taught his servants the story of Gehezi (the servant
of Elizeus) and how he sped for his labor, which for his bribing became ^. Kin.
5.27.
a Leper as white as snow: is this the proof that they use to make of
ministers?


Par. What it is now I know not, for this that I tell you of was done for long
ago: but I think it be otherwise now.


Genesis So it had need, or else it is stark naught: for they ought to have
proved and examined, whether that had been in you which is required of a
minister, as to be 1. Tim. 3.2.
blameless, sober, waiting, apt to teach, not greedy of filthy lucre, and
such like: but by your own saying there was not a word of that matter.


Par. Truly no otherwise then I told you.


Genesis I pray you what good counsel did your father give you, when he (meant to
make you a minister) seeing you were so unable to do any thing of your self,
did he promise that if you did not discharge your duty, he would go to the
devil for you?


Par. No, he meant nothing less: but this counsel he gave me, that I should
seek to please all men as near as I might, and that I should take heed of my
self: for being once a minister, every man would be on my jack, and it would
be, who that might have a fling at me, and these words have I found true, and
my fathers counsel have I always followed, and I do what I may to get the
good will of all men, I am free hearted, and spare not to spend even all that I
have, for of three hundred marks, which I receive by the year: I can not fetch
three hundredth pence at the years end: I am a good fellow, and as I receive
it of my parishioners so I spend it amongst them again, neither am I high
minded, as many of you gentlemen are, whom a man may not speak withal under
a couple of Capons: I can drink a Pot of Ale with a good fellow at any time,
and can sit at Cards or Tables a whole day together, and am contented to be a
companion (in these matters) for the meanest in my parish: and thus do I
bestow my time, and spend my money in goodfellowship, for I have no man to
care for but my self, and therefore I know not for whom I should keep it.


Genesis Are you so good a fellow (Master Parson) as you speak of? Beware that it
be not such fellowship as the Apostle spoke of, when he said that the ^am. 4.4.
fellowship of this world is enemitie with God: and in that you say you have
no man to care for, appears the little care you have of those for wh^ you
shall answer for: have you taken upon you to be a Shepherd, and can you be
contented to be fed of your sheep? will you there their f^ises and sell their
skins? will you for this promise to bring them to good pasure that they may be
fed unto eternal life, and yet say still you have no man to care for? Well, well
(M. Parson) this gear must be looked unto in time, or else for your
carelessness you shall be sure to answer.


Par. You mistake me Sir, I mean not my Parishioners, which I know are my
tharge, but my meaning is, I have no wife nor any child for whom I need to
care for.


Genesis Then I perceive you are not married.


Par. No in deed I am not, neither do I mean to marry.


Genesis Why? do you not think it lawful for one of your calling to marry, or
have you that gift of chastity, that you need no such help?


Par. As touching chastity, I am a man as another man is, but how lawful it
is for a priest to marry, I could never as yet attain to the knowledge.


Genesis What are you a teacher, and have not yet learned so much? truly by mine
advise, before you had been allowed a Master, you should first have proved
your self a better scholar. What can you say for the defense of so wicked an
opinion, is not the word of God a Lantern to your steps, and a guide unto your
paths? If not, no marvel though you be out of the way: does not S. Paul
say? that to 1. Cor. 7.2.
avoid fornication let ^uery man have his wi^e? how dare you then say that
Ministers may not marry? If you can prove them to be no men, I will agree
with you, if not, I pray you answer me.


Par. What Saint Paul says, I can not tell, but I can show you good reason
why a minister should not marry.


Genesis Have you so good reasons for it (M. Parson) I pray you let me hear some
of them, that I may be acquainted with them, and I will promise you, if you
can show me better reasons, ye ministers ought not to marry, then I can show
you to the contrary, I will bind my self to be conformable unto you.


Par. You know that ministers can not assure their wife nor children of any
living: and is it not better (think you) that they remain unmarried, then to
fill the world full of beggars.


Genesis But you know that all have not the gift of chastity, and is it not
^etter (think you) that they marry, then to fill the world full of bastards?


Par. As for that matter, there are many shifts, so that although a minister
be not married, he need not to be troubled with many bastards.


Genesis What your shifts are (M. Parson) that you use I know not, but this I am
sure of, that if you have not the gift of chastity, you were better 1. Cor.
7.9.
to marry then to burn: therefore, M. Parson, if you find not that gift in
you, I would wish you to take a wife of your own in the fear of God.


Par. What, would you have me to have a wife of mine own? fie upon her, naie,
yet I had rather to take a snatch sometimes amongst my neighbors, the^ to have
a wife of mine own, what if there should come an alteration, and the laws
should change, I pray you in what case should married ministers be then?


Genesis But what if you should find an alteration before that time, and from a
proud prelate become a firebrand in hell, in what case I ^ay you should you be
in then? for I can tell you, that Heb. 13.4.
whoremongers, and and adulterers, God will judge.


Par. As for that take you no care, for you (...) be no judge of the matter,
neither for all your thretninges can I be persuaded that it is lawful for
ministers to marry, but if they would needs marry, they must be married to
their books.


Genesis What would you have a man married to a book? I perceive you know not
wherefore matrimony was ordained.


Par. Yes, so simple a scholar as you make me, I know so much.


Genesis Then I trust you remember, that God said unto man and woman Genesis 1.20.
increase and multiply, and if you will have a popish priest married to a Mass
book, the Devil may be a gossip to the child that they beget, and Saint
Paul says that it is the Tim. 4.1.
doctrine of devils to forbid marriage, and that in ye latter days there
should be some of that wicked opinion, of the which number (I fear me) you are
one.


Par. You are al in S. Paul, and nothing but scripture, I would fain have you
show me some doctor that might make for your warrant, amongst al our talk
you have not recited one.


Genesis No: I marvel that you are so forgetful, have I not laid before you many
doctors?


Par. None, to my remembrance.


Genesis No, did I not recite you, Doctor Esaias, Doctor Jeremy, Doctor Peter, and
Doctor Paul?


Par. What, do you account them doctors? they be but Prophets and Apostles.


Genesis What (M. Parson) do you make a but of them? I pray you who are they
that you account doctors?


Par. I mean Augustine, Cyprian, Jerome, and their fellows.


Genesis Are there none Doctors but these think you? I pray you how will you know
a Doctor?


Par. I will know a Doctor by his learning.


Genesis That is very well said, and do you think these men whom you speak of,
better learned, then Prophets and Apostles, which were taught of God himself?


Par. No, I do not think so: but yet these are they that our frefathers have
taken hold on, to defend their opinions.


Genesis What our fathers have done, to us it shall not skill, or what opinions
they held we need not care for, but if your doctors agree with our Doctors,
we agree with them, if not, we will leave Augustine, Jerome, and their
fellows, and learn of the Prophets and Apostles, which are their masters.


Par. I perceive (Gentleman) it is a great matter whereof you can say nothing,
and for your kowledge I must needs commend you, but because your eye sight
is good, that you can find so many faults in other men, me thinks your own
life should be such as does answer your profession, therefore if I might be
so bold to entreat you, I would crave to know what has bin your bringing up,
and how in these dangerous days you shape to live.


Genesis Your commendations does far exceed my desert, but to fulfill your
desire to know mine estate, I will be as ready to show you, as you are to hear
it, but sorry I am to leave you no better persuaded, then yet I find you: but
in hope that the Lord will work more in you, after you have paused a while, I
will keep promise with you touching my self, and talk more of your own
estate anon.


Par. But before you go any further (Gentleman) I shall first desire you that
I may be so bold to know your name.


Genesis What, would you so feign know my name (M. Parson) I will not stick with
you in so small a matter, neither is my name such that I should refuse to
show it you.


Par. Then (I pray you sir) what is it?


Genesis My name is Chistopher Conscience.


Par. What are you a Gentleman, and are you called Conscience? me thinks it
is an unfit name for you, as might be devised.


Genesis Why should you think so (M. Parson) is it not as meet for a Gentleman,
as any other man?


Par. No, for I would always have a man called according to the qualities
that are in him.


Genesis And may not conscience be it? a Gentleman think you?


Par. Truly (Gentleman) it is possible enough, but it is so unlikely, that
for mine own part, amongst a great number I could never find many, that had
any conscience in them at all.


Genesis Oh (M. Parson) I think you speak either of malice, or of affection.


Par. Noe I promise you, I speak as I think, and if it be true that you are a
gentleman that does deserve the name of Conscience, I marvel what you do here
in this place.


Genesis Why (M. Parson) where should I be?


Par. Me thinks it is a great maruail that you are not presented to the
Queens Majesty, for the greatest wonder that ever she saw.


Genesis Why is it such a strange sight, to see a Gentleman with a good
conscience?


Par. What it is in the Court I cannot tell, but in the country I am sure it is
so.


Genesis Nay, (M. Parson) you are not so sure of it, as you make your felfe, for
although you have met with some that have used you hardly, yet you may not
think but there are other some, and that a great many, that are honest
Gentlemen, and will choose rather to loose their credit, then crack their
conscience.


Par. I will not deny but that there be a few, but to say there are many of
them in a Country, I will never yield to it, as long as I live.


Genesis You may not Mat. 7.1.
judge any (M. parson) but hope the best of all, and leave such matters unto
the judgment of God, which Apoc. 2.23.
searches the heart, and raines of al men, and knows those that are his.


Par. Well, I am contented to hope well of them, although I have small cause to
say well of any of them: for I have not forgotten, what scraps and paringes they
have fetched out of my benefices, and yet forsooth they would be counted such
as will do no man harm, and persuade themselves, that they are men of very
good consciences: but if this be the fruits of a good conscience I had as
lieue have a badde conscience as a good.


Genesis There is no doubt of it, but that a good conscience will cause a good
life, and a bad consience will always show it self.


Par. That I think (in deed) to he very true: but this grieueth me, that
they will say they have good consciences, when they are stark naught, but
because you are a Gentleman, and think your self to be a man of a good
conscience, I pray you let me here (according to your promise) how: ou do
behave your self, that I may know how to discern a good conscience from a bad
and first let me be so bold to entreat you to show me your ^rudition from your
childehoode unto this time, and what care your Father had of you in your tender
years, to see you so well brought up until man's estate.


Genesis First you must observe, that my father was a man ordained to bear the
office of a justice in the common wealth: and amongst many children, I was his
eldeste son; and my father being one that feared God, had no desire so
great, as to bring up his children in the same fear, and because of them al,
I was (by nature) most able to bear the greatest charge, his cheifest care was
to see me well brought up, ye I might thereby learn to discharge my duty, and
the better to bring this to pass, I was from my infancy trained up in
learning, and when I came to be of discretion, I was sent to the University,
that I might the sooner attain to that which was his desire, and I being but
young of years, and wanton by nature, my father for so long time would not
suffer me to have the bridle, but spared no charge to keep me under Masters
and tutors, that might enforce me to that, which of my self I was unwilling:
and of al times, I thought those days most grievous wherein they wrought
best for me, and did like of no company so well as of theirs which did most
hurt me: and in this case I continued the space of my childish years: but when
I was able to discern good from evil, and my dearest friends, from my
greatest enemies, and thought those that feared God could give me best counsel:
I was never before so unwilling to take their instruction, as I was desirous at
last to follow their admonition, and could like of no company so well, as
theirs that were conversant with such as were faithful: so that at length,
through the providence of God, their good instructions, and gentle persuasions,
I was gotten so far in love with the law of the Lord, that I could say with
the Prophet David, that his word was Psalm. 119.
sweeter unto my soul, then honey unto my throat and I found such pleasure in
the reading thereof, that all the day long my study was in it, and the more I
read, the better I learned, and the deeper I tasted, the sweeter I felt it, so
that from that time to this, I have always loved the law of the Lord above
gold or precious stone, and am as glad when I see it, as those that have
found great spoils? and when it pleases God, to take away my father, and
place me in his room to bear the like office that he did, I kn^we there was
Wis. 6.4. Romans 13.1.
no power but was ordained of God, and that it was my duty (above all
things) to seek his glory, and I was taught by the example of Joshua, that
Ios. 1.8.
the law of the Lord ought not to depart out of my mouth: but that I
should study in it day and night, that I might do al things that were
written therein. Thus did I begin, and so do I continue, and no longer do I
desire to live, then this may be found in me, for I know that right Psalm.
116.13.
dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his saints: and that the
Wis. 3.11.
hope of the ungodly is vain, their labors unfruitful, and their works
unprofitable, and though they Wis. 3.17.
live long, yet their end shall be without honor.


Par. If all this be true that you have said, you have told me of a strange
matter: for it is as hard a thing to find this which you have spoken of in a
man of your calling, as it is to obtain that which is past hope of finding:
for you being a magistrate and placed in so high a room, are set in a
p^rrilous place, and in great danger of falling: I know many of your fellows,
that can say well, and make almost as faier a show as this, but when they
come to searching, and their secrets are well known, between their words and
their deeds, there is found great difference: they can all say they are set
to execute justice, but when it should be put in practice, they strain
courtesy who shall begin: and few love so well to execute justice, as they do
to neglect it thoroughe corruption of bribes, for justice will be sold for
many, and the devil may have your souls for gain, and as for your religion,
it is al in your lips, and it is to be found no where else, it will be
boughte for goodfellowship, and you can frame your selves to every company,
amongst the holy you can counterfaite gravity, and say as they do, but when
you come in company, where they keep other rule, you can be as bad as the
worste. I can speak by experience, of more then a good many of you, that it
is but dissimulation, all that ever you do, you can prate and talk, and make
so fair a show in words, as though they were so holy, that the best reports
were to bad for you: but he that might open your budgets, and look in your
boxes, and take a view of your lives, and your livings, which you have
purchased, ye houses that you have builte, the goods that you possess, and the
money that has bought you all this, which you have gotten by pilling, polling,
bribing, usury, and such like, should find that if you had your deserving,
hanging were to good for you.


Genesis You are very plain (M. par) I fear me you begin to wax angry: in any
wise be ware of that for the Iam. 1.20.
wrath of man does not work that which is righteous before God.


Par. No (Gentleman) I am not angry, but I am somewhat plain with you, for you
have been meetlie plain with me, and therefore I am the bolder with you.


Genesis But you must be advised what you say, and impute these faults whereas
you find them.


Par. So do I, for I spoke not to any, but such as have these faults in
them, but this is the troth of it, you gentlemen are so tender that you may
not be touched: you can be contented to talk your pleasure of other men, but
your selves take scorn to be told of your own faults, you can see moates in
othermens eyes, and keep beams in your own, you stimble at strawes, and leap
over blocks, you strain at gnats, and swallow Camels, you lay heuie burdens
upon other men's shoulders, but will not lift at them your selves with one of
your fingers: and yet you gentlemen nevertheless think well of your selves,
and that there is no fault but in us of the ministry: but he that might make
an anatomy of all the parts of you, and search you thoroughly, should find al
these, and a great many more faults then I have spoken of.


Genesis Although you find these faults in some, yet you may not condemn all,
for as there are many such as you speak of, so there are some which deal well
and truly: I mean not to e^cuse any that deserve not commendations, but if
my self were as faulty as those whom you speak of, my conscience would
condemn me, for dealing unjustly: and I confess that it is a hard matter, in
so great an office to deal vprightlie: but seeing we are called of god to
defend his cause, we ought to set to it head and shoulders, that no jot
thereof may fall to the ground: and the harder the matter is to be brought to
pass, the more pain ought we to take about the same, that we may be found
faithful servants, to make a just account of so great a stewardship, and I
know that in a matter of justice we ought neither to Exodus 23.2.
reverence the mighty, nor esteem the person of the poor to perfect justice,
and that Leui. 19.15. Exo. 23.8.
gifts blind the eyes of the wise: and Eccle. 40.12.
bribing is forbidden, and I have not forgotten what the wise man says of
negligent Magistrates, hear Wis. 6.2.
and learn (says he) ye that be judges of the earth, give ear ye that rule
the multitudes, and delight in the number of people: the power is given you of
the Lord, which shall try your works, and search out your imaginations, how
that ye being his officers, have not given true judgment, have not kept the
laws of righteousness, nor walked after the will of God, this do I know to be
true, and at this do I quake and tremble: for even as the Psalm. 123.2.
eyes of servant look unto the hands of their masters, and the eyes of a
maiden unto the hands of her mistress: so ought we to attend upon the Lord
our God: no prince so mighty, no estate so stout, but he must stoup at the
Lords beck, and tremble at his countenance: nor no man that ever was, is, or
shall be, Romans 14.12.
but shall once appear before the maiesticall seat of the mighty Iehoua, to
acknowledge him to be the only Lord above all others, and he that will not
submit himself, as unworthie to be made his footestoole, shall one day find
that the wickedness of so proud a heart, has wrought him his utter
destruction, and that this fault may not be found amongst us, let other men's
harms teach us to beware: proud Dan. 5.20.
Nabuch^d^noser, was (for his pride) changed from a man to a beast, hard
hearted Exodus 14.28.
Pharao was (for his disobedience) drowned in the red sea. 2. Chr. 33.1^
Manasses, for his idolatry was linked with bolts of iron. Saul for his good
intents ill wrought was 1. Sam. 15.28
rent from his kingdom. Herod for his vain glory was eaten up with lice: Act.
12.23, Mar. 27.5.
and Judas for his treachery was given over to desperation, who knows this,
and will not know himself* What vain man will set himself against his God? or
what miserable creature will not submit him self to him that made him? Oh that
they knew that God Iam 4.6. 1. Pet. 5.5. Luke 14.12.
resists the proud, and gives grace unto the lowly: and that such as humble
them selves shall be exalted, and such as exalt them selves shall be brought low,
Then should they be as wise as Solomon: as faithful as Abraham: as patient as
Job: as just as Joshua: and be found with David, even m^n after the lords own
heart: for it is God that will make all his enemies his footestoole, and give
unto wicked Magistrates a hard Wis. 6.6.
judgment. This is our duty, look so it as we will, although we be never so
Psalm. 99.1.
rebellious, yet he is king still


Par. I perceive (gentleman) that you have learned by many examples, what you
ought to do, and if you do as much as you know, you are worthy to be
commended: you have told me of many matters, and showed me many examples,
which you say may teach us wisdom: but me thinks you make more ado then you
need: for I have heard that if a man love God above al, and his neighbor as
himself, he has done as much as the law does require.


Genesis Yea, and that is true: for out of true love which we owe unto God,
springs obedience to his laws, with love toward our neighbor: and without
love our other deeds will nothing profit us (for as Saint Paul says) if we
^. Cor. 13.2.
had all prophecy, and could understand al secrets, and all knowledge: and
if we had as much faith as to remove mountains, and were as liberal as to give
all our goods to the poor, and our bodies to the fire, and being without love
it should profit us nothing.


Par. In deed as you say, and as I think, that love is the cheifest thing ye
we ought to have in keeping: so in my judgment, amongst the most part of you
gentlemen, it is the greatest thing that is wanting: for your love does so
far differ from the love that ought to be amongst men, that it may better be
compared to the love amongst dogs: for the dogs will go together, sleep
together, play together, and lie together, as though there were such friendship
amongst them, that nothing should make them enemies, but in the midst of
their familiarity, if there be but a bare bone thrown amongst them, that
he may have it that can catch it: you shall see them al go together by the
^ares, that amongst many, one may have it: so is it amongst many of you
justices and gentlemen, you will talk, walk, sleep, and lie together, as
though true love were in you, but let there be but a bad bargain, or a poor
man's living that it may be his that can catch it, a man shall find on the
sudden your love to be wanting, and every man will seek to get it.


Genesis This that you speak of in deed is too true and of that number there are
too many: and that this covetous mind does so reign amongst us, does
appear the little knowledge they have in the Law of the Lord, by the which
they so direct all their doings: I would wish them to do as I would my
self, be content with that which their parents left them, and give themselves
wholly, to the executing of Justice, and leave off from purchasing other men's
livings.


Par. And are you so well contented (gentleman) that you like not of purchasing
the liuinges of other men? if it be true, you are such a one as I thought little
to have found you, and although I have spoken against the pilling and polling
of poor men, yet I never meant, but that men may lawfully buie and sell each
others liuinges, for is it not lawful think you to buie a piece of land
sometimes, when a man has his money lying by him? what would you have them to
do with their money, if they should not employ it that way?


Genesis I would have them to do as Luke 19.8.
Zacheus did, give half of their goods to the poor, and if they have done
any man wrong restore him four fould.


Par. Bring you that in their heads, and I will give you my neck, and I think
you teach others that lesson which you will not learn your self: for I pray
you, could you be contented to give a way half of your goods to the poor, and
make a restitution of the wrong gotten goods that you possess.


Genesis If I might have heene so happy, to see Christ in my house, as Luke 19.5.
Eliseus did in his, that I might have given entertainment to so great a
peer, as such a one as is Lord of heaven and earth, I could upon that
condition be contented to give away al my goods, and take a bag and a staff,
and follow him. But because there is no such commandment given us,
therefore we are not bound to it. But to make a restitution of Exo. 22.5.
goods gotten wrongfully, we are straightly commanded.


Par. But what shall such do with their money, that be good honest
gentlemen, and have done no man wrong?


Genesis They should take the counsel, that Tobias gave to his Son: if they
have Tobit. 4.8.
much, they should give liberally, if they have little, yet do their diligence
gladly.


Par. To who^ should they give? there are some ye have no alms deed in the^,
how then shall they be sure to give as they ought?


Genesis S. Paul has set down a rule that we ought to do good Gal. 6.10.
unto al men, but specially unto those ye are of ye household of faith.


Par. What, is there no other order set down in the scripture, but that a man
must give still? a man may give so long, til he give away all that he has, and
so he may beg himself.


Genesis There is no commandment for any man so to do: but you may read in the
Gospel of a poor Mark. 12.42. Luke 21 4.
Widow that did so, and Christ commended her for the same.


Par. Did he so? truly if I might see one that did so, I would count him
very wise, but I had almost forgotten to ask you one question.


Genesis I pray you what is that?


Par. Do you not think that a man may lay his money to usury, and employ it
that way?


Genesis No: I know it is Exodus 22.^4. Leui 25.36. Deuteronomy. 23.9.
forbidden, and therefore it ought not to be used at al.


Par. Yes, I think a little, ten of the hundred, or some reasonable master.


Genesis If it be reasonable it must not be at al, for God has said by the
mouth of his Prophet, that he shall only be accepted with him, that in
lending of his money, Ezech, 18.17 Luke 6.35.
takes no increase.


Par. Truly I tell you there are many wise men, that think they may take
somewhat lawfully and not offend at al.


Genesis Then belike, they think themselves wiser the^ the holy Ghost, and so
they shall be sure one day, to have a fools reward.


Par. But I pray you Sir (because you would wish Gentlemen to give over
purchasing of other men's liuinges) do^ you not think in deed, that they may
lawfully bestow their money that way?


Genesis This much I can tell you, that a man may offend in such dealinges many
ways: and he that does not use it at al, shall be sure not to offend (in the
same) at all, but to say that it is not lawful in any respect, I am not able to
prove it, but I would such as do love it, did know what the Prophet Esaias says
of such matters. Woe (says he) be unto those Esai. 5.8.
that i^ine house to house and land to land, and bring their liuinges so
near together, that the poor can get no ground: do they think to dwell
upon the earth alone? this Woe do I hear always sound in my ears, and it
causes me to stand in awe, fearing least for such an offense it might fall on
my self, and therefore (M. Parson) to tell you my mind plainly, and what I
think of these matters: I do so abhor such covetous men, and such
miserable wringing, as is now a days to much put in practice, that I cannot
like of those that use it.


Par. You must like of them, as the world is now, or else few will like of you.


Genesis How many does dislike with me, for disliking with sin, I make no
reckoning: for I secke not the praise of men, but my whole study is, that I
may know best, which way to set forth the glory of God, and discharge my
duty unto him, of whom I am placed in office, and I am taught not to Exodus
23.2.
follow a multitude, to do evil: and I know the most part go the wrong way:
and I had rather deal justly by my self, then deal wickedly with company:
for he that will commit sin for company, may chance to go the devil for
company. If Noah and his company had been companions with the wicked when the
World was ouerflowed with water for the sins of the people, no doubt of it,
but Noah and his company, had been drowned for company. If Lot and his
household had offended for company, they had (no doubt) been burnt with the
other Sodomites for company, If Caleb and Joshua had murmured (against God)
with ye rest of the people for comapanie, they had surely have been kept out
of the Land of promise with the rest for company, but let this he our
comfort as it was theirs: that if there be but eight persons in a whole
World, but one household in a great city: but two men amongst many
thousand, that fear God, yet when the Lord sends his punishments amongst the
people for their sin, the righteous shall be sure to have no hurt: a Psalm.
91.7.
thousand shall fall on their left hand, and ten thousand on their right: and
yet there shall no harm come nere them. Therefore (M. Parson) for mine own
part, it is so far from me to participate with their offenses, that I abhor
the company of such as live ungodly.


Par. Me thinks you are to presise (being a gentleman) it were enough for me
and my fellows, to lead such a life as you speak of, and yet I would not be
bound to live so singular a life for any thing, a man may be holy and to holy,
if he be, and if we should make choice of no company, but such as are so
holy, we may chance to seek a great while, and yet go alone at the last.


Genesis I for my part had as leave to be without company, as to be in
company of those that live wickedlie, for he that touches pitch Eccle. 13.1.
2. These. 3.14. Ephe. 5.7.
shall be defiled therewith, and such as are conuersaunt with the ungodly, may
chance to be infected, with their dangerous diseases, and S. Paul wills such
as fear God, not to be companions of the wicked, nor to have any fellowshippe
with the works of darkness.


Par. If the case do stand with you, that you will choose rather to be alone,
then in such company as does not like you, and you will like of none, but
those that live virtuously I think it stood you upon to take great
deliberation, in making choice of a good wife, since the company of the wicked
do so ill like of you.


Genesis You may well suppose that to be true, for so was I sure to find it, and
because that amongst so many women there are few good, and as Solomon said,
that amongst Eccle. 7.30.
a thousand he had not found one, you may well think a good wife hard to be
gotten.


Par. What are they so scarce as you make them?


Genesis I have told you what Solomon said, and he was a man of great wisdom.


Par. Although good women were not plenty in his time, yet there is good
reason why there should be more living in these days then ever there were:
for there dyed not a good woman a great while.


Genesis Oh (M. Parson) you speak more then you can prove: for death does take
the good, as well as the bad, and it was prepared for the one as well as for
the other: but belike you do not know a good woman that you are of that mind.


Par. I pray you Sir, by what tokens shall I know a good woman?


Genesis If she be one that fears God, if she be holy as was Hester, if she
be constant as was Iudeth, if she be virtuous, as was Rebecca: if she be
chaste as was Susanna: if she be obedient as was Sara: if she love Christ and
his word more then all the vanities of the world as did Mary: if you find this
in a Woman, deubt not of her goodness, but praise God for her, and wish her
many fellows.


Par. What must she have all this in her before she be good? What if she
have but two or three of these virtues, is not that enough? if she be holy and
obedient sometimes, may she not be a little cursed, a little covetous, and may
not she play the good fellow a little sometimes, when her husband is out of
the way?


Genesis No: she must be altogether virtuous or else it were as good she were
altogether wicked: for if she will serve God, she must serve him alone: for he
is a ielous God, and will not part stakes with any: he will have al or none,
and if there be but one sin found in a woman, whereby she does dishonor god,
it is enough to condemn her, although she think her self fraught with many
virtues.


Par. What do you think so? I would feign know how you can prove that?


Genesis I will prove it by this place of Scripture, which says, they Math.
5.19. Iam. 2.10.
that offend in one point, are guilty of the whole law.


Par. In deed you say true, such a place there is: but yet me thinks it is
hard dealing, that when a man or woman has kept a great many of the
commandments a great while, and shall go to the devil at last for the breach
of one of them: believe me if you will, if it be true, I think there is not a
woman in this country, that shall be saved: for I never hard of the woman nor
yet man, that has kept the law so preciselie, but that they have offended
one way or other: and what shall they then do, if the case do so stand?


Genesis This may be our comfort: that that which of our selves we can not do,
and that part of the law which we do not fulfill, Christ 1. Ioh 2.2.
has done it for us, if we take hold on him by faith, and trust in him as our
only Mediator and Redeemer.


Par. This is well said, now I like you well, for of that mind have I always
been, that it is no matter what we do our selves, nor how we live, for Christ
by his death has purchased pardon for all.


Genesis Oh now I perceive you are far deceived, to think you may live at your
pleasure, and that Christ will be a baude to your sin: for Christ died not
for us to the intent that we should continue in sin, but that we Romans 6.4.
should die unto sin, and live unto righteousnesse^ and let no man take such
liberty by the death of Christ, that he may live as he list, and yet go for a
good Christian: for S. Paul says Gal 5.24.
they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts thereof: and again, ^. Tim. 2* 9.
all that will call on the name of Christ mast depart from iniquity.


Par. What are you there now? I pray you let us talk no more of that matter:
but let us return to our women again which we had in talk but now: me
thought that communication did like me well, I pray you by what tokens shall a
man know a bad woman?


Genesis If she serve not the true God, but false Gods of her own invention, as
did 2. Chr. 5.16.
Maacha, whom her own son Asa, put from her authority, and burnt the idol
that she had made. If she be as very a harlot as Genesis 39.12.
Putyphars wife, which whould have committed Whoredom, with her servant
Joseph, if he had not been the honester man. Af she be as covetous as Genesis
3.15.
Rachell, that was contented to give another woman leave to lie by her husband
Jacob, for a little Mandrago^as. If she be such a one as Paul speaks of, that
do wa^der from 1. Tim. 5.13
house to house idle, and not idle only? but as a tatler and busibodie,
speaking things that are not comely. If she be worldly minded, wretchedlie
given, and so drunken with the same, that she set more by the carefulnes of the
world then by Christ and his Gospel: as did Luke 10.4.
Martha, if she be as Popeholy, as the peeuishe woman in the Popish time, that
could not say their Paternoster without a pair of beads. If you find any of
these in a Woman, pray for her, that she may amend her manners, and have grace
to come out of the snare of the devil, of whom she is holden captive at his
pleasure.


Par. I pray God amend them all, and now you have showed me how I shall know
the difference between a good woman and a bad: I pray you let me hear what
good council you would give unto your women and maidens, that might be a stay
for them in their tender years.


Genesis I would wish them above al things, first to seek to serve God, and lead
their lives in his fear* and by the example of Sara: (R^^uels daughter) to
fli^^ unto the Lord in all their dis^^esses: and to say with her out of the
(...) of a good conscience: Tob. 3.16.
thou know Lord that I had never desire unto man, but have kept my soul
clean and from ^^^^^nely l^st, I have not kept company with such as pass
their time in sport, neither have ^^^iade my self partaker with their (...)
walk in light behauiou^^^ husband have I consented to take, not for my
pleasure, but in thy fear, and in any wise I would with them to beware of
gadding, by the example of Genesis 34.1.
Dina, ye daughter of Lea, which on a time would needs go abroad, to see and
to be seen, and lost her virginity before she came home, let them beware of
proud hear^^ and wanton looks, by the daughters of Sion, Esai. 3.16.
which did walk with stretched out necks and coy looks, going and tripping
nicely and tinkling with their feet that these plagues fall not on them, which
the Lord promised the daughters of Sion: that he would shave their heads, and
discover their filthiness, and take away the gorgeousness of their attire,
their Caules, and the round tyres, after the fashion of the Moon, the sweet
perfumes, the bra^lets and the Wimples, the bonnets and the slops, the
headbandes and the Tablets, the ear ringes and no^eiewels, the costly apparel,
the vailes, the crisping pinnes, the glasses and the fine linen, the hoods,
and the launs and in steed of good smell give them stinch, and for their girdle
a rent, and for well set hatre, baldness, and in steed of a stomacher a
sackcloth, and for their beauty, sunburning.


Par. But what shall they have for their Dublets? do you find that mentioned
in the Scriptures?


Genesis No, I never did read of it, and therefore I think there was no
abomination so great before.


Par. Why, is it an abomination for a Woman to wear a dublet think you?


Genesis The holy Ghost thought so, when he gave a commandment, to the
contrary.


Par. I pray you what commandment is there for it?


Genesis This we may find writtten in Deutronomium, that Deuteronomy. 22.5.
a Woman ought not to wear that which pertains to a man, nor a man that
which pertains to a woman, for all that do so are abomination unto the
Lord.


Par. Then by this saying, it is no more lawful for a woman to were a dublet,
then it is for a man to wear a Peticoate.


Genesis In deed as you say, they be both alike, and both abominable in the
sight of God.


Par. I think our gentlewomen do not know this, that they do (now a days)
so much use it.


Genesis Whether they do or no, I know not, but if they do not, it is through
want of knowledge in the word of God, which is the cause of this, and a great
many such faults, but if there be any that do know it, and use it, I would
wish them to leave it, if they set more by the favor of God, then they do by
the pride of a dublet.


Par. Some there may be that will reform themselves, if they have committed
this fault through ignorance, but many of them I think, will still continue,
as fine as a dog in a dublet.


Genesis Well, let them look to this, and all other such faults, as they will
answer for it, and because ignorance is the cause of many of these faults,
and some there be that would frame themselves to better manners, if they knew
which way: I would wish the^ every morning before they attire them selves, to
set the bible before them as a glass that they may be sure to put on such
cloths as they may seem comely in the sight of God: and there they shall see,
1. Pet. 3.3.
the Apostle will tell them, that they must beware of embroidered hair, or
hanging on of Gold, either putting on of gorgeous apparel: and the hid man
which is in the heart must be without corruption, of a meek and quiet
spirit, which is before God, a thing much set by: and after this manner, in
the old time did the holy women, which trusted in God, attire themselves, let
them take heed in any wise ye they put not on pride with their apparel, for
Iam. 4.6.
God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the lowly. This is the
counsel that I would wish them to take, which is not mine own advise, but the
counsel of the holy ghost, which did know what was best meet for them: and
therefore I would wish al such as fear God, gladly to accept it.


Par. In deed I think the counsel be good: and how it will be accepted
hereafter I cannot tell: but I am sure that it is now, little or nothing
regarded: neither do I think that amongst the most part, it will be any thing
followed: for women will be fine and handsome I tell you: say you what you will.


Genesis If they set more by the favor of God, then they do by the praise of
man, let them frame themselves to that order which God himself by the mouth of
his servants has set down, and he will bless them, and make them joyful
mothers of virtuous children, and shall spend their days in happiness, and end
their lives in peace: if not, they shall one day find, that their glory will
be their shame, such pride is their utter destruction, and the breach of Gods
laws, their everlasting confusion.


Par. They are bound to thank you for your good will, but I fear me a great
many of them would like you better if you had held your peace.


Genesis I know not, nor I care not what thanks I have for the same, but that
which I have said: is for good will yt I bear unto them, and to discharge my
duty which I owe unto God.


Par. I pra^e you sir, if a man would choose a good wife, amongst the like of
all these women whom you have spoken of: by what tokens shall she be known?


Genesis Saloman does teach us, that favor Pro. 31.3.
is deceitful, and beauty is a vain thing, and a woman that fears the
Lord is only to be praised. Therefore to choose a good Wife by Salomans advise,
is (in a Woman) to respect the fear of God, as the cheifest thing that is to
be sought for.


Par. And I pray you Sir, have your self met with so good a one as you speak
of?


Genesis Truly it is not for me to answer to that question: but such as she is,
I praise God for her, and this she could say in making ^hoise of a husband,
that she would non but him that would choose a wife for virtue: for he that
marries his Wife for riches, promotion, beauty or such like, which are the
delights of a corruptible eye, and may soon vanish and vade away: when the
woman shall want these things, the good man will lack his wife, and for her
self, if she might have all the world in iointer, and a husband that could
bring her al world lie delights, and yet without virtue, is like a painted
sepulcher that is fair without, and within full of dead men's bones. But where
the marriage is made for virtue, which does continue for ever, they shall be
sure always to love, and live well together.


Par. If you have found so good a Wife, you may think your self happy.


Genesis I do confess it, and know it to be the greatest blessing that in this
world man may possess. For examples to teach us what inconveniences wicked
women unto their husbands have wrought. 3. Kin. 11.4. 3. Kin. 21.9.
Salomons wives did turn his heart, and caused him to commit idolatry: wicked
Iezabel wrought the destruction of her husband as well as herself. Job his Job.
2.9.
wife bid him curse God and die, and the wise man says, that it is better to
dwell with a Eccle. 25.8.
Lion and a Dragon, then with a wicked and a brauling woman.


Par. You are very full of your Scripture, I marvel how a man of your calling
could atteine to this knowledge: for you have many lets, and a great charge
to look unto, which (in my judgment) would occupy so much of your time,
that you might not have leisure to study for this learning.


Genesis It was my first study, before I had so great a charge: to know how I
might answer it, before I took it in hand: for in all my affairs I ought to
make the Psalm. 119.
statutes of the Lord my counselors, that I may be sure always to be well
advised of that which I take in hand.


Par. What, you are a Gentleman, and me thinks this grauetie does not become
you: for you must be lusty as the world goes now a days, or else you will be
little or nothing set by.


Genesis How I am accounted of in the world, I set no store: for I hunt not
after the praise of men: if I did, I Gal. 1.10.
could not be the servant of God, I am contented to let the world go as it
is, with the vanities thereof, and leave the idle praises of a vain man, to
those that love them: and my self do esteem them no better worth, then a
blast of wind blown into the air, which is come unlooked for, and gone we
know not whither: but if there be any that will think evil of me, for framing
a life to live according to the word of God: I would they knew the dangers
are great, and their enemies more then they are ware of: for by what means,
they may chance to pluck all the powers of heaven and earth about their
ears, for the cause is the Lords, and although he do a while Psalm. 50.2.
Pro. 12.6
wink at their sin, yet in the end he will laugh at their destruction. Therefore
I would wish them to be wise in time, and be no longer a friend to
filthiness and an enemy to virtue: but let them think it sufficient to have
spente the time past of their life: in 1. Pet. 4.3.
wantonness, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like: and to return, though
long first, yet at last, that the Lord may have mercy upon them.


Par. You say well: but yet there is a time for all things, I think you are not
always in your book: nor so holy but that you can be contented to use lawful
exercises, which are fit for a Gentleman, as hauking, hunting and such like?


Genesis Lawful exercises, being lawfully used I can very well like of: and as for
hauking and hunting, they are such exercises, as many men in these days do
make them their occupations: and as the things are indifferent, being
indifferently used, so as they are now amongst the most part put in practice
they are shamefully abused.


Par. I pray you Sir, let me know what you dislike in these things? me
thinks there is no such fault to be found therein: I pray you give me leave
to speak for the^, for I love to keep a Hawk my self, and course a Hare
sometime, me thinks it is a goodly sport.


Genesis It is not unlike, but you love it well, for there are some of your coat
that are so ^n love with these things, that they have greater care over their
Dogs, then for the souls of the people.


Par. But to let that matter pass, I pray you let me know what be the faults
that you find in hauking and hunting?


Genesis For hunting this I may say, and such as are hound keepers shall bear me
witness, that there is as much spent, about the feeding of their vile dogs,
as would fill the bellies of many a poor body, as dear in the sight of the
Lord, as they themselves. And the time that they bestow vainlie, all the day,
all the week, a whole month, a whole year, yea, and some their whole life in
these, and such like vanities, might and ought to be spent much better. Their
vain talk, their blasphemous oaths, for which they shall answer, are the
fruits of this their pleasure, which in the end (without amendment) will work
them their utter destruction.


Par. Although in many these faults may be found, yet there are some that
can hehaue themselves better, and use none of these things whereof you speak.


Genesis Some there may be of that number you speak of, or else they were
naught al: but they are so few, that amongst twenti a man shall hardly find
two, that can keep their mouths from cursing, and their tongues from
blaspheming, the glorious name of God: and he that can think best of himself,
and has kept his tongue a great while, yet when it is come to that pass, that
his patience shall be tried, as when his hounds are at a fault, or his hauk
cannot be served: then he himself will be at a fault, and think the greatest
oath he can invent, to little to help the matter: and then with shame they
show their religion, that they set not so much by the dishonouring of their
God, as they do by the rating of a vile Cur. But I would wish such faults
to be looked unto in time, that they be not overtaken in their sin, and
rewarded for their iniquity they have many orders to be observed in these
pastimes, and many lecinges there is amongst them for trifles: I wish they would
leave these vain matters, and lece one another for greater faults, as
cursing, lying swearing and such like: that the name of God be not blasphemed,
and in the end, themselves for their sins, accordingly rewarded: for if the
Lord fall a lecing of them, he will pay them home, and give them such stripes,
as they shall feel the smart thereof for ever, for let them flatter
themselves, as fair as they can, and think better of themselves then they do
deserve, yet if their pastimes be full of abuse, and their mirth be not in the
fear of God, they draw iniquity with coards of vanity, and sin as it were
with a Cartrope.


Par. In deed (as you say) it were very well, if this that you have spoken of
might be put in practice, and that this lying, curssing, and swearing, might be
utterly abolished: but yet me thinks a Hauking oath sometimes is a small
matter, and they are but Gentlemen's faults, and therefore I think they may
the better be borne with all.


Genesis What, do you think (M. Parson) that the Lord does regard the person
of one man more then another for that he can be contented to suffer than in a
gentleman, which he does punish in others? No, hold this for an everlasting
truth, that with him there is no 2. Chr. 19.7. Act. 10.3.4. Romans 2.11. Ephe. 6.9.
respect of persons, but such as continue in well doing shall receive
according: and they that offend his majesty (without amendment) shall find no
mercy.


Par. But I will tell you (Gentleman) some there be, that are so accustomed to
these faults, that they ran not leave it if a man would hand them: and
therefore you must bear somewhat with the world, or else there will be no pastime.


Genesis What (M. Parson) would you have me to be a baude to the wickedness of
the people, and to soothe them in their sin* Fie upon you, fie upon you, are
you a minister, and will utter such ungodly speech? I perceive you savor of the
things that are not of God. And I would you knew it, it is so far from me to
allow of their wickedness, that I seek by all means possible, to suppress
the same: for I know it is not lawful for me to sow Ezec. 13.18.
pillowes under men's elbowes, nor to laugh at their sin. If I did I might
chance weep for my wickedness, and be guilty of their sin. Therefore I
would they al knew, that such as Psalm. 119. Leu^. 1^.11.
delight in cursing, it shall fall on them selves: and that Apoc. 21.8.
lyinge is forbidden, and they that use it shall have their part Eccle. 23.12.
in that la^e which burns with ^i^e and Brimstone: and that the Exodus 20.7.
mouth of the swearer, sle^eth the soul, and the Lord will not hold them
guiltless that take his name in vain, now if they think it good to swear,
curse, and lie, and love the punishments due for the same, let them use it
still, if not, let the^ learn to fear before the majesty of God, and tremble
at his judgments: for as the night does follow the day, so does these
punishments, so ungodly a life: for such as offend without any scare of God,
shall be punished for ever without repentance: and they ye never leave their
sin, shall be sure never to be forgiven: but because repentance is a
remedy at all times, and time must be taken while it is: I would wish it be
sought for while it may be found, unless they seek it hereafter, when it
will not be gotten.


Par. I perceive you are very severe in punishing of sin where you may bear
rule, and therefore I think you are a hard master to your servants, or else
they are very good servants to their Master.


Genesis As for me and my servants, my desire is, that we may be such as may serve
God: so shall I be sure to use them well, and they shall not fail to serve me
faithfully.


Par. And are all your household such as fear God?


Genesis If they be not, they are not such as may please me, and if I knew them
to be otherwise, they should not remain in my house, for I know where the
fear of God is not, that place is Pro. 3.33. Deuteronomy. 28.16.
accursed, but the dwellinges of the righteous shall evermore be blessed, and
to my knowledge I have not one, but is so reformed of his life, that he does
not give any example of evil.


Par. If it be true, you may say more, then any that ever I heard of before,
and I pray you what orders have you taken to bring this to pass?


Genesis First I have according to the Deuteronomy. 6.7.
commandment, showed them the law of the Lord, that they might know what
they ought to do: and if I find any so obstinate that will not learn, or so
ungodly that does refuse to reform his life, I reform my house, and send him
out of the doors: for I know the room of such to be better then their
company: and that one skabbed sheep may mar a whole flock, and the
company of the ungodly to be so dangerous, as no plague nor pestilence is so
infectious: and I have learned of David, to look unto Psalm. 10.16.
such as are faithful in the land that they may dwell with me, and such as fear
God, those I make my servants.


Par. These orders in bringing up of your servants in the fear of God, deserve
great commendations. But if they do their service faithfully as it becomes
them, do you keep them continually in the servitude of Egypt?


Genesis No: for I am taught to Eccle. 7 21. Deuteronomy. 15.13.
love a discrete servant as mine own soul, and not to defraud him of his
liberty, nor leave him a poor man, and it is my duty to do unto my
servants, that which Colo. 4.1.
is just and equal, knowing that meself have a master in heaven. Thus (M.
Parson) have I showed you my bringing up, and how from my Childehoode unto
this day, I have lead my life, and of these orders if it please you, I can be
contented you shall be a partner: and if you be now any better persuaded, then
heretofore, I will willingly bestow the charge on you, to find you meat and
drink, and all other things necessary for you as long as you live, if you
will accept such intertainment as I can make you.


Par. Sir I am bound to thank you (for your good will) most heartelie, but I
do not yet find any such necessity, to be chargeable unto any man, as long as
I am able to discharge my self.


Genesis Oh it greeueth me to hear you, are you always one manner of man? you
have told me that you have no wife nor child to care for; and what can you
more desire then food and raiment?


Par. But what need I become subject to any man, when as I may be master of
servants my self?


Genesis For any subjection at your hands, I never meant to look for, but if you
can like of this offer, you shall have a chamber as your own, a man at your
commandment, and you shall fare no worse then my self, which I trust shall be
sufficient to content either of us both. Therefore if you can find in your
heart to forsake your ungodly promotion, and livings unlawfully possessed,
and become a new man and servant to God, say no longer nay, but take this
offer while you may have it.


Par. To have a Chamber in your house and to forgo a house of mine own, is so
exchange the better for the worse, and to shut my self in a prison, whereas I
am now at liberty, and whereas you offer me one man to attend on me, you may
know that I now am able to keep three or four faule fellows, which are
ready at all times to serve my turn: and I am so well beloved amongst my
parishioners, that there are few men or their wives, but are at my commandment
to do for me the best that they may: therefore you to counsel me to leave
all these commodities, and be chargeable to you, is to trouble your self, and
do me no pleasure.


Genesis Oh (M. Parson) I would not wish you to think so, but that I can be
content to be at greater charge, so that I might thereby do you any good. And
these vanities, which you account commodities, are nothing but trains of the
devil to trap you in his gin, for he could be contented to give you all this
world (if it were his) that he might have but your soul in the world to
come: therefore (M. Parson) I would you knew it, that that which I have said,
I wish you for the best, and that you might be unburdened of that great charge
which is too heavy for you to bear. Oh, let not the love of money work the
loss of your soul, but be contented to lose somewhat for Christ, which was
contented to lay down his life for you: oh Wis. 1.12.
seek not your death in the error of your life: make no tarying to turn unto
the Lord, and put not of from day to day, unless his wrath come suddenly, and
in the time of vengeance he do destroy you, do no longer sell your self to
sin, and this miserable world, but set your affections in heaven, where your
redemer lives for ever. Come away from that whore of Babylon: drink no
longer of her poison: leave of from Papistrie, and defy the Pope and al
Popery.


Par. Why, I trust (gentleman) you do not think that I am a Papist, for so
you might prove me a traitor both to God and the Queen.


Genesis Truly (M. Parson) I have taken you for no other all this while.


Par. Then I perceive you have been far deceived, for I would you knew it,
I am as good a Protestant as the proudest of you al.


Genesis What are you so? I pray you what protestation can you make thereof, that
I may be so well persuaded of you:


Par. I can eat flesh on Fridaies, I care not if there were not one fasting
day in a whole year: I can fall to my vittailes all the Lent: I care not if
the Pope were hanged, so I might fare a penie the better for it. I can be as
holy in the Church as any man, although ye flesh be somewhat frail when I am
abroad, and a thousand such things can I do, which would be to long to
rehearse.


Genesis Oh I perceive you are deceived of your self, for you are an Epicure out
right. What do you account this to be a Protestants life: No, (M. Parson) a
Protestaunt is not known by these marks.


Par. No? I pray you, how will you know a Protestant.


Genesis If he profess that there is no redemption, 1. Tim. 2.5.
but in the blood of Christ: if the word Gal. 3.24.
of god dwell in him plentifully: if his talk be always of the Heb. 9.26.
commandments of the Lord: if his profession and Colo 6.7. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Romans
2.13.
his life do agree: if he love such as fear God, for his sake: if the world
be Psalm. 15.4. Gal. 5.24.
crucified unto him, and he unto the world: if he be not hie minded, but does
make himself equal with those of the lower sort. If he Phil. 3.8.
count all the world but dung that he may win Christ: if he love Psalm. 119.
the law of the Lord above gold or precious stone: If he be no Ephe. 5.5.
whoremonger, no drunkard, no usurer, no thief, no swearer, no filthy talker,
no covetous person: If he be no negligent Pastor: if he be sorry for his sins
committed, and does seek to become a new man: if he love Christ and his Gospel
so well, Luke 14.26.
that he can be contented to loose his life for the same. If you find this in
a man, know him to be a Protestant, as well in deed as in name, for this is
required of him that will be a professor of the gospel, and bear the name of a
Protestant.


Par. What are there no Protestaunts, but such as have all this in them? then I
think there be not many Protestauntes, amongst a great number of professors.


Genesis In deed I know, Christ's flock is a little flock: and that it is an
easier matter to be called a Protestaunt, then proved a Protestant: but yet
some there are, and that many more then we know which do worship God, in
spirit and truth, and are appointed to be heirs of the kingdom of heaven.
Of the which number (M. Parson) I long to find you one, and if you will once
turn unto Christ, he will be be merciful unto you: and there will be more joy of
so penitent a sinner, then of Luke 15.7.
ninety and nine just persons. If you did know the reward you should have for
following of Christ: you would make haste to go after him: If you did know
the ioies, that God has prepared for those that love him, were such as the 1
Cor. 2.9.
eye has not seen, the ear has not hard, nether the heart of man has ever
conceived, you would thirste after them as the Heart does for the water brooks.
If you did know how Psalm. 84.1.
amiable are the dwellinges of the Lord of Hosts, your soul would have a
desire and longing to enter into ye courts of the Lord, yea your heart and
your flesh would rejoice in the living God. If you did know that in his
presence is the Psalm. 16.12.
fulness of joy, and that at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore:
you will choose rather to be a Psalm. 84.11.
door keeper in the house of your God, then to dwell in ye tents of the
ungodly. If you did know ye glory they shall have in his kingdom, that suffer
for his sake in this world, you would set more by the ^eb. 11.16.
rebuke of Christ, then by all the treasures of Egypt. Beware of that subtle
serpent the Devil, which goes about like a ^. Pet. 5.8.
roaring Lion, ready to devour you: it is his persuasions, ye makes you in
love with this world* and if it lay in him, he would say unto you, as he did
unto Christ, that he Mat. 4.8.
would give you all the kingdoms in the world, to fall down and worship him:
for riches and other vanities of ye world, being unlawfully possessed, are
nothing but baits of that subtle Serpent, to entrap such as be not wary of
him. Therefore as you love the safety of your self depart from that which is
evil: remember Romans 6.23.
that everlasting life is the gift of God, and the reward of sin is
everlasting damnation: and know that one sweet loost from Christ's cheeks, is
better then all the fair countenances of the world: and an angry countenance
from his face, is able to crush al their enemies in pieces. Therefore avoid his
displeasure, beware of his wrath, get into his favor, and continue in his fear
and you shall stand though the earth fall, and shall be sure of the victory,
though all the world were set against you.


Par. For your good council I most heartelie thank you, and with your gentle
persuasions, you have greatly moved me, and therefore I mean to take another
order with my self which I trust shall like you well enough


Genesis I pray you (M. Parson) let me hear that order.


Par. Thus I do determine to lay my plot, because it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God, and great dangers are like to befall
those that continue in their sin: I will take such a order, that I will not
spend much, but live sparingly a while, until I have gotten a good piece of
money in my purse, that may maintain me during my life: and then I will depart
from my livings, and repent for all matters half a dozen years hence.


Genesis But what if you should chauuce to dye (M. Parson) before these years
come out?


Par. In deed that is the worst, I never thought on that.


Genesis Oh in any wise have care of that, for death comes many times unlooked
for, and you are not sure of your life one hour: and if death should overtake
you in your sins: you are lost for ever. Therefore I would wish you, not to
delay the time any longer, but deal wisely for your self while you may: for
if you be once gone Psalm. 50.22.
no man may deliver you, nor make agreement unto God for you.


Par. Truly (Gentleman) you say honestly, and your persuasions are very
strong, and if I might be sure to obtain the favor of God and inherit the
kingdom of heaven by such means as you have showed me, and that there were
no doubt of it: I could be contented to yield unto you: but I must tell you
plain, my benefices are sweet, and if I should forsake them all, and go to the
devil at last, it would grieve me.


Genesis To put you out of doubt for that matter, hear what Christ himself
says, which is the door whereby you must enter into heaven: whosoever Mar.
19.29.
(says he) forsakes house or brethren, father, or mother, wife or children,
goods or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold in this
world, and in the world to come, life everlasting.


Par. What is meant by that hundred fold? that if I put away my benefices, I
shall have them again and many more? then I care not how soon I depart with
them.


Genesis No, (M. Par.) you must not think so, but this know, that God is able to
give you a thousand times more, as you may see by the example of Job. 42.10.
Job, but the meaning is this: that you shall in this whorlde have such peace of
conscience, which the ungodly are without: that you shall say with Paul, you
are as 2. Cor. 6.10.
having nothing, and yet possessing all things: and in the world to come, ioies
unspeakable, in a life that shall last for ever. Therefore (M. Parson) think no
time so happy, as that which you bestow in procuring of your self that which
will stick by you for ever.


Par. Oh this comfort is great, and these words have stricken me to the heart.


Genesis How do you (M. Par) me thinks your color does begin to change.


Par. Oh, oh, oh.


Genesis What are you not well, that you look so ill?


Par. Oh, sick, sick.


Genesis I would we had some Ginger for you, or a little Aquauitie.


Par. Oh I am sick, I am sick.


Genesis Will you ride to some town? and we will send your water to some physician.


Par. Oh, no, all the Physicians in England are not able to cure this disease.


Genesis Why (M. Parson) where does it grieve you?


Par Oh at the heart, at the heart.


Gen I marvel what it should be, that does take you so suddenly: have you
not ben so troubled with it before?


Par. Oh no, I never was in this case since I was borne before.


Genesis Be contented to tarry the Lords leisure a little while, and you shall
see, that it will mend anon.


Par. Oh Lord help me, oh Jesus help me, God and our Lady help me.


Genesis Oh (M. Parson) that is very ill said: do you not think that God can
help you of himself but that you must entreat our Lady, to do somewhat for
you? in so saying you have greatly dishonored God.


Par. Oh, the Lord forgive it me. I confess I have offended him in it.


Genesis God be praised, that you are so soon reformed. But I marvel what it
thoulde be, that does trouble you so at this time.


Par. Oh it lies heavy at my heart.


Genesis What should it be think you that does lie so heavy?


Par. Oh it is my sins, which are more then I am able to bear, for now I
feel my self pricked at the heart, with grief of my former life. Oh Lord be
mer^ifull unto me a sinner. How grievously have I offended so loving a father?
how wickedly did I enter into the ministry? how negligently have I taught,
how vitiously have I lived? how many souls through my negligence have gone to
the Devil, and I have been careless and taken no thought for them: oh forgive
me these mine offenses, or take me out of this vale of miserye, that I sin
no more.


Genesis Oh comfort your self and know, that with the Psalm. 130.7.
lord there is mercy, and with him there is plenteous redemption: yea like Psalm.
103.13.
as a father pitieth his own child, so is the Lord merciful to them that
fear him.


Par. Oh how comfortable are these sayings now unto me? which sometime I loved
not to hear thereof. Oh my benefices, my benefices, that have wrought me this
woe: Fie upon them, fie upon them, fie upon them: Oh I was never so far in
love with them, as I do now detest and abhor them. Oh that al dumb dogs,
unpreaching prelates, popish priests, non residentes, and unlearned ministers,
would learn by mine example to be wise in time. Oh that such as can preach
would preach: and such as can say nothing would give over the place which is
unmeet for them: Oh that such as are set as Cities upon a high hill, would
preach Christ the Lord, and them selves servants: oh that this saying were
not to true, Phil. 2.21.
that every man seeks his own, and no man that which is Christ's: oh that
laborers might be sent into the Lords harvest, and loiteres might be rooted
out: Oh that such as know nothing, but to shear the Sheep, and feed
themselves, did now know so much as I do, for I never had such pleasure in
keeping my benefices, as I do now find joy, being willing to forgo them.
You told me (Gentleman) that you thought your self happy to come in my
company, but I may bless the time that ever I saw you Oh how much am I bound
to the Lord, ye has ordained such a means to work me my salvation: praised
be his name therefore.


Genesis Oh the Lord be praised for ever, that now I find that in you, which
long I have sought for. My mind did give me that the Lord had his work in
you, and now experience does teach me, that it is unfeignedly true, and I
doubt not, but you are now willing to forsake your benefices and to go home
with me.


Par. I am more willing to depart with them, then ever I was to have them: and
am so out of love with the^, that it greeueth me to think on them and my desire
is, that I were so clean discharged of them, that I might never here more of
them.


Genesis You shall not need to take any further care: but ^^ntent your self,
and you shall have that which is yours, and be troubled no longer.


Par. But think you not, that I may have my monye again, that I paid for
them unto my Patrons?


Genesis That question is not woroth the asking, for they will be far from making
a restitution, that they will not be known you paid any thing for them. But I
pray you what did your be^e sires cost you?


Par. I think my three benefices did stand me, one way or another, about a
five hundred pounds.


Genesis What did they so? Oh insatiable. Symmonie: I pray you in what order did
they deal with you? and with what shame less faces could they d^n^aunde
money for them?


Par. I have of a long time kept secret their counsel, but now I will
disclose their policy. First you must observe, that my three benefices, I had
of three Patrons, ^ the first after suit made unto him, said he was contented
that I should have it before another, on this condition, that I would be
thankful for the same: and it should cost me nothing: but my friends (he said)
were contented to bestow the same upon me: and I should not be privy of a penny
that was given, before the money came to be paid, and then I should reap the
fruits of my benefice in two or three years after. Another of my patrons
would take no money, for he knew it to be unlawful: but if I would bestow a
dish of Angels (of Apples I should say) upon him when the time of the year
did serve, he was contented I should be heard before another, but the apples
must be very ripe and as yellowe as gold. My third patron was counted a man
of a very good conscience, and he would no money at any hand, but his wife must
have a gown and that made of Satin, laid with a silver lace, and the collar
stiffened with as many old angels, as came to a hundred pound: and she was
so in love with the same, that if it la^e in her she would never were other
fashion: and when her husband saw it, he liked the stuff so well, that he
would have a suite of apparel of the same making: so that to make them this
gorgeous suite of apparel, I was feign my self to wear a thread bare coat, I
know not how long.


Genesis Oh most wicked, and Devilish devises, is there such chopping and changing
buying and selling of men's souls? but that the mercy of the Lord, is above al
works, ye for so wicked an abomination, the earth does not groan under us, as
being weary to bear us. Have they such shifts to dazzle the eyes of me^? or do
they think by such means, to escape the judgments of God? Let them know that
when the Lord will make inquisition for sin, and the secrets os al hearts
shall be opened, this their wickedness shall show it self, and without
amendment shall not go unpunished, Oh how happy are you whom God has drawn
from dangerous dealings? your happiness is more then I can express, you have
by these means gotten heaven and earth on your side, the Lord himself does
favor you, the Sunn and Moon will show you a cheereful countenauce: the earth
shall serve for your pleasure, the dew in the morning will give you a sweet
savor, the flowers in the field will cast you a pleasant smell, The stones in
the streets are at league with you, neither is there any thing under the
heavens, that shall hurt you but all are sworn to your safety: the Lord shall
send his Angels to Psalm. 34.7.
pitch their tents about you: so that al your enemies shall do you no harm,
but death it self shall give you the victory, when it comes to play his
part, it shall set you free from a great many of miseries, and Apoc. 14.13.
place you in an everlasting happiness. But as for such as* continue in their
wickedness, woe be unto them, it were better for them, that they had never
been born, for their state, is accursed, and the best of them is but Mich. 7.4.
as a brier, or a rotten stake in a thorny hedge, and though they flourish a
while, as does the flower of yt field, yet shall they wither as does the grass
and Esai. 51.8.
worms shall eat them, even as moths eat cloth and wool: Woe be unto them that
through the stubbernesse of their hearts can not repent, but heap up for them
selves wrath, against the day of wrath, and declaration of the righteous
indgement of God, Romans 2.5.
which will reward every man according to his works.


Par. Then Woe the unto all Patrons, which buie and sell benefices.


Genesis Yea, and happy are such Patrons, as bestow them upon such as are worthy
of them, and that take no money for them, but seek only the glory of God,
and the salvation of their brethren.


Parl Are there some such Patrons think you, that does so bestow their
benefices?


Genesis Yea, no doubt of it, there are some such, and that many, although
because you have not found them, you think the contrary, Elias thought (when
there was a slaughter, amongst the prophets of the Lord) that there had been
none left, that did serve the true God, but himself, beacuse he knew them not:
but the 3. Kin. 19.^4.18.
Lord told him, that there were seven thousand, which he had reserved, that
did never bow their knees to B^al. So no doubt has he now a remaant, whom he
does preserve from that sin of simmonie, and do leave it as a thing which
does highly displease the Lord: the which number, I beseech him daily to
increase: yt the feet of the ministers ^^aie be Esai. 52.7. Romans 10.15.
beautiful, and themselves mess^ngers, that may bring glad tidings of peace,
and tidinges of good things.


Par. I shall be counted but a fool amongst my felows, for playing of his
part and they will make it a game to laugh at, for dealing in this manner: but
the best way is, to give them leave, and abide their skoffs, with patience,
until the Lord root them out, or give them hearts of repentance.


Genesis You say very well, it is our parts to Psalm. 27.16.
tarry the Lords leisure, and be contented to bear the railinges of our
adversaries for a while: these days will not continue for ever, there will
come a laughing time for us, when they shall weep and howl for the misery
that shall come upon them: and shall be feign (one day) to say of you, this Wis.
3.5.
is he whom we sometimes had in dirision: we ^ooles thought his life madness,
and his end without honor: but lo, how he is counted amongst the Sons of
God, and his portion is amongst the saints, these words shall the ungodly say
with grief of heart: when themselves are tormented, and you shall be comforted,
when you shall have ioies unspeakable, and they shall be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, And now that you may
set some order concerning your self, and such stuff as you have at home; I
will send two of my men with you, that shall deal for you as they would for me,
and in hope that it shall not be long, before I see you again.


Par. I thank you sir most heartelie, and I praise God highly that have
stirred up such an instrument to call me to repentance, I will ride to my
benefices, and discharge my self clean of them, and with as much speed as I
may, I will wait on you, in the mean time: I pray God bless you, and yours,
and continue that good mind in you, which now you are of, that you and I with all our household, may so serve God in this transitory world, that we may
joy with him for ever in the world to come.


Genesis Amen.


FINIS.
A godly and necessary prayer into this book.
O ETERNAL and everlasting God, which have made thy dwellings above the
heavens, and by the Scepter of thy might, do rule all the powers in the
world, all which should sound to thy praise, and redounde to the honor of thy
glorious name: we most vile wretches, whom thou have made of the dust of the
earth, throw down our selves here before thy majesty, as unworthy to be made
thy footestoole, submitting our selves unto thee, and acknowledging our sins,
we appeal to thee for mercy. We confess (O Lord) that our wickedness is
great, our misdeedes many, and our sins innumerable, and thou art just, thy
judgments are over all the world, and the punishments due for our sins are
intolerable. Forgive them, O Lord forgive the^, mollify our hard hearts, and
give us right spirits, that we may see our sin, and learn to tremble before
thy majesty, and fear to offend any longer. Oh be thou favorable unto us, or
else we are lost for ever: If thou be angry, what may make us merry? if thou be
offended, how may we be pleased? If we have lost thy favor, what friendship
can help us? If thou withdraw thy grace from us, what good shall our riches do
us? If thou be not on our side, what shall we do with the help of man? If we be
whole in body and sick in soul, rich in substance and poor in godliness: have
the world at will, and know not how to use it: If we have such liberty to do
waht we would, any yet so sinful to do nothing as we should, Oh the finne
of so corrupt hearts, what misery will it bring us? what vvoe will it work
us? how many plagues are there ordained for so great sins? and what a
continual pain will our ungodly pleasure purchase for us? O Lord if thou
let us live here a while, in wealth and ease, to the end we shall live for
ever hereafter in misery and woe? alas that ever we were born, to see such
wo^ul days: oh far be that from us (O Lord) and continue thy mercy toward
us for ever. We confess that our sins have well deserved thy wrath, and our
wickedness, is great enough to provoke thy anger, and we know that thy
mercies already showed unto us, have been more then our deseruinges, we have
always felt thy fatherly affection toward us, when we have showed our
selves unnatural children, and revvarded thee evil for good: Oh lord forgive
it us, forgive our ungodly behavior, and lay not our sins to our charge, but
continue thy mercy toward us still. Look favorably upon this Realm,
bless va with thy goodness, and defend us from Satan and all his
ministers, overthrow their deuelish devices, and bewray their ungodly
pollices: preserve our Queen whom thou have placed over us, let her rule
faithfully in thy fear, make her days happy, and send her a long life if it
be thy good pleasure, and when this her earthly princely state shall cease,
give her a heavenly kingdom where she may reign for ever, make her
counselors wise in thy fear, to give such council, as may tend to thy
glory: let he nobles know that their honors consists in thy worship. Teach
magistrates to humble themselves, and seek the advancement of thy glory, let
them know that they are not placed in office by thee, to govern as they list,
or do that which seems good in their own eyes, but to suppress sin and
support virtue, let them draw their swords to cut down vice, and embrace
godliness, as that which is only their worship, teach the ministry, to teach
the truth unto their flock, and seek the safety of thy people, and not their
own private gain: let them not be such as can teach others and not them
selves, that can shere the sheep, and not feed the flock, let not the desire
of filthy lucre, make them careless to do their duty, but let the remembrance
of thee (which wilt call them to an account) cause them to have a care of their
charge. Teach masters of housholdes, mystresses and Dames, children and
servants to serve thee, and lead their lives in thy fear, O Lord learn the^
to know that to dwell under thy defense, is only to be happy, and not to obey
thee, is to be accursed, and to heap up for our selves, wrath against the day
of wrath, when, every man shall be revvarded according to his works: let the
power of thy majesty (which can with a word shake all the powers in
heaven and earth) strike so deep into our hearts, that we may set more by thy
favor, then all the fair countenaunces of the world (which are but vaniti)
let not any thing be our delight but that which may please thee, and let
nothing make us sorry but that which does offend thy majesty. Also we beseech
thee to look upon thy whole Church (wheresoever) with favor behold it,
comfort the afflicted members thereof, deliver them with speed, or give them
patience to tarry thy leisure: let them not faint in that good course they have
begone that suffer for thy truch, but be thou their help in trouble and lay no
more upon them then they are able to bear. And although we at this time here
at home, have not so great cause to complain, as many of our brethren in other
countries. But thou (O Lord) have dealt more favorably with us then with them,
yet let us not be proud of our estate, but give us hearts of humility, to
prostrate our selves before thy majesty: for we know that our deseruings are
not such, nor thy hand is not so shortened, but that thou can strike us as
well as them, let not so great wickedness lodge in our breasts, that our
prosperity should make us to forget thee, for although we sleep now in
secutitie and think our selves out of danger, yet thou can quickly set the
nations about us upon our ears, and give us over to a worse mischief even
amongst our selves: thou can soon make a whole man a sick body, and of a
living body a dead corpse, and all our pleasures may soon be gone, the
adversity of one hour may make us to forget: all our sins have truly
deserved these and greater plagues, but that thy mercy toward us, has been
great, which I beseech thee for ever to continue. Forgive us our sins and
pardon us, for thy son Christ's sake, quicken us as thou art wont to do thy
chosen, give us a taste of the joys of thy kingdom, that we may know it is
better to be a door keeper in thy house, then to dwell in the tents of the
wicked and ungodly, let not the vain delights of this corrupt world lead us
unto vanity nor let the alterations of this changeable time turn our hearts
from thee, but teach us to know that thou art alvvayes one and the same, and
do never forget such as do put their trust in thee. We know that thy
fatherly care over thy children is great, that they shall not loose a hair of
their head, but thou will know how (...) they come for^ it: oh learn us for so
great love, to love thee again, and fear to offend so dear a Father: keep
far from us the breach of thy laws, covetous minds, lying lipes, swearing
tongues, malicious hearts, unchaste and ungodly behavior, which does offend
thee, and provoke thine anger againsty us: and beat down our stout stomcks,
that we may stand in awe and fear thy displeasure, that the plagues due for
our sins may be turned away from us. O Lord make us wise in time, pla^t in
our hearts a love to thy judgments, and always have im mind that thou which
made the eye must needs see, which made the ear must needs hear, and thou
which sea^chest the hearts and reins, must needs find out our wickedness. And
because of our selves we are not able to do any thing that is good, but prone
and apt to all kind of sin and wickedness, we beseech thee so to assist us
with the aid and help of thy holy spirit, that we may through the same, do
those things which of our selves we are not able, that it may be to thy glory
and for the health of our own souls. Oh let these our prayers pearce the
heavens, and enter into thine ears, and give us this and all other things
necessary for us, from this time to the end of our lives, and after death a
life to live for ever, for thy dear sons sake, in whose name we beg it of
thee in that prayer which he himself has taught us, saying. Our father. etc.


