A TRVE RELATION OF A BRAVE ENGLISH STRATAGEM, PRACTICED lately upon a
Sea-Towne in Galizia, (one of the Kingdoms in Spain) and most valiantly and
succesfully performed by one English Ship alone of 30. Tonne, with no more than
35. Men in her.

AS ALSO, With two other remarkable Accidents between the English and
Spaniards, to the glory of our Nation.

Printed for Mercurius Britannicus. 1626.

A true Relation of a brave English stratagem practiced lately upon a Sea-towne
in Galizia, (one of the Kingdoms in Spain) and most valiantly and succesfully
performed by one English Ship alone, of 30. Tonne, with no more than 35. men in
her.
With two other Remarkable Accidents between English and Spaniards, to the
glory of our Nation.
YOu shall here (loving Countrymen) receive a plain, full, and perfect
Relation, of a stratagem bravely attempted, resolutely seconded with bold
English spirits, and by them as fortunately Executed upon our Enemies, the
Spaniards: Who, albeit upon what Kingdom soever they once set but footing,
they write Plus vltra, devouring it up in conceit, and feeding their greedy
ambition that it is All their own; yet this great golden Faggot of Dominion may
have many sticks plucked out of it, if cunning fingers go about to undo the
Band: as by this Galizian Enterprise may appear.

A pregnant testimony hereby being given, that if the great Warriors of the
Sea would join together, and Thunder all along the Spanish Coasts, the
Cast^lian Kingdoms might easily be shaken, when so poor a handful of our
English being spread before one of their Sea-townes, was the forerunner of so
terrible a storm to all the Inhabitants.

Such a brave mustering of all the Gods of the Ocean in one conjoined Army,
would quickly make the great Donnes to alter their proud and insolent Poesy,
of Non sufficit orbis (the world is too little to fill their belly, when the
East Indies lies upon one of their Trenchers, and the West upon another; yea,
and compel them to dwell quietly at home, in their own hot barren Country of
Spain, contented with a dinner of a few Olives, a handful of Reisins, and
such poor trash; not intruding into other Kings Territories, (especially these
fruitful ones of ours,) to eat up our fat Beefes, Veales, Muttons, and
Capons, (Victuals too good for such insatiable feeders,) when whole Countries
(might they swallow down their fill) are nothing to be devoured at one meal.

Come forth therefore you Renowned English, and by the example of a few
Countrymen of yours, plough up the furrows of your Enemies Seas, and come
home laden (as they have done) with spoils, honors, victory, and rich
purchased Prizes.

Fear not to fight, albeit five Kings bring their men of War into the field,
for you have a Joshua to stand up in your defense, and to bid them battle.

And when you go to draw your Swords, or to discharge your Cannons against the
Iron ribs of the Armadoes of this Potent and bloody Enemy, Pray unto the
Lord toward the way of the City which he has chosen, and toward the house
which in that place is built up for his Name, and He in heaven will hear your
prayers and supplications, and judge your cause, and deliver these wild
Boares, and Bulls of Tariffa into your Toils.

To arm you for Action, for your Country, for your Fames, for Wealth, and the
credit of your Nation, whenever it pleases God, that you put to Sea, may you
be prosperous, and speed no worse than these have done, whose story I am now
going to set down.

One Captain Quail borne in Portsmouth, desiring to attempt something for the
honor of England, and benefit of himself and followers, by the License and
authority of those in England who might give him leave, got a Bark of
Plymouth, which by him and his friends was sufficiently furnished with Men,
Victuals, and Munition: the Bark being but 30. tun, and the men in her, to
the number of 34. or 35.

This Captain and the resolute Gyng with him went merrily to Sea, and sailed
too and fro, without fastening upon any purchase, answerable to their
expectation, or defraying such a Charge, as they and their Ship had been at.
Their fortunes in England were not great, and if they should return home
without some exploits, their estates would be less. Hereupon the Captain
discovering his mind to his Lieutenant whose name was Frost, they two (after
consultation between themselves) persuaded the rest of their company to try
their uttermost adventures, rather than like Cowards to go back, who hearing
the Captains resolution, were on fire to follow him, through all dangers,
happen whatsoever could. And so they clapped hands upon this desperate
bargain, yet protesting, and seriously vowing not to turn Pirates, thereby to
make booty either of their own Countrymen or friends to the State.

Good hope thus, and a prosperous wind filling their Sails, they houered
along by the Coast of Galizia, which lies upon the head of Portugal, to the
Northward. In passing by which, the Ship being clear, and the shores quiet,
the Captain commanded them to cast Anchor before a certain Town called Cris,
which had a Plat-forme, or Fort with Ordnance to defend it; and this was done
at Noonday.

Then, he being perfect in the French tongue, wrote a Letter in that Language
to the Governor or Captain of the Fort, importing thus much, That they were
poor distressed Frenchmen, driven thither by some Turkish men of War, and
flying to them (as to their friends) for succor: pretending their greatest
want to be Wood for firing, and fresh Water, to relieve them, of both which
necessaries, they knew that place abundantly stored, and for which they would
give any reasonable content.

Thus ryding at Anchor in sight of the Town, and their Cock boat being lost
in a storm; they had no other device to convey the Letter to the Spanish
Commander, than by sending a Sayler upon an empty Hogshead, with an Oar in his
hand to guide him to Land, he being very skillful both in the French, and
swimming.

The Spaniards seeing a man making to them in that strange manner, thought
verily they were men distressed indeed, and thereupon Manning out of a Skiffe to
meet and receive him, they took him in.

The Letter spoke his business to the Spanish Captain, who talking further in
the French to the Mariner, and being thereupon certainly assured of their
distress, determined to sell to them such commodities as they wanted, at as
dear a rate as he could: and for that purpose commanded another Skiffe to be
Manned out with certain Spaniards, who suspecting nothing; hastened to go
aboard the Pinnace, with their Captain in company.

In the mean time Captain Quail had shut his Port-holes close, and hid his
Ordnance: discovering not above five men upon the Hatches, who seemed to carry
sickly faces, and weak bodies, and were all vnarmde. The Spaniards are
joyfully embraced and welcomed: such poor victuals as they had aboard were
with arguments of much love set before them: Holland Cheeses were cut in the
middle, and such Wine and Beer offered them, as they were furnished with.

This Entertainment carrying away all suspicion with it, Captain Quail
invited the Spanish Captain and the rest of his company to his Cabin. In
passing to which, the Spanish Commander espied a piece of Ordnance; at which
starting back, and not half well pleased, demanding why it lay there, Quail
excused it, and said, that was all the protection they carried about them, to
defend them from dangers: and so with as much Cunning as he could, he drew by
complement, and disguised fair language, all the Spaniards into his Cabin:
whither with good words he welcomed them, and saluted them with Cannes of
Wine, which whiles they were tossing (albeit the Spaniard is the most temperate
drinker in the world) and Captain Quail with his foot giving a knock for
more; That sign of the foot was a watchword to fetch up all his Mariners;
who crying St. George, appeared in their full number, every man armde with a
chargde Pistol, and short Sword drawn in his hand.

The Spaniards astonished at this unexpected surprisall, seeing no remedy,
yielded themselves, and so were all taken prisoners: an assurance being given
them by the English Captain upon the oath of a Soldier (his honor) and the
faith of an Englishman, which to an Enemy he scorns to break, not a Spaniard
there should be in any danger for his life, so they would be quiet and silent,
otherwise Death.

Certain Fishermen were all this while round about them at their labor, yet
perceived nothing.

With all speed therefore that possibly could be used, Captain Quail and his
Lieutenant making their Prisoners sure, Manned out the two Spanish Skiffes with
his English Muskatiers, every one of them lying down in the Skiffes flat on
his belly, none (that might be mistrusted, being seen) but such only as Rowed
the two Skiffes.

Then, with great Circumspection (attended upon by a resolution to meet Death
face to face) they landed themselves, and (active as fire) suddenly with little
or no danger at all, surprised the Platform, and with the same dexterity were
Masters of the Fort: for the act being quick as lightning, so amazed the
Spaniards, that it took from them all apprehension not only of fear, but
prevention, or acknowledgement of that danger which trod upon their heels. So
that Captain Quail, what with his own success and the others astonishment,
in a short time, and without resistance, seized upon the Ordnance of the
Plat-forme, which turning and discharging upon the Town, and his own Bark
likewise giving fire to her Pieces on the other side, Away ran the people, to
the number of Two hundred persons, besides Women and Children. At the noise of
these sudden terrors, the Fishermen likewise, cutting their Nets, hastened as
fast as they could to shore, having more care to save themselves than to catch
any Fish; and so flying up into the Country, the Town was left naked, and
letten to new Landlords. Who meeting no Spaniards willing to be their Tenants,
and the Englishmen themselves being loath to tarry amongst such bad
neighbors, they rifled both the Fort and the Town, and had the Pillaging of
both, for Eight hours together. In which time, they hurried to their Ship any
thing that was of value, and besides the abundance of much riches, they brought
away the Ordnance of the Fort, the Bell out of the Church, and the Challice:
and so (without wrong to their persons) putting their Spanish Prisoners into
their own Skiffes, to shore they sent them, with a warlike, triumphing Farewell
from their own Pieces, and are now with much honor arrived in England.

If this Example noble Countrymen cannot give you sufficient Encouragement,
do but look back into the former Ages, and take a brief suruay what
Honorable attempts, exploits, undertakings, and stratagems, have in foreign
Countries been enterprized and achieved by the English, when brave John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, etc. being but a Subject, without borrowing or
charging of the Kings treasures, out of his own Purse and Coffers, and
assisted by his Friends and such voluntary Gentlemen, as craved dependence upon
his Fortunes, without Press or compelling any man, beating up his Drums,
leauied so sufficient an Army, that with it he Conquered all Spain, removed
the Usurper, and reinstated the expulsed Don Pedro, and after by
Interchangeable Marriages, made himself and successiue Issue, compettitors and
allies to the Crown and Dignity Imperial.

Of what Honors our Nation have purchased from the French, even their own
Chronicles, without the flattery of ours, give ample and sufficient
testimony: Witness the Battles of Poytiers and Cressie, fought by the
Invincible Soldier (for the great terror which he brought into France)
called the Black Prince, who with Inimitable valor, Courage undaunted, and
expedition almost beyond human apprehension against infinite odds, and
nothing on his own party to encourage him, save want of number and
disadvantage of place, yet notwithstanding, not only desrouted their mighty
Armies, killing many and defeating all. But brought the King Dolphin, and all
the Prince peers of the land Prisoners, and presented them at the feet of his
Father.

The Scotch King, taking the advantage of the King of Englands then being in
France, who lay at Calice, made Inrodes and Incursions into this Land, whom the
Queen Philip then destitute of all her Nobility and Gentry, as being then
with the King her Husband in France) met with an Army of Priests, Husbandmen,
Artificers, and some few Gentlemen, gave him Battle, vanquished his Army,
took him Prisoner, and added one thing more to the eternizing of her Husbands
and Sons famous and renowned valors.

I omit the great Battle fought by Henry the Fifth at Agincourt, with many
others, and least I be taxed of too great a digression return to the former
discourse by me promised, and I make no question by you expected.

In Lisbone not long since, The 2. Honor of our Nation.
a young Merchant (who for diverse respects desires to have his name concealed,
being in the company of certain Donnes, and falling in discourse about the
valor of several Nations, they so far exceeded in the hyperbolies of their
own praise, that they blushed not to affirm, that one Spaniard was able to
beat two Englishmen out of the Field, which they in their braggadesme
enforced so far, that though the rest were silent, this young Gentleman not
able to conceal a true English spirit, after some retort of language, there
made a protestation, That if it pleased the Governor to give him leave, he
himself would undertake, (making choice of his Weapon) to fight singly against
three of the proudest Champions they would produce against him; to cut off
Circumstance, the Challenge was accepted, the Governor prepared the combitants,
with the time and place appointed: a great confluence of people assembled:
where one young Merchant, armed only with his Sword and a Spanish Pike in the
lists appeared, who by the three adversaries was boldly and resolutely charged:
but God and his good Cause defended him so well, that the Combat continued not
long, till one of them he had laid dead at his foot, and having received from
them some few scratches, with the loss of a small quantity of blood, but
without danger, he so actiuely and resolutely behaved himself against the
suruiuors, that they after diverse wounds from him received begin to quail in
their former courage, and fight more faintly and further off, which the
Governor perceiving, commanded the Combat to cease, and withal to guard him
the Englishman from the fury of the displeased multitude, who could have
found in their hearts to have plucked him in pieces, where calling him up to him
conveyed him safe to his house, and after much commendation of his valor, very
nobly secured him to his Ship, wishing him for his own safety to be seen no
more ashoare, whose counsel he followed; and since with much Envy from them,
and great Honor to us, he is arrived in his own Country.

I desire to be tedious in nothing, but will acquaint you with another Exploit,
no less remarkable then the former, performed in the beginning of this last
Month April, and thus it was:

A worthy Gentleman one Captain Warner, The 3. Honor.
with two small Pinaces was bound toward some part of the West Indies, neither
of them being of above 30. Tonne burden: He being thus at Sea, was chased by a
tall man of War a Dunkirker, who came toward them as if she meant to
overrun them at once and bury their ruins in the bottom of the Ocean,
which Warner perceiving, pretended to make away with one of his Pinaces, as if
he purposed to save a stake and leave the other to the enemies fury and
spoils. The Dunkirker not able to fasten on both at once, took the advantage
of the first, intending when he had seized her to make like prise of the
other, hales her, boards her: his Sailors and Soldiers being all greedy of
booty neglect their own Ship, only busying themselves in the rifling of the
other, where I leave them all busy at work; which Warner perceiving, and not
willing to slack so good an opportunity, takes the advantage of the wind,
suddenly casts about and seazeth upon the Dunkirks Ship, whose men were most
of them aboard his other Pinace; boards her, takes her, man's her, and now being
armed with her strength Commands both his other Pinace, and all the Enemies
aboard her, by which Stratagem, he not only ransomed his own, but subdued
his Enemies, made prize both of Ship and goods, and took all the men
Prisoners. A noble encouragement to all the brave Captains and Commanders of
our Nation, to strive to Imitate him in his resolution and valor.

And thus worthy Countrymen you see that notwithstanding the proud braues of
the public Enemy their scandals and calumnies, with all the aspersions of
disgrace that their malice can devise, to cast upon our Kingdom and Country,
maugre their Invasions threatened on Land, or their nauall tryumphs boasted at
Sea; how the great Creator of all things, in whose sight pride, vainglory,
and ambition are abominable, can when he please by the hand of the youngman
David, stoop the stiffe-neck of the strongest Goliath. And noble Countrymen
may these few Encouragements put into you the ancient Courage of your
ancestors, whose memories through all Seas, Nations, and Languages, have been
and ever shall be Sacred to all posterities. Now is the time of acting, and to
show your selves as you have been ever, Held and esteemed brave in attempting,
and bold in performing, and so without question your expeditions shall be
successful, as the fame of your virtues Immortal.

FINIS.

