ARTICLES TO BE enquired off, within the province of York, in the
Metropoliticall visitation of the most Reverend Father in Go^ Edwin
Archbishop of York, primate of England and Metropolitan.

In the.xix. and.xx. year, of the reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the grace of God of England, France and Ireland Queen, defendor
of the Faith, etc. 1577. and. 1578.

Imprinted at London by William Seres.

ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED off within the province of York, in the
Metropoliticall visitation of the most reverend Father in God Edwin
Archbishop of York, Primate of England and Metropolitan. In the.xix. year
of the reign of our most gracious sovereign Lady Elizabath by the grace of
God of England France and Ireland Queen, defendour of the Faith, etc.
FIrst whether Common prayer be said in your church or chapel upon the
Sundaies and holy days at convenient hours, reverently, distinctly, and in
such order without any kind of alteration, as is appointed by the book of
Common prayer? And whether your Minister so turn himself, and stand in such
place of your Church or Chauncell, as the people may best here the same? And
whether the holy Sacraments be duly and reverently ministered in such manner,
as is set forth by the same book? And whether upon wednesdayes and Fridaies,
the Letany and other prayers be said accordingly, and the comminatio^ against
sinners read thryce yearly.

2 Whether you have in your Church or chapel, all things necessary and
requisite for common prayer and administration of the holy Sacraments,
specially the book of Common prayer with the new Calendar, the Psalter, the
Bible of the largest volume, the Homilies, both the first and second Tome, a
comely and decent Table standing on a frame, for the Communion Table, with a
fair linen cloth to lay upon the same, and some coueringe of Silk, Buckram
or other such like, for the clean keeping thereof, a fair and comely
Communion Cup of Silver, and a cover of Silver for the same, which may serve
for the administration of the LORDS BREAD, a comely large Surples with wide
sleeves, and of fine lynnen cloth for your Minister to wear, and all other
things necessary for the premises, with a comely pulpet conveniently placed,
and also a Chest or Box for the poor?

3 Whether your Person, Vicar or Curate, at all times in saying the common
prayer upon sundays and holidays, and in administering of the Sacraments, does
use and wear the Surples, yea or no? or do suffer any other to say the
common prayer, or minister either of the Sacraments in your Church, not wearing
the same?

4 Whether any Person or persons not being ordered at the least for a Deacon,
or lycenced by the Ordinary, do say common prayer openly in your Church or
Chapel, or any not being at the least a Deacon, do solemnize Matrimony, or
administer the Sacrament of Baptism, or deliver unto the communicants the
Lords Cup at the celebration of the holy communion, and what he or they be that
so do? And whether the Person, Vicar, or Farmer of your benefice, do cause any
Curate to serve your Church before he be examined and admitted by the Ordinary,
or his deputy in writing?

5 Whether your Person, Vicar or Curate, has or does maintain any doctrine
contrary or repugnant to any of the Articles agreed upon by ye Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London, Anno Domini. 1562. And whether they have
publicly or secretly taught any doctrine tending to the discredit and
disprayse either of the Book of common prayer, or of the received order, for
government in the Church, or make any other innovation? And whether they have
permitted any man so teaching or making such innovation, and what be their
names?

6 Whether your Person or Vicar have any mo benefices than one, how many, and
in what country be they, and what are their names, and who is the Patron of
his benefice or benefices. And whether he be resident upon his benefice, and
keep hospitality or no, and if he be abse^t, whether he does relieve his
parishioners, and what he gives them, and if he may dispend twenty pound or
above by year, and be not resident, whether he does distribute the.xl. part of
the benefice where he is not resident among the poor of the Parish, or no? And
whether any vittaling, typling, or ale selling be had and kept within the
mansion house of any Person or Vicar.

7 Whether any person or persons be admitted to answer as Godfathers or
Godmothers at the Christening of any child, except he or she have before
received the holy communion, and can say by heart the Articles of the Christian
faith, the ten commandments of God, and the Lords prayer* and will recite the
same before the Minister, if he or she be thereunto required?

8 Whether for the retayning of the perambulation of the circuit of your
parish, the Minister and Clarke, with the Churchwardens, and certain of the
substantial men of the parish in the days of Rogations, walk about your
parish according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions?

9 Whether the Register book of al Christenings, Marriages, and Burialls, that
happen in your parish from time to time, be duly kept and the same
Christenings, Marriages, and Burialls, entered into the same Book by your
Minister, according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions? And whether ye have
one Coffer with two locks, for the keeping of the same Register Book, or no?

10 Whether your Person, Vicar, or Curate, do keep any suspected woman in his
house, or be an incontinent Person, given to drunkenness, or idleness, or be
a haunter of Tauerns, Alehouses, or suspected places, a Hunter, Hawker, Dicer,
Carder, Tabler, Swerer, or otherwise give any evil example of life? And
whether his apparel be comely and grave? And whether he be diligent in
visiting the sick, especially if he be thereunto required?

11 Whether when any christian body is in passing, the Bell be tolled, to move
the people to pray for the sick person, especially in the greater towns, where
the sick person dwells near unto the church? and whether after the time of
his or her passing out of this world, there be any more ringing but one short
peale before the burial and another short peale after the burial? And whether
on all Saints day after Evening prayer, there be any ringing at all in your
Church or Chapel, or any other superstitious ceremonies used, te^ding to the
maintenance of the popish purgatory, or praying for the dead, and who they be
that use or do the same? And whether there be any ringing on Sundays or holy
days in the service time, or between morning prayer and the Letany, or at any
other times, contrary to good order or law?

12 Whether your Minister do at the least every second Sunday, and every holy
day openly in the Church, (especially when it is fair weather) here, examine,
and instruct the children, apprentices, and servant of both the sexes, that
be of convenient age within your parish, in the Catechism allowed and set
forth with certain additions, or at the least so many of them by course as
cannot say the same by heart, and as he may well hear and instruct, for an
hour at the least before or after the Evening prayer? And whether for that
purpose he does take the names of them all, and by course call certain of them
by name every second sunday and holy days to come to the teaching of the same
Catechism, until they have learned the same?

13 Whether all fathers, mothers, masters, and dames, of your parish, cause
their children, servant, apprentizes, both mankind and womankinde, being
about six years of age and under twenty, which have not learned the
Catechism, to come to the Church on the Sundays and holy days, at the times
to them appointed, or at the least such and so many of them as your Minister
shall appoint, and there diligently and obediently to hear, and to be ordered
by the minister until such time as they have learned the same Catechism, and
what be the names of those that do not cause their children, servant, and
apprentices so to come to the Church to be instructed and examined, and how
many of the said children, servants and apprentices, be in your parish, which
being above seven years old, and under twenty years of age, cannot say by
heart the said Catechism, and what be their names and age, and with whom
they dwell?

14 Whether your Person or Vicar has preached or caused to be preached four
sermons at the least every year in your Church and what be the names of him or
those that so did preach? and whether they were lawfully licenced so to preach,
if any other than your Person or Vicar did preach the same? and whether if there
be no Sermon, your Minister do read for the most part every Sunday distinctly
and plainlye, some part of the Homelies appointed to be read? And whether any
Minister not admitted by the Ordinary, do expound any scripture or matter of
doctrine, by way of exhortation or otherwise, and thereby omit and leave off
the reading of the Homilies already set out.

15 Whether your Minister has admitted to the receiving of the holy Communion,
any open and notorious sinner or evil liver, by whom the congregation is
offended, without due penance first done, to the satisfaction of the
congregation. Or any malicious person yt is notoriously known to be out of
charity, or yt has done any open wrong to his neighbor, by word or deed,
without due reconciliation first made to the party that is wronged, according as
is required by the Book of common prayer?

16 Whether your Minister has admitted to the holy Communion any of his parish
being above twenty years of age, either ma^kinde or womankinde, that can not
say by heart the ten commandments, the articles of the faith, and the Lords
prayer, or being above twelve years and under twenty years of age, that
cannot say by heart the said Catechism? And whether he marry any persons
which were single before, that cannot say the said Catechism? And whether he
uses to examine his parishioners at convenient times, to the intent he may
know whether they can say the same which is required or no?

17 Whether your Minister do Church any unmarried woman after they have been
delivered of their children begotten unlawfully, before they have acknowledged
their faults openly, occording to the order prescribed by the Ordinary, or
his deputy?

18 Whether there be any in your parish, man or woman, being of convenient age,
that has not received the holy Communion thrice at the least this last year,
and namely at Easter last or there about for once, and what be their names? And
for what cause they do abstain from the holy Communion? And whether yearly
before Easter at convenient times, and namely on Sundays in Lent at
afternoon, or such other days in the week next before Easter, such of your
parishioners as the Person, Vicar, or Curate shall appoint, and require to come
unto him, do come and recite unto him the Catechism, or at the least, the
Lords prayer, the articles of the christian belief, and the ten
commandments by heart in English, and if any so required do wilfully and
stubburnely refuse to come and recite the same? Whether the Churchwardens and
sworn men or any of them do assist the Minister therein, that such stubburne
persons may be rebuked and expelled from the communion at that time, and so
presented to the Ordinary?

19 Whether the people of your parish, especially householders, having no
lawful excuse to be absent, do faithfully and diligently endeavor themselves
to resort with their children and servants to their parish Church or Chapel
on the holidays, and chiefly upon Sundaies, to Morning and Evening prayer, and
upon reasonable let thereof to some other Church or Chapel, where common prayer
is used, and then and there abide orderly and soberly during the time of common
prayer, Homelies, preachings, and other service of God there used, reverently
and devoutly giving themselves to the hearing thereof, and occupying themselves
at times convenient in private prayer, and who they be that either neglige^tly
or wilfully abse^t themselves or come very late to the Church upon Sundaies
especially, or that walk, talk, or otherwise irreverently behave themselves
in the Church, or use any gaming abroad, or pastime in any house, or sit in
the streets or Churchyard, or in any Tavern or Alehouse upon the Sunday or
holydaye, in the time of common prayer, Sermon, or reading of the Homelies,
either before noone, or after noone?

20 Whether the forfeiture of twelve pence for every absence from common
prayer, appointed by a statute made in the first year of the Queens
Majesty's reign, and set forth in the beginning of the book of common
prayer, has been levied and taken according to the same statute, by your
Churchwardens of the last year, of every person that so has offended, and by
them be put to the use of the poor of the parish, and if it be not, by whose
default it is not levied, and what particular sums of money have been
forfeyted that way, and by whom, since Easter in ye year of our Lord 1575.
until the day of giving up the presentment concerning these Articles, and so
from time to time as the said Churchwardens and sworn men shall be appointed
to present in this behalf, and how much of such forfeytures have been levied
by the Churchwardens, and by them delivered to the use of the poor of the
parish, and to whom the same has been delivered?

21 Whether your Church or Chapel and Chauncell, be sufficiently repaired and
clenly kept, and the mansion house of your Parson and Vicar, with ye buildings
thereunto belonging, likewise sufficiently repaired, and your Churchyard well
fenced and clenly kept, and if any of ye same be ruinous and in decay, through
whose default it is so? whether the Churchwardens of the last year were
enjoined to have repaired any part of the Church, or fenced the Churchyard, and
did neglect to do the same?

22 Whether there be any Inkeepers, Alewiu^s, Vitailers, or tiplers, that
suffer or do admit any person or persons in their houses to eat, drinck, or
play at cards, Tables, or such like games, in time of common prayer or Sermon
on the Sundaies and holidays? and whether there be any shoppes open on
Su^dayes or holidays, or there be any Butchers or others that use to sell
meat or other things in the time of common prayer, preaching, or reading of
the Homelies? And whether in any Faires or common Markets falling upon the
Sunday, there be any showing of any wares before the divine service be done in
the forenoone?

23 Whether for the putting of the churchwardens and sworn men the better in
remembrance of their duty in observing and noting such as offend in not
coming to divine service, your Minister or reader do openly every Sunday after
he have read the second lesson at Morning and evening prayer, monish and warn
the Churchwardens and sworn men to look to their charge in this behalf, and
to observe who contrary to the said statute offend in absenting themselves
neglige^tly or wilfully from their parish Church or Chapel, or irreverently
as is aforesaid, use themselves in time of divine service?

24 Whether the Churchwardens of the last year have given to the parish a
just account of the Church-goods that were committed to their charge, and what
Church goods they have sold, and to whom, and whether to ye profit of the
Church or no? And whether any person suppress the last will of the dead, and
perform not legacies bequethed to the Church, or to Orphans, poor Maids
marriages, high ways, schools, or any other godly use?

25 Whether there be in your parish any that be malicious, contencious, or
uncharitable persons, seeking the unjust vexation of their neighbors, scoldes,
common swearers, or blasphemers of the name of god, any fornicatours,
adulterers, incestous persons, bawdes, or receyuers of such incontinent
persons, or harbourers of women with child which be unmarried, conueying or
suffering them to go away before they have done any penance, or make
satisfaction to ye congregation, or any persons that are vehemently suspected
of such faults, or that be not of good name and fame, touching such crimes and
faults, any common dru^kards, ribawds, or other notorious evil livers?

26 Whether there be any that be married in degrees forbidden, or that have
married two wives, or two husbands both living, or that live not together with
their wives, and what be their names? any married that have made preco^tracts,
any that have married without banes thrice solemly asked, or yt have married
forth of their parish church where they ought to have sole^nised marriage?

27 Whether there be any man or woman in your parish that uses witchcraft,
Sorcery, Charms, or unlawful prayer, or inuocations in Latin or English, or
upon any christian body, or beast, or any that resorteth to the same for
counsel or help, and what be their names?

28 Whether any person or persons within your parish have committed usury,
contrary to an Act against Usury, made in the xxxvii. year of the reign of
the late King Henry the eight, and lately revived, and what are the names of
such Usurers? And what is the manner of their Usury?

29 Whether the Scholemasters yt teach in your parish either openly, or
priuateli in any Gentleman's house or others, be of a good and sincere religion
and conversation, and be dilligent in teaching of youth? whether they be
examined, allowed, and licenced to teach by ye Ordinary or his deputy? and
whether they teach the Catechism allowed and commanded by ye now Archbishop
of Caunterbury both in English and Latin unto their scholars, according to
their capacities, and what be their names?

30 Whether there be any among you that is a hinderer of true religion, or a
fautour of the romish power, or that stubburnly refuses to come to the church,
or to communicate, or otherwise will not conform himself to unite and godly
religion, set forth by common authority, or any that wilfully or obstinately
does defend or maintain any heresies, errors, or false doctrine, contrary to
the holy scriptures, and what be his or their names?

31 Whether in your churches and chapels all alters be utterly taken down and
clean removed even unto the foundation, and the place where they stood paued,
and the wall whereunto they joined, whited over, and made uniform with the
rest, so as no breach or rupture appear? And whether your roode lofts be taken
down and altered so, that the upper parts thereof with the soller or loft be
quite taken down unto the cross beam, and that the said beam have some
convenient crest put upon ye same?

32 Whether all and every Antiphoners, mass books, grailes, portesses,
processionals, manualles, legendaries, and all other books of late belonging
to your church or chapel, which served for ye superstitious latin service,
be utterly defaced, rent, and abolished, and if they be not, through whose
default that is, and in whose keeping they remain? And whither all vestmentes,
albes, tunicles, stoles, phanons, pixes, paxes, handbells, sacringbells,
censers, chrismatories, crosses, candlestickes, holy watersticks, images, and
such other relics and monumentes of superstition and idolatry be utterly
defaced, broken, and destroyed? And if not, where, and in whose custody they
remain?

33 Whether there be any man or woman in your parish, yt resorteth to any
popish priest for shrift or auriculer confession, or any other within three
years now last past has been reconciled unto the Pope, or to ye church of
Rome, or any yt is reputed or suspected so to be? And whether there be any ye
refuse to come to ye church to hear divine service, or to communicate according
to ye order now established by public authority, and what be their names?

34 Whether there be any person or persons ecclesiastical or temporal within
your parish or else where within this diocese, that of late has retained or kept
in their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or deliver to
others any English books, set forth of late years at Louain, or in any other
place beyond ye seas, by Harding, Dorman, Allen, Sanders, Stapleton, Marshal,
Bristow, or any of them, or by any other English papist, either against ye
Queens meiesties supremacy in matters ecclesiastical, or against true
religion, and catholic doctrine now received and established by common
authority within this realm, and what their names and surnames are?

35 Whether your Hospitals, spittles, and almesehouses be well and godly used
according to the fundatio^s and ancient ordinances of ye same? whether there be
any other placed in them then poor impote^t and needy persons, that have not
wherewith or whereby to live.

36 Whether ye Deanes Ruralles and Sumners, or any, of them do pay annual rent
fee or pension for their offices, (...) pay and to whom^

^ Adulteries, Incestes, and Forni(...) within your Parish or (...) of Easter
1577. How many (...) been put to open pe(...) how many have been (...) ^aue
fined and paid (...)cellor, Commissarye, (...) to the Deanes, Regi(...) to
escape open punish(...) what their names and sur(...)

(...)che deacon, co^missarie, official (...) ecclesiastical jurisdiction in
(...) or actuaries, apparitors or (...) time wincked at, and suffered (...),
incests, or other faults (...)maine unpunished and vncor(...) bribes,
pleasure, friendship, (...)tionate respect, or any of the^ (...) in this
dioces, by exacting (...) excessive procurations, any re(...), or any other
like ways, or (...)

(...) the Archdeacon has any Summer (...) does weekly find out offenders
and (...) before the Archdeacon, and whether the (...) do hear or determine
any matter other (...) (...) are presented by the church wardens and sworn
(...) his visitation ^^^den yearly next after the feast of (...) the
jurisdiction of a Bishop in (...) Archdeaco^rie*

Whether any morice dauncers, ^ish^ ^earers* (...) any others have come
vnreuerntly in^^ the church or churchyard, and there daunced, or played any
unseemly (...) (...)


