Injunctions given by the reverend father in christ John by Gods providence,
Bishop of Sarisburie, as well to the Clergy, as to the Churchewardens and
enquirers of every several Parish, as well of his peculiar as general
jurisdiction within and of the Diocese of Sarum to be observed and kept of
every of them in their offices and callings, as to them shall appertain, for
the advancement of gods honor, thincrease of virtue, and good order to be
continued within his said Diocese, and the same to be enquired of and put in
use by all the Archdeacons, Commissaries, and other officers excercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction under the said Bishop, according to the limittes
of their several offices and jurisdictions, in their Synodes, visitations,
inquiries, and Courts.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham for Richard Iackson, and are to be sold
in Gutter Lane at the sign of the red Lion.

Anno. 1569.

February. 22.

Injunctions given by the reverend father in Christ John, by Gods providence,
Bishop of Sarisburie. etc.
For the Clergy.
INPRIMIS, you must travel diligently and painefully to set forth Gods true
religion, and adourne the same with example of godly life, being circumspect
that you offend no man, either by light behavior, or by light apparel.

2 Item, upon every Sunday and holyday, ye shall in your Church at convenient
hours reverently and distinctly say or sing the Common prayer appointed by the
laws of this Realm, both in the fore noone and after noone, so turning and
placing your selves, as the people may best hear the same, and upon every
Wednesday and Fridaye (not being holydaye) ye shall say the Letanie and other
Prayers appointed for the day, and shall also at all times requisite and
convenient, duly and reverently minister the two holy Sacraments according to
such order as is set forth in the book of Common prayer, and administration of
the Sacraments. etc.

3 Item, ye shall every Sunday, and every holy day openly in the Church,
hear and instruct the children and servants of both sexes within your
parish, at the least so many of them at once by course as the time will serve,
and as ye may well hear and instruct for an hour at the least before Evening
prayer, in the ten commandments, the Articles of the belief, and the Lords
prayer, and diligently examine and teach them the Cathechisme, set forth in the
book of common prayer.

4 Item, to the intent this thing may be more effectuallye executed, ye shall
take the names of all the children and servant of both sexes in your parish
that be above six years of age, and under twenty, which can not say the
Catechisine, and shall call by course certain of them by name, every Sunday
and every holy day to come to the Catechism, whereby you may easilye note and
observe, what parents or masters be negligent in sendyng their children and
servants to be instructed, and take occasion thereof both privately and
openly to exhort them to send their youth as they are appointed.

5 Item, you shall not admit to the receiving of the holy Communion any of
your Parish, which be openly known to live in any notorious sin without
repentance, unless the same person do first openly reconcile him or hirselfe
again to ye sati^^^ction of the congregation, nor any malicious person that is
notoriously out of charity, without private reconciliation first made to the
party against whom the malice shall be conceived and borne.

6 Item, you shall not admit to the holy Communion any of your parish, men, or
women, being above twenty years of age, that can not say by heart the ten
commandments, the Articles of the faith, and the Lords prayer, nor any being
above twelve years, and under twenty years of age, that can not say by heart
the Catechism that is set forth in the book of common prayer.

7 Item, for that purpose ye shall before Easter and all other times of the
year when the holy Communion is to be by you ministered, give warning before
unto your parishoners to come unto you, either in the after noone of some
Sunday or holy day, or the day before they purpose to receive, or at some other
times before, as necessity shall cause you to appoint, if there be any
multitude, or in the morning at the furthest, before they shall receive, so
that it be before the beginning of Morning prayer, so many of them as intend to
receive, and not only to signify unto you their names, to the intent ye may
keep a register or note of all such persons as from time to time shall
communicate, but also to be by you examined, whether they can say by heart the
ten commandments, the articles of the faith, the Lords prayer, and the
Catechism, according as after the diversity of their ages is above required,
and such of them as either can not or will not recite the same by heart unto
you, ye shall repel and put back from the holy Communion, until they shall
be able and willing to learn, and by heart recite the same unto you. For your
better assistance wherein, ye shall call upon and require the Churchwardens and
sworn men of your parish to be present, one of them at the least, at every
such examination to the intent they may help to put this good order in
practice, and take a note of such wilful and negligent persons, as shall be
found faulty in this behalf, and so present the same to the Ordinary.

8 Item, ye shall not admit to answer as Godfathers or Godmothers at the
christening of any child, any person or persons, except he, she, and they
have before received the holy Communion, and can say by heart the articles of
the christian faith, and will recite the same before the Minister, if he, she,
or they be thereunto required.

9 Item, ye shall every Sunday when there is no sermon in your Church,
distinctly and plainly read one of the Homelies set forth by the Queens
Majesty's authority or one part thereof at the least, in such sort as the same
is appointed to be read.

10 Item, ye shall not take upon you to expound any scripture or matter of
doctrine by way of exhortation or otherwise, in your own Church or other
where, unless ye be admitted so to do, by the Ordinary, or be licenced to
preach.

11 Item, you shall read openly in your Church in time of divine service,
twice every year upon some of the Sundays within one month next after the
feasts of Easter and Saint Michaell tharchaungell, plainly without addition or
change: A declaration of certain principal articles of religion, set forth
by both the Archbishops and the rest of the Bishops of this realm, for the
unity of doctrine.

12 Item, you shall preach, or by such as are lawfully licensed, shall cause to
be preached in the Churches where ye are Persons or Uicars, one sermon every
quarter of the year at the least.

13 Item, none of you shall serve. ij. cures at one time without special
license under your ordinaries seal.

14 Item, no Curate shall serve any cure within this Diocese, without
special license in writing under the Ordinaries seal.

15 Item, for the putting of the Churchewardens and sworn men better in
remembrance of their duty, in observing and noting all such as do offend in
not coming to divine service, ye shall openly every sunday after ye have read
the second lesson at Morning and Evening prayer, monish and warn the
Churchwardens and sworn men of your parish, to look to their charge in this
behalf, and to observe who contrary to the law do that day offend, either
in absenting themselves negligentlye or wilfully from their parish Church or
Chapel, or irreverently use themselves in the time of divine service and so
note the same, to the intent they may either present such offenders to the
Ordinary, when they shall be required thereunto, or levy and take by way of
distress to the use of the poor, such forfeytures as are appointed by a
statute made in that behalf.

16 Item, ye shall from time to time diligently call upon and exhort your
Parishioners to confer and give toward the relief of the poor as they
may well spare, and specially when ye visit them that be sick, and make
their testaments, and for your own parts also shall charitablye relieve the
poor to your ability.

17 Item, ye shall daily read at the least one chapter of the old testament,
and another of the new, with good aduisement, and such of you as be under the
degree of a Master of Art, shall provide and have of your own, according to
the Queens Majesty's Injunctions at the least the new testament, both in
Latin and English conferring the one with the other, every day one Chapter
thereof at the least, so that upon the examination of the Archdeacon, Co^missary
or their officers, in synodes and visitations, it may appear how ye profit in
the study of holy Scripture.

18 Finally, any of you shall not keep any suspected woman in your house, or
be an incontinent liver, given to drunkenness or idleness, or be a haunter of
Tauernes, Alehouses, or suspected places, or a hunter, hawker, dicer, carder,
tabler, swearer, or otherwise give any evil example of life, but contrariwise
at all times when ye shall have leisure, ye shall hear or read somewhat of holy
scripture, or shall occupy your selves with some other honest study or
exercise, and oftentimes give your selves to earnest prayer. And shall always
do the things which appertain to honesty, and move your Parishioners to
quiet and concord, helping to reconcile them which shall happen to be at
variance at any time, and by all means ye can, endeavor to profit the common
wealth, having always in mind that ye ought to excel all other in purity of
life, and should be examples to the people to live well and christianly, not
giving any way just cause of offense.

For the Churchwardens and enquirers, commonly called the sworn men of every
Parish.
INprimis, yt you the Church wardens and enquirers in every Parish within the
Diocese of Sarum shall upon your oaths duly and truly certify and present in
writing unto the Ordinary, Archedcacon of the place, or Commissarie, or to
other officers appointed in this behalf, once or oftener in every year as
hereafter is appointed, at such certain days and places as shall be
signified unto you from time to time, all such matters as hereafter ensue. That
is to say.

1 First, ye shall certify and present once in every quarter of a year,
whether your Persons, Uicars, and Curates, do diligently, obedientlye, and
duly observe and keep all the said Injunctions given unto them, as is above
mentioned, so far forth as the same do any manner of way concern them or any
of them, and if they do not, then which and how many of the said Injunctions
do they not keep, and in what points do they violate and break the same.

2 Item, whether the Queens majesty's Injunctions be quarterly read by your
Persons, Uicars, or Curates.

3 Item, to certify and present quarterly whether there be any among you, that
is a hinderer of true religion, or a favorer of the Romish power, or that
stubbornely refuses to conform himself to unity and godly religion, set
forth by common authority, or any that wilfully and obstinatelye defend or
maintain any herisies, or false doctrine, contrary to the holy scriptures,
and what his or their names are.

4 Item, to present quarterly, whether any parish Clark or any other person not
being ordered at ye least for a Deacon, do presume to solemnise matrimony or
minister the sacrament of baptism, or deliver to the communicants the Lords
cup at the celebration of the holy communion, and what he or they be, that so
do. And whether any person not being a Minister, Deacon, or at the least
tolerated by the Ordinary in writing, do attempt to say the common prayer,
and other divine service openly in the Church, and what he is that so does.

5 Item, to certify quarterly, whether your Curate presume to serve in your
Parish Church without license from the Ordinary in writing, and under seal,
or whether any serve two cures without license.

6 Item, to certify yearly at the visitation, whether your Parish have a
Bible of their own, the book of common prayer, a Psalter, the two books of
Homilies, the book called the Paraphrases of Erasmus, and other books
requisite, and a fair and comely Communion cup of silver with a cover of silver
for the same, which cover may serve for the ministration of the Lords bread.

7 Item, to certify likewise, whether your Quiere be comlye and orderly kept,
whether ye have a fair and comely Communion table standing upon a frame with a
fair linen cloth to lay upon the same, and some carpet or covering of silk,
Buckeram, or such like for the clean keeping thereof, and a decent large
Surples with sleeves for the Minister, to be used of him in all his
ministration within the Church, and also a chist or box for the almose of the
poor.

8 Item, to certify quarterly, whether your register book of christenings,
marriages and burials, be duly kept, and the same christenings, marriages, and
burials as they happen from time to time, be entered by your Minister into the
same book, in the presence of you the Churchwardens or one of you.

9 Item, to certify quarterly, whether when any christian body is in passing,
the bell be tolled, and the Minister called to comfort the sick person, and
after the time of his or her passing, there be any more ringing but one short
peale before the burial, and another short peale after the burial. And
whether on all Saints day after Evening prayer there be any ringing in your
Church, or other superstitious ceremonies used, tending to the maintenance of
the popish purgatory, or of praying for the dead, and who they be that use or
do the same. And whether there be any ringing or tolling of Belles on Sundays
or holy days between Morning prayer and the Letanie, or in any time of divine
service, or reading of ye homilies or preaching, except one bell, in convenient
time to be rong or tolled before the sermon. And who they be that so do ring,
or toll the belles otherwise.

10 Item, to present yearelye at the visitation, whether there be any in your
parish, man or woman, being of convenient age, that has not received the holy
communion thrice at the least in every year, and namelye at Easter or
thereabout for once, and what their names are. And whether yearly before
Easter at such convenient times (and namelye on Sundays in Lent at after
noone) as the Person, Uicar, or Curate shall appoint and require his
parishioners to recite unto him the Catechism, or at the least the Lords
prayer, the Articles of the christian belief, and the ten commandments by
heart in English, if any wilfully and stubbornly refuse to recite the same,
whether you the Churchwardens and sworn me^, or some of you, do assist and aid
the minister therein.

11 Item, to present quarterly, whether such scholemaisters as teach in your
parish, be of a sincere and sound religion, and be diligent in teaching and
bringyng up of your youth godly, and whether also they be allowed by the
Ordinary to teach.

12 Item, to certify and present quarterly, whether all fathers, mothers, and
masters of your Parish cause their children and servants both mankind and
womankind, being above six years of age, and under twenty years, which have
not learned the catechism, or at the least such and so many of the^ as your
minister shall appoint, diligently to come to ye church every sunday and every
holyday at the time appointed, and there obediently to hear, learn, and be
ordered by your Minister, until such time as they have learned all the said
catechism by heart, and what be the names of those that do not cause their
children and servants so to come to the church to be instructed and examined.

13 Item, to certify and present quarterly, whether the lay people of your
Parish especially householders having no lawful excuse to be absent, do
faithfully and diligently endeavor themselves to resort to their parish church
or Chapel on the holy days, and chiefly on the Sundaies, to Morning and
Evening prayer, and upon reasonable let thereof, to some other usual place
where common prayer is used, and then, and there abide orderly and soberly,
during all the time of common prayer, Homilies, preachings, and other service
of God there used, and what be the names of those that negligentlye or
wilfully absent themselves, or come very late to the Church upon the Sundaies
and holy days, but especially upon the Sundays.

14 Item, to certify and present quarterly the names of such of your
parishioners as walk, talk, or otherwise irreverently behave themselves in the
church, or use any gaming abroad, or in any house, or sit in the streates or
churchyard, or in any Tavern or Alehouse, upon the Sunday or other holy day
in the time of common prayer, sermon, or reading of any of the Homilies.

15 Item, to certify and present quarterly, whether you the Churchwardens and
sworn men do levy and gather of every person that wilfully or negligently
absenteth him or her self from their Parish church, or irreverently behaueth
him or her self in the church in time of divine service upon the Sundaies and
other holy days, the forfaiture of. xij. d. for every such offense, according
to a statute made in the first year of the Queens majesty's reign that now is,
and have put the same forfaitures to the use of the poor of the parish, and
what particular su^mes of money are quarterlye forfayted that way, and by
whom, and how much thereof is levied and delivered to the Collectors of the
poor. And if any such forfaitures be not levied incase of such offenses, by
whose default it happens, that the same are not levied, and what be the names
of such as offend that way, and do not pay the said forfaiture.

16 Item, to certify and present quarterly, whether there be any Innekepers,
alehousekepers, Uictuallers, or Tiplers, within your parish, yt admit or suffer
any persou or persons in their houses, to eat and drink, or play at cards,
tables, or other games in time of common prayer, preaching or reading of
Homilies on the sundays or holy days, and whether there be any shops open on
sundays or holy days, or any Butchers or others, that use to sell meat or
other things upon the sundays or holy days in like time of common prayer,
preaching, or reading of the Homilies, and what be the names of the persons
that so offend. And whether in any Fayres or common Markets falling upon the
sunday, there be any showing of any wares before Morning prayer be done.

17 Item, to certify and to present likewise, whether you have Collectors for
the poor of your Parish, whether they do their duty in gathering weekly,
and distributing the alms of the poor, according to a statute made in the
fifth year of the Queens Majesty's reign, and make a just account thereof
quarterly.

18 Item, to certify and present likewise all such persons as be of ability
and do obstinately or frowardly refuse to give reasonablye toward the
relief of the poor, or do wilfullye discourage others from so charitable a
deed, and what be their names.

19 Item, to certify and present at ye least quarterly all swearers and
blasphemers of Gods name, all drunkerds, adulterers, fornicators, ribauldes,
incestuous persons, bawdes or receivers of such incontinent persons, or of
strange women with child, whose husbands are unknown, or any persons that
are vehemently suspected of such faults, or that be not of good name and
fame, touching such crimes and faults, and all sowers of discord between
neighbor and neighbor within your Parish.

20 Item, to certify likewise, whether your church and chauncell be
sufficiently repaired, and cleanlye kept, and the mansion house of your Person
or Uicar with buyldings thereunto belonging likewise well repaired, and your
Churchyard well fensed, and cleanly kept, and if any of the same be ruynous,
and in decay, through whose default it is so. Whether the Churchwardens of the
last year were enjoined to have repaired any part of the Church, or to have
fenced the Churchyard, and did neglect to do the same.

21 Item, to certify whether the Churchwardens of the last year have given to
the Parish a just account of the church goods that were committed to their
charge, and what church goods they have sold, and to whome^ and whether to
the profit of the church or no? And whether any person suppress the last will
of the dead, and perform not Legacies bequethed to the church, or to Orphans,
pore maids marriages, high ways, schools, or to any other godly use.

22 Item, to certify and present, whether the churchwardens and sworn men of
the last year have of any private corrupt affection concealed any crime, or
other disorder in their time done in your parish, and have not presented the
same to the Archdeacon, or Commissarie, or other officers, having been charged
and enjoined upon their oaths to present the same, and what crime or disorder
the same was. And whether they or any of the^ at any such time or times as they
should have been at divine service in the church upon the sundays and
holidays, and should there have observed such Persons as then were absent from
the Church, have themselves been absent from the church, and have sit in ye
tavern or alehouse, or have been idle else where, or at ye boules, cards,
tables, or other gaming, in time of divine service without regard of their
office or duty in that behalf.

23 Item, to certify and present once in the year, whether for the retayning
of the perambulation of the circuit of your Parish in the Rogation days,
commonly called the Gang week, your Minister, and your Clerk without wearing
any Surplesses upon them, and you the Churchwardens and sworn men, with
certain others of the substanciall men of your Parish, do yearelye walk the
accustomed bounds of your Parish, with giving of thanks, and using of such
order of prayers and Homilies, as be appointed by the Queens Maiest^^s
authority in that behalf, without carrying of banners, staying at crosses, or
using any other superstitious ceremonies in any of your perambulations.

24 Item, to present likewise, whether there have been any Lords of misrule,
or disguised persons in Christmas, or daunsers, minstrels, or May gamers, at
any other time, that have irreverently come into your Church, and there played
vuseemely parts, with scoffs, ie^ts, and ribauldrie talk, or daunsing, and
namely in time of Common prayer, and what their names be, and the names also of
such others as came with them to maintain such disorder.

25 Item, to present quarterly, whether ye know any to be married within the
degrees of affinity or consanguinitie prohibited by the laws of God, or any
that being divorced and separated for the same, do yet notwithstanding
cohabite and keep company still together, or whether any being married without
those degrees have unlawfully forsaken their Wives, or Husbands, or married
others. For the more certain knowledge of which degrees, you shall procure,
that the Table touching the degrees of Matrimony ^^st set forth by the most
Reverend father in God Matthew Archbishop of Cantorburye, be fastened in some
convenient place in your Church.

God save the Queen.

