ARTICLES To be enquired of, by the Church-VVardens, and Sworne-men, in the
Visitation of the Right Worshipful, the Archdeacon of SVRREY



Printed at London by Miles Flesher. Anno Dom. 1626.

The tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOu shall swear, that upon due consideration of these Articles given you in
charge, you shall present every such person of or within your Parish, as you
shall know to have committed any offense, or omitted any duty mentioned in any
of these Articles, or which are publicly defamed, or vehemently suspected of
any such offense or negligence: So help you God, by contents of his holy
Gospel.

ARTICLES
Touching the Church.
WHether is your Church or Chapel, with the Chancell thereof, and every part
of either of them, well and sufficiently repaired, glased, paued, or any thing
noisome or unseemly?

2 Whether is your Churchyard well fenced, as has been accustomed? if not,
whose default is it?

3 Whether has there been any fighting, chiding, brawling, or quarelling in
your Church or Churchyard: and by whom?

4 Whether is the mansion house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, with all the
building thereunto belonging, and Church-house sufficiently repaired,
maintained, and to their right uses, employed?

5 Whether have you in your Church the Bible in the largest Volume, the book
of common prayer lately authorized by his majesty, the books of Homilies
allowed, the two Psalters, a convenient Pulpit for the Preaching, a decent seat
for the Minister to say Service in, conveniently placed, a strong chest with an
hole in the lid, and three locks and keys, one for the Minister, the other
for the Churchwardens, for the Alms of the poor, and the keeping the
Register Book of the Christenings, Marriages and burials?

6 Whether have you in your Church a Font of stone for Baptism, set in the
ancient usual place, a decent Table for the Communion conveniently placed,
covered with silk or other decent stuff in time of divine Service, and with a
fair Linen cloth over that, at the administration of the Communion?

7 Whether have you all such Bells, ornaments, and other vtensils as have
anciently belo^ged unto your Church: a Communion cup of silver with a cover; a
fair standing pot or stoop of silver or pewter for the Wine upon the
Communion Table, a comely surplesse with large sleeves, a Register book of
parchment for Christenings, Marriages, and Burials, a book for the names of all
strange Preachers, subscribed with their names, and the names of the Bishop or
others by whom they had License?

8 Whether are weekly the names and surnames of all persons married, christened,
and buried, and of their parents, with the day and year, entered into your said
parchment book, and every leaf being full, subscribed by you the Ministers
and Churchwardens?

9 Whether are all your seats in your Church in good repair, cleanly kept,
conveniently placed, and the parishioners in them, or elsewhere orderly set
and is there any contention or striving for any seat or place amongst them?

10 Whether in any of your Churches the partition between the Chancell and the
body of the Church, be taken away? And how long since, and by whom? have you a
Terrier of all the gleab-land, and other appurtinancies belonging to your
Church?

Touching the Ministry, service, and Sacraments.
WHether is the whole Common prayer said or sung by your Minister both morning
and evening, distinctly and reverently every Sunday and holyday, and on their
Eues, and at convenient and usual times of those days and in most convenient
place of the Church, for the edifying of the people?

2 Whether does your Minister observe the orders, rytes, and ceremonies
prescribed in the book of Common prayer, in reading the holy Scriptures,
prayers and administration of the Sacraments, without diminishing in regard of
preaching, or any other respect, or adding any thing in the matter or form
thereof? does he baptize in any basin or other vessel, and not in the ordinary
Font?

3 Whether does your Minister on Wednesdayes and Frydayes, not being holidays
at the accustomed hours of service, resort to the Church, and say the Letany
prescribed, and does your Clarke or Sexton give warning before, by foulling of
a bell on those days?

4 Whether does your Minister, as often, as he administreth the Communion wear
the Surplesse and first receive it himself? Whether does he use any bread or
wine newly brought, before the words of institution be rehearsed, and the bread
and wine present on the table? whether does he deliver the bread and wine to
every communicant severally?

5 Whether does your Minister give warning publicly in the Church at morning
prayer, the Sunday before he administreth the Communion for the better
preparation of the Parishioners?

6 Whether has your Minister admitted to the Communion any notorious sinner
openly known or defamed, or any who has openly and maliciously contended with
his neighbor, before repentance and reconciliation made and done by appointment
of the Ordinary?

7 Whether has your Minister admitted to the Communion any Churchwarden or
Sideman, who has wittingly and willingly neglected (contrary to his oath) to
present any public offense or scandal, being moved to present either by some
of his neighbors, the Minister, or his Ordinary?

8 Whether has your Minister administered the Communion to any but such as
kneel, or do any refuse to kneel? has he administered to any who refuse to
be present at public Prayer? or is there any who has depraved the Book of
common Prayer, administration of the Sacraments, or the Rites and Ceremonies
prescribed, or the Articles of Religion agreed upon anno Dom. 1562. or the
book of ordering Priests and Bishops: or spoken against his Majesty's
Supremacy: or have any been for these causes repelled, and what be their
names?

9 Whether has your Minister more Benefices then one? if he have, how far
distant are they; how often is he absent in the year? when he is absent, has
he an allowed Preacher for his Curate?

10 Whether is your Minister and allowed Preacher? if he be, does he every
Sunday in your Church, or some other near adjoining where no Preacher is,
preach one Sermon every Sunday?

11 Whether does your Minister being no Preacher allowed presume to expound the
Scripture in his own Cure, or elsewhere? does he procure every Month a Sermon
to be preached in his Cure by preachers lawfully licensed, and on every Sunday
when there is no Sermon, does he or his Curate read some one of the Homilies
prescribed?

12 Whether is your Curate allowed by the Ordinary under his hand and seal, to
serve in your Cure, and whether does he serve two Churches or Chapels in one
day?

13 Whether does your Minister in saying the public prayers and usually
administering the Sacraments, wear a decent Surplesse with sleeves? and being
Graduate, does he wear therewith a hood by the order of the Uniuersities,
agreeable to his degree?

14 Whether has your Minister or any other Preacher in your Church, preached
any thing to confute or impugn any doctrine delivered by any other preacher,
and has he and they used the prayer for Christ's Catholic Church, as is
prescribed by the Canon?

15 Whether has or does any preach in your Church which refuses to conform
himself to the Laws, Rites and Ordinances established, or which has not
first showed a sufficient License?

16 Whether does your Minister in his Sermons four times in the year at the
least, teach and declare the Kings Majesty's power within his Realms to be the
highest power under God, to whom, all within the same owe most loyalty and
obedience, and that al foraine power is justly taken away?

17 Whether does your Minister every Sunday and Holyday half an hour before
Evening prayer or more, eramine and instruct the youth in the ten
Commandments, the Belief, the Lords Prayer, and the Catechism set forth in
the book of Common Prayer?

18 Whether has your Minister married any which have not been three several
Sundays or holidays asked in your Church in the time of Divine service,
without License? and has he without License, married any, or with any License
but only from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of the Diocese,
or his Chancellor?

19 Whether has your Minister either with License or without, married any at
other times then between the hours of Eight and Twelve in the forenoone, or
in any private house, or before their Parents or Governors (the parties being
under the age of 21. years) have testified their consents?

20 Whether does your Minister declare to the people every Sunday at the time
appointed, what holidays and fasting days be the week following? does he
being a Preacher confer with all Recusants, and persons excommunicate or
suspended in his parish: being no Preacher, does he procure a sufficient
Preacher to reclaim them thereby?

21 Whether does your Minister keep a note of all persons excommunicate, and
once every six months does he denounce them which have not obtained their
absolution, on some Sunday in service time, that others may be admonished to
refrain their company?

22 Whether death your Minister having notice given him diligently visit the
sick (the Disease not being infectious) does he instruct and comfort them,
does he then move them to make their Testaments, and remember the poor, and
other works of charity?

23 Whether has your Minister refused to baptize any child brought to the
Church upon any Sunday or Holyday, or to bury any corpse brought into the Church
or Churchyard, or to Church any woman, having had convenient warning thereof?

24 Whether has your Minister, being truly informed of the danger of death of
any infant unbaptized, and being desired to go to the place where the child
is, to baptize it, neglected to go, by means whereof the child died
unbaptized?

25 Whether does your Minister at any time preach or administer the Communion
in any private house, or church any women except when any are so impotent that
they cannot go to Church, or are very dangerously sick, where and how often
has he so done?

26 Whether has your Minister held or appointed any public Fast, or been
present at any? does he or any other person in your Parish hold any Lecture or
exercise, without the License of the Bishop, under his hand or seal, or
attempt by fasting, or other wise to cast out any devils?

27 Whether has there been any secret conuenticles or meetings in your Parish,
by any Priest, Minister, or others, tending to the deprauing of the form of
Prayer, Doctrine, or the government of the Church?

28 Whether does your Minister in his journey, wear a cloak with sleeves,
called a Priests cloak?

29 Whether does your Minister resort to any Tauernes or Alehouses, or does he
board or lodge in any such place? or does use any base or servile labor,
drinking, riot, dice, cards, tables, or any other unlawful games? Is he
contentious, a hunter hawker, dancer, swearer, suspected of any incontinency,
or has given any evil example of life?

30 Whether is there in your Parish any Minister or Deacon, who has forsaken
his calling, using himself in his course of life as a Gentleman or other Lay
man? Or any that is not in holy Orders, read Common prayer or use any
ministerial duty in your Church or Chapel?

Touching Schoolemasters.
Whether have you in your Parish any Schoolmasters, who teaches either in
public School, or private house, is he of sound religion, or does he give any
evil example of life? is he allowed by the Ordinary? or does your Minister or
Curate teach? and is he allowed in like manner?

2 Whether does your Minister or Schoolmaster who teaches, teach the
Catechism by authority set forth?

Touching the Parish Clarke, and Sexton.
WHether have you a Parish Clarke sufficient for his place, of the age of 20
years at the least? is he of honest conversation, can he read, write, and
sing? is he diligent in his office, and serviceable to his Minister, and not
given to overmuch drink, or any other vice? is he chosen by the Parson or
Vicar, does he take upon him his Clarkeship before he has taken the Oath of
Supremacy before the Lord Bishop, or his Commissary?

2 Whether does your Clarke meddle with any thing above his office, as
churching of women, burying of the dead, reading of prayers, or the like?

3 Whether does your Clarke or Sexton keep your Church clean, the doors fast
locked, is any thing by his default lost or spoiled in the Church? does he
suffer any unseasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in your Church?

4 Whether does your Clarke or Sexton, when any is passing out of this life,
neglect to toll a Bell, having notice thereof, or the party being dead, does he
suffer any more then one short peale, and before his huriall one, and after the
same another?

5 Whether does any in your Parish refuse to pay unto the parish Clark or
Sexton, such wages as are unto them due, and have been accustomably paid?

Touching Parishioners.
Whether has any in your Parish spoken against or any way impugned the Kings
Majesty's Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, the truth and doctrine of the
Church of England, the form of Gods worship contained in the Book of Common
prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments?

2 Whether has any in your parish spoken against or impugned the rites and
ceremonies established in the Church, the government by Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, and others that bear office in the same?

3 Whether any have in your parish spoken against or impugned the form of
making and consecrating Bishops, Priests or Deacons, or have any separated
themselves from the society of the congregation, and combined in a new
Frotherhood, or depraved the Synod lately held by the Kings authority?

4 Whether does any in your Parish profane, violate, or misspend he Sunday or
holyday, or any part of them, using any offensive conversation, or worldly
labor in those days?

5 Whether have any in your Parish in the time of Divine Service, covered his
head, albeit he has no infirmity, in which case a cap or nightcoyfe is
allowed: or is there any who has not reverently kneeled when the general
confession, Let any, or other prayers are read, and which do not stand up at
the saying of the Belief?

6 Whether has any in your Parish disturbed the Service or Sermon by walking,
talking, or any other way, or departed out of the Church during the Service or
Sermon, without some urgent cause, or loytered about the Church or Church Porch?

7 Whether do all Parishioners receive the holy Communion thrice every year
at the least, whereof the feast of Easter to be one, and have all being of the
age of xvii years duly received, or not?

8 Whether has any Parent been urged to be present, or admitted to answer as
Godfather for his own child, or has any Godfather or Godmother made any other
answer or speech then is prescribed by the Book, or have any been admitted for
such a baptism, who have not first received the Communion, do any keep
their children longer then is convenient?

9 Whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, come and cause
their children, servants and Aprentices to come duly to the Church, and
according to the Ministers directions to be instructed or catechized?

10 Whether have any persons married together within the degrees of
consanguinitie or affinity prohibited, set forth in a Table, appointed to be
placed in every Church?

11 Whether have any persons once lawfully married, forsaken each other, or do
live asunder without the authority of the Ordinary, or do any being divorced
or separated, marry again the former wife or husband yet living?

12 Whether have any been married in the times wherein marriage is by law
restrained, without lawful License viz. from the Saturday next before Aduent
Sunday, until the fourteenth of Januarie: and from the Saturday next before
Septuagesima Sunday, until the Monday next after Low Sunday: and from the
Sunday next before the Rogation week, until Trinity Sunday?

13 Whether have any in your Parish irreverently used your Minister, or have
any laid violent hands upon him, or disgraced his office and calling by word or
deed?

14 Whether have you in your Parish any dweller or soiourner, who is a
maintainer of popish Doctrine or suspected to keep schismatic books, or to
favor any heresy or error?

15 Whether have you any common resorters unto your Church, which are not of
your parish, or do any such, hear divine service, and receive the Communion
amongst you: what be their names, and of what parish are they?

16 Whether have any in time of divine Service, upon sundaies or holidayes,
opened their shops, exercised their trade, used any gaming, been in Tavern or
Alehouse, or otherwise employed?

17 Whether are there in your Parish by common fame and report, any Adulterers,
Fornicators, Incestuous persons, Bawdes, receivers, close favorers, c^^iueyers
away, or which suffer to depart any incontinent persons unpunished? and
blasphemers, common swearers, drunkards, riba^^s, usurers, malicious
slanderers, scolds, or sowers of discord, or any defamed of the said crimes?

18 Whether do any in your Parish administer the goods of the dead without
authority, or suppress their will and testament?

19 Whether do any refuse to pay to the reparations, ornaments, and other
things required in your Church, as they are indifferently sessed, or any other
dwelling out of your parish, which hold land in your parish?

20 Whether has any person excommunicated, been suffered to hear divine
Service or Sermon, to receive the Sacraments, to be married or churched: or have
any excommunicate been buried in Christian burial? do any frequent their
company, who be they?

21 Whether has any in your parish been christened, churched, buried, or
received the Communion, or been married out of your Church without license both
parties dwelling in your parish?

22 Whether have all women in your Parish delivered of child, come at
convenient time after to Church to give thanks, and have they been churched
according to the book of common prayer?

23 Whether has the perambulation of the circuit of the parish been observed
once every year: if not whose default is it?

24 Whether have any in your parish given she churchwardens, or Sidemen, or
any of them; evil words, for doing their duty according to their oath and
conscience?

Touching Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
Whether do any in your Parish take upon them to be Churchwarden or Sideman,
which are not lawfully chosen by the Minister and parishioners according to the
canon, or do any continue that office longer then one year, except he be
chosen again, and are all such officers chosen yearly in Easter week?

2 Whether do your Churchwardens within one month at most, after their year
ended, before the Minister and parishioners, give up a just account of all such
money, and other things, as they have received, and bestowed? have they
delivered all remaining in their hands belonging to the Church or parish, by
bill indented, to the next Churchwarden?

3 Whether have the Churchwardens, with the advice of the Minister from time to
time provided a sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and (...) wine for the
number of Communicants?

4 Whether do the Churchwardens and Sworne-men before every Uisitation and at
other times, when there is just occasion, meet and confer about their
presentiments and the answering of their Articles? and who has (after notice
given him of the time and place) carelessly absented himself?

5 Whether the forfeiture of twelve pence for absence from Church, appointed by
statute for the use of the poor, be taken and leauied by the churchwardens and
employed according to the said statute: and whether is the same forfeiture
taken of all persons which stand wilfully suspended or excommunicated?

6 Whether have any Churchwardens lost, sold, or detained any goods,
Ornaments, Bells, Rents, or implements of the Church?

7 Whether do the Churchwardens and Sidemen, suffer any to say divine
Service, or preach, being not lawfully allowed? and do they, about the midst
of Divine Service, usually walk out of the Church, and see who are abroad in
any Alehouse, or elsewhere absent, or evil employed, and whether have they
presented all such to the Ordinary?

8 Whether do you know or have heard a fame of any offense committed, or duty
omitted by any of your parish, before your time, and heretofore not presented
to the Ordinary, or as yet not reformed, and whether have you presented the
same?

9 Whether has any part of your Church been lately altered, new built, or any
addition made thereunto, the walls pulled down, new doors made into the
Church, or any sollaries built there by any, without allowance of the Ordinary?

10 Whether is any part of your Church employed to any profane use, is your
Church Porch, Church walls, and Churchyard, cleanly kept without any
annoyance, in whose default is such annoyance?

11 Finally, do you know of any matter or cause, which is a breach of the
laws Ecclesiastical, here not expressed?

FINIS.

