ARTICLES to be enquired of within the Dioces of Norwiche, in the
Metropoliticall visitation of the most Reverend father in God, MATTHEW, by the
providence of God, Archebyshop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan, In the year of our Lord GOD, M. D. LXVII.

M. C.

Imprinted at London by Reginalde Wolf.

Anno Domini M. D. LXVII.

Instructions to the Commissioners for the dioces of Norwiche.
1 First, that you do with all diligence travel to reduce the state of the
clergy unto one uniform order in their ministration and preaching: and that
without any parciall respect you will put in dew execution the Queens majesty's
Ecclesiastical laws, Statutes, Injunctions, and her highness other
commandments given and published in that behalf.

2 Item, yt in all places in your cyrcuite, you give in charge not only unto
the curates and ministers, but also unto the Churchwardens of every church and
chapel, that they do not admit and suffer any person to preach or
minister in their several church or chapel, before they shall first see
their several lycences under seal in due form, under the pain that may
follow thereof.

3 Item, you shall take diligent heed, that no fees but due and of old
accustomed, be exacted or taken of any of yt people by any register, clerk,
somner, or any other your ministers or attendantes.

4 Item, for the better certainty and knowledge of all duties and fees unto
such as should pay the same, you shall note the certain some thereof with one
of your hands at the least in some part of every Instrument or writing that
shall pass your seal or grant.

5 Item, that you foresee yt no greater price be taken for the Articles which
you shall inquire of, together bound with ye Aduertisements then iiij. d. and
for ye table of ye degrees ij. d.

6 Item, when you have fynished your visitation and cyrcuite, (the charges of
your vyage being borne and discharged) if any part of the dew procurations by
you received of the clergy, do remain unspent, all the same you shall
distribute to the most poor and needye of the clergy that be residentes, and
keep hospitality upon their benefices in the said dyoces

Articles to be inquired of.
IN primis, whether Divine service

Item, whether you have in your paryshe churches

Item, whether your Prestes, Curates, or ministers prayer. And whether they do
celebrate the same divine service in the chauncell or in the Church, and do
use all Rites and orders prescribed in the book of Common prayer, etc. and none
other.



Item, whether your Curates or ministers or

Item, whether images and al other monuments down, according to the order
prescribed: and of the partition between the Chauncell and the Church be
kept. Whether your Churchyardes be well fen sed and cleanly kept. Whether
any sale have been made of your Church goods, by whom and to whom, and
what has been don with the monye thereof coming. Whether your Chauncels and
Parsonages be well and sufficiently repaired: Whether any man have pulled down
or discovered any (...), Chauncel, Chapel, Alms house, or such ^^e, or have
plucked down ye bells, or have felled or ^^yled any wood or timber in any
Church yard.

^^em, whether there be any Parsons that intrude

Item, whether your Parsons and Uicars be residente releaue the poor
charitably to their hability, according to the Queens Injunctions. Whether
they pray for the prosperous estate of the Queen's Majesty, as is prescribed in
her graces Injunctions.

Item, whether any of your ministers does or

Item, whether your ministers do call upon fathers,

Item, whether your Persons, Uicars, and Curates of life, or in unwont and
unseemly apparel.

Item, whether any of your benefices be vacant,

Item, whether your Ministers keep their registers

Item, whether your Parsons and Uicars have

Item, whether the lay people be diligent in coming to the Church on the
holy days, and with all humblenes, reverently and deuoutelye do give
themselves to the hearing of Commune prayer in the time thereof, and otherwise
occupy themselves in private prayers, readinge of Scriptures, or other
virtuous exercise. If any be negligente or wilful. Whether the forfaiture be
leued on their goods to the use of the poor, according to the laws of this
Realm in yt behalf provided. And what money has nen gathered by the
Churchewarde^s of the forfets.

Item, whether there be in your quarters any that

Item, whether, there be among you any

Item, whether there be in your parishes any Inkeepers commonly absente them
selves from their own Church: or otherwise idely or lewdlye prophaneth the
Sabbath day. Any that keep any secret co^uenticles, preachings, lectures or
readings, contrary to ye laws. Any suspected of heresy, or that maintain any
erroneous opinions contrary to the laws of almighty God and good religion, by
public authority in this Realm set forth.

Item, whether there be in these parties which

Item, whether there be any which of late have

Item, whether there be any money or stoke appertaininge hands, that refuse or
differreth to pay the same: or that uses fraud, deceit or delay to make
any account in the prelence of the Honestye in the parish, for the same.
Whether your Church wardens and others, before time, have given the yearly
account, according unto the custom as it has been aforetime used. whether
the store ofthe poor men's box be openly and indifferently given where
need is, without parciall affection. whether any stock of cattle or grain
appertaining to your churches, be decayed: by whose negligence, and in whose
hands.

Item, whether your schoolemaisters be of a sincere

Item, whether there be any among you that use

Item, whether there be any in these parts, that live not together, but
slau^derouslie live a part: Any that have married out of the parish church,
where they ought to have the same solemnised.

Item, whether any your Ordinaries within this

Item, whether have any of them at any time wittingly

Generally, whether there be any evil livers or offenders of the laws of
almighty God: Any suspected of any notorious sin, fault or crime, to the
offense of Christian people committed: Any that stubburnlie refuse to conform
them self to unity and good religion: Any that bruteth abroad rumors of the
alteration of the same, or otherwise that disturbeth good orders, and the
quietness of Christ's Church and Christian congregation.

Imprinted at London by Reginald Wolf.

Anno Domini. M. D. LX VII.


