Injunctions to be observed and kept, within the Dioces of Saint Dauides,
exhibited in the Visitation, of the right Reverend Father in God, Marmaduke
Bishop of Saint Dauides aforesaied, in the 25. year of the reign of our
most gracious sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England
etc.
BEcause I dnderstande, there is used in most parts of my Dioces, an infinite
number of Popish Ceremonies and other things, contrary to the Laws of God,
and the Queen's majesty's most godly proceedings: I thought good, for the
avoiding of the same to set down these Injunctions followyng: Requiryng you,
and every of you (for that it tends to the glory of almighty God and ye
benefit of those people committed to my charge) to have a special care,
within ye limits of your charge, for the speedy observation, and fulfilling
of the same: In doing whereof, you shall not only obeie Gods Commandments,
observe her highness laws, and discharge your own duties. But shall also
greatly benefit the common weal, increase true Religion, and maintain the
Country in all virtue and godliness; where heretofore it has been (for the
most part) trained up in erroneous opinions, Idolitious amity, and wicked
Superstition.

Injunctions to be observed, as well of the Clergy, as Laity: within the
Dioces of Saint Dauies, etc.
FIrst, whereas heretofore in sondrie places, it has been a foolish use
amongst a sort of ignorant, blind Priests and Ministers, that at the saying
of these words, imediatly going before the distributio^ of the Sacramental
Bread and Wine: Who in the same night he was betrayed, took bread, and when he
had given thanks etc. Likewise after supper he took the cup etc. They would
take the bread and wine in their hands, lift it up and show it unto the
people: whereupon has ensued, horrible Idolatries, and religious adoration of
the Sacraments the^ selves, or rather of the bread and wine, as by kneelyng,
knockyng of the breast, liftyng up of hands, closyng of their eyes, with the
finger and the thumb. For the auoidyng whereof it is decreed, that no Person,
Vicare, or Curate, whatsoever, hereafter shall handle, lift up, or show unto
the people, the bread and wine, but shall let it lie still upon the Table,
until the distribution thereof, and then to break it, receive it himself, and
distribute it unto others, according to the orders of the book, without any
addition or detraction.

2 Item, for the better edefiyng and hearing of the people in the ordinary
Service, the Minister shall always stand, either in the body of the Church,
or at the least, in the lower end of the Chauncell, (where commonly the seat
of the Minister is) with his face always turned down unto the people, and
thence reverently, distinctly, and with a loud voice, read the said Service.

3 Item, that no notorious offendour, wrong doer, malicious person, Infant
under fourtene years of age, Idiot, Fre^ticke, or others, ignorant of the
principles of the Christian religion, and the doctrine of the Sacraments,
shall be admitted by any Minister to communicate.

4 Item, that there be no recourse by the Minister, to the Communion Table, to
say any part of service there, saving only when there is a Communion to be
ministered: for is does retain a memory, of the Idolatrous Mass: For the
auoidyng whereof, all the Service shall be said by the Minister, in his own
seat or Pulpit, with his face turned down toward the people: saving that
when there is any thing extraordinarily to be done: as Baptism, Burial,
Marriage, or thanks giuyng for women delivered: then he may use the accustomed
place thereof.

5 Item, that there be no Linen cloth laid upon the Communion Table, saving
that when there is a Communion to be ministered.

6 Item, when there is a Communion to be ministered, that the Communion Table
be placed at the lower end of the Chauncell, as nere unto the people as may
be convenient, and when the Ministration is done, remove it to the upper end
of the said Chauncell.

7 Item, that when there is a Communion, that all the people which will not
communicate being called thereunto, be commanded to depart for that time out
of the Church: after the general Confession made, in the name of the
communicantes, and if any be so stubborn, that they will no depart, then the
Minister to proceed no further in the Communion, but in the next consistory
court, complain of them, as interrupters and troublers of Gods divine service.

8 Item, that no Minister, do presume to minister any more Co^munions but
only one, in one Church in one day.

9 Item, that there be no Communion ministered in any Church, or otherwise
private, except there be at the least, three for every score communicantes
that be in the Parish, to communicate with the Minister.

10 Item, that none be admitted to receive the holy Communion, but such as the
Minister (by due examination) shall know, can perfectly say the Articles of
their faith, the ten Commandments, and the Lords Prayer, at the least,
yea, the younger sort must say the whole Cathechisme.

11 Item, that every man and woman do receive the holy Communion thrice in
every year at the least.

12 Item, that no Minister do admit any of an other Parish, to communicate
in his Parish Church.

Baptism.
FIrst, that no lay man or woman do presume to minister Baptism, but (if the
child be weak) that they send for the Minister of the Parish, and the
Midwife not to meddle with it at all, otherwise the^ is in the book of Common
Prayer.

2 Item, (to take away Superstition) the Minister shall not dippe the child
that is to be baptized in water, but once only, and that discreetly, or else
poor water upon him, once only, in the name of the Father, the Son, and of
the holy Ghost.

3 Item, that no Minister or Priest, do put on, or suffer others to put on the
childs head that is baptized, the Chrisom (as it is supersticiously called)
wherein has been great superstition, and yet is in sondrie places.

4 Item, that none be admitted to be Gossippes which be under 14. years of
age, and they to make an open confession at the Font, of the Articles of their
faith, yea, the younger sort must say the whole Cathechisme.

5 Item, that the father of the child that is to be baptized, be present at
the baptizing of his said child, during the whole action of Baptism.

6 Item, that the Minister shall not meet and receive the child that is to be
baptized, at the Church door or Porche, nor shall there say any piece of
Service for that purpose, which heretofore supersticiously has been used.

7 Item, the Minister shall not suffer the suerties or Gossippes, to put their
hands upon the head of the child, immediately after it is named, and baptized,
as if there were some virtue or hidden mystery therein.

Burial.
FIrst, that there be no Crosses of wood made and erected in sondrie places,
where they use to rest with the corpse: and especially that no wooden Crosses,
be set upon the Cross in the Church yard, or upon, or about his grave.

2 Item, that the Clark nor his deputy, do carry about the Town, a little
bell called the Saints bell before the Burial, after the use of Popish
superstition.

3 Item, that there be no offerynges at Burialles, whether directly or
indirectly: their Months minds, or twelve Months minds, as
sustpersticiously they have been termed and used.

4 Item, that there be no prayers made for the dead, either in the house or
upon the way, or else where: which thing supersticiously has been frequented
and tolerated by the Ministers.

5 Item, that the Clarke and one or two with him at the most, shall cast the
earth upon the corpse, and none but they.

6 Item, that there be no Candles used upon the corpse, whilst it is in the
Church.

7 Item, that no Ministers, when they resort to Burials, to any other Churches
then their own, shall wear any Surplesse, or such like attire more then
usual.

8 Item, that there be no ringyng of Belles at Burialles, saving one short
peale before the Burial, and an other after.

At the thanks giuyng for the deliverance of Women.
FIrst, the Minister shall not meet the Woman at the Church door, or Porche,
there taking her by the hand, and leadyng her into the Church, mumblyng to him
self I know not what, and that namely in Latin, as heretofore amongst them
has been used.

2 Item, that the Midwife go not before the woman, that is to yield her thanks
into the Church, and so up to the Communion Table: for these two foolish and
supersticious customs, the one by the Priest, and the other by the Midwife
has baedd and hatched, as well supersticious terms, as also act of Churchyng
of women: as if for that conceiuyng and bringyng a child into the world (and
that in lawful Wedlock) a woman should be unclean and profane.

3 Item, that the woman that is to give her thanks, either else the Midwife,
shall not kiss the Communion Table, when they offer the accustomed duties.

ITem, that Images, Pictures, and al Monumentes of fained miracles, as well in
walls, as in glass windows, be defaced, and namely the Image of the
Crucifixe, and the two Mary's in the Chauncell windows.

2 Item, that the Paraphrase may be provided in every Church, or rather
Bullingers Decadies in English, for it is much more profitable.

3 Item, that the quarter Sermons may be provided for.

4 Item, that the Ministers shall buy for their study in Deuinitie, all such
Books as shall concern the same, and be nominated by me: and that within two
months after the denomination and receipt of these Injunctions.

5 Item, that Alters and Rood loftes, may be pulled down and utterly defaced,
and the timber thereof, either sold, or else put to some good uses: for as yet,
they stand in most Churches little or nothing blemished.

6 Item, that the Lords day, and other lawful Holidaies be spent in the
divine service of almighty God, and that old supersticious holdaies, be
justly abrogated and put down: yet, bidden to be observed by the Minister in
the Churches.

7 Item, that the twelve pence forfaited for absence from the Church, beleuied
and taken according to the Statutes.

8 Item, that no Ministers receive common Whores and wicked women, to give
their thanks as well as honest Women, without first they be examined by the
Ordinary, and allowed thereunto under his seal.

9 Item, that the Minister done usually teach the Cathechisme, to the youth
of their Parish, which now is altogether neglected.

10 Item, that the Minister shall read the Queens Majesty's Injunctions,
openly to their Parishoners, four times in the year at the least, and that
they (usually in the Rogation week) do by perambulation, compass in the
uttermost bounds of their Parish.

11 Item, that no Minister shall play at Dice, Cards, Tables, Boules, or any
other unlawful game.

12 Item, that no Minister shall sell any Ale, or Beers, or keep any
victuallyng house, or haunte any other Alehouse, or Tavern.

13 Item, that the Minister solemnise no Matrimony in private houses, Gardins,
profane Chappelles, or in any other place, otherwise then the law does
permit them.

14 Item, that the Minister do wear such decent and comely apparel, as
does belong to their vocation, and (so many as be able) to provide clokes
with slecues.

15 Item, that every Parsone, or Vicare, be resident upon his benifice, or
otherwise (having a sufficient Dispensation) do substitute a fit person in
the place, allowed by the Ordinary, and the same to be always there resident.

16 Item, that every Parsone, Vicar, or Curate, do from time to time, use good
persuasions, to all their Parishoners, liyng on their death beds, to give by
their Testament, or otherwise, some thing toward the repairing of the decayed
Church of Saint Dauides.

17 Item, that no Parsone, Vicar, or Curate, do Marry any person within the
degrees prohibited nor that h^^e any more wives, or housbandes then one.

18 Item, that the Churchwardens of every Parish, have an especial care, that
no Curate be permitted, to serve in their Parishes, except he do first she we
unto them, his license from the Ordinary so to do, and they to keep the same
safely, for their own discharge.

These Injunctions above written, and every part and percell of them, I
straightly charge and command every man (to whom they do appertain) fully
to observe, maintain, and keep, upon pain of the Laws, for that cause made
and provided.

FINIS.

