To the most Honorable Assembly of the Commons House in Parliament.
The Humble petition of English Merchants, trading into Spain and France:
Humbly shows,
1 THat the Subsidy due to his Majesty for one Tun of French wine is 3.
shillings being filled at the landing of the same.

2 The English Merchants of London, are now constrained to pay for every Tun
that shall be landed, be the Caske but half full, 3. shillings Subsidy, 42.
shillings impost, and 15. shillings for composition of purueyance: which charge
of purueyance is paid only in London port, and began but lately: They also are
compelled to pay 3. pounds upon every two pipes of Conneacke wines, which
usually do want 7. Cesternes, and as much for every 4. Hogsheads of High
Country wines, when indeed 5. of them filled up, do not contain one Tun of
Assise. The Maligo and Canary Caske are also well known to be both vndergage.

3 The farm of sweet wines (which sometimes allowed 15.) does now allow 12. in
the 100 for leakadge, and all empty or refused Caske, even to merchant
strangers, as by an order of the 15. of Nouemb. 1612. appears: which said
sweet wines do pay no greater duties, and yet are known to be much more
durable, and of better worth. The use of former time has been to make some
restitutution or allowance to the Merchant, for impost of such eager and
decayed wines, as should remain on his hands unsold at the years end, which
is now nothing at all regarded or considered of.

4 The wisdom of Parliament anno 1. Rich. 3. did ordain every Tun to
contain 252. gallons, the butte or pipe 126. and the hogshead 63. according to
which measure, his Majesty's Officers should receive subsidy and duties, and
for more certainty, every port Town has a sworn Officer, to gadge all wines
and oils, before the Merchants can expose them to sale, upon pain of
forfeiture, that the Subjects might be no more deceived in gadge of Caske as
formerly they were.

5 The Farmers of the Customs, against all Law and equity, do force the said
Merchants, to pay subsidy and other duties for full vessels, though often,
vndergadge, unseen, or unladen, when many of them want half their wine, and
thereby receive 4 pounds at least, where 3 pound is not truly due, or else will
not suffer the merchant to land his goods, but seize them as forfeit for none
custom.

6 The Merchants being in great bonds to them for these duties, made in his
Majesty's name, fearing to offend the Farmers, and to hazard their credits and
estates by sudden extents, and willing to prevent the spoil and perishing of
their goods, are forced to yield, without any penalty or remedy, against the
Farmers so unkindly and unreasonable oppression.

May it therefore please this most high Court, in tender regard of the
premises, to take such course and order, for ease and relief of your
Suppliants said greeuance, as to your most grave wisdoms, shall seem meet
and indifferent. And they as in duty shall daily pray for the long health and
happiness of so prudent, provident, and compassionate an Assembly.

Signed by William Bond, William Spite, William Palmer, Thomas Boothby, Thomas
Friar, Richard Archdal, Henry Kinnerslie, John Dade, Nicholas Smith, F^ancis
Tailor, Edward Brown, Thomas Wetherall, Conway Manlye, George Benson, Humfrey
Slany, Thomas Bewley, Marmaduke Rawdon, George Langham, John Sherington, John
Worsop, Clement Harby, Richard Wiseman, Francis Samborne, Tho. Walton, Henry
Lee, Thomas Hanson, William Attwill, Henry Lee, Nathaniel Peacocke, John
Papril, John Hall, William Bonham, Christopher Barnes, Thomas Air, Thomas
Hampson, Richard Barnabee, Francis Haddon, Richard Symmes, George Porter,
William Gonnell, William Peacocke, Thomas Slingesbye, John Crabbe, Richard
Trauis, Thomas Gilberd, Charles Atye, Roger Iackson.

The copy of an Order set down at the Council Table for Merchant strangers.
WHereas upon a petition heretofore exhibited to this Board by the English
Merchants of London, trading Spain, and other places for sweet wines,
concerning an allowance to be made unto them for leakage, it was thought fit
after diverse hearings of the cause, to order, That there should be an allowance
made unto them of 12 in the 100. by his Majesty's Farmers, of the impost of
such sweet wines as they brought into the port of London, as by the said order
more at large appears.

And whereas the Merchant strangers of the City of London, are in like manner,
suitors to the Board, for an allowance to be made unto them for leakeage,
according as heretofore has always been used, being otherwise hardly able
to drive a trade in that commodity, in regard of the double Subsidy,
buttleridge, and other duties which they pay for those wines, whereof the
English, are altogether freed and exempted; Their Lordships having considered
as well of their petition, as the answer thereunto made by his Majesty's Farmer,
and being informed, That they have always had the same allowance heretofore
for leakage, as has been made unto the English: and that in regard of the
double subsedies and buttleridge, which they pay, the proportion of difference
will still hold to the advantage of the native Merchants; It is therefore this
day ordered, That his Majesty's Farmer of the impost of sweet wines, shall make
the like allowance of 12 in the 100 of the old impost and subsidy only, for
leakage of such wines contained in his Lease, as shall be brought into this
kingdom by the said Merchant strangers, in such manner and form as is made
unto the English merchants: And it is likewise ordered, That such Caske as is
out end for end, or left for fraught, shall be likewise allowed unto them.
Provided nevertheless, That for such sweet wines as are brought into this
Realm by the said merchants, either out of France, or the Low Countries,
allowance is to be made of 5 in the 100 as in former times has been used. And
it is also ordered for the avoiding of any further difference in this behalf,
That the said Merchants do fill no wines on board after they come into this
Realm. Sunday the 15. of November, 1612.

Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Lord Chancellor. Duke of Lennox. Lord
Admiral. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of Worcester. Earl of Pembroke. Lord Privy
Seal. Lord Wootton. Lord Stanhop. Lord Knolles. Sir John Harbert. Sir Julius
Caesar.


The copy of a Letter to Sir John Swinnerton Knight, then L. Mayor of London.
We did not expect to have found such difficulty in your Lordship, in
submitting your self to the Order lately made on the behalf of Merchant
strangers, concerning the leakage of sweet wines, being done upon so just
grounds, and agreeable to the usage of former times, and that with as much
indifferency and respect to your Lo. as the cause would bear: but forasmuch as
the said Merchants are much damnified in such wines as are now ready to be
discharged in that port of London, and cannot be landed but by order from your
Lordship, We do hereby require you for the avoiding of any further prejudice
therein, to sign such warrants as shall be meet for the landing of the said
wines, upon security given by them for payment of such duties as are due upon
the same, wherein we have thought meet likewise to move your Lordship, not to
stand too strictly upon security they shall offer, in respect they may be
strangers, otherwise known to be sufficient for the same. And so expecting
due performance hereof, without further trouble to this Board, we bid you etc.
Sunday the 23. of November. 1612.

Lord privy Seal. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of Worcester. Lord Zouch. Lord
Wootton. Sir Julius Caesar.



