diagram of the veins of a horse I B
The 2 temple v The 2 eye. v The 2 forhead. v The 2 pallet. v The 2 neck. ve
The 2 plate. ve The 2 fore shanke. ve The 2 side. ve The shanke. ve The houfe.
v The hanch. ve The tail. ve


diagram of a farrier's tools

THE English Farrier, OR, Countrey-mans Treasure. Showing approved Remedies to
cure all Diseases, Hurts, Maimes, Maladies, and Griefs in Horses: and how to
know the several Diseases that breed in them; with a description of every
Vein; how, and when to let them blood, according to the nature of their
Diseases.

With directions to know the several Ages of them.

Faithfully set forth according to Art and approved experiment, for the benefit
of Gentlemen, Farmers, Inholders, Husbandmen, and generally for all.

depiction of the farrier's profession

At London printed by John Beale 16^^

The Contents.
Chap. 1. How and when a horse should be let blood, and by what sign a man may
know whether it be needful or no. Chap. 2. In how many Veins a horse may be
let blood, with a description of the several Veins. Chap. 3. Directions to
know when to let a Horse blood, and in what Vein, and for what disease,
grief, or cause, and how to know the grief or disease. Chap. 4. How to know
the Age of a Horse. Chap. 5. Things necessary to be known by every Farrier.
Chap. 6. To know the several Diseases that grow in Horses and in what parts
they grow, and upon what causes. Chap. 7. How to judge of the sicknesses and
impediments in a horse by his Doung or Ordure. Chap. 8. How to judge of the
sicknesses or impediments in a Horse by his Stale or Urine. Chap. 9. A
description of the number, qualities, and measure of the Sinews of a Horse.
Chap. 10. Of the three powers or virtues whereby as well the body of a Horse as
every other beast is governed. Chap. 11. Of the number and situation of bones
that be in a Horses body. Chap. 12. In what points the art of shooing does
consist, and of hooves and of the diverse kinds thereof. Chap. 13. Of paring and
shooing the perfect hoove and fore-feete, and how to make the shoes and
nails. Chap. 14. Of paring and shooing the hinder feet. Chap. 15. How to keep
the hoove of a horse moist in the Stable, and the Receipt of the ointment. Chap.
16. Approved Remedies for curing all kinds of Diseases, Hurts, Maymes,
Maladies or Griefs, in Horses.
THE English Farrier, OR Countrey-mans Treasure.
Chap. 1. How, and when a horse should be let blood, and by what sign a man
may know whether it be needful or no.
FIrst, to preserve health, it is good to let him blood four times a year

First, in the Sprng about the beginnng of May, because the blood begins to
increase: Secondly, in September, because the blood beng then inflamed
inequally, may euaporate or break out: Thirdly, about the midst of December,
to let out the gross and knotty blood: Fourthly, about the midst of March.

But I would not wish you to let a horse blood but once a year, and that in
the beginning of May, within a fortnight after his putting to grass; for then
you shall let out the gross and old blood, and the new will come in his place:
Except it be upon great need, I would wish you not to let him blood at all: for
often letting blood causes debility in the horse, it hinders the sight, and
makes the blood resort inwardly, which cloyeth the heart and intrals, and
leaves the outward parts destitute.

Chap. 2. In how many Veins a horse may be let blood, with a description of
the several Veins.
IN the two Temple Veins, which be the first and principal Veins in the
head. In the two Eye veins, which are easy to find in the face of the horse,
somewhat beneath his eyes In the two Pallet veins in the Mouth. In the two
Neck veins. In the two Plate veins which are in the breast. In the two
Forehead veins. In the two Fore-shanke veins. In the two Fore veins before.
In the two Side veins, which may be called the Shanke veins. In the
Taile-veine. In the Hanch-veine. In the Hoofe-veine. In the two Fore shanke
veins behind.
So that an horse may be let blood in 13 veins: All which, are easy enough to
know, because every one lies in a little Gutter, which you shall find by
feeling with your finger.

Chap. 3. (...) to know when to let a horse blood, and (...) what Vein, and
for what disease, grief, or (...), and how to know the grief or disease.
(...) be pained with any grief in his (...) ^inesse, Frenzy Falling-euill,
diagram of the veins of a horse I B
The 2 temple v The 2 eye. v The 2 forhead. v The 2 pallet. v The 2 neck. ve
The 2 plate. ve The 2 fore shanke. ve The 2 side. ve The shanke. ve The houfe.
v The hanch. ve The tail. ve


or such like, then it is good to let him blood in the temple vein, with a
fleme.

If his eyes be watrish, or bloud-shotten or grieved with Pin or web, or haw,
then it is good to let him blood in the Eye vein, with a fleme.

If he have any weariness or heaviness of body, or be diseased in the throat
with the stranglings or Quinasie, or swelling of the Arteries either within or
without, then it is good to let him blood in the Pallat veins in the mouth
with a Cornet.

If he be vexed with an Ague, or with any other disease universal hurting his
Body, then let him blood in the Necke-veine^

If his grief be in the Lungs Liver, or any other inward part: then let him
blood in the breast veins, which we call (before) the Plate veins.

If he be grieved in the shoulders, then let him blood in the fore-feete veins
above the knee with a lance, and that very warily: for that place is full of
Sinews.

If he be grieved in the Joints, then let him blood in the Shackle-veines, and
that very warily: for that place is full of Sinews also.

If he be foiled in the fore-feet with Foundring, or otherwise, then let him
blood in the two veins (make way first with your drawer, to come to your
veins) in the Fore-feete.

If he be diseased in the Kidneys or Reins, Back or Belly then let him blood
in the Flank-veines.

If he have any grief in his hips, then let him blood in the tail vain, or
hoof vein.

If his hinder Legs be grieved, or Joints, or Feet: then let him blood on
the Shackle-Veins, and on the two veins behind on the hinder Feet,

Chap. 4. How to know the age of a Horse.
A Horse has forty teeth: the thirtieth month after his foaling he loses
two above and two beneath; in the fourth year, he loses two above and two
beneath: when he is five, he casts all the rest both above and beneath. Those
that come first above, are hollow: when he is six, his hollow teeth are filled
up: and in the seventh all the rest are filled up: then you may no longer judge
of his age by his teeth.

Chap. 5. Things necessary to be known by every Far^ier.
AS first to know into what disease a horse is inclinable.

Secondly what be the causes of every disease in particuiar,

Thirdly how and by what w^yes and means these diseases do grow.

Fourthly the signs how to know and distinguish them,

Fifthly and lasty the means and mannr how to cure them,

Chap. 6. To know the several diseases that grow in horses, and in what parts
they grow, and upon what causes.
Bags, in the weakes of the mouth. Barbs, be two teats growing under the
tongue. Bottes, do grow and breed in the Maw and guts. Blisters, on his body,
comes through heat and cold. Canker, is in his mouth venomed, and will make
his tongue to have clifts, and scabs in his upper lips underneath, and are full
of black a weals or pimples, so that he can hardly eat his meat.
Coult-Evill, is by ranknes of water and blood: it will cause his belly and
Yeard to swell. Cloying, is in the hoof of the Feet. Cords, is a stacke sinew
in the legs before. Cu^bs, is a swelling sinew behind the hoof. Crotches,
is a ruff scuruines about the fetlocks Interfeering, is striking on the joint
above the pastorne. Farcion, or Farcie, is a Scabbe or knobs breaking in diverse
places of his body, and comes chiefly in the Veins. Fever, is a sickness
taken with cold, and will cause him to shake. Thistula, is an old rotten Sore
in the body. Foundering, is taken in the body, and feet also. Fraying, is taken
in the body, feet, and legs, which is a stiffenesse coming only with cold.
Prounce or Pimples, is in the pallet of his mouth, Galling, or other hurt: and
come especially by eating of frozen grass, or dust. Gigges or Flapes, are
Pimples or Teats in the inside of the mouth. Glaunders, are Curnels under his
Jaws: and when they are ripe, they will run at his Nose, and so break out.
Gorge, is a swelling of blood on the legs Gravelling, is taken in the Feet
Web in the Eye, or the Haw, which is a Gristle growing on the Feime which
scowreth the Eye Hide bound, is when the skin cleaves to the flesh and the
Ribs. Hoofe-bound, is in the pinching of the hoof. Itch in the Tail, is by
excess of blood. Lampas, is the flesh in the mouth nigh the upper Teeth.
Mange, is (...) Mallender, is a (...) the knees. Molt-long, is the (...) of a
(...)-hoof. Mourning of the Chine, is a Wasting from the back or (...)
Navel-galled, is a (...) against the Navel, or as (...) Pains is a (...)
above (...), or foot-lock. Poule-evill, is on the (...) of the Neck: and
breeds by stripes. Pin or web, which covers the beard of the Eye. Rume, is
taken by cold, and so his Teeth will wax loose, and seem long, and then he
cannot eat his meat, but it will lie in lumps, about his Iaws. Ring-bone, is a
hard gristle about the Hoof. Quinnasie, is soreness in the Throat. Selander,
is a Scab on the Hammes on the hinder legs. Shackle-galled, is on the
Pastorne. Spavin, is on the Joint in the hoofes behind. Splent, is a splend
sinew above the fetterlocks. Staggers, is a dizzinesse in the head, breeding of
cold and of the Yellowes. Stranglings, is a swelling in the Throat. Stone, in a
horse. Surbating, is under the Soales of the Feet on the further side. Vives,
is a certain Curnell under the ear, or a Canker in the Mouth or Throat.
Wind-gals, are Bladders about the fetterlocks. Yellow, is a kind of Iaundies,
and will cause the Eyes to look yellow, and other parts of the body also.


Chap. 7. How to judge of the sicknesses and impedimets in a horse, by his
doung or ordure.
I have found for the most part the dung or ordure is correspondent to the food
the horse ea^eth especially for the color, for if he run at grass, or be ^led
in the Stable, the will his dung be evermore green, howbeit of a more bright and
sometimes again of a more dark color, and freer from darkness is ever best,
and does make appearance of the more sanity and health of the beast, as also
that is th reby the less subject to constiuenesse, and therefore in better
state of body. But if his ordure be very bright and laxatiue, it is an
infallible sign that he has eaten some thing that is against nature; as a
Feather or some naughty worm, some Spider or the like unwholesome thing,
otherwise he scowreth of some inward co^d which has formerly lurked in his
stomach or body: but if his doung at grass or soil be very hard and costiue,
which he puts forth with round and hard trattles, then is it a great sign
that he is very hot in his body and inward parts, which may endanger the
staners, or else does show that he has a surfeit which he got (before his
putting forth) through intemperate riding, ^shing, raw, or evil food, or the
like, whereby the horse is in danger to become morfounded, to have the yellows,
or iaundise, or a fever; which will otherwise hardly appear in him in it is
effect until his coming into the Stable, at what time due order must be taken
for speedy prevention. But if your horse do feed upon Straw, then will the
color of his doung be yellow and some what hard, long, and well compact, all
which be tokens of a healthy and a sound body; but if it be reddish, and
exceeding dry, it is a sign of ensuing sickness, by means of a great drought
in the body, and so also if it be thine: but if it be blackish, and does not
smell strong, then is it a sign that the horse is in danger of death. But if
your horse do feed upon Hay and Oats, and that he be sound in body, then will
his Excrements be a brown yellow, moist, and well compact but if the brownesse
be converted into redishnesse, you may be then well assured that he has some
distemperature in his body, but when it conuerteth into blackness, then if
prevention be not speedily had, death ensues: and as touching the smell, that
falls out according to the quantity of the prouender you give him for the
more prouender, the stronger will be the smell of his Ordure, and Pease and
Beans will cause his Ordure to smell stronger than Oats, and bread more than
any grayn or Pulse; and the more bread and prouender you give him, the more
perfect and sound shall you keep him in his body. But if his dung be brown and
slimy, and shine withal, then be you assured he has much grease which lies
in his body, which Physic must fetch away from him, for then also is his
blood putrified, corrupted, or enflamed. But if you do find by his Excrements
that he voydeth undigested stuff, which you may know by the whole corns of
Oats, Wheat and other Grain he sends forth in his doung, then persuade
yourselfe, that your horse has lately taken a formal surfeit, which may right
easily bring him to his end, if a discreet course be not speedily taken: in a
word, if his doung be black and has little or no smell, then make you no
question but that he is in danger of death, which will full soon after follow,
if the greater care be not taken to hinder and prevent the same.

Chap. 8. How to judge of the sicknesses or impediments in a horse by his Stale
or Urine.
IF he shall find his water to be either pale, whitish or yellow not much
unlike to the color of Whey, or fat Amber, or if it be not very clear, but
smells somewhat strong let the ferrier then be confident the horse is not
sick, but sound and healthy, and in perfect state of body; but if his Urine be
extreme clear and white, and of the color of Rock-water, and withal slimy,
then has he a taint in his Kidneis, Reins, or back, or else he enclineth to
the stone or else he has some stoppage in his Kidneys. But if his water be high
colored like to the color of strong Beer, then is it a token the blood of the
horse is enflamed, and that he is subject to a Fever, or to some strong
Surfeit: but if it be red and of the color almost of blood, then is the blood
more inflamed, which came of over hard riding, which may prone very dangerous
to his life. But if it be of a pale greenish color thick, and viscous, then
certainly his Back is grown weak, and he is in danger of a Consumption of
his Steed. But if it be high colored and nebuled or mixed with small Clouds,
with a kind of blackness therein, then this does demonstrate ensuing sickness
and death, if it be not carefully prevented. But if the Nebulosity be dispersed
into several parts, and not combined as it were into on Mass or Body; this
then argues, that the malice of the disease begins to depart, whereby the
Ferrier may have great hope of the health of the Horse.

Chap. 9. A description of the number quallity and measure of the sinews of a
horse.
IT behooves us also to describe unto you the number, quality, and measure of
the sinews of a horse. From the ^id nostrils up to the top of the head, and so
down along the back, even to the crooper comes it great cords or tendons,
every one xii. foot long. Th^n is there two branches and principal sinews of
the brain, containing four foot. Then from the shou^ders to the nex^ io^t
downwarde two great sinews or tendons. And from that joint down to the
pastorns four great s^newes. Also in the forepart and about his breast, as well
within ^s without, are x. sinews, and as many in his hinder parts. Then from
the reins of his back unto his stones are four, so that in his whole body he
has in all four and thirty apparent sinews.

Chap. 10. Of the three powers or virtues whereby as well the body of a horse
as every other beast is governed.
THe powers and virtues whereby the body of every beast is governed, are in
number three, that is to say, the power Animal, the power Vital, and the
power Natural. The power Animal, is a virtue incident to the brain, which
through the sinews c^mming like conduite pipes from the brain, distributeth
feeling and moving to all the parts of the body. The power Vital is a virtue
belonging to the heart, which gives life and spirit to all the body; and to
every part thereof, by means of the arters, which also like conduit pypes do
proceed from the heart, the chief fountain of natural heat.

The power Natural, is a virtue properly appertaining to the liver, which
gives nutriment unto all the body, and to every part thereof, by means of the
veins, which like wise proceed from the liver like conduit pips, carrying the
blood from the liver, which is the fountain of blood unto every part of the
body. Moreover, the power natural comprehends four other virtues, that is
to say, the virtue attractiue, whereby it draws sustinance meet to nourish
the body, then the virtue retentiue whereby it retains and keeps the
sustinance received, thirdly, the virtue digestive, whereby it digesteth the
same: and finally the virtue expulsive, whereby it expels excrements, or
superfluitys. Thus you see that the three powers before recyted, be of no small
importance, and therefore the Ferrer had need to have a special regard unto
them. For if any of them fail, the beast cannot live.

Chap. 11. Of the number and situation of bones that be in a horses body.
Every Horse or Ox, has in the upper part of his head two bones, and from his
forehead unto his nostrills, other two Also two nether Iawe bones, and of teeth
in all, to the number of xl. that is to say, of Iaw teeth, or side teeth,
xxiiii of tushes xiii. of forteeth, otherwise called the shearing teeth xii The
joint bones, as well of the neck as of the back, be in all twenty two. that is
to say from the head to the withers, vii. and from thence to the reins or
kidneys. viii. and from thence to the tail, seven, then is there the great
broad hinder bone, called the sacred bone, which has xii. seames or ioyntures
Also in the horses shoulder be two great bone called the spade bones, and from
thence to the forcelles or Canell bones, other two bones and from thence to the
first joint above the legs, other two and from thence to the knees two called
the thigh bones, and from thence to the pastornes, other two called the shanke
bones, and from thence downward to the hooues, be in all xvi. little bones.
Then there is a great bone in his breast whereunto are fastened xxvi. ribs.
And to the Col^elle behind be two bones, and from the mo^ayrs to the ioints
other two, and also two toward the ribs. From the bending of the hough unto
the leg, are two small bons and from the leg to the two feciles of the
leg, other two little bones and from the pastorns to the hooue sixteen
little bones. The sum of all the bones, is one hundrad threescore and ten.

Chap. 12. In what points the art of shooing does consist, and of hooves and of
diverse kinds thereof.
THe Art of shooing consists in these points, that is to say, in paring the
hooue well, in making the shoe of good stuff, in well fashoning the web
thereof, and well piercing the same, in fitting the shoe unto the horses
foot, in making nails of good stuff and fashoning of the same, and finally,
in well driving of the said nails, and clenching of the same. But since neither
paring nor shooing is no absolute thing of it self, but has respect unto the
foot, or hooue, (for the shoe is to be fitted to the foot, and not the foot
to the shoe) and that there be diverse kinds of hooues both good and bad,
requiring great diversity as well of paring as shooing.

Of hooues some be perfect and some be voperfect The perfect Hooue is that
which is round, smooth and short, so as the Horse may tread more on the Toe
than on the Heel, and also right, and somewhat hollow within, but not over
hollow, haueing a narrow frush, and broad Heels. The imperfect Hooue. is
that which lacks any of these propertyes beforesayde, belonging unto a
perfect Hooue. For as touching the first point mark. If the Hooue be not round
but broad, and spreading out of the sides or quarters, that horse for the most
part has narrow heels, and in continuance of time will be flat footed which is
a weak foot, and will not carry a shoe long, nor travel far, but soon
surdate, and by treading more on his heels, than on his toes, will go low on
his pastorns and such feet through their weakness be much subject to false
quarters, and to grauelling.

Secondly, if the hooue be not smooth, but rugged, and full of circles, like
Rams horns, then it is not only unseemly to the eye, but also it is a
sign that the foot is in no good temper, but to hot and dry, and thereby
perh^ppes makes the hooue to be brittle.

Thirdly, if it be long, then it will cause the horse to tread all upon (...)
heels, and to go low on his pastornes and thereby to breed windgalls.

Fourthly, if ^e hooue be not right, but crooked, that is to say, broad
without, and narrow within, whereby the horse is splay footed, then it will
cause the horse to tread more inward, than outward, and to go so close with
his joints together, as he cannot well travel without enterfering, or perhaps
strikes one Leg so hard agains another, as he becomes lame. But if he be
broad within and narrow without, that is not so hurtful. Notwithstanding, it
will cause him to graueil sooner on the outside than on the inside,

Fifthly, if the hooue be flat and not hollow within, then it breeds such
inconveniences, as are before declared in the first imperfect hooue. And again
if it be over hollow, then it will dry the faster, and cause the horse to be
hoouebound. For the over hollow hooue is a strait narrow hooue, and grows
upright, whereby though the Horse treads upright, and not on his heels, yet
such kind of hoous will dry over fast, unless they be continually stopped, and
cause the horse to be hooubound, which lameth them, making them to halt.

Sixthly, if the truth be broad, then the heels be weak, and so soft as you
may almost bend them together and then the horse will never tread boldly on the
stones or hard ground.

Seauenthly, and lastly, if the heels be narrow, the be tender and the horse
will grow to be hooubound.

Chap. 13. Of paring and shooing the perfect hooue and forefeet, and how to
make the shoes and nails.
FIrst pare the feat of the shoe, so even and plain as may be, to the intent
that the shoe may sit close and not bear in one place more than in an other
and take more of the toe, than of the heel, to the intent that the heels be
higher then the toe, because all the weight of the horses, fore-body lies upon
the quarters and heels of the forefeete. And therefore those parts should be
most mayntained, and taken off with the butter as little as may be. For the
paring of the heels, being naturally thinner, and more tender than the toe,
does greatly weaken them: but the toe being naturally thick and hard, would be
pared so thin almost as the edge of a knyfe. But in paring of the hinder
feet, a clean contrary order is to be observed.

Then make your shoe of spruse or spanish Iron, with a broad web, fitting it
to the foot, and let the spongs be thicker, and more substanciall then any
other part; of the shoe, yea, and also somewhat broad, so as the quarters on
hoth sides may disbord, that is to say, appear without the hooue a strawes
breadth, to guard the coffin, which is the strength of the hooue, and only
bears the shoe, and when you come to the piercing thereof, spear not to
pierce it from the quarter to the hard toe, but not backwards toward the heel
and pierce it so as the holes may be wider on the outside than on the inside,
and that the cyrcle of the piercing may be more distant from the edge of the
toe, then from the edge of the quarter, whereas it begins, because the hooue
is thicker foreward then backward, and therefore more hold to be taken. And as
touching the nayls then make them also of the same Iron beforesaid, the heads
whereof would be square and not fully so broad beneath as is above, but
answerable to the piercing holes, as the head of the nails may enter in and
fill the same, appearing above the shoe no more than the breadth of the back
of a knife, so shall they stand fast without shogging, and endure longer, and
to that end the stamp that first makes the holes, and the perschill that
pierces them, and also the necks of the nayls, would be of one square fashion
and bigness, that is to say, great above and small beneath, which our common
Smithes do litregard, for when they pirce a shoe, they make the holes as wide
on the inside, as on the outside, and their nayls with so great a shouldering
by drying them over hard upon the nail tool, as the heads or rather necks of
the said nails, can not enter into the holes, for to say the truth, a good
nail would have no shouldering at all, but be made with a plain and square
neck, so as it may justly fit and fill the piercing hole of the shoe. For
otherwise the head of the nail standing high, and the neck thereof being
weak, either it breaks off or else bends upon every light occasion, so as
the shoe thereby stands loose from the hooue and is quickly lost. Moreover,
the thanks of the nails would be somewhat flat, and the points sharp
without hollownesse or flaw, and stiffer toward the head above, than beneath.
And when you drive, drive at the first with strokes and with a light hammer,
until the nail be somewhat entered, and in shooing fine delicat horses it
shall not be amiss to grease the points of the nail with a little soft
grease^, that the nails may enter the more easily, and drive the two Talon
nails first. Then look whether the shoe stands right or not, which you
shall perceive in beholding the Frush, for if the spongs on both sides, be
equally distant from the Frush, then it stands right, if not then amend it
and set the shoe right, and standing right, drive in another nail, that done,
let the horse set down his foot again, and look round about it to see
whether it fitteth the horses foot in all places, and whether the horse
teradeth even and just on it or not. And if you see that the shoe does not
furnish every part equally, but perhaps appears more of one side than of
another. Then make the Horses other foot to be lifted up, to the intent he may
stand the more stedily upon that foot, and so standing, strike him on the
hooue with your hammer on that side that the shoe is scant, and that shall
make the shoe to come that way. The shoe then standing straight and just,
drive in the rest of all the nails to the number of eight, that is to say,
four on the on side, and four on another, so as the points of the nails may
seem to stand in the out side the hooue even and just one by another; as it
were in a Cyrenler line, and not out of order, like the teeth of a saw whereof
one is bent one way and clinch them so as the clinches may be hidd^n in the
hooue, which by cutting the Hooue with the point of a knyfe, a little beneath
the appearing of the nail you may easily do. That done with a ^ape, pare the
hooue round, so as the edge of the shoe may be seen round about.

Chap. 14. Of paring and shooing the hinder feet.
FOr the paring of the hinder feet, is clean contrary, to the forfeete, for
the weakest part of the hinder foot is the toe, and therefore in paring the
hinder foot, the toe must be always more spared than the heels.

Then make the shoe fit for the hooue in such forte as is before said,
saving that it would be always strongest toward the toe, and it must be
pierced nigher the heel than the toe, because as I have said before, that the
toe is always the weakest part of the hinder foot. Also let the out side of
the hinder shoe be made with a Calkin, not over high, but let the other sponge
be agreeable unto the Calkin, that is to say, as high in a manner as the
Calkin, which Calkin is to keep the horse from flyding, But then it may not be
sharp pointed, but rather flat and handsomely turned upward.

Chap. 15. How to keep the hoove of a horse moist in the stable, and the
receipt of the ointment.
AS Horses hoous do many times take harm through the necligence or
unskillfulness of the Ferrer, in evil paring or shooing the same, even so they
take no less harm many times through the necligence of the keeper for lack of
stopping, and keeping the forefeete moist, for the hinder feet most commonly
are kept to moist, by means that the doung and stale is suffered to lie
continually at their heels. But the forfeete stand continually dry, whereby
the horse becomes brittle hooued, yea, and many times hoouebound, which a
good keeper will not suffer, but be mindful to sto^ them often, either with
horse doung, or Cow doung, yea, and also to wash them clean without, with
water, and then to anoint them with some good supplying ointment, as this here
following prescribes.

Take of Turpentine, of sheeps sewet, of each half a pound, of vnwroght wax
half a quarterne, and of Sallet oil half a pint. Boil all these together in
a pot, sturring them continually until they be thoroughly mingled together.
Then take it from the fire, and let it cool, and being cold, preserve it in
the same pot, or else in some other, to the intent that you may have it ready
every second day to annoint all the coffins of the Horses Hooues round about,
but first wash their hooues fair and clean and suffer no dirt to remain upon
them, then being dried with a cloth annoynte them.

The siixt Chapter. Approved remedies for the curing of all kinds of diseases,
hurts, maimes, or malidies, or griefs in Horses.
For the Galling of a Horseback.
TAke Butter, vinegar and Bay Salt, and melt them together, and lay on the
horse back warm: then strew upon it sut, or the poulder of a clay wall.

Another for the same.
Take ob. of turmericke, bruise it, a handful of Bay Salt, and a handful of
Sut, with two handfuls of Oatemeale, mingle it with Urine, and make it into a
Cake as well as you can, and then upon a hot harth bake it till it be burnt
black, then beat it into poulder; and when you have washed your horseback
with Lee very hot or Chamber Lee, then strew on the poulder: and when the
poulder is almast gone, dress it as aforesaid.

If it be festred, take Yeest, Honey, the white of an Egg,, and sut; mingle
them together, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the dead flesh: then
straw on Verdigreace, and renew it once a day.

Another for the same.
Take a pottle of Vergis, two penny worth of green Copris, and boil it to a
pint and a half: wash depiction of a man on horseback and search the hole
therewith, and fill the hole* with Red Lead, (...) so let it remain three
days untouched, then wash it with the same, and fill it again with Red Lead:
and so every other day wash it with that Water, not made so strong of the
Copris; and lay thereon Red Lead, this will heal it though it be galled to the
body.

To heal any canker or sore in a horse.
Take of the strongest Beer a pint, put it into a quarter of a pound of Alum:
and half a hand full of Sage: Seethe it to the one half, then take out the
Sage leaves: this will heal any Canker or Sore in a horse.

To heal any cut in a Horse.
Take a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, of tar and black Soap, half so
much of each, and a little turpentine: boil them altogether (but the Soap) and
as soon as you take it from the fire, put in the Soap and then use it.

For a horse wrung in the wales.
Take Butter and salt, and boil them together till they are black, then power
it on hot: then take up a flake of Horse doung that is hot, and loy it on the
sore back, and so dress him till he be whole.

For fretting on the belly which comes with galling of the foregirt.
This comes with the fore Girt, and it stops the blood which is in the
principal veins, called the plate Veins, which do run length ways, take
Oil of Bays, and Oil of Balm, two ounces of Pitch, two ounces of tar, one
ounce of Rosen: mingle them altogether, and annoint the fore bowels, then take
Flax and lay upon it, and sear it with a hot Iron, but take heed it be not
too hot, for fear of burning.

For Thistulaes.
When you first perceive it to swell, then scald it with Honey and sheep
suet, but scald it very much, this will keep it from breeding.

Then take and slit it in the ueather end of the sore and put as much Mercury
Sublimatum as a Pease, abate it with Sallet Oil, laying it on with a feather;
after that take verdigreace four penny worth, Vitriall ob. Lead three penny
worth, beat these together and every day wash the wound with Copris water made
with Copris and Elder leaves in Summer, and with the inner green bark in
Winter: after washing, take the powder, and put it on the sore, and after it
drop on a little Oil.

Another for the same.
Take the outtermost green shells of Walnuts, and put them in a tubbe, strowing
three or four handful of Bay Salt upon them, some on the bottom, some on the
middle, and some on the top, and so keep them all the year: and when you will
use them, take a pint of them, and a little bay salt, and half a quarter of a
pound of black Soap, with half a spoonefull of May butter (and for want
thereof, other butter and incorporate them together, and then spread it on the
sore: but two hours before you lay it on, annoint the Sore with a little
Venice-turpentine.

A medicine to kill the thistula clean, cankers, or foulesores
Take vnguentum Egyptiacum which is made of Honey, a pint, Vinegar half a pint
Alum a quarter of a pound, and verdigreace an ounce and half, see the them
altogether, till they be thick and a tawny color; this is called Egyptiacum:
And to made it the strongest way, is to put Subl. an ounce make in powder and
Arsnicke two scruples, and boil it together.

This strongest is for thistulaes, Cankers, and foul Soars: and the first may
be used in the Mouth, but not that which is made of Sublimatum and Arsenicke;
for they are poison.

A Tent to put into the hollow place of
Take of Sublimatum well powdered, one ounce, the midst of well leauened
Bread stake baked iiii. or of Neuin fenne drammes; mingle them together with a
little Rose Water, and make Tents thereof* and dry them upon a tile, and then
take it to use.

To make a Lee for the same, or water to kill a Thistula at the bottom.
Take Lee, honey Roch Alum, and Mercury, and seethe them together: and apply
it to the thistula at the bottom thereof,

Another for the same.
Also to dry a thistula, take Rue, Wine, Goats doung, and Bean flower, and
sees (...) together, and lay it on, and this will dre it up.

To sinck-a Thistula.
Take first and sear it with this mark O or such like, and then take Rosen,
Sheep fallow, and brimstone, and boil them together, and lay it on very hot
with a Cloth: this will sink it down again. This is good also for a
Windgall: take and pick it out (but beweare of Sinnewes) and then lay it on;
but not so hot, but very reasonable: and this will keep it cleave.

For a Thistula in the head.
Take the juice of house-leeke and dippe a lock of Wool in it, and put the
lock of Wool in his Eare^ and bind it fast, use this once a day.

Another for the same.
If there bea any inflammation in the Ears, or that it grows to an
inpostumation in that place, you shall boil the roots of Mallows in water
till they wax tender, then bruise them, and strain out the water clean and
being warm give it the Horse to drink.

To know the Bottes.
When you think that your Horse has the Boss, look in his mouth: and smell
on his breath, for it will stink, and his mouth will be full of slime.

To cure the Bottes.
Take as much black Soap as a Walnut, as much Brimstone beaten, and a little
Garlike, and put it in good Ale, and give it to the Horse blood warm: but for
a Mare with foale, then take brimstone, sut, and Garlike, with out soap.

Another for the same.
Take a handful of new Hens doung* and a quart of good stale drink, and all
to bray it with your hands: than take a good handful of bay Salt, and put two
Eggs to it, and bray them together, and give it your horse to drink in a
horn.

Another for the same.
Take a pint of milk, of Saffron, ob of Alum ob. beat them together, and
give it him to drink.

To kill the worms in the maw.
Take the crops of young broom, and of Sauin and Grunsell, of each a quantity:
then crop them small, and give it him with his provender evening and morning
let him and not drink for a good space after.

If he have the long worms, take milk, brimstone and honey, and give him to
drink.

For the worms in the Coddes.
Take the guts of a young Pullet; and cast it into his mouth fasting, and make
him to swallow them down: do this three mornings together, but let him not
drink nor eat in five hours after.

Some use to give him fresh broom in his prouender, and salt water to drink.

Others do give him of green Willow, or green Reed so eat, and in
disgestion of the meat, he shall cast out the Worms.

Another for the same.
Take the Garbidge of a young hen or Pigeon while it is warm, roll it first
in a little Soap, and and after in Bay Salt, and force it down his threate:
and it will help him. Probatum.

To know when a Horse has the worms.
Take up his upper lip, and you shall see many small blew veins, greater and
bigger than the worm veins by a great deal.

For a Horse that has the Trunchions.
Let him drink Heunes doung, Mint, Sage, and Rue: and let him blood in the
Nostriles* or else give him Sauin or Sothernewood to drink; and it will cure
him.

Another for the same.
Take ob. of Arment, ob. of Honey, ob. of veniricke, ob. good stale Ale: mingle
them together, and tie up the horse head on high, and give it him to drink
with a horn.

For Blisters.
Take the suyce or ground Iuie, with so much Brimstone, a quantity of tar,
and so much Alum: put it altogether, and lay it to the sore.

For the Bards.
If they grow long, they will hinder his feeding: they do use to clippe them
with a pair of sheares, and then wath his Mouth with water and Salt: and that
will cure him.

For the Staggers.
You shall perceive them by beating his head, and he will be as though he were
hlind.

Take garlike, rue, and bay salt, and beat them grossly put vinegar into it, and
put it into the horses ears, and then wet wool in his mediciue, and stop his
ears therewith and bind them close, and let it be so 24. hours, and then
pull out his tongue and wash it with vinegar, to make him have a good stomach.

Another for the same.
First take a wispe of wet hay, and burn it under his nose that the smoke may
fume into his head, then take half a handful of Salandine, and as much
hearbg^ace, three or four cloves of Garlike, and a little (...) Salt, and st^p
them together, and put thereto ^ or five spoonefull of vinegar or vergis: then
(...) it into the horses Ears: and tie the Ears close that no air may come
in: let it continue in his Ears a day and a night, and then let him blood.

Or else take Rue and Salandine, of each alike, and white Salt, and stamp them
together, and put into his ears, and bind them up for two hours.

Another for the same.
Take oil of bitter Almonds, i. oz. di. of Ox gall, ii. Drammes of black
Ellebor stamped, ob of grains of Casterum, of Vinegar, and of veriuyce five
drammes* sees them altogether till the vinegar be consumed, then strain them,
and put it into his Ears.

For the pain in the head, or stifeling.
Keep his head warm and let him drink warm water mingled with wheat-meale,
or Fennel-seede, and blow it into his Nose with a quill, and some powder of
Ellabar, Sneesing powder, mixed together with some pepper: then take a pint of
malmesie, the whites and yolks of five new laid Eggs, one head of Garlike
bruised, small pepper, Cinnamon and Nutmegs beaten fine, and a quantity of sweet
butter: mingle them together, and give it him to drink three days after: but
let him not drink in four hours after.

For the wanders.
Take half a bushel of Barley, and set on the fire in a pan, and put t^reto
running water, and ever as the water wastes, put in more, so that the Barley be
covered with water, and let it sees till the Barley be broken: then take a
little Poke or Sack, and put the Barley therein, and lay the same on the Horse
ridge on length from the Maine to the Cropper, all hot: and let it lie till it
be cold, and there let it lie a nigh^ and a day, and put the Horse into a
green Yard some xxiiii. hours, and there he will wallow: and then take him
in, and he will be whole.

For the Yellowes.
You shall know them by the white of his Eye, which will be yellow, or else by
his tongue, which will have yellow veins, or put up his upper Lip, and you
shall see veins yellow.

Take two races of Turmericke, and ob. of Saffron and put to it a pint of
strong Beer or Ale, and warm it blood-warme, and give it him.

Another for the same.
Take Turmericke a cloue and di and di. a dozen thaines of Saffron, one or two
Cloves, and six spoonefuls of vinegar or vergis: and put each in Ear three
spoonfuls, and stop his ears with black wool: and then tie them fast seven
or eight days.

Another for the same.
Take long Pepper, grains, turmericke, and Licoris beaten in powder: put them
into strong Beer and give it him to drink.

For the pains or Crotches, which comes by heat, and sudden cold upon it,
The pains appear above the Hoof: you shall know them by the Hair standing
right up, you must take up the shackle vein on both sides, then take the soft
Row of a red Herring, and Mustard, and black Soap, and boil these in vinegar
and make a P^aster, and lay it to the sore.

There is no Vein between the Posterne and the Hoof but the Shanke Vein,
and the Vein which serves for the Crotches must be taken up on the inside
and the outside.

Wash it first with warm Urine, then dry it with a Cloth, and c^ippe away a^l
the hayres o^ the scabby place; then rub and chafe it all over, and make fast
his feet, and rub the p^ace grieved with Butter and tar boiling together
upon a Clout tied on a sticks end and ba^e it well therewith: use this once or
twice a day, till it be whole.

Butter and honney molten together, is good to annoint an Horse for pains, or
Crotches*

Another for the same.
T^ke a pound of Hogs grease, i. d. worth of verdigreace ii. oz of mustard.
di a pound of oil de bay, a quarter of a pound of Naruell, di. a pound of
Honey di. a pound of English Wax, i. oz. of Arsenicke, ii. oz of Red Lead,
half a pint of (...): boil all these together, and make an Ointment of it:
C^ippe the Horses leg bare, and lay this medicin to it very hot.

For Courded legs, or scratches.
Take up the sheines beneath the knee, and let him blood as much as you think
good, then knit the Vein above and beneath, and annoint the legs with this
oil following.

Another for the same.
Take Frankincense, and Rosen, and fresh grease, and boil them together, and
strain it: and keep it to your use.

A Drink to raise a Horse, or for a Horse that is sick.
Take two pennyworth of Pepper, two penny worth of Saffron, two pennyworth of
Annis-seedes two penny worth of turmericke, a pennyworth of long Pepper, two
pennyworth of treacle, a pennyworth of Licoris, a good quantity of penny
reyall and Archangell: Give him these with the yolks of Eggs in milk to
drink, And for Neat Cattle, give these to drink.

For a Scurfet Horse.
Take a quart of Beer or Ale, two pennyworth of Sallet oil, and as much
Dragon water, a pennyworth of treacie: make them warm upon the coals and put
into it a pennyworth of Horse Spices: and give it him.

For a Hide-bound Horse.
This comes by overmuch working, ill dyering, and naughty dressing take
Fen-creeke, turmericke, Annis seeds, Bays, Licoris, and Cummin beat all
these together, and give him one spoonefull of all these in Ale or Beer blood
warm. this is also good for the cough: this will also keep him from it, If
you use to give if him before the disease comes.

Another for the same.
Take away some blood with the Flem; then give him some warm meashes morning
and evening, and give him Malt sodden in water together, or branne and water,
or some wheat sodden with Barley in water and it will help him.

For the hoofe-bound.
You shall raise the hoof above from the top to the soale in four or five
places, that the Water may come out: Some do raise it round with a sharp
knife, and along downward, and then rub it well with Salt once or twice.

For a loose Hoof.
Take Tar three spoonefull of Rosen, a quarter of a pound of Tansie, Rue, of
red Mints, of Sothernwood, of each half a handful: beat all them together
namorter, and put there to half a pound of butter, i, d. worth of Virgins wax:
then fry them altogether, and bind it to the Hoof for eight days, and it
will eure him.

For a brittle hoof.
If your Horse have a brittle Hoof, it is because it is too hot or too dry;
and does stand a day in the Stable unstopped.

Take Oxe-doung and temper it with Vinegar, and bind it warm all over unto
the Feet, and under the soales of the Feet, on the next day use him so
again; so use it for a week together, and it will help him: use to stop
his Feet with Ox or Cow doung, or his own; and let him stand so a month.

Or, take the fat of Bacon, and temper it with Turpentine, and annoint his
Feet therewith; which is very good.

A Medicine for the Cough, or morning in the chine.
Keep your Horsemeatlesse over night, then take a a pint and a half of milk,
three he^ads of Garlike p^lled and stamped, boil them to the half: give it to
your Horse, and some at his nose, then run a quarter of a mile, then rest
him; and after that, run him three times more, every time resting him: then
put him into a stable, and keep him very warm, give him no water till
ofternoone, then give him good Mesh and so use him with Meshes three days, and
give him no water but always warm, for three days.

Another for the same.
Take Hornehound. Licoris, and Annis seeds, in powder make Balls thereof with
fresh Butter and give it your Horse.

Another for the same.
Take wheat flower, Annis seeds, and Licoris, being stamped in a mortar. Five
or six cloves of garlike being bruised: mix all these together, and make a
Praister of them, and roll them in balls as big as a Walnut: then pull out
his tongue, and cast the balls down his throat three or four of them at a
time: and give him two new laid Eggs after them shells and all.

For the Glaunders.
Take swines grease clean clarified, and as much oil of bay as a Walnut: give
it him to drink with fair water, luke warm.

Another for the same.
Take of Ellecampana, Annis seeds, and Licoris of each i.d. worth, boil them
in three pints of strong Ale or Beer, unto two pints or less: then put into
it a quarter of a pint of Sallet oil, and give it him to drink blood warm

Then take Enfordium in a Quill, and blow it up into his nose, and within three
days after, take mustard, Vinegar, and Butter, and boil them together: put
thereto half an ounce of Pepper, and give it him to drink. Use the one
Medicine one week, and the other another; and ride to work him easile.

Another fer the same.
Take a quantite of Annis seeds, Kicoris, and Ellecampana roots; ^ong pepper
and Garlike, of each a like, with three Eggs, and some butter, a quantity of
malmesie, and some strong Ale mixed together; and make it warm, and so give it
him, and keep him warm.

Another for the same.
Sees a handful of pilled Earlike in Milk, and put a piece of Butter
thereto, and some Ale: and stir them all together, and give it him fasting,
and ride him softly a while after, and then set him up: but keep him warm
nine days after.

For the strangies.
Cut him between the Jaws, and take out the Kernels and wash the place every
day with beer and butter, and stop it up as long as you can, and give him
new milk and Garlike to drink, and the juice of the leaves of Birch withal;
or in winter, the bark of Birch: also smother him with the fume of Masticke or
Frankincense.

For the Farsey.
Take black Soap, Arsenicke, vnstaked Lime, verdigreace, and Red Lead: work
these together, and lay them to the sore.

Another for the same.
Take three ounce of Quicksiluer, and put it into a bladder, with two
spoonefulls of the juice of Orange or Lemmons, and shake them together to cool
the Quicksiluer: then take half a pound of fresh Hogs grea^e, and of Vergis
and ounce: put all these in a Treede dish, and work them well together: then
anoint the Knots with this Ointment till they rot* then let them out with a
sharp Knife, and anoint them still: and put into his ear the juice of
Rag-weed, and they will dry up. Probatum.

A drink for the Farsey:
Let him blood in the neck of both sides, four fingers from the head, and
give him this drink.

Take a Gallon of fair water, and put therein a good handful of Rue, and a
spoone full of Hempseeds and bruise them into a mortar altogether, and sees it
till the half be consumed: and when it is cold, give it him to drink.

For the Farsey.
Take black Soap, Mustard made of sharp Wine or Vinegar, and Red Lead, mix
all these together, and anoint the veins all along, rub it ever with an hot
Iron made of purpose, but very thick: rub the Medicine much in with the
Iron, being red hot.

To destroy the Farsey,
Take the juice of hemlocke a good quantity, and bray them together, and put
into the ears, and prick the knots and put in salt, and give him drink with
sweet Wort, Fennel and Treacle.

For a Horse foot, that is wronged in the foot lock.
Sees a quart of brine till the foame rise, then strain it and put thereto an
handful of Tansie, as much of mallows a saucerful of honey, and a quarter of a
pound of sheeps Tallow: stir all these on the fire til the Herbs are well
sodden, and all hot, lay it to the Joint, and then lay a cloth over it, and it
will be whole in three days.

For a wrench in the foot-locke.
Take Pompilion, naruile, and black soap, of each alike. and heat them hot on
the fire and then a noynt him therewith.

For a horse that is Stiffed or hipped,
Take a pound of Bolearmoniacke, on quarter of red wine vinegar, six eggs beaten
shells and all, two pennyworth of English honey, as much Venice Turpentine, one
quart of flower, one good handful of bay salt, and put all these in a pot, and
keep it close all night, and the next day applay some of it to the hurt,
dressing it once a day for nine days together.

For a horse that is foundred.
Take verdigreace, Turpentine, and sallet-oyle, two or three spoonefuls of Hogs
grease, and bees wax one ozboile a together, and so dip flax or towin it, and
stuff his feet there with, and let him blood in the toes.

Another for the same
Pluck off his shoes, and pare hollow his Feet nigh to the quick, then race
him with a crooked Lance from the heel to the toe in two or three places on
both sides of the Hoof, and let him bleed well: then clap two or three hard
Eggs to it as hard as he may suffer it: and as they cool, lay on more: and
then lay hot horse dung upon them and about his feet, and he will soon
recover if you give him rest.

For a horse that is foundred in his feet.
Take tar, neats-foot oil, and the yolks of eggs, i.d. worth of verdigreace,
and some Wheat bran, and boils these together, and bind them under his foot
very hot.

If he foundred in his body.
Take ob of Garlike ii, d. worth of powder of Pepper-ii. d. worth of powder
ginger.ii. d. worth of grains brut, sed, and put into a bottle of stale ale
the best you can get and give it him to drink, and litter him to the belly and
lay-clothes on him as many as he can bear: and let him blood on the sides.

For blindness
Take two dry tile stones, and rub them together and blow the powder of it
with a quill into his eyes three or four times.

For the web in the eye.
Take the lean of a gammon of bacon, and dry it, and thereof make powder, and
use the powder, and it will cure it.

For the pearl in the eye,
Take the juice of ground-iuy, the juice of salandine, and woman's Milk, and
put it into the eyes, and it will also cure him.

For the Maw in the eyes.
Make a plaster of the juice of ground-iuie, and of Iuie-berries stamped in a
Mortar, beaten with wine or water: and plaisterwise lay it one the eye or eyes
evening and morning.

Another for the same.
Some take a Needle and a double thread, and thrust the needle through the
filme of the eye wherein the Crush grows; which pull out, laying it on your
fingers end, and holding the Needle and thread straight, and so cut away the
hard matter a penny breadth, but beware you cut not away the hard fat, which is
the wash of the eye: neither cut the Filme wherein the Eye grows; but cut
between the filme and the crush, and then squirt in beer.

For a Canker in the Eye.
Take roch Alum and green copris, of each alike boil them in three pints of
running water, until the one half be consumed; then take it from the fire,
and once a day wash his eyes therewith, being made lukewarm.

For a stroke in the eye.
Lay thereto the juice of Smallage, Fennel, and the white of an Egg.

For a windgall.
Take and cut the Skin, then take a spoonefull of Oil de. bay, one
spoonefull of turpentine, i. d. worth of Verdigreace the white of an Egg, and
a quarter of an ounce of Red Lead: boil them together, and it will make a
Salve, lay the same to the place where you did cut him. Probatum.

Another for the same.
First clppe off the Hair bare, then cut it the length of a B^ane, and let it
out: but beware of (...) Sinnewes that you cut not them: then have ready molten
Rosen, Sheep tallow, and brimstone, boiled together: then lay on this
medicine, but beware it be not too hot.

For the Spauin.
Take Mustardseede, and Oil de Bay, and Cow doung, the roots of Mallows, a
quantity of Turpentine, di. oz. of Bolearmoniacke, beat them to powder, and
work them together, and bind them hot to the Spauin.

For the blood Spauin, and bone Spauin.
Take up the vein above and beneath the joint, and let it bleed well, then
knit up the veins, and annoint them with butter till they be whole.

For the bone Spauin.
For the Bone Spauine, prick it with a sharp pointed Knife, then take a piece
of candle, and lay a piece of brown Paper upon it, and with a hot Iron melt
the tallow, and after annoint it with butter.

For inflammation of the Coddes.
Boil Groundsell in wine and vinegar, and so bath him therewith, and use to
ride him into the water.

Another for the same.
Take a quart of good alewort, and set it on the fire, with the crumbs of brown
bread strongly leauened, and a handful of Commin (or more) in powder: make a
plaster of all these and bean flower, and apply it to the grief as hot as it
may be suffered.

Another for the same.
Take new cow doung and sees it in milk; then make a Plaster, and lay it
upon the grief as hot upon the swelling as may be:

For swelling in the Coddes.
Let him assail a mare, and give him no prouender, and let him blood above the
great vein between the Hippes, and lay thereto hard eggs in his own doung
and make a plaster of the same, and lay it to the Cods, and if it help him
not, let him stand in the water half an houer.

For the Strangullion.
Take bread and bays, of Laurel, and temper them together with may butter, and
give him there of three days together, and he shall be whole.

For festring of the sore.
Take lime and tough horse doung, and temper them together with Pepper and the
white of an egg, and lay it to the sore five days, and it will cure him.

A drink for the stone.
Take a pint of white wine, half a pint of bur feed and beat them small, ii
oz. of Parsely seed, half a handful of hysope, half an oz. of black soap:
mingle these together, and warm it, and give it him.

For the stone Collicke, and fret.
Take unset leekes, and stamp them small, and Soap, milk, and butter, and
give it the horse: it will make him piss.

For a horse that cannot stale.
Take a Nutmeg, and a handful of parsely, seed, beat them in powder, and a
handful of butter, and heat it in good Ale, and give it him blood-warme, and
he shall stale at ease.

For the stone and to make him piss.
Take the seed of Smallage, Parsely Saxefrace, the roots of philudendula,
Cherrystone Kernels, Grunsellseedes, and broom seed, of every one alike much:
make them in fine powder, and give it him in white Wine.

For a Horse that cannot dung.
Take eleven leaves of Lorell, and stamp them in a Mortar, and give it him to
Drink in strong stale Ale.

Another for the same.
Take Barley and seethe it in the juice of Gumfolly, and give him the Barley to
eat and the juice to drink.

Another for the same.
Or else, take and let him blood, and boil the blood with the powder of the
pill of Pomgranats, and put in some Wheat: hen strain it, and give it him to
drink three or four mornings, but let him not travail.

Another for the same.
Take the powder of Licoris and Annis seeds, depiction of the farrier's
profession diagram of a farrier's tools depiction of a man on horseback rouled
up in Honey and give him three or four bals of them at a time, pulling out his
Tongue, and putting it in his throat: It loses his breath and sets his
wind at liberty, and purges the cold and stiffnesse, and expels the
Glaunders. Bruised Licoris, Annis seeds, Garlike bruised, a little Sallet oil,
and Honey given blood warm in Milk cures many diseases and keeps him from
more.

For a Horse that is broken winded.
Take a Hedgehogge and split him and take out his guts, and dry them up in an
Oven until you make powder of them, give it to your Horse to drink in a pint
of strong Ale, a part thereof: then take Bals of Annis seeds and Licoris rolled
in butter, and cast them downe-his throat, and wash his Oats in good Ale or
Beer, then take Commin, Annis seeds, Licoris and Sentalie, and make powder of
them, and strew three spoonefull in his Oats, being moist: use this same
Fourteen days.

Another if he be pursey.
Take Molline or Long wort; and make a powder thereof, and give it him to
drink with water, and it will heal him.

Or you may take the Powder of Gensian at the Apthecaries, and that will heal
him also.

For a horse pricked with a Nail.
Take out the hoof til you come to the bottom, or Vein; then take
Turpentine. i. oz. Tar i. oz. Pitch i. oz. Beef Sewet i. oz. and one head of
Garlike^: Boil them altogether, and lay them to it so hot as may be suffered:
and if it chance to break out above the Hoof, then take the said medicine,
and annoint it therewith.

To heal a Mangie Horse.
Let him blood on both sides his Neck, then cut the Skin in the midst of
the Forehead two fingers broad, then raise the Skin on both sides, and put
in slices of Angelica root, or Elecampana; leave them til it rot, then thrust
out the matter, but leave the roots; they will come out as he heals,
annoynting the Mangie places with Oil Olive.

Another for the same.
Take Lamp Oil, fine powder of brimstone, of black Soap, Tar, barrow
Hogges-greace, and the Sutte of a chimnie; of each alike, and then mix them
altogether, and annoint the place therewith so hot as may be suffered, and it
will help him.

For the mangie of a dog.
Take Vinegar, Gunpowder, black Soap, Brimstone, burnt Alum, and Verdigreace:
boil altogether with Honey and rub over the mangie place.

For the strangle-halt.
Take up the Master-veine above the knee, and underneath the same Vein lies a
string, cut it away: then cut him below the nostrils, and take away two
strings, and then annoint him with butter and Salt.

For the Mares Evil.
Take Milk, Oate-meale, Mallows, Wormwood, Horehound, and Smallage, wring
these together with your hands, and boil them together till they be soft, and
lay it to the grief, which will bring it to a head: then you must lance it;
then take Red Lead, burnt Alum, and Rosen, beat these to powder, and cast
upon it.

To take away the bones, Knobbe, or Ringbone.
Take a pound of strong Lee, and Soap, a quarter of Vitriall Rom^ i. oz. of
Salarmoniacke, as much of Roch Alum, and boil them together till they are
thick, and so use it for an Ointment.

Gypsiacum the strongest kind, lay it to with Cotton three or four times, will
take it away. This is good also for a splint: and though it be a Thistula in
the Crown it will sink it.

For the Powle-evill; which comes of a bruise behind the Ears.
Take a hot Iron, but first take up the hair all the whole compass; then
search it with a hot Iron, and then take (...) Lead and black Soap, and
mingle them with water, and make it thick, and anoint him therewith till it
be whole.

To make water for the same.
Take a quart of water, half a pound of Roach Alum, iiii, d. worth of
Mercury, a quarter of a pound of verdigreace: and when you see the horse curb
his head, wash him with this water.

Another for the same.
Lay a Plaster of Hogs grease on, to ripen (...) place, and when it is rive,
lance it, and thrust through a hot Iron, if it be very deep, and keep it
open wi^ tents made of Sponge, and dippe it in Hogs grease: use this for
four days, then take Turepentine, and the yolks of Eggs and Saffron and
mingle them together, and dippe your tents of Spung therein, and be sure they
go to the bottom, and Plaster it with Hogs grease: and this will cure him.

For the Canker.
You must take out his tongue, and let him blood in five or six places; and
like wise on his upper lip that he may bleed well, and all berubbe his
tongue and lips with salt, then the next day wash his tongue and lips with
vinegar, and rub it again with Salt, and give him warm drink and new Beer
a day or two.

For a colt-Evill.
Take the juice of Hemlocke, and wash his yard and rods therewith.

Another for the same.
Take bean flower, vinegar, and Bolarmoniacke, and work these together, and
lay it to the codde.

Another for the same.
You may wash his shed with warm vinegar, and draw forth his yard, and wash
it also: then ride him into the water: let him swim, and there toss and
turn him: use this two or three weeks.

For the coying.
If he halt, pull off his shoe and open the place pricked with a Knife, and
power in Turpentine, War, and Sheep suet, being molten together: then close
it up, and set on the shoe again: let him rest, and come in no ^et ground.

Some do use to burn the hole with a hot Iron, when they have pulled out the
Nail; and some do power in boiled butter in the hole once a day, and it has
cured it.

Another for the same.
Take a handful of nettles, of black soap, of vinegar, of each of them a
spooneful, and three times so much Boares grease or Bacon grease; then stamp
them well together, and stop the Sore therewith, and it will not rot any
further, but heal, although you labor him.

Some do stop up the hole when they draw forth the nail, with tallow and
horse-dung, and then set on the Shoe.

For the Cords.
The cure is to flit it, and with a Bucks horn to take it up, and tie it in
two places, and cut it away.

Another for the same.
Take Mustard, and Aquavity, and Sallet Oil, and boil them on the coals, and
make a Plaster, and hind it hot to the place. It is good also for any strain,
so it be new done.

Another for the same.
Take the Grounds of Ale, and being made warm, bathe his Legs therewith, and
wispe him with a Hay rope.

Another for the same.
Take smallage, and an herb called Oxeye, and some Sheep suet, choppe them
altogether, and boil it in man's urine, and bathe the place therewith, and wet
a Hay-hand in it, and roll up the leg therewith, Probatum.

For the Curbs.
Fret his Legs with thy hand, and then take red Colewort leaves, and Barrage,
and bray them together, and lay it thereto five days.

Seethe a pound of black Soap in a quart of strong Ale, til it look like
Tar, and anoint the Sinews therewith, and it will supple them, and bring them
to the right course. It is good for a man, if he be stiff in the Joints.

For the Enterfeeting.
He may be much helped by shooing with a skilful Smith: But if the Skin be
off, take Maybutter, with a quantity of yellow Rosen, as much Naruel; then fry
them together in a Pan, and let it stand til it be cold, and put it in a
Pot, and put to it a little new Cow dung, and make Plasters thereof and bind
it to the place. This will heal also the^ prick of a Nail.

For the Narvell galled.
Take Sut of a Chimnie, and Yeest mixed together, and Plaster it on: but shift
it once a day.

Another for the same.
Take nettle seeds, and mix them with Sallet oil and anoint the sore, or
chafe it therewith.

Some use to wa^h him with warm water, and then anoint the place with Grease
and Salt mixed together.

Another for the same.
Take herb bittony, brimst one in powder of Elibory, pitch, and old grease,
and stamp them together: and when you have washed them with Chamber-lee,
anoint him with this medicine.

A water for a Galled back, or any foul sore.
Take a pottle of veriuyce, three penny worth of green Copris, and boil it to
the one half, or more, and wash the Sore with that, and then fill the Sore
with red Lead; and let it not be dressed of three days: and then dress him
again, as you shalsee cause.

For a green wound.
Take white Wine and make it warm, and wash the Wound therewith, then take
Turpentine, M^p, and a little Wax, and me it them together, being stirred,
continually til they are well mixed, and then use it. If it be a cut, Take Tow,
and dip if therein, and fill the wound with it: If it be a hole, make Tents for
the place.

Another for the same.
Take Hogs grease and Venice Turpentine* and melt them together: and if it
be a Cut, take Tow and dippe therein, and fill the wound therewith. If it be a
hole make Tents, and dress it therewith.

For a hot impostume in any outward part.
Stamp Liverwort, and mix it in the Grounds of Ale Mallows, and Hogs
grease, being made hot, and lay it thereto.

Another for the same.
Bruise Lettice seeds, and Poppie seeds, and mix them with Oil of Red
roses, and plaister-wise lay it on the sore.

For a cold Impostume.
Take the herb Baulme; stamped and mixed with Hogs grease, and
Plaister-wise lay it to it.

Another for the same.
Seethe white Mint in Wine or Ale, with Oil or butter and lay it hot to the
place.

To ripen any Impostume.
Sees Mallows roots, and Lilly roots, and then bruise them, and put thereto
Hogs grease, and Lin seed meal: and Plaster wise lay it to it.

For the Rheum.
Let him blood in the Vein under the Taste, and rub his Gummes with Sage tied
to a sticks end, and give him for a while, the tender Crops of black Briars
in his Prouender.

For loose Teeth.
Prick the Gummes with a Knife, and then rub them with Honey, Sage, and
Salt, beaten together. The Sorrel Horse is most subject to this Disease.

For the Fever.
Let him blood in the Thigh in the middle vein four singers under his Tuell:
or else, take the Vein in the Necks, and give him a drink.

Another for the same.
Take Water and Honey, the juice of Purselaine, Gum Dragone^, and
Frankincense in powder, with a few of damask Roses, and mix them altogether
and give it him to drink.

Another for the same.
Take of Germander four ounces, of Gumdragonet, and of dried Roses, of each
one oz. beat them all in fine powder, and put them in a quart of Good Ale,
adding thereto Oil of Olive four oz. of Honey as much: and give it the horse
luke warm to drink.

If he draws his breath short, and sigheth with all let him blood in the
Neck: and then take a pint of Wine, with di oz. of Sallet Oil, and mix
therewith Frankincense: and with the iii. part of the juice of Mugwort, give it
him to drink.

For the Fronce or Fronts.
You must cut or burn them out: then wash them with Beer and Salt, or Ale and
Salt, and so they go away.

For the Gigges or Flappes.
Gigges or Flappes, are Pimples, or Teats in the insides of the mouth: you must
cure them as you cure the Camery or Fronce; either will help him.

It is good to pull out the Horses Tongue very often for fear of breeding any
Blisters or Blaines, under his Tongue, or for fear of Hay-seed, which will
breed to some of those diseases.

For the Gorge, or to bring Hair again.
Sear him with a hot Iron a handful above the knee* then rope him round about
with a soft Rope of Hay, and power on cold water, and let it remain a night
and a day.

To bring Hair again.
Take the dung of Goats, some Honey, and Alum, the blood of a Hog: mix
them together, and heat them til they are ready to boil, and being hot, rub
the place therewith.

Another for the same.
Take the soot of a Cauldron, mixed with Honey and Oil and anoint the place
therewith.

Take green walnut shells, and burn them to powder, and mix them with honey,
Oil, and Wine, and anoint them therewith.

For Gravelling.
Thou shall take off his Shoes, and pare out all the Gravel clean (for if
you leave any Gravel it will breed to a soreness called a Quitterbone,) then
must you stuff him with Turpentine and Hogs grease melted together, and dip
in Tow or Flax, then clap on the thooe, and keep it stopped, and shift it
every day til it be whole, and let him come to no wet: If you stop it not up
well, it will rise above the hoof: then you shall have more business, and put
your horse to more pain.

For the molt-long.
It is an ill soreness above the Hoof, which will breed out in Knobs and
bunches, with a watery humor.

If it be in Summer, take black snayles, and burre roots, and beat them
together, lay it thereto.

If it be in Winter, take the scraping of the bottom of the shagges of the
Burre roots, and put to it a handful of the inner bark of Elder, and beat
them together, and plaister-wise lay it to.

Another for the same.
Take Garlic, Pepper, and honey, and stamp them together, and anoint his
Tongue therewith, and thereof lay some to his Pasterns.

To stop a Laske of a Horse.
Take Bean flower, and Bolearmoniacke, of each a quart: mingle these together
in a quart of Red Wine, and give it him lukewarm: let him rest and keep warm
let him drink no cold water, but lukewarm: and put in Bean flower, and let
him drink but once a day, and not overmuch, for the space of three or four
days.

Another for the same.
Take ob. of Alum, beaten in fine powder, and Bolearmoniacke, beaten small:
and a quart of good milk: mingle them together til the milk be of a curd,
and give it him to drink, and diet him as before said: and this will stop
him. Probatum.

For the Vines.
Take E^remonic, honey, and violet leaves; stamp them together, and slit the
sinnew underneath the ear and lay a Plaster thereto three days.

For the Canker in the Nose or Mouth.
If you see the Canker he of great heat, and burning in the Sore with
exceeding pain, you shall take the juice of purslaine, Lettice, and S^, or
Night-wade, and wash the fore with a fine clout, or spout it on with a squirt,
and this will kill it.

Another for the same, most singular.
Take H^y, Sage, and Rue, of each a good handful, and se^th them in drine and
Water, to the third part of them: strain them out and put in a little white
Copris and Honey, and a quantity, and so wash the place with it. (It is a
singular thing to remove the molles^) which done, you shall make a water to
heal it, as thus*

Take rib-wort, bitonie, and Daisies, of each a handful: then sees them in
Wine and Water, and wash the sore three or four times a day.

Some say, that crystal made in powder, is specially good to kill the canker.

For any swelling of a Horse.
Take hemlocke and stamp it, and mingle it with sheep doung and vinegar, and
make a plaster, and lay it to the swelling.

To heal the wound in the Lampas.
Take a sawcerful of Honey, and 12. Peppertornes, and bray them together, and
temper them with vinegar, and boil them a while, and then lay it on the wound
three or four days: and then let him blood in the Lampas.

For the Ring-bone mallender
Take a paring of a cheese, and roast it well, and lay it to the mallender as hot
as he may suffer it.

Or else chafe it well til the blood follow, and anoint it thereon: chafe it
with a hot Iron, so that it hold to the mallender: then take ten flowers of
Gillyflowres, set well, and henne-mucke, and temper them well together and lay
it on.

FINIS.
depiction of the farrier's profession diagram of a farrier's tools diagram of
the veins of a horse I B
The 2 temple v The 2 eye. v The 2 forhead. v The 2 pallet. v The 2 neck. ve
The 2 plate. ve The 2 fore shanke. ve The 2 side. ve The shanke. ve The houfe.
v The hanch. ve The tail. ve





