ARTICLES To be enquired of by the Churchwardens and Swornemen, within the
Diocese of Winchester in the Visitation of the reverend Father in God, Thomas
Bishop of Winton, in his Triennall Visitation, holden 1603.

In the first year of the reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lord, James
by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of
the Faith, etc.

Printed at London by Thomas Purfoot. 1603.

THe Churchwardens and their assistants are straightly required to read or
hear all these Articles read over unto them, and diligently to consider and
enquire thereof, between the time of the delivery hereof unto them, and the
making of their presentiments.

Articles to be enquired of, by the Churchwardens and Sworne-men, within the
Diocese of Winchester, and the truth thereof to be by them, upon their
oaths, certainly presented to the Bishop or his Deputy, with particular
answer to every Article.

Articles concerning the Clergy.
WHether your common prayer be read by your Minister in your Churches or
Chapels plainly and reverently upon all Sundays and Holydaies, and other
days prescribed, in such order as is set forth in the Book of common prayer,
authorized by the Laws of this Realm, without any innovation, or change of
any part thereof at due and convenient hours? And whether the holy Sacraments
be likewise ministered reverently in such manner, as by the Book of common
prayer is appointed. 2 Item, whether any person, not being ordered, at the
least a Deacon, has attempted to say common prayer openly in your Church or
Chapel, or to solemnize matrimony, or administer the Sacrament of Baptism.
3 Item, whether the Churchwardens have permitted or do suffer any Curator
Minister to serve your Church before he be admitted and examined by the
Ordinary in writing, and do show his license under seal unto the
Churchwardens: and whether any Curate do serve two Cures in one day. 4 Item,
whether your Minister not being a Preacher, do every Sunday when there is no
Sermon, read distinctly and plainly, some part of the Homilies prescribed and
set forth by the Queens authority to be read: and whether any Minister, not
admitted by the Ordinary, or by other lawful authority, do expound any
scripture or manner of doctrine, and thereby omit and leave off the reading of
Homilies: or whether any in your Parish do deprave or speak against the
Homilies, and the use of them in the Church? 5 Item, whether your Minister do
at the administration of the Lords Supper, reverently kneel when himself
receives it, according to the Book of common prayer: and whether the
communicants themselves in like sort do reverently kneel upon their knees at
the time of the receiving thereof: or whether he do administer it confusedly,
to some kneeling, to some sitting, and to some standing. 6 Item, whether your
preacher, in his prayer made in his Sermon, whether it be at the beginning,
middle, or end thereof, do use or omit at any time the prayer for his Majesty,
with his whole title given him as King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, desender of the faith, etc. of all causes, and over all persons within
his Majesty's Dominion, as well ecclesiastical as temporal, next and
immediately under God supreme Governor? and for our most gracious Queen, the
Prince of Wales their eldest Son, and all their royal Progeny. 7 Item,
whether any Lectures. Cenuenticles, or private meetings, be read or used within
your Parishes, either public in the Church, or privately in any house, by any
not licenced thereto by the Ordinary? Or whether any such Reader do teach any
doctrine of innovation, to withdraw ye people from due obedience to the
ordinances of the Church, set forth by public authority, or to cause them
to forbear participating in prayer and sacraments with our Church? 8 Item, how
many sermons has your Parson or Uicar preached in his own Church within this
year past. And if your Parson or Uicar be not a preacher, how many sermons
has he procured to be preached there in this year past: and who has preached
them, and whether were they that did preach them, licensed or no? and by whom?
9 Item, whether your Minister has received to the holy communion, any persons
which be not of his own Parish, without testimony from the minister of the
place where they dwell what they be, that it may appear they be not persons
excommunicate, or otherwise notorious offenders? 10 Item, whether your Minister
do every Sunday or holiday, openly in the Church, call for, hear, and
instruct all the children, apprentices and servants that be of convenient age
within your Parish, or at the least, so many of them (by course) as the time
will serve, and as he may well hear and instruct for one half hour, (at the
least) before or after Evening prayer; in the ten commandments, the articles
of the belief, the Lords prayer, and the sacraments, and diligently examine
and teach them the Catechism, as it is now allowed, and set forth in the Book
of common prayer: and whether (to that purpose) he has taken the names of them
all, and by course call certain of them (by name) every Sunday and Holiday to
come to the teaching of this Catechism: and if the Parents and Master be
slack in sending them, whether he has called upon the churchwardens to
present them? 11 Item, whether your Parson, Uicar, or Curate, or other Minister
in your Church or Chapel, has admitted to the holy communion any public
excommunicate person, or any open or notorious fornicator, adulterer, or evil
liver, by whom public offense is given, without due penance first done, to
the satisfaction of the congregation, enjoined him by his Ordinary. 12 Item,
whether your Preachers or Ministers be peacemakers, and exhort their
Parishioners to obedience toward their Prince, and all other that be in
authority, and to the government ecclesiastical now established, and to
charity and mutual love among themselves: whether they be diligent in
visiting the sick, and comforting them? 13 Item, whether any person has
preached, declared, or spoken any thing in derogation of the Book of common
prayer, which is set forth by the Laws of this Realm, dispraising or
deprauing the same, or any thing therein contained; or against the Preachers or
Ministers of the word and sacraments? 14 Item, whether there be provided in
your Parish one convenient parchment Book? And whether therein are written the
names of all persons, which have been christened, married, or buried in that
Parish since the beginning of the reign of our late most gracious Sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth? And whether every page of that Book being filled with
the inscription of those names be subscribed by the Minister and
Churchwardens? And whether every Sunday after morning or evening prayer, the
Minister in the presence of the Churchwardens, do write into that parchment
book, the names of all persons that have been christeneed, married, or buried
in the Parish the week before? And immediately after the wr^ting of all the
said names, whether the Minister has openly and distinctly read in the Church
all the said names of that precedent week, and the day and month of the
christening, marriage, or burial of every such person. And whether there be
provided in the Church a convenient coffer with three locks and keys, for the
sure keeping of that Register parchment book? And whether the Minister and
both the Churchwardens, having every of them one of the said keys in their
custody, do safely keep the said Register Book in the said coffer,
according as has been by the Canons of this Church of England provided. 15
Item, whether your Ministers do keep any man or woman in their houses,
suspected to be incontinent persons, or be themselves given to drunkenness,
haunters of Tauernes, alehouses, or suspected places, or otherwise suspected
of any notorious crime, or light disordered behavior, or have given any evil
example of life, or use unseemly apparel in colors, guards, or light
fashions. 16 Item, whether for the retaining of the perambulation of the
circuit of your Parish, the Minister, Churchwardens, and certain substantial
men of the Parish, in the dates of the Rogations (commonly called Gang-daies)
walk the accustomed bounds of your parish? whether in the same they use any
superstitious or popish ceremony, but only meditate of Gods mercy, give him
thanks for blessing of the earth, as is by the law of the Church set down. 17
Item, whether there be any in your Parish that reads any private lectures, or
uses expositions of the Scriptures in any private man's house whatsoever,
contrary to law? and whether any preach, and do not at certain times in the
year minister the Sacraments in their own persons, and in such Church where
he reads his Lecture. 18 Item, whether any Parson, Uicar, or Minister has
procured himself to be admitted into sacred orders by any corrupt means of
money, reward, gift, or promise of reward, or by any symonicall compact has
procured his benefice, directly or indirectly, or be thereof by common same
suspected or defamed. 19 Item, whether your Minister do reject those women
(being married) which do come to the Church to give thanks after child birth,
according to the order set down in the book of common prayer. 20 Item, whether
your Minister have married any person, not being three sever all sundaies
lawfully asked in their Parish churches, according to the book of common
prayer, or not being sufficiently licensed thereunto, by license from the L.
Bishop of Winchester his officers. 21 Item, whether your Parsons and Uicars do
maintain and keep in due reparations, their mansion houses and other edifices
belonging to their ecclesiastical livings, and not suffer them to fall into
ruin and decay: and whether your almeshouses, hospitals, and spittles, be well
and godly used, according to the foundation and ancient ordinances of the
same: and whether there be any other placed in them than poor, impotent, and
needy persons, that have not wherewith, or whereby to live?
Articles concerning the Churchwardens and their assistants.
ITem, whether you have in your Parish Churches and Chapels, all things
necessary and requisite for common prayer and administration of the
Sacraments: specially the book of common prayer with the new Calendar, two
Psalters, the English Bible in the largest volume, the Table of the ten
commandments, a convenient Pulpit well placed, a comely and decent Table
standing on a frame, for the holy communion, with a fair linen cloth to lay
upon the same, and some covering of silk, buckeram, or other such like, for
the clean keeping thereof, a fair and comely communion cup of silver, and a
cover of silver for the same, which may serve also for the ministration of the
communion bread, and a decent large surplesse with sleeves. 2 Item, whether
your Churches, and Chapels, with the chancell, be well and sufficiently
repaired and kept, without abuse of any thing: and whether your churchyards be
well fenced and cleanly kept: and if any part thereof be in decay, through
whose default it is so, and whether any strife has grown amongst your
neighbors, about pewes or seats in the Church? 3 Item, whether those decays
of your Chauncels and Churches which were lately upon special inquisition
presented: have been and are sufficiently repaired sithence that time according
to former commandment given to that purpose, or how much thereof do yet
remain indecent, ruinous, or in any decay, and to what value, and by whose
fault? 4 Item, whether your Font or Baptisteries be removed from the place
where they were wont to stand: or whether any persons (leaving the use of
them) do christen or baptize in basins, or other profane vessels, not
accustomably used in the Church before time. 5 Item, whether the Schoolemasters
within your Parish, openly or privately in any man's house, be of good and
sincere religion, life and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of youth, and whether with their Scholars they do resort orderly
on Sundaies and Holidaies to church: and whether your Schoolemasters do
receive the holy communion so often as they ought to do, and so many of their
scholars as be of sufficient age and capacity to receive: and whether they
have been examined, allowed, and licensed for schoolmaisters by the Ordinary or
his officers in that behalf? 6 Item, whether all Houshoulders in your Parish
have caused their children, servants, and apprentices, both mankind and
womankind, (being above seven years of age) which have not learned the
Catechism, to come to the church on Sundaies and Holydaies at the times
appointed for catechizing, and there diligently and obediently to hear: and
what be the names of those that have not caused their children, servants, and
apprentices, so to come to the Church to be instructed and examined? 7 Item,
whether do any work or keep any shop, or any part of their shop open upon
the Saboath days, or upon any Holydaies, (appointed by the laws of the Realm
to be kept holyday, or do use any work or labor upon those days. 8 Item,
whether you your selves, or the Churchwardens in the years before, have
suffered any unmarried woman (being begotten with child) to go out of the
Parish before she has done penance: or any man defamed of whoredom, to depart
unpunished: and forth of whose houses they have gone away with unpunished. 9
Item, whether there be any in your Parish, which for any cause whatsoever,
wilfully forbear to come to Church, to public prayer, or to hear Gods word
preached, pretending it unlawful to come to our assemblies, as the church of
England now stands: and how many months they and every of them have so
absented themselves by the space of one year last past. 10 Item, whether any
do refuse to receive the holy communion at their own Ministers hand, either
because he is not a preacher, or because he duly observes y^ order of
ministration, appointed by the book, and who they be that do go from their
own Parish to receive at any other Ministers hands: and whether any of your
Parishioners (having a preacher to their Minister) do absent themselves from
his sermons, and resort to other places to hear other Preachers? 11 Item,
whether the people of your Parish (especially householders, having not lawful
excuse to be absent) do diligently themselves resort with their children and
servants, to the Parish Church or Chapel on holydaies, and cheefely on the
sundaies, to Morning and Evening prayer, or upon reasonable let thereof, to
some usual place where common prayer is used, and then and there abide orderly
and soberly during the time of common prayer, Homilies, Sermons, and other
service of God there used, reverently and devoutly giving themselves to the
hearing thereof, and who they be that negligently absent themselves, or come
very late to the Church, or use any gaming or pastime abroad, or in any house,
or sit in the street, Churchyard, or in any tavern or alehouse upon the Saboth
or holiday, in the time of common prayer, Sermon, or reading of ye Homilies,
either before or after noone? 12 Item, whether there be within your Parish any
Inkeepers, ale-wiues, victuallers or tiplers, that suffer or do admit any
person or persons in their houses to eat, drink, or play at cards, tables, or
such like games in the time of common prayer or Sermon on the Sundaies or
Holydaies: and whether any Butchers or others that commonly use to sell meat or
other things, do make sale in the time of common prayer, preaching or reading
of Homilies: and whether in any Faires or common Markets (falling upon the
Sunday) there be any showing of any wares before Morning prayer be done: and
whether any Markets and selling of wares be used or suffered in any
churchyards, by common packemen or pedlers going about, or any such people
either of your parish, or not? 13 Item, whether the Churchwardens of the last
year have given to the Parish a just account of the Church goods and rents
that were committed to their charge, according to the custom that has been
before time used: and what Church goods they or any other have sold, and to
whom: and whether to the profit of your Church, or no? and what has been done
with the monney thereof coming? 14 Item, whether any of your parish (being of
convenient age) have not received the holy communion thrice in euarie year at
the least, and namely at Easter, or thereabouts for once: and what their names
are, or which (at their receiving) have not signified the same before to your
Parson, Uicar, or Curate, that he might conveniently examine them: and who have
refused to come to him to be examined? 15 Item, Whether there be any in your
Parish, that administer the goods of those that be dead without lawful
authority, or any that suppress the last will of the dead, or any Executors
that have not fulfilled their Testators Will, especially in paying of Legacies
given to the Church, or to other good and godly uses, as to the rel^ef^ of
poverty, to helpless Orphans, poor Scholars, poor Maidens marriages, high
ways, and such like: and by whom they are so detained? 16 Item, whether there
be any in your parish that has or does offend contrary to the Statute made in
the 37. year of the Reign of King Henry the eight for the reformation of
Usurie, and revived by an Act made the thirteenth year of the reign of the
late Queen Elizabeth, taking above the rate of ten pounds for the lending of
an hundred pounds by the year: and what be the names of such offenders? 17
Item, whether your Minister, or any of the Parish, without the consent of the
Ordinary, have caused any to do penance or be punished, either openly or
otherwise, for any crime punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws only, and
what be the names of the parties that have been so punished, and in what
manner? 18 Item, whether there be amongst you any that use sorcery or
witchcraft, punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws, or that be suspected of
the same, and whether any use any charms, or unlawful prayers: and whether
any do resort to any such for help and counsel, and what be the names both
of such as use it, and of such as resort unto them for help? 19 Item, whether
there be among you, any blasphemer of the name of God great or often swearers,
adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons, bawdes or receivers of incontinent
persons, or harbourers of women with child which be unmarried, conueving or
suffering them to go away before they do any penance, or make satisfaction to
the congregation, or any that be vehemently suspected of any such fault: any
drunkards, or ribawdes, or any that be malicious, contentious, or uncharitable
persons, common slaunderers of their neighbors, raylers, scolders, or sowers
of discord between neighbors, and especially raylers against Ministers, and
against their marriage. 20 Item, whether there be any in these parts that have
married within the degrees of affinity or consanguinitie, by the laws of God
forbidden, or any, that being divorced or separated for the same, do yet
notwithstanding cohabite and keep company still together, or any that being
married without those degrees, have unlawfully forsaken their wives or husbands
and married others, any man that has two wives, or woman that has two
husbands, any that being divorced or separated asunder have married again, any
that have married and contracted themselves without the consent of their
parents, tutors, and governors, any that have married without banes thrice
solemnly asked, any couples married that live not together, but slanderously
live apart. 21 Item, whether your Minister and Churchwardens have suffered any
lord of misrule or summer Lords or ladies, or any disguised persons, or
May-games, or morice dancers, at any time to come irreverently into the church
or churchyard, and there to dance or pl^y, in the time of common Prayer,
Service, or Sermon upon the Saboath day? 22 Item, whether any within your
Parishes do resort unto barnes, fields, woo^^, or private houses for any
extraordinary expositions of scriptures, or conferences together, and so do
(as it were ^make a several Church or sect unto themselves, or be drawers, or
perswaders of others to any such schismatic sect, and in whose houses, or in
what places have you heard of any such meetings. 23 Item, whethe^ there be any
of your parish known or suspected to conc^^le o^ keep hidden in their house,
any Mass books or other books of Popery and superstision, or any chalices,
copes, vestiments, or other like superstitious ornaments in their form and
fashion vndefacet, for some exercise of their superstition, as may be
suspected, if they may have time or opportunity theretoo: or whether any be
known or suspected to receive any such books or like trumperie from beyond the
seas, and so disperse and carry them abroad to others. 24 Ite^, whether any in
your parish, married in any private houses since the last visitation, have bin
known or suspected to have bin married by any popish priest, or in any other
order then is appointed by the church of England. 25 Item, whether any children
borne within your parish do remain unbaptized, or be suspected to be baptized
by any popish priest, Seminary, or Jesuit: or whether any Recusants live
together as man and wife, who are not known to be married according to the
laws of this Realm. 26 Item, whether you know any notorious Recusant, who
obstinately refuses to be partaker, with the church of England in public
prayer and hearing the word of God preached, being for his disobedience and
contempt excommunicated, and so dying excommunicate, to be buried in christian
burial, not having before his death sought to be absolved. 27 Item, whether
any of the stocks appertaining to the church, be subtracted by any person, and
to what value, and by whom.
Generally, what faults soever you know to be within your parishes not
specified or mentioned in these Articles, and punishable by the Ecclesiastical
laws, you shall by virtue of your oath aforesaid duly and truly present them
to your Ordinary, that reformation may be had accordingly.

These subscribed Articles, are specially enjoined and commanded by the said
Reverend father, to be from time to time observed by the Minister and
Churchwardens of every church.

1 THat henceforth the Churchwardens shall not permit any Minister to serve
the cure of their church until the minister do first show forth unto the said
churchwardens his license thereto, under the hand and seal of the said Bishop
of Winchester, or of his Chancellor, upon pain of contempt. 2 Item, that from
henceforth they do not admit any minister to preach in their cures, but only
such as already be, or henceforth first shall be allowed thereto, under the
hand or seal of the L. Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, or of the said
Bishop of Winchester. 3 Item, that a true copy of the names, days, and month
of the christning, marying, and burial of all persons in every parish yearly
subscribed under the hands of the minister and churchwardens, testifying their
collation and agreement of the said copy with the said parchment book, shall
be yearly exhibited into the Registry of the Bishopric of Winchester, in the
yearly visitations of the Bishop or his Chancellor. 4 Item, that in this
triennall visitatio^, the names of all lay men presuming, or which by any
favor are tolerated to read divine service in any church, be diligently
enquired and presented: and that henceforth ye churchwardens upon pain of law,
do not permit any lay man to read divine service in the church, without y^
special license of the bishop of Winchester or of his chancellor under their
hand and seal, of which licenses there shall remain record in the registry of
the said Bishop. 5 Item, that the churchwardens do upon the saboth days
diligently observe the careless and negligent comers to divine service, and
after admonition given by the minister and church wardens, do at y^ least at
every visitation, present the names of such negligent persons, and the several
days of their absence. 6 Item, that every beneficed man, not being a preacher
allowed by public authority, and the farmers of beneficed men not being
resident, shall every Uisitation deliver to the Register a note in writing of
all Sermons preached in their Cures from one Uisitation to another, subscribed
with the preachers hand, which notes the Register shall (after the visitation
ended) certify unto the said reverend father. 7 Item, if the Churchwardens
and sidemen at this visitation, or any other henceforth, shall wilfully or
negligently omit to present any crime or offense worthy of presentment and
reformation, whereof the Minister, then or after, may have knowledge, that then
the Minister shall give aduertizement thereof to the said reverend father or
his Chancellor.
FINIS.
God save the King.

