A brief and plain declaracion of certain sentences in this little book
following, to satisfy the consciences of them that have judged me thereby to be
a favorer of the Anabaptists

Ecclesia xxiiii. All these things contains the book of life, the testament
of the highest, and the confession of the truth Suffer the infantes to come
unto me and forbydde them not: for unto such, the kingdom of God is due.
Mark. x. To the reader.
AFter I had setfurth this little book to the intent that the faithful reader
might thereby be sterred up and proud ked to pray wout ceasyng, yt the
detractours and defamours of the faithful professors of yt faith of Christ,
might either be made favorers and sette^ forth of the same: other else so
confounded and dashed out of countenance through the Godly conversation of
the true and unfeigned professors of the pure Euangeli^e doctrine, that they
might not for very worldly shame once open their lips to speak any evil
word of them: incontinent the Devil who ha^h always endeavored to stop and
hinder the glory of God and the profit of his members (the faithful
congregation) put into the minds of certain learned men, (who also are ernest
defenders and setters forth of the truth) to report and affirm this my
fact, to be a mayntenaunce and vpholdyng of the Anabaptists opinion, which
denied it to be lawful to Baptize the Infantes and young children which are not
of years of descresion to know and confess the faith of Jesus Christ Not much
unlike is this subtyle practice of our gostlye adversary, unto that which he
wrought in the time of Christ's passion. He did then beat into the head of
Pilates wife such kind of dreams: that she was thereby moved to send word
to her husband that in no case he should give sentence against that just man
Jesus Christ, whom the Jews had than brought before him, requiryng him to
give sentence of death upon him, because he said that he was the son of God.
This proceaded not of any desire that he had, that Pilate should not commyt so
heinous a faut as to give sentence against that most innocent and immaculate
lamb Jesus Christ: but of y^ great ranker and malice that he bare toward
man, who could not otherwise be restored the^ by the bloodshed of that most
pure and innocent lamb Jesus Christ. Even so (most dearly beloved) in this
present practice, our gostly enemy intented not to root out the error of the
Anabaptists out of the minds of men: but because he perseiueth yt the very
name of the^ is so odious to yt faithful yt they think their books unworthy
to be had among christian me^: he thought yt he might by no means so sone
bring me out of credit with the congregation as if he might procure some man
(whose authority is great in the congregation) to give me the name of a
favorer of that most wicked and dyuelish opinion: and so to cause me^ to
refrain this book, least they should by the readyng thereof, take any utility
or profyt.

But, as the spirit of God shall be my guide, so will I declare, not only that I
am none of the favorers and maintainers of that destable error, but also that
I do (as much as in me lies) impugn and resist the same, so that, that
wicked serpent, shall be by the same means defeated of his purpose: by which he
in tended to have spoiled the of thy commodity. First thou shall note that I
am no favorer of them or their opinions, for that I shall playnelye declare
that the scriptures which they aledge, make nothing for their purpose And
the^, that I do in all that I may impugn them, by that I shall endeavor to
establysh (...) fyrmeby the scriptures: the contrary of their opinion. For the
first thou shall note, that the ground of their opinion is upon the order that
the Euangelis^ Mark keeps in the rehersing of the words of Christ to his
Apostles when he sent the^ to preach. Mark. xvi. Faith say they, does in the
words of Christ go before Bapt^me. Necessary is it therefore, that he that
shall be Baptized do first believe. But the Infantes (which have not the use of
reason) cannot understand the faith of Christ (and much less embrace and
profess it) wherefore, it cannot stand with the word of God that Infantes
should be baptized. No doubt (christen reader it is not possible that any
should be acceptable before God, without faith. For so writes Paul to the
Hebrews. xi. And truth it is also, that says must go before baptism, none
other wise th^n the cause proceadeth or goes before the effect or thing that
comes thereof, as the tree must neades be before the fruit that it bears.
And it is also infallibly true, that the Baptism which is acceptable before
God must neades spring out of faith But to infer upon this, that the
Infantes and young children ought not to be baptized: is farwyde from the true
m^anynge of these places of scripture. And yt shall casely appear to them that
^st to weygh the circumstaunces of the places so that they may conceive the
whole intent and purpose of the writer.

First for the words of our savior Christ in Mark, they were the word^s of
commission ^euen to the Apostles, that they should go into the whole world and
preach the Gospel unto all creatures. These words sown, that the Apostles
might not chose them any peculiar nation to preach unto, nether Jew nor
Gentyle, another Greek nor Romain. But their commission was into all the world,
yea. and to preach to all creatures the Gospel of God. No nation, no estate,
condition or degree, excepted. As well were they bound to preach to the plowman
as to the prince, as well to the labourer, as to the lord. God has no respect
to the per son, All the sons of Adam are of one degree in the sight of the
Lord. Here was no mention made Infantes neither of any other age. But I am
sure there is no man so far wide as once to think that the Apostles were here
in commanded to preach unto Infantes. For they as beasts lacking the use of
reason cannot receive the faith that has his beginning of hearing (as saint
Paull writes) in this text therefore is no precepte of Infantes either for the
Baptisynge of them other else the leauyng of them unbaptized. The precept
that is hear given is none other but to go in to all the world and to preach
the Gospel to al nations, estates and degrees. Then is there anexed the promise
of the free mercy of God toward all the world, that is, that whosoever
should beleaue and be baptized should be saved, but he that will not believe
shall be comdemned. Here is it manifest, that without believe, Baptism avails
not. For he that will not believe shall be condemned. But hear we must beware
that we do not by these words condemn all Infantes and young children, be
cause they have not the power to understand and believe. For this part of y^
text partaineth no more unto them, the^ the other (concerning the precept of
the preaching) does. This place of scriptur therefore, is to be understood of
them only that have the use of reasone to per ceiue and understand the
preaching of the gospel: and yet will not embrace it, and receive baptism,
the sign of the washing of their sins by the preciouse blood of our
savior Christ shed for the redemption of the world. As for the other text,
that is of Paul to the Hebrews the. xi. chapit. wherein is declared that
without faieth non can he acceptable to God: apparteyneth also unto such as
are of years of discrecio^. For in all the chapter, is there none rehearsed but
such as were of age and discrecion. Wherefore we may justly infer hereof, that
it is not possible that any person should be acceptable unto god in his
works, without the work that he does, do proceade of a pure and sincere
faith. For as the prophet Esaye, says in his. lxiiii. chap. Out works are al
as the cloth yt is defiled with menstruous blood. And further, (...). Paul to
the Romans. xiiii The works that proceed not of faith are sin Faith it is
therefore that makes our doings acceptable unto God, and without faith nothing
that we do is acceptable. Whereupon I infer that except the congregation which
Baptize they^ children do it of faith: this their Baptisyng is sin in the
sight of God, and therefore not acceptable unto God. But if the^ do it of faith
^rusting that God shall plant in the hertes of the infantes that living faith
that may cause them to confess his name when they shall receive the use of
reason: then is this their fact no less acceptable before God the^ the deed
of Abraham was when he upon the faith that he had in the promise of God:
Circusised all the males of his household. For, as Circumcision was a sign or
token to declare that all they that received it, trusted to be redeamed by the
Mesias that was promised to the said Abraham, and as the fathers to declare
their faithful hope, did not only cyrcumsise them selves, but their children
and familes also: so is Baptism a sign to declare that the receivers thereof,
do unfeignedly believe that yt blood of Christ has washed their sins, And
upon like trust as the fathers had, that God will exte^d his mercy unto their
children and famyly: they do baptize them also, as appears in the acts of
the Apostles, where is mention made of certain me^ whose families and
housholdes were Baptized when they, had received the faith. But here it might
be said that in these places it is me^cioned that the whole families believed
and then received Baptism. So that the infantes (which had no believe) remained
still unbaptized. Whereunto I answer, that if the Parents were faithful, they
could not chose but their faith would constrayne them to do as those faith full
did yt brought their children unto Christ, Mark. x. And then the Apostles I am
sure were not so forgetful but that they bare in mind the words of their
master who rebuked the^ for forbidding the children to approach him, which were
brought by their faithful parents that he might put his hand on them Yea,
(...) doubt not but that after the example of their master, they embraced the
infantes declaring the^ to be the inheritours of the king dome of God, and that
none should enter that kingdom: unless he would become a^ one of them. Thus
have I declared mine opinion concerning the Baptism of infantes (as I trust)
sufficietly to satisfy them that have in^staken me, and to declare that all
such sentences (in this little book) as do so greatly impugn Baptism without
faith: are to be understand so, that nether they that be of age ought to be
Baptized without they do first believe and co^ fesse Christ: nor the infantes
onles the faith full congregation do with one assent offer the^ at the font of
regeneration with full mind and he^tie desire to have them members of the church
of Christ, having most sure and certain hope that God (...) ^oorke in the^ such
manner of faith as shall cause the^ at the years of discretion to profess and
follow the doctrine of Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be
all honor for ever and ever* ^o be it

A BRIFE AND Faithful declaration of the true faith of Christ, made by
certain men susspected of heresye in these articles following.

i. Thessalonians. v. Quench not the spirit, despise not the propheciynges,
but prove all things, and keep that, that is good. Esaye. v. Woe be unto them
that call good evil, and evil good, which make darkness light, and light
darkness. Anno. M. D. xlvii. Per me I.D.

The Prologe.
Seeing that saint Paul says to the Ephesia^s iiii. that there is but one
faith or belief, so may every christen man hertely morn, when he sees that
so many and diverse faythes are found, among them that boste them selves to
be christen men. Also that the one dreadfully sclaundereth and with great
tyranny persecuteth the other, and that without indifferency. But also the
lord Jesus Christ has said: that in the last days shall be many offended,
and the one shall betraye the other, and the one hate the other. And that ma ny
false prophets and false christen shall arise and seduce many. For this cause
is it very necessary that every christen man faithfully cry unto God with
continual prayer, that he wy^ give him a steadfast belief, and will keep him in
the right way, that he do not go into crooked ways, through the gyle or
disceyt of false hypocrysye of the false christen or prophe^es. And God will
doubtless keep his elect from Satan and his ministers, although the time be
never so perylous, or never so many dampnable sects be brought forth, yea
although the darkness should cover whole Egypt, yet shall God nevertheless
let his face lighten over all true Israelites, so that they shall know his
ways upon the earth, and his salvation among the heathen. And although
Himeneus and Phile^us do turn from the right way, nevertheless the sure
ground of God stands ever fast, and has this seal, that God knows them
that are his. For we know well that God (how be it') that he out of his
unmeasurable n^ye and grace, yea out of the inexpressible love of his fatherly
heart, defends his children from al evil, yet nevertheless will he be prayed
unto of them as we have many ensamples thereof in scripture, how that the holy
men in their trybulacion or angwyshe have called unto god, and have been herd
and helped of him. And seeing then that the right christen ever for their
befifes sake grievously are troubled, yea as gold and silver in the fire both
with bodily troble and falls doctrine vnd^tsought and proved: it is therefore
very necessary that we pray the lord with all dilygence for a right
understanding of his godly word, and for a sure immovable faith for euermor.
Also it is not vnnecessarye yt they bear their belief, contained in writing
always about them, and daily read it partly to the e^horting and confortyng of
them in all persecution and tribulacions, which may come unto them by gods
word Partly again for a defense against all antech^ystes spyrytes, which
always i^dae the faith of the rightuouse, how chrystenly so en^r it be, and
how many feste so ever it agrees with all godly scripture, for an heresye, yea
for a deuelyshe doctrine and gvle shall it be compted. Say ii. ^or. vi. And of
this so doing, no man shall merueyle, seeing, that all saints have b^n taken
for transgressors or seducers, of this evil blind world. Yea Jesus Christ
him self though ^e ^e the ever ^astynge truth (John. ^iiii) was taken of
vnmyse Scrihes and Pharisees, for a b^gyler of the people. I^an. vii. yea for a
mad man, and a man ^ossessyd with the devil.o lord what a blas^heinye, And his
doctrine was not taken of them as gods word, but as a disseuable s^ducynge,
not as bread of life, nor as a medicine for the soul, but compted as a poison
or venym of the wicked serpent.

Seeing then that the Lord did suffer, reason it is for the servant to
suffer also. And all that, that is come upon the lord, that must (as trewlye
as Gods word is) overcome the servant also.

Here upon may every servant or disciple of Jesus Christ prepare him for he
must be ready, to suffer all confusion, sclaunder, and tribulation for his
Lord and masters sake.

We therefore perceiving this, will not be moved with the scaunder of the
wicked people, the which sclaunder our faith for heresy, and yet many of them
know not what we believe, but as they here of our adversaries, and thereafter
do they judge us. Notwithstanding though we do not regard their sclaunder,
yet nevertheless will we (so far as it is possible) mete them, and write
(through the grace of God) our faith: because that every man may read it,
and then may they with understanding and with christen charity judge. The
which we, both of al good diligent readers, and also of our adversaries
frendely desire, and mekely pray.

Here ends the Prologe.
The articles of the chri^ten faith.
I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy gooste,
and borne of Marye the virgyn. He suffered under Poncius Pylate, he was
crucified, dead and buried. He desended to hell, and rose the third day from
death. He ascended to the heavens, and syttteth on the right hand of God the
father almighty. And from thens shall he come to judge the quick and dead. I
believe in the holy ghost the holy church catholyke, to be a congregation of
saints, to have remission of sins, the resurrection of the flesh, and the
everlasting life.

At the first we believe in one God. Deuteronomy. vi. and father of our lord Jesus
Christ. ii. Cor. i. the which is the Lord of heaven and earth. Luke. xi. and
creator of al creatures. Hebre. i. Yea he is father of us all. Ephe. iiii. the
which has elected us to be his crildren through Jesus Christ. Ephe. i. And
therefore shall we him all only worship, and beside him none other gods. Deuteronomy.
v^. Also we shall fear him as an almigh ty god. Psalm. xxxiiii. and as a
merciful father we shall love him with al our hertes, with all our soul, and
with al our power and mind. Mat. xxii. and upon him must stand all our
hope. Hiere. vii. For he is the father of light. Jacob. i. of the whythe all
mankind lives, Actu. xvii. both ^odelye goods Prouerbeo. x. everlasting
salvation. Psalm. xxxvii. together with al perfyte gifts come, and descended.
Jacob. i.

Forthermore we believe in Jesus Christ, the son of the living god our lord.
i. Cor. vii The which is the very bryghtnesse of his fathers glory, and the
very image of his substance. Hebre. i. Yea he is the only begotten son of
the father. John. i. come forth out of the mouth of the most highest God.
Eccles. i. xxiii. first borne before all creatures. Collos. i. Through the
which all things are created. Heb. i. In whom we have redemption, namely
remission of sins through his blood. Col. i. with the which he has washed
us. Apoc. i. and has also reconciled us again to his most holy and gloriouse
father. Ephesians i. ii. that were before enemies to God. Roma. viii.

For after the time that god had made man after his image and similitude, he
set him into Paradise, that he should eat of all the fruits of the garden of
pleasure, exceptynge him the tree of knowledge of good and euyil. Gene. ii. But
man has disobeyed the Lord his God, and transgressed his commandment. Genesis
iii. Through the which disobedience and transgression of the godly
commandment, death and curse is come over all mankind. Romans v. And when
there was no help nor comfort for man, whereby he might have been redeemed or
delivered out of Satan's power. Then had God the merciful father pity upon
mankind and promised the^ a sead namely Jesus Christ, his only begotten
son, the which should tread upon the head of the serpent, and overcome the
devil, and restore the^ to life again. Gene. iii. And like wise as god is
ryghtuouse in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Psalm. criv. and ^ew in all his words. Psalm. li. so has he kept all his promyses truly. And as the
time was fulfilled. Gala. iiii. God let his word descend into the womb of
the vyrgyn Marye, and by the workynge of the holy gooste be came flesh: as
John witnesses saying: The word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we saw
his glory, as the glory of the only begotten son of the father full of grace
and verite John. i. Also this only begotten sone of god by the power of the
holy ghost became man and is become like unto us in all things except sin
Hebre. ii. He hathsuffered death for our sake. Esaias. liii. and has taken away
Satan's power, and restored life in agyne. i. Timot. vi. yea he is made unto us
wisdom and ryghtwysnes, sanctyfyenge and redemption. i. Cor. i. And likewise
as he dyed for our sins. Hebre. ii. so is he risen again through the power of
his father Roma. vi. for our righ tuousnes Roma. iiii. And as he oftentimes
showed him felfe after his resurreccyon, unto his dyscyples. Acti. i. so is he
ascended into hea uen in thyr presence. Luke. xxiiii. And sytteth at the right
hand of the almighty rather. To. viii. Above all rule, and might, and dominion
and above all that may be named, not only in this world, but also in the
world to come ^phesi. i. And has subdewed all things under his fete. Hebre.
ii. in summa, he is alorde above all lords, and a king above all kings. Apo.
xix. yea he is an almighty god with his fa there. Apo. xxii. John. x. And
nevertheless he is also our only advocate and mediator. i. John. ii. Tymo.
ii. our only hye priest. Hebre. v. the sacrifyce that he has done for our
sins, abides of valor for evermore. (...) ebre x.

Forthermore likewise as Christ our lord is ascended up into heaven, so shall
he come again from heaven Act. i. with the dominion of his father, and with
the angels. Mat. xxv. for to give every man reward after his works, yea for
to judge yt quick and dead. Act. x. Tim. iiii

We believe also in the holy ghost god with the father and the son, which holy
ghost is a teacher of all christen. Ioh. xiiii. and he does cloth them with his
gifts, and gives every one the measure of feyth after his own will. i. Corin
xii. and keeps them immovable in one faith, for he is a ruler of the christian
congregacyon Acti. xx. He is also the anoyntement. i. John. ii. wherewith all
christian are anointed, and of that behalf are called the anointed of the
lord. Psalm. ciiii.

So is this holy ghost given unto the christian as an erneste of their
inherytaunce to their re dempcyon, and they again be his own to the praise of
his glory Ephesi. i. In summa it is impossible without this holy ghost to
know god ryghtly. i. Cor. ii. or with all the hole heart to believe upon hun.
i. Corin. xii. or to call upon him as a father. Roma. viii. And therefore does
god pour this his holy ghost upon his chil dren, whereby they may rightly
know him, and ryghtly believe in him, and as a right father call upon him.
Sata. iiii.

This is our belefe to the father son and holy ghost, which three we
knowledge to be one god. Deuteronomy. vi. whose seat is the heaven, and the earth is a
benche of his fete. Esaias. xivi. yea the which is an everlasting. ii. Match. i.
an almighty. Psalm. ^v. a ryhgtuouse. Psa. ii. and a merciful god. Psalm. cxiv.
The which alone wylbe worshypped and served. Deu. vi. For he can alone help
us. Esaye. xliii. which he does for his names sake and not for our rygh
tuousenes sake Esaias. rliii.

Forthermore as we have said that al they that do believe are joined together,
and through the holy ghost knitte in unity, so is there a chri sten church,
the with is builded of living stones. i. Pet. ii. which church is the house of
god. Heb. iii. and the house of god is the congregation of God. i. Timoi. iii.
and the congregacyon of God is the body of Christ. Ephesians. i. And seeing
that al right christians are one body. (...). Cor. r. in the which they al
through one spirit are baptized. i. Cor. rii. So must there be a communion of
saints, namely that al saints or true beleuers are also joined together in
unity, as the members of one body. Romans xii. And in this communion of saints
is remission of sins, and that wout it is no sin forgiven, nor any hope of
salvation. Ephe. ii. yea like as it is impossible yt a member ca^ live that is
not in the bo die, so is it possible yt any man may live in his soul, and ca^
be releaced out of death by remission of sin, the which is not a member of
the body of Christ. For Christ has reconciled us al unto god his father in one
body. Ephe. ii. And there fore must al they stand in variau^ce yt are no (...)
bres of this body, of yt which Christ is yt head. Ephesians. i. to the which he
gives salvation. Ephesians. (...)

Now must we also know that how be it that God always forgyueth sins.
Esaias. xliii. yet has Christ given unto his congregation power to bind and to
lowse which shall not be vndersca^de after the antichrist doctrine the bishop
of Rome has power to remitte sins, but the christen congregation whose head
is Christ, and not the Romyshe Antechrist, and is rewled of the holy gooste
and not of the fornicatyshe spirit of the Prophetysse Iesabell. This
congregation I say has power to bind and lowse (that is to say) all what
she byndeth other lowseth is done by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ. i.
Cor. v. and through the holy ghost, as a rewler of the christen congregation.
Actu. xx. so is there in the christen congregation remission of sins.

There shall be also a general resurrection of the flesh, namely that all they
that are dead shall rise again, some to everlasting life, and some to
everlasting dampnacion. John. v And they that shall live and remain until the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, they shall be changed in the twynkelynge of
an eye, at the time of the last ^ompet. i. Corhin. xv. For the trompet (says
Paul) shall blow, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed.
For this corruptible body must put on un corruptibilitie, and this mortal
body must put on immortality. i. Corhin. xv.

At the last is there also an everlasting life. John. xvii. which all they
shall receive that believe on Jesus Ihrist. John. vl. and stedfastlye abide in
good works seeking praise honor, and immortality. Roma. ii.

This is the sum of our belief, yea and a right christen belief, through
the which faith all ryghtuouse live. A^ac. ii. And with out the whyth belief
no man may please god. Heb. xv. Therefore must the everlasting God be blessed,
that out of his immeasurable mercy and grace, has given us this faith through
Jesus Christ. Ephe. ii. And this is the some of our faith with the shortest.

The sacrament of Baptysme.
BAptysme is a sacramenttall token, the which is given us of Christ. Math.
xxviiii. And is at the first an entering into the christen congregacyon (as
Paul says) we are baptized in one spirit to be one body. i. Corhi. xii.

Secondarily, it is a fountain of regeneracion, as Paul witnesses, saying
that Christ has saved us by the fountain of the new birth, and renewynge of
the holy gooste. Tit. (...). Not that the water does save us, for nothing can
save us, but ouely god, Esaias. xliii. But after that our Lord Jesus christ has
spo ken: that he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. Mar. xvi. and
Gods word is verity. Johan. xvii and his promyses may not fail. Psalm.
cxlvii. Therefore must baptism nead^s bring salvation unto them that in
belief are baptized, not for the works sake, but for gods word and
promises D^u. viii.

Thyrdely baptysme is a covenant of a good conscience to god. i. Pet. iii.
namelye that he that in belief is baptized, binds him self or makes a
covenant with god: that from thens forth he will live after his will. And of
this couenauntes behalf, which must be done out of a clean faithful heart,
has the baptysme power, and not for the waters sake, wherewith the fylthynesse
of the flesh might be washed away. But without it be that the hertes of them
that are baptized, be cleansed. Act. xv. through Gods word. John. rv. the
water can not (...) them. Wherewith it is also proved, that baptism without
faith may in no wise be broked.

Forthly baptism sygnifieth an offering of the flesh, and a ressurection into
a new life, as we have unto the Romans, know ye not (says Paul) that al
we which are baptized, in the name of Jesus Christ, are baptized, to dye with
him. Therefore are we buried with him by baptysme for to dye, that like wise as
Christ was raised up from death, by the glory of the father, eue^ so we should
walk in a new life. (...). Romans vi. This is now shortly expressed what
baptysme is, and what it signifies. Now must we also know, that seeing no
good work without faith may be done. Romans xiiii. So must he that shall be
baptized believe, or else he can not ryghtly be baptized, as we may clearelye
understand in the words of Christ Jesus, wherwyth he has institute this
baptysme, and commanded his apostles, saying: Go and preach the gospel to
(...) creatures, he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Mar. xvi. Here
will no sophisti^ reasonynges and dreams be allowed, for the Lord will
destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will take away the understanding of the
prudent, and will make the wisdom of this world folishnesse. i. Cor i. and.
iii. But the word of God shall abide for ever. i. Pet. i. And Christ says:
that heaven and earth shall perish, but my words shall abide. Mat. xxiiii.
Therefore must also the words of Christ (he that believes and is baptized
etc.) not be altered or changed. And seeing that Christ has instituted or
ordained faith before baptism, so must he that shall be baptized believe, or else
the words of Christ suffers force, and are wholye and fals^lye altered and
changed, as we now a days alas may ^e, and it is a miserable thing, that
this baptysme is so evil understand, and so shamefully broken. And seeing
that the scripture does so clearly thereof witness. Though that all the
witnesses of scripture perteynyng to this matter, be not here alleged for the
shortness sake, yet do we take out one of them, namely the example of the
Apostle Philip, which when he showed Gods word unto the gelded man, which
was the chamberlayne to Candas, Queen of the Moryans, and he him self desired
to be baptized, but the ^ewe minister of god Philip, would not baptyse him,
except he did not only believe, but also openly confessed it. Act. viii. This
example is well worthy to be marked, for ^t the first we may se here the
great diligence and how desirous the chamberlayne was of baptysme, which is
a learning unto al them that love their salvation, that they shall desire this
work hertelye, and not defer it, b^ as soon as they by hearing of the word
of (...). Roma. x. with the operacion of the holy go^st i. Cor. xi^. has
received faith. And if there be any man that will not be satisfied with this
ensample of Philip, let him perceive also how Ananias did compel Paul, saying
unto him: why taryest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash a way thy sins.
A^tu. xxii. Here we se that Baptysme, after the faith is received, may not be
deferred. Therefore has the cham berlayne with great diligence desired
baptism after that he did believe, saying unto Philip: Behold here is water,
what should left me to be baptized? Actuum. viii. Forthermore seeing ^he
true minister of God Philippe, would not baptyse him, except he confessed
his faith: doubtless he has therwyth teached us, that all they that will be
baptized, must confess their belief, as ye se the chamberlayne did.

But for as much as all the former scriptures are spoken of them only that
be of years of discretion before they receive the fayeth of Christ: It is no
altering of the institution and word of Christ, to baptyse the innocents and
unbelieving infauntes, which have not as yet received the use of reason,
whereby they might decerne faith to believe and profess the name of Christ. For
as in the circumsition of the old law the faith of the parents sufficed to
make the child one of the chosen people of God, notwythstandyng that the
circumsicion of the flesh is not circu^sicion (as Paul wrytteth to the
Romans) but the circumsion of the heart, even so in the baptism of our
infantes, notwythstandynge that the washing of the body in water is not
baptysme, but the washing of the soul in the blood of Christ by faith: yet
shall the faith of the parents be accepted of God and their children made
members of the church of Christ thereby. If any require witnesses of the
scripture for this assersion: let him read and consider well the storye of
Samson, and Samuel, with other like stories of the old testament, wherein may
easily be perceived how god did then accept the children for the parents
faith. Let him co^ syder also the stories of the gospel, wherein appears how
Christ would not have the children kept from him when their pare^tes brought
them to him that he might lay his hands upon them, and how certain children
were cured of diseases even for the fayeth that was found in their parents.
And last of all it is evident both in the Acts, and Epistles of the Apostles,
that when certain men received the gospel, both they and their whole
housholdes were baptized. Where it is not to be thought that the infantes were
rejected, because they could not understand the Apostles preaching. For saint
Paul wrytiynge to the Corhinthians as concerning the children begotten
between an heathen man and a faithful woman, or between an heathen woman and a
faithful man: says that the children are clean by the reasone that one of
his parents is faithful. And what other thing should ^e mean ther^y but
that God accepts those children for members of his church, whom the
faithful parents do wyllyngly bring to the foun tayne of regeneration, there
to receive the sign of the everlasting couenaunte between God and us? And if
any man will wyllingly withstand Christ and his Apostles, and do other wise
then Christ has commanded, and his Apostles taught and did, he is blinded,
but his blyndnesse shall wax manifest well enough. Likewise as the Egypcians
sorcerars, the which wythstode Moses and Aaron, but at the last were
manifestlye seen and known. ii. Timo. iii. This is with the shortest the faith
of our baptism.

Of the supper of the lord.
THe supper of the lord, is a memorial toke^ of the suffering and death of
Jesus Christ and is instituted of Christ for this cause, that the faithful
congregacyon of Jesus Christ, should come together, for to show the death of
Jesus Christ, and his benefytes, lauding and thanking him, magnyfyenge his
holy name, and then also eat of this bread and drink of this wine, to a
remembrance that Christ has given his body and shed his blood for us. Math
xxvi. And because that it is a common use that a token of remembrance has the
name of the thing that is remenbred by it. Therefore has Christ called the
bread his body, and the wine his blood: not that his substance is in the
bread and wine, but that we should remember him thereby. Likewise as the ^aster
la^be was called the passing by, and yet was it not in it self the very pas
sing by, but a token or remembrance of the passing by. Deynge now that the
easter lamb has the name of the thing that the Israelites remembered by it,
and whereby they might ever lastyngly keep in remembrance the benefytes of god,
right convenient is it that Christ has called the bread his body, and the
wine his blood because that we should remember thereby his death and passion,
yea the only sacrifice of his body, which he has suffered to be broken and
his blood to be shed for us. Nevertheless how be it that the materyall body of
Christ is not in the bread, nor his blood in the wine, yet nevertheless is
the supper of the Lord (...) parttakynge (but spyrytually) of the body and
blood of Christ, as Paul says: Is not the ^uppe of thanks geuyng wherewith
we give thanks, a part taking of the blood of Christ? And the bread that we
break, is it not the (...) taking of the body of Christ? These words of
Paul do witness clearly that the faithful eat the body of Christ
spiritually, under the bread and wine yea likewise as a bryde receives her
housbande with a ring, even so receive the faithful Christ to be their own
and everlasting salvation. But that some men will have that the bodyly
presence should be in the bread, is a great mysse understanding of the godly
word: yea it is an antechrystes doctrine, which is contrary both to our faith
and to al holy scripture. For we be leave and holy scripture bears wytnes,
that Christ after his resurrection is ascended up into heaven, and sytteth
upon the right hand of his almighty father. Romans viii. And bideth there as
concerning his bodyly presence, but spiritually he has promised to abide with
us to the end of the world in his word Mat. xxviii. And seeing that now
Christ as concer nyng his bodily presence abides at the right hand of his
father Hebre. x. so may not the body of Christ be in the bread. And again it
is against all truth that Christ at one time has been in many or diverse
places, as touching his body. Forthermore we do daily se what dredful ydolatrye
is s^rong out of the carnal understanding of these words of Christ: This is
my body, and yet daily spryngeth, to the great and abominable slander of the
honor of god so that men worshype a piece of bread for their god, yea and
hold that to be their maker. And the papystes lock him in ^olde and silver,
not reme^brynge what Paul and Stephen witness saying: The most highest
will not dwell in temples made with man's hands. Acts. vii. and. xvii. O
blind men that are so bewytched of the whore, that ye can not nor will not
believe the manifest truth, O blyndnesse and great presumptuousnesse of the
papists, that will take upon them to fetch Jesus Christ out of heaven, into a
piece of bread, which is consumable, as we clearelye se by experience, and
that it should be worshypped for God, which is everlasting and
unchangeable. Now what remedy for we can not help it, therefore must we do
as the Lord Jesus Christ spoke unto his apostles of the phariseis, saying:
Let them go for they are blind, and leaders of the blind, when one blind
leads an other, so fall they both into the dytche. Mat. xv. But the Lord
must be thanked that out of his unmeasurable grace has ^ned our eyes, that we
can se and know, wherefore we shall take the bread and the wine in the supper,
namely for a memorial and token of the sufferyng and death of Jesus Christ yea
for the body and blood of Christ: but that for the by names sake, and not of
the material things behalf, as is above rehearsed of the Easter Lamb.

Forthermore the supper of the Lord is also a ioynynge together of the
christen co^^regacion in love. And also the congregation that will hold this
supper, must be well appointed and joined together in brotherly love, yea they
must stand in one spirit and soul. Philip. i. having a burning love. For
Paul says: we many are one bread and one body, in as much as we are
partakers of one bread. Like wise as yt mebres of one body are not in stri^ one
against an other: but in a charitable unity serving one an other. i. Corhi.
xii. so may there no strife nor debate be found in the con gregacion of God.
i. Corhin. i. so that any man should only care and take thought for him
self, and not care nor look upon his brothers lack, but the one must help
and care for the other in all things necessary, where he can or may Gal. vi.
and no man must seek that, that is his, but every one the others wealth.
Philip. ii. And likewise as of the graynes of corn can not be baken bread,
but through fire: eue^ so can not the congregation be a right spiritual lofe
(whereof Paul speaks) but through burning love and charity. And so ought yt
christian congregation to be one lofe. i. Cor. x. For likewise as many graynes
are sown to the intent that bread should be baked of it. So sows the
great father of household his preciouse wheat into the acre or ground of
this world, to the intent that they all should become one lofe, and break the
supper of the Lord rightly after the words of Paul: we many are all one
bread and one body, in as much as we are part takers of one bread. i. Cor.
x. And where so ever the congregation is not so appointed and the bread broken
in this manner, there is the bread eaten, and the wine dro^ken to a judgment,
from the which God the merciful father will defend and keep all diligent
lovers of the everlasting truth tho^owe his inexpressible goodness and mercy.

Amen.
Of the very chrstian kingdom.
WE believe also that god the heavenly father, has given to his only begotten
sone Jesus Christ, al power in heaven and earth Math. xxviii. yea as Paul
says: He has set him on his right hand in heavenly things above all power,
rule, might and domynyon, and a boue all that may be named not only in this
world, but also in the world tocome. Ephe. i. Above all this has the
heavenly father especyally instituted and ordained Jesus Christ his only
begotten son, to be a king over the mount of Syon that is to say, over the
faithful congregacyon. Psalm. ii. which faithful congregation is the kingdom
of Christ. Col. i. And the domynyon of this kingdom stands not in a carnal
dominion or power: But likewise as the lord is a spirit. ii. Corhinthians.
iii. even so is his kingdom spiritual inwardly within us. Luke. xvii. and not
of this world. John. xviii. wherefore the prophet zachary promised us a
king thorough the holy ghost, the which should not come with vi^iable
dominion, nor great worldly tryumphe, but with an humble and a meke spyrite, And
should not ^ule as a worldly king over the carnal Syon or Israel, but should
rayngne a spirytuall king, and rule the spiritual Israelytes with the scepter
of his godly word. And these are the words of the prophet. Rejoice thou great
lie O daughter Syon, be glad O daughter Jerusalem, behold thy king comes
unto the ^owly and simple is he, he rides upon an Ass and upon the foele of
an Ass, even thy rightwyse and savior, and he him self is poor (...). ix.
These words of the prophet witness clearly that Christ's kingdom is
spiritual, and stands not in any outward dominion. John. xviii. And likewise
all these prophets do witness in these chapyters following. Esa. iiii. ix.
Ierem. xxiii. xxxii. Esechi. xxxiiii. xxxvii. Myth. iiii. Therefore do we hold
the doctrine of the carnal kingdom of Christ to be a dreadful errowr, and a
great heresye, yea we hold it to be an heresye, of the Chilcastes, the which
now again is raised amongst the^ of Mynster, and has breyded her out in
other places, to the great slander and hinderaunce of the true gospel of god.
Forthermore if any man take upon him and presume to be the promised Da uyd or a
king of Syon as John Layden at Mynster has done, him do we hold for an
antechriste above all antichrists, yea boue the Romysh Antechryste. How
dredful so ever he has slaundered god, and exalted him self against the
almighty god, and yet it is not com to such an abhominacion, as to put him
self a king of Sion, or to take upon him to be a promised dauyd: But in these
days rise so many abominable and presumptuous spirit fulfilled with all
manner of wyckednes, and satan's pride, that take upon them to rebbe Jesus
Christ of his kingli sc^pter, and to take it unto them selfs: woe be unto all
such dred full slaunderers of the godly majesty or power. woe be also unto the
seduceres which go about with witchecrafte wherewith they have begyled many men.
Woo be also unto all them which do not separate them selves from those
antechrystes and seducers, but yet do seek help or comfort of them, yea that
leave the very Moy^en Jesus Christ and desire other gods to go before them,
upon the^ shall fall that which is spoken of by the prophet Ieremye: Lord they
that do forsake the shall be destroyed, and they that turn from the shall be
ashamed, and their names shall be written in the earth, for they have leaft
the, the living fountain of water. Behold therefore will we by the grace of
God, abide by our spiritual King Jesus Christ, and pray him that his
kingdom may increase in us, yea that he will defend us from all evil and
reserve us to his everlasting heavenly kingdom, to his glory and honor for
ever.

Amen.
The weapons wherwyth a very christian ought to fight.
Seeing that the whole Gospel of our^ Savior witnesses that the christian
must suffer, and in no wise may revenge the evil. So that we think by the
help of god, not to turn from the wholesome doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For it is right convenient that a servant with his lords commandment, and
a disciple with his masters doctrine to be contented. Mat x. And here now may
no sophistical cauillacions nor fond ymaginacions be allowed, as though the
words of Jesus Christ should now be at an end. And seeing that Christ says
unto his apostles: what I say un to you, that do I say unto al, watch ye,
heaven and earth shall perish, but my words shall never peryshe. Therefore do we
hold them for dreadful seducers and abominable heretykes, that w^ll pre^ume to
say, that the doctrine of Jesus Christ (as concerning suffering) should be ^t
an end, and that the christen should no more need to suffer, but that they
should cast away the weapons where with the apostles have fought as their
epistles rchearse, and put upon them the harneys of David, yea that they
should destroy the whole world with the material sword and also take the
world unto them selves. O what a blind dream is this, which is spronge out
of Satan, and is contrary to the whole gospel of our lord Jesus Christ. O what
an iniquity is this of the^, that will with the children of Israel leave the
lord the fou^tayne of living waters, and dygge them selves pyttes the which
do seem fay^e, but they ca^ give no water. O what a blindness, yea what a
folyshnes is it of them, that for the sayings of the prophets, which they
understand not, will refuse and leave the most highest prophet, the only
begotten son of god, and the everlasting verity Jesus Christ and do not
dread to exalte the old testamente above the new, and to set Moses above
Christ? O god shall now the new testament auoyed for the old, and shall the
preciouse blood of the innocent lamb Jesus Christ be counted less then the
blood of calves? O lord how are these me^ so blinded that they with the
styffenecked Israelites do abhor the living bread of heaven, and do desire
^he flesh of Egypt, that is to say they do refuse Jesus Christ the very bread
of heaven, and do huger after men's doctrine and inverted dr^es, and after
^isceyuable prophets? But we will by the grace of god abide by our lord and
master Jesus Christ, and hold it vnd^niable, that no unclean doctrine which
might be against the gospel of our lord Jesus Christ may be brought in or
suffered, but he alone must be allowed, for he is lord master and Savior,
and besides him is none other. In summa we know of none other verity, nor of
none other way, of none other life, but only of Jesus Christ. John. xiiii.
For this cause if there come any prophecies or visions that will draw us from
this wholesome doctrine of Jesus Christ they must be accursed. Furthermore how
and with what weapons that the christian shall fight, does Paul clearelye
teach us to the Ephesians in the syxte Chapter with these words: Stand
therefore and your loins gyr ded about with the truth, having on, the breast
plate of rightuousenes, and shodde upon your fete with the gospel of peace,
that you may be prepared, a^oue all things take hold of the shield of faith,
where with ye may quentch the fyry darts of the wicked, and take the helm of
salvation, and the sword of he spirit, which is the word of God. And John
says All that is borne of god ouercometh the world. And this is the victory
that ouercometh the world, even our faith. Who is it that ouercometh the
world, but he that believes that Jesus is the son of God. Out of these
words of John may all right christians well understand that the victory
stands in an vpryghte fayeth, and not in any carnal and outward^ weapon.
And we do hold it with the Apostle John, and are also content with Paul, so
that we will hold with them, all strange doctrine which might be contrary to
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for utterly accursed.

Gala. i.

Of Matrymonye.
OF matrymonye we do hold now in the new testament not after the will of Moses
nor after the ensampel of the patriat ches, but as god instytuted it in
paradyse, and as it was restituted again of Christ, and brought again to the
first institucion, namely that Matrimony is a ioynynge together of (...)
persons, that is to say a man and a woman, af ter the words of the lord: They
two shall be one flesh. Genes. ii. And for this cause has Paul commanded
the byshopes and deacons, every one of the^ to be a housband of one wife Out of
the which text must needs follow, that no christen man may have more then
one wife, or else had Paul robbed the bishops and deacons of their common
chrystian lybertye, yea he had tangled them in a snare, which is impossible. i.
Cor. vi. so is it not to be found in any apostels writing, that any Christen
man in or after the apostels times has been Polygamus (that is to say) has
had many wives. What yt the apostles have not taught nor used, in their
congregacyon, that shall not we teach nor use as an necessary thing ^o man's
salvation. For else must it follow that the apostels had not known nor taught
all the trueh, which is against the words and promise of Jesus Christ, which
promised to his apostels saying: when the conforter the holy ghost shall come
he shall teach you all the truth. Ihon. xiiii. And Paul took god to witness
yt present day that he was pure from the blood of al me^ for he had kept
nothing back but had showed them all the counsel of god, Acti. xx. Now is it
well known that Paul taught not that a Christen man should have many wives,
and therefore it is not the counsel or will of God: but much more is the
counsel and will of god, that a christian shall have but one wife. Seeing that
all the new Testament always spea keth of one man and one wife, as appears by
these chapirers. Mathewe. xix. Mark. x. (...). Timothe. iii. Titu. i. i.
Corhinth. vii. Ephe. v. And therefore can not we approve the Jews Poligamians
the which some have begone. But we hold us after the ensample of Adam and
Eve, and also in this matter it is restitusted again by Christ. Matthew. xix.
Mark. x. we are also well contented with Paul, which does say that for
auoydyng fornicacion every man shall have his own wife, and every woman her
own husband Also that Matrimony is a soy^ynge together of man and woman,
after the word of the Lord: These two shall be one flesh. Genesis. ii.
Mathewe. xix. Mark. x. Ephesians. v.

This is the confession of our faith, in the which we hope that nothing shall
be found but the pure truth of the Gospel, if so be that it be not judged
after man's good thinking, but only after the rule of thy Godly word. And
notwythstandynge because that we will give no plase unto the sclaunderers, that
of a presumptuouse high minded spirit might sclaunder or raise upon us, we
are always ready, and offer our selves, that if any christen man being
learned in the scripture, can reprove us with Gods word in any thing that
should fail us of the truth, to him we shall and will always gladly as
disciples unto ther^ maiste^ give place, and gladly with all toy sulnesse of
the spirit, recey^e al christen doctrine of him. Seeing that Peter a prince of
the Apostles must suffer that he was rebulted of Paul, reasone it is that we
should suffer to be rebuked, if we through man's ignorance were fallen in
error, we that are poor servants of the Lord, and skantly have received
one pound, where as Peter had received five, the which our understanding is
no more to be lykened to the high apostles wisdom, then a gnat by a camel.
And we know also that Solomon says: Be not wise in thine own conceyte. And
again: He that refuses to be reformed, despises his own soul, but he that
submits him self to correction is wise. And for this cause will we always
be diligent to hear, and with all m^kenes submit our selves unto him, that
could teach us any doctrine, more agreeable to the holy scripture: But if any
man will condemn our faith without the judgment of scripture and judge it
after the proverb: as the blind iuggeth the color, that must and will we
suffer for gods sake. Also if any man will be our Pharao and tread us down
because yt we be Ilsraelites or feign would be, in this will we aso co^ fort us
with the holy scripture, hoping yt our hea ue^ly father shall have mercy over us,
through Jesus Christ, and strength us so with his holy ghost, yt we shall not care
for the dreadful sclau^der over our faith. And we perceiving yt blyndnes of the
common people, and the great tyranny of certain princes, so yt the common people
are so blinded in their memory, yt they ca^ not judge the light from darkness
nor the right from unrighteous or lies from the truth, yea they cry over
Jesus that be shall be crucified, and Bara^as shall be let go. And also diverse
princes are so full of tyranny that they do persecute the christen, and without
any mercy put them to the most grievous and cruel death, not remembryng that
the innocent blood of the ryghtuouse Abell cries for vengeance, against the
murderer Cain, unto God in heaven. Nevertheless the scripture must be
ful^illed, namely that all they that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer p^rsecucyon. And christ says to his apostels: Have they persecuted me,
they shall also persecute you. And therefore says John in his epistle: Be^old
what love the father has showed on us, that we should be called his chylderne:
Therefore the world does not know you, because it knows not him. With those
and more other scriptures, may we comfort our selves, and especyallye with
the words of Christ, saying: Blessed are they that suffer persecucyon for
ryghtuousnes sake, for theyrs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men
r^uyle you and persecute you, and falsely say all manner evil sayenges against
you, for my names sake. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in
heaven And we pray god our heavenly father, through our lord Jesus Christ*
the which out of his unmeasurable mercy and grace, has given us a clear
vpryght f^yth, that he keep and reserve us forth in this peryllous time, from
all false doctrynes of the mynisters of the hellish Satan And that we through
the Aungells color, which they often times have upon them, may not be
per^erted to ^aue the truth of god And forther^e do we pray unto the lord.
that he will so strength and fortyfye us with his holy gooste, that we do not
ware weary of^s sufferynge persecution for the ryghtuousnesset sake: but that we
may be able to stand in all dreadful sclaunder, and tyrannous persecucions
of the wicked Antechristes spirits, yea and that we rather, if it be neade
suffer this bodily death, byding in our faith, then we should forsake it, and
dye eternally. From the which eternal death the Lord God preserve (...) them
that love and seek him with all their heart through Jesus Christ our Savior. To
whom be laud, praise, honor, ma^estie, and dominion, for ever.

Amen.
To the reader.
NOthing ca^ be so plain, so manifest or op^: but the cauillour (who seeks
nothing else but doubts) will find abosidaunce of mattier therein, to make the
same, at the first sight to appear hard, obscure and dark. In like manner,
he the lyueynge of the faithful beleauers in C^histe never so Godly and
agreeable to the truth, be it never so quiet, peaceable and civil: yet will the
adversaries find mattier enough to deface it so, that the simple people shall
judge none other but that they be heretykes, and they^ lives, a^ominable, their
sayings and doings sediciouse, disquiet and sclaunderouse. What man can
deuyse to write more Godly then Paul did to the Romans? And yet were there
some that said he would have men to sin, ^o the intent that the mercy of
God might be the more aboundaunt in the forgiueynge of the same Roma. iii. Who
could lead so godly a life, in such austeritie, and hardenesse as John the
Baptiste did? And did not the Iewse say that he had a dyuell in him? To be
b^fe, who conlde frequent the company of sinners and misleueynge people, with
so perfyte crample of lyueynge, haueynge so great force to draw them from
their wickedness to follow his example, as Christ did? And did not the
Pharisees report him to be a friend and maynteyner of evil lyuers and open
s^ners? Math. ri. The same schole master that instructed these false
detractours: has also, and does daily, instruct our papists, in the ^ame
his documentes, and plain lections. The devil I say, leaves not his old
pr^actyse, but keeps his dearelye beloved ^n ^re wythal. If any man preach or
write of the iustificacion by fayeth, and do therein declare the unworthiness
of us and our works which can desetue nothing toward our justification:
incontinent they c^e out upon him heretyke, he says men shall be saved thought
they live never so ungodly. Vf he speak any thing concerning the abuse of
the ceremonies and sacraments: what ^rclamacions do they make? how do they
report him to be a sacramentarye? If he speak any thing of Baptism:
declaryng that neither the holiness of the water, neither of the oil, can give
the grace therein promised, and that the was shynge in the founte avails not
them that observe not the profession they make there: how detestable an
anabaptiste shall he be compted? Of the supper of the Lord, who can write or
speak any thing concerning the abuse thereof, but he is charged with the utter
denial of the same? That thou therefore (christen reader) may so wythdrawe
thy credyt from these false reporters, that thou will but once think it
possible that they may belie these men, whom they call men of the new
learning: I have set forth this little book wherein thou may se what faith
they have, that bear this evil report. And that thou may thereby be
provoked first to try the spirits whether they be of God or not, and after
to credyt them even as thou shalt find them worthy. The proverb teaches
the, that it is not all gold that glyttereth, and we have learned by
experience, that it is not all Gospel that the priest preaches. Try the
gold therefore by the toutche stone* and the priests preachinge by the word
of God. Prou^ the spirits, and know for certentie that, that spirit is not
of God? which denies that Christ is come in the flesh. And what other
thing is that, then to deny that his coming in the flesh is the sufficient
and only satisfaction for our sins? Who so ever he be therefore, that
denies us to be frelye redeamed by Christ without any part of our deserts:
the same denies Christ to be come in the flesh. If thou prove them therefore,
once to have denied on this wise that Christ came in the flesh: I beseech y^,
even for Christ's sake: to try their reports by the scripture or thou credyt
them. And the^ as thou fyndest them so take them. The Lord open the eyes of
thine heart that thou may se the hid and secrets abhominacions.

Amen.
Pray Christian reader that the word of the Lord may have free passage, and
that we may live a God ly life there after, that it may be acceptable in his
sight.

FINIS.

