NEWS Out of France for the Gentlemen of England. A Stratagem most ventrously
attempted, and valiantly atchiued by the French King, the 27. day of July. Anno
Domini 1591. Wherein is desciphered, what trust his royal Majesty reposeth on
the valor of the English, and their duetifull service unto him at all assayes.

News also touching 16. Ships taken nigh the Haven of Deep, and the
discomfiture of the Popes Forces transported into France toward the aid of
the Leaguers, both concurring on the 28. of July last past.

With a report of the princely meeting, and honorable conioyning of the whole
power of the French King the sixth day of this present Month of August,
consisting of English, Germane, and his own people.

Deuteronomie. 1. 30. The Lord your God, who goes before you he shall fight
for you, according to all that he did unto you in Egypt before your eyes.
Imprinted at London for John Kid and are to be (...)

In laudem Angliae charissimae suae Patriae decasticon.
ANglia cincta mari' est, Anglis mare commoda mill,
Vtque alter globus est Anglia cincta mari:
Anglia cincta mari' est, sacris quia virgo gubernat
Regibus, hinc foelix Anglia cincta mari:
Anglia cincta mari' est, homines quia moenia tanquam,
Quos amor unit, abhinc Anglia cincta mari:
Anglia cincta mari' est, quod fert Satrapasque, Ducosque
Inuictos Marti', hinc Anglia cincta mari:
Anglia psalle Deo, quod Terra, fretumque bearunt
Te ante' alias gentes, Anglia psalle Deo.
Cato. Pugna pro patria.
To his friends, the Gentlemen Readers of England, health.
GEntlemen, whereas the old world admired Hanibal for but scaling the Alps,
Caesar for building a bridge over Rheyne, Pompey for subduing a few barbarous
Territories, leave now to marvel at the strategems, the world affordes you
greater maruailes. Look on the experienced prowess of your own Countrymen,
far exceeding the puissance of base Pagans, who as they be presidents most
honorable: so are they by your steps, and plaudities to be honored. Imitate
the virtues of your Ancestors, that all the world may ring of your noble acts,
of your Ancestors said I, nay of our Caualiers yet living, who as they be
equal in valor to the best of any time; so are they before al other to be
followed of your persons at this time. Remember the fortitude of Norris never
quailed, consider the magnanimity of Williams never daunted, and worthy
Yorkes forwardnes never impeached: But what should I compile a catalogue of
them, whose valors and virtues are best known unto you: only this our
Sovereign, and the whole commonwealth intreates you, that as whilom your
politic Predecessors, and now these your martial Progenitors by their
exploytes have attained the height of renown in the world; so ye like
renowned Children of so renowned Parents, would by your courageous enterprises
brandish your names and fames throughout the world: facite, and valete.

Yours to command in all courtesy. G. B. M.of Art.

A Poem touching the credit of this News, with an item to them, that takes
felicity in publishing Lies.
NOthing (says Quintilian) so much comme^deth the person of the writer, as the
truth of the subject, he proposes to write: And certes nothing advanced so
highly Julius Caesar's history, as truth polished with Eloquence discreetely:
for as in the judgment of the wise the one without the other had argued great
imperfection: so both intermingled savor of wonderful discretion, and so much
the rather, because the Author seems estranged from Philautie, and Ambition.
I cannot but praise them of ancient time, and touch some in these days, who
either for that they know not, or care not for truth, or will not inquire after
the truth, will be sure to publish nothing but untruth, mispending their time,
misdemeaning their brain, and misusing their pen, no less foes to themselves,
then back friends to the welminded. I speak this (Gentlemen) for that this
Pamphlet had many days sithence come to your view, had not these apish
Pamphleters neither left way for themselves, nor other, any further to thrust
out their heads: But whereas this obortiue Pygmey dare peep out, and show his
face to the world, understand that it is but under sureties, on condition, that
he neither mutter, speak, nor write any thing but truth, or at the least that
whereof he can allege sufficient authority: who although he has been
stayed, but not brought to a blancke, therein takes so much the more hearty
grace, because he knows some of these counterfeites will be driven to a
Nonplus: And thus much I will say, and and in saying truly avouch (being
privy to all his proceedings) that at this time he will not, (nay if he would
he may not) neither would he if he might speak any more than truth, or that
has been credibly informed, or that commonly among the best passes for truth,
wherein if peradventure he speak not so much, as some of you know; or write
so much, as others hear, think, that neither his ears, nor his eyes are so
large, as to hear and see all things done in his own country, much less
over Sea in a forrayne climate: but accept his News favorably, as he gives it
friendly, and if in any jot he shall offend you, he most humbly craves your
pardon, ever remaining courteously at your command.

G. B.
Magna' est veritas, et preualet.
A Stratagem most venterously attempted, and valiantly achieved by the French
King, the 27. day of July Anno Domini, 1591.
THe French King (who for his singular wisdom deserves to be reckoned a
secon Solomon, and invincible fortitude an other Sampson) having drawn his
forces down into Picardie, presented his arms before the town of Noyan, and
begirt the same, where having continued the siege some few days, no day free
from some hard skirmish, hot encounter, or dangerous assault, the loss for
the most part falling on the enemies, whereby the said town was in ieopardie
to have revolted (which was practiced by some) to the King his part, in so much
they stood on terms of yielding, but that they had some small hope of
succor, and supply of victualles to be sent them from Roan for the conuoying
whereof (as they understood) should be sent Mounsier Tauanas late commander
of Roan, whose forses consisted of 400. Horse, and 5000. footmen every way
well fitted for such a service, carrying minds resolutely determined (as
appeared by the ensuing conflict) by some sudden surprise to have raised the
siege, yea and indaungered the Kings own person, if God (who has promised to
defend his servant Joshua, that is his faithful magistrates, and bring the
counsels of the wicked to naught) had not by strange means miraculously
discovered their malicious treachery, making his very enemies his willing
friends at such an exigent. For Monsier Iean de Primadian, Registerer to the
Bishop of Roan privy to their intentions, although (as they term him) a
Catholic, yet moved in conscience to cross by what means possible he
could any wicked action, or attempt that might touch the safety of the King
his sovereign person, manifested by letters the day before, the whole plot of
treason intended toward his Majesty. Whereupon the King no less desirous to
take the opportunity, then careful to prevent the evil, immediately that night
commanded a Cornet of horse, conducted by a brave French Captain to discover
the Enemy, who by the break of day approached the walls of Roan, where
estsoones they had spied issuing forth, the foresaid companies in martch toward
Noyan, whereupon they presently retired, till by some means, and in some
convenient place for the purpose happily they might charge them, or at the
least discry their determinations: thereof to certify his Majesty, which (as God
would) they performed luckely: for having ambushe themselves in the skirt of a
wood, on the sudden charged the enemies vauncurriers, led by a hardy
gentleman (as it seemed.) For notwithstanding our sudden charging them (which
was done to the proof,) whereby they were well nigh discomfited, and that the
said leader hardly escaped himself, with some few in his company by his
retreat, yet loath to receive so great a wound to his reputation, as to be
mated, or rather vanquished by so small a troop, as was ours, seconded ye rest
of his followers, yet fighting: but though he performed resolutely his part
therein, yet was it his fortune to be taken hardly with life, by one Master
Thomas Robartes an English gentleman, the rest were all chased and taken
prisoners, even at the front of the enemies battalious, with little loss on
our side, to the number of some 23. men, hurt, taken, and slain: But the
foresaid Prisoner being with expedition conuaied to the King, confirmed all
that before by letters his majesty had intelligence of, and disclosed also,
what ways, and means they had laid down to surprise his Majesty's forces.
The K. supposing it not necessary to suffer them make their approach in sight
of Noyan, forthwith consulted to encounter them further of, sending forth
scouces to bar the news of their coming from the town, determining
himself to follow (as he might) with part of his army (for he thought it
altogether troublesome, and unmeet to dislodge the whole.) And in regard of
the resolute English (for so he terms them) whom he meant most to employ in
this service, of whom also he had good experience, for such like services
heretofore by them performed, his Majesty decrees to use the fewer of his own
Nation, and therefore sending secretly for his approved champion Sir Roger
Williams, imparted unto him both what had bin performed, as also his intention:
of which the redoubted Cheualier was very joyful, and as forward as valiant,
greedily thirsted for the encounter, and thought every minute an hour, til
they were marching. All things being put in readiness for the journey, suddenly
the espialles returned with news of the enemies approach, and their order:
which Sir Roger Williams understanding, ever like himself, and having now (as
he thought) found a danger equal to his heart) which heart through his good
fortune has gotten a courage to despise al dangers) earnestly desired his
Majesty do him the honor of the first encounter, in regard of the safety
of his Majesty's own person; which the King through entreaty granted.

This request obtained, and our Vauncurriers in view of the Enemy, word was
brought the King thereof, and being (as God would) in a place situate by nature
for the purpose, his Majesty caused a squadr on of pikes to march forward
strongly armed, and in the Reregard of them undiscovered certain companies of
Musquetters on the left side, in manner of an ambush (yet as a wing to the
main Squadron) was Sir Roger Williams, and with him certain Cornets of horse,
and some companies of Musquetters, to second those of ours, that the Enemy had
sight of, and were now ready to encounter: on the right wing was the King with
most of the horse in the field, as well shot as other, somewhat behind Sir
Roger lying also in ambuscado, to answer the hope of the other, if need
required: But in such sort* as when occasion was offered, ye said Horsemen with
those of Sir Roger Williams, answered his Majesty's expectation, and suddenly
pursuing the opportunity (while 300. of their horse were charging our main
Battle, (which strongly endured the shock) enclosed the Enemy, and happily
at the first encounter, being hotly maintained, discomfited them, and very
vigorously pursued the victory, which (by the omnipotent power of GOD
especially, and triumphant valor of the English) being gotten, as having
chased, and slaughtered them almost the space of two leagues, the retreict
sounded, the dead were ouerlooked, and prisoners numbered: The dead were many,
and captives some few, all for the most part men of name, worth raunsoming,
amongst whom was the General himself, Monsieur Tauanas Leiutenant of Roan,
sore hurt, and likewise his Nephew Commander of the Fort of S. Katharins taken
prisoner: which glory was renownedly achieved on all parts the 27. day of
July, Anno Domini 1591. The Lord the giver of victory be praised therefore.

This one thing remains yet in this report untouched, which I cannot any way
omit, and all true hearted Englishmen may be joyful to record. For the French
King both in this petty battle, and at all times else, perceiving the hearts
of the English ready pressed to do him service, and their haughty minds
prompt to attempt any graund enterprise, (whereby either glory, or gain may
he purchased) as also the swift forwardnes, and forward swiftnes of his Eagle
Sir Roger Williams, to soar over and detallant the Martial foes of so
Martial a field, his Majesty well noting it, and in noting it scanning what
was best to be done, called them before him, where yielding first his royal
Sister, and them all immortal and most hearty thanks for their paynefull,
and no less powerful service, uttered many gracious words to the everlasting
commendation of all England. Thus far concerning this heroical Stratagem,
and wonderful, and no less worthy exployte, effected by the flower of
Chivalry, and mirror of Courtesy the French King now reigning.

News is also brought to the French Ledger of the taking of 16. Ships of the
Leaguers without any peril, all well laden with commodious Merchandise, and
provision for war, right against and nigh the Haven of Deep the 28. day of
July last past, which were fraught for Roan, (some say for Newhauen) but by
divine providence brought thither. The mighty GOD of Israel never send us
worse news.

News also from the Dukedom of Sauoy, how Monsieur de Eguidiers Governor of
his Majesty's Forces in those parts, incountred the troops of horse, that were
sent into France by the Pope toward the strengthening of the Leaguers, and
ouerthrewe four hundred of them a little below the Alps; the rest miserably
escaping by flight, the 28. day of July also: Some say the remnaut is returned
into Italy: others that they yet houer and liuger in the Country. But
howsoever it be, it is to be hoped they shall have as unfortunate success, as
they have had hitherto: no other reason I can assign thereof, but this, that
God now in these letter times vouchsafes to bring things to speedy even*
there by to hasten the coming of his Son to judgment, for that he has
promised to shorten those days; and we know by all accounts that they are
both likely to be shortened, and draw to an end. For who doubts but as
that butcherly City, ( Rome I mean) and bloody Nation was first founded in
blood, (the one Brother bathing his hands in the blood of the other) so she
shall end in blood and abominable desolation, as her stiffenecked Sister
Jerusalem did before her. And to believe this I am so much ye rather incited,
because I both hear and see daily by the omnipotent power, and outstretched
arm of GOD, that both that City, that Kingdom, and all the friends and
adherents of the same, do come to perpetual ruin, and utter destruction, as
is now exemplifled by the noble Rebels, and rebellious Nobles of France: for
who esteems that ever the Duke de Main, or those noble personages, that
irreligiously resist their God, and proudly rebel against their Sovereign,
could have been brought to so extreme misery, and grievous calamity, as to
fly from City to City, from Coast to Coast, from Country to Country, and
find no safety, either in inward Conscience, or outward conversation, if they
were not even those, on whom God predestined to power his dreadful and
execrable vengeance, permitting them like castaway Cayne, no place of safeguard,
but to become runnagates over all the fare of the earth.

A second reason also forcible enough I have to persuade me, that even now the
kingdom of Antichrist is falling, and shortly (the Lord of hosts knows how
soon) will fall, for that another pillar of his chair, or rather a main
proppe of his pauili^^ begins to shrink, his golden Metropolis ( Spain I
mean) who having now many hundred years maintained his Religion, fostred his
sucklings, panipred his shauelings, defended his Inquisition, and furthered his
proceedings, in part ^^^^^ereth and is weary of her burden, a burden in deed
no less burden some, then combersome both to body and soul. For within these
few days, not a month sithence, variance happening between the chief Masters
of the Inquisition, and the Kings Arch-secretarie, Sarogosa, a city of Aragon
(wherein the said Secretary was borne (began to take arms against the
Inquisition, and approve unexpected, and untrue positions (as they termed
them) contrary to their Decretalls, their Doctors, their Divines, and
devils. A Kingdom (says our Savior) divided in itself, cannot stand:
certes then the kingdom of Satan divided, must needs be ruinated: for as by
concord small things come to perfection: so by discord the greatest powers,
puissantes, and principalities, that ever have been in the World, bend to
destruction. Weigh the state of the 4. Monarchies both flourishing and
declining, the cause of their establishment, and original of their decay, and
ye shall find concord a mean to the one, and discord a mother of the other:
bath bringing forth strange effects. But to come nigher, what was the first
cause of planting the Gospel (for which so many have, and yet spend their
dearest blood in France) but their first supplanting of common quiet, their
unspeakable butcheries, horrible martyrdonies, and execrable massakers, all
doubtless begone, and practiced by the sufferance of God to none other end, but
to raise up fresh feeds, and nourish the increase of the Gospel, calling home
thousands of souls elected to his kingdom. This did France, and we are daily
to hope, and howerly to pray for the like of Spain: The Lord open their eyes
to discern white from black, light from darkness, truth from error in due
time according to his good will and pleasure.

But leaving Spain, let us return again to France, from wherlie every day
(the Lord for his merries sake increase it) are heard blissful and most
happy notes, his Majesty's affairs successively prospering an all sides. For
sithence the departine of our Soldiers from London, which was on the 23. 24.
25. and 26. days of July last, unto this 12. of August, besides the News
already set down, many matters of great importance have chanced, the verity
whereof (for that I cannot attain, and learn the circumstances directly) I
pass them over in silence, only of this passell ensuing, I have received
credible information, that on the sixth day of this month, being the 16. after
their computation at Bloys, his Majesty's Forces all met, and royally counited
themselves together, at what time the brave worthies and warlike Gallants of
Germany appearing on horseback in Martial order, every one thoroughly
furnished with all habiliments necessary, were first welcomed by his Majesty,
and entertained of the Camp with a peale of ordinance joyfully. But whereas in
the letter (from whence I coppied out this News) all his Forces be named, and
yet no mention made of the English, I suppose he meant it by the forces of the
Almaygnes only, and those his own subjects that were sent out of Brytain to
join with his Majesty's host there, and none otherwise. For there is news
come lately, that the Earl with his companies remain yet about Deipe, there
staying a while on weighty considerations, till they hear further. But how
ever it be, this is most certain, that his Majesty has a goodly army,
besides those warlike troops the right Honorable Earl of Essex is to come
with, who how they were appointed, is known to al England, and I need not now
discourse.

Thus far concerning the prosperous success, and fortunate progress of this
mighty Prince, whom the Lord has preserved from time to time, from year to
year, day to day, hour to hour, so many times, years, days, and hours
most miraculoufly from all the furious invasions, and cancared conspiracies of
all his enemies, and made him to triumph over them, outliuing the most part,
reclayming by his virtues the better sort, and taming by policy the perverse
and obstinate, being snatched from the chawes of the Lions, delivered from the
gates of Death, and reserved from infinite perils (as the wide world
confesses) by divine providence, to none other end, but to declare the
wondrous works of the Lord, and show forth his mighty acts unto the Princes
of the earth, and especially that Man of sin, and strumpet of Babylon,
foster-father of brauls and battayles among Christian Princes, and generally
the Bloudsucker, Butcher, and tormentour of all Europe, whom God in due time
at his good pleasure will by the hand of this his anointed (as he did by
David fighting against the uncircumcised, Philistin,) terrify, torment,
scourge, and confound, which he has begone by his English Debora first, and will
finish in this his Champion, (making them both mirrours for all Potentates)
that all the world, and especially the kingdom of Antichrist may acknowledge,
that there is a God that rules in Israel, and protecteth the house of Iaacob,
making his enemies his footestooles. The Lord in mercy grant it, to the
comfort of his little flock, the abolishment of sin, confusion of his
enemies, and establishment of his own glory in Sion, and let all faithful
Soldiers, and loyal subjects say, Amen, and cry in fervent zeal of spirit,
Lord Jesus come quickly, even so. Amen.

Epilogus.
GEntlemen Readers, thus though rudely, and untimely, yet truly and
sufficiently, ye have heard the tenor of this news, or at the least so
much, as I could well fish out, for it is a thing altogether impossible, and
may pass for a paradox, to reach unto every particular accide^t. For the
news being not inacted in our own Country, coming from far, as also we
our selves not present, or oculati testes, but relying on letters, bare
reports, and heresay, like testes auriti, we must needs miss of much of the
matter, and sometimes happily, (or rather unhappily) either in too much, or too
little commit an absurdity; But (as I said before) assure your selves, we
swerve not wittingly one tittle from truth, but have inquired diligently
thereafter, and offered unto your view nothing but that we have seen in the
letters of credible persons, or been instructed of at the hands of men of
account, or that commonly passes for truth at the Exchange, or has been
preached to the French congregation, or is tossed up and down at the
Ambassadors house in the mouths of the best; which al in my opinion may serve
for a certificate autentique. But leaving these ambages, and cleaving to your
courtesy, I beseech you in courtesy be not too curious, but more willing to
lep over a block, than wilful to stumble at a straw, considering the finest
Velvet has his brack, and nothing is fo currantly written, but admitts some
crabbed imperfection, and may captiously be misconstred. Macte vertute sitis.

Precatio ad coelestem nostrum Patrem miseris hisce temporibus.
O Tater patrum rutilas Olimpi
Qui seeds seeds super, et potenti
Diriges verbo, tua quae creauit
Cuncta potestas:
Da tuis seruis placidam quietem,
Dirimas tristeis (precibus precamur
Feruidis) lites, refluasque caedes
Sanguine seeds;
Arma flaccescant, timor esto nullus
Martis, armorum sonus asperorum
Dirus abscedat, valeatque pugnae
Saeua cupido:
Quid iuuat bellum, (ratio modusque
Si procul cedant)? amor iste campi
Pessimus vadat, propereque coeli
Quaerite regnum:
Charitas crescat, probit asque morum
Regnet occultis hominum medullis,
Faxit, vt dignos fidei feramus
Vndique fructus:
Tunc tuum nomen (Deus o supreme)
Semper extollet precibus, triumphis,
Laudibus, psalmis, modulis, choraeis
Anglia parua.
Angli quasi angeli.

