ARCTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF, IN THE VISITATION OF the most Reverend Father in
God, RICHARD, by the Providence of GOD, Lord Archbishop of York^, Primate of
England, and Metropolitan.

Had in the Year of our Lord God, 1636.

LONDON Printed by JOHN NORTON. 1636.

The Advertisem^nt.
THe Minister, and Churchwardens are to call unto them the Neighbors of the
Parish, and out of them to make choice (according to the custom of the place)
of two of the discreetest parishioners to be Sidemen, and they altogether are
to read over these Articles diverse times. Then, after they have duly
considered of them, they are to write their answer or presentment unto every
Article particularly, and truly, according to their consciences. Lastly, they
are all of them to bring their presentiments to the Visitation, and there the
Churchwardens, and Sidemen upon their oaths (but the Minister according to
the Canon in that behalf) are to deliver them up under their hands.

The oath to be ministered to the Churchwardens, and Sworn men.
YOu shall swear, that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward, and
gain, or fear of displeasure or malice set aside: you shall upon due
consideration of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such
person of, or within your Parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or
made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles, or which are
vehemently suspected, and defamed of any such offense, fault or default:
wherein you shall deliver uprightly, and according to truth; neither of malice
presenting any contrary to truth; nor of corrupt affection sparing to present
any, and so conceal the truth, having in this action God before your eyes with
an earnest zeal to mayntaine truth, and to suppress Vice; so help you God,
and the contents of this Book.

Touching the Church, Churchyard, Parsonage, and Vicarage-house
FIrst, whether your Church, Chapel, and Chancell be well, and sufficiently
repaired in the walls, and roof, the Seats convenient, the floor paved, the
windows glazed, your Bells in tune, and all these cleanely kept, and the
mansion house of your Parson or Vicar, with the building thereunto belonging,
be likewise well, and sufficiently repaired, and your Churchyard well fenced
with walls, rayles, or payles, and cleanely kept.

2 Whether has your Church or Churchyard been abused, and profaned by any
fighting, chiding, brawling or quarrelling, any plays, Lords of misrule,
summer Lords, morris, dancers, pedlers, bowlers, bearewards, butchers, feasts,
schools, temporal courts, o^ Leets, Lay Iuries, musters, or other profane
usage in your Church or Churchyard, any hells superstitiously rung on
Holidayes or their eeves, or at any other time without good cause allowed by
the Minister, and Churchwardens: have any Trees been felled in your
Churchyard, and by whom?

3 Whether are your Almes-houses, and Church-House if you have any sufficently
repaired, mayntained, and to godly, and their right use employed?

4 Whether have you in your Church all things necessary for common prayer, as
the Bible in the largest volume, the books of common Prayer, the book of
Homilies allowed, two books of common Prayer, a convenient Pulpit for the
preaching, a decent seat for the Minister to read Service in, conveniently
placed, a strong chest, with three locks and keys, one for the Minister, the
other for the Churchwardens for the keeping of the Register book of the
Christnings, Marriages, and Burials, and a poor man's box with three locks;
conveniently placed near the Church door?

5 Whether have you in your Church a font of stone for baptism set in the
ancient usual place: a decent table for the communion conveniently placed,
covered with silk, or other decent stuff in time of Divine Service, and with
a fair linen cloth over that, at the administration of the Communion?

6 Whether have you all such bells, ornaments, and other utensils as have
anciently belonged to your Church, a communion-cup of silver with a cover, a
fair standing pot or two of pewter or purer metal for the wine upon the
communion table, a comely Surplesse with sleeves, a Register book of
parchment, for christnings, marriages, and burials, a book for the names of
all strange preachers, subscribed with their names, and the name of the Bishop,
or other, by whom they had license to preach.

7 Whether is the Alms for the poor duly distributed, and are the names, and
surnames of all persons married, christened, and buried, and of their parents,
with the day, and year entered in your parchment Register book?

8 Whether are ye ten Commandments set up in your Church or Chapel, and
other chosen sentences of holy Scripture upon the walls in convenient places,
and the Table of the degrees prohibited in marriage, set forth 1563?

9 Whether have you in your Church or Chapel the book of the Canons agreed
upon in the convocation holden at London Anno. Dom. 1603. and confirmed by his
Majesty's royal authority, and whether your Minister have read the same in
your Church or Chapel once every year, according to his Majesty's
Injunctions in that behalf?

Touching the Ministry, Service, and Sacraments.
Whether is the common prayer said or sung by your Minister both morning, and
evening, distinctly, and reverently every Sunday, and Holiday, and on their
eeves, and at convenient and usual times of those days, and in most
convenient place of the Church for the edifying of the people?

2 Whether does your Minister observe the orders, rites, and ceremonies
prescribed in the book of common prayer, in reading holy Scriptures, prayers,
and administration of the Sacraments without diminishing (in regard of
preaching or any other respect) or adding any thing in the manner or form
thereof?

3 Whether does your Minister on wednesdaies, and fridaies not being holidaies,
at the accustomed hours of service, resort to the Church, and say the ordinary
prayers, and Letany prescribed? And does your Clarke or Sexton give warning
before by tolling of a bell on those days?

4 Whether any Minister leaving the use of the Font, do in your Church or
Chapel christen or baptize in any basins, or other profane vessels: or
whether your Minister do baptize or christen any out of the face of the Church,
and Congregation without special cause, or without Godfathers or Godmothers:
And whether any person or persons be admitted to answer as Godfather, and
Godmother at the christening of any child, except he or she have before
received the holy Communion: and whether does your Minister in ye baptizing of
children, observe ye orders rites, and ceremonies appointed, and prescribed in
the book of common prayer, without addition omission or other innovation?

5 Whether do you know any Parents that keep children unchristened, or that
were not christened at their own Parish Church or Chapel, and for what cause
they remain yet unchristened, or have not been christened at their Parish
Church or Chapel: or do you know, have heard, or vehemently suspect any
parents, whose children have been christened by any Popish Priest, or
otherwise than by the laws of the Church of England is allowed?

6 Whether does your Minister as often as he administreth the communion, first
receive it himself in both kinds, and whether does he use in the
administration any bread, and wine newly brought before it be set upon the
Communion Table, and the words of consecration be rehearsed, and does he
deliver the bread, and wine to every communicant severally in such sort as is
prescribed?

7 Whether does your Minister give warning publicly in the Church at Morning
prayer ye Sunday before he administreth the communion for the better
preparation of the parishioners? and whether does he administer the Sacraments
so often as that every parishioner may receive thrice in the year at the
least, whereof Easter to be one?

8 Whether has your Minister administered the Communion to any but such as
kneel, or do you know any that refuse to kneel: has he administered to any
that are under Ecclesiastical censure, as for refusing to be present at
public Prayer, or who has depraved the book of common Prayer, and
administration of the Sacraments or the Rites, and Ceremonies, prescribed, or
the Articles of Religion agreed upon, or the Book of ordering Deacons*
Priests* and Bishops, or against his Majesty's Supremacy: or has committed
other the like enormities, and what be their names?

9 Whether has your Minister more Benefices than one: if he have, how far
distant are they, how often is he absent in the year? when he is absent from
your parsonage or vicaradge, has he a licensed Preacher for his Curate?

10 Whether your Churches or Chapels be or have been destitute of a Curate?
And how long, and by whose default? And whether any Curate have served, or do
serve without license of the Ordinary? or do any officiate in any cure that is
not in holy orders.

11 Whether do youknow any Popish Priests, Seminary, Jesuit, or runnagate
persons, that do preach, say Mass, or minister any Popish Sacrament or
ceremonies, or else do resort secretly or openly into your Parish: And whose
house do they resort unto and of whom are they harbored, and what be the
names of such Popish Priests, Seminaries, Jesuits, or Runnagates* and such as
so harbor and releeve them?

12 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or any other person in your parish
be a favourer of the Romish Church or Religion, or any other Sect or
Schismatic opinion, or has or does maintain or teach any doctrine contrary
or repugnant to Gods Word or to any of the Articles agreed upon by the Clergy
in the Convocation holden at London, An. Dom. 1562. And whether they have
taught publicly or secretly any doctrine tending to the discredit, and
disprayse either of the Book of Common Prayer, or of the Preachers, and
Ministers of the Word, and Sacraments, or of the received order for government
by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and other officers in the
Church of England, or make any other innovation* And whether have they
permitted any man so teaching or making such innovation, and not made the same
known.

13 Whether is your Minister an allowed Preacher: if he be, does he every
Sunday in your Church or some other next adjoining, where no Preacher is,
preach?

14 Whether does your Minister being no Preacher allowed presume to expound the
Scripture in his own Cure or elsewhere: does he procure every month a Sermon
to be preached in his cure by preachers lawfully licenced, and on every Sunday
when there is no Sermon, does he or his Curate read some one of the Homilies
prescribed?

15 Whether your Minister do openly every Sunday after he have read the second
Lesson at Morning and Evening prayer, admonish and warn the Churchwardens,
and Sworn men to look to their charge, and to observe who offend in absenting
themselves negligently or wilfully from their Parish Church or Chapel, or
unreverently use themselves in time of divine Service?

16 Whether is your Curate allowed by the Ordinary under his hand, and seal to
serve for your cure, and whether does he serve two Churches or Chappells in one
day? whether is he Deacon at the least, and what stipend has he for serving
the cure?

17 Whether does your Minister always in saying public prayer, and
administering the Sacraments, wear a decent surplesse with sleeves and being a
graduate, does he always wear therewith a hood by ye order of the University,
agreeable to his degree?

18 Whether has your Minister or any other Preacher in your church, preached
any thing to confute or impugn any doctrine delivered by any other Preacher,
and has he, and they prayed for Christ's Catholic Church, the Kings Majesty,
the Lords Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. as is prescribed, Canon 55.

19 Whether has or does any preach in your Church, which refuses to conform
himself to the Laws, Rites, and Ordinances established, or which has not
first showed a sufficient license.

20 Whether does your Minister in his sermons four times in the year at the
least, teach, and declare the Kings Majesty's power within his realms to be
the highest power under God, to whom all within the same owe most loyalty, and
obedience, and that all foreign power is justly abolished?

21 Whether does your Minister every Sunday, and Holiday half an hour before
Eevening prayer or more, or at some other convenient time at Eevening prayer
examine, and instruct the youth in the ten Commandments, the Belief, the
Lords Prayer, and the Catechism, set forth in the Book of Common prayer, and
whether do the Churchwardens assist the Minister herein?

22 Whether has your Minister married any which have not been three several
Sundaies or Holydaies asked in your Church in the time of divine service,
without license or without a ring: or has he with license or without, married
any, whereof neither dwelt in your Parish?

23 Whether has your Minister with license or without, married any, at any
other times than between the hours of eight, and twelve in the Forenoone, or
in any private house, or when there is no license, before the Parents, and
Governors (the parties being under the age of 22. years) have testified their
consents?

24 Whether has your Minister declared to the people every Sunday at the time
appointed, what Holidaies, and Fastingdaies be that week following: does he
being a Preacher confer with all recusants, and persons excommunicate or
suspended? being no Preacher does he procure a sufficient Preacher to reclaim
them thereby?

25 Whether does your Minister keep a note of all persons excommunicated, and
declared so to be, and once every six months does he denounce them which have
not obtained their absolution on some Sunday in service time, that others may
be admonished to refrain their company?

26 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, be diligent in disiting the sick,
and comforting them, and whether they bury their dead in such christian, and
comely manner as is prescribed in the Book of Common prayer, and whether any
Lay man, other than a lawful Minister, has taken upon him to bury the dead
contrary to Order?

27 Whether has your Minister refused to baptize any child brought to the
Church, or to bury any corpse brought into the Church or Churchyard, or to
Church any woman, having had convenient warning thereof?

28 Whether has your Minister being truly informed of the danger of death of
any infant unbaptized, and being destred to go to the place where the child is,
to baptize it, neglected to go, by means whereof the child has dyed
unbaptized?

29 Whether does your Minister at any time preach or administer the Communion
in any private House except when they are so impotent that they cannot go to
Church; or very dangerously sick?

30 Whether do any Chaplens in your Parish, preach, or administer the
Sacrament in any Chapel not consecrated, or in any House having no Chapel
allowed by Law, and do the Lords, and Masters where such Chapels are, resort
often to the Parish Church, and there receive the Communion once at the least
every year?

31 Whether has your Minister held or appointed any public fast not appointed
by Authority, or beone present at such: does he or any other in your Parish
hold any lecture or exercise, or attempt by Fasting, or Prayer, or otherwise,
to cast out any Devils, without the privity, and allowance of the Bishop under
his Hand, and Seal?

32 Whether has there been any secret Conventicles or meetings in your Parish
by any Priests. Ministers, or others, tending to the depraving of the form of
Prayer, Doctrins or Government of the Church?

33 Whether does your Minister wear decent apparel, does he in public go in
his Doublet, and Hose, without a Coat, or Cassocke, or Cloak, and does he
wear any unseemely, and lightcoloured apparel?

34 Whether does your Minister make accustomed resort to: any Taverns, or
Alehouses, except for his honest necessities or does he board or lodge in any
such place, does he use any base or servile labor, or frequent drinking, riot,
dice, cards, tables, or any other unlawful games: is he contentious with his
neighbors, or a Hunter, Hanker* swearer, dancer, usurer suspected of
incontinency, or does give evil example of life?

35 Whether is there in your Parish any Minister or Deacon who has forsaken
his calling, using himself in his course of life as a mere Lay man.

36 Whether is his Majesty's declaration lately published for quieting, and
silencing the controversies lately stirred up to the disturbance of our Church
with new questions, strictly observed by your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or
whomsoever else that preaches in your Church?

37 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, catechize the youth of
the Parish in your Church, every Sunday after dinner by question, and answer;
and apply his afternoon preaching, and exhortation, to the instructing, and
edifying of the congregation in that kind of catechizing if he Preach?

38 Whether have you in your Parish any weeke-day Lecture, or not? And if you
have, by whom is the same performed; whether by one particular man thereto
licensed, or by sundry neighbor Ministers, and whether are the public prayers
always read, before such lecture, and sermons, in his surplesse, and hood,
according to his Majesty's instructions lately set forth?

39 Whether are there any within your Parish (under the degree of Noblemen, and
men qualified by Law) who do keep any private Chaplains in their Houses?

Touching Ecclesiastical Courts.
FIrst, whether the Chancellor, Commissaries, or any other using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Diocese, their Registers, or Actuaries,
Apparitors or Sumners, have at any time been corrupt in their places, or taken
any excessive fees, or winked at, and suffered any Adulteries, Fornications,
Incests, or other faults, or offenses to pass, and remain unpunished, and
uncorrected, or have commuted any penance without special license of the
Bishop?

2 Whether do you know that there has been any commutation of penance,
allowed of by the Ordinary in your Parish: and whether has your Minister
publicly signified it to his Congregation, what sums of money have therefore
been paid, and whether have the said sums of money, or part thereof been
distributed by your Minister, and Churchwardens to the poor, or otherwise
employed to some such godly, and charitable use, as was prescribed by the
Ordinary?

3 Whether do you know any householder, or other person whatsoever, within your
Parish or Chappelry that is deceased yt has made his last Will, and Testament,
and the same not hitherto been proved, nor administration taken from the
Ordinary or other Judge competent?

4 Whether has your Chancellor, Commissary, or other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, heard any matter of office privately in their
Chamber, without their sworn Registers, or their Deputies presence, or in
their absence, of such other persons as the Law does allow for an Actuary in
such a case.

Touching Schoolmasters.
FIrst, whether have you in your Parish any Schoolmasters, who teaches either
in public School or private House, whether is he reputed to be of sound
Faith, and Religion, does he resort duly to Church, and receive the Communion,
or does he give any evil example of life, is he allowed by the Ordinary under
his hand, and seal: or does your Minister or Curate teach, and is he allowed
in like manner?

2 Whether does your Minister or Schoolmasters, who teaches the Catechism by
Authority set forth, does he when there is any Sermon or divine Service, bring
his scholars to Church, and see them quietly, and reverently ordered, does he
examine them after their return, what they have learned of the Sermon?

3 Whether does he at other times teach them such sentences of Holy Scripture,
as may induce them to all godliness, does he teach the Grammar set forth by
King Henry the eight, continued by King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth?

4 Whether has your, Schoolmasters an Usher under him, are they both
diligent, is your Usher allowed by the Ordinary does your Schoolmasters direct
bis Usher the form, and manner of teaching, and does he weekly take account
of him, and the Scholars under his charge, how they have profited, and what
they have learned, and out of what Authors?

5 Whether has either of them spoken, writ, or taught against any thing
whereunto he formerly subscribed, as the Kings Supremacy, the Articles of
Religion, Book of Common prayer, or any thing therein contained?

Touching the Parish-Clarke, and Sexton.
FIrst, whether have you a Parish-Clarke appointed by ye Minister, sufficient
for his place, of the age of twenty years at the least, is he of honest
conversation, can he read, write, and sing, is he diligent in his office, and
serviceable to his Minister in the time of Divine Service, and otherwise?

2 Whether does your Clarke not being in holy orders meddle with any thing
above his office, as Churching of women, Burying the dead, Reading of prayers,
or such like?

3 Whether does your Clarke or Sexton keep your Church clean, the doors safe
locked, is any thing (by his default) lost or spoiled in the Church, does he
suffer any untimely Ringing, or any profane exercise to be committed in your
Church?

4 Whether does your Clarke or Sexton, when any is passing out of this life,
neglect to toll a bell, having notice thereof: or ye party being dead, does he
suffer any more Ringing than one short peale, and before his burial one, and
after the same another.

5 Whether does any of your Parish refuse to pay unto the parish Clarke or
Sexton such wages as are unto them due, and have been accustomably paid?

Touching Parishioners.
FIrst, whether has any in your Parish spoken against, or any way impugned ye
Kings Majesty's supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical, the Truth, and Doctrine of
the Church of England, the form of Gods worship contained in the book of
Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments?

2 Whether there be any person or persons known or vehemently suspected to
have written, printed, or by any means, published, and dispersed, or otherwise
to have, or to have had in his or their use or keeping, any Popish books or
libels, or any of those slanderous or schismatic, and seditious libels, or
other books, that impeach the book of common Prayer, or the Religion, and
Ecclesiastical government, or any other part thereof, established by Law in
this Realm, or does impeach the credit or estate of any Ecclesiastical person
or governor within the same?

3 Whether has any in your Parish spoken against or impugned the Articles of
Religion, agreede upon in Anno. Do. 1562. the rites, and ceremonies established
in the Church, ye government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
and others that bear office in the same?

4 Whether has any in your Parish spoken against or impugned the form of
making, and consecrating Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, or have any separated
themselves from the society of the Congregation, and combined in a new
Brotherhood or depraved the Synods of the Church of England held by the Kings
Authority?

5 Whether has any in your Parish maintained or defended any such Ministers or
Schoolmasters as refuse to subscribe to the order of the Church, have they
affirmed that such Ministers, and adherents may make Rules, and Orders in
causes Ecclesiastical, without the Kings Authority?

6 Whether does any in your Parish profane, violate, or misspend the Lords
day, commonly called Sunday, or Holidaies appointed in the Church of England,
using any offensive conversation, or worldly labor in those days, or any of
them: or is there any that wilfully refuse, or negligently has absented
himself from Divine Prayers on Sundays or Holidayes?

7 Whether does any in your Parish, in ye time of Divine Service use to sit
with his hat on his head: or is there any who has not reverently kneeled when
the general Confession, Letany, and other prayers are read, and which have not
stood up at the saying of the Belief.

8 Whether has any in your Parish disturbed the Service or Sermon, by walking
talking, or any other way, or departed out of the Church during the Service, or
Sermon, without some urgent cause, or loytered about the Church or Church Porch?

9 Whether there be any in your Parish, man or woman, being about fifteen
year of age, that has not received the Holy Communion, thrice at the least
every year, and namely at Easter las^ or thereabouts for once: and whether any
abandoning his or th^^r Parish Church, have received the Holy Communion in any
^ther Parish Church or Chapel, or private place?

10 Whether has any parent been urged to be presented, or admitted to answer
as Godfathers for his own child, or has any God father or Godmother made any
other answer, or speech than is prescribed by the Book, or have any bin
admitted for Godfathers fathers or Godmothers, at Baptism, who have not first
received the Communion?

11 Whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, Mistresses, come, and cause
their children, servants, and Apprentices to come duly to the Church, and
according to the Ministers direction to be instructed, and catechized, or who
be they that have not obeyed the Minister herein?

12 Whether have any persons married together within the Degrees of
Consanguinity or Affinity prohibited, set forth in a Table, appointed to be
placed in every Church: or have any married or contracted themselves under the
age of one, and twenty years, without the consent of their Parents, or
Governors, if their parents be dead?

13 Whether have any persons, once lawfully married, forsaken each other, or
do live asunder otherwise than by law is permitted: or do any, being divorced
or separated, marry again the former Wife or Husband yet living?

14 Whether has any of your Parish unreverently used your Minister, or have
any laid violent Hands upon him, or disgraced his office, and calling, by word
or deed?

15 Whether have you in your Parish any Popish Recusant or maintayner of popish
doctrine, or suspected to keep or disperse Schismatic books, or to favor
any Hereste or error?

16 Whether have you any common resorters to your Church which are not of your
Parish, abandoning their own Parish Church, or do any such receive the
communion amongst you: what be their names, and of what parishes are they?

17 Whether has any upon any Sunday or Holiday opened their shops, exercised
their trade, or used any gaming, bin in any Tavern or Alehouse, or otherwise
ill employed in the time of Divine Service?

^^ Whether are there in your Parish any adulterers, fornicat^rs, incestuous
persons, bawds, receivers of defamed persons, close favorers, conveyers away
of such, or which suffer to depart any incontinent person unpunished, or are
there in your Parish any blasphemers, common swearers, drunkards, ribawds,
usurers, malicious slanderers, scolds or sowers of discord, or any defamed of
the same crune?

19 Whether do any in your Parish administer the goods of ye dead, without
authority, or supresse their Will or Testament: have any Executors neglected to
perform their Wills, especially in paying of Legacies given to the Church, to
the poor, or to any other charitable or godly uses?

20 Whether do any refuse to pay to the reparations, ornaments, and other
things by Law required to be in your Church, as they are seized by Law: or are
any dwelling out of your Parish, which hold land in your Parish, that refuse
the like payment or seasement?

21 Whether have any not being of your Parish been christened, churched,
buried, or received the Communion, or been married out of your Church, both
parties dwelling in your Parish?

22 Whether have all women in your Parish delivered of child, come at
convenient time after to Church, to give thanks, and have they been Churched
according to the form of the Book of common Prayer?

23 Whether has ye Perambulation of the circuit of your Parish bin observed
once^ every year, if not, by whose default is it?

24 Whether has any in your Parish given the Churchwardens or Sidemen or any
of them evil words for doing their duty according to their oath, and
conscience, in making presentment for their default?

25 Whether there beany man or woman in your Parish, that uses witchcraft,
sorcery, charms, or unlawful prayer or invocations in Latin or English, or
otherwise upon any Christian body or beast, or any that resorteth to the same
for counsel, or help, and what be their names?

26 Whether there be any, that pretending themselves to be Physicians or
Surgeons, do take upon them to practice Physic, or Surgery, not being
lawfully licensed thereunto, or which refuse to show their said license to^ the
Minister, or Curate, and Churchwardens of your Church or Chapel, when they
shall be hereunto required?

Touching Churchwardens, and Sworne-men.
FIrst, whether do any in your Parish take upon them to be Churchwarden or
Side-man, which is not lawfully chosen by ye Minister, and Parishioners,
according to ye Canon, or do any continue ye office longer than (...) ye^re,
(...) chosen again, or that it be a custom (...) warden to continue two
years, a^ all such ^fficers yearly in Easter week?

2 Whether do your Chu^^^-wardens with (...) ^th at the most after their
year (...) before the Minis^^^ Parishio^ers, give up a just acco^^^ of all
such money and (...) they have received, and bes^ed, have they (...) remaining
in their hands belong^^^ to their Church o^ ^^^ish, by Bill indented, to be
delivere^ (...) the next Church (...)

3 Whether have ye Church-^^rdens, with the (...) Minister, from time to time
p^^^^ded a sufficient quanti^^ (...) white bread, and who^esome w^^^ for ye
number of co^^^^^cant^.

4 Whether do the Church-^^^rdens, and Sworn^me^ before every visitation, and
at oth^^ times when there is (...) ^n meet and confer about th^^^
presentiments, and the (...) ^ring of their Articles, and who has (after notice
given him of the time and place) carelessly absented himself?

5 Whether the forfeitur^ (...) twelve pence, for (...) from Church, appointed
by St^ to ye use of the poor, (...), and levied by the Church-war^^^^, and
employed according (...) the said Statute: and whether i^ ^said forfeiture
taken of all persons which stand wilfully susp^n^^d or excommunicated?

6 Whether have any Churchwardens lost, sold, or detained any Goods,
Ornaments, Bells, Rents, or Imp^e^ts, of the Church?

7 Whether do, you the Church wardenns, and S^, about the midst of divine
Service, usually walk out ye Church, and see who are abroad in any- Alehouse,
or elsewhere about, or evilly employed, and have ^^u presented all such
off^nders to the Ordinary?

8 Whether do you kno^ or have heard a fame of any offense committed, or duty
omitt^^ by any of your Parish before your time, and heretofore not preseared by
the former Churchwardens to the Ordinary, or as yet not reformed, and have you
presented the same?

9 Finally, do you know of any matter or cause which is a breach of the laws
Eccl^^^icall here not expressed, and have you presented the same?

FINIS.

