ARTICLES To be enquired of within the Dioces of London, in the Visitation of
the Reverend Father in God, Richard Bishop of London, in his general
Visitation,

Holden In the fortieth year of the reign of our most gracious sovereign
Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

AT LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1598.

A Branch of the Statute made in the first year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for the uniformity of
Common prayer and service in the Church.
THat from and after the feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next
coming, all and every person and persons inhabiting within this Realm, or any
other the Queens majesty's dominions, shall diligently and faithfully (having
no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent) endeavor themselves to resort to
their Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof to
some usual place where common prayer and such like service of God shall be
used in such time of let, upon every Sunday and other days, ordained and used
to be kept as holidayes: and then and there to abide orderly and soberly during
the time of common prayer, preaching or other service of God there to be used
and ministered, upon pain of punishment by the Censures of the Church. And also
upon pain that every person so offending shall forfeit for every such offense
twelve pence, to be levied by the Churchwardens of the Parish where such
offense shall be done, to the use of the poor of the same parish, of the goods,
lands, and tenements of such offender by way of distress. And for due
execution hereof, the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords temporal, and
all the commons in this present Parliament assembled, does in Gods name
earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the uttermost of their
knowledge, that the true and due execution hereof may be had throughout their
Diocese and Charges, as they will answer before God for such evils and
plagues, wherewith almighty God may justly punish his people for neglecting
this good and wholesome Law.

The Tenor of the Oath ministered to the Churchwardens and Swornemen.
YOu shall swear, that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and
gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice set aside, you shall upon due
consideration of the articles given you in charge, present all and every such
person of or within your parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or
made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles, or which are
vehemently suspected, or otherwise defamed of any such offense, fault, or
default: wherein you shall deal uprightly and according to truth, neither of
malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor of corrupt affection sparing to
present any, and so conceal the truth, having in this action God before your
eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice. So help
you God and the contents of this Book.

The charge of the Churchwardens and Swornemen, set down for the better
performance of their duties, and discharge of their Oaths.
THey are straightly charged to hear all these Articles read over to them, and
diligently to consider and inquire thereof. And for that the time is so short in
this Visitation, that they shall not be able to make a perfect answer unto all
of them, and that notwithstanding there are many notorious faults presently
worthy of presentment and reformation, they are charged to make their answers
unto them presently, so far forth as their memory shall now serve them. And
to present now such faults in their parish as at this time are worthy of
presentment or reformation, and that after their coming home betwixt this and
Saint Martins day next they shall again hear all the Articles read over unto
them, and diligently consider and enquire thereof, requiring the Minister to
assist them for the better performance of their duty, to make a true and full
answer in writing signed with their hands and marks, wherein they shall
present as well all such faults or offenses contrary to the Articles as they
forgot or omitted to present at the time of the Visitation, as also all such
faults and offenses contrary to the Articles as shall happen and chance
betwixt this and then.

Articles to be enquired of within the Diocs of London in this visitation
holden in the year of our Lord God. 1598. Articles concerning the Clergy.
1 WHether is common prayer read by your minister in your Church or Chapel
distinctly and reverently upon all Sundays and holy days, and in such order
as is set forth by the laws of this Realm in the book of Common prayer,
without any kind of alteration, omitting or adding any thing, and at due and
convenient hours.

2 Whether does your minister upon Wednesdayes and Fridaies, not being holy
days, read in your church or chapel, publicly the Letanie and other prayers
appointed in the said book for those days, and whether does he read the
comination against sinners in such order and form as it is there also
prescribed.

3 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate in the administration of the
Lords Supper, or of baptism, when he solemnizeth matrimony, burieth the dead,
churcheth women etc. use the forms and prayers prescribed in the Communion
book, without omitting or altering any part of them, and without any of his
own additions.

4 Whether does your parson or Vicar read public prayer and administer the
Sacraments ordinarily himself, using such rites and ceremonies as are
prescribed in the book of common prayer: as namely whether does he kneel at
the receiving of the holy communion: make the sign of the Cross upon the
childs forehead in the administration of baptism: baptize any without
Godfathers and Godmothers: use the ring in marriage: and generally whether does
he in the discharging of all these duties, and when he reads common prayer,
either upon Sundaies holidaies, Wednesdayes and Fridayes wear a surplice, or
if you be served with a curate, whether does he the said curate observe all the
said particular rites and ceremonies mentioned in this article.

5 Whether does your minister upon Sundays at morning prayer declare unto the
parishioners what holyedaies and fasting days are appointed to be kept the
week following: whereby they may be put in mind to prepare themselves, and to
repair to the church to public prayer according to the laws of the Realm.

6 Whether does your parson, vicar, or curate, or either of them reject at any
time those women being married which do come to church to give God thanks
after their childbirth, or refuse to visit the sick, or to bury the dead,
according to their duties prescribed in the book of common prayer.

7 Whether does your minister in the Rogation days of procession use the
perambulation of the circuit of your parish, appointed by her majesty's
Injunctions: and whether does he in the said perambulation move the people to
give thanks to God in the beholding of his benefits, for the increase and
abundance of his fruits upon the face of the earth: and sing or say the two
Psalms beginning: Praise the Lord O my soul, etc. with the Letany and
suffrages thereunto belonging: and at certain convenient places read the
homily of thanksgiving to God, already devised, and divided into four parts,
without addition of any superstitions ceremony heretofore used.

8 Whether does any man, being neither minister nor deacon read common prayer
openly in your church or chapel, or administer the sacrament of Baptism, or
solemnize matrimony, or take upon him to practice any other ministerial duty
in the church, that is prescribed to be executed particularly by such as are
either ministers or Deacons: and what is his name that so does.

9 Whether is your parson or vicar apreacher, licensed to preach by lawful
authority according to her majesty's Injunctions: if he be, how many sermons
does he preach yearly, if he be not, how many does he procure to be preached
by others: who has preached them, and whether were they preachers licensed, as
is before expressed.

10 Whether does your parson, vicar or curate every sunday when there is no
sermon, read distinctly and plainly some part of the Homilies prescribed and
set forth by her majesty's authority.

11 Whether does the parson, vicar or farmour of the benefice in your parish
cause or suffer any curate or minister, either to read service, etc. or to
preach, before he the said curate being no preacher be examined and admitted by
the ordinary in writing: and before he the said curate being a preacher be
thereunto admitted according to her majesty's Injunctions, and before they
show their said several licenses unto the churchwardens.

12 Whether does your Preacher in his prayer which he makes at the entrance
into his sermon, use at al times the prayer for her majesty, with her whole
title prescribed in her highness Injunctions: as, Queen of England, France,
and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. and of all causes, and over all
persons within her highness dominions, as well ecclesiastical as temporal,
next and immediately under God, supreme governor: and whether does he in like
manner then pray for the Archbishops and Bishops, as by the said Injunctions
it is also appointed.

13 Whether your minister does serve two cures in one day.

14 Whether does your parson, vicar or curate every Sunday and holyday openly
in the Church earnestly call for, hear, and instruct all the children,
apprentises, and servants of both sexes, that be of convenient age within your
parish, or at the least so many of them by course as the time will serve, and
as he may well hear and instruct one hour at the least, before or after
evening prayer in the ten commandments, the articles of the belief, and the
Lords prayer, and diligently examine and teach them the Catechism, as it is
now allowed, and set forth in the book of common prayer.

15 Whether is there any man in your parish, being neither your parson, vicar,
nor curate, that takes upon him to preach or read lectures either in private
houses, or publicly in your church or chapel, who is not licensed so to
preach or read according to her majesty's Injunctions, or who does not once a
year at the least administer the sacraments in your said church or chapel,
where he so preaches or reads.

16 Whether your minister has or does receive to the holy communion any
persons which he not of his own parish, without testimony from the minister
of the place where they dwell, what they be, that it may appears that they be
not persons excommunicate or otherwise infamous.

17 Whether does your parson, vicar or curate administer the holy communion
unto any communicants which do not receive the same devoutly and humbly
kneeling upon their knees, or whether does he administer it confusedly to some
kneeling, and to some, either sitting or standing, or walking.

18 Whether has your parson, vicar, or curate, or other minister in your
church or chapel, contrary to the order set down in the communion book, and
contrary to her majesty's Injunctions in that behalf, admitted to the holy
communion any open or notorious fornicator or adulterer, or other wicked liver,
by whom public offense is given, without due penance enjoined by his Ordinary
first done, to the satisfaction of the congregation, and without such further
submission, as in the said book and Iniunction is required.

19 Whether does your parson, vicar or curate, or any other minister or
preacher, baptize in your parish church or chapel, any Infants, not in the
Font according to the ancient custom, but in a basin, and urge the parents of
the said infant to be present, and in place of Godfathers for their children.

20 Whether does your parson vicar, or curate once every quarter of the year
read her majesty's Injunctions openly and deliberately before his parishioners
at one time or at two several times in one day, according as in the said
Injunctions it is prescribed.

21 Whether has your parson vicar, or curate, or any other minister preached,
declared, or spoken any thing (...) your parish in derogation of the book of
common prayer* which is set forth by the laws of this Realm, dispraising, or
deprauing the same, or any thing therein contained, or against the present
estate of the ecclesiastical government, established by the same authority,
or against any office, function, or part thereof, affirming the same to be
unlawful.

22 Whether has your parson or vicar more benefices then one, if he has not,
whether is he resident upon that one: if he be not resident, where does he
remain, and by what authority is he absent, and whether does he leave a
sufficient minister and preacher to supply his absence, allowing something
yearly toward the relief of the poor: and what does he so allow.

23 Whether is your person or vicar who has two benefices within this Dioces:
or one benefice in this Dioces, and another forth of the same, resident one
half of the year (...) one of them, and the other half year or the greater
part thereof upon his other benefice, and whether does he leave the benefice in
your parish provided of a sufficient preacher to serve it: and has an
especial care of some convenient hospitallity to be kept in his absence
according to his ability, and the proportion of that living.

24 Whether does your parson, vicar, or curate keep a just and perfect note of
al such as do communicate in your parish, and do not rather, regarding their
private gain, receive their offerings at Easter, deliver them tokens enter
them into their book, and so certefie as communicants those who never received.

25 Whether does your parson, vicar, or curate keep any man or woman in their
houses, that are suspected to be, either of evil religion, or of badde life, or
whether be they or any of them incontinent persons themselves, or given to
drunkenness or idleness, or be haunters of Tauerns, alehouses, or suspected
places, hunters, hawkers, dicers, carders, common table-players, swearers,
dauncers, or otherwise suspected persons of any notorious crime, or light and
unseemly behavior, or give evil example of life, or use disordered or
unseemly apparel, either in colors, guardes or light fashion.

27 Whether there be any ministers or priests within your parish, which live
idly without any cure, neither serving in any place, nor having any place of
reading or preaching, and so become offensive to their calling.

Articles concerning the Church.
1 Whether have you in your parish Churches and Chapels all things necessary
and requisite for common prayer and administration of the sacraments,
especially the book of common prayer with the new Calendar, two Psalters, the
English Bible in the largest volume of the edition set forth by the Bishops,
and lately imprinted by the Queen's Printer, the Table of the ten commandments,
a convenient pulpit well placed, a comely and decent Table standing upon a
frame, for the holy Cmmunion, with a fair linen cloth to lay upon the same,
and some covering of silk, buckram, or other such like for the clean keeping
thereof, a fair and comely communion cup of silver, and a cover of silver for
the same, which may serve also for the ministration of the communion bread, a
decent large surples with sleeves, and a strong chest or box for the alms of
the poor, with three locks and keys to the same, and all other things
necessary in and to the premises.

2 Whether there have grown in your Church since the last visitation in the
year 1595. any contention betwixt any of the parishioners, touching the
placing or displacing of any in any seat or pew in the church, and whether
there have been any pew builded since the foresaid year 1595. in any your
churches, without the express leave and consent first had of the Ordinary of
the Dioces, and by whom have any such been built.

3 Whether is your Church or Chapel, and the Chauncell well and sufficiently
repaired and kept without abuse of any thing: whether does your Parson, vicar,
or curate, or the proprietarie or farmour of your parsonage or vicarage in your
parish keep the parsonage or vicarage house with all other the edefices thereunto
appertaining in good and sufficient reparations: and whether is your churchyard
well fenced and cleanely kept without any laystall or other annoyances.

4 Whether the Church of your parish be now vacant or destitute of an
Incumbent or no, and if it be, how long it has been so, and who is the
patron, and whether during the vacancie of the benefice, he occupies the globe
land, and takes the tithes and other fruits to him self during the time of
vacation, or who else occupies and takes the same, and by what authority.

5 Whether your church be a parsonage or a vicarage presentatiue or donatiue,
or otherwise served by a curate: whether did they ever heretofore hear or
know that it was a parsonage or vicarage, and how came it to be decayed from
being presentatiue, to be in the state it now is, and when was it first
decayed from being a benefice presentatiue, as you remember.

6 Whether your fonts or baptisteries be removed from the place where they
were wont to stand: or whether any persons, leaving the use of them, do
christen or baptize in basins, or other vessels, not accustomably used in the
church before time, or do use any kind of lauor with a remouable basin, or have
taken down the old and usual font heretofore used in your parish.

7 Whether is there in your parish a sufficient Register book of parchment, of
marriages, christnings, and burialls, provided at the charge of the parish:
whether are all the names of those that have bin, either christened, married, or
buried since the beginning of her Majesty's reign newly written into the said
parchment book: whether does the Minister every sunday read the names
publicly of those, that were either christened married, or buried the week
before: whether have you a public chest with 3. locks for the minister, and
the two churchwardens to keep the said book in: and whether have you brought
a transcript of all the names of such as have been christened, married, and
buried this last year into M. Blackwel my Register his office, as you are bound
to do every year hereafter within a month after the feast of Easter by the
constitutions last authorized by her Majesty.

Articles concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
1 Whether the Chancellor Archdeacon, Commissarie Official, or any other using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this diocese, their Registers or Actuaries,
Apparators, or Summoners, have at any time winked at and suffered any
adulterers, fornicators, incestes, or other faults or offenses presented unto
them, to pass and remain unpunished, and uncorrected for money, rewards,
bribes, pleasure, frindship, or any other partial respect.

2 Whether does the Chancellor, Commissaries, Archdeacons or any other
Officialles hear any matters of office, or correction privately in their
chambers without the presence of the sworn Register or his deputy, or do
discharge any man's penance for money, without the consent of the ^. Bishop,
according to the last constitutions by her Majesty confirmed, or do send any
writing under their own hands to your church, without the Registers presence
at the doing of it, either for marriage of any couples, or for ending or
ordering of any matter of office, correction, or penance.

Articles concerning Schoolemasters.
1 Whether the Schoolmaster or schoolemasters within your parish openly or
privately in any noble or gentleman's house, or in any other place be of good
and sincere religion, life, and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of youth, and whether they have been examined, allowed, and
licensed for schoolemasters by the Ordinary or his officers in that behalf.

2 Whether your Schoolemaister or Schoolemasters do themselves receive the holy
communion as often as they ought to do, and whether they bring with them so
many of their scholars as be of age sufficient, and of capacity by
instruction to receive the Lords supper, or else be able to give testimony in
what church their scholars do receive and hear public prayer.

3 Whether your Schoolemaister or Schoolemaisters do orderly on sundays with
their scholars come to the church of their parish where they teach, and there
see their scholars placed in some convenient place, so as they do not disquiet
the minister or parish in time of divine service, but may exercise themselves
godly in reading and hearing the service and sermons, and in answering with the
congregation in reading of public prayer.

4 Whether the schoolemaister or schoolemaisters either private or public do
teach their scholars the Catechism authorized by public authority, at the
least once every week, and do instruct and examine them in the same, or do
teach any other catechism, and what catechism it is that they so do teach.

5 Whether your schoolemaister or schoolemaisters or any of them be known or
suspected to read unto their scholars privately any unlawful books, or
privately to instruct them in their young years either in popery, superstition,
or disobedience, or contempt to her Majesty and her laws ecclesiastical by
public authority allowed.

6 Whether your schoolemaister or schoolemaisters or any of them under presence
of Catechizing their scholars, which is a most godly order, carefully by them
to be observed, do keep lectures, readings, or exposition in divinity in
their houses, having continual repair unto them of people not being of their
own family and household.

7 Whether the schoolemaister or schoolemaisters within your parish do teach
his or their scholars any other grammar then that which is commonly called the
kings grammar, set forth by the authority of King Henry the eight.

Articles concerning parishioners and others of the Laity.
1 Whether all householders in your parish cause their children, servants and
apprentises, both mankind and womankind being above seven years of age, and
under twenty, which have not learned the catechism, to come to the church on
sundaies and holidayes at the times appointed for catechizing, and there
diligently and obediently to hear, and what be the names of those that do not
cause their children, servants, and apprentises so to come to the church to be
instructed and examined.

2 Whether the church wardens do quarterly deliver to the Archdeacon a note of
al those who do not send their children and servants to be catechized

3 Whether any do work or keep any shop open upon Saboth days, or upon
any holidaies appointed by the laws of this realm to be kept holiday, or use
any work or labor, or open show of their wares in any of those days.

4 Whether you your selves or the Churchwardens in the years before you have
suffered any unmarried women being begotten with child, to go out of your
parish before she has done penance, or any man defamed of whoredom to depart
unpunished, upon direction appointed by the ordinary. And forth of whose
houses have they gone away with child unpunished, and how many unmarried women
which have been delivered within your parish these three years last past, have
gone away without doing of penance.

5 Whether the parish Clarke be appointed according to the law, by the parson
or vicar of the parish, with the allowance of the Ordinary, and whether he be
not obedient to the parson, vicar, or curate, and whether he be able to read,
and whether he keep the books and ornaments of the Church fair and clean,
and cause the church, and quire, the communion table and the (...) to be kept
clean and decent against the service time, the communion, sermon, and baptism.

6 Whether there be any person or persons ecclesiastical or temporal within
your parish or elsewhere within this Dioces, that have retained and kept in
their custody, or that read, sell, utter, disperse, carry, or deliver to
others any English books or libels, set forth either on this side or beyond
the seas, by papists or others against the Queens supremacy in causes
ecclesiastical, or against true religion and catholic doctrine, or the
government or discipline of the church of England, now within this realm
revived and established by common authority, and what their names and surnames
are.

7 Whether there be any in your parish who are noted, known, or suspected to
conceal or keep hidden in their houses any mass books portesses,
breuiaries, or other books of popery and superstition or any Chalices, copes,
vestments albs, or other ornaments of superstition, uncancelled or undefaced,
which it is to be coniectured they do keep for a day, as they call it.

8 Whether there be in your parish any popish or sectarie recusant or
recusants, which for any cause whatsoever forbear or dissuade and dehort
others to come to Church to common prayer or to hear Gods word preached,
pretending it unlawful to come to our assemblies, as the church of England now
stands, established by her majesty's authority, and what their several name
or names are, and how long they have been recusants.

9 Whether any do refuse to receive the holy communion at their own ministers
hands, either because he is not a preacher, or because he duly observes the
order of ministration appointed by the book, and who they be that do go from
their own parish, to receive at any other ministers hands.

10 Whether any of your parishioners having a preacher to their parson, vicar,
or curate, do absent themselves from his sermons, and resort to any other place
to hear other preachers.

11 Whether all the people of your parish above 16. years of age, and
especially householders, having no lawful excuse to be absent, do resort with
their servants and children to their parish Church or Chapel on the holy
days, and on the Sundays to morning and evening prayer, and who they be that
either negligently or wilfully absent themselves, or come very late to the
church upon the Sundays or holidaies, or that walk, talk, or otherwise
irreverently behave themselves in the church, or use any gaming or pastime
abroad or in any house, or sit in the street or churchyard, or in any
tavern or alehouse upon the Sunday or holiday in the time of common prayer,
sermon, or reading of the homilies, or any of them either before or after noone.

12 Whether the forfeiture of xii. pence for every time of absence from the
church upon every sunday and holiday appointed by a statute made in the first
year of the Queens majesty's reign to be levied and taken according to the
same statute (the tenor whereof is set down in the beginning of this book)
by the churchwardens of every person that offends, and by them be put to the
use of the poor of the parish, if it be not so levied, by whose fault it is?

13 Whether there be in your parish who do receive into their houses, keep,
harbor, or relieve, or which do resort to any popish priest, or which be noted
or suspected to be seducers, and perswaders of others by their example or
doctrine to popery or superstition, thereby to alienate the Queens subjects
from their due obedience and christian religion, now by law established in
England.

14 Whether there be any Inkeepers, alewiues, victuallers, or tiplers, that
suffer or do admit any person or persons in their houses, to eat, drink, or
play at dice, cards, tables, bowls, or such like games, in the time of common
prayer or sermon on the sundays or holidayes, or any Butchers or other that
commonly use to sell meat or other things in the time of Common prayer,
preaching, or reading of homilies: and whether in any faires or common markets
falling upon the Sundays, there be showing of any wares before morning prayer
be done: and whether any markets and selling of wares be used or suffered in
any churchyards on the Sabbath day by common packmen or pedlers going about, or
any Butchers.

15 Whether the Churchwardens of the last year have given to the parish a just
account of the church goods and rents that were committed to their charge,
according to the custom that has been aforetime used: and what church goods
they or any other have sold, and to whom, and whether to the profit of your
church or no: and what has bin done with the money thereof coming?

16 Whether the churchwardens and sworn men, since the fourth day of August,
1597. have of any private corrupt affection concealed any crime or other
disorder in their time done in your parish, and have not presented the same to
the Bishop, Chauncelor, Archdeacon, Commissarie, or such other as had
authority to reform the same: and whether they or any of them at any such
time as they should have been at divine service on sundays and holidaies, and
should there have observed others that were absent, have been away themselves
at home, or in some tavern or alehouse, or else about some worldly business,
or at bowls, cards, tables, dice, or other gaming, without regard of their
office, and duty in that behalf.

17 Whether your minister and you the churchwardens, or any other in your
parish have in your reuestries made any orders, or do use to call any parties
before you for any cause to be ordered by the ecclesiastical laws, and so do
use a kind of Presbiterie or censuring over your neighbors, under pretense of
your vestrie meetings.

18 Whether any of your parish being of convenient age, have not received the
holy communion thrice this last year at the least, and namely, at Easter last
or thereabouts for once, and what their names are, or which at their receiving
have not signified the same before to your parson, vicar, or curate, that he
might conveniently examine them, and who have refused to come to him to be
examined.

19 Whether there be any in your parish that does administer the goods of those
that be dead without lawful authority, or any that suppress the last will of
the dead, or any Executors that have not fulfilled their testators last will,
especially in paying of legacies given to the church, or to other good and
godly uses, as to the relief of poverty, to orphants, poor scholars, poor
maidens marriages, hiewayes, scholars, and such like, and by whom are they so
detained. And whether any such legacies or goods, of what kind soever paid
or delivered to any godly or public uses since the beginning of her Majesty's
reign, be otherwise employed, and not in such sort, and to that end for the
which they were given.

20 Whether there be any in your parish, that since the fourth of August 1597.
has or does offend contrary to the statute made in the seven and thirtieth
year of the reign of King Henry the eight, for the reformation of usury,
and revived by an Act made in the thirteenth year of the reign of the Queens
Majesty that now is, taking above the rate of ten pounds for the lending of an
hundred pounds by the year, and what be the names of such offenders.

21 Whether has your minister or any of the parish, without the consent or
priuitie of the Ordinary, caused any to do penance, or be punished either
openly or otherwise for any crime punishable by the Ecclesiastical laws
only, and what be the names of the parties that have been so punished, and in
what manner.

22 Whether the Injunctions sent from my Lords grace of Canterbury and the
high Commissioners in November 1587. directed to your minister and
churchwardens, not to receive strange Preachers not licensed be observed, and
whether the said Iniunction remain in your Church or no.

23 whether there be any amongst you that do use sorcerie or witchcraft
punishable by the ecclesiastical laws, or that be suspected of the same: and
whether any use any charms or unlawful prayers: and whether any do resort to
any such for help and council, and what be the names, both of such as use it,
and of such as resort to them for help.

24 Whether any couples that be married in private houses within these three
years last past have bin known or suspected to have bin married by any popish
priest or otherwise, after any other order then is appointed by the church of
England.

25 whether there be among you any blasphemers of the name of God, great or
often swearers, adulterers, fornicators, harlots or whoremasters incestuous
persons, bawdes, or receivers of naughty and incontinent persons, or harborers
of women with child which be unmarried, conueying or suffering them to go away
before they do any penance, or make satisfaction to the congregation, or any
that be vehemently suspected of any such faults, or that be not of good name
and fame touching such crimes and faults of drunkards, or ribawds, or any that
be malicious, contentious, or uncharitable persons, railers, scolders, or
sowers of discord between neighbors, and especially railers against ministers,
and against their marriage.

26 whether there be any in these parts that have been married within the
degrees of affinity or consanguinitie, by the laws of God forbidden, or any
that being divorced or separated for the same, do yet notwithstanding cohabite
and keep company still together, or any that being married without those
degrees have unlawfully forsaken their wives or husbands, and married others,
any man that has two wives, or any woman that has 2. husbands, any that
being divorced or separated asunder, have married again, any that have married
and contracted themselves without the consent of their parents, tutors, or
governors, any that have married without banes thrice solemnly asked, any
couples married that live not together, but slanderously live apart.

27 Whether there be any in your parish who will come to hear the sermon, but
will not come to the public prayer appointed by the Book of common prayer,
making a schism or division, as it were, between the use of public prayer
and preaching. And whether there be any, who being present at public prayer,
do not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees, at such times as by the
Book of common prayer they are appointed: to wit, when they make a general
confession of their sins: when all prayers and Collects are read: in the time
of the Letanie: when the ten Commandments are read, etc. And what are
their names that have at any time showed themselves undutiful and vnreuerent
in this behalf.

28 Whether the minister and churchwardens have suffered any lord of mis-rule,
or summer lord or ladies, or any disguised persons, any players, or maie-games,
or any moris dauncers, at any time to come irreverently into the church or
churchyard, and there to dance or play, or show them selves disguised in the
time of common prayer, and what they be that commit such disorder, or that
accompanied or maintained them, or any plays to be played in the church.

29 Whether there be any married women or others within your parish, which
after childbirth refuse or contemn to come to the church to give God thanks
for their delivery, and to have the prayers publicly appointed in that behalf
by the book of common prayer.

30 Whether any within your parish do resort unto barns, fields, woods,
private houses, or to any extraordinary expositions of scriptures, or
conferences together, and do (as it were) make a several church or sect unto
themselves, and be drawers or perswaders of others to any such schismatic or
damnable sects, and in whose houses, or what places have you heard of any such
meeting.

31 Whether any do keep their children unbaptized longer than is convenient,
unless it be for sickness of the child, or other urgent occasion: And whether
any do carry their children from the parish they are borne in, to other
parishes to be baptized, and so refuse their own parish, or do bring strange
ministers into their own houses to baptize their children privately according
to their own fantasies.

32 Whether any notorious recusant who obstinately refuses to be partaker
with the church of England in public prayer, and hearing of the word of God
preached, who is for his disobedience and contempt excommunicated, and so dies
excommunicate, be buried in christian burial, not having before his death
sought to be absolved, and testified the same his submission to some honest and
discreet man, who shall upon his oath signify to the Bishop of the Dioces,
whereby his Lordship may give order to the Ordinary, before whom he was
excommunicate for his absolution.

The second bills, and in them the names are to be set down of all such as
have been buried at any time since the seventh day of August 1598, and
likewise of such as have bin married by any license, with the names of those
who granted the license ever since the said seventh of August, they are to be
brought into Master Blackwells office in Iuie lane, being the principal
Register to the Lord Bishop of London betwixt the 26. of November next, and the
4. of December then following, if there be not any other place appointed at his
Lordships sitting in Visitation to bring them unto.


